OF HAPPINESS: WHEREIN It is Fully and Particularly Manifested, that the
greatest Happiness of this Life consists in the Fear of God And keeping His
COMMANDMENTS, IN Opposition to the Pleasures of Sin, or the pretended
convenience of Disobedience.

By RICHARD STAFFORD.

There be many that say, Who will show us any Good? Lord lift thou up the Light
of thy Countenance upon us,

Psalm. 4 6. Let thy work appear unto thy Servants, and thy Glory unto thy
Children. And let the beauty of the Lord our God be upon us: and establish thou
the work of our hands upon us, yea, the work of our hands establish thou it,

Psalm. 90. 16, 17. London, Printed and Sold by Andrew Soul, at his Shop at the
Sign of the Three Keys in Nags-Head-Court in Grace Church Street; And by Abel
Roper at the Bell over against the Middle-Temple-Gate near Temple Bar, 1689.

THE CONTENTS.
Chap. I. OF Happiness in General, p. 1 Chap. II. Of Man considered in his
threefold Condition, Original, Corrupted and Restored: Of his Thoughts, Words
and Actions, Infancy, Youth, Manhood, therein of Company and Marriage; Of Old
Age, Body, Senses and Sensual Pleasure; Of the Soul, Understanding, Will,
Affections, as Love, Fear, Joy, Sorrow, Anger, Hope: Of Temptations; The Close,
p. 17 Chap. III. Of Kings. The necessity of Government in order to Preservation
and outward Peace. Of the Person of Kings, wherein it is particularly showed,
that all their Enjoyments cannot make them Happy, but their Happiness is to be
had in God only, with an Exhortation and Direction thereto, p. 136 Chap. IV. Of
the Nobility and Gentry. An Exhortation for them to serve God: A Caution
against mistakes in matters of Religion: The unreasonableness of some
particular Reproaches: Of Humility, and the way to Greatness. The Description
of a Good Man, p. ^68 Chap. V. Of the Common People. It is the Duty of all to
be in some Calling: An Exhortation to serve God: Against Ignorance, and
Unbelief: Some Considerations of living in the World, and further drawn from
the four last things. Of different Communions; Of Deceits. A Description* of
the Wicked and Godly in this World, p. 216 Chap. VI* A Survey in General of
those Sins which hinder the Happiness of Mankind, as contrary to Scripture, and
from the Nature of Things, p. 265 Chap. VII. Of Gluttony and Drunkenness, p.
277 Chap. VIII. Of Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness, Lasciviousness, p. 301
Chap. IX. Of Covetousness, p. 322 Chap. X. Of Anger, Wrath, Hatred, Malice,
Envy, p. 340 Chap. XI. Of Fear, p. 361 Chap. XII. Of Religion, Faith,
Repentance, Obedience, against Ungodliness. Of Preaching, Prayer, Praise, the
Sacrament. That Religion does not consist only in the outward Ordinances, but a
Divine inward Frame and Disposition, which if universally complied withal, will
give Peace and Rest to the Soul, p. 409 Chap. XIII. Of Wisdom and Prudence, p.
545 Chap. XIV. Of Righteousness and Justice, p. 567 Chap. XV. Of Temperance in
Meat, Drink, Apparel, Recreation: Of the passing away of Time, p. 582 Chap.
XVI. Of Courage, p. 602 Chap. XVII. Of Humility and Pride, p. 617 Chap. XVIII.
Of Afflictions in General. A Digression concerning Words. Of Sorrow,
Melancholy, Sickness, Pain, Poverty, and other Adversities. p. 635 Chap. XIX.
An Exhortation to Obedience and the Fear of God; The Conclusion of the whole,
p. 690
A DISCOURSE OF Happiness, etc.
CHAP. I.
Of Happiness in General.

HAppiness is the desire and aim of all Men, and as the several good things are
to be had by labor and right means, so this being the comprehension of the
whole, is to be attained likewise. There is no accomplishing of worldly
projects and designs, without succession of time and endeavor; things being
as^it were hidden, that they may be sought; afar off, so they must go who will
have them; and commonly future to exercise our diligence and expectation. Let
the same be done immediately toward the great and principal end, as to the
lesser and subordinate, and none shall labor in vain; but the like care and
constancy as is used in ordinary matters; then any person may be assured of the
chiefest good. All other things are coveted after in order to Happiness, though
it be under the name of Pleasure and Convenience; there is an impatient thirst
after it from the Beginning; for besides those natural cravings after the
necessaries of Life, Meat, D^ink, Raiment; yet this is not all, there must be
some delight: There is Play and Divertisment, and then changing that from one
kind to another, from Childish to the more Manly (though too often mistaken)
enjoyments. There is an eager inclination after sensual Pleasure, and outward
Mirth: As to these the means must be first had; Money or Estate which are to be
gotten, and then to reap the Fruit of his Labors; or who has them already, he
is not to lie or sit still, but must rise and go forth to gather those present
and visible good things; still this is but the Happiness of half the Man, the
Body only, and yet to be acquired somewhat more requires also a satisfaction.
The worst part has its desires and is not fed with Husks or Pebbles, but
things convenient, sufficient here is already found out, both for use and
delight.

Now let the nature of the Soul be considered, according to her first
excellency and just inclination, as she came out of God's hand, and for what
designed* whether there be any Objects proper for her, that they may be had
also. Take the whole Man in conjunction, his spiritual part (if not ^hoaked and
(...)led) seeks after Happiness, as the other does Health, Nourishment and
sensible gratification. Whether the Soul is in growth, or puts it self forth
according to the capacity and increase of the Organs, shall not be curiously
inquired; but it seems to partake of the Imperfection, and would come up
toward Perfection. It has an ignorance and blindness, which should be taken
away by degrees: A stubbornness and l^st through original corruption, which is
to be subdued and regulated: It is certainly capable of bettering and
improvement by right means, and so may arrive at Happiness, all one as the Body
does its convenience. The great Question all along will be, what the right,
means are? for we are in a world of intermixture where is Right and Wrong, Good
and Evil, Truth and Falsehood, Apparent and Real; and therefore must narrowly
discern the one from the other. A right Knowledge carries through all, and
acting according to that Knowledge. There is an established and fixed nature of
things pertaining to us Men; the visible we know by sense and experience, the
invisible by certain Reason and the full assurance of Faith. Amongst the
various and seemingly perplexed, they may be reduced unto two general ways: That
of Gods Commandment, according to his prescribed order and use of them, showed
forth in his Word, or in disobedience and transgression: He made them all at
first very good, Genesis 1. 31. but evil, corruption, vanity and fal^hood came in;
and now has sent his Word to inform us aright, that we may not be deceived,
but so to use as not to abuse them. It is the same to all Mankind, what he
says to that Nation, O Israel thou have destroyed thy self, but in me is thy
help, Hos. 13. 9.

As a way is showed to the things of the Flesh, so of the Spirit, for Man is
made up of both; he does already know and labor after what appertains to that,
let him do the same to the other: He is to work out his Salvation and
Happiness, (which are both the same thing) for God works in him to will and
to do, who has given Grace and Power. If thou cryest after Knowledge, and
liftest up thy voice for Understanding; if thou seek for her as Silver, and
searchest for her as for hidden Treasure: Then shall thou understand the fear
of the Lord, and find the Knowledge of God Pro. 2. 3, 4, 5. Thou shall learn
his Kingdom and Dominion over us Creatures, and acknowledge as most due our own
obedience and subjection; thou shall fully apprehend the things pertaining to
it, and what is contrary, or an hindrance. To him that perfectly knows what
are the right and true means to Happiness, the attainment is easy. To separate
the precious from the vile; to lay hold of the real good from mere appearances,
to find out something more then this World gives, (for which we are beholden
unto Gods Revelation in Scripture) to obtain the sure hope and expectation of
good things to come. If a way is pointed out how any one may be happy, if he is
endued with Power to go therein, for he may understand, and he may do; I think
more cannot be desired, unless he is forced unto it, which none is: But all are
prompted with the same inclination as to eat when hungry. Indeed the spiritual
part can be longer in suspense without true Happiness, then the Body its
Nonrishment; for it is a more excellent and enduring substance, yet it desires
that as much as the other being and support.

If thou be wise, thou shall be wise for thy self; but if thou scornest, thou
alone shall bear it, Pro. 9. 12. If thou would learn to refer all things to
Gods Glory, and under that to thy own Happiness. Examine every days Actions how
they promote this end. What am I the happier for having had or done this? such
things pass away and fail, be thou for what endures and grows up. Renounce what
is seemingly delectable and fancy, and endeavor after real Goodness and
Wisdom. If the true Christian may be manifested to be more happy in his manner
of Life, th^n the natural ungodly Man with all his sinful Pleasures and
Profits; who is sincere making the Scripture the Rule of his Actions, if he may
be found more blessed then outward Professors, or those who keep some of the
Commandments of God, and neglect others under the false pretense of more
Happiness and convenience. If it can be made evident that to have respect unto
them all is Peace, how the least Varietation is disquiet and Ps. 119. 6.
misery, and a greater loss then the supposed benefit; This is directly to
oppose the Enemy of Gods Kingdom and Man's Happiness, and to take from him all
his Armor wherein he trusts, Luke 11. 22. for the Bait of every Temptation is
Pleasure, Convenience and Advantage; now Happiness is more then all these, and
there succeeds in the room of the other, Truth and real Gain, Peace and future
Glory. The World need not be angry, but should rather pray for good Luck in
this undertaking, in that it is only pleaded for to which they are strictly
required by gracious Promises and severe Threatenings. God is above and greater
then Man, and therefore it is no fault to speak for his Government. And there
are in our selves earnest Longings after Satisfaction, give it me or else I
die, so we are to be acquainted thoroughly that it is in God only. Amongst all
those Divisions and Opinions concerning Happiness (wherein those of Old were so
puzzled) one is to be fixed upon true and certain; after a diligent search
through the whole Creation, and so often returned all is Vanity and Vexation of
Spirit, the Conclusion of the whole matter is here to be more particularly
surveyed, Fear God and keep his Commandments, for this is the whole Duty of
Man, Eccles. 12, 13. His greatest Happiness even in this life does consist
herein. This Proposition by Gods assistance which I do humbly and earnestly
implore (O send out thy Light and thy Truth, let them lead me) I shall
endeavor to manifest; the general Opinion of mankind is against this, they
will own as much Ps. 43. 3.
with their lips outwardly, but contradict it by their own Actions: But yet
Truth if cleared and brought forth, will prevail with ^nprejudiced, unbyassed
mind^. If any are not so, it is through lust, interest or humor, which they
think as some helps toward Happiness, and therefore if they should hinder the
impartial inquiry after that, it is to be hoped they may be laid aside. The
utmost Happiness of this World is to be free from as many Evils as possible,
and to enjoy as much good as may be had in this state of Humiliation and
Imperfection.

God would not have any Man to be perfectly and absolutely Happy as to this
prefent time. Himself alone is the Blessed, Mark 4. 61. He is the Fountain of
all Happiness, and reserves for those to be Partakers thereof who shall be
found worthy. The design of the following Discourses, is, that we may prepare
and make sure of that above all things, and to pass through here with more
Comfort and fewer Evils then usually Men do; But sincere, complete, and
uninterrupted Happiness is not to be expected in this Earth, for it would take
off our desire from God and his Kingdom, and also we could not bear it
according to the Capacity we are now in. There is to be seen by his wise
providential ordering, a Succession and mixture of Good and Evil, sweet and
bitter, and we have all things in an imperfect manner. But Man either not
knowing or wilful going contrary to this design of Almighty God would fain be
truly Happy, and that presently; with which Temptation the Devil prevails over
him to revolt from God and break his Commandments, suggesting a full
Satisfaction may be had when it is ordained otherwise. As it always proves a
mistake, so most commonly the Person not recovering from it when he comes to
know as much, it proves destructive and miserable to him. Did he but patiently
wait and stand still, he might see the Salvation of God. The Lord does design
the Happiness of his Creatures, and why are they not contented he should go his
own way in bringing to pass his gracious Work? At first he made us without our
selves, and now he would make us Happy with our selves, if we would not run
before, but follow hard after him, Ps. 63. 8. in the way he shows. Would we
endure a little Travel before we come to Rest, not mistake in the Place, but
hearken unto and obey what our God says, Arise ye, depart for this is not your
Rest, Mic. 2. 20. Leave of that pursuit and fixing on temporal Happiness, and
seek for that which is to come. Every thing puts in mind of our imperfection
which is in order to perfection, so we are to move toward it, but not run out
catching after what is not to be had. Our mortality should teach us to breath
after immortality, and the natural result is not to rear up a dwelling place as
if we were to abide here forever, or to be lifted up with Prosperity as if we
should never be moved, but to look out for the eternal Mansion, and that
Kingdom which cannot be shaken. What ever we meet with is mixed and
unsatisfactory, we again desire what is not so, this should put us upon seeking
after those pure and satisfying Pleasures above. The things we see, handle and
taste are fitted for the Convenience of our vile and dying Bodies, which they
like well enough; but this prompts to go in the way for them to be made
glorious and incorruptible. The Soul finds every thing empty and short,
whereupon she pants after a proper fullness, which is only in the Fruition of
the Godhead, with whom we would be eternally transported. Here is the mischief
and danger, all outward Pleasures if moderately used are diversions, but if too
much, they quite turn aside out of the way. Even the diversions do mightily
hinder; so that were the Man contented to go on and use them no more then needs
must, he would infallibly arrive at the Blessed end: Pass through this World in
a constant smooth Temper: Choosing rather to spend his time in the Peaceable
Fruits of Righteousness, then in the Clamorous but troublesome Delights of Sin
and Vanity; let his days fly over his Head in doing real Good, then snatching
at what the World est^ems good things; continually make Provision against the
time to come, and not to lavish away the present in idle unsatisfying Mirth;
remember the great and higher ends of Life, then barely to eat and drink well,
or taste Pleasure. Not to antedate his Happiness expecting it perfect and
enduring, which is to be so hereafter. And finally to spy out and avoid the
deceitful appearances of it now, and to do whatever Conscience and Reason
dictates is to be done to secure unto himself immortality and Glory. Rest is
not to be had in transitory things, not Peace in a troublesome World. Neither
can earthly things satisfy Heaven born Souls, He that loves Silver will not
be satisfied with Silver, nor he that loves abundance with increase, Eccles.
5. 10. And he who loves Pleasure may be surfeited, but never filled.

Were Men really persuaded, that these things are so, they would be freed from
much trouble and disappointment, for they deceive themselves with vain
Expectations and tormenting Desires. By raising such a conceit of Happiness
they pine long for want thereof, and when had are discontented as before.
Whilst in pursuit they flatter themselves with abundance of Satisfaction, but
after they are obtained with much Labor and Care, they prove to be empty
Delusions, and Clouds without water. If we could be made sufficiently sensible
of the Vanity of the Creature, and ^hroughly know the nature of things, we
should not look for more Contentment then they really yield, nor render our
selves miserable by being often deceived. We should set our affections on those
things above, if we did verily think nothing would satisfy them here below.
The Lord stretches forth the Heavens, and lays the Foundation of the Earth,
and forms the Spirit of Man within him, Zach. 12. 1. Which is o^ such a
refined and immortal Nature, that nothing* can content but what is of the same
quality and continuance with it self. Had we brutish Souls, were the whole so
as some little inclinations, then indeed we should be so pleased with sensual
Delights that it would be good for us to be here. But think upon them even in
the jol^ity and vigor of Youth, which is led on for want of full knowledge
expecting more still, and if they transport, it is but the Pleasure of a Beast
without Reason and Reflection, for that suggests somewhat is wanting still. The
Soul (if suffered to have its natural tendency and power) would find out where
only it is to be had. But there is a secret unseen Enemy who uses all Arts and
Devices to keep off from this. One would admire at his exceeding subtilty in
deceiving mankind as he does in this thing. It is strongly ingrafted into all
minds, that they are not only willing, but do actually endeavor to be as Happy
as they can, yet many miss of being so. Even reasonable Creatures, who know and
have Power to choose the Good and refuse the Evil, and use so much industry in
pursuit thereof, yet are deceived. There are many false Opinion^ concerning
Happiness, which are received without full Examination, when there is but one
true. The old Proverb as many men as many minds, is never more verified then on
this Object and the means necessary to it. Every single Person does choose a
several path, having Fancies and Thoughts of his own by which he Acts. And
though singularity is abhorred in Religion (the only way thereof) yet here it is
affected by all: Every one would be Happy, but go his own way, which indeed are
turnings out of the way, standing still, and going backwards. There are many
who with the Reubenites and Gadites take up their Rest on this side Jordan, so
they only are to be blamed, if they come not into the pleasant Land. Others
adva^ce a little further, but through prejudice or Self-will refuse to know and
follow all directions that are necessary, so they err and wander but do not
arrive at it. Others will not hear any thing thereof, so they cannot desire.
And thus some being careless and negligent; some partial, blind and stubborn,
others ignorant and unbelieving, it comes to pass that the true Road to
Happiness has so few Travelers. It is most to be admired of those who journey
not at all, when they evidently know how they are in Tents of flesh which
cannot po^^ibly continue. Why should it seem strange and incredible that God
would raise them up in another place after they are removed hence whereof we
are so much told? When he has already brought us into this World without our
Consent, and we heard nothing of it before, or if that was impossible, yet we
are assured that Children will be born and of the future Generations, though he
makes no such particular discovery to us of that, as of our own future
Condition. Besides divine Testimony, the Cloud of Witnesses, there is a desire
and firm assurance within, that we shall remain forever; there is an earnest
Expectation and Coveting after more then is to be seen or had here, an
insatiable thirst after Happiness puts us upon doing those things, which
entitle unto and make meet for a blessed Eternity, so strongly has God fenced
up our way to bring us to himself.

All the Sons and Daughters of Men do groan within themselves; those many and
different Actions of the World are to this end; none grudges any toil or pain
for to have it, Who refuses to do any thing to be Happy? Let it be what it
will, he seems contented; for this do I Labor and Sweat and run and can never
do too much but all in vain. Show us any way and we will follow it. Say thou
this O Man? Will thou stand to thy word, and not go away sorrowful at the
saying, when thou art told how thou may be Happy? Will thou then Iook up unto
God? Acquaint thy self with him and be at peace, thereby good shall come unto
thee, Job 22. 21. That word imports a full knowledge of him and his ways. Do
thou think knowledge was given thee in vain? Will thou exercise that, and let
it go before thy Actions? Upon assurance thou will diligently use and seek to
advance it; then prove all things, hold fast to that which is good, thus doing
thou must be Happy. If thou do prove all things, thou must prove the things
pertaining to Gods Kingdom; and not pass slightly over them as the manner of
the World is; who dwell amongst the Pots, run from one Evil to another, from
this sinful Pleasure or Profit, to such an Humor, Fancy or vain Opinion, and
have not to do with what is Good, Truth and Reason. These finding nothing but
Trouble and Discontent, Emptiness and Vanity lie down and sink down under the
Wretched (and as they think remediless) Condition of mankind. Whereas they walk
up and down in the Earth, a place of Misery and vexation, seek rest and find
none; but do not lift up their Heart to God in the Heavens, from whom alone is
to be had all true delight and satisfaction. They follow after false
disquieting things, not minding the true Peace provided for the Soul. One would
think those mistakes and deceits every where, should drive them sooner to this
sure Refuge, yet alas! such strangers are we naturally to God, that we are apt
to seek help of every thing before of him; and if after all nothing is to be
had, then we fly unto him as a reserve and last resort; hereby intimating, if
we could be assisted any other way, we had never came unto him. What base
unworthiness is in our nature? that should deal so with our Maker, who is the
Author of all things, even of those we seek for succor. God knows our
ignorance, delights in Mercy, and is pleased to admit thereof. But here is
the failure again, that some do not turn to the Lord their God, nor are
obedient to his voice. They take Religion just for a present Dut. 4. 29, 30, 31.
ease, which if it does not give forthwith, they become impatient, rashly and
falsely concluding there is no good to be found in it; Every thing before they
tried to the utmost, but of this they do not make a full experiment. They would
be contented in reference to other matters to part with any thing, or to wait
any time so they may find good; but will not turn from every evil way, nor
tarry the Lords leisure, and so they go away without benefit.

Could we be assured the things of God are for our Happiness, we would be for
them, which they are, or nothing in the World is. And it may appear they are
equally for the good of the inward Man, as other things to the outward. All
besides may be disproved and found insufficient to quiet our restless and
craving part. The wise Gentiles did come so far as to constitute the chiefest
good in the practice of moral virtue, then which nothing did conduce more to
the Peace and Tranquillity of the mind. They did grope by the Wall-side of true
Religion, but were not within; They did give attestation to the excellency of
God's Ways, though they did not know him; all one as a reflex beam of light may
through a crevis pass into a low Dungeon without ever seeing the Sun. By how
much the nearer the approach is to the right end, there is somewhat mo^e rest,
then what was wholly besides. A full draught of water does quench the thirst,
when dipping the finger therein, will only cool the Tongue; however, that is
better then to thrust earth, or what is of a contrary nature into the Mouth.
The discerning Heathens could know that outward sensible things did not make up
the greatest Happiness of this Life. That is situate within a Man's breast, and
the rational part cannot subsist with mere conceits, but requires something
proportionable to her nature.

It concerns every one what thoughts he has within himself, Luke 12. 17, 19.
and if he would act sincerely for his own good, he should first strictly
debate whether they be true or false; for if they should prove wrong, he loses
all his foregoing labor, which might have been spent in obtaining a real good;
and on the contrary becomes miserable by a disappointment. The general course
of Men's doings, do turn upon one principal point; there being but one time of
trial, one main good or evil set before them, to which all the lesser and
single acts do relate. There is one God over all, one rule of action in his
Word, one end of everlasting Happiness or Misery. And the several deeds done in
the Body, are as so many steps to one or the other. The Law and the Testimony,
and the Light in them, discovers the nature of all how many soever they be, and
to what they lead. So again, when one is in any misery or trouble he should
take heed how he seeks for ease and recovery, for otherwise the last error may
be worse then the first, and he may become more miserable by what he thought
would be a cure and remedy. Let him look and find out the cause. Have recourse
unto the lively Oracles, when he is in sorrow and discomposure of mind. Whether
himself be not of the number of those who are Like the troubled Sea when it
cannot rest, whose Waters cast up mire and dirt, Isa. 57. 20. And there his
melancholy (as they call it) is the necessary effect of Sin and Guilt. Their
Consciences being wounded, they run up and down seeking a little Comfort, when
they carry still that along with them; they go from one place to another, here
and there, and yet are not satisfied. By this means the deadly thing is not
taken away, but sticks still fast till it rankles and becomes insensate, so
more dangerous. Some being hardened through the deceitfulness of Sin are not
sensible; how this occasions present dullness or disquiet, but impute it to
natural disposition, and fasly imagine to have a cure by what was the original
cause thereof: These acting contrary to Reason, meet with the usual event of
Folly. The pleasures of Sin are but for a season, and after the several times
are over; the melancholic fit returns as bad, rather worse then ever. If they
would suffer themselves to be admonished, how they neither make use of the
right remedy, nor apply it to the distempered part; for instead of taking away
they feed the Disease, and use stupifying Medicines, which only take away the
sense but not prevent Death. The Sinner that labors under remorse, will drink
heartily, for sorrow is dry, so endeavoring to drown the spirit within him,
which though it sink at night, will rise again in the morning, and because it
tells him the truth, it is thought his Enemy for disturbing him; And therefore
he will try again to drive that unwelcome Guest out of his house, which cannot
be done. Then continual Business, Recreation or Company shall divert its
whispers: Otherwise by gross Ignorance or stupid inconsideration he willingly
becomes as bruit Beasts, whom he observes to be disturbed from nothing within.
Thus he dreams of relief, as if he should not die, and puts of what would do no
other harm then lead him to Repentance, till it is hid from his Eyes.

It is truly said of the Wisdom that is from above, Her ways are ways of
pleasantness, and all her paths are Peace, Pro. 3. 17. Under that Word is
comprised all Happiness, and this throughout the whole Scripture is promised to
keeping of the Commandments of God. O that thou had hearkened to my
Commandment, then had thy Peace been as a River, and thy Righteousness as the
Waves of the Sea, Isa. 48. 18. There is a constant serenity and calmness of
mind. The sincere Penitent when he is habituated to the way of Godliness, finds
more Pleasure then ever he did in the course of Sin. He i^ more comforted in
singing Praises, and making spiritual melody in his Heart, then heretofore in
drunken Songs, or lacivious tunes. More satisfaction arises to him in
meditating on God's Law, then who devise mischief, or let their thoughts run
after all manner of filthiness. This is the constant felicity of God's chosen,
but they have greater things then these; the antepasts of Heaven, the earnest
and first fruits of the Spirit, that joy of the inward Man which far exceeds
the most exquisite delights of Sense. All these are without allay or mixture,
there is no Condemnation or Fear, no Repentance or Vexation among them. It is a
true and sensible satisfaction, though it may seem mystery and foolishness to
carnal Men. Any one may have it upon the terms of the Gospel, who observes all
things whatsoever the Author thereof has Mat. 28. 20.
commanded, for want of which so many miss of it. The Covetous does avoid
Gluttony, Drunkenness or such chargeable Sins, and will be apt to cry out with
the Pharisee, God be thanked I am none of these; But he does not take heed and
beware of Covetousness, Luke 12 15. so he is not happy here, For through the
love of Money he pierces himself through with many Sorrows, nor will be
hereafter, for such shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, 1. Cor. 6. 10. He
whose God is his Belly, is perhaps no Man's enemy but his own, and therefore may
expect the peaceable fruits of Righteousness, but in vain, for he has not here
any lasting joy; it arises only from the Meat and Drink that perishes; neither
will he attain to the fullness thereof, His end being Destruction from the
presence of God, Phil. 3. 18. They do somewhat toward obtaining Happiness, but
the other evil deprives thereof. One accursed thing troubles Israel here below,
and shall never approach so near as to disturb the rest of the People of God.
However the enemies to their own good would have it, yet it is necessary to
that of the present time to avoid every evil way, for otherwise there can be no
true Peace of mind, no freedom from fear and regret.

In the day of Prosperity be joyful, but in the time of Adversity consider: God
also has set the one over against the other, to the end that Man should find
nothing after him, Eecles. 7. 14. Look into them both thoroughly, and they are
little, each passes away, and it is the same thing afterward. So they are not
to be admired or feared, but the one cautiously used, and the other submitted
unto, that they may help forward to eternal Happiness; for that is happiness
indeed, and the principal concern; when all temporal things slip away like a
Dream, which affects a little for the instant, but afterward is not minded.
But good Men can better bear Affliction then others, having joy and gladness
within, when the Body is weak and languishing. They have quietness and
assurance of mind, when the Flesh is wasted with pain or sickness. This is so
manifest, that even the Wicked (if they have courage to stand by and observe)
will secretly ejaculate, Let me die such a Death, and let my latter end be like
his; Mark the Perfect Man, and behold the Upright, for the end of that Man is
Peace, Psalm. 37. 37. when others are attended with Horror, Amazement, or
Stupidity and Inconsideration.

All acknowledge those more happy in their Sickness and Death; but the great
doubt and inquiry will be, whether they are so in their Life; for if that can
be brought forth and made to appear in the Light of the living, it would be no
small argument for the Conversion of Sinners from the error of their way. The
reason why the^ follow after the Lusts of the flesh and commit sins most in
Fashion, is because they think it is for their present Happiness, their Honor
and Reputation which is one part thereof. Now were they fully convinced, that
could equally, yea more be had in obedience to Gods Commandment, these would
live according to that, unless they are the greatest Fools that can be
imagined, considering the disproportion of the rewards of the one, and sad
Punishments that are to the other way. If the God of this World has not
blinded their eyes, and they are not altogether become Carnal who cannot
discover any thing within, they may consider the great difference of things set
before us, Life and Good, Death and Evil, that they may choose the better and
avoid the worse. Evil has a thin appearance of Good, and therefore is catched
at and embraced; so Good has an outward show of Evil, and is abhorred and
despised. At first sight sin and iniquity seem to further the Happiness of
mankind, but in truth is the Cause of Misery; so righteousness and obedience
looked slightly on, appear to bring in convenience and disturbance. Sin has a
show of Wisdom and Briskness, when in the Act it is folly, afterward
Tribulation and Anguish of Soul; the other at a transitory glance is foolish
and dull, but upon full Trial is the greatest Prudence, perfect Peace and
Satisfaction to the mind of Man. The delusion and mistake is, Men do not see
thoroughly into things, nor look beyond the present unto the end, and consequent
of them; for if they did this, they would not be deceived in that greatest
Concern (for every Soul would have the one and escape the other) of Happiness
or Misery. Judge not according to appearance but righteous judgment. That
excessive Laughter and outward Noise (which sometimes accompany the Pleasures
of sin) make ignorant undiscerning Persons stand in Admiration of it. But is it
not all like crackling of Thorns under a Pot, which gives a blaze, but no solid
heat, and is suddenly extinct? Ye which rejoice in a thing of naught, Amos 6.
13. Is not your heart even in the midst thereof sorrowful? How many Damps and
u^heard Sighs are perceived from within by your selves amongst merry Company?
Are you not more pensive afterward? When you are alone (if you can endure
that) and reflect the next morning; are they not all vanished away as last
nights Dream? What odds between that and yesterdays Enjoyments? Is this your
utmost Happiness that is mixed, broken of, and interrupted? Which day by day
grows more tiresome, and ceases to delight. A whole Life so spent, as between
the last rising of the Sun and setting thereof, does not satifie at the
instant, utterly perishes, and seems as if it had never been; those Delights
are not greatest which make most noise, but rather shallow and hastily run
away, when true Satisfaction like deep Water is silent and full.

We may indeed show forth outward Signs of Rejoicing, for wherefore has God
given us Powers so to do, if we might not Laugh? He that does not afflict
willingly nor grieve the Children of Men, (I am persuaded) does not delight to
see a sad Countenance, disfigured Faces, or a Head hanging down* like* a
Bulrush, but Loves a cheerful Aspect as well as a Giver. We may be Christians
and Men still. Both merry and facetious as far as consistent with the perfect
Law of Liberty. We may use the Creatures and Recreations in a moderate way, and
so they relish more then running to the full Excess of Riot. In the mean while
we do not place our happiness in them. We esteem them as Blessings, and are
thankful, but do not rest contented being designed for greater things, we do
not use them as the chiefest Good, nor consume most of our time and care in
them, as the manner of some is: Who therefore term us Melancholy and stupid,
but themselves are more properly brutish. Why should they accuse any one for
not being exceeding Cheerful in those things which cannot make the Owners so?
That Aspersion is generally cast upon all Gods Servants, as if his ways were
nothing but Sowreness and Misery, and so discourage others. It is unworthy to
bring an evil Report of the Land they never searched, their words are not much
minded who speak evil of the things they know not. But it is much worse in the
Spies, who say they have knowledge and experience, if they do lessen it in a
whispering and indirect manner; it is because themselves did flightly view, and
so away; they had a secret Prejudice before, and came in as it were by force,
and for their own safety. But had they went through, and into the midst of it,
diligently observed all things, dwelt there for some time, the longer the
better, they will perceive the Goodness thereof. By that time they have
continued as long there as in the wilderness of sin, they will like it much
more; somewhat is to be allowed to a state of Trial, consequently Temptations;
an imperfect knowledge, those remainders of Original corruption, which are so
many weights that we must carry along in the Christian race, but still by Gods
aid we can go through here with more Contentment then others in their ways. But
seek ye first the Kingdom of God and his righ^eousness, and all these things
shall be added unto you, Mat. 6. 33. Such Provisions and Accomodations as are
necessary for your Journey; if you have them not in so great abundance, yet you
shall in a more excellent way; your Life is more sweet and comfortable, then
those who have Riches or Estate. The Apostle ranks those among the enemies of
the Cross of Christ who mind Earthly things, Phil. 3. 18, 19. and therefore
it is improper to insist upon Considerations drawn from them, unless they lead
up toward the Heavenly.

The knowledge of God and Eternity make all things besides seem little and
momentary, for the greater will obscure the less, as the Sun does the Light of
Moon and Stars. Now because most say with their mouths God is their chiefest
good, Heaven their end, when their Heart runs after temporal things; unless his
Word did discover it in plain and true Sayings, we should be at a loss how to
find out their Hypocrisy* or put a difference between making them the
principal or subordinate end. Where is such a cumbring about many things, and
so little or lazy regard to the one thing needful; That earnest care and
greater degree of affection after one then the other, will manifest their
Pretenses to be lying and vain; for it is a certain Rule, Where is Faith and
Love of God, that Man will not commit sin, or leave Duty undone, to accomplish
present things. And if he did sincerely intend for Heaven, he would not do
those things which lead contrary, as that Word (which makes known the place and
way) does expressly declare. Men would not be so mightily concerned for a moment
(no more then they are for one Nights Lodging upon a journey) if they had a
real Sense of Eternity. If it was not for this great end, all Men's doings are
vain; their Divertisements would be as the flyings of a Swallow, during its
appointed time; their heaviness and misery as the Mournings of a Dove, which
would be ended. Whatever delights or afflicts, soon passes away, and we are
gone. To talk of their Good and Evil would be as impertinent, as now it is to
lay down Rules for having the tickling of a Feather, or prevent the scratchings
of a Pin. Their goings up and down would be as the moving of a shadow which is
lost in darkness. The deep thoughts of Heart dreams followed with a dead and
eternal Sleep: Great swelling words like a voice crying in the wilderness
instantly perish, and signify nothing. Those fancied worthy and great Actions
just carry on that small Variety which is in the course of the World, but
little more then what Beasts do in their several kinds, all things would be
small and inconsiderable in this Life of Vanity, barely appear and be
forgotten. If there was an utter end and no more, it would be an idle (as it is
now unacceptable) Office to use any words about them.

But seeing the Case is otherwise, there is a God that judges in the Earth,
Psalm. 58. 11. He has given a Law to those several Generations that pass
through here to govern them by. All those things which seem to be vanished and
gone by, will rise up again, for we must all appear before the Judgment Seat of
Christ, that every one may receive the thing done in his Body, according to
what he has done whether it be good or bad, 2 Cor. 5. 10. We are only proved
here how we will behave our selves toward God. It is worth while to look
further, to consider Man in his several Circumstances, State and Condition in
this World, with some general Heads of Good and Evil that are set before him,
if he may be stirred up or put in mind of some things for his own Happiness and
Safety.

CHAP. II.
Of Man confidered in his threefold Condition, Original, Corrupted and
Restored: Of his Thoughts Words and Actions, Infancy, Youth, Manhood, therein
of Company and Marriage; Of Old Age, Body, Senses and sensual Pleasure; Of the
Soul, Understanding, Will, Affections, as Love, Fear, Joy, Sorrow, Anger,
Hope: Of Temptations; The Close.

THou have made Man a little lower then the Angels, and have Crowned him with
Glory and Honor, Psalm. 8. 5. One part is of the dust of the ground, the other
the breath of Life, a reasonable Soul, in which he has resemblance to the
angelical Nature, and is exalted above Beasts. His Happiness in the state of
Innocence, and how it was lost by Transgression is known by every one that
reads the Scripture, again he was redeemed by our Lord and Savi^ur Jesus
Christ, Romans 5. 17, 18, 19. 1 Pet. 3. 18. If we are not wanting to our selves,
he has restored us to as great a Capacity of good, as we should have had if
our Forefather had not sinned. God so loved the World, that he gave his only
Son, that whosoever believes on him should not perish, but have everlasting
Life, John 3. 16. Hereby perceive we the love of God toward us, because he
laid down his Life for us, and greater love then this has no Man then to lay
down his Life for another, 1 John 3. 10. The holy Spirit inspires Grace and
good Motions into our hearts, whom if we do not resist, and so grieve, he will
Seal us to the day of Redemption.

We feel the mischievous workings of Original Corrruption, and we have the same
quality of our first Parent to Lust after forbidden things. A coveting after
Evil, and averseness to Good. Behold I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did
my Mo^her conceive me, Psalm. 51. 5. It is intermixed and grows up with every
part, that we all are as prone to Evil, as the Sparks to fly upward: Indeed
goodness does appear reasonable and lovely, yet our Inclinations are backwards
to the Practice of it, there is a Close hankering after and Preference of the
contrary. The whole Man is defiled, Mark 7. 21, 22, 23. Genesis 8. 21. Eccles. 3.
9. He devises iniquity in his Bed, he studies to do mischief, His Thoughts are
vain, He takes no delight in Good, but rather on Lust, Pride, and all manner of
Concupisence. Every mouth speaks folly, Isa. 9. 17. Evil Communications,
Filthiness, Deceit, Lying, and all sorts of Evil proceed out of it. With
Blasphemies and horrid Oaths he is dishonored who enabled it to Speak. With
this Sword it is endeavored to give our blessed Redeemer more Wounds, and to
crucify him afresh. The tongue is a fire, a World of iniquity; so is the
tongue amongst our Members, that it defiles the whole Body, and sets on
fire the course of Nature, and is set on fire of Hell. Therewith bless we God,
even the Father, and therewith curse we Men, which are made after the simitude
of God, Jam. 3. 6, 9. Our Actions proceeding from the same corrupt Stock are of
the like Nature; Wise to do evil, and forward to put in Execution what our
wicked hearts conceive. Every Member is wicked, and abominably wicked. Their
inward part is very wickedness, Psalm. 5. 9. and as it is further described,
Romans 3. 10. to ver. 18. Man is become as sinful as is possible for such a poor
Creature to be with short Faculties and Powers; they are stretched forth to the
utmost, he sins till he has not Ability to sin any more; though he has not
wherewithal to vent, yet the malicious and corrupt Desire is infinite in a
little finite Being. The Seeds of Evil came in with the forbidden Fruit. But we
must not accuse Ad^m of our Transgression more then is due, for it is our own
fault if we suffer it to grow forth and improve it to that monstrous height. It
may be hewn down and destroyed, but still the stump of the Dan. 4. 23.
Roots is left in the Earth. The holy One that came down from Heaven has got
this Privilege and Power for us. The Lamb of God, which takes away the sins
of the World, could even at this present time extirpate it quite Root and
Branch; but that he is not pleased to do for wise Reasons, yet now he puteth in
such a Condition and Ability to perform so much as in and through him will be
accepted; and we shall come to that place where this accursed thing with all
its remainders shall utterly be done away. If we come unto him, and sincerely
do what is required under the second Covenant, Christ's righteousness will
supply our defects. The filthy Rags, Isa. 64. 6. Shall be cast away, and we
shall be arrayed in fine Linen clean and White: For the Fine Linen is the
righteousness of Saints, Rev. 21. 8.

What then, shall we continue in sin that Grace may abound? God forbid. Those
which make this damnable inference, do mistake the Gospel Covenant, which
requires obedience and good Works, Tit. 2. 11, 12, 13. 1 Pet. 2. 24. Heb. 5. 9.
Christ has brought good tidings and published Peace, and brought good tidings
of good, and published Salvation, Isa. 52. 7. The same Jesus has said, Those
which do iniquity shall be cast into a Furnace of fire, Mat. 13. 41, 42. Luke
13. 27, 28. He has proclaimed the acceptable Year of the Lord, and the Day of
vengeance of our God, Isa. 61. 2. The Gospel is commonly said to be all mercy,
yet therein the wrath of God is revealed against all ungodliness and
unrighteousness of Men, Romans 1. 18. so 2 These. 1. 7, 8, 9. The end of both Law
and Gospel is obedience, by this we are freed from the Curse, Gal. 3. 10, 13.
We have further the assistance of the holy Spirit to resist Temptations and
keep Gods Commandments. The stony Heart is taken away, and an Heart of flesh is
given. Whereas the whole Man is corrupted, now he is put into a way to be right
again, if he will use the Grace given him. He may run counter to his natural
State, and be sanctified throughout. A good Man out of the good Treasure of the
Heart brings forth good things, Mat. 12. 35. After those days says the Lord,
I will put my Law in their inward parts and write it in their Hearts, Jer. 31.
33. So we may draw near with a true Heart in full assurance of Faith, having
our Hearts sprinkled from an evil Conscience, and our Bodies washed with pure
water, Heb. 10. 22. Sanctify the Lord God in your Hearts, 1 Pet. 3. 15.
Casting down imaginations and every high thing that exalts it self against
the knowledge of God, and bringing into Captivity every thought to the
obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10. 5. Excellent Subject matter is laid down for
them, Phil. 4. 8. There is God and his Law to be meditated on, Creation,
Redemption, Providence, the knowledge of our selves. There is a large Field for
thoughts to range in, and the Soul is continually sending some forth. We are to
cherish the good, and cast the bad away. It has been said, Thoughts are free;
every Man may have what he will to himself in the deep of his Heart, not
thoroughly considering with whom we have to do, a God who searches the Heart and
tries the Reins, who has commanded, Wash thine Heart from wickedness, that
thou may be saved, how long shall thy vain thoughts lodge within thee? Jer.
4. 14. And in these latter days has spoken by his Son, Blessed are the pure in
Heart, for they stall see God, Mat. 5. 8.

The principal use of Speech is, that We may offer the Sacrifice of Praise to
God continually, that is the fruit of our Lips, giving Of Speech.
thanks to his Name, Heb. 13. 15. and then it is necessary to maintain Society,
to Communicate our thoughts to each other, that we may be helpful and
beneficial (for none is sufficient of himself) either in spiritual or temporal
things. God has ordained that we should stand in need, that we may be kind and
serviceable to one another. This is the end of Conversation and Neighborhood,
so of Speech, without which we should not differ from the Flock or Herd. We are
to do all the good we can by mutual Admonition and Counsel, both to give and
receive, and Practice it severally. Put them in mind to speak evil of no Man,
to be no Brawlers, but gentle showing all meekness unto all Men, Tit. 3. 2.
Wherefore putting away Lying, speak every Man truth with his Neighbor, for we
are Members one of anoother, Ephesians. 4. 25. Nothing is so contrary to the design
of Speech as that, for this pretends to discover our thoughts when we do not,
and thus deceive them. Truth is the image of God stamped upon the Soul, which
lying is a direct Violation of and severely threatened, Rev. 21. 8. The caution
our Savior and his Apostle gives, Mat. 5. 37. Jam. 5. 12. is to hinder that
wicked Prevarication of the first use of Speech aforementioned; it is contrary
to praising of God, which makes his great and dreadful Name vile and cheap, by
vainly using it upon little and trivial Matters. These are the slips of the
Tongue we are obliged to beware of. The positive Duties thereof are to speak
out for Gods Glory, and the benefit of others: To talk of his Statutes, and not
to be ashamed. Though in our Age it is styled canting, yet not to be afraid of
the reproach. However, let those be acquainted who cast it upon others, for
speaking of Gods Law; I say, let such have a Care how they put an opprobrious
and slighting term upon the Language of the holy Ghost. Th^se who are not
openly profane will reply, they do not intend Scripture in so speaking, but
are against the unseasonable Citation thereof by such a one. There are some who
would have us be Christians only at Church or Prayers, and think it unbecoming
to hear or Discourse of the Word but at those times; whom Moses has long since
answered, and undoubtedly he knew what was most acceptable, and well pleasing
unto God. These words which I command thee this day shall be in thine Heart:
And thou shall teach them diligently unto thy Children. And thou shall talk of
them when thou sit in thine House, and when thou walk by the way, and
when thou lie down, and when thou risest up, Deuteronomy. 6. 6, 7. It was not only
to be in the Synagogue but at home; not only in their Family* worship, but when
they walked abroad. Was this Commandment to the Jews, and not to Christians
also? Have we not as great Promises and strict Obligations to Duty as they had?
Are we not to glorify God in our words as well as they? Or shall they be all
confined to Worldly business, idle Tales and Impertinencies, and not be
allotted to the one thing needful, our eternal Welfare? This would be more
right and seemly, if the things of the next Life were little and perishing, and
those here great and enduring; for if it were so, some could not be more busy
in the Affairs of this, and negligent to the other: When it is just contrary,
for in a little while, and these shall not be, day by day single Persons are
taken from them, when the other ever remain. It is not absolutely necessary for
Men in all times, and in all places to talk of nothing but good things, (though
indeed the more the better) for there are other innocent Topics of Discourse.
As the Changes and Chances of this World, which serve to magnify Providence,
and divert the mind; and all those things wherein is no harm or evil, for use
may be made of what go under the Name of indifferent things. Then concerning
business, and the way of management, how to direct our Actions. As for Mat. 12.
36. it is supposed our Savior intended against false words, as may be gathered
from V^r. 31, 32, 33, 34. and the reason added ver. 37. But if it were so
understood by which no real profit accrues to the hearer, then by our words all
of us would be in danger to be condemned. There is no parrallel place of
Scripture, which confirms that strict acceptance. Indeed a good Man does not
willingly give way to that discourse, for which none is better afterward, yet
if the company be delighted with it, and it is not evil directly or indirectly,
the Pleasure thereof arises from mutual conference, so if this diverts, the end
is answered. Our Master is not austere, but willing that his Servants should
take some delight in Conversation. But it is to be remembered whom we serve, the
God of Knowledge and Wisdom, and not Beelzebub the God of flies; so it is to be
desired, that all our discourse were substantial and grave, and we were come up
to that degree of understanding, to find more joy and satisfaction therein,
then others do in vain and useless things. It is in no wise irksome or
unpleasant to those who have the Love of God in them. There are some whose
Religion consist in talk, who say and do not, Mat. 23. 2. Who think and would
put off the Commandments of God, by using their Mouth to Holy and Divine
things, which themselves do not mind in the Heart, nor obey in their Life and
Actions; these are foolish and deceived. Others take up Religion for a
supplement of Discourse; when they are at a stand, and know not what to say
else, it comes in after and only for want of other talk. These act unworthily
toward him who is most Great and Glorious. So speak ye, and so do as they that
shall be judged by the Law of Liberty, Jam. 2. 12

The rule of Action is the whole Scripture as it relates of Actions
toward God, our Neighbor (all which may be judged of by Mat. 7. 12.) and to
our selves. Gods Glory is to be the end of all, 1. Cor. 10. 31. By his word all
the Actions of mankind may be determined whether good or evil. Where no Law is
there is no Transgression, Romans 4. 15. And where there is either going contrary
or leaving it undone, is Sin. Eschew evil and do good, is a comprehensive
Command reaching to all our ways. The example of our Lord, Acts, 10. 38. is
obligatory to all according to their Capacity and Station, to do what good they
can whilst in the World; to profit whom they are able, but to hurt none.
Whether ye eat or drink, or whatever you do, Respect is to be had unto God, for
his Government extends over the whole Man, even the thoughts and intents of the
Heart. All the faculties of Soul and Members of Body, are to be made
instruments of Righteousness unto Holiness, which were before instruments of
Sin unto Iniquity.

This is a blessed change which every one would have, if he did thoroughly
understand the true worth thereof, but an Enemy does hinder, whom the Captain
of our Salvation would enable to resist, if he would follow the directions, and
use the Power given him. He prompts and inclines when the other does beat off.
The Temptation is near the same with our Lords invitation, who promises rest;
the other makes a proposal and offer of Happiness. If the poor Man is overcome
by cunning persuasions, then he is held Captive, he has leave for a while to
intoxicate himself with Pleasures, that he may not be sensible of his enslaved
condition. Outward objects are provided to divert him from looking within; by
these, as Children with Toys, the Soul is deluded some time, but at length
grows weary. He finds no real satisfaction in any thing, he knows not what to
do, Conscience will move him toward Repentance. Then comes the evil one to
affright him from considering of his ways. If the evil spirit is in danger to
be cast out, he does foam and rage; the possessed is in as great a combustion as
if he were cast into the Fire; and therefore some fearful Souls will rather
endure the Bondage still, then bear the trouble of driving it out; like silly
Patients die of their Sores, rather then suffer them to be searched to the
bottom. But there are others who dare grapple with this power of darkness,
Fasting and Prayer are excellent Weapons; the Soul being freed from the clog of
Meat and Drink, is more strong and vigorous, so fitter for the Combat; by the
latter he is called to assistance, Who for this purpose was manifest in the
Flesh, that he might destroy the works of ^^e Devil, 1. John. 3. 8. When the
strong holds of Sin are pulled down, the Enemies turned out, the Conqueror will
succeed in the room, Christ dwell in him, and he in Christ, If a Man love me,
he will keep my Words, and my Father will love him, and we will come unto him,
and make our ahode with him, John 14. 23. If he know when he is well, he will
endeavor to continue so, not admitting of any Sin, least b^ the ^ilthy smoke
thereof he should offend and cause to go away the undefiled one of God, who
holds his Soul in Peace and Blessedness. This condition any one may arrive at,
through the Grace that came by Jesus Christ. A Prize is put into our hands,
which (if we have the heart to use the means) we shall certainly obtain. It is
no great matter, only to obey the Gospel, which is what a wise Man could choose
to do, if no recompense of reward was to be revealed hereafter, for such true
satisfaction (which nothing else can give) arises to the mind through well
doing, that this alone is sufficient motive.

There is more sincere Pleasure in abstaining from evil thoughts then yielding
to them, the mind is serene and clear; and meditation of good things is suitable
to its nature, has neither Shame nor Repentance following it. What are called
common and indifferent things, they do equally divert as what are sinful and
strange. To speak the truth is natural, there is no difficulty and trouble to
find out evasions, or avoid self-contradiction. There is no danger for him to
be entangled in his talk, who speaks nothing but truth, for that is consonant
to it self. Lying is shameful and hated, who are addicted to it would not be
accounted so, it is odious in the opinion of the worst of Men. Slandering,
Flattery and other Sins of the Tongue are abominated by all that have but
common nature and ingenuity. As for vain Swearing, those who use it will
acknowledge there is no Pleasure nor Profit: yea, but there is ^ashion and
Custom. It Is strange that one is not reputed a complete Gentleman, unless he
affront his Maker; nor a Soldier without bidding defiance to the Lord of Host.
Does it sound great and majestic? But how improper is it for a Worm of five or
six foot long, to use it against the express Command of him describ^d, Isa. 40.
12, 15, 17, 22. And who has said, which he has also fulfilled in foregoing
Generations; I will cause the arrogance of the Proud to cease, and will lay low
the Haughtinss of the Terrible, Isa. 13. 11. Did men really believe and
consider his Infinite Greatness, Power and Truth, who has affirmed he will not
hold them guiltless that take his Name in vain, they would not do it so often
upon the meerest trifies. If they are such Fools to say in their Heart, there
is no God, Why are they yet greater to take that in their Mouths, which in
their imagi^ation is nothing? But his Being is as true as that there is a
World, and any thing in it, more certai^ then that they live, for he was
before, and so remains notwithstanding all their silly fancies: Themselves will
find there is a God that judges the Earth, and when he comes, Every one that
Swears shall be cut off as on that side, Zech. 5. 13. They are the more
inexcusable because they have so little Temptation to this Sin; the commonness
whereof seems to be imputed to that perverse humor of some who will therefore
do it because God has forbidden it. Be not Merciful to any wicked
Transgressors, Psalm. 59. 5.

Perjury is Infamous amongst all Nations; some have thought no punishment too
severe for it. God is highly provoked and dishonored, the forsworn Wretch as
far as lies in his power makes him an Instrument and Partner to his own deceit
and malice: As if the fountain of Truth were false as himself, he calls him for
witness to a mischievous Lie. He prays God would help him according to the
Truth he speaks, but prevaricates that, and his prayer shall turn into his own
Bosom, and so be destitute of his aid, without which he shall perish. If God
did not keep silence, none would presume to do after this manner, and then
could be no Trial; but in the other World shall be found true what is written,
Ps. 50. 21.

The Atheistical Disputer (whom after-Ages will hardly believe to have ever
been) is more plagued with fears of eternal Vengeance, then all the
affectations of wit and applause amongst his monstrous Herd amount unto. And
this disadvantage lies against him, that those things are true even before Men
were, or could argue against them; and so remain notwithstanding all absurd and
foolish Imaginations. It is better and more happy not to offend with the
Tongue, then to let it loose to its several kinds of Sin and Irregularity.

As for Actions, What does yield more real content then to do justly? The rules
whereof none violates without Regret and Condemnation. There is an inward and
sensible grief, when any thing is done contrary to the Law written in the
Heart. It is vexation to reflect upon an injury done, and they cannot endure to
look the person in the face against whom it was; and which is yet worse, will
add hatred and evil speaking to excuse themselves from the Wrong. But the
upright keeping a Conscience void of offense toward God and Man, is not afraid
nor ashamed to see any one; Though he i^ profitable to himself (as the end of
things will man^fest) yet he w^ll now rather rece^ve then do Wrong, and has
for ea^nest of reward, a free undesturbed mind. So much in general of Thoughts,
Words and Actions.

Come we to Man's bodily Frame and Constitution with the growth, and several
Periods thereof. It is composed of Flesh and Blood, Bones and Sinews, curious
in its Contrivance, each Member ^itted for the respective Office, no* part
useless, and the whole so knit together that the Work denotes God to be the
only Author thereof, Psalm. 119. 13, 14, 15, 16. He made us, and not we selves,
Psalm. 100. 3. This is here inserted, because some ungodly natural People
attribute too much to themselves, as their Parents were causes of them, and
they of their Children. This Temper arises from unbelief and ignorance, and is
much different from that of the Patriarch, when his Wife said, Give me
Children, or else I die; his Anger was kindled greatly against her, and he
said, Am I in Gods stead, who has withheld from thee the Fruit of thy Womb?
Genesis 30. 1, 2. Psalm. 127. 4. But those would rob God of his Honor, and, who
cannot make one hair White or Black, nor add one Cubit to their Stature, think
that they give being to their Posterity; and if they had not been, neither
should the others. As if the Almighty could not have brought themselves into
the World otherwise, then by means of the Parents they had. This is to limit
the holy one of Israel, Psalm. 78. 41. to confine his Power, who has made
Heaven and Earth, and there is nothing too hard for thee, Jer. 32. 17. Who
might have ordered us of this Generation, and of this or that Family, to have
been born of Heathen Parents, placed us in another Nation, brought us into
being a thousand years since, if he had so pleased. God has established a
Course of Nature, and Acts according See Isa. 24. 16.
to it, but therein Parents are only the instrumental cause of our Being. And
call no Man your Father upon the Earth: For one is your Father which is in
Heaven, Mat. 23 9. Have we not all one Father? Has not one God ^reated us?
Mal. 2. 10. Thou O Lord art our Father, we are the Clay, and thou our Potter,
and we are all the Work of thy hand, Isa. 64. 8. Without an Almighty power that
orders, it cannot be imagined so excellent a Creature should proceed from
such a mean beginning. The Fathers according to the Flesh do nothing toward
the infusion of the Soul, and for the viler part, no more then the Husbandman
to make the Corn grow, only scattering the Grain in the Earth. Have not thou
poured me out as Milk, and Crudled me like Cheese? Job 10. 10. They are but
instruments in the hand of God, and by the meanness of them (if the blinded
World did see as much) he does the more magnify his own Power. It should teach
us to abase our selves, and the more to exalt our Maker. Who might have created
all mankind, as he did the first immediately out of the Earth in fullness of
Stature, or to grow as Trees and Vegetables; but by the same Wisdom he made the
Heavens, has ordained this only way of coming into the World; His Son was born
of a Woman, not by way of common Generation; the blessed Virgin did not know
Man, The Holy Gbost came upon her, the Power of the Highest over-shadowed her,
and therefore that holy thing was born of her, which was called the Son of God,
Luke 1. 35. All we that are conceived in the heat of Concupiscence are defiled,
but Christ sanctified the Womb. He submitted to the meanness of our Birth, that
he might take our whole Nature upon him, Sin only excepted.

The Prophet, Ezekiel. 16. 4, 5. describes our Birth, the poor Infant Of Infancy
and Childhood.
comes forth in Pain, and being exposed to unusual Light and Cold, shows its
dislike by Crying. It is more destitute, weak and ignorant then other Creatures
at first are; they never sinned, but our most merciful God has provided for
this by implanting a Care and Affection in the Mother. By degrees the Child is
brought up, and howsoever despicable it seems in our Eyes. O Lord out of the
Mouth of Babes and Suckl^ngs, have thou ordained Strength, Psalm. 8. 2. Our
Savior has testified his Love and regard for them, Mat. 18, 19. and 19. 14.
Even Men of perfect Stature must be born again, or they cannot see the Kingdom
of God, Joh. 3. 3. Luke 18. 18. In malice be Children, but in understanding be
Men, 1 Cor. 14. 20. The tender Infant has not so much of this, as forefooted
Beasts and Creeping things; every toy and t^i^^e pleases him for the present,
then he is weary of the same thing, (an Emblem that we are in pursuit after
Happiness, but do not find it) He affects Variety of Fool^ri^s, which delight
because he knows nothing better, but as he grows up he puts away these things
for more manly. There is a Series of Play-games, those that come to be the b^st
and wisest Men, when in this Age, spoke as a Child, understood as a Child, and
thought as a Child, 1 Cor. 13. 11. At this time of Life God winks; and as the
Follies thereof are not remembered by us, so neither will they be imputed by our
merciful Father. Though it passes away* pleasantly, (we then taking as great
delight in Rattles, as afterward the more studied Pleasures) yet none ^nvies
the Happiness of Children, their Recreations being idle and vain. By little
knowledge and reason begin to appear, which is improved by Tutors and
Governors. The workings of corrupt Nature are first discovered by Pride and
Self-will, which last is somewhat restrained by them. Whereat he is angry and
troubled, Not considering the kindness of his Parents is greater in providing
him proper Learning and Instruction, then as they we^e instrumental of his
coming into the World, for a B^ing only is not desirable unless Happiness is
annexed to it, and that cannot be had without knowledge. The Spring of Life is
the only time for that to bud forth and grow; the apprehension is lively and
brisk, the Memory good, nothing to hinder, and all things are easy in our
first years. No Seed ever came to perfection which was not sown then, and if it
be well harrowed in afterward by study and meditation, it will yield a
plentiful Crop, to the great Satisfaction of the Owner. If diligence be
answerable to his advantages, he will be both Wi^e and Learned. If designed for
a Trade or Civil employment, this is no burden, but will show how to manage
Affairs with more Discretion, but it much more helps to Spiritual and good
things; the Faculties begin to be more widened, and after they have* been some
while inured to Reason, ascend higher to be capable of Divine and Heavenly
things.

The Giddiness of Youth is a mighty impediment to both, they are for being
their own Men, and following their own O^ Youth.
ways; To be Brisk, Lightsome, and Playing mad Pranks. They are not so prudent
to Consider their own ways, but follow wicked Courses with haste and ignorance,
as the Horse rusheth into the Battle. We will deny our selves nothing Lust
craves for, but sati^fie that in every particular. All our study shall be to
find out what Pleasure to divert our selves with; If it be suggested, that
Religion contradicts this Licentiousness, they mock or despise; Say they, We
will let Religion alone for Melancholy Fools, old Persons or silly Women. But
stay a little: Is not all this Humor and Bravery in order to a supposed
Happiness? And what if thou should miss the real by such vain imaginations,
and a few transitory Acts? That of Eccles. 11. 9. has a sad sting in the end,
For all these things God will bring thee unto Judgment. This know, that
Religion (which none can reproach or contemn but ignorantly or unadvisedly) is
not a thing indifferent: Men may use it, or not at their Pleasure, as
Convenient and Prejudicial to other purposes. No such matter, It is just that
all People, young Men and Maidens, old Men and Children; nay, they must whether
they will or no be subject unto God. If they are so of a willing mind and free
Choice, he is pleased to accept thereof, and will reward them. But if no^,
their refusal is Contempt and Disobedience; which will be punished accordingly.
We shall all stand before the Jud^ment Seat of Christ, for as it is written, As
I live says the Lord every knee stall bow to me, and every Tongue shall
Confess to God, so then every one of us shall give Account of himself to God,
Romans 14. 10. 11, 12. Every Person now upon the Earth, or was heretofore, or
shall be, must either go to Heaven or Hell. It is thus O young Man; But these
things are not minded. Their desire is not to be sensible of danger, till they
have irrecoverably plunged themselves in. As if misery was the less, when not
foreseen; whereas this will be a stinging Aggravation, for had they done so
they might have pr^vented it. Is any Worldly evil less grievous, when we fall
into it through our own Folly and neglect? If it might have been avoided by
knowledge and care before hand, but is not, this does enhance the Bitterness
and Anguish of Soul. Inconsideration is the property of Fools, and has
Repentance always following it, but is much worse in the Concernments of
eternal Happiness or Misery, for an Error here is Remediless. As the Tree falls
so it lies, for those who continually stand upon the Brink of the bottomless
^it, and are only holden from dropping by the breath in their Nostrils, not to
look on their danger, that they may go further from it, is most unreasonable.
Especially seeing they are afraid of the least evil, a slight imaginary
Dullness, by which the Temper beats them of from desiring the knowledge of Gods
ways, or so much as reflecting on their own.

There are some who have a little more Consideration, but are unwilling to
leave the Company and pretended Joviality of their Equals for fear of reproach,
or to be out of Fashion, and therefore will Swear, Drink, Whore, Talk filthily,
yet they (retaining some Sense of Gods displeasure, and their own future
Account) think to make up for all by intending to repent hereafter. Let these
be admonished, Not to despi^e the Riches of his Goodness and ^orbarance, and
long suffering, not knowing that the Goodness of God leads thee to
Repentance, Romans 2. 4. And therefore in no wise should be made an occasion to
put it off further. If thou do ever come to true Repentance, and the Love of
God, thou will really wish thou had served him from thy youth up. It is the
wisest way whilst in our power so to do, as we ought and shall desire to have
done; and again to let alone other things from which we are obliged to refrain;
Seeing Christ's easy Yoke must be put on, It is good for a Man that he bear it
in his Youth, Lam. 3. 27. If it seem unpleasant at first, it is because he Is
as a Bullock unaccustomed to the Yoke, Jer. 31. 18. This only restrains the
Madness and Licentiousness of that Age, but takes not away reasonable and
moderate delights, which a little use will render more pleasing and acceptable
then Lying Vanities. Be not afraid, you are not called forth to Melancholy and
Misery, but the proper act of Man. The end of our Redemption is, That we might
serve God without Fear, in Holiness and Righteousness before him all the days
of our Life, Luke 1. 74, 75. And then certainly we must not exempt the choicest
part thereof. It is said in general, Cain brought of the Fruit of the Ground,
he rendered some Homage and Duty; But Abel brought of the Firstlings of the
Flock, and the Fat thereof; and the Lord had respect unto Abel and his
Offering. God required them under the Mosaical Dispensation, and Calves of a
year old, and the first that opened the Womb; thereby signifying that our
Bodies should be offered up unto him, as a living Sacrifice whil^t the Marrow
is in our Bones, and they are of full health, strength and vigor. To have the
first Fruits of our Reason and Understanding set a part for him. Though he
could have commanded every day and moment of our Lives; took ^s to his service
(as the Ox and Ass ^or ours) when he pleased, without making any question or
dispute concerning it, yet he leaves us to our Liberty: But how does he resent
it, when freely offered and given up unto him? Thus says the Lord, I remember
thee* the kind^ess of thy Youth, Jer. 2. 2. see Hos. 11. 1. 2. Chron. 34. 3.
Mark 10. 21. These are written for the Exhortation and Encouragement of all, to
come betimes, for God has a pec^liar Favor, and does take notice of them, ^or
only doing that which is the duty of all to do; To follow after him that is the
guid^ of our youth, Jer. 3. 4.

The nature of the Christian warfare and state of its Enemies require the chief
time of Life to encounter with them. When he is Listed at Baptism, he takes an
Oath to fight manfully against the World, the Fle(...) the Devil. The latter is
most maliciously set against us, Rev. 12. 12. 1 Pet. 5. 8. whom we must Resist
steadfast in the Faith, by this Shield we shall be able to quen^^h all the siery
Darts of the Wicked, Ephesians. 6. 16. The Angel of the bottomless Pit is often
transformed into an Angel of Light, yet if we are so happy, As from Childhood
to have known the Scriptures, which are able to make wise unto Salvation, 2 Timothy 3. 14, 15. We shall not be ignorant of his devices, no^ be beguiled
through his subtilty. Resist the Devil and he will flee from you, Jam. 4. 7.
This subdued, the next is our* own dear self, for though none ever hated his
own Flesh, but loves and cherishes it, yet that when too much cockered and
luxuriant turns our Enemy; When Blood runs warm in the veins, the Senses quick
and brisk, that is rampant and would get Dominion over us; The Commands are
directed accordingly, Flee youthful Lusts, 2 Timothy 2. 22. If ye live after the
Flesh ye shall die, but if ye through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the
Body, ye shall live, Romans 8. 13. Put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make not
Provision for the Flesh to fulfill the Lust thereof, Romans 13. 14. When overmuch
fuel is taken away, the fire will do no hurt, but serve only for its necessary
use. Another Enemy is the World, which with its pomp and glittering is apt to
deceive new and tender minds, but if they be seasoned with the Love of God and
Knowledge of his Word, particularly what is written Jam. 4. 4. 1 John 2. 14,
15, 16, 17. 1 John 5. 4. this will cast out the love of the World; Faith
overcomes it clearly, for what this assures of, does so infinitely exceed
Wordly Greatness and Glory, that they cannot hold due competition with the
heavenly; manifest Sense shows that we are but Sojourners here, and have no
continuing City; Faith ^eeks one to come; so we will hold no correspondence
with what we are now in, then as furnishing conveniences for, not to hinder
ou^ Journey. All these Foes are more dangerous, because they assault in the
disguise of Friends, making a show of Happiness, but deceive into Misery, and
do most strongly tempt in our inconstant Age. They act subtly, taking
advantage of want of a through and perfect Understanding. But fore warned and
fore-armed. Wherewithal shall a young Man cleanse his way? by taking heed
thereto according to thy Word, Ps. 119. 9. Which discovers the snare laid for
him, and he may avoid it in the midst of his career, if he can duly stop or
turn aside. I have more understanding then my Teachers, because I have learnt
thy Word. Every thing done in the World is with intention and desire after
good, and that lays down certain directions for Happiness; and avoiding Misery,
so this kind is most profitable.

If God did no more regard the Iniquities of Youth then Childhood, its Vanities
were more allowable, as the effect of Mirth and Lightness, but there is not the
same reason for both. Children have no Knowledge between good and evil, Deuteronomy.
1. 39. but Youth has or may have, which is the same thing. God expects when we
know his Will, we should do it, otherwise we Sin, and are liable to his
Indignation, It would be impertinent for the Psalmist to cry out, O Lord
remember not the Sins of my Youth, Ps. 25. 7. If God would never have imputed
them. And Righteous Job would have falsely expostulated; Thou writest bitter
things against me, and make me to possess the Iniquities of my Youth, Job 13.
26. so Jer. 31. 19. The just Judge of all the earth, calls to account for those
Transgressions, as of succeeding years. Good Men have been guilty of some
Extravagancies at that time of Life* which are not written for presumption and
license to Sin, but for the Hope and Comfort of those who Repent as they did,
and for those who are not yet defiled with Wickedness, to keep their innocence.
By their Examples it appears, that however sweet in commission, yet they are
exceeding bitter in remembrance. Many secret, heavy, doubtful and disturbed
Thoughts did arise, as often as they did look back upon them; the pleasure
whereof was vanished as if it had never been. All things considered, he
consults most for Gods Glory, and is wisest for his own Peace, who remembers
his Creator in the days of his Youth.

It is said, A young Saint an old Devil. Which pestilent Proverb sprange from
him the Father of Lies, who will suffer himself to be abused for the
advancement of his own Kingdom. There can be no suspicion or danger in the word
of Truth, which requires, To bring up Children in the Nurture and Admonition of
the Lord, Ep. 6 4. The wise Man renders a Reason for it, Prove. 22. 6. This Age
will gadly receive the impr^ssions of good, which are as acceptable as those of
Sin and Evil. If they grow up and consent with them, they become more customary
natural and delightful, then unlawful Pleasures are to others. The sincerity of
Youth tastes of the good Word of God and powers of the World to come, which have
their due influence on such a mind. The simplicity thereof does highly approve
the works of Righteousness, which cannot be otherwise thought of, except by
Corruption and Wrong. Would God these youthful qualifications might be still
retained, which in these and other instances are very advantageous for the
things pertaining to him. This the Enemy of mankind knows, though he does
cunningly whisper to the contrary, for he uses endeavor to get the first
Possession into our Hearts. He will try to hinder our Sons from being, As
Plants growing up in their Youth. And as far as the divine permission extends,
will graft into tender Stocks, the wild Olive Tree, that it may become
fruitless, hewn down and cast into the fire. He shows forth many alluring baits
and fair promises to beguil foolish nature to himself. If he gets young Souls
he has half done his work. When he has them in invincible* clutches, he
instills a dislike of Holiness, insinuating as if God's Law was too strict, it
curbs free nature, and deprives of Happiness. Why should not a young Man enjoy
pleasure? He furnishes with several Commendations of Drunkenness, Lust and
other deeds of darkness. He uses all tricks and devices, to get our first
years, for if he misses them, he very seldom recovers the following, so
contrary it proves to the forementioned saying. If a man keeps all Gods
Commandments from his Youth, knowing that therein is great reward, and having
respect still to that he despises the present pleasures of Sin, finding more
satisfaction in the way he walks in. He knows the necessity and encouragement
of Perseverance, 1 Cor. 15. 58. 2 John verse 8. Rev. 2. 10. It cannot be
denied, but there have been some Apostates, (the Scripture never supposes or
cautions against a vain and impossible thing, see Ps. 125* 5. Ez^k. 18. 24.
Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6. and 10, 26, 38. and 12, 15. 2 Pet. 2. 21, 22.) but these are
few in comparison of those who hold out unto the end. If they are well grounded
in the Faith, and lay a good Foundation: If they are quite gone out of Egypt,
and leave not a hoof behind, Exodus 10. 26. forsaking every evil way, the Sin as
dear to them as their right Eye. And then if they sincerely endeavor still,
and are not lazy or negligent, not omitting the means of Grace; there is no
great fear but these will receive the end of their Faith, the Salvation of
their Souls. These love God and are loved by him; Who loves with an everlasting
Love, J^r. 31 3. These shall receive the Crown of Life which the Lord has
promised to them that love him, Jam. 1. 12. If Satan desires to sift them as
Wheat, yet our blessed Advocate prevails, that their Faith fail not. The
ministering Spirits, Heb. 1. 14. Ps. 91. 11. 2 Kings 6. 16. preserve against the
destroying. We are put in mind of good, to defeat the suggestions of evil;
endued with spiritual Wisdom to discern and avoid the Crafts and Deceits of our
Adversaries. Wherefore let him that thinks he stands, take he^d least he
fall, 1 Cor. 10. 12. And having done all to stand, Ephesians. 6. 13. (for
Christianity is not an idle state, but compared to a Pilgrimage which is always
going forward, and using care not to be out of the way) there is no doubt that
the aforementioned Speech will ever be found true in him; which ought to be
razed out of the number of Proverbs, whose nature is to be true for the most
part, but this is most commonly false, and rules are laid down that it may be
always.

Let none hence be discouraged from early walking in the way to Heaven. We have
a long Journey to go, the sooner we set out, so much the better. If in the
Spring time he has all the year before him, observing the directions in
Scripture, he shall neither miss the way, nor be disappointed of the end, which
he proposes to himself. For the Lord never said to the House of Jacob, nor any
one else, Seek ye my face in vain; Gird thy Sword upon thy Thigh, O most mighty
with thy Glory and Majesty; And in thy Majesty ride prosperously, because of
Truth and Meekness and Righteousness, Ps. 45. 3, 4. Looking unto Jesus (there
Prophesied of) the Author and Finisher of our Faith. Consider him least you be
weary and faint in your mind, Heb. 12. 2, 3. Grow in Grace and in the Knowledge
of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 3. 18. till thou come to the
fullness of Stature, to be a Perfect Man, both in the divine and common
acceptance, which is the third stage of Life.

In which we are properly Men and reasonable Creatures; the Body being at its
utmost pitch, the understanding ripe and sound. Of Manhood.
Now we have a right estimate of things in their own nature; what we formerly
admired and were pleased with, we daily disesteem. The gayeties of Youth appear
foolish and despisable. Our thoughts are altered to more substantial things.
Company and getting of Money are two principal things this time is taken up
with, and therefore it is not to step much besides the Subject matter, to treat
severally of them (according to our purposed method in their rightful use, and
contrary abuse; all in pursuance to the general Argument. Company is thought
one Of Company and Solitariness.
of the chief good things belonging to the Sons of Men, which whosoever does
not care for, is pitied as Melancholy and Miserable. Indeed we are made for
Society, and there is implanted an inclination in our Nature toward it. Our
Lord when he dwelt among us, did freely converse with mankind. So did his
Apostles. They did endeavor to turn many into the right way from whence they
had strayed, and did effectually answer the end of Society by doing good to
others. As for those who retire and shut themselves from the World upon the
account of Religion, do otherwise then those, who did understand and Practice
it most. Let them spend much time in Devotion, yet What receives he of thine
hand? Thy Righteousness may profit the son of man, Job 35. 7, 8. but who runs
away, he does not exercise Acts thereof. How can he love his Neighbor as
himself? (which is one half of his Duty) who never performs Offices of kindness
unto him? The Saints of old did not lurk in Dens and Caves of the Earth till
driven there by Persecution. And John Baptist was in the Deserts till the day
of his showing unto Israel, Luke 1. 80. but after he Preached and lived among
Men. There is no example or precept in Scripture for the solitary Life. The
wilful Hermit (who is for pleasing God in a way he has not showed nor
commanded) does also violence to his own just Inclinations, is continually
discontented, and wishes he had never been, for he lives only to be sensible of
sad Reflections. He frets at the heavy Yoke he bears, which as God ordained is
easy and Light, but himself by Additions has made insupportable. His Life
through his own Foolish choice, is become like the Owl in the Desert, or the
pensive Inhabitants of the Wilderness.

Let not the Reader mis-apprehend here or in any other place, for the things
themselves are not so much spoken against as the Excess, and abuse of them.
Man's Nature (which must be Co^^ected in order to Happiness) is addicted to
extremes; in declining one he runs to the other, and leaves the middle way of
Truth, so turning aside into the bypath of Error. Some being sensible of the
inconvenience of too much Solitariness, therefore will not use it at all; and
yet great advantage may be thereby received. One may better converse with God
by Prayer and good Thoughts. Our blessed Lord would go up to a Mountain to that
intent, upon it was transfigured, and thence ascended into Heaven. And who
would follow him thither, it is now expedient he should sometimes go alone up
to high places, from whence he lifts up his Eyes, and as he surveys the
Creation in the height, in the length and breadth; all things appea^ little and
inconsiderable below. As he there takes a Prospect, he is not ravished with the
glittering Pomp of Worldly Grande^r. A numerous Army make a goodly show to
Bystanders, but seems to him as a Company of fabulous Pigmies, and the
greatest Commander is looked on as a small despicable Creature. Populous Cities
and all the Inhabitants thereof are as a Bee-hive, some going in and some
coming out, Men walking in a vain Show and disquieted in vain, Ps. 39. 6. The
best way to despise the World is, to behold it from some great exceeding high
Mountain. By meditation in Retirement, and observation in the Streets, we may
at length have a true apprehension of the very Nature of things freed from that
deceitful varnish and appearance. But they are discovered to be transient,
little and unsatisfactory, so there is less Temptation to fix up a Rest here,
but we are moved to seek that which remains for the People of God. If we did
always run up and down the City, we should not be so sensible of this, the
Heart will not Soar up where true Joys are only to be found, when it is pressed
down with the fancied Delight of Buying, Selling and getting Gain. It is
necessary to come out from Worldly business, and to be alone. Which is not so
unpleasant as commonly imagined, according as the Person is. A good Man is
satisfied from himself, Prove. 14. 14. As he walks out in the Fields to
meditate, he is as well pleased as others in great and jovial Company. A Bird
sings sweetly within; Thoughts of innocence and the good he has done and will
continue in, afford more Complacency then all the Variety of the World.

The ungodly are not so, P^. 1. 4. for what is the others Comfort, is Torment
to them. They run to the Covert of Taverns and Alehouses, and intermix with the
Herd of Fellow Creatures, if they may lose the Sense of their Disturber. They
keep still in some Company, for there is no such security against their
supposed Enemy. These hate and declaim against Solitariness, for thereby the
remembrance of Sin and Guilt, those accusings and fears would be stirred up,
which are so afflicting, that (if they will not obey and come to Repentance)
they cannot endure what prompts to this good end. Yet such pass in the World,
for happy brisk Men, and seem an unanswera^le Objection against the intended
illustration. That great show of Mirt^ and Jollity, make half thinking People
judge them to be in a Blessed condition. It is to be known, that all the
Pleasures of sin are only outward, they are loud and visible when there is no
inward and sensible rejoicing: Or, like a flash of Lightning, they may
transport for a moment, when the mind is more Dark and Cloudy afterward. Take
them amidst good Fellowship, they are at first heavy, till their Spirits are
revived by strength of Liquor. Hence drinking is so much in Fashion, there is a
deep Melancholy in its Followers by contracted Guilt, that they cannot be
really cheerful till half Drunk, and they cannot Laugh heartily till this has
caused them to stammer and bubble at the Mouth. The most jovial Companion out
of his Cups, is no more then others. It Is an excuse in every Man's mouth, they
drink only for the sake of Company. Each Person will say, he had rather not,
and then it is a frivolous and false Pretense, for the whole cannot be desirous
of that whereof no part is. But this is a Fig-leave to cover the shame. of this
sin, for they will speak against it with their Tongue, when they wish in their
Heart to be pouring down, knowing they cannot be Merry till they have had some
quantity thereof. Company is nothing worth, if they have not some of the good
Creature to exercise themselves withal. The Lethargy of sin has brought them
into such a Damp, that they are scarce ^nlivened till they find this stir in
their Bodies. The Clamours of Conscience are drowned with the noise of Company,
chaunting to the Viol and other kinds of Music. They comply with, and approve
of the ungodly Speeches and Actions of those they converse with; They drink
with the Drunkard, Talk Lasciviously with the unclean, Frame their Mouth to
common Swearing, by reason whereof the Land mourns, Jer. 23. 10. Their chief
aim being recommend to themselves to Company, they will rather please a parcel
of dying Men, then the ever-living God, and will give Preference to Earthworms
before him who is over all God blessed for ever. They use Flattery, invent
Lies, rather then spoil a pleasant Story, take part with the Advocates for sin.
Either they do it themselves, or silently hear the way of Truth evil spoken of,
thinking by this base obsequiousness to retain Friends. Thus they treasure up
wrath against the day of wrath, Rom 2. 5. And though they seem never so
Cheerful in profane Talk, Scoffers and walking after their own ungodly Lusts,
though they make a show not to value his displeasure and threatenings: Yet, The
Lord shall laugh at him, for he sees that his day is coming, Ps. 37. 13. Which
will be upon him whether he thinks of it or not. When thou criest, let thy
Companies deliver thee, but the wind shall carry them all away, Isa. 57. 13.
Before the last great Evil day comes, he does commonly fall into some
dangerous and doubtful Sickness. And then if he looks back upon his Life past,
and forward to the approaching Judgment, he is possessed with Horror and strange
Amazement; Like a wild Bull in a Net, full of the fury of the Lord. Then he
thinks; Had I followed Goodness half so eagerly as my Lusts, I should not now
be in this miserable Condition. What Fruit have (...) of all past Jollities and
sinful Pleasures? What has Lust profited me, or what good has all pleasant
Cups done me? All these are passed away like a shadow. I see now the Vanity of
these things, and shall I again pursue them? No I will not; if God is pleased
to grant that I may recover, I resolve on an entire Reformation; The Lord is
not willing any should Perish, but that all should come to Repentance, 2 Pet.
3. 9. He did defer the Judgment upon Ahab for his temporary Humiliation; so it
may be observed in the general Order of his good Providence, that he does
seldom cut off any in the midst of their Sins, without having given them
warning by outward affliction, or some Sickness before; which is not unto
Death, but the Glory of him in sparing Sinners so long, and for the benefit of
them, if they did make a right use of it. And commonly in their first
Chastisements they have such thoughts, which in some are lasting and sincere,
spending the Residue of their Life in Gods Service; but with others they lie on
the surface of the Heart and are taken away. At first perhaps these will give
God thanks, declare how Gracious he has been unto them, and this for fear of a
Relapse; but when perfectly recovered, they are soon won over by the Scoffs and
Enticements of old Companions, they fall to the like course of iniquity, and it
is happened unto them according to the true Proverb, The dog is returned to his
own Vomit again, and the Sow that was washed to her wallowing in the Mire, 2
Pet. 2. 22.

Not only to habituated Sinners, but unto all too much Company ceases to
delight, is a distraction and prejudicial to Happiness. How can he converse
with God, (which is Man's greatest Honor) who spends all the time with his
Creatures? Those short intervals allowed for Devotion signify nothing, for
even then their Thoughts are taken of^ from the most sublime and excellent
Object. How can he thoroughly understand Gods Law? (in whose knowledge and
observation all our Happiness consists) who deprives himself of the leisure to
study it. How can he ever know himself? Who makes it his only business to be
known unto others. He cannot be Good or Holy, who keeps all sorts of Company.
The greater part of mankind are wicked, so he who seeks out for all
Acquaintance will meet with those, who by Evil Communications corrupt good
Manners: It becomes a snare to most, and when in the midst thereof. If any Man
do not decline, or offend not in word, the same is a perfect Man, Jam. 3. 2.
But thousands hereby have been betrayed into the ways of wickedness. Every
Speech at the Gallows is a warning against evil Company, and the damned in Hell
will for ever curse those that were the occasion of their coming there; many of
good and honest Principles, of Rustic simplicity when once they come into
Babylon, a Cage of every unclean Bird, they are well pleased with the abundance
of her Delicacies, and so become Partakers of her Sins. The Devil has his
Agents, who use all means to make others such as themselves. Who solicit
mightily for the Advancement of his Kingdom. Through Envy they are not willing
others should be more Happy then themselves, and therefore Labor to seduce
them. They Laugh inwardly to see into what a Fools Paradise they lead young
Scholars, the Pleasures will vanish and disappear to them also, and they are
for making others as much Children of Hell as themselves. Wickedness through
the multitude of its Followers has crept into the Fashion of every place: Even
under the Light of the Gospel more gross Deeds of Darkness are committed, then
whom the day Spring from on high, has not yet so fully visited; The Devil is
most busy here, and must use more then ordinary diligence, knowing the others
are already Captive and easily retained. There are so many of his servants gone
forth into the World, that they intermix with all Companies. In too many they
make up the majority, so the rest shall be subject unto their rules and
discourse, which is wicked and filthy, befitting the sons of Belial.

If a godly Man is amongst them, they keep close and mark his Steps. When he
reproves according to Ephesians. 5. 11. if he does with meekness, they slight it; but
if with boldness and power then they are enraged like so many Wasps. They will
dispute against him with reproach and evil speaking. And do get the victory if
multitude of words carry it, however, the prejudiced hearers conclude for that
side which talks most and suitable to their own corrupt inclinations. Indeed
seldom any good comes of this kind of reproof, and it were to be desired few or
none occasions hereof did happen, for every one that fears God should not
keep such Company, but if he lights among them casually, let him behave
himself, as God's Word and his own Conscience shall direct him; The rule is
concerning doubtful Sins, to refrain is the safer way; so of controverted duty,
it is the sure side to perform. Here is some obligation from Lev. 19. 17. None
ought silently suffer Iniquity to bear down all before it, or to let words
against faith and good-manners pass uncontradicted. He must not be afraid nor
ashamed to speak out for God and Religion, knowing what is written of the
fearful Rev. 21. 8. and of the shameful, Mark 8. 38. if he should get hatred by
reproving a Scorner, Pro. 9. 7. yet therefore he should not decline the promise
of Jesus, Blessed are ye when Men shall hate you, and when they shall separate
you from their Company, and shall reproach you, and cast out your name as evil
for the Son of Man's sake, Luke 6. 22, 23. If one is among wicked people, he
does either comply with them, which is Sin, or reprove, and then he is grievous
unto them. For what fellowship has Righteousness with Unrighteousness, and
what communion has Light with Darkness? and what concord has Christ with
Belial? 2 Cor. 6. 14. An unjust Man is an Abomination to the Just; and he that
is upright in the way, is Abomination to the Wicked, Pro. 29. 27. My Son if
Sinners entice thee, consent thou not, Pro. 1. 10. It is more to be feared they
will corrupt him, then he reform them: Many who begun well have turned aside
from the good way, and by seeing it made contemptible as is daily done by
malicious Tongues, have changed their minds, and having been in the counsel of
the Ungodly, themselves at length stepped up to the Seat of the Scornful. Their
former Righteousness is turned into Wormwood, so bitter are they against it.
Let none who are established, run into unnecessary danger, for it is folly to
venture when there is no occasion, which is rarely done without diminution of
Love and Zeal, if not to overthrow the Foundation. It is indeed possible to
retain uprightness and a good Conscience amongst the worst, but least they
should be an occasion of falling, (for no Temptation is so strong as bad
Company) it is godly discretion not to have intimate acquaintance with them,
but only such as business and common civility does require.

Sincere Friendship is to be reserved for the Faithful; an exaample hereof is
the Man after God's own Heart. In the Saints that are in the Earth, and the
excellent is all my delight, Ps. 16. 3. I am a Companion of all them that fear
thee, and of them that keep thy Precepts, Ps. 119. 63. The Conversation of good
Men does instill principles of Honesty and Truth into the mind, settl^ the
doubtful, recalls those that were going back to their own crooked ways, and
establishes all in the right. The Holy Ghost records even what seems lesser
things, which serve for our use and instruction. All that believed were
together, Acts 2. 44. The Apostles went about from place to place, confirming
the Souls of the Disciples, Acts 14. 22. There is both profiting of himself and
others by good Company. The Talent is not given to hide in a Napkin, but every
one is to communicate according to that measure of Grace and Reason he has
received. And suffer himself to be admonished, for none is so wise or knowing,
but he may both learn and be put in mind of several things from those who seem
weak and foolish in the Eye of the World. Every one Eccles. 4. 9. 19.
should endeavor to get a convenient number of good acquaintance, for there is
such a mutual Love amongst real Christians, that they will do one another all
the good they can. When these meet, they take as great delight in the language
of Canaan as others in profane talk. They are more pleased to build up one
another in our most holy Faith, then others in discoursing of the best way for
getting Offices or Preferment, Money or Estate, Honor and Pleasure. Whoever
thinks this strange, it is because himself takes no delight in such kind of
conference, for want of Faith and the Love of God. Society is not confine only
to Heavenly discourse, there is as much subject matter for u^ as others, we can
supply the defect of evil Communication^ w^^h good. And then that variety of
the occurrences of the World is common to all. But (...) whose mind as^^nd^
above ^hese lower regions, is ind^^d diverted with (...)g of the several
changes and accidents here, and he turns them into a good use; yet his chief
delight is in such discourse which relates to his better part, and that Life
which shall never end. He finds more real satisfaction in what is good to the
use of edifying, then in the other kind which r^creates only for the present,
concerning those things which in a short time are to be done away. The Apostle
finds fault with Fo^^^h Talking or Jesting, which are not convenient, Ephesians. 5.
4. They render Christianity as a vain and light thing, such a deportment is
offensive to those within; and will be apt to disgrace the Profession to those
without, as if it was not equally, yea more grave and substantial then
Philosophy and human Wisdom. A good Man will guide his affairs with discretion,
Ps 112. 5. He knows how to behave himself with Company, and how without. He is
endued with that self-sufficiency (through God) that he will not thrust himself
among all sort of People good and bad; for he is well contented alone, and had
rather be so then sit among vain persons, or have fellowship with the ungodly.
He will not refrain from any out of a pharisaical superciliousness, or say unto
his Neighbor, Stand thou by, and come not near me, for I am holier then thou,
Isa. 65. 5. The Son of God did eat and drink with Publicans and Sinners; and
therefore he will not scruple to converse with any, except those who are
arrived at the height of Wickedness, who do not at all esteem but mock the good
Way, With such an one he is not to keep company, no not to eat, 1 Cor. 5. 11.
Only let your Conversation be as becomes the Gospel of Christ, Phil. 1. 27.

Of all Company, Marriage is the most near and Honorable. It was Instituted in
Paradise by God, Genesis 2. 18, 24. and after Of Marriage.
confirmed by our Savior Jesus Christ, Mat. 19. 4, 5, 6. This is the
established means for the propagation, continuance and succession of mankind:
The Author of our nature has implanted Mal. 2. 14. 15.
a strong desire and tendency toward it. We are not let loose to unbounden
Lust, for that would bring strange disorder and confusion into the World: None
would know which were his own; Besides such a mixture and variety of Seed
hinders Conception, as appears by common Prostitutes. There would be much
inconvenience and ruin, unless the great Lawgiver had prescribed Hos. 4. 10.
such Rules concerning this Ordinance, which (as his other Commandments are
wisely contrived, both to carry on the Course of the World, and also for trial
of Man's Obedience. In which last if he approves himself, he is promised Peace
here and Glory hereafter. Adultery, Fornication, strange Lusts are forbidden in
the old and new Testament, they being contrary to this excellent order of Life,
which would be miserable if the Bed were not kept undefiled; the Apostle
immediately adds, Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge, Heb. 13. 14 All
the commands in Scripture relating to Husband and Wife, are exactly fitted for
their mutual Comfort, which again is presently lost by disobedience and
variation from them. That Vexation and Discontent so common amongst Married
persons, is because they 1 ^et. 3. 7.
do not fulfill the Law of Love, and of bearing the Infirmities of one another:
Husbands do not dwell with their Wives according to knowledge, giving Honor
unto them as the weaker vessel, or they observe not their Duty in submitting
unto and obeying their Husbands. They have not the Love of God in them, for
here to apply that of the Apostle, He that loves not his own Wife, 1 John 4.
20.
which lies in his Bosom, whom he has seen, how can he love God whom he has
not seen? If he did love, he would keep his Commandments, and not deal
Treacherously against the Wife of his Youth, who is his Companion, and the Wife
of his Covenant, Mal. 2. 14. Neither would she behave her self despitefully
against her Husband.

Some enter upon this state for worldly and carnal ends, as when Beauty, Riches
and a good Family (as it is commonly styled) are the reasons why they determine
their choice on such an Object. Who instead of complying with those ends of
Marriage God has ordained, frame others of their own Invention, what he
Instituted as an happy state of Life, themselves going according to their own
thoughts render miserable(...) This is not so to be understood that none should
propose to himself any worldly ^^d, for he may lawfully, but that must not be
made chief. We have an example in Abraham's Steward, Genesis 24. of s^^king unto
God in the first place, All our Actions should b^ to h^s Glory, and then this
of so great moment is not to be exempted. We are to prefer his Commandment
before all other things, and th^^ temporal considerations may come in
subordinat^ to that. ^ut to have those worldly things the only or principal
inducement, is both sinful and foolish, for the Man does no^ take counsel of
God, nor rightly consult for his own Ha^piness.

To begin with Beauty, which indeed is Gods Blessing and Gift, Of Beauty.
perfect through his Comeliness, but when it is trusted unto, Ezekiel. 16. 15. and
made an occasion to draw off from him, then it is necessary to discover the
Truth and Nature thereof. It is one of the admired Idols of the World, which is
had in Estimation for supposed good, though it be thin and vain. What is a well
colored Skin? Now Color is no substantial thing, and therefore cannot give
satisfaction which in it self has so little reality. A fa^r Woman has Life
and Motion, otherwise she differs little from a well drawn Picture, which does
delight; the outward Lineaments do somewhat please, but nothing else. Excellent
sensible Objects do by Constancy tire, and we at length become unaffected.
Whether this does hold true between married Persons, they know who have the
experience. But further it renders liable unto Temptations, so was Joseph of
old, and change the Sex, many are at this day; he did beat back the
Solicitations of his wanton Mistress, with this single Thought, How can I do
this great wickedness, and sin against God? Genesis 39. 9. Those who now are alike
tempted, may keep themselves unspotted by the same means. The fear of God is a
sure Preservative against all Assaults of the wicked. If according to sincerity
and truth, it constantly withstands the Temptation; natural Conscience and
inward Modesty is another Band whereby God has tied us up to the observance of
his Commands. But if these Cords are broken, none will hold. The fear of shame
and disgrace before the World is no restraint, if the Deed of darkness may be
hid from the Husband and others. It is too well known and Practiced that this
may be done, Who dare sin when God sees them, will likewise when Men do not see
them, for such a place may be found out, but the eyes of the Lord are in every
place, beholding the Evil and the Good, Prove. 15. 3. The abomination of
wickedness in our days is described, Ezekiel. 16. 32, 33, 34. Some maintain their
indigent Gallants, and steal from their Husband to gratify them. Thus, and
other kind of ways, they make their Beauty to be abhorred.

Another inconvenience commonly attends it, Which is Folly: Not that I believe,
God makes any one Foolish. All Souls are his, and there is no greater Diversity
between them at first, then the Stature, Similitude, or strength of the Body.
Natural Idiots are found to be so from defect or irregularity of the Organs
within, as Blindness or Deformity without. But what goes commonly under the
Name of Folly, is through our own fault and negligence. The mind is not
improved for want of receiving in the words of knowledge and instruction, which
are necessary to the growth and continuance in understanding, as Meat and Drink
to the Flesh. And then by not exerting, the faculties become dull and useless,
as the slothful are unapt to work. This is the cause why Women in general are
not so Wise and Learned as Men. Could we now see as God sees, into the parts of
the Soul, or as we shall when let slip out of this Flesh, the Leanness and
Blindness of ignorance, the Deformity and Crookedness of Folly, that drowsy
unactive Disposition would be as much despised, and we should equally endeavor
to strive against them, as now we do such defects of the Body. But the World is
only for visible and present things, and if they are well enough, do not so
much care for the invisible and future; when Faith and Reason do assure these
will be visible and present also, of longer continuance and greater Concern.
Whose chief aim is to recommend themselves before others, one excellent thing
to set them of is thought sufficient, they mind no more. So in the present
instance it comes to pass that Beauty is without Wisdom. All the Care and
Education is concerning that, but not to accomplish the inward parts; for all
Pride, Boasting, and Selfconceit, yet a King and one Skilled in the Female Sex
has left this Character, As a jewel of Gold in a Swines Snout, so is a fair
Woman without Discretion, Prove. 11. 22.

But suppose better; One who is Chaste and Wise, Yet she is subject to Accidents
and decay. The Fruit of the Womb makes an Alteration in her Face, a fit of
Sickness ^^ssens her ruddy Complexion, Sorrow and Discontent do impair it. If
none of these should be, still the Glorious beauty is a fading Flower, Isa. 28.
1. It declines in Summer, by little Perishes in Autumn, and is quite withered
in the Winter of Age. Then the furrows are cast up: When once it is laid down
it rises not till ^he Heavens be no more, and then that Love sinks which was
only built on this rotten Foundation. To repair the ruins of time by
Supplements of Art, to fill up the Wrinkles with Paint and Vermilion, is to
strive against Gods appointment. And this is a presage (which they should take
as such) of falling down lower into the Pit, where is an utter end of this
esteemed Perfection. In the place of Skulls they seem all alike, there is no
discerning which in the time of its Flesh was clothed with a fair Skin, or not.
When we behold these grim Spectacles, there is nothing to be seen of
flourishing Age. The use of all may be not to set the Affection on what is a
mere idol of Happiness. God has purposely ordained our Excellency should not
li^ in the Body; as appears not only from the matter thereof, but even from
what seems lovely: There is very little in it, and few (not above one in an
hundred) have that exact accomplished Beauty. And for those who either have
already, or desire it; let them be exhorted to serve God and continue in all
Obedience, not making it an occasion of sin, Pride, Vanity, Murmuring or
Discontent; but Practice that of Phil. 3. 20, 21. then we have all
Encouragement and assurance that, our vile Body shall be changed that it may be
fashioned like unto his glorious Body, which will as much exceed the fairest
Complexion on Earth, as that does the Face of a Toad. But whosoever will not do
thus now, we see with our Eyes all that is above spoken of fulfilled, and
further, They shall be an abhorring unto all Flesh, Isa. 66. 25. If they make
the utmost of their Beauty, it is a vain and empty thing, which cannot profit
nor satisfy, and such is the danger thereof.

For the other inducement to Marriage, Riches; it has been the just and good
Practice of all Countries and Times to give somewhat in Dowry; but the Error
is, when the less is made the chief and sole Consideration. Who are resolved to
enrich themselves, and love the Wealth more then the Person, these are often
deceived in their Proposals and Expectation of Contentment, as common
observation and experience do manifest. There are several inconveniences which
over balance the seeming Good, which need not be recited here, because the end
of Riches and their subserviency to Happiness is to be stated further on.

When Marriages are entered into upon indirect Considerations, the Misery is
sensible all the Life long. And indeed how can it be reasonably expected, it
should be otherwise? When it is first grounded upon evil Principles. Those
which make Beauty the only end, are acted by Lust, who affect Riches by
Covetousness, and another sort by Pride. All which are contrary to Gods Law,
And therefore who forsake the Living Waters, expecting satisfaction in broken
Cisterns, it is no wonder they greedily hunt after, but never find it. It is
just that those, Who despise Gods directions, and that Happiness he (...)
provided for Men, and therefore do not seek of him, should be (...)ted with the
eager p^rsuit, and much more with a miserable disappointment, that their Mouth
may be stopped, and forced to acknowledge, As they cannot live nor move, so
neither be Happy without him. If they were really convinced of this, they would
not be so often deceived with an Egyptian Reed, on which if a Man Lean it will
p^e^ce into his hand, nor in this important Concern set up false Ends, and
Superior to those of his ordaining.

The Apostle has a whole Chapter, 1 Cor. 7. on this Subject, and toward the
Close gives instruction to Marry in the Lord. Whoever sincerely Lives according
to his Commandment cannot be an ill Wife. Christianity endows with that Grace
and Perfection, a meek Humor and Disposition, such an obedient and humble
frame of mind, that if the Man has the least Ingenuity or good Nature, he must
Love and Honor her. If these be wanting (let her make what Pretense she will
by going to Church, Devotion or sanctified Talk) it is to to be feared, for by
the Fruits you may know them, she is an Hypocrite, for she cannot be a good
Christian, who is not a good Wife; for that obliges to all that is commanded in
Scripture concerning this Relation. Whosoever finds a^ Wife, finds a good thing
and obtainetb favor of the Lord. Let him rejoice with her, let her be as the
loving Hind and pleasant Ro^, let her Breasts satisfy him at all times, and
let him be always r^visht with her Love, Prove. 5. 18, 19. Live joyfully with
the Wife whom thou love, all the days of the Life of thy Vanity, for that is
thy Portion in this Life, and in thy Labor which thou take under the Sun,
Eccles. 9. 9. When a Man has taken a new Wife, he shall not go out to War,
neither shall he be Charged with any business, but he shall be free at home one
Year, and shall cheer up his Wife which he has taken, Deuteronomy. 24. 5. When they
live together according to Gods Ordinance, there is no tormenting Jealousy, no
strife nor brawling, Discontent, Upbraiding, Forwardness, nor scornful
exasperating Language, but all kindness and tender Affection is to be seen
among them. Their Hearts are comforted, being knit together in Love. They are
one Flesh and Members one of another. If one suffers, the other does also, and
by a pleasant Sympathy jointly partake of their several Condition. He Mourns
with her that Mourns, and rejoices with her that rejoices. It is thought by
some that all difference of Sex will cease, when those things shall be laid
aside, that relate to Mortality and Imperfection, for in the Resurrection they
neither Marry nor are given in Marriage, but are as the Angels of God in
Heaven, Mat. 22. 30. Who are all of the same kind. As to the present time,
There is neither Male nor Female, but ye are all one ^n Christ Jesus, Gal. 3.
28. Who was born of a Woman, that as the Transg^ession came by her, so through
her was conveyed the greatest Good that ever came to mankind. Both are of the
same Nature, Heirs of the same Promises, and it is equally the interest of each
sort, to endeavor through Gods Grace to be Happy.

So much of Company and Marriage. The other thing, Men Of Getting Money.
are taken up with, is Riches and getting of Money. Now if any cunning Rules
were laid down for the procuring thereof; they would be read earnestly and
attentively with the utmost Examination. But do they not endeavor after it as
a means to live happily? And as such it is to be treated of. It is expedient to
obtain the things pertaining to this Life, which are Meat, Drink, Raiment,
Habitation, Honor, Pleasure, and such like. We cannot be ascertained of them
without Money; this need not to be insisted on, but only to put in mind for
what end Money is necessary. The end is the Principal thing, which is or should
be more desired then what tends only by the way toward it; and therefore if we
can attain the end without so much assistance of those Collateral means, they
signify nothing. The Goodness of Riches consists only, that through Custom
other things are under the Power of them; which may be bought and had, and also
in using them to this purpose. ^ood and Clothing are in their own Nature of
more Worth and Excellency; but then as they Minister to Pride and Pleasure,
they are no end, but false and mistaken means to Happiness, as hereafter may be
showed. The absurd Acting of the World lies in making that an end which is a
means only, nay, which are wrong and contrary to the thing desired. Happiness
is sought for by the ways of Pride, Sensuality, and Cov^t^^s^ess; now there is
no need of going round about, when there is a direct Path; and further they
will appear upon the di^igent Search to lead an opposite way into D^^^ruction
and M^^ery.

The so much beloved Interest is sought after in order to Satisfaction, for
otherwise some would not by injustice and wrong endanger the loss of their
immortal Souls, to obtain Wealth or Estate. Some fond Conceits do spur them on,
as they fancy it for their Honor and Credit, to be the Stock and Foundation of
a great Family, so they shall be talked of through many Generations, when it
will not extend further then that single House, and with them be forgotten in
two or three Discents: And all is but the Breath of others, a weak and
transitory thing for his whole Happiness to subsist(...) on. When by Commission
of Sin, and Omission of Duty they enhance their future Account, mis-employ that
Diligence which might be spent, on a more excellent thing, waste their Spirits,
not enjoy what they have, deprive themselves of beloved Sleep in Service of
dear Ma^^mon. If these make Pretenses to Religion, that (which would moderate
and rectify) is made a furtherance to worldly Designs. This is to give them
outward Reputation and Honesty, so to get a Trust or Power committed to them,
by falsifying of which they raise themselves, or to carry on close unjust
Practices. There have been too many Examples of those who lift up their hands
in the Sanctuary, and seemingly praise the Lord, Whose right hand is a right
hand of Falsehood. Who appear to sanctify the Lords Day, but practice Deceit
and Guile all the Week long. So universal has been the Corruption this way,
that considering People will most suspect them, who are Godly. But there are
more Knaves to be found amongst the wicked and profane then Hypocrites. Indeed
those remain longer undiscovered, for these have the Eyes of all fastened on
them, who mark their steps, and are glad to find out such a great fault in what
has a resemblance to Goodness, and many times it is a false imputation of
wrong Charged on such, who neither did, nor intended any. B^t in this corrupt
World, innumerable are the Tricks and Devices (sinful or not is no
Consideration, or no hindrance) to get Money: Men go to and fro, from this
place to that, B^y and Sell all to this purpose, as if it was the principal end
for which they were Created. A faithful Man shall abound with Bl^ssings, but he
that makes have to be Rich shall not be innocent, P^ov. 28. 20.

There is no need to leave of the business of ones Calling, or sinful Gai^,
because some have thus abused it, for this would be ridiculous as to neglect
Eating and Drinking, because some turn that into Gluttony and Drunkenness. Nor
is he obliged when he has just got a Livelihood to stop and go no further, but
may be still diligent in business, expecting the blessing of the Lord which
makes Rich, and adds no sorrow with it, Prove. 10. 22. Trust not in
Oppression, become not vain in Robbery: If Riches increase, set not your heart
upon them, Psalm. 62. 10. They are a strong Temptation, whereby many unstable
Souls have been deluded and left their first Love; but when the desire is taken
of, they may be pursued with a kind of indifferency. Having this resolution
ever firm, that no Profit shall move us to part with our Integrity, nor to
offend Christ, if the whole World were to be gained. Learn of me, for I am meek
and lowly in Heart, and ye shall find Rest unto your Souls, Mat. 11. 29. We
should neither love abundance, nor eagerly hunt after increase if we were
humble, for then it would be no Pleasure to boast in the multitude of Riches,
or be lifted up, which is the principal Reason why they are desired. Take away
Pride, and Covetousness will cease; for however the wretched Miser creeps
that the spoil may fall into his hands, however speaking and studious to please
his Superiors, if he may get by them, yet he is naturally proud and esteems
himself above others, according to the Pelf he has. But if we had right
Thoughts of our selves, (for all those are without, and nothing of the Man) we
should not be puffed up with great Estates, fine Apparel, or Aerie Titles of
Honor. By humility and fear of the Lord, are Riches, Honor and Life, Prove.
22. 4. The inheritance in Heaven swallows up the Conceit of that here. Be
clothed with Humility, 1 Pet. 5. 5. this takes of that earnest Affectation of
Gorgeous and soft raiment. The Honor that comes from God only, John 5. 44.
makes all great Titles and flattering Expressions not valued. Who believes, and
goes the real way to obtain these things, receives but little Satisfaction from
what the Men of this World think their greatest Happiness. His desires are
spiritualized, so they are not carried after sensual Pleasures.

To Labor to Eat, and to Eat to Live, and to Live to Labor is no end; (though
many poor Souls are willingly ignorant and unmindful of any thing more) but it
is to serve and obey God, to continue for some time according to his Ordinance,
and all is toward the eternal Rest, Life and Happiness. And therefore all
along every thing is to be done to attain that; and those things to be
refrained from, which may endanger, least any one should come short of it. The
affections may, and are to be set on the things above, even whilst he takes
pains for things here, they are necessary and convenient for our Pilgrimage,
through this place to Jerusalem, which is the Mother of us all; but still these
are transitory goods, when there is the enduring substance. What is so hardly
ingrafted into the minds of some people, is easy to be understood; The
covetous Worldly Man knows what he labors for is current Money; and why does
he think that should tarry with him, which has already passed through so many
hands before it came to his? but now he fancies to keep it, in vain, for
(besides loss and casualty, which often convinces it is not in his own power)
if they do not slip from him, he must be taken from them; for when he dies he
shall carry nothing away, Ps. 49. 17. If it could be done, it would be a
senceless thing to carry a little Gold that perishes to (where we all hope to
go) the City that is pure Gold, Rev. 21. 18. The yellow dust here, which seems
so glittering and desirable, is dim and dross in comparison of that.

But for all that can be said; a disregard and little value for Riches seems an
idle speculation, for who has it? That argues their want of Faith and Reason,
or Foolishness in not ^iving according to them. Christianity is to be judged of
by its precepts and true examples, and not to be measured by those who do not
comply therewith. The blessed Jesus had a Purse-bearer for the poor, but we do
not read that he had any thing more then to serve necessary occasions; when
they came to him for one Penny Tribute-Money, he works a Miracle to have that;
and never is Recorded to have sought any at all but at that time. Peter was not
ashamed to own openly, Silver and Gold I have none, Acts 3. 6. The other
Apostles were in a like condition: Those whom they Converted unto the Faith,
had all things common, and sold their Possessions and Goods, and parted them to
all Men, as every Man had need, Acts 2. 44, 45. They did despise what the World
now does magnify; yet we pretend to follow the steps our forerunner, and they
are gone before; But care is to be had that we do not miss of the place they
are entered into, as we now vary Mat. 14.
from what they were in this World. The young Man who had kept all God's
Commandments from his youth upward, was rejected because he would not go and
sell that which he had, and give to the poor, when he was promised to have
Treasure in Heaven; and it is immediately added of the hardness of a rich Man
to enter into the Kingdom of God; from whence may be gathered, that to prefer
any profit before the Commandments of Jesus, If there is not a readiness,
willingness, nay actual doing the same when occasion requires to lose or sell
all worldly possessions Luke 14. 33.
for his sake and poor Brethren; if this mind be wanting, all signifies
nothing, though he has done never so many good actions before. To come so near
to Heaven, and not be admitted for want of one thing, makes the disappointment
worse and more tormenting. Although many having the form of Godliness do love
this present World, yet none does so who is a sincere and universal Christian,
as one must be, if he intends to find Good by his Profession.

But the natural Man discerns not these things, they are foollishness unto
him; and therefore it would be proper to speak somewhat, whereof he is
sensible. Perhaps he imagines all the rest to be talk, as now he begins to
perceive what is done to be Vanity, a Dream, and next to nothing. However
formerly he did hunt after what he thought was real, now he discovers it to be
empty and vain, and therefore concludes the like of what is more told him. Not
thoroughly considering this is a strong evidence of the truth of God's Word,
which before acquainted, as he did hear somewhat of the Vanity, Deceitfulness,
Unfruitfulness of those things; And then he would not believe, but now that is
found true by his own experience. Why then may it not be supposed to be true,
when it speaks further of the continuance, greatness, and substance of things
hoped for? If it is fulfilled in the less, why shall it not also be in the
greater? If in things present, why not in things to come? If I have told you
Earthly things, and ye believe not, how shall ye believe if I tell you of
Heavenly things? John 3. 12. But it is experienced by all what the Word speaks
of the fiction and falsehood of some things, so it is reasonable to give regard
when it declares the truth and reality of others. It is to be feared, and he is
in time to be forewarned thereof, least he be found a Fool in this as in former
things, to know them only by after wit and experience. As he discerns not the
Vanity and Delusion of Youth, till that is over; so not to learn the things
proper for a Man till that is past, nor the things of eternity till he is let
into it, which is sad; for an error here is without remedy. It is foolishness
in an old Man to say, O that I had done thus, and thus in times of Youth or
Manhood, when he might have done them then, and now they are past and
irrecoverable. It is just the very same as to those things also, unto which
through the Grace of God we endeavor to persuade Men. And therefore suffer
your selves to be put in mind, you are come to perfect understanding, judge of
what is said.

It is a deceivable and lying consequence, (with which the Devil does tempt
people to unbelief toward their declining years) that all things whatever are
Vanity, because they find it so of the things before them. Every temptation, if
thoroughly considered, makes against him; for this confirms that all things
indeed are so as affirmed in Scripture. So they are not to be taken up as a
reserve, but to be surely believed; they are not to be looked upon as
conjectural notions of happiness, but to be most faithful and true, worthy to
be trusted unto, if we had ten thousand lives to be ventured upon them, or so
much hope and desire proportionable to them. The inspiration of God makes known
the deceitfulness of all fansied good here. That speaks of every thing
according to its very nature (either in express words, or just consequence)
which belong to mankind from the greatest to the least, except what may be
known from our selves, and the most common observation. The more we know of the
things of this World, we less esteem them; and thence it is that we every day
more disrelish sensusual pleasures, for they ti^e and the same has been had
before; life grow tedious and irksome, for the same returns over and over
again, and it is not satisfactory. Even good fellowship is every day less
admired, and people grow more se^fish and shut up within themselves. As for
Money, the Heathen Cicer^ did reckon Covetousness in old Men an unaccountable
thing, to get the more provision, the less journey they have to go; but he did
not so fully think of, that this was cleaved unto as (in the Prophets phrase)
the refuge of lies, Isa. 28. 17. the last of all Vanities. Men's affections must
be carried after something, and where they apprehend all to be so; they fix
upon that which is only more substantial, because they suppose less subject to
Vanity; but even here after they have labored for it, they are not satisfied.
When in any pain or troubled, or toward the close of their days, to reflect
upon their Gold and Silver will not yield the least comfort, it will rather
enhance present misery because that cannot case them in time of need, which
they have faithfully served all their life before. It would be sad if amidst so
much Evil and Vanity, such lies and delusion, there was nothing to be found
good and real, truth and certainty. But there is, The Grass withers, the
Flower fades, but the Word of God shall stand for ^ver, Isa. 40. 8. That (as
aforementioned) speaks exactly of all things as they are, which is a
demonstration, that what it says further is true. And then the work of
righteousness is real and eternal.

To you of full Age the Word of Exhortation comes. Exhortation.


Be not afraid to be happy here and hereafter: Do not with regret flee from the
wrath to come, you are now warned. And that knowing the time, that now it is
high time to awake out of sleep, for Romans 13.
now is our Salvation nearer then when we believed. You are nearer to Death and
Immortality then ever you were yet, The night is far spent, the day is at hand.
A great deal of your life is gone, and your dying day approaches. You are
called upon to leave of your sins and disobedience, least they deliver you over
to the damnation of Hell. Will you not endeavor to avoid that, who will do any
thing to shun a temporal calamity? You are not (but God knows how soon you may,
if you continue in an hard impenitent heart) cast down into the everlasting
Dungeon, the place of utter Darkness. Is it irksome to read these lines? It
will be much more intolerable to suffer the truth of them, and they are only
laid before you, that you may be put in mind, and so escape. The Father of
Spirits calls upon you, Turn and live, for why will you die? God would have you
all to be saved, you are adjured in his name to leave of walking in the way to
destruction, despise not his loving invitation. O that my people had hearkened
unto me, and Israel had walked in my ways, Ps. 81. 13. When they are r^bellious
and disobedient, it goes against him to punish them. How shall I give thee up
Ephraim? How shall I deliver thee Israel? How shall I make thee as Admah, my
heart is turned within me, my repentings are kindled together, Hos. 11. 8. This
same God, who is here described, as if he did earn with bowels of Compassion;
yet if People set at naught his Counsel, and will have none of his Reproof, he
speaks to them in another manner. When your fear comes as desolation, when
Destruction and Anguish comes upon you. Then shall they call upon me, but I
will not answer, they sball seek me early, but they shall not find me, Prove. 1.
27, 28. Wherefore, as the Holy Ghost says, To day if ye will hear his voice,
harden not your Hearts, H^b. 3. 7, 8. Is he not worthy of a present Answer? All
People must grant that, but the Thoughts of some in the depth of their Heart
are: It is no matter now, for his business may be as well done at another time,
the longer it is staved of, so much the better, for then there will be the less
time to serve him, and if they can so much as to get Heaven, it is soon enough.
Are these the secret Imaginations, which some keep so close to themselves? But
they do not in the mean while thoroughly consider how, all things are naked and
opened unto the Eyes of him, with whom we have to do, Heb. 4. 13. so he knows
these innermost Thoughts all one, as if they were wrote legibly upon the
Forehead of those who conceive them. How disingenuous is this? And will he not
so judge of it? As if he must have those things put on him, which they would
not suffer from their Servants. For would they like those who will do just
enough to receive Wages, but no more, and less if they could? Can it be
reasonably expected, God will reward those base and Mercenary People, who do
not esteem of him, but only the good things he has prepared? Who would
willingly receive his Gifts, but have neither Love nor Reverence for the Giver.
If thou will enter into Life, keep the Commandments, said he, who is to judge
every Man's work. What those are, himself has likewise told us, they are two,
The first is, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart, and with all
thy Soul, and with all thy mind, and all thy Strength. How can he do this, who
has such unworthy Thoughts? Such an one, unless he repents of the Evil, will
never be judged a Lover of God, and then notwithstanding all his Policy he may
come short of his Expectation. God does confound the Wisdom of the Wise, and
takes them in their Craftiness. Those which fancy, and propose to themselves
some new fine and ^asie way to Heaven of their own invention, it is a thousand
to one but they perish in their Projects, for Men must not think any way to
avoid the force and obligation of Gods Commandments. Indeed they may choose
whether they will observe them or not; but then they must not choose to
themselves the reward that is promised for keeping of them. Neither let them
imagine to draw up new Articles of Agreement, besides that Covenant of Grace,
God has been pleased to establish with Man, for that is only of his own
making, and it is merciful enough; it is not come to such Familiarity, that he
should accept what sinful Creatures would give him. It is most just, that God
who made us without ourselves, never asked our Advice, whether we should be
formed Vessels to Honor or Dishonor, should also give us what Laws he please,
making his own Terms and Conditions, upon which we are to receive the
Happiness, whereof himself is the only Giver. We are not to frame any out of
our own Brain, and offer them unto him; for seeing he has created us to serve
him, showed us how, lent us Life for a time to do it, We are not to seek out
new Devices, or to Parcel out this time as we see best for doing thereof. This
is here mentioned, that those may beware who think it sufficient if they allot
the least Portion, nay the last moment for doing that wherefore the whole was
given them. These are the Statutes and Judgments, which ye shall observe to do
all the days ye live upon the Earth, Deuteronomy. 12. 1. which is not taken away, but
rather more confirmed under the Gospel, as appears from, Luke 1. 75. Who then
would be saved? We learn from the Prodigal Son, the Publicans and Sinners, the
joy over them that repent, those many gracious Texts concerning it, that if we
do go astray and come home again, we shall be received to Grace and Favor. But
if Men from hence take occasion to spend their days in wickedness, and their
Life in disobedience; if they turn the Grace of God into wantonness, it is an
horrible abuse, and who thus pervert the ways of the most High, may
notwithstanding their vain purposes perish for ever. If they go on in their
wicked Course, they may unawares be given over to a reprobate mind, and all
their Thoughts whereby they intended to be reconciled unto God at such a time,
come to nothing. It is both unworthy and sinful to put him of from day to day;
and he who does not Love to be mocked or despised, may reward such after their
deservings, withdraw his Grace, and let them go on in their own imaginations.
What if one should come into the Vineyard a little sooner then needs must? Is
not Heaven worth Laboring all the day for? And can too much be done to avoid
Hell? Is it not better in a thing of so great moment to come more early, and to
wait for your Lord, that when he comes and knocks, you may open immediately,
Luke 12. 36. then to ^arry till the Critical time of his coming, for you know
not when this will be? Who knows, That certain day that is limited after so
long a time? Heb. 4. 7. Who can tell exactly how far, and how long he may go in
the way of wickedness, and return? The utmost bounds are not set down, But this
we are assured of, the further we go, the more way is to come back, which will
require so much the more Labor and Pains. Have thou any degree of the Love of
God? Would thou not trifle with him? Do thou seriously expect to inherit
his Promises and avoid his Threatenings? Have thou any regard to the eternal
Welfare or Misery of thy own dear self? Art thou so Wise as not to hazard (when
there is no need) such an exceeding good set before thee, and on the other hand
so great an evil? Break of presently thy Sins by Repentance. Turn you, Turn
you, and then Iniquity shall not be your ruin.

That ye put off concerning the former Conversation the old man, which is
corrupt according to the deceitful Lusts: And be renewed in the Spirit of your
mind. And that ye put on the new man, which after God is created in
righteousness and true holiness, Ephesians. 4. 23, 24. Then the Fruits of the Spirit
recited, Gal. 5. 22, 23. and other practical Duties are as agreeable to our
Nature, as before the Works of the Flesh were. When men are transformed by the
renewing of the mind, they prove what is that Good, that acceptable, and
perfect Will of God. It seems so even to their real Sense and Disposition; they
find more Comfort and Happiness in what is good, then formerly they did in
evil. Be not doubtful or suspicious; you are in no wise required to go softly
all your years in the Bitterness of your Soul: But you are invited forth to
what Is a Tree of Life to them that lay hold upon her, and happy is every one
that retains her, Prove. 3. 18.

As those can further assure you out of their own experience, who sought her
early; Who being partakers of the Divine Nature, take more delight in the
things of God then others do in the things of the World. Who by continuance in
well-doing have a Blessed Habit thereof, so it is become familiar and pleasing
as any other Course of Life. Their love preserves them from committing of evil;
and though this being hot at first, did cool again, yet they have used all
means to renew it, To keep the Fire upon the Altar always burning, Lev. 6. 3.
If the flame do not continue so brisk, as at first kindling, yet they have
taken all imaginable Care that it shall never go out. It cannot be expected one
should be continually ravished with a pleasant Country as at first sight
thereof; the longer we live and only behold the Works of Creation, it takes
away that just Wonder and Astonishment. And so it is of the invisible things of
God, we are not always so transported as at first hearing of them, when they
were New and exceeding Great; they are the very same still, but the defect is
in our selves, our Ears are dull of hearing and remain unconcerned. There may
be a Gracious and Wise disposal in this, that ye should show forth the Praises
of him, who has called you out of Darkness into his mavelous Light, 1 Pet.
2. 9. These youthly fervour^ of Spirit, that joy because of the sudden
Alteration, that taste of precious things, that lively Faith in what is
unutterable, how much did they exceed the little Vanities of the natural State?
And when all these do flag and become less affecting even to the end of our
Lives, it may be a short Emblem given us to signify, that when we shall be let
into the Enjoyment and Possession, they will be infinitely more surprising. And
we shall be amazed within our selves how it came to pass, we should have the
less Sense, the nearer we did approach to them. They will be found to be so
much beyond then was possible to enter into the Heart to conceive of them. I
have heard of thee by the hearing of the Ear: but now mine Eye sees thee.
Wherefore I abhor my self, and repent in Dust and Ashes, Job. 42. 5, 6. Which
then was so great, that there wants a word to set it forth, and this should be
fully assented to as true, yet to lessen the inward Estimation thereof; the
nearer we draw to be more unmindful, careless and negligent must be a
condemning thought to the Souls in Heaven, that ever they should come t^ither
with Faintness and Weariness of mind, that their steps should well nigh slip,
or think of going backwards. By which perhaps they have lost such Degrees of
Glory and a greater reward. They will be vexed that they did not more whilst
here in the World. But it will be inexpressible Anguish to all Apostates, who
forsake their first love. A Lesson of instruction to us now in the way, things
are so ordered to see if we will do what the Prophet complains for want of,
There is none that stirs up himself to take hold of God, Isa. 64. 7. Which
is to be done by constant frequenting the Ordinances, hearing the Word, Prayer
and Sacrament, Holy Meditation, edifying Discourse, Watchful avoiding the
occasions of evil and other hindrances: And also doing good Works. In all
things put forth the utmost Strength and Vigor, get that Chain of Graces, 2
Pet. 1. 5, 6, 7. And if these things be in you, and abound, (there is great
Emphasis in that word full measure, and running over) they make you that ye
shall be neither barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus
Christ. They that wait upon the Lord shall renew their Strength; They shall
mount up with Wings as Eagles, they shall run and not be weary, and they shall
walk and not faint, Isa. 40. 31. They must continue in all means of Grace and
Duty, even from the Child to the Ancient of days as long as they are in this
Earth, for this is the place of Faith and Waiting, otherwise this blessed
Promise does not belong to them. All that you have hitherto done signifies
nothing, unless you still press forward to the mark of the High Calling in
Christ Jesus. And ye have hitherto run well; what should hinder, but that you
should obtain? You have past over the Corruption through the Giddiness and
unruliness of Youth, have escaped the Dangers of that shallow violent Age, in
which so many have split and been carried away with the swift Streams of Lust,
running down into the dead Sea, before ever they considered well where they
were going. But you are safely arrived into the Mediterranean of this Life, and
your Voyage now is safe, pleasant and easy. You will quickly be at the desired
Country, if you do take diligent Care. Behold now is your Salvation nearer
then when we dreamed, and in a little while it will be before you. Wherefore
lift up your feeble knees, and your hands that hang down; use still your utmost
endeavors, and the great Pilot above will not leave you nor forsake you. If
you be not wanting to your selves, he will not be behind in making good his
Promises. Go on still as you have begun. Watch ye, stand fast in the Faith,
quit you like men, be strong, 1 Cor. 16. 13. Exhorting one another, and so much
the more, as you see the day approaching, Heb. 10. 25.

The day when the Keepers of the House shall tremble, and the strong men shall
bow themselves, and the Grinders cease because they Of Old Age.
are few, and those that look out of the Windows be darkened, Eccles. 12. 3.
This is the fourth, and last Period of Man's Life. Old Age is Gods Blessing,
which he bestowed on his Servants before, and under the Law, as the Fathers
before the Flood, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. The Spirit of God says by Solomon,
My Son forget not my Law, but let thine Heart keep my Commandments, for length
of Da^s, and long Life, and Peace shall they add unto thee, Prove. 3. 1, 2. But
we, who are under the Gospel, and not Carnal Ordinances, must not so much rely
on Temporal Promises as the Jews did; Yet the Apostle seems to intimate, Ephesians.
6. 2, 3. that of long Life ex^ends to Christians also. We are enjoined
Temperance, moderate Labor, and Action, which naturally conduce toward it;
and on the contrary, several come short by the Sins of uncleanness, Gluttony,
Drunkenness, Revenge, Sloth and such like. God does indeed take away at several
Times and Seasons out of the good Pleasure of his Will, but still many hasten
Death unto themselves, through their own Sin and Folly. He that takes heed of
those things prolongeth his Life; and if it be cut off through any other
Sickness or Accident, this is his comfort and assurance, that it was not
through his own Fault. The humble Christian never thinks himself sufficiently
prepared, and therefore desires a long space of Repentance and making ready.
Nor will he presume to rush forward, and boldly meet his God before he is sent
for, he thinks it Duty to wait till he is called. He being but a Potsherd of
the Earth, dares not be thus rude with his Maker, as to go before, for this
would be the way to be excluded from his Presence for evermore. We are to use
all honest Care to preserve our Life as long as we can, for Death is no such
trivial thing, as some seem to make of it through ignorance and unmindfulness.
The Servant of God has no reason to fear, for unto him it is an entrance into
a Blessed Eternity, yet he would be rightly provided. What is to be done but
once, all Wisdom and Caution are to be had, that it be done well and sure. If
by any means I might attain unto the Resurrection of the Dead, not as though I
had already attained, or were already perfect, Phil. 3. 11, 12. Or if that were
done yet, he is to tarry the Lords seizure. What if he has stood without his
Fathers House the Spring, Summer and Autumn? yet there was no great Hardship in
them; if there was, it signifies not now, it is all past and gone. The worst is
behind, the Winter, (and that may be shortened, none knows how soon) but for
the present it is somewhat irksome to endure the Frost and Cold, to have our
head Hoary and our joints Tremble. This does make him more desire, Come Lord
Jesus, come quickly; and it will be a greater happiness when he does come, but
in the mean while he is not angry if not heard, see Heb. 10. 36, 37, 38. If the
body be waxed Old, the Mind suffers no decay; the Seed sown in Spring,
cultivated in the time of strength, yields a plentiful Crop, which does good
service in this time of need. They shall still bring forth Fruit in old Age,
they shall be fat and flourishing, to show that the Lord is upright, Psalm. 92.
14, 15. The flower falls, and the beauty thereof is vanished before the Fruit
come, but this is better: So it is of the flourishing and loveliness of Youth,
that is gone before good and worthy Actions are performed; but when they are
done, the remembrance of them, and a well spent life is a mighty comfort to
fading and decrepit years. If he cannot now enjoy the pleasures of the World,
that can be no vexation unto him whose mind is fixed upon better Objects, God
and Christ. He being thoroughly convinced both by reason and experience of the
vanity of all things here below, does indeed pity, and not the least envy those
who greedily hunt after them. Having the Wisdom from above which is gentle, and
easy to be entreated, he has no peevishness of humor, and therefore he is
not wearisome nor hated like others of the same age. The Grace of God changes
the whole nature, much more a single circumstance thereof. He is not in
continual dread of the approach of Death, for that is the thing expected and
desired. The sting of it is sin, but he has made it his business throughout
his life past to pluck that out, now he can lie down in peace, knowing
assuredly that day (which others so much fear) will be unto him the Birth day
of Immortality. Neither is he afraid to consider thereof before hand, for it
does not appear terrible to him who is reconciled with God, and has laid up a
Foundation by good Works which are ready to follow him. Having cleaved unto God
in life and health he will not cast him away in time of Age, nor forsake him
when his strength fails. He that is his God will be his Guide unto Death;
with this firm assurance he is blessed.

But the sinner being an hundred Years Old shall be accursed, Isa. 65. 20. and
therefore is extremely afraid to receive it. That studied unmindfulness of his
latter end, when Death dogs him at the heels, and is ready to gnaw on him, yet
he puts of the looking thereon, and thence foolishly thinks all is well enough.
An horrible dread and fearful expectation hovers over him, which he drives away
as long as he can; some make a show off much Mirth and Briskness, all for
pleasure and company still; this is but a forced Joviality. However they
pretend to have a Youthful mind in a withered Body, in vain Pastimes to skip
like young Lambs, this they are the more obliged unto for to stifle inward
Sorrow and fear. It is an easy matter, especially by aid of Company and
Sensuality, to make an outward appearance of what is contrary within, to laugh
or make a noise when there is Vexation of Spirit. It Is not only Age nor
Constitution (whatever worldly and unbelievers talk) is the cause of Misery,
but it is principally occasioned by Sin and Guilt, which others again are freed
from by Innocence and Gospel Righteousness. Some are such deceivers of
themselves, that they will rather think any thing a cause of trouble then their
sins. The way of the wicked is as Darkness, they know not at what they stumble,
Prove. 4. 19. Natural weakness is common to all, as to which they are tormented
and others comforted; but they are further subject to horror and misery, from
which the Righteous are altogether freed: If the eyes of the ungodly are waxed
dim, so that they cannot longer behold vanity, it is grievous to be bereaved of
what they placed good in, especially there being no Light within them, but
their body is full of Darkness. If they are not able to fulfill their lusts,
(in which was their chiefest delight) how wretched must they be? When the
affection and desire toward them does still remain, but the Members and Senses
have lost their power and relish. Those which knew no other Happiness but
outward sensual pleasures, and they have yet an hankering; what shall be done
when those are vanished, and they have no other comfort or satisfaction instead
thereof? They wish they had never been; Life is a burden, which they would
surrender up presently, if they could be certain the Spirit would turn into
soft air, and the body ever remain insensible as the Earth out of which it was
taken, but they sadly fear it will be otherwise. The oldest men if remaining in
Irreligion and Wickedness, still do desire and endeavor after a further
continuance of their life, though it be a succession of miseries linked one
upon another, and they have sucked out, even to loathing, all Worldly
pleasures, and now cannot enjoy them. They are weary of life, and afraid to
die, for they expect no good from it but evil. That punishment which attends
for them till out of the body frightens when they are in, and the remedy they
use, is not to think thereof. If they cast a transient glance toward the
Grave, as sometimes they are forced, they do not look beyond unto Eternity and
future Judgment, for that raises trouble and anguish of mind. There is an
inward apprehension (which has been stifled as much as it could) they are
indeed afraid to appear before that God whom they have provoked and offended
throughout their foregoing days. This they were warned of all along by Gods
Word and Ministers, their own Conscience, but having continually resisted them
all, these Scriptures are fulfilled in them, Isa. 6. 9, 10. and 29. 10, 11.
Romans 1. 24, 26, 28. Talk to an old Man (who has hitherto lived in
disobedience, and never left his lusts till they left him) concerning Religion
and exhort him to repent, it is the same as if you did to a bruit Beast. His
ear is deaf and stupid to those things, he understands as little of them as a
Child. Strangers have devoured his strength, and he knows it not, yea, gray
Hairs are here and there upon him, yet he knows not, Hos. 7. 9.

There has been some exhortation used to those in the state of Manhood, for if
they are unconverted, they have the spirit of slumber, so they are more easily
awakened; but the spirit of deep sleep is poured out upon old hardened Sinners,
and it is to be feared some of them will not be thoroughly rouzed, till they
feel the flames of Hell about their Ears. This Age is not usually bettered by
reproof: Who are unjust will be unjust still, and who are filthy will be filthy
still. However they may know, otherwise they shall feel, that God shall wound
the head of his Enemies, and the Hairy scalp of such an one as goes on still
in his trespasses, Ps. 68. 21. Let all people take heed how they put off their
turning unto the Lord till this time, for it is an unworthy thing after the
body has served diverse lusts and pleasures, and worn out in them, and disabled
any longer, then to offer it up unto him. Is it then a living Sacrifice, holy,
acceptable unto God? Is this a reasonable service? No, he disowns the Blind,
the Lame and Sick for Sacrifice, Mal. 1. 8. Is it meet that the Church of God
should be like the pool of Bethesda to be frequented by a number of impotent
Folks, of Blind, Halt, and Withered. Neither let any presume too much on those
who were called at the eleventh hour into the Vineyard, but the reason is there
given, they were not hired before, and they came as soon as called. But here in
a Christian Country, all are called to serve the Lord in their Youth; if they
refuse because they think the day too long, and they fancy it well enough, if
they go a little before Sun setting; will the great Householder thank them for
it, and so be imposed upon? In no wise, for which of you will be so served? If
your own workmen should not come, or loyter all the day and do nothing till the
time they should leave of Work, would you reward such base and negligent
Fellows who thus despise and put a trick on you? God will be no more mocked or
slighted by his Creatures, then they will be by those under them. He is jealous
of his Honor, and hates to have his commands disregarded; with him is Power,
Sovereignty and Wisdom: Men must not think to give him an answer when they
will, at some time hereafter, for now they have other business to do, or with
Felix put him off to a more convenient season. Let them deal thus with their
Prince, and see how he will resent it. God is not beholden to the Work of his
hands, neither does he receive any benefit by them; it is alone his infinite
Goodness and Love, that he makes unto us any offer of Happiness, and not our
desert who do all we can to provoke the Author of our being. He has not dealt
with us after our sins, Psalm. 103. 10. He commands to turn from them and be
healed; it is meet and right (the distance being infinite of him over us) to
answer him at the first call, which he does again, and waits that he may be
gracious, but he does not for ever. Pharoahs heart was hardened after he had
refused Gods message ten times; and there are but few old Men in this Nation,
who have hitherto continued in an unregenerate condition, but have more often
resisted Gods Ambassadors commanding them in his name to turn and live, and
therefore equally deserve hardness of heart. But God who can raise the Dead,
can raise these also out of the Lethargy and Death of sin; he can pluck these
brands out of the Fire, Zech. 32. Yet there being so few sincere and hearty
converts of this nature; Oh my Soul, trust not thou upon such uncertainties, to
day while it is called to day harden not thy heart, but hearken unto Gods
Voice; forsake thy sins immediately, and then thou art sure. Defer not till old
Age to be justified, for then a thousand to one if ever thou be.

The hoary head is a Crown of Glory, if it be found in the way of
Righteousness, ^rov. 16. 31. It has a resemblance to the Ancient of Days, and
is a sign of that Eternity God shall endue him withal* for the time is at hand,
let him that is Righteous be Righteous still, Rev. 22. 10, 11. Let your Loins
be girded about, and your Lights burning, for the Bridegroom is near, go ye out
to Meet him that you go in with him to the Marriage; be thou faithful unto
Death and I will give thee a Crown of Life.

Thus have we run through all the Ages of Man, which are visible Of the Body,
Senses, and sensual Pleasure.
in the increase, change and alteration they make in his body. Let none flatter
himself as if he should certainly pass through them all, nor defer the doing of
those things which ought to be done presently; for we are not sure of a Day or
a Week forward. For besides the many instances of sudden Death; Sickness is
most commonly so, which in three or four days may hurry us hence to give
Account for the Deeds done in the Body; so uncertain a thing is life, that by
outward appearance none knows whither it will be long or short. The breath in
our Nostrils hangs upon such slender threads from within, and is subject to so
many Casualties from without, that if it were not for Gods providence who holds
our Souls in life, we should rather admire that any live so long, as die so
soon. Upon this frail thing depends our everlasting Happiness or Misery, it
being the space to try how we will behave our selves toward God, and
accordingly we are to receive from him. B^hold thou have made my Days as an
hand bre^dth, and mine Age is nothing before Thee, Ps. 39. 5. By reason of the
Evil and Vanity (which enclose us on every side) it is irksom and tedious,
which makes it seem somewhat longer; but when our days are passed away they are
the same, as a tale that is told, Ps. 90. 3. So it appears upon a Deathbed,
yea, in the time of Health and Vigor, the Years that are past may be all
measured in a thought, and the same as if they had not been. How soon is the
Morning of Youth over? How is our Face changed, as if we were not the same Men?
What was ruddy and flo^^ishing, begins to wither like the Grass. The body has
been, is still changing, and never continues in one stay; We dwell in Houses of
Clay, whose Foundation is in the Dust, Job 4. 19. It continually tends whence
it was taken; the matter is heavy and weak in its own Nature, and yet we, as if
born for no other end, but to make our selves Miserable, will render them
worse, by giving too much way to bruti^h appeties they become unactive and
dull. We naturally groan in this Tabernacle, it depressing the Heavenly
aspiring Soul, yet by sensuality sink it even lower unto the Earth. As if the
seeds of Corruption did not sufficiently trouble us, we throw in more by
Surfeiting and Drunkenness, and by going over to strange lusts, consume our
strength. If God did not take more care for us then our selves do, we should be
the most Miserable of all his Creatures. To prevent these inconveniences are
the commands and directions in his good Word, Romans 12. 1. 1 Cor. v. 15. Romans 6.
13. 19. 1 Cor. 3. 17. 1 These. 4 3, 4. 1 These. 5. 8. 1 Cor. 9. 25. Luke 21. 34.

We should not only escape the Evils, but as to the body might enjoy good
things, which indeed are little, but proportionable Of Pleasure.
to its small and perishing nature; for labor it has refreshment and sl^ep:
And further are some pleasures, which God has provided for every sense; the
Eye is pleased with variety of Works, the Pious Soul takes great delight in
beholding the Moon and Stars which he has Ordained, and by the Beauty of the
Creatures is to be seen the greater excellency of the Creator. If it be
pleasant now to see them through a glass darkly, it will be much more hereafter
to see clearly God as he is, face to face. The ear is delighted with Singing
Psalms and Praise, and the several kinds of Music. The Palate is refreshed
with the savor of Meat and Drink, God has given liberty to the use of Man, by
which we may Taste and see that the Lord is good, Ps. 33. 8. The smell is
gratified with Flowers, Balm and Spiknard; another sense has also some delight
answerable to it.

But here Men are to be Advertised, that sensual pleasures were allowed just to
refresh us, and thereby also to try our obedience, for several Commandments are
against the excess of them. When too greedily had, they prove a transgression,
and also an hindrance to the things of the Spirit being contrary to them. These
too often thrust out the other, making a show of more happiness, and therefore
let it be examined whither they will really yield so much as they pretend,
considering them in their sin and abuse with the utmost delight that does
arrive from them; The pleasures of sin for a season, Heb. 11. 25. So styled by
the Apostle, because they endure no longer then this life, and also they are
only for that Moment in which they are had. The pleasantness of Meat and Drink
vanishes in the Mouth, and the delights of Lust are sooner gone then well
perceived; sensual enjoyments pass by, and are the same immediately after as if
they had never been. In the very midst the heart is not satisfied, for they
please one half of us, the worse part, but not the whole Man. The Soul is
unconcerned; and though by much indulging sensual pleasures the understanding
waxes gross, so it cannot relish what are proper to that, being brutish in its
imaginations; nevertheless it cannot be so in its enjoyments, for the things of
this life do not give a true and real contentment, to those who do not live
according to it, and come near the Beasts that Perish. Who have least Reason or
Wisdom, are most Transported with bodily Pleasures, yet none is so void
thereof, as to receive a full Satisfaction from them; I appeal to the greatest
Voluptuary (if his heart be not so covered over with Fat, that it cannot
conceive at all) Whether he does really think himself to be an happy Man? Is he
not of the Number of those, who amidst jovial delights rejoice in appearance
and not in heart? Does he not still desire after something else then what he
has already? A true sign that he has not Felicity, for he cannot show it
forth by Rest and Peace of Mind.

There is in our Nature an earnest desire after Happiness, all follow after
what they imagine may bring them to it. The two Principal Roads (for there are
many Bypath and little Wanderings) are goodness and pleasure; that the former
is the best and only way, is the Manifestation of all the foregoing and ensuing
Discourse: But the latter seems broad, and therefore entices Wayfaring Men,
especially Fools to walk in it, Come ye simple ones, and turn in hither, and
they judging only by appearance, are soon brought into the liking thereof. It
seems pleasant and smooth at first, so they walk on Merrily; but going on, they
meet with rubs, and whereas they thought it would be more delightful, they fi^d
the contrary; they begin to be tired, and would go back into the other Way, but
that did seem Narrow and Rough when they looked upon it at first, and therefore
vainly and foolishly conclude that is worse further on, which also is just
contrary as may be seen, Prove. 3. 17. Isa. 35. 8. The Devil whi^pers to them
not to believe as much, for they have wearied themselves in the way of
Dest^u^^ion, and if they kn^w of a better, they would walk in it; but he
subtly persuades there is none better then what they are in already. They are
by sad experience sensible it is no good Way, but giving credit to the Father
o^ Lies, continue therein. Men retain their sinful Pleasures, though Surfeited;
for they cannot w^ll live without so^e Delight, and they think Paultry and
Insignific^nt on^s are better then none at all. A Whore at length is Nauseated,
but kept unto, till another Recreation is found out, of which they are wearied
again, and then they seek a third, so run round in a Circle, their life being
nothing but a studied and small variety of falsely called Pleasures, which
satiate but do not satisfy. These are the foolish and hurtful lusts, which
drown Men in Destruction and Perdition, 1. Tim. 6. 9. And the Rich are more
given to them, as the Apostle here observes. I bese^ch you as Strangers and
Pilgrims abstain from Fleshly, lusts which War against the Soul, 1 Pet. 2. 11.
Which raise a Mist before the understanding, making it dull and heavy, which
stifle its Operations and hinder good exalted Thoughts, which keep the Soul
more fast in Prison, and are directly opposite to her Spiritual Nature as
Darkness to Light.

The design of the Gospel is to prepare us for better things, to bring us from
Earthly unto those that are Heavenly. Walk in the Spirit and ye shall not
fulfill the lusts of the Flesh, for the Flesh lusts against the Spirit, and
the Spirit against the Flesh, and these are contrary the one to another: They
that are Christ's, have crucified the Flesh, with the affections and lusts, Gal.
5. 16, 17, 24. To be carnally minded is Death, but to be Spiritually minded is
Life and Peace. For if ye live after the Flesh, ye shall die: But if ye through
the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live, Romans 8. 6, 13. And
then can be no greedy desires after sensual Delights. An affection or hankering
after them is the principal thing forbidden, for there is large Commission
given, Genesis 1. 29. and 9. 3. 1 Timothy 4. 4. A sweetness is put into the
Creatures, and sense given us to perceive it; but they are to be used according
to the bounds God has set in his Word and our Nature. To be temperate in all
things, and not the least sensual minded, is what does become Men and also
Christians; Neither let Ungodly Men walking after their own lusts think them
less happy, because these have not an unlimited enjoyment, as they wrongfully
usurp to themselves; for the great God, who gives us all things richly to
enjoy, may well prescribe after what manner they shall be received, especially
seeing it is for our further good. Sobriety gives a better relish to every
lawful delight, then all the studied Sauce and Contrivances to those who are
full and Surfeitted. But then we do err not knowing our selves, for Nature does
not so much require Pleasure, as now and then a little Divertisement, but is
for a middle and even State between Pleasure and Pain; There may be observed a
weariness of the former, if too long dwelt on, and the desire of intermission.
Take Reason into Advice with Enjoyments, and then they will not be troublesome
or occasision of inconvenience; but this is banished because it is thought to
lessen, only for that it conceives of them according to truth. Indeed the Act
is little and mean, common to us with Beasts, unsatisfying mixed and vain. When
sought after they are full of trouble and impatiency, and afterward is
Disappointment and Vexation. All which perish in the using, and are determined
in this Life; which signify no more taken all together, then the single
interrupted Acts, all which go of as a Dream when one awaketh. So it is not
possible for the true and real Happiness to consist in them; all this may
Learnt as a Man.

But then the Grace and Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ teaches more: That
there is a real good set before the Sons of Men, that we are to press forward
to it, and take heed least these things hinder. There is great Talk in the
World about following Pleasure, and too much Practicing of it; not minding how
consistent it is with Christianity, and the Attainment of true Happiness.
Abstain always from unlawful things, and sometimes from lawful, may seem a
rigid and severe Rule; but yet is necessary, for the Boundaries between good
and evil are so small and indiscernable, that he which will venture to go to
the utmost of one, will before he is aware transgress, and pass into the other:
To prevent all Danger of this Nature, it is commanded, Abstain from all
appearance of Evil, 1 These. 5. 22. All Excess is Evil, even what are esteemed
the more innocent Divertisements (if followed too much) do turn aside the Heart
from God and good things. The Apostle Prophecies of these last Days: That, Men
shall be lovers of Pleasures, more then lovers of God, 2 Timothy 3. 4. But it is
strange, that any should be so, who really believe in him; for can they imagine
he has Communicated more Goodness to things then is in himself? That there is
more Satisfaction in earthly Vanities then the things above? May they not more
certainly conclude, that he purposely made things here so small and empty,
least they should take off our esteem from him, that fullness of Joy, and the
Pleasures for evermore at his right hand? By these sweet things he gives an
earnest, if we seek after it, and shall be found worthy, Luke 16. 11, 12.
That, He will commit unto us the true Happiness. And therefore let the
Christian be put in mind not to be Liquorish nor Desirous after present things,
but turn the whole Stream of his affection to God, and the things of his
Kingdom. Look diligently to himself, that he forsake all to come unto them. Let
him who has this hope, purify himself from all dregs and defilements of
Sensuality. And let those follow after it, who are strangers to Godliness,
without Hope, and who have nothing e^^e to trust unto, Who if they are bereaved
of this, they are bereaved of all; these are Sensual and earthly, the other man
is spiritual and Divine.

He has the Body subdued to the Spirit, Whereas some willingly suffer their
noble and free born Souls to be inslaved unto a lump of Flesh. And become the
worst of Gods Creatures, for they are not Vassals to themselves, nor Act
contrary to their own Nature. All the Excellency of a mere Sensualist lies in
his outside. A gallant Horse exceeds him in Beauty and Strength, the Lion in
Courage, a Fox in craft and subtilty; but indeed he has the Pre-eminence in
that which should be his Shame, for all things unseemly and abominable meet in
him together, which are single, and not to be found but in the worst of Bruits.
Man would be a contemptible Being, if it were not for that Divine thing within,
which preserves his Sovereignty over the lower Ps. 8. 5, 6.
Creation, but when this is defiled by the filthiness of sin, he sinks below
himself. He forfeits his Honor by disobedience unto his God; and his Soul
creeps and cleaves unto the ground, which was given to raise him up unto
Heaven. As to the Body none has much reason to Glory, for the Beasts excel us
in every Sense, and are equal in every Member. Wherefore the Almighty sent us
into such Flesh, we are not to enquire, but rest satisfied with the good
Pleasure of his Will. Nay, but O man who art thou, that reply against God?
shall the thing formed, say to him that formed it, Why have thou made me thus?
Romans 9. 20. God made us immortal, but we made our selves vile and corruptible,
For he did not suffer his holy one (in whom was no Sin) to see corr^uption,
Psalm. 16. 10. Whatever our Condition is now in this Taberna^le, it was not
grievous before the fall, and we deserve worse then what is laid on us. The
Children of God contentedly fear with all the Weakness and Pain belonging to
the Flesh, having for support, 2 Cor. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4. Happiness rises unto them
out of what by Nature is miserable; All things work together for good.

But it is time to enter within this vail of flesh. The Soul is the Of the Soul.
Man himself; Compare Mat. 16. 26. with Lu^e 9. 25. The Body is enlivened and
made sensible, but is as it were a mere Trunk or Engine for the Soul to Act in.
We know less of the way of the Spirit then of other things, but since what was
written, Eccles. 11. 5. there has more Revelation come forth, What appears
from thence and manifest reason is to be laid open, that we may know how to
Labor after our proper Happiness. We should have been very much in the dark,
if not for the Law and Testimony, and the light in them; yet still we are shut
in a narrow Room, closely co^fined within the Walls of thick Clay; so we must
not expect a perfect knowledge thereof, till this shall be made glorious and
transparent: For now we see through a Glass darkly, but then face to face: Now
I know in part, but then shall I know, even as also I am known, 1 Cor. 13. 12.
It is no small inconsiderable thing, for observe with what it is ranked; The
Lord stretches forth the Heavens, and lays the Foundation of the Earth, and
forms the Spirit of Man within him, Zech. 12. 1. It being the manner of his
wonderful working, to comprize a great matter in a small place. And this argues
the Excellency of spiritual things, that they are of equal with material,
though these seem as much greater (as the Ocean is to a single drop) and
therefore are as worthy to be sought after, as what may be seen or handled, now
with the outward Senses. Such is the Wisdom and Contrivance of God, that those
things are declared unto us whilst in the Flesh, and in a World of sensible
Carnal things. That which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which we
have seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have handled
of the word of life, for the life was manifested, 1 John 1. 1, 2. Now these
cannot be Eat nor Drunk, nor keep Warm; but yet are rec^ived in, and as
sensible to the Soul, as they are to the Body. And also have the aid of Sense
to convey them in. And tend equally ^o her bettering growth, and Establishment;
The Soul may be known by its Operations, which may be distinguished (as we give
Names to the several parts of the Body) by the Understanding, Will and
Affections.

By the first we have the knowledge of Good and Evil, Truth Of the
Understanding.
and Falsehood, to follow the one, and ^schew the other; which we naturally and
readily do: For though the Practice of the World discovers that Men are Wise to
do evil, and to do good have no knowledge, Jer. 4. 22. they forsake the Truth
and greedily run after Error, yet not apprehending them such, but through
counterfeit and disguise appear to them as good and true. Their understanding
being darkened does not see thoroughly in things, and they looking through a
false Glass judge according to the outside, and mistake appearances for good,
and delusions for truth. Men are deceived by false Notions, for they follow
after what is seemingly best and convenient. If the mind did see clearly into
the things separate from the deceitful Varnish they have put on, if the Fogs
were dispelled within and without, they would not miss of the good and right
way.

If any man walk in the day, he stumbleth not, because he sees the the light
of this World: But if a man walks in the night he stumbleth, because there is
no light in him, John, 11. 9. And this is the Condition of People at first,
though it is hard to let so much light into some Men, that they may just
discern their own state: It is certain, mankind did as little know (what they
most ought) the things of God, and another World, their own future Happiness,
and how to secure it, as those now in the dark night see of the things of this
World. That Revelation which he has made in Scripture does discover it all as
plainly as the Sun shines in the Firmament, to see the things before us. And
if those be made appear to concern us as much as these do, then a like
understanding of them will be found altogether necessary. Every one knows,
that barely to see, signifies not much, without Reason or Sense within,
manifesting their Nature whether good or evil unto us, for otherwise Poison
might be received in as wholesome Food. He is reckoned a Fool who cannot put a
difference in things of common Life, between what is for his Welfare and Harm;
He is thought a heedless Fellow, and next to madness, who has no regard to
what may preserve, or what may destroy; He is reputed stubborn and wilful, and
unpitied when he falls into Misery, who would not suffer himself to be
forewarned thereof, nor would use means (when he might) to prevent it: All this
is exactly so as to the World to come. The Holy Ghost does often use the
similitude of light and darkness, by the former signifying that manifestation
of the Will of God to us Men, what he would have us to know, and more
particularly for that which came by the Gospel of Jesus Christ, which is in
order to recovering of sight to the blind, Luke 4. 18. see Isa. 9. 12. and 60.
1, 2, 3. Mal. 4. 2. Luke 1. 78, 79. John 1. 4, 5. The Condition of those
before, and the refusal of it is darkness. They know not, neither will they
understand, they walk on in darkness, Ps. 82. 5. Even at this very day, This is
the Condemnation that light is come into the World, and Men love darkness
rather then light, because their Deeds are evil, for every one that does evil
hates the light, neither comes Ephesians. 5. 13.
to the light least his Deeds should be reproved, John 3. 19, 20 But alas! What
siguifieth this pitiful shift? For no Man's sins are to another, but to God
only; and he knows them as well with their utmost Sinfulness and Aggravation,
as if committed openly before all the World. The darkness hides not from thee,
Ps. 139. 12. The light is not manifested to make our Sins known (for they are
before) but for the Prevention and avoiding of them. Gods Will would be done on
Earth as it is in Heaven, if his ways were as much known; For they who know
him, will not offend against him. Our Souls would escape out of the Snare of
the Fowler, if we did see it laid for us. We should not yield to Satan's
Temptation, if we did know the utmost in it; no more then a Wise man Acts
against his Reason and Interest, for the alone Promise of a Rattle or Childish
Toy.

If he had not to do with Fools and Blind, he could not drill them on with such
Toys and Vanities. The Lust of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eyes, and the Pride
of Life, Pleasures, Riches and Honor, are the baits he uses; which make a
Glorious show and pretense to be the good things allotted to the Sons of Men.
At first sight they dazzle our Eyes, we perceive nothing but Beauty and
Loveliness in them; yet if it be thoroughly considered, all these put together
do not make good that Happiness and Peace which mankind so eagerly desires: And
they are to be had in Gods ways, so the first and great Temptation Vanishes.

If the Enemy cannot draw Men off from God and Religion, he trys to corrupt and
deceive them therein by Lies and false Suggestions; but all this may be
prevented by the written Word without, and the understanding within he has
given us. The Foundation of the whole is, which way to atone, please, and find
acceptance with Almighty God; this cannot be better known then by what himself
has showed by Angels, his Son and Holy Men inspired by him. Who have done it
faithfully and truly; and laid down a reasonable way to this purpose. As we
have received, so ought we to walk, that we may please God, by complying with
all his Mind and Will, which he has revealed unto us by them. Now this could
never be done, unless it was known; And this neither by seeing it in a Book,
nor hearing with the Ear (for a Child does this) unless it be understo^d. Thy
hands have made me and fashioned me, give me understanding that I may learn thy
Commandments, Psalm. 119. 73. The inspiration of the Almighty gives men
understanding, Job 32. 8. He did not to Horse and Mule, for these are carried
by blind instinct of Desire and Aversation; but we with Knowledge and Choice as
to Good and Evil. Thy word is a Lamp unto my Feet: And a Light unto my Path,
Ps. 119. 105. Without that our own Understanding is altogether insufficient, as
may be seen by the wanderings of those of old time, who were carried away with
dumb Idols, the strange Follies of Idolatry and Superstition, that ignorance
and uncertainty of the chiefest Good and Immortality. Something may be observed
at this day which confirms that, The natural man receives not the things of
the Spirit of God, for they are Foolishness unto him, neither can he know them,
for they are spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2. 14. It is an amazing thing to
consider, those who are prudent as to the Affairs of the World, who have all
Knowledge and Skill of the best way to get Riches and Honor, who foresee and
carefully avoid temporal Evils; yet commonly these of all Men are most
ignorant, as to the things of God and their Salvation. They think it beneath
their parts to condescend to such things, it is an undervaluing of their
worldly Wisdom to practice Simplicity and Godly Sincerity. This they esteem as
fit for none but Ignorant and Foolish people. One would admire hereat, if he
did not call to mind, Mat. 11. 25, 26. 1 Cor. 1. 18, 19, 20, 26. The greatest
Scholars are not always holy and obedient; for Knowledge puffs up, and they
Fancy it a Disparagement to come to the things that are base in the Esteem of
the World, and the things which are despised. The Blindness received by Adams
Transgression is not taken away, for they disdain (as they foolishly and
ignorantly think) the meanness of the Remedy. There are some still Vain in
their Imaginations, and their foolish heart are darkened: Professing themselves
to be Wise, they Deuteronomy. 8. 17. Isa. 10. 13.
in the end will become Fools; that all may know who come into the Promised
Land, it was not their own Power or Wisdom brought them thither: For through
proud Nature we are apt to rob God of the Honor due to his Name, to say we
made our selves Happy. Such boasting is false and hateful to our great Master,
who even this way teaches us to acknowledge, (if we will speak but the truth)
that all our sufficiency is of him, 2 Cor. 3. 5. If we are left to our selves,
all our Wisdom is Earthly, Sensual and Devilish; and serves for no other end,
but wisely to descend into Hell. Natural Reason alone is not able to Conduct
unto Heaven, for it knows not the way; unless it had been for the revealed Will
of God, we had been also Grovelling in the Dark, as our Ancestors, or the
Indians and Pagans at this time.

Wherefore we receiving a Kingdom which cannot be moved, let us have Grace,
whereby we may serve God acceptably with Reverence and Godly fear, Heb. 12. 28.
Let us pray for the Holy Spirit, which is promised to every one that Asks, and
that gives Life to the dead Letter making it understood, and leads into truth
sufficient to render us Happy. That of guiding into all truth was a particular
Promise to the Disciples, as appears by the Words following, He shall not speak
of himself, and he will show you things to come, John 13. 16* Now if he who
boasts of thi^, will do the other also, have the Spirit of Prophecy as well as
the pretended one of infallibility, then this Scripture extends to him; but
seeing he has not that, neither the other; for what Christ has joined
together, he is Antichrist that puts asunder. Show the things to come
bereafter, that we may know that ye are Gods, Isa. 41. 23. Who opposes and
exalts himself above all that is called God, or that is Worshipped: So that
he as God sits in the Temple of God, showing himself that he is God, 1 These.
2. 4. That same Jesus from whom he pretends to derive his Commission and Truth,
foretells that many false Christ's and false Prophets shall arise, of whom we
are to take heed, and Commands, Search the Scriptures, John 5. 39.

For that only Objection, from 2 Pet. 3. 16. which the Man of Sin does so
mightily insist on to beat off the People from that word, wherein his own ways
and Corruptions are so Condemned: The Argument does not amount to so much, as
that we ought to abstain from Meat and Drink, because possibly we may meet with
Poison. For the wresting of Scriptures, to their own Destruction is a wilful
known Act as the word Imports. Po^son may be conveyed in unknown to us, but it
would be more ridiculous to say, I will not Eat any thing, because I know what
is Poi^on, and can Eat that also, whereas this should encourage him the more to
necessary Food, because he knows the other and can avoid it. The word of God is
as necessary to nourish unto eternal Life, as the other to preserve the
present, and none need to be afraid: For this is certain (however People are
frightened and perplexed about Doctrines and Opinions necessary to ^alvation) As
in the ways of wickedness, none Perishes without a Mal^cious, Sinful, Stubborn
and continued Trangression of the Will: So it is of the understanding, unless
there is some Malignity and ill deserving therein, God will never be eternally
angry with Men for it. Things are so ordered, that every one may be saved by
Labor and sincere Use of means, and none mis-carries or is damned, but through
his own Fault and known Wilfulness. God would have all men to be saved, and to
come to the knowledge of the Truth, 1 Timothy 2. 4. The end is here put before the
means, for the Apostle speaks of Gods principal intention, and here mentions
the way how they may accomplish it, by knowledge of the Truth; which whosoever
does sincerely and universally (as any one may do) this will quicken and stir
him to arise and be saved. It is the same as if in ordinary Conversation one
would have his Servant go to such a place, and then shows him the way.

Truth is distinct from Man, for it is the very Nature of things without, the
Connection between themselves, and how they pertain Of Reason.
to us, whether Divine or Common, for so they are distinguished to us when
properly all things are Gods. There is a Power implanted in us to know them;
many of them are hidden, which we discern by searching and inferring one thing
from another, which is the proper Office of our understanding, and commonly
called Reason. Some have been offended at this word, because it is so little
mentioned in Scripture, Whereas it is, 1 Samuel 12. 7. Isa. 1. 18. Acts 17. 23.
Acts 24. 25. and in innumerable places by other words to the same purpose, as
Knowledge, Wisdom and Understanding, and the great necessity of them is pressed
throughout the whole Book of God. He appeals to us, Ezekiel. 18. Whether his ways
are not equal? Implying we have some Capacity to think thereof. I speak as to
Wise men, judge ye of what I say, 1 Cor. 10. 15. And then what he says
concerning the Gentiles, That which may be known of God is manifest in them,
for God h^th showed i^ unto them, for the invisible things of him from the
Creation of the World are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are
made, even his Eternal Power and Godhead; so that they are without excuse:
Because that when they kn^w God, they glorified him not as God, Romans 1. 19, 20,
21. Their way of knowing him was by inferring, it was some one who made this
Beautiful House of the World, and he that Built all things is God. They had but
a dim knowledge of him, just believed he was, but for want of Grace and
Revelation knew not how to come unto him, nor seek him aright.

This is our advantage above theirs, we have now (blessed be his Divine
Majesty) the Old and New Testament completed, the sum whereof is a rational
way of pleasing God, see Mat. 23. 16, 17. and Isa. 44. 19. All our duty to him
is a reasonable service, Romans 12. 1. Here is to be seen his law for the
Government of the World, which at first was given in short (as well becomes
Sovereign and infinite power) as the ten Commandment, which contain great
equity. The Writings of the Prophets are as so many Expositions on them, who
did exhort to the observance, and reprove for the Transgression of them; all
which may be observed to be reasonable inference and conclusion from them,
applicable to those particular acts as even the heart of Man might judge. Who
is among you that fears the Lord, that obeys the voice of his Servant? Isa.
50. 10. God who at sundry times and in diverse manners spoke in times past unto
the Fathers by the Prophets, has in these last days spoken unto us by his Son,
Heb. 1. 1. In whose Gospel the things to be done, are most agreeable unto the
Sons of Men; the precepts given us, are worthy of the Son of God, and came from
above, for the Wisdom of Ages could not contrive so excellent; He whom the Jews
did style a Carpenter, has outdone all who were ever before him; his worst*
and implacable Adversaries could not say any thing against what he Taught, and
those sent to apprehend him, did confess, never Man spoke like this Man, John
7. 46. The malicious world could not find fault with his Doctrine; Of all those
Antichrists and Heretics, who have done so much mischief to the Church of God,
none have either wrote or spoken against the rules of Life, unless some mad
profane Persons in a scurrilous Language, which prevailed nothing upon Wise
and considering Men, and never made any Proselites but such as were before led
that way by their corrup^ Lusts and Affections. Nothing can be said against
them; ^o^ they a^^ p^re, (...), and even the perfection of reason. All do
approve of their Excellency, that do admit them into full and due
consideration; If reason were stretched out to the utmost, and suffered to have
its perfect work, to look out every way, and ^ow far this would dictate, This
Star being now assisted by the Son of Righteousness, would direct to the right
Path; though it be a small Light in comparison to the other, yet it will lead
to the greater; by direction of both we may go on securely. Religion without
reason is Superstition and Folly (God is not pleased with the Sacrifice of
Fools) and reason without Religion, does argue Man more ungrateful to his
Maker, so liable to a greater Condemnation.

Well is it where they meet together, and each assist the other, remembering
still which is subject, and must keep close to the other. The natural
understanding prompts to do nothing prejudicial to our Happiness, and to follow
after what conduces thereto; if it be further unable, that hinders not, seeing
it is offered help from above: Gods Grace is sufficient, and that is never
wanting to any who desire and seek after it, which every one may do. And
therefore let none say (if he becomes Miserable) that it is through God he is
so; for I have no pleasure in the Death of him Deuteronomy. 8. 20.
that dies, says the Lord God; wherefore turn your selves and live ye, Ezekiel.
18. 22. That we may know how to do this, we are showed, and also required to
follow after Him who is the Way, the Truth, and the Life. God has given us
Knowledge and Power to be Happy, and has done all things that can be well
conceived; seeing he has been pleased to make us as we are, to put us to a
free Choice and Obedience: We are not Gods, but the Work of his Hands, he may
do what he will with his own; if God should force us to do our Duty, that would
be like the Sacrifice of a Beast against his Will. We ought to praise our God
that he has made us capable of serving him, who has provided so much for our
Good, that we may live for ever if we will; he does press us forward to the
things which are for our Peace; he Neh. 9. 29.
does testify against us, that he might bring us again unto his Law; this is
done by the Spirit he has given us.

Conscience is called the first Spirit of Man, 1 Cor. 2. 11. Prove. Of
Conscience.
20. 27. It is the most excellent part of the reasonable Soul, which being
assisted from above, make Application of the Man's actions to himself. He that
is wise, is wise unto himself; and this bringing all things home, is most
useful for accomplishment of the great end of Happiness; Reason may wander in
fruitless Speculation and insignificant Thoughts, but this Ministers only
profitable things: its Office is described, Romans 2. 15. Their Conscience also
bearing Witness, and their Thoughts in the mean while accusing or else excusing
one another; which is a certain demonstration, that Man is in subjection under
a Law. He is not troubled for fear of Humane Power or Punishment, but for those
things only in his own heart, whereof that has no knowledge; it has respect
unto the Invisible God over us, who has given a Law to all the World, both
Jews and Gentiles; the first had it Written in Tables of Stone, and to the
other it was Engraven in their own Hearts. Now something sits as Judge within
the Man, examining all that is done by him; it will not condemn the Innocent,
See Exodus 23. 20, 21, 22.
nor let the Guilty go free: It is Gods Vicegerent (and therefore a contempt to
one is against the other also) making known his Will and Pleasure, pressing it
to be observed: It is an emblem and forerunner of his future judgment, for it
is neither to be bribed nor deceived, but determines impartially and knows
all things, rendering unto every one according to his deservings; If well, then
is comfort and joyful expectation; If ill, Sin lies at the Door, there is
regret and fear: Mention is frequently made hereof in the Writings of the
Heathens, but we do not find they used so many Tricks and Artifices to stifle
it, as is the practice at this day; Who think themselves wise and happy if they
can do thus much, and they may, but there is great danger herein; for if they
should suppress Conscience in this life, and come to that place where it will
be revived again, where the Worm shall never die; that little time of ease and
quiet here, would signify no more then if one in a light sickness should fall
a sleep for a Minute only, and thence awake in a continual burning Fever. To
commit more sin, and to hope thereby to be relieved, is as foolish as to quench
the Fire to cast more fuel on; Indeed at first this does somewhat stop the
Flame, but after it will blaze more violently: So remorse may be a little
hindered for the present, but returns worse by reason of the fresh guilt that
has been added, increasing and driving nearer unto, but not removing the
future punishment. It is now so grievous that some care must be sought out one
way or another; When by reason of iniquity, the whole head is sick, and the
whole heart is faint, there are two kinds of remedy; the one is of the
Physicians of Souls, the Exhortation of turning unto the Lord with Weeping,
Fasting and Mourning, the diet Drink of Penitential Tears, the exercise of
Repentance; these seem severe and harsh (but yet, Who does not submit to as
much for Bodily Health and Recovery? And is not Eternal Life as much as these?)
The Patient does not like these wholesome Medicines; Is there none who can do
the business sooner, and more easily? When old Satan perceives any troubled in
mind for their sins, he knows the consequent, if he does not administer present
comfort, they will be renounced, which are the cause of so much Disquiet and
Vexation: And then Gods design that this sorrow should work repentance will
take effect; this the other fears, and therefore will endeavor to hinder. He
whispers that their present sadness is not occasioned by serving of diverse
Lusts and Pleasures (for they were found sweet in the enjoyment) but it is
their Natural Constitution, against which they must strive; Eat Drink and be
Merry, Do not give way to Heaviness. The poor Man thinks this admirable Advice,
much better then the other sour prescriptions, and does fancy his inward
Diseases will be healed more pleasantly and safely; but mark the end.

He knows the virtue of strong Drink, for when reason is destroyed, there are
no reflex thoughts of upbraiding Guilt and approaching Misery; all is in a
peacable condition: This does not last always, the sober intervals return, and
with them worse heaviness for last nights folly. He finds that did not
perfectly cure him, but then resorts again unto the same esteemed remedy; by
repeated acts he gets an habit of Sottishness, so by little and little, he does
still the unpleasing (because true) suggestions of Conscience; continual
^^pping makes way for the Spirit of slumber and drowsiness; a custom of sinning
will at length take away all sense of it. Habit and Use will make Drunkenness
and other Sins become as Natural Actions, that they shall be committed without
concern or regret afterward, for that does vanish by small* degrees till it is
none at all; ^o Adultery and Fornication may seem all one, as Eating, Drinking
and Sleeping. The qualms following Injustice, Theft and Deceit go off, and come
to be as easily practi^ed as the honest works of the calling; sin is of an
hardening deceitful Nature, and those who suffer it to reign for some time in
them, at last lose the sense of Good and Evil. A thick and insensate skin is
drawn over their hearts, which is the reason so few (though many live wickedly)
are troubled with terrors of Conscience. Harden not your hearts (that is their
own act) but exhort one another while it is called to day, least any of you be
hardened through the deceitfulness of sin, Heb. 3. 18, 19. which plainly
imports that it may be done. All that live in wrong or iniquity, either have
hardness of heart, or inconsideration, which is the leading step thereto, or
their Consciences are accused of sin. The first is a sad Symtom of Eternal
Death, when in Scripture Phrase their Consciences are seared with a hot Iron,
being past feeling, Ephesians. 4. 9. a reprobate mind, Romans 1. 28. The second is
folly and danger, the last is irksome and unpleasant, which would cease if the
cause were taken away. He that covers his sins shall not prosper, but who so
confesses and for saketh them, shall have mercy, Prove. 28. 13. But as long as
this admonishes and stirs within, there is life, and they are not dead in
trespasses or sins. If men would not be impatient and grieve at its reproof, it
would do them no harm, only persuades to return and come into the way of
Salvation; then it will be quiet and satisfied.

Wretched is that Person who does slight and refuse its motions, who grieves
the Holy Spirit God has put in to reclaim from the evil of our ways, and to
bring back unto his Commandments; by this may be seen how desirous he is of the
happiness of his Creatures; if they do any thing contrary, they are judged of
themselves, they are condemned of themselves: That self Indignation, secret
Whispers, Twitches, Desires, Entreaties, Solicitation, watching of Opportunity,
Importunity, La^hes, Threatenings, both fair and severe means, they are all to
make them follow the thing that good is, and to affrighten them from evil. The
Spirit of Man is the Candle of the Lord, searching all the inward parts of the
Belly, Prove. 20. 27. If it find any thing amiss, it will not let him rest till
it be amended; This does not torment Men, but only moves to take away that
which is the cause of all Sorrow and Misery. (This is repeated again, because
it may be thoroughly attended unto,) Satan labors mightily that it may not be
so thought; for if it should, his principal design of deceiving Mankind would
be spoiled; for though by yielding to his Temptations, they become Miserable,
yet still he is not wanting to intimate, how that is not the cause, but some
other accident. As he is full of all Subtilty, so Men are exceeding ingenuous
to deceive themselves; and so their own wit conspiring with his, they easily
believe what he would have them: And though none could ever find it at long
running, yet still they think the way of Wickedness a way of Pleasantness, and
it is good to walk therein. But let such foolish reasoners consider this one
thing at present (for more has been, and is further to be offered to this
point.) Whoever lives sinfully, either his Conscience is seared or not: If it
be, then he is become stupid dull and heavy; so whatever he takes, cannot long
and thoroughly enliven him, and he is no more happy then a Stock or Stone; Nay
worse, for he feels and cannot be rid of the manifold Misery and Afflictions of
Life, for which he dares not call up reason for comfort, because it will
Subminister further thoughts, and plague him yet more. He does not at any time
enjoy true and real peace, the utmost is stupidity: If he is not yet arrived to
this wretched condition, but has some feeling within; then that bitter regret
behind, and horrible dread of Eternal Vengeance further on, are more
troublesome then the empty pleasure of a darling Sin, or Momentary ease of
gratifying a lust. When he considers, he finds more Anguish and Vexation of
Mind in one hour, then the Joviality of many days amount unto, and therefore he
must be inconsiderate, or he can take no comfort in his life, so the utmost of
a wicked Man's happiness is studied Acts of Inadvertency. Let him move where he
will, a Companion goes along with him, and when he is free from Company or
Business (and even amidst them) drops in a silent thought, which vexes him that
will not comply therewith.

There are who laugh at this word Conscience, turning it into sport and
ridicule; but who seem to scoff at it in others, perhaps at the very time find
its turbulent motions in themselves; and if with scrued countenances they make
a show of much Mirth, yet the contrary is within, and whilst they wittily
deride the Rod, themselves are smarting under it. If their senses are then in a
fermentation through Wine, so they feel it not, nevertheless when that is over,
and they remember what is past, they are conconvinced from within, how they
inveighed against those things as idle Fancies, the reality whereof they must
acknowledge in themselves. There is no Man ^^ving who has understanding but
that does recoyl upon him, condemning for what he has done; and also alarm
with fear of more then temporal inconveniences, something he sees not, and
beyond this life.

Some would impute it to custom, for in matters indifferent there is an
aukwardness and regret to leave of things which one has been used unto; but
herein is to be observed a great diversity, for there is a slight vexation in
the imagination only; but when Conscience accuses, there is indignation and
anguish in the very Soul, which does as much exceed the other, as the piercings
of a Sword does the scratch of a Pin. The first goes off and is remembered no
more, but this rises up in Sickness or Affliction: None is much displeased with
himself for not doing of things which he never did before, especially if they
have a show of inconvenience; but Conscience prompts to the first act of duty,
though never done heretofore, and exposes to hardship and danger. It pricks on
our Sluggish Nature to do such things, God requires in his Word by sincere
Application thereof to our selves, though we would be glad of an excuse not to
do the same. Another particular is to be observed, which does evidence the real
distinction between Good and Evil as declared in Scripture; for when the mind
is in suspense and even between them both, as with young Persons, if they do
that which is good, they have no Condemnation for the same, but only when they
leave it; so in Evil there is present regret, which continues till forsaken;
and how long soever one has been accustomed to this, there may be a little
wishing to the contrary at first, but joy and gladness spring up when one has
perfectly recovered from it.

There is no such care used to choke the sense of common Affliction, or that
small displacency for Omission of ^us^omary things as those accusings and
suggestions of mind; these are endeavou(...)ed to be suppressed all the life
long, but in time of dangerous Sickness or Deathbed they will appear again.
Conscience would do the very same in the midst of Health and Life as then, but
stupe^actions and hindrances are sought for, which fail at this last time; and
also they approach nearer to God, so they dare not quench his Spirit as
heretofore: They know not but Death may be at hand to arrest and bring them
before his Judgment Seat. When Company, Business, Pleasure cannot be had, but
they must think whether they will or not, then is unexpressible tortur^ of
mind, and sad fear; such is the condition of the Wicked on a Deathbed, unless
hardened or like dumb Beasts become inconsiderate. Most are ashamed, and
therefore conceal their condition as much as they can; but there are some few
such Monsters of Iniquity, who were Malicious Transgressors in their life time,
and will be sullen now; If these are never so troubled in mind, these will not
confess nor give Glory unto God, nor would have Bystanders converted and
Edified, but will to the last make a show they are no otherwise dejected then
for Pains and Diseases they suffer in the Body. And thus some being hardened,
some ashamed, other spiteful, let none wonder that those horrors of Conscience
(which are real) yet are not so often visible in wicked profane persons, even
in their last Visitation.

Conscience being the Minister of God to bring Mankind to his Obedience, will
make use of the Authority given; being a terror to the Rebellious, a praise
and encouragement to them that do Well. The first are not given over: When they
are in great Adversity or Trouble, this will try what can be done then; for now
People must consider, especially what has brought this evil upon them. The
good Spirit is glad to find them in this temper, forthwith informs the true
reason thereof, and thence takes occasion to persuade to sin no more, least a
worst thing befall him. It cannot absolutely force, but does all next to that to
reclaim from his sinful and vain conversation.

Good God! What is Man that thou art mindful of him? And the Son of Man that
thou visitest him? Why should thou (but only Psalm. 8. 4. Mic 21. 18. Romans 10.
21.
because thou delightest in Mercy) all day long stretch forth thy hands unto a
disobedient and gainsaying People. God would have him come to repentance and
be saved, as he manifests by causing his light to shine in Man's heart again,
notwithstanding he has before several times labored to extinguish it; that if
he still goes on, when he shall be plunged into utter Darkness, he must lay all
the fault on himself; for if he had yielded unto what God did, and would have
done for him, and contributed half so much pains as he did in coming to the
place of Torment, he had escaped that, and ascended up above: For he had so
many Warnings, Solicitations, Repulses, and Rubs cast in his path toward
Hell, that he could not travel on in quiet. He was h^mpered with the cords of a
a Man, with bands of Love; yet he would with the most hard Labor and Pain
break through them, and follow after the Error of his own ways, which he finds
to end in Destruction and Misery. 'Saith he, Have I undergone so much Trouble
and Vexation to make my self a Castaway? Is the Lake of Fire and Brimstone the
portion of my Cup, and all the reward I must have for wearying my self in the
Devils Service? Have I done violence to mine own Inclinations, suffered such
Vexation of mind, and rejected those good things offered me formerly by the
Father of Mercies, but now (as my deserts require) the God to whom Vengeance
belongs? Have I refused those eternal Pleasures I might have enjoyed with
him, and now come to all this? Righteous art thou O Lord, for thou did by thy
Spirit warn me to flee this wrath; thou did show how I might have done it,
and gave me Power, and all that was requisite on thy part, but I was foolish,
despised thy Counsel, set at naught thy Reproof, and have done despite unto thy
Holy Spirit, and all without reason; just are thy Judgments. Such may be
supposed to be the thoughts of the Damned, and (I believe) a great part of
their Misery is upbraiding themselves with Folly, in that they took greater
Pains to bring themselves there, then others do to go unto Heaven, which was by
Accusings, Fears, and disquiet of Mind in their Lifetime; and though they did
endeavor to pacify, yet ever and anon those bitter girds would return. The
wicked man travelleth with Pain all his days. A dreadful sound is in his Ears,
Job 15. 20, 21. The wicked are like the troubled Sea when it cannot rest, whose
waters cast up Mire and Dirt, There is no Peace, says my God, to the wicked,
Isa. 51. 20, 21. Their Conscience would throw out that Clog of Guilt, which
they do not yield unto, because their Sin must be forsaken; so they are full of
Contradiction and Torment.

There is a doubt (which lies open to common observation) Cic. l. 1. not. Deor.
against what has been said; alike unto what Cicero takes notice of, Quibus
medicores homines non it a valde moventur, his Epicurus clamat omnium mortalium
mentes ess^ perterritas. Tot millia latrocinantur morte proposita, alii omnia
que possunt fana compilant, etc. so it is here at this day, Who are more
ungodly and wicked then the lowest sort of People? Beggars, Vagabonds, and such
as just get their living; and yet th^s^ are not troubled with Fears and
Scruples of mind; as they live, so they die without them. But they do not live
absolutely without them, for at first these also have them, though not in so
great a measure as others: but at length are hardened and stupi^ied by a more
fatal device, then all the studied invention of others. If any one will
practice it, it is at own Peril; and therefore shall be here inserted; It is
gross ignorance, for a man cannot have troublesome thoughts about that, whereof
he has none at all. Where is a forgetfulness of God over him, no knowledge of
good and evil, otherwise then what is natural, which being not exerted nor
furthered, there is some Sense at first, but this vanishes by wicked Custom,
hardness of Heart, unmindfulness of what shall be after this Life, as is the
Condition of the poor and foolish. That these are not afraid, is no more to be
wondered at, then a blind man going amongst Rocks, or upon the brink of a River,
who is not concerned for his danger till he falls into it. So they are just led
through the Vale of this Life by him, who tryes all he can to deceive the whole
World. All his devices may be reduced to this of ignorance, for according to
the measure thereof, every Person has less regard to the things of God; for
there is no resisting of them, but by not minding of them. A full Evidence that
they are real, and more then talk only, because they always prevail and have
influence where they are thoroughly considered of. The Understanding and
Conscience brings to the knowledge of them: this cannot be otherwise avoided
then by defacing and sinking them into Bruitishness, that is to do just no more
then keep the Body in Life, eat drink and get Clothes. It may be, and is pinned
down to this by the meanest of the People. But those higher are ashamed of this
State of Folly and Blockishnes^, yea, that will not manage the Affairs of this
World. And therefore others will let out the Powers of the Soul so far as to do
that: And then the things of God will also come in, for if they can once* infer
and examine a Consequence by his Works, (which they cannot look out of Doors
but they must see) they must come to some apprehension of the Maker. And then
they must hear and read somewhat of his Book, the Holy Scriptures. And further
they find those Characters in their own Hearts, which exactly agree with them:
So the good Seed is received in, and they have no other way to hinder the
impression and growth of it, but by the deceitfulness of Riches, Cares of this
World, and Lust of other things whereby they become unmindful; for the Soul
cannot intend upon two contrary things together. Thus it is provided as
concerning Man's Salvation and Happiness, and if when he knows the means, he
will not use them; and the hindrance, but will not remove it, nor countermine
and defeat the Wiles of the Enemy, he deservedly misses thereof.

If our Heart condemn us, God is greater then our Heart and knows all things.
Beloved if our Heart condemn us not, then have we Confidence toward God, 1
John 3. 20, 21. Blessed are they that do his Commandments, that they may have
Right to the Tree of Life, Rev. 22. 14. They have assured hope to all those
precious Promises of infinite more worth then all the Kingdoms of the World. In
the mean while they have Peace with God. In that word is contained more
Satisfaction then the most witty Sensualists can find, for their Wine is
mingled with Gall, they have Bitterness intermixed with Enjoyments, but this is
sincere without allay. This admits a reflection of Complacency, not of Pride.
The Lord will give Grace and Glory, Ps. 84. 11. so Peace and Happiness, the
first is had here, and the latter hereafter. A good Conscience does not consist
in those mighty Transports and Exstacies, (though a little Taste of them is
sometimes given) they are reserved for eternal rejoicing in Heaven; but it is
that constant Tranquillity and smoothness of Spirit, fully contented with it
self, that does not seek out for sinful Divertisements, for it has no need
thereof. This is affirmed to exceed all things in the World; it reaches within,
giving an Acquiessency and stayedness of Mind. It is also without interruption
and trouble, making outward Enjoyments more sweet, which are not worthy to be
compared with what is perceived within. Unto the upright, there arises light in
darkness, Ps. 112. 4. for worldly Cares, Affliction and sickness they can
apply, 1 Pet. 5. 7. Romans 8. 28. Ps. 41. 3. for their mind assures them they
have and do perform the Conditions, unto which those and other Promises belong.
The Memory of a well spent Life is a constant Satisfaction all along. And when
it comes toward an end, they can lie quietly upon their Pillow applying to
themselves, Isa. 38. 2, 3. 2 Cor. 1. 12. 2 Timothy 4. 6, 8. That which puts the
wicked and ungodly in mind of the Threatenings out of Scripture, does bring home
the Promises to the Good and Obedient, and so they are Comforted. Yet few who
call themselves Christians, are sensible of this Blessed effect of a good
Conscience, even as few do discover the Misery of the evil one; That same word
and truth, which manifests the Reason of one, does of the other also.

The Promises of God are only belonging to the Condition of universal
obedience, as appears from the express Words of the Covenant, Jer. 7. 23. Ez^k.
18. 21. Ps. 18. 22. Ps. 119. 6, 101. Deuteronomy. 12. 32. Mat. 28. 20. Luke 1. 6. Mat.
13. 44, 46. 1 John 3. 6. Tit. 2. 14. More Texts might be added to the same
purpose, but the truth is evident from within, for the neglect of one of Gods
Commandments, or the allowance in one wilful known sin hinders all true peace.
We trust, we have a good Conscience, willing to live honestly in all things,
Heb. 13. 18. According to this description all have not, who pretend to it;
There are three sorts in the Visible Church, mere Professors, Partialists, and
sincere Christians. The first are those who keep unto the outward Ordinances,
but Religion does not govern their life and manners, these are condemned, Isa.
1. throughout, Psa. 50. 16, 17, 18, 19. Jer. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Prove. 21, 22.
Mat. 7. 21, 22. Psa. 66. 18. Prove. 28. 9. Luke 20. 47. Ezekiel. 33. 31. and 36.
20. Romans 2. 13. Jer. 42. 20. The Soul that sins it shall die, Ezekiel. 18. 4.
There is no respect, or mitigation had to the counterfeit and external
Righteousness, which here is Hypocrisy. The second sort are better, they do
well to have respect unto some of the Commandments, but they neglect others.
Whosoever shall keep the whole Law and offend in one point, is guilty of all;
for he that said do not commit Adultery, said also do not Kill. Now if thou
commit no Adultery, yet if thou Kill, thou art become a Transgressor of the
Law, Jam. 2. 10. 11. The same God who has forbidden all sins of
Unrighteousness, has forbidden the lusts of the Flesh, Gal. 5. and so on the
contrary. If thou live in the one or the other, thou art liable to his Wrath
and Punishment. Our Blessed Lord says, He that loves Father or Mother above
Me, is not worthy of Me, Mat. 10. 37. Much less is he who prefers a paltry lust
or unjust gain before him: The first Commandment is, Thou shall love the Lord
thy God with all thy Heart, and with all thy Soul, and with all thy Mind, and
with all thy Strength, Mat. 12. 30. Which cannot be consistent with reservation
of a known sin. Who so loves God will forsake it, for he requires it, Ye that
love the Lord, hate evil, Psalm. 97. 10. And then they must take up the same
resolution with the Psalmist, I will set no wicked thing before mine Eyes,
Psalm. 101. 3.

These and such like inferences Conscience does make, and falls out with the
beloved sin; there are indeed several Whims and Fancies, with which the Man
does endeavor to stop the grumbling within, but yet the mind cannot be
thoroughly satisfied as to the Foundation of a present peace and solid comfort,
or assured hope of future Happiness. What Peace, as long as sin has Dominion
over him? He may go on in a course of Godliness, make a slight and partial
Examination of his Life and Actions, but if he does it thoroughly, then he is
troubled with that breach of the Law; nay, all the other things in which he
does well, do not yield relief Equivalent to the Vexation for this one thing
wanting. It is pity that those who have advanced a good way, should not go
further; that they should be such Enemies to their present Peace, and endanger
their future safety as to lose that, and the benefit of what they have wrought
only to gratify some sinful Lust or Interest. The Pleasure or Convenience of
that cannot make amends for the want of so much Good and Satisfaction, which is
occasioned only by this accursed thing. By one poisonous Herb death is in the
Pot, so this takes away all the delight from the practice of Religion. And
other People looking on these Examples cannot think, neither do they find that
it makes men Happy, but Miserable; for they see, and these experimentally know
themselves to be sad and sorrowful in performance of Holy Duties. When they
hear and read the Word, they find no Comfort, because that convinces of Sin.
Whose Hearts are clogged with Guilt, it is awkward to lift them up to that God,
who has no Pleasure in wickedness. If at any time they are devout at the
Ordinances; then peradventure they meet with greater remorse of Conscience for
the reserved iniquity, which makes them dull, and think the Worship of God an
unpleasant work. They go indeed, but when they are there, What a weariness is
it? Mal. 1. 13. There are too many amongst the Worshippers of God, who live in
unrighteousness, or practice some of the Lusts of the Flesh; so general has
the Corruption been this way, that it is thought excusable, and these gross
Sins seem allowable to Flesh and Blood. Who thinks otherwise is branded for
rigid and precise, that would sh^t up the Way to Heaven. God forbid any should
describe the Way more narrow and straight then really it is (for it is the Duty
of all to encourage Travelers, and not to frighten them) but on the other
hand, let none say it is broader then the Blessed Jesus and Holy Men, moved by
the Holy Ghost, have taught us; for that would give them the Lie* and cause
Presumption and Danger to the whole World. It is Chalkt out in the Word of God:
As many as walk according to this Rule, Peace be upon them, and Mercy, and upon
the Israel of God, Gal. 6. 16. they must follow these Directions, who would
have their Feet guided into the way of Peace. Strange! That Men should be
enraged against the Consultations of their own Security and Happiness, That
they should willingly keep themselves from Satisfaction of Mind. Does the
difficulty or fancied good of those Sins, hinder from laying them aside? It
cannot be a harder Work* then to pull out the Right Eye, or cut off the Right
Hand, yet if these offend Christians are obliged, or to suffer what is worse,
Mat. 18. 8, 9. Yet this is not so grievous as may be imagined; for when those
Lusts (as dear to a natural Man, as the Members of the Body) are rooted out,
the Labor is irksome for the present, but afterward Joy and Satisfaction
spring up. They did for a Season please the brutish part, yet that train of
Guilt dragged after, did wound the inward parts; the Pain there did exceed all
the Sweetness he ever had by the sudden Enjoyment: For the faint delight of a
small time, his whole Life was rendered Miserable. But when they are driven out,
the Anguish goes off in a perfect Cure, and there succeeds the delight of a
sound mind. It being once freed from Guilt and deadly Sin yields such Comfort
that cannot be conceived, but by those who have the Blessed experience. Which
none can attain unto but who actually comply with the Grace of God, according
to all that is written, Tit. 2. 12. 14.

The peaceable Fruits of righteousness are to be had by those, who are purified
from all iniquity, who have knowledge in Divine Matters, and do according to
it. If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them, John 13. 17. and
miserable are they, who do not. Who have tasted the good Word of God, every
thing done contrary thereto, does grieve and vex them. This is laughed at under
the name of tenderness of Conscience, but it intitles to the favor and
acceptance of the Almighty, if he is careful not in the least to offend. Who
studies in all things to approve himself unto God, and cares not if by so doing
he gets the ill Opinion of others. If Conscience be Evil, the Praise of Men
will not make it good; but if good in it self, the Tongue of Slanderers and
Blasphemers cannot render it bad. Reproaches cannot hurt it, and if compassed
about with Innocence, those sharp Arrows, even bitter Words, do as little
injury as if they were shot against a Wall of Brass. It is above the reach and
malice of the wicked, neither can they more disturb her Peace, then Winds and
Storms do the upper Region. Not the greatest external violence, much less the
light breath of ^nvious Talking People, can move what is established upon the
sure Foundation of righteousness. And therefore it is suspicious of those, who
prefer their Credit in the World before Duty, Who had rather Act contrary to
Truth, then be Evil spoken of. They may do so still, but if they knew what it
was, To have a Conscience void of offense toward God and Man, they would
rather displease the whole World then him only; and would lose the Good Will of
all, rather then this dear Friend within the Bosom; for if all Men living did
seek out Delights and Honors to confer on another to make him Happy, they
could not do so much as this alone. All the Pomp and Glory of the World,
whatever can be named or is accounted dear amongst Men, do not half so much
(for they extend to the outside) conduce to our Satisfaction as a good
Conscience only.

A Second Part of the Soul, is the Will; Whatever a Man does or neglects, it
is according to the disposition of his Will, Of the Will.
this inclining him to some things, and keeping off from others, according to
which He Acts; Some have said, that Actions have the Denomination of Good and
Evil according to this faculty, whereas the Divine Law gives that, and this is
but a Power to observe or transgress against it. The Spirit of disobedience
works in our Members. There is an Averseness to God, and a strong inclination
without reason to run contrary to his reveal^d Will. Man by his Fall, is as it
were turned upside down; for what should be under the Spirit of our Minds, does
rebel and get above. What should be an Instrument to execu^e the Dictates of
the Understanding, usurps Authority over that. Having got the upper hand, this
Self-will Commands in chief; so he does things against knowledge, the Checks of
Conscience, and Dictates of right Reason. The Man practices those things
whereof he is convinced, they are not for his Good. He is sold and held Captive
under Sin, which gains more Strength by being submitted unto. Now this is no
absolute Compulsion and Force, (which he brought himself into) but like Slaves*
under an hard Master, who do many things which they could refuse at the very
time, but fear or other Convenience makes them, till they can get their Liberty
and Freedom. He that is most under the Dominion of Sin, is not forced to the
Acts thereof, for several times he does intermit them when they might be had.
The Lascivious Wanton does not run upon his iniquity in the Market place, as a
bruit Beast among the Herd. And so it is of other kinds of Sin; but it has
such a prevalency, that for the most part he does the ^ame. It does tyrannize
and keep in aw, not suffering him to do the thing that good is: It makes him
seek out things to gratify Lust, puts unto much trouble for Accomplishment
thereof, and which is an Aggravation of the Misery, when he has made Provision
to fulfill them for some time, it is still eager, and craving after more; the
Acts do not satisfy, yet there is impatiency after them, and so much the more,
how often they are had, Crying out give, give, and it is never enough. No Man
can fulfill all his Desires immediately, for some he must tarry before he can
obtain, and those intervals of Expectation are not altogether so pleasant; for
others he is disappointed, both which create more Pain then the Delight of the
thing wished for. In the frequent Repetition of the same he is cloyed, and the
Will Commands to seek out for new Objects, when he may weary himself in the
range, but can find none.

Whosoever commits Sin, is the Servant of Sin, John 8. 34. And yet they were
betrayed into it, with a Pretense of more Freedom, and being their own Men; for
not so much Original corruption, as their own added Transgression has
inthralled them. While they promise them Liberty, they themselves are the
Servants of Corruption, for of whom a man is overcome, of the same is he
brought in Bondage, 2 Pet. 2. 19. Every one is thus, who is led away by sinful
Inclinations, which is the worst sort of Slavery. If they be fulfilled, he is
thirsty after more; and if not, he is discontented when they did obtain, it was
great trouble before; the thing when had, does not satisfy; and still Desires
are let out after something more: All of us are miserable and enslaved in our
natural State, but Gods Grace does help and bring us out.

The spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to Preach
deliverance (...) the Cap^ives, and recovering sight of the Blind, and to set
at liberty ^h^m that are bruised, Luke 4. 18. To free those that are the
Servants of ^in. Know ye not that to whom ye yield your selves servants to
obey, his s^rvants ye are to whom ye obey, whether of sin unto Death, or of
obedience unto Righteousness? Romans 6. 16. If Men will not yield subjection unto
God, they do to something else; they are servants of Sin and Evil, and as much
under the suggestions of them, as the obedient Soul is bound to live according
to his Word. Gods service is perfect freedom in comparison of serving diverse
Lusts and Pleasures; yet these ^tand in competition with that, so one would
think Men were in love with Destruction, or they would not suffer so much to
^all into it; for less trouble rightly bestowed would carry them to Heaven. His
Commandments are not grievous, 1 John 5. 3. Which cannot be said of the
dictates of a sensual appetite; neither is so much difficulty in keeping them,
as making provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof. The way of Man
is not in himself, it is not in Man that walks to direct his steps, Jer. 10.
23. It is not in his own power to make himself happy, and seeing he fain would
be so, let him make the wisest choice. The Lord commanded us to do all these
Statutes, to fear the Lord our God for our good always, Deuteronomy. 6. 24. And who
would not be confined to the things which are for his welfare and happiness? It
is for the safety of the Ship that it be steered; Man's goings are of the Lord,
how can a Man then understand his own way, Prove. 20. 24. That way is not good,
which is after his own thoughts, Isa. 65. 2. And then unto whom can he stand
better beholden? then that the Lord shall guide thee continually, Isa. 58. 11.
The Steps of a good Man are ordered by the Lord, and he delights in his way,
Psalm. 37. 23.

It is the property of the Creator alone, and not any Creature to have his own
will: Angels do comply therewith, much more should the Sons of Men, especially
when it is so reasonable and excellent. It restrains from nothing, but what
would do hurt and make us miserable; Self will which is an Enemy to
Righteousness and Peace, must be pulled down. This is the first thing to be
done, If any Man will come after Me, let him deny himself, Mat. 16. 24. says
our Savior, which is no such hard saying, as carnal Reason may Judge; for it
is a greater satisfaction to resist corrupt inclinations then to yield unto
them, the less they are given way unto, the less strength they have; the
understanding part rejoices to get Masterdom over the Will, for that is
naturally contrary to the Law of God; so Command must be had over it, or no
Obedience will be performed.

Some have subdued Countries, triumphed over mighty Kings, led them and their
people into Captivity, yet themselves have been holden under the invisible
Chains of imperious lust and desire. They are troubled with stirs and
commotions in their new conquests, but the greatest are within their own
breast, which cannot be appeased (though the others may) by outward force.
Those Wars and Fightings come from their lusts, which War in their Members, and
cannot be suppressed with all the gallant Troops of Horsemen or brave Legions;
Though they have got Cities and strong Holds, yet still they lust and have not
enough: If they kill never so many Enemies to possess their Lands, yet they
desire to have, and cannot obtain as much as they wish for; they Fight and War,
yet have not what they would. And the reason of all is, because they know not
God, who is the only proper and commensurate object for Man's vast desires.
There is no other way to Contentment, but to apply our selves unto the infinite
One above, that he would be pleased to moderate our desire after the things
here, and turn the whole stream thereof unto himself. If we could cease
reaching after outward things more then what is necessary, we should be more
happy then those who have greatest abundance; the not having is no torment,
where is no desire. We are imperfect and wanting, so must covet after somewhat
more; this leads our desire to the end ^or which it was put in, that is,
takes off from the Creature which cannot satisfy, to fix upon the great
Creator in whom all fullness dwells. As the Heart pants after the
Waterbrooks, so pante^h my Soul after thee, O God. My Soul thirsts for God,
for the living ^od: when shall I come and appear before God? Psalm. 42. 1, 2.
Whom have ^in Heaven but Thee? and there is none upon Earth that I desire
desire besides Thee, Psalm. 73. 25. If ye be risen with Christ, seek those
things above, Col. 3. 1. These are equal to our boundless desires, and even the
contemplation do some what fill, much more will the enjoyment hereafter.

Whereas these here being subject to vanity, leave the mind craving and empty.
What can be a great^r Torment, then earnest desire after those things which are
not to be obtained by all that would, and if had to be disappointed of that
satisfaction expected from them? Inordinate Affection, evil Concupisence,
Covetousness have a present punishment, besides the wrath of God which comes
on the Children of Disobedience. To prevent these, direction is given in the
words foregoing; Mortify there ^re your Members which are upon the Earth, Col.
3. 5, 6. ^f this be done, and the body is dead unto the Worl^, there can be no
^^^re after things therein. Our Lord Jesus Christ gave himself for our sins,
th^^ he might deliver us from this present evil World, according to the will of
God and our Father, Gal. 1. 3. 4 Christians are obliged by their profession not
to love it, nor to walk according to it, 1 John 2. 15, 16, 17. Ephesians. 2. 2, 3.
Let none think these harsh Doctrines, which make man's life miserable, when they
do the contrary: In the World is trouble, who mind it are perplexed with cares,
loss, and disappointment. If any (as none ever yet did) should compass all that
he sought after, he would be dissatisfied, yea more then when he first began;
for he has spent his days and strength in a vain thing. He that succeeds most
prosperously has a bundance of Labor and Grief for his Portion, and when he
has done all, yet still gapes after more of the same, or somewhat else; it
must be the more excellent way to cease from those desires, which are the cause
of so much misery. This was the Doctrine of Ancient Philosophers, they gave
many specious reasons to enforce the observance thereof; but here was the
failure, they would have desire taken of from outward things, but then knew not
rightly where to place it; for we are not sufficient of our selves, neither
could be happy in the exercise of virtue, that according to their notions,
being but a barren and dry Subject, and not of so large extent as Man's
capacity; so they left him hovering between Heaven and Earth, and he could not
any where find rest for his Soul. But our Religion (which does more exceed
their Morality, then the Sun shining in its Brightness does the first dawning
of the day) removes this uncertainty and hindrance of Happiness. We are not to
look at the things that are seen, yet we look upon things that are not seen, 2
Cor. 4. 18. We can apprehend something within, and beyond all sensible objects;
Lay not up for your selves Treasure upon Earth (we are not at a loss what to do
further, as they were) for we are taught and also enjoined, to lay up for our
selves Treasures in Heaven, Mat. 6. 19, 20. We are put in mind, to set our
Affections on things above, when they are taken off from things on the Earth,
Col. 3. 2. The Christian has Subject enough for his desires, God and the Holy
City. He is the Fountain of all Happiness and makes it glad, in his Presence is
fullness of Joy, Psalm. 16. 12. So he that in heart and mind thither ascends, and
with him continually dwells, must be happy; for our Conversation is in Heaven,
Phil. 3. 20. and to be preferred before him who roots in the Earth, and
turmoils after what he must leave in a little time. Whereas the Saints look
with disdain upon whatever seems Beautiful or is accounted excellent here
below, but not worthy to be compared with those Glorious things which are
spoken of thee, O City of God, Psalm. 87. 3. Did othe^s look up, and do the like
things to entitle them to the same hope, they would not be cumbred about many
things, but be more employed in the one thing needful; When the mind Soars up
to the third Heaven, it is calm and peaceable, all disturbances being gendred
out of the Earth, but does not molest who is above them.

Thus has been showed how our will and desire perverted by Original corruption
and Additional Sin, may be right framed by the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ,
who was sent to make up for Adams Transgression. Lust in the wicked is the
occasion of much evil, but the desire of the Righteous is only good, Prove. 11.
23. Obedience is the condition of Happiness, Jer. 7, 23. Mat. 19. 17. Heb. 5.
8, 9. Now this could not be done if we had no will, no more then it can be by
Beasts. By this power Man is exalted above inanimate and sensitive things; God
has given him power to be so, and he is become a self-moving Creature; he can
go this way or that, so can creeping and forefooted things; but then he can do
this or refrain, as there are not only See Genesis 18, 19.
inclinations but reasonings from within. When of two things he can do either,
it is a demonstration that he is a free Creature: To Man (not the Fowls of the
Air, or Fishes of the Sea) the Lord has said, Obey my voice and live: He does
not command, nor are we obliged to what is impossible; the gracious Lord
appeals to us for the equality of his ways, Ezekiel. 18. And he would not command
us to turn and live, if he had not before put it in our power so to do. As we
should think hand of the end, so of the means, for i^ a Man were compelled to
lead a wicked life, and could not do otherwise, he might as well be punished
for simple Eating, Drinking and Sleep as that; and so on the other side, if he
were led irresistably (it is indeed by strong impulse and quickening) by grace
to a Godly life, he might expect to be glorified, because he Eats when he is
Hungry. The righteous judgment of God will render to every one according to his
Deeds, Romans 2. 5, 6. What one is forced unto, are none of his: If a Man would
violently put a Sword into another hands, and grasping that, thrust it into
the body of a third, he alone is guilty of the Murder, but not the Weak person
who could not withstand what was done. God declares throughout his Word that he
will deal so with us, as we do with one another: But this will be more for our
advantage, because he has Goodness, Mercy, and all Knowledge, whereby he will
show himself more graciously and uprightly, Psalm. 9. 8. and 98. 9.
then now is done by the best and wisest of Men. The Grace of God is his Word
revealed in the Gospel opposed to the Law, so Joh. 1. 17. Tit. 2. 11. and the
assistance of his Spirit by which Men know, and also are inclined to do; but
there is a power in them to work together with that Grace, 2 Cor. 6. 1. Phil.
2. 12, 13. Col. 1. 29. There is a Light which lights every Man that comes
into the World; by the help of which he may make use of such means as will
procure greater degrees, and so doing may grow in grace. This is given to every
one, not that it is of Man, for what have we that we have not received? 1 Cor.
4. 6, 7. Natural faculties are no more our own, then the Grace of God, for he
is the maker and giver of both; But they may be used, and lifted up toward
Spiritual things. Otherwise what does it signify to exhort People to Duty? All
Preaching would be vain, and if they could neither understand nor do, it would
be as ridiculous a thing to declare the Word in the Congregation, as among an
herd of Cattle, or uttered to the Trees of the Forest; Incline your Ear, and
come unto Me; hear and your Soul shall live, Isa. 55. 3. Which does manifest
they might, if they would; They refused to hearken, and pulled away the
Shoulder, and stopped their Ears, that they should not hear, Zech. 7. 11, 12.
Which does most plainly imply that they might have done otherwise; There is an
idle pretense too common among Men, for when pressed to this or that Duty, the
Excuse is, I cannot do this, whereas if they would make use of the means (which
are in the power of all) they may have further assistance sufficient to do what
is required of them. Some hence take occasion to live habitually in gross sin,
and others in all manner of Wickedness; but the great judge of all Men will be
no more put off with such kind of tricks, then themselves will be by such
sayings from their servants; and it is strange that they should be such
Deceivers of themselves, as wilfully to keep off from what would bring them to
Obedience and Happiness; the way to which is not to do our own will, but the
will of him that sent us into this place of Trial.

Let none accuse God as an hard Master, for though the unprofitable servant
will be apt to lay the blame upon him to excuse his own Sluggishness, yet he
does not reap where he does not sow; neither will he require the improving of a
Talent, but according to what he has given. See, I have set before thee this
day Life and Good, Death and Evil, Deuteronomy. 30. 15. Some may think this last sad
thing is, but not the other; We cannot come nor be persuaded to that, why the
prophet Moses for further assurance repeats it, verse. 19. with the most solemn
Testimony. I call Heaven and Earth to record this day against you, that I have
set before you Life and Death, Blessing and Cursing, therefore choose Life.

The affections have much influence over the will, to move it Of the Affections
and Passions.
this or that way; these have been likewise tainted with original corruption,
which has infected the whole Man. To speak of their irregularity and abuse, is
referred to some distinct Chapters hereafter; the present design is to show
that God has ingrafted them into our Nature, and what is their right end, how
they are to be ordered toward Happiness, as they are governed by the
everlasting Gospel. The Passions are a Torment to the Wicked and occasion of
Evil; so unto the Righteous are a comfort and instrument of good. The one
pervert, these manage them aright; but considered abstractedly in their own
Nature, are not only useful, but necessary to accomplish the great end.

To begin with the most noble Affection, Love, which is the fulfilling of the
Law. The first of all the Commandments is, Hear Of Love.
O Israel the Lord our God is one Lord; And thou shall love the Lord thy God
with all thy Heart, and with all thy Soul, and with all thy Strength, and with
all thy mind; This is the first Commandment. And the second is like, namely
this, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self, Mark. 12. 30, 31. For this
thou shall not commit Adultery, thou shall not Kill, thou shall not Steal, thou
shall not bear false Witness, thou shall not Covet, it is briefly comprehended
in his saying, Romans 13. 9. Love to God and ones Neighbor is the Whole Duty of
Man; That keeps from offending the Most High, and also from doing the least
injury to our fellow Creature; for self-love cannot endure any should be done
to our selves: Says the beloved Disciple (who makes good the denomination, by
inculcating and repeating this word over to the utmost delight,) This is the
Love of God, that we keep his Commandments: and his Commandments are not
grievous, 1 John 5. 3. By these two general, judge of all that come under them;
there is no Torment in Love, but all Happiness and Satisfaction; it receives
greater degrees according to its object.

And then how exceeding must that be, which arises from the infinite God? The
joy of that Soul is unexpressible, who perfectly love him: That strangers may
conceive somewhat thereof, and come over to partake of it; if they would be
fully convinced in the Heart, what every one will own with the Mouth, it is
requisite to lay down particularly; there is all the reason in the world that
we should love God, yea the very same why we love any thing. This is either the
excellency of the thing it self, or the kindness and actual good it does unto
us; upon all which God deserves our utmost and whole affection: He is the
excellent One, the Sum of all perfection. Speak of him as much as you can, and
yet you will come short; for he does exceed. The Lord is great, and greatly to
be praised, ^sal. 96. 4 It is not possible for any flattery and complement
(that is only for poor imperfect Creatures) to be used toward him, for we
cannot say more then really he is, nor attribute more Good, Glory and Honor
then does belong, and is in him. We love a single Man for his Goodness, Wisdom,
Uprightness, Beauty; now they are but shadows and little in the Creature, but
he is the Original and Fountain of all, much more then all, then the Ocean is
to a single drop. All lovely perfections that can be thought of or named, or
are any where to us unknown (as there are millions) yet come from him who is
the Author of all, with whom all fullness and eminency dwells. As for the
relation he humbles himself to have toward us, there is a jealousy in the
heart of the Natural Man to that; And if here should be used fine expressions,
the greatest Wit and smooth Language to assure Men of Gods goodness toward
them, they would suspect it more under a flourish of words; and therefore
cannot be directed any where better then to his revealed Will in Scripture
which speaks plainly, John 3. 16. Romans 5. 6, 7, 8. 1 John 3. 16. Psalm. 63. 3.
Psalm. 73. 1. Deuteronomy. 7. 9. Psalm. 145. 20. Jer. 29. 11. Jer. 31. 3. Psalm, 68. 19.
Look upon his whole Book, that excellent Law he has given, that Love and Grace
manifested by Jesus Christ. Examine it altogether, consider thoroughly the
design of the whole, He will have all Men to be saved, 1 Timothy 2. 4. Even
Heathens and those without: He is not willing that any should perish, but that
all should come to Repentance, 2 Pet. 3. 9. This is said as to the Scoffers
mentioned, verse. 3. and the worst of Men; Reflect further on those good and
comfortable things, he has given us to enjoy: He does good, and give us rain
from Heaven, and fruitful Seasons, filling our hearts with food and gladness;
so much for the use and delight of our outward Man, and then it is certain he
never designed the misery of that. He has done the same equally extensive,
Isa. 55. 1 John 7. 37. as to our better part; which appears by the Frame,
Powers, and Tendency thereof. All things are established for the present
contentment and Eternal Happiness of us all, both Body and Soul and Spirit, to
bring us to the greatest Glory and Exaltation we are capable of. If we would
suffer our selves to be thoroughly made sensible, God has a love to us, the
enmity in our nature would be taken away, and we should be reconciled unto him,
as will appear more and more by a full knowledge of his ways, and our doing
according to them. Draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh to you, Jam. 4. 7.
Have an honorable esteem and good will toward him, and his kindness will be
discovered to you. Whatever hard thoughts arise, or are subministred by the
Tempter, they all proceed from our ignorance and sin; some remainders whereof
are in good Men, though they should labor all they can to have the same done
away. If any Man love God, the same is known of him. Many make a show of much
love; but if true and sincere, it will be manifested by the very nature
thereof, for if we love God, we must be careful to please him above all things,
as Profit or Pleasure, Favor or Good Will of Men. We must be zealous for his
Glory, contented to suffer Shame, Reproach or any Inconvenience for him: We are
to side with him against the World, and the corruption therein; a sense of his
favor and assurance of his See Exodus 32. 26.
reward, will make amends for all the seeming disadvantages the other may bring
on us. All Acts and Offices of Religion are Pleasant, and this keeps in all
Obedience: Love is a constant Principle always abiding on the Soul, for it has
a Complacency therein, and Dictates at all times, to do all things
well-pleasing in his sight whom we Love. Take good heed therefore unto your
selves, that ye Love the Lord your God, Else if ye do in any wise go back,
Josh. 23. 11, 12. Implying that if this be not in their Minds, they would do
so. This suggests, that they can never do too much for God, makes them do every
thing Willingly and Cheerfully, carries them through all the Varieties of this
Life, sweetens their Enjoyments; and for Sickness, Pain, Loss, Affliction, this
gives that Patience and Resignation, that they are as none adversity, for they
can apply Romans 8. 28. 1 Cor. 2. 9. Prove. 3. 11, 12. The apprehension of a good
God above, makes every thing Happy unto them. As the Father has loved me, so
have I loved you, continue in my Love, John 15. 9. and he that loves the Son,
loves the Father also.

Glory to God in the highest, and on Earth Peace, Good Will toward Men, was
sung at the Birth of Christ our Lord, who Of Love to ones Neighbor.
fulfilled it by that excellent and improved Law, he gave unto us: Ye have
heard that it has been said, thou shall love thy Neighbor and hate thine
Enemy, But I say unto you, love your Enemies, Mat 5. 43. 44. This seems an
unreasonable Command to Flesh and Blood, but only as it is corrupt and
unbelieving, for otherwise it may be justified. If thine Enemy be hungry, give
him bread to Eat, and if he be thirsty give him water to drink, for thou shall
heap coals of fire on his head, and the Lord shall reward thee, Prove. 25. 21,
22. Thou shall by this means stop his further Violence and Malice. In point of
prudence, it is better to bear a little Evil then by resisting receive greater;
and trust to the recompense of God, for having obeyed his Command. We are
obliged to do more then is common to Men, to manifest our Faith and Dependence
on him, as may be seen by what is required, Mat. 5. 44, 45, 46. The Reason is
added, That ye may be Children of your Father which is in Heaven, for he makes
his Sun to rise on the evil and good, and sends rain on the just and unjust.
God is provoked every day, yet he is strong and patient; He loadeth Men with
Benefits, which they make occasion to sin yet more, which he suffers to try if
his Goodness will lead them to Repentance; but if they offend yet worse, their
Malice does only hurt themselves, but he is highly exalted, and looses nothing
if all the World were as Stubborn and Rebellious against him, as is possible
for such small and limited Creatures to be. His Glory and Goodness and
Happiness is still the same, for all the ungodly Deeds and hard Speeches, which
ungodly Sinners commit and speak against Jud. 15.
him. His obedient Servant, who is but Dust and Ashes, a Worm, and nothing in
Comparison of the Great Lord of Heaven and Earth, Who has, and shall receive
every thing from him, is here in Duty bound to imitate his Maker; and (all
through his Gracious ordering,) cannot receive the least disadvantage by it By
loving; Enemies, they become reconciled unto him, or not. I^ the first, then it
is granted by all to be better then revenge. But suppose the worst, They are
still malicious, and resolved to do him all the mischief in their Power; the
whole in the end will fall on themselves, and not on him. Will they say all
manner of Evil of him ^alsly for Christ's sake, his Religion and Good
Conscience? They cannot torment him in this, for he applys the Blessing, Mat.
5. 11, 12. and the Promise, Psalm. 31. 20. He may be just sensible, but does not
lie under Vexation and Discomposure. The light breath which sends forth evil
Words, can never make any Wound in his Soul, who has on the Breastplate of
Righteousness. Sayings of one another signify nothing, We are all to stand at
Gods Judgment Seat, and who have assured Evidence of being approved, Detraction
there does no harm but increases our reward, that we can heartily forgive the
Authors thereof? Will they do their utmost, and persecute him to the Death? As
they did to the Prophets, the Lord Jesus and his Saints; yet after they have
done that, they have no more that they can do: They entitle him to a Crown,
which the Lord has promised to such; so when he comes to suffer, he may well
say with him, (Who suffered for us, leaving us an Example, that we should
follow his steps,) Father forgive them, for they know not what they do: When by
the Eye of Faith he sees the Heaven opened, he may with real Charity, and
sincere Affection cry out. Lord lay not this Sin to their Charge.

If it be reasonable to love Enemies, so it is to love Friends; this we do as
Men, that as Christians. A new stone is laid, and both are raised above the
common pitch. A new Commandment I give unto you, that ye love one another, as I
have loved you, that ye also love one another, John 13, 34. from whence the
Disciple that leaned on Jesus Bosom, makes this* necessary inference. Hereby
perceive we the love of God, because he laid down his Life for us, and we ought
to lay down our Lives for the Brethren, 1 John 3. 16. To do the highest Act
thereof that can be expressed. There is nothing more enjoined in the Gospel
then Love. The Primitive Christians (who did live exactly according to the Rule
given them) were remarkable for this; See how they love one another, was
observed by the Heathens concerning them, who herein fulfilled that Saying of
their Lord and Master, By this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, if
ye have love one to another, John 3. 35. But we, that are reserved to the dregs
of time, are strangely ^egenerated from the Practice of our Fathers, living as
if there was no such Command. How few among us do observe the Royal Law?
Without are dogs, Rev. 22, 15. but these would be thought of the Christian
Church, who bite and devour one another, Gal. 5. 15. If restrained by Laws of
the Country, which preserve outward Peace, yet still are snarling at one
another. These go to Prayers, as if there was no such Petition, Forgive us our
Trespasses, as we forgive them that Trespass against us, which must be begging
a Curse and Condemnation, instead of Blessing and Pardon. These hear the
Gospel, which says, Be ye kind one to another, tender hearted, forgiving one
another, even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven you, Ephesians. 5. 2. One would
think there was no such thing as Love mentioned, if he were to judge by the
Actions of some People. This is no slighting Matter, or as some would make it a
piece of Bravery, in that they can live contrary to Rules and Preaching, for it
will be determined what the end of those must be, who obey not the Gospel.
Hatred is contrary to Christianity as bitter to sweet, or is possible for
things to be one to another. Let one do never so many Acts of Worship and
Devotion, yet if he lives in Malice and Revenge, Strife and Envying, Hatred
and Variance, he has the Name and show of Religion, but nothing of the benefit
and reward thereof. In this the Children of God are manifest, and the Children
of the Devil, Whosoever does not righteousness is not of God, neither he that
loves not his Brother, 1 John 3. 10. If he says, he is a Christian, he is
not, but of the Synagogue of Satan, Rev. 2. 9. the Author of all black and
corrupt Principles.

There should be a greater measure of Love amongst those, who have not only the
form of Godliness, but the Power thereof; for they also are found defective in
this Duty. They love indeed, but somewhat of Dissimulation and Partiality goes
along with it. The first is thought a thing so necessary, that the common
Saying is, He that knows not to dissemble, knows not how to live. It is
esteemed an Act of Prudence, what the Apostle calls Fleshly Wisdom, but
contrary to that simplicity and Godly sincerity, and the Grace of God, 2 Cor.
1. 12. which did give him so much Comfort, and not only unto him, but to all
that will alike observe it. Who have Conscience toward God, do as in his sight
speak unto Men, knowing that from him Dissimulation cannot be hid. What John
says is observable, which he applies to this, My little Children, let us love
not in Word, neither (...) Tongue, but in Deed and in Truth. Why so? Hereby we
know that we are of the Truth, and shall assure our Hearts before him, for if
our Heart condemn us, God is Greater then our Hearts and knows all things, 1
John 3. 18, 19, 20. A smiling Countenance or flattering Speech is not enough,
but you must attain unto unfeigned Love of the Brethren, and see that ye love
one another with a pure Heart fervently, 1 Pet. 1. 22.

Neither is it to be confined to one particular Sect or Party, as if all the
Elect of God were comprised in a National Church, or such a Congregation. While
one says I am of this, another says I am of that, ye Hate, Reproach, and
speak Evil of one another. 1 Cor. 1. 12.
Hatred, Variance, Emulations, Strife, Seditions, Heresies exclude out of the
Kingdom of God, Gal. 5. 20, 21. and therefore not to be kept up by those who
equally hope to be Partakers thereof. It would be better if there was no
distinguishing Terms, or Nicknames. Be not ye called Rabbi, for one is your
Master, even Christ, and all ye are Brethren, Mat. 23. 8. The Disciples were
called Christians first in Antioch, Acts 11. 26. and ought to have never been
called any thing else; for Men's Persons (seeing that the Apostles refused it)
should not be had so much in Admiration, as to give Denomination to their
Followers, and assume unto themselves that Honor, which is due unto the Son of
God only. It has given occasion to Divisions, raised Heart-burnings, and the
utmost Malice among Men, to the Destruction of Charity and Luke 10. 29.
Peace. It is observable, that Christ explaining who was Neighbor to him that
fell among Thieves, instances in a Samaritan, and there was Division and
separate Meetings between the Jews and Samaritans, as among us at this Day; so
it is the natural and necessary Construction of the great Commandment, to show
Mercy and Love to those of a different persuasion. We are all Members of one
another, and ought to be united under Christ our Head.

Behold how good and pleasant it is, for Brethren to dwell together Ps. 133. 1
in Unity. Much Happiness arises from true Friendship, and there is none
comparable to that which is built upon the firm Foundation of Christianity.
Nothing can be more lasting and sure, if upon that alone without the rotten
Prop of Worldly and sinister Respects. Whatever some pretend to generous Nature
or Civility, none is like that which results from Goodness and Duty. The
chiefest Love is to be showed forth to those of our own Profession, but yet to
be extended unto all, Mat. 5. 45. 1 Timothy 2. 1, 3, 4. for though at present some
are Strangers from the Covenant of Grace, yet we know not how soon they may
come in; however we are to love them as they were made after the similitude
Jam. 3* 9.
of God, and are our Fellow Creatures. Honor all Men, Love the Brotherhood, 1
Pet. 2. 17. If it be possible as much as lies in you, live peaceably with all
Men, Romans 12. 28. What can be more reasonable? Hereby a Man is freed from all
the torment of malice, envying and strife; he is not disturbed with thoughts of
revenge, or knawing reproach of others, which are as so many Wracks and
Instruments of Cruelty, to those who give way to these Sins. On the other hand,
if there be any Satisfaction in Love, any Blessing in Peace, any good in mutual
kindness and affection, he enjoys all this. In this word Love, all the Law is
contained and obedience; so as a necessary Conclusion from this, all manner of
Happiness.

A Second Passion is Fear. At first sight it may seem strange Of Fear.
that this which troubles and afflicts Man, should also conduce toward his
Happiness. But God having set down such Decrees for our Salvation, as expressed
in Scripture, this is necessary to attain it. God was pleased to take this way
to be glorified, as to the Inhabitants of the Earth; to declare his Sovereignty
over the work of his hands, to set up his Kingdom and Government over us, to
which are annexed Rewards and Punishments proportionable to the great King, who
has prepared them. Mal. 1. 14. Ps. 95. 43.
He may justly forbid a thing upon as severe a Penalty, as he thinks fit. None
thinks hardly of an Earthly Prince, for punishing obstinate and ungrateful
Rebels: Nay, themselves if they have any Reason, must acknowledge they suffer
their deservings. So it is of Gods dominion over us: His infinite Majesty and
Greatness require all Honor and Subjection; His goodness appears, that he had
rather People would live quietly and obediently under his Laws. I drew them
with Cords of a Man, with Bands of Love, Hos. 11. 4. So that if there was any
remainders of Noble Nature and ingenuity, they might be prevailed upon by his
Goodness. But alas! we are averse to him, the Author of all Good we ever
received; we struggle, we give backwards and break these Bands asunder. His
love is despised, then he sends forth Threatenings if they will reduce to his
obedience; and if they do not, Sentence is to be executed accordingly. If men
will not love him, they should fear him, and that will bring them over unto his
love.

He should be the chief Object of all the Powers of our Soul. Sanctify the
Lord of Hosts himself, and let him be your fear, and let him be your dread,
Isa. 8. 13. It is Idolatry to love the Creature more then him, so it is a
Provocation and Contempt to fear any thing more then him: Either to neglect
Duty, or commit Sin for any 1 Pet. 3. 14, 15.
terror of men; Is he not more to be feared? And I say unto you my Friends, Be
not afraid of them that kill the Body, and after that, have no more that they
can do; but I will forewarn you whom you shall fear: Fear him which after he
has killed, has power to cast into Hell, yea I say unto you, fear him, Luke
12. 4, 5. forewarned, forearmed according to the Old true Proverb; and we are
therefore told hereof that we may avoid it. We are warned to flee from the
wrath to come, this we should never do unless we did fear it. It is so
represented to us, that if we believe, we must tremble; for we do fear things
less terrible and grievous. Who is he that dares wander alone in some Desert
without the least Glimmering of light? That does not shrink at being thrust
down into a horrible and deep Dungeon, for a few Months and Years? He must much
more abhor to be reserved unto the blackness of* darkness for ever, Jud. 13. It
is sufficient to startle the boldest worker of iniquity, and make him leave of
to do so any more. Would not he who now commits Sin, because it seems to him
sweet and pleasant, fear to drink of the bitter dregs of the Cup of Gods wrath,
and to suck them out? He that is now all for mirth and jollity, and will
purchase it at the price of wickedness, not enduring any thing that is dull and
tedious, must be frightened with weeping and gnashing of Teeth, neither can be
bear with the groans and tediousness of a miserable Eternity. Those which run
after any thing to hinder a little Discontent of Mind, and Melancholy (which if
turned aright would prevent all this) how can they suffer the knawing Worm
which never dies? The Sinners in Zion are afraid, fearfulness has surprised
the Hypocrites: Who among us can dwell with devouring Fire? Who amongst us
shall dwell with everlasting burnings? Isa. 33. 14. for they would be rid of a
little pain and uneasiness. Even those gallant Spirits who pretend to fear
nothing, must be moved at such things. Perhaps you do resolutely suffer those
Wounds received in defense of King and Country, which are marks of Honor, and
they will be cured in a little time, or you will be past Sense of them. But you
cannot so easily bear, that not one single Part or Member, but your whole Body
should be cast into the fire which shall never be quenched, where all
Sufferings are full of Shame and Ignominy. To have no rest but in a Bed of
Flames, not for one night only, but another, and so a third through innumerable
Ages: Here Courage must fail, and thy brave Spirit be cast down: Flesh and
Blood must abhor Pain so great, and of so long Ezekiel. 22. 14.
continuance. Though some are apt to say: Tush, God we care not for him, yet if
they ^eriously consider of his Judgments, they must tremble and fear before
him, Rev. 6. 15, 16, 17. However those seem to swagger with big words, with
their horrible Oaths and Blasphemies, as if they could not be Men of valor and
renown unless they did contemn and provoke the Almighty, yet let them prepare
to meet the Lord of Hosts, the God mighty and terrible. Are they stronger then
^e? But should a 1 Cor. 10. 22.
Potsherd strive with his Maker? What is vain Man, whose breath is in his
Nostrils, to contend with that God in whom he lives, moves and has his Being,
who takes away his breath and he Deuteronomy. 32. 41.
dies, who will repay to every one according as he deserves? Let him whilst he
is yet in the way, hearken to those gracious Words: Fury is not in me: Who
would set the briers and thorns against me in Battle? I would go through them,
I would burn them together; Or let him take hold of my strength, that he may
make Peace with me, and he shall make Peace with me, Isa. 27 4, 5. God does not
delight in Punishment, it is twice called his strange Act, Isa. 28. 21. like a
merciful good Judge, unwilling to pronounce what in justice he is bound unto.
And it is this utmost degree of wickedness (which none arrives unto without his
own perverseness and fault) that has made him prepare it. And he tells the
Sinner he shall be too hard for him, yet invites him again to Reconciliation
and Favor, Let him take hold of my strength, that he may make Peace with me,
and he shall make Peace with me: If he does here slight it, insinuating that
Religion is an Act of Cowardice, he pretends to be above that, and fears
nothing; What an unaccountable thing is it, that a little Earth-worm should
affront or despise the Great Lord of all the World? And if he continue so to
do, nothing is so just and righteous, as that he should suffer for the same.
Even now he has inward tremblings of the Great God, and those Punishments
prepared for them, who hate him, and will not obey his Laws. As he looks out,
or is alone, an horrible dread seizes him of the invisible Power, whom he has
wickedly offended. Those profane abominable Wretches resort to continual
Company and Sensuality to stif^e the Sense thereof. By this way (which must
fail) they strengthen themselves against the Almighty, Job. 15. 25. otherwise
it were not possible to come up to such an height of wickedness and
transgression against him. Fear is implanted in all Men, and the Divine
Threatenings are sufficient to work upon it, for the same things do terrify
now, and if those were present and visible in like manner, the stoutest Hearts
would run and be at their Wits end. It would be a more amazing sight, then when
Abraham looked toward Sodom, and toward all the Land of the Plain, and lo the
Smoke of the Country went up as the Smoke of a Furnace, Genesis 19. 28. we should
all think, we could never get far enough off from so terrible a thing.

If there were no Promises nor Threatenings, Who would be the Servant of the
Lord? For now there being both, and other Arguments to yield to his obedience,
that if we believe and consider of them, it is impossible that we should do
otherwise then assent and be actually persuaded by them, yet still for want of
that few are thoroughly brought over: But if these were taken away, none would
serve God; and his Church would be like the wilderness. No Homage (though most
just and due from us without) would have been paid unto him without Expectation
of future reward, Neither is he worshipped, as though he needed any thing, Acts
17. 25. for he wants not the Services of Angels, much less of sinful Men. His
Glory and Happiness was infinite and complete before the World began, and
cannot receive the least addition: He created man to take him up unto himself,
and out of the good pleasure of his will, has ordered him to dwell on the face
of the Earth, to try whether he will be obedient and a fit inhabitant for
Heaven; and has placed on the other side of him a Land of Darkness, of Dragons
and Scorpions, where the Shadow of Death and no Light is, that if he will not
come whither he calls and invites him, he may as a just recompense of his
stubbornness and transgression fall into the other. In the mean while it is
made known and he is liable thereto, that he may flee and get away; it is
decreed he must take up his everlasting habitation some where, and seeing that
is so full of misery, he should now seek out the new Heaven and new Earth,
where dwells Righteousness. If we were to sleep for ever, or to be as we were
before our Birth, we should not esteem of, and consequently not labor after
the rest that remains for the people of God; But now it is his Decree and
Ordinance, that if we should miss thereof, we must necessarily drop where is no
rest day nor night, so we are obliged out of self-love to endeavor more
diligently after the other. There have been some of Opinion that to talk of
Hell is not agreeable to the Gospel Dispensation, and that fear should be
banished, alleging, 1 John 4. 18.

For what end did God put it in Man, but that hereby he might be stirred up to
shun the approaching Evil? Why has he told the World thereof by his chosen
Messengers, but that they might escape it? If it be not agreeable with the
Gospel, Wherefore is it so often spoken of therein? John (who was sent to
prepare the way of the Lord) Preaches of the Wrath to come and unquenchable
Fire, Mat. 3. 7, 12. A little after, the Author of the New Testament speaks of
utter Darkness, weeping and gnashing of Teeth, Mat. 8. 12. Everlasting Fire and
Punishment, Mat. 25. 41, 46. The like was the Doctrine of his Apostles, 2 Pet.
2. 9. 2 Pet. 3. 7. Rev. 9. 6 and 14. 10, 11. and 16. 10, 11. and 21. 8. Jam. 2.
19. and 5. 5. Jude 5, 6, 7, 13. Lastly, he who came after them all, as one born
out of due time, delivered the same, 2 These. 1. 9. Knowing therefore the
terror of the Lord, we persuade Men, 2 Cor. 5. 11. So those, who make this
objection, differ in judgment from him and other Holy Men moved by the Holy
Ghost, for they used this kind of Doctrine. Should they not now Teach, as
Christ himself did, whose Ambassadors and Stewards they say they are? Have they
not him for an Example? Are they wiser then he? Why should not all the
Arguments, which God has given in Scripture, be made use of to exhort unto
Duty? amongst which this is powerful and apt to prevail; for though indeed Love
is the most excellent and abiding principle of Obedience, yet the terrors of
the Lord do more effectually persuade Men, which will drive when the other
grows faint and languishing. Because of the little smart and irksomness, there
is an unwillingness to speak or hear thereof; but it is an odd kind of
Mercifulness to let Souls drop into Hell, rather then a little disturb them
before hand with the rumor thereof, and they had better suffer that then the
thing it self. This brings most people unto repentance, for they look about
themselves, and think what will be the event of a wicked life continued in. The
word every where denounces Woe and Cursing, Tribulation and Anguish against it,
and their own Conscience accusing them of sin, and that they are now subject
unto all those threatenings which they will certainly feel, unless some way
avoided. All men, even the wicked and ungodly, do abhor misery; and would flee
from it if they saw it coming, and therefore they turn from iniquity least it
should be their ruin. This conversion proceeding from such motives as God has
given in his Word, is acceptable with him; By faith Noah being warned of God of
things not seen as yet, moved with fear (observe that) prepared an Ark to the
saving of his House, Heb. 11. 7. And others save with fear, Jud. 23. After our
Lord assures us of the joy over one sinner that repents, Luke 15. He brings
in the parable of the Prodigal Son, who was ready to perish for hunger; the
consideration of that, and not any love to his Father caused the resolutions of
going home, yet he was kindly received who was so little worthy of it. So one
rouzed up with fear comes to repentance, and seeing Gods wonderful compassion
toward him, notwithstanding his former sins and provocation, which are all
pardoned according to his gracious promise, Isa. 1. 18. Now his former hatred
and aversness is turned into good* will and reconciliation to his Heavenly
Father, and he l^ves much, much being to him forgiven: This is increased more
and more by further acts of Divine Goodness he is sensible of; so what was at
first begun by fear, is now grown perfect and consummate by love; and then
living and being stablished in all Obedience, he comes to that perfect love
which casts out fear, 1 John 4. 18. For having peace toward God and
forgiveness of past sins, he is not tormented with affrightful thoughts of
Damnation; for though heretofore he was an Adulterer, or Covetous, or a
Drunkard, now he is Washed, ^e i^ Sanctified, he is justified by the Name of
our Lord Jesus, and the Spirit of our God, 1 Cor. 6. 11. He has not that fear
which he had at first, which has Torment; There is a Godly fear, Heb. 12. 28.
Which is to be retained all the days of our life. Love and this kind of fear
are consistent, Deuteronomy. 10. 12. The distance is infinite between the most mighty
Lord of all Psalm. 2. 11. Psalm. 89. 6, 7.
things and a poor Worm, so it is requisite to preserve a reverence for his
awful Majesty, and not to think or speak of him as an equal. It is the constant
style of the Old Testament, and also a Gospel precept, Fear God, Luke 12. 4. 1
Pet. 2. 7. We are likewise obliged to be somewhat fearful concerning our own
Salvation, Heb. 4. 1. Romans 11. 20. Phil. 2. 12. 1 Pet. 1. 17. To do this is not
Tormenting, but stirs up carefulness, and puts upon all things to secure it,
Happy is the Man that fears always, Prove. 28. 14. From which proceeds a
good Life, thence a good Conscience, and then is no fear; none that is Slavish
or has Torment.

A third Passion is Joy, which word denotes Happiness, and is often Of Joy.
enjoined in Scripture; for thou command all things which may do good, O
thou Lover of Souls. Let the Righteous be glad, let them rejoice before the
Lord, yea let them exceedingly rejoice, Psalm. 68. 3. Behold my servants shall
rejoice. Behold my servants shall sing for joy of heart, Isa. 65. 13. Thou
shall rejoice before the Lord thy God in all that thou put thine hand unto,
Deuteronomy. 12. 18. This joy is not taken away, but increased under the Gospel; The
ransomed of the Lord shall return and come to Zion with Songs, and everlasting
joy shall be upon their heads, Isa. 35. 10. This the Prophet who saw his coming
foretold, and so it was at the first appearing of Christ our Lord, Luke 2. 10,
11. He having now accomplished the work for which he was sent into the World,
there is sufficient matter of gladness. Many righteous Men have desired to see
these days; The whole Gospel, by which is established a better Covenant,
imports what the Apostle does repeat in his exhortation, as if it could never
be pressed enough; Rejoicing in the Lord always, and again! say rejoice, Phil.
4. 4. This is the Lord we have waited for, we will be glad and rejoice in his
Salvation, Isa. 25. 9. Which is the happiness of Heaven, the clear
manifestation thereof to the World, and the possibility we are put in to
partake of it. As then it will be a delight to remember how we came through
this dark and troublesome Vale; so whilst we are here, we should lift up our
hearts with expectation thereof. Accordingly the good Men of old time did, who
had but the Glimmering whereof we have the fuller Light: If the heir of a
Kingdom or a good Estate is so transported with conceits and fancies of future
good, it cannot be thought absurd, that who have the evidence and hope of such
an exceeding eternal blessedness (which will be one day revealed) should be
proportionably pleased with the foresight and John 16. 22. Gal. 3. 22.
assurance thereof. Accordingly that Christian who has a real interest, has
also a sensible rejoicing therein, which does exceed all the pleasures and
imaginations here. What results from gross and sensual things, is not worthy to
be compared with pure and spiritual; yet God as a most Bountiful Master to his
Servants, has given them many things here for recreation and delight: He does
deny nothing which is good and convenient for us; We are all to admire and
comply with the Riches of his Mercy and Love, who has placed into our frame
this affection of joy, and has provided things proper for it, and has done as
much as lies on his part to complete the great end of our being happy.

How then came Sorrow in? God made it not, neither has he pleasure in the
grief of the living; but it came in through Sin and Of Sorrow
Transgression, Genesis 3. 15, 16. It was the effect of man's own disobedience, and
was justly inflicted on him as a Punishment, so it is continued of every sin
besides. As such God ordained it, but in the beginning when he made Male and
Female, he did not implant it into our nature; we now come into the World
crying, for we fell and were corrupted with our fore-father; Sin is interwoven
into our very flesh, and as the necessary consequent thereof sorrow also. The
Conception and Birth of our Lord was different from ours; in him was no sin,
yet when he came into the World to make his Soul an offering for sin, He was a
Man of Sorrows, and acquainted with Grief. The Lord has laid on him the
iniquity Isa. 53. Mark 14. 34
of us all, yet it pleased the Lord to bruise him, he has put him to grief, so
great that he poured out his Soul unto Death, and bore the sins of many. But
now since he has borne our grief, and carried our Sorrows (O astonishing
goodness of the Son of God) we are so far from sinking under them, that these
also (I speak Mysteries) tend to our Happiness. Whilst we look on him, whom we
have Pierced, and Mourn for him as one Mourns for his only Son, Zec. 12. 10
Isa. 63. 9. 1 These. 1. 10.
even then considering how, in his love and in his pity he has redeemed us,
and has delivered us from the wrath to come, an holy joy will arise. When we
reflect that he who did drink of the Brook in the Way, has now lifted up his
head above Angels, Principalities and Powers; Wherefore God has highly exalted
him, and given him Phil. 2. 9.
a Name which is above every Name; Our Sorrow is turned into Joy for the
exceeding and glorious condition Jesus (whom our Soul Heb. 12. 1.
loves) is in at this time; If ye loved me, ye would rejoice, because I Cant.
1. 6.
said I go unto the Father: This he said before his bitter Death John 14. 28.
and Passion, and now may seem to speak to all the World what he did once to
the Daughters of Jerusalem. Weep not for me, but for your selves; Are you
troubled at those cruel sufferings I have undergone? My Fathers indignation is
past, they are all over, and the remembrance is not in the least grievous, now
I am crowned with Glory and Honor. But weep for your selves who are in the
Wilderness, for the tribulation in the World; and more especially weep for
those sins which occasioned what I did suffer; forsake them, and come to me: If
ye pretend to be sorry for me, and this does not follow, that is, to cry out
Hail King of the Jews, and crucify him afresh, and put him to open Shame. He
has instituted an holy Feast for the continual remembrance of his Passion; the
reasons thereof are to stir up our love toward him, and the hatred of our own
Sins. God has manifested his displeasure against them by the Death of his own
beloved Son, who came out of his Bosom; yet when he took sin upon him, had the
full Vials of wrath poured forth, as is evident by his Agony and bloody Sweat,
by the pains he endured on the Cross; His sufferings were so exceeding, that
none but he who traveled in the greatness of his strength, who was mighty to
save, and therefore could endure.

The consideration of which should make us abhor our selves, and repent in Dust
and Ashes, to mourn and be in bitterness for those sins which have slain the
Prince of Life. This is that sorrow required under the Gospel, for Godly sorrow
works repentance to Salvation not to be repented of; for behold this self
same thing that ye sorrowed after a godly sort, what carefulness it wrought in
you, yea what clearing of your selves, yea what indignation, yea what fear, yea
what vehement desire, yea what zeal, 2 Cor. 7. 10, 11. If it were troublesome,
yet to obtain these good fruits none should refuse it; but our Gracious God
has ordered for the encouragement of all, some sweetness therein; In the midst
of such sorrow the heart is light and cheerful, which seems absurd and foolish
to carnal Men; yet who have had sincere contrition, know it to be true; even
whilst they were pouring forth penitential tears, gladness was in the inward
Man. Let not this pass off for strange, for if in the midst of laughter the
heart is sorrowful, why may it not be also joyful in the midst of weeping? Thus
says the high and lofty one, that inhabiteth eternity whose name is holy, I
dwell in the high and lofty place, with him also that is of a contrite and
humble Spirit, to revive the Spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart of
the contrite ones, Isa. 57. 15. When Almighty God does this, who or what can
depress and make it sorry? There is light and cheerfulness, however cloudy and
dark it seems without; the Sun does always shine in its full Brightness, but
somewhat between does hinder ou^ perceiving thereof; so it is of Gods Favor,
and the light of his Countenance. Our infirmities and imperfection do take away
the feeling thereof; whereof we have the more, as they go off, and are
endeavored against: God is not far from us, but our iniquities separate from
him; he does not so much hide his face, but our sin and weakness, like a
curtain before the Soul, intercepts the sight thereof. None need to be
discouraged, or think the King of Kings will not regard him, because of his
small and mean condition; there is another gracious promise, Isa. 66. 1. 2.
Some do highly esteem a kind word, or pleasant aspect from a great personage,
and shall so little a thing, which does no real good, be so much accounted of,
when it proceeds from vain Man whose breath is in his Nostrils? Is not his
favor to be more valued who is Lord of Lords, whose loving kindness is better
then life, Psalm. 63. 3. For it reaches further. Certainly if we had faith, we
should not care to be rejected and despised of Men, as long as we have the
assurance of that; no more then he who has the Kings favor does regard the
esteem of a common Beggar; God (who is not a Man that he should lie) has
promised it to godly sorrow and contrition; herein are those sayings found
true. They that sow in tears, shall reap in joy, Psalm. 126. 5. Blessed are ye
that weep, for ye shall laugh. Blessed are Luke 6. 21.
they that mourn, for they shall be comforted, Mat. 5. 4. To Sinners and the
merry Men of the World, the Apostle gives Admonition and Exhortation. Be
afflicted and mourn and weep, let your laughter be turned to mourning, and your
joy to heaviness; Humble your selves in the sight of the Lord, and he shall
lift you up, Jam. 4. 9, 10.

But the sorrow of the World works Death, 2 Cor. 7. 10. Therein is nothing
but Vexation, and therefore to be taken away: Christianity has showed an
excellent way of doing this, which those of old time were ignorant of, see Mat.
6. 25. to the end, Phil. 4. 6. 1 Pet. 5. 7. 1 Cor. 7. 30, 31. Set not the heart
and affection (for the disquietude arises from that) on the World. The more the
mind is separated from Sensible things, it conceives of Spiritual, which is
Life and Peace, Romans 8. 6. And to this it is quickened, knowing that shortly we
are to be quite taken from these, and for ever to abide with the other; and
therefore is greater reason they should be the object of our thoughts and care,
then the little things that are only for a while present. A lively faith sees
into the other World, and over looks this: It gives a transitory glance, but
not sixes on perishing things, and then they are no disturbance: Experience
assures we must be certainly deprived of them, as we daily see others are a
little before. Our profession teaches to draw off our desires before we are
utterly taken from them; to be in, not of, rather above the World, just set the
hand to those little concernments here, but to have the affection still on
things above; and then the Man has not much of Worldly Sorrow for his Portion,
though he has some (for as he partakes of the corruption, so must he of the
curse of his Fore-Father, which also in a great measure is taken away by
Christ) yet he is comforted by Gods Grace, that he is very well able to bear.
Many are the afflictions of the Righteous: but the Lord delivers them out of
all, Psalm. 34. 19. And in the mean while giving patience and support, he is not
broken under them; Heaviness in the heart of Man makes it stoop, but staying
upon his God, he is not cast down: Cast thy burden upon the Lord, and he shall
sustain thee; ^e shall never suffer the Righteous to be moved, Psalm. 55. 22.
Many are the places in Scripture which minister Consolation to them in
affliction or trouble; this precious Balm if applied, will heal all their
diseases and sores, of whatsoever kind they be.

But many Sorrows shall be to the Wicked, Psalm. 32. 10. For this belongs not
unto them, neither can they relish it: When they are in pain or heaviness, they
must groan and be in like miserable condition with them which have no
understanding; their sense render them capable of sufferings, but their Spirit
being become brutish will not sustain them; they may indeed palliate, but can
have nothing to get a real hope or deliverance; ye shall lie down in sorrow,
Isa. 50. 11. Would they be raised up again? Then they must cease to do
wickedly, and hear the word of God which says, When thou art in Tribulation,
and all these things are come upon thee, even in the latter days, if thou turn
unto the Lord thy God, and shall be obedient unto his voice, for the Lord thy
God is a merciful God, he will not forsake thee, neither destroy thee, Deuteronomy. 4.
30, 31. And if thou learnest obedience by sufferings, thou may kiss the Rod
and say, it is good for me that I have been afflicted, that I might learn thy
Statutes, Psalm. 119. 11.

Anger is often abused to Sin, and then is Torment; but may Of Ange^ and ^eal.
become instrumental of obedience and productive of good. When conversant about
holy and divine things, it is Zeal; the nature whereof may be understood from
Mark 3. 5. John 2. 17. Psalm. 69. 9. and 119. 139. Acts 18. 25. Mat. 24. 12.
Lev. 20. 4. It does arise from the love of God, causing a vexation of mind and
indignation at those who dishonor him; He is revealed in those several
relations of King, Father and Master; so his Subjects, Children and Servants
are bound to stand up for his Glory and Honor, when any thing is done that
seems contrary thereto. If this Duty were not mentioned or required in
Scripture, as it is, Tit. 2. 13, 14. Rev. 3. 15, 16, 17. and by many Examples,
yet manifest reason teaches it. Where is love Number. 25. 11. 13.
of God, there must be Zeal: Which shakes off Negligence and Sluggis^ness of
Spirit, and raises a Joy in doing his Will; this holy Fire warms Devotion, and
utterly banishes all carelessness and contempt in Spiritual Duties. The Man is
pleased and does give thanks when he sees God glorified, and although there is
a grief to behold the contrary, Psalm. 119. 158. Acts 17. 16. Ezekiel. 9. 4. that
will be abundantly rewarded by the Most High; he shall not suffer for what
others do, yet he cannot cease to pray for them, to mourn in secret for their
sins.

Thou shall not hate thy brother in thine heart: Thou shall in any wise rebuke
thy brother, and not suffer sin upon him, Lev. 19. 17. Charity and Love
obliges to admonish him to come out of the paths leading unto Death: A
reasonable Creature cannot justly take this ill; yet sometimes Hatred and
Reproaches are returned for this best kind of Civility and Friendship; however
the one has done his Duty, and what the other will one day wish he had
hearkened unto; the Satisfaction of a good Conscience requites for all evil
entreaty in the mean while. If they Curse him who stands up for Gods cause, he
takes it patiently, knowing the time will come when the Lord will arise and
maintain it himself. Those who are the offscouring and filth of the World, the
contemptible ones of the Earth; yet when God comes with his Holy Angels, the
Scene will change, and themselves will be the 1 Cor. 6. 2, 3.
same who think and would make these so now. Indeed Zeal does draw on Reproach,
Contempt and Evil Sayings; and therefore some would not have it be used because
of these inconveniences. But surely they do not consider, or not believe the
Promises, as particularly, Luke 6. 22. Who have made Conscience to serve God in
all Duty, were in past Generations esteemed Fools, simple and ignorant People,
despised, defamed, evil entreated; under the Law, They had trial of cruel
Mockings and Scourges, Heb. 11. 36, 37, 38. Our Lord himself was despised and
rejected of Men, he was despised and we esteemed him not, Isa. 53. 3. The like
also happened to the first Christians. And now we are fallen into those
perilous times, Where they receive his Name, but do not obey his Doctrine;
make so much outward Profession as to entitle them unto, Having a form of
Godliness, but denying the Power thereof: They do not only rest here, but
according to the Apostles Prophecy, (which this day is fulfilled) They are
despisers of those that are good, 2 Timothy 3. 3, 5. These say they have hopes of
going to Heaven, but what should they do in the Holy of Holies, the pure and
sanctified place above, who cannot endure what has a resemblance to it here?
It is alleged, they do not condemn or speak against the good Actions of
others, but their way of doing; they cannot approve of that forward indiscreet
zeal (it is their own Phrase) and making so great Pretenses in the Eye of the
World; for say they, Men may be good Christians, and yet not seem so outwardly.

If it were sufficient to be a Christian only within, this would take away the
Crown from the Martyrs, and accuse them of Folly, for according to this
supposal they might have believed on Christ, and have kept their Faith to
themselves, and so have escaped cruel Torments and Death. But this they did
not, knowing what was written, Mat. 10. 32, 33. Romans 10. 9, 10. It Is replied,
the Case now is altered, We do not live amongst Heathens, but in a Christian
Country: it is taken for granted, that every one believes Jesus to be the Son
of God, what need of so much Profession? But are we not amongst Infidels in
heart, Profane, Ungodly, Wicked, half Christians? Who in heart and mouth set
themselves against God and Christ, as the Gentile World did. What mean those
bitter Words and Railings, Witty Jests and Drolls against those, who are
careful to serve God in sincerity, but to discourage and make them ashamed of
so doing? This has been the usual Practice of the World; the Prophet does arm
those of his own and succeeding times. Hearken unto me, ye that know
righteousness, the People in whose heart is my Law, (this is a peculiar manner
of expressing Gods Sincere and faithful Servants) Fear ye not the reproach of
men, neither be ye afraid of their revilings, Isa. 51. 7. Our Lord Christ does
severely threaten his Followers, if this device of the wicked should take
effect upon them; Whosoever shall be ashamed of me, and my words in this
adulterous and sinful Generation, of him also shall the Son of man be ashamed,
when he comes in the Glory of the Father with the holy Angels, Mark 8. 38. It
is said Words indefinitely, and therefore extends to his Doctrine and
Commandments; and so it is not called Jewish or Heathen, but the same Character
which belongs to our present Age. He is ashamed or afraid of his Religion, that
will not own it. If he shrinks back, and would not be thought Godly when he is
so secretly, this proceeds from Pride and sinful Modesty. When the Name of God
is blasphemed or taken in vain, the way of truth evil spoken of, Wickedness
commended, every one that fears God is obliged to speak out in Reproof,
Vindication and Contradiction. Zeal was typified by the Fire that shall ever
burn upon the Altar, it shall never go out, Lev. 6. 13. Can that be, and yet
not seen? Is any zealous for God, hating Corruption whe^ever he sees it, who
yet does not appear so to others? The same Jesus who has Commanded to take
heed of the leaven of the Pharis^es which is Hypocrisy, Luke 12. 1. that We do
not our Alms before men, to pray in secret, Mat. 6. has also said. Ye are the
Light of the World. A City that is set on an Hill cannot be hid. Let your Light
so shine before men, that they may see your good Works, and Glorify your
Father which is in Heaven, Mat. 5. 14, 16. If ye are a peculiar People, you
will be taken notice of; if zealous of good Works, they will be known. If you
do not sound a Trumpet, and blaze them abroad your selves; but ^^ey praise you
in the Gates, you cannot help that, your reward is still with the most High, as
long as you are careful to approve your selves in his sight, and not as unto
Men. None should refrain from doing good, because others may come to bear of
it; no more then forsake the assembling of our selves together, because others
see us go to Church. Neither (as the manner of some) is this to be done only on
the Lord's Day, but as we have opportunity on every day, for so they did in the
first Ages of Christianity, Luke 24. 53. Acts 2. 42, 46. The Pastors were then
an Ensample to the Flock, Acts 3. 1. However strange or precise it seems now to
go to public Worship on a Week* day, it was as unusual then to neglect it. Who
considers the Relation we stand in toward the Great God of the World, must
think it a reasonable Service to pay our Homage, and Praise him from every
rising of the Sun, unto the going down thereof. Nor are we to avoid good and
edifying Discourse, because that will be likewise heard, but the Obligation is
greater, from Psalm. 37. 30, 31. Mat. 12. 34, 35. If the heart be good, good
things will come forth. God alone is the discerner of the Thoughts, and they do
not appear, yet Words and Actions will. If they are good and just, it is
impossible, but they must be discovered to be so.

But let it be cautioned, from Isa. 42. 2. Mat. 12. 16, 18, 19. against making
too much outward show; There is a good and middle way, between too much
Affectation on the one hand, sinful Shame and Lukewarmness on the other: Both
extremes are to be avoided, but indeed the first is safe, if the heart be
sincere, thoroughly purged from all Hypocrisy and Pride. It is much better to
be too zealous, (if that can be, for there are no limits set in Scripture) then
of a careless and indifferent Temper; for that is always spoken against. But it
is good to be zealously affected always in a good thing, Gal. 4. 18. And if out
of a good intention, God knows the unfeigned love in the heart, from whence it
proceeds, and so may approve thereof: So there is no such Reason, why that,
which is called a forward indiscreet Zeal, should be hated and spoken against.
Every thing, which does exceed the ordinary and fashionable Godliness of the
multitude, is termed so. We have seen that of our Savior fulfilled, Because
iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall wax cold, Mat. 24. 12. The
judgment of God being different from that of Men, perhaps he may judge that to
be true and prudent, which they thus call. Those Opinions and Excuses in
Religion which are vulgarly received, are as commonly false. But admit some
were over Zealous, Yet Charity envieth not, thinks no evil, believes all
things, hops all things, 1 Cor. 13. 4, 5, 7. And here will make a good
Construction, that such is well meaning, and therefore this takes off from
prejudice and evil surmizings against him. If some are more diligent in the
Worship and Service of God, we ought the more to rejoice, and glorify God on
his behalf. But to hate a Man for no other cause but his well-doing, is not
what all, but only the worse sort of wicked do. Neither do thou too rashly
condemn thy poor Brother, for whom Christ died, of Superstition, (that has
been so termed, which in the Language of the Holy Ghost is to fear the Lord
greatly, 1 Kings 18. 3.) But how know thou his heart? It may be he does what
is Commanded, or thinks to be plainly inferred from the Word: If he is
mistaken, thou art rather to rightly instruct, then malign or envy him; but in
no wise to laugh and make sport; that cannot be justified on Fellow-
Christians. It is sufficient to bear Reproach from those without, but it is
more grievous when it comes from the same Household of Faith. However Grace and
Wisdom will despise the Shame, and enable to take Pleasure in infirmities, in
Reproaches, in Necessities, in Persecutions, in Distresses, for Christ^ sake, 2
Cor. 12. 10.

Great heed is to be taken, that Zeal be according to Knowledge; for where
blind and mis-guided, it has done much mischief to the World by horrid
Cruelties, Massacres, Rebellions, Persecutions. The time comes, that whosoever
kills you, will think that That of Isa. 11. 9. is observable for the reason
there added.
he does God service. And these things will they do unto you, because they have
not known the Father, nor Me, John 16 2, 3. Said our Lord to his Disciples and
Followers, which has been fulfilled to a Witness. Some have pretended for God
and his Christ, and their Sword has made many Fatherless and Widows, have
after the most strange manner tormented to Death Women and Children, ripped up
Infants out of the Mothers Belly, shed the Blood of the Saints like water
throughout Christendom. All this, and more has been done by those, who in
their own Opinion Luke 9. 55.
were zealous for the Prince of Peace; He came to save men's lives, but these
have made it their business to kill and destroy. The Disciples were reproved
concerning the Samaritans, Ye know not of what Spirit ye are of, which plainly
manifested, that he allowed not of the murder of Men, though for his own
Honor, the best of ends. His whole Gospel Commands Love, Peace, Gentleness,
Meekness, and forbids whatever is contrary to them. But this Doctrine has been
concealed from some, who have given up themselves to blind Teachers, those
Sanguinary Priests and Jesuits; they have obtruded the Doctrine of Devils, for
that of the Holy Jesus; and have put off for the Commandments of Christ, the
Dictates of their Blood-thirsty minds. The silly People laden with Sins (and
perhaps willing to make Atonement by murdering of Heretics, which did increase
their Guilt by slaying the Lords Heritage) were taught, ignorance makes the
better Christians: They might have so much used their own natural Reason, as to
have considered, that Christ's Laws cannot be obeyed unless they are known, and
therefore they must search the Scriptures, which he Commands, John 5. 39. to
see what they are, or have them from honest Teachers. But if they had done the
first, they would have found Ministers of Satan transformed as the Ministers of
Righteousness, 2 Cor. 11. 15. And they would have known them by this kind of
Suggestions, which come from none but the Destroyer; for what seems hateful and
cruel to us as we are Men, can never be thought to have been delivered by him,
who came into the World to perfect, not deprave Humane Nature. The many sad
Effects of wild destructive Zeal, have proceeded from their wilful Ignorance
of the Law he gave us, for they had been all prevented, if Men had only acted
according to the Directions of the New Testament.

Some on the other hand have read the Scriptures; but through
mis-interpretation, or rather wilful perverting some places of the Old
Testament, have cried up Zeal for the Lord of Hosts, have rebelled against, and
even killed the Lords anointed on this wicked Pretense. He re* again the
Teachers of the People did cause them to err: But suppose the utmost should be
granted, they did counted for, (which yet is not) That Rebellion was lawful to
the Je^s, it can be no more inferred, that it is lawful to us Christians then
Revenge of private Injuries which was allowed to them. We live under another
Law and Dispensation. Ye have heard that it has been said, an eye for an eye,
and a tooth for a tooth; but I say unto you, that ye resist not evil, but
whosoever shall smite thee on thy right Cheek, turn to him the other also, Mat.
5. 38, 39. there the Doctrine of Non-resistance is set down, and further
enforced, Romans 13. 1, 2. No Zeal is according to the Gospel, which stirs up to
Sedition and Rebellion: If we would have it approved by God, it must be ordered
according to the Rules laid down there, otherwise it is Sin and Madness.

There is another mistake concerning Zeal, of those who punctually observe
their own Traditions, and are very exact in paying Tithe of Mint, Anise and
Cummin, but omitted the weightier Matters of the Law, Judgment, Mercy and
Faith, Mat. 23. 23. Thus did the Pharisees of old: And whether some of late
have not been more zealous for a Ceremony, then Holiness and the Love of God,
their own Conscience knows, and their Actions have discovered. We should be
zealous for every thing according to its Proportion, for the Commandments of
God in the first place, then for the things which Minister unto Decency and
Order; for seeing they may both stand together, those are necess^ry and must be
done, the other if Authority had not established them might have been left
undone; however they are to be preferred, which are of Divine Institution and
Substantials of Religion, before those which are Humane and Circumstantials
only.

Hope is a right Application of the Promises in Scripture unto Of Hope.
our selves. Those were many in the Old Testament, But by Jesus our Lord are
given unto us exceeding great and precious promises, 2 Pet. 1. 2, 4. This is
the Promise that he has Promised, even eternal Life, 1 John 2. 25. In hope of
eternal Life, which God that cannot lie promised before the World began, But
has in due times manifested his word through Preaching, Tit. 1. 2, 3. for
Discovery has been made thereof by little and little. It was contained in
those general Expressions, The Lord, the hope of their Fathers, Jer. 50. 7.
Hope in God, Psalm. 146. 5. and so Heb. 11. 13, 16. He was not ashamed to be
called their God, for he has prepared for them a City. They had Confidence,
God would do something more for his Servants then temporal and present Mercies,
for they were also common to others: But as he is just and good, so he would
make some requital for obedience, that Hardship and Inconvenience they met with
from the World for his sake. Which they did expect hereafter in another place.
God was the same then, and his Decrees alike sure, though they were not so
clearly made known unto Men. And therefore now it is called Hope, which enters
into that within the Vail, Heb. 6. 19. a better Hope, Heb. 7. 19. a lively
Hope, 1 Pet. 1. 3. all in opposition to those faint Guesses and imperfect
Knowledge they had thereof under the Law. They had but a dull and glimmering
Prospect beyond the Earthly Canaan, but now Christ has brought Life and
immortality to Light through the Gospel, 2 Timothy 1. 10.

Herein is comprised greater and more durable Happiness then is possible to
conceive. That may serve to stir us up; but otherwise it does not signify to
expect or talk of great things, if we did not know how to come at, or should be
disappointed of them. But blessed be God we are both taught the way, and if we
use the means (as they are put in our Power) we shall certainly obtain, for he
is faithful that promised, Heb. 10. 23. The way and means are showed in
Scripture, and may be briefly comprehended in these Texts, Lord I have hoped
for thy Salvation, and done thy Commandments, Psalm. 119. 166. And every man
that has this hope, purifieth himself, even as he is pure, 1 John 3. 3. Hope
puts upon Obedience and Action, otherwise it is vain and false. It is an idle
and dangerous Delusion to flatter our selves with the good things God has
prepared for them that love him, if we do not; or if we say we do, and yet not
keep his Commandments. If hope alone will bring a Man to Heaven, Why will it
not get him Money 1 John 5. 3.
or Estate here on Earth? Why will it not provide him necessaries for Life?
Every one Laughs at him, who does neither Plow nor Sow, and yet says, He hopes
for a good Crop at Harvest: It is alike foolish and deceiving in him, who
expects to be an Inhabitant of the New Jerusalem, and yet walks not in the way
which leads thither. He may now ^ooth himself with what fancies he will, but in
the end will find his thoughts shall be as a Dream of a Night Vision, as when
an hungry Man dreameth, and behold he eats, but he awaketh and his Soul is
empty. His idle imagination may suggest unto him, that he is just ready to
receive the Crown of Glory; but when he comes to appear before God in Judgment,
and is thoroughly rouzed out of Carnal security, he may be sent another way. If
only thinking would secure a Man, none would go to Hell, for the wicked and
ungodly hope to escape that. Which makes them go on still in their Course; for
did they really believe, themselves should be cast into a Furnace of Fire for
having done iniquity, Mat. 13. 42. they would no more do so, then one now will
drink a Glass of seeming pleasant Liquor, in which he knew was rank Poison.
Either men do not believe that place, or Fancy they shall some way avoid, or
they must be the veriest Fools to go the direct way to it. They dare not think
God to be a Liar, for fear he should manifest the contrary on themselves: And
then they must not deny the immutability and truth of his Word, which is
confirmed so often, Isa. 40. 8. Isa. 55. 10, 11. Mat. 24. 35. John 12. 48. 1
Pet. 1. 25. And then how can thou hope O Man? when that says, The unrighteous
shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. Be not deceived, neither Fornicators, nor
Idolaters, nor Thieves, nor Covetous, nor Drunkards shall inherit the Kingdom
of God, 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. And yet thou shall, when some of them thou Art, and
do continue. We are sure the Judgment of God is according to truth against
them which commit such things: And then how can thou hope to escape it? See
Romans 2. v. 3, 6, 7, 8. Thou may be destroyed for all thy hope, for hope which
is against the plain word of God, is not hope; for that which a Man has no
Promise, what does he hope for? Neither let him perve^sly abuse, Romans 4. 18. as
think to be saved with hoping Abraham, for it is evident Abraham had the Promise
of God, Genesis 15 5. for what he hoped for, but had no natural Grounds for it,
Heb. 11. 11. but here it is only a false and fond Presumption, directly
contrary to Scripture. And if he will for all trust to go to Heaven, every
common Beggar that lies upon the Dunghill, has greater Reason to expect to
climb up to the real Throne of Majesty, and be King over this whole Nation, for
there is no impossibility in this, as in the other, It being impossible for God
to lie, Heb. 6. 18. When a wicked man dies, his Expectation shall perish: and
the hope of unjust men perishes, Prove. 11. 7. Neither does it avail much in
this Life, it may stifle the afrighting thoughts of Damnation, but yields no
true Peace and Comfort. It standing upon weak and rotten Grounds must not be
searched, for then it would totter and vex the Man that entertains it. But if
he would not be deceived in the greatest Concern of his own eternal Happiness,
he might know, that if his hopes now will not bear a through Examination, it is
Suspicious they are false, (for true Gold will abide the Fire) and then they
will not pass for true in that day, when the Lord shall try all things. If
himself should strictly consider, he would spy out the deceit, much more will
the all-seeing God; He will judge the secrets of Men by the Gospel, the
reserved and innermost thoughts; which if here suffered to come out would
defeat the vanity of all his hopes. But this would be disquietude, he must not
cast them off, for he is willing to save his Soul; then suffer thy self to be
put in mind how it may be done. The error of most Men is, they will exclaim
horribly against despair (which indeed is a sad thing) and will take all
imaginable heed of not falling into it, but then they pass over the sure and
middle way as if this were too near it, and so fall upon another more dangerous
Rock, which (they going on securely without noise,) proves destructive to
thousands; I mean presumption on Gods mercy where is no ground for it. What
does it help the Ship tossed to and fro, to cast out Anchor where is no bottom
to fix on? When the soul is troubled, what real good does it to let out hope,
if there is no promise to stay it self on? Or if he thinks he can, yet heed
must be taken that it be not falsely applied, for that would be like foolish
Pilots, who fancy they see the Shore, and make toward it, when it is
quicksands, in which they coming near are Swallowed. Alas! just upon sinking
they discover the deceit, but if they had before, they had avoided it; The
Sinner dropping into the bottomless Pit, then is fully sensible of the
falseness of all his former hopes, but if he had been so wise in the day of
Salvation, to have trusted unto them no further then they were to be made true
and steadfast out of the Word, he had never came to this. Then perhaps Satan
(working with all deceivableness in them that perish) might beat off from
examining themselves thoroughly, representing such thoughts as Melancholy
Fancies, tending to despair, which they must drive out of their mind. But they
should consider whether such do necessarily arise from Scripture, for by that
all must be judged at the last day. And if we would judge our selves, we should
not be judged, 1 Cor. 11. 31. We might know before hand how it will go with us;
if one has a title to the Heavenly inheritance he must make it good out of
this Statute Book, which God has made for his government over the World;
according to which is to be distribution of rewards and punishments; from Deuteronomy.
29. 20 Rev. 3. 5. It appears that every common person has a name in the
Courtroll of Heaven, and we are to arrive there upon the performance of such
conditions in the mean while, so plainly laid down that every one may know
whether he does them or not. The Case being thus, it is the wisest way (now
being the only time of doing them) to read that Book to see whether all things
are done that are written therein, and if not, to do them whilst we may correct
what is amiss, then to go on slightly and negligently, not much minding it
before hand, least when the Book is opened, Rev. 20. 12. Such and such things
may be found wan^ing or mistaken, and so the most inestimable good is lost for
want of a full examination and knowledge. This disappointment will be more
tormenting and argue of folly, because then he will have no opportunity to fill
up and make right what was wanting or false; ^e might have done it heretofore,
but then would not consider. And therefore least any one that reads here should
come into this wretched condition, Behold I have told you before, let him make
no delay to search and try his ways: if they are straight when examined by the
rule of Scripture, there is no fear; but if contrary, they must be forth with
amended by it.

Neither think this the way to despair (which is the only Objection against
sound Doctrine) but to be converted and healed. If one is in a damnable State,
the greater danger is in not being sensible thereof, but none at all in knowing
it, for he may recover out as soon as he will; let him repent and do so no
more, no longer trust unto those errors and mistakes: If he is not yet come up
to that fitness and Qualification for Heaven, it is no hindrance but he may
endeavor after it, he may come up to such a degree of eminency and perfection
before he die, and at present may do somewhat toward it. Gods Mercy and Pardon
is to the greatest Sinners upon true Repentance; there is no necessity for any
one to continue in his sins, and when he forsakes them, the promises do
presently belong to him, see Isa. 55. 7. Ezekiel. 18. 22. So again the threatenings
are not absolute, but only hang over the impenitent; this word Despair is more
often talked of then considered; for in property of Speech it is opposed to
Hope, and is a distrust of Gods Mercy, when there is good evidence in holy Writ
that he may be partaker of the Promises. But if one can challenge no property
in them because of his wicked Life and Conversation, or lives in one sin
impenitently, to which damnation is threatened; this cannot be said to be
despair, because as long as he remains thus, he has no ground for hope, no
more then a Murderer or Capital Felon may be said to do so, when he knowing the
Law thinks he shall be Hanged, if it be proceeded against him according to the
strict rules of Justice. And so it is of the sinner, Except ye repent, ye shall
perish, Luke 13. 3. In common Opinions and Sayings, the sense of Good and Evil,
Truth and Falsehood is confounded; that passes for despair, which is but the
right pronouncing of ones condition out of that word by which all are to be
judged at the last day. It Is neither that, nor the inferences which necessarily
flow from it, which bring this sad effect on any, but Men's committing and
holding fast those sins to which the threatening part is just and due; but they
might cease to do so and avoid it. The design whereof is to turn many away from
iniquity, Mal. 2. 6. Not lull them in the continuance of it. Neither would they
make lies their refuge, and under falsehood hide themselves, Isa. 28. 15. only
for a little outward quiet, if they did thoroughly consider the great good and
satisfaction of a true and well grounded hope.

It was said of Old, Happy is he that has the God of Jacob for Psalm. 146. 5.
his help, whose hope is in the Lord; but now he is much more, who looks for
that Blessed hope, and the Glorious appearing of the great Tit. 2. 13.
God and our Savior Jesus* Christ, and so shall be ever with the Lord. 1 These.
4. 17.
With the thoughts of this he can contentedly bear all the present miseries and
infirmities of life, that God will give an end unto them, and receive him to
himself, where shall be no Sorrow, nor Rev. 21. 4
Pain, nor Crying; Those which have the sure expectation of a Kingdom or good
Estate, do not grudge at some small inconveniences in the mean while, the
thing waited for will make abundant compensation; so likewise who does really
hope for the Kingdom God has prepared, can easily go through with that
Tribulation he meets with in the World; Looking unto Jesus the Author and Heb.
12. 2.
Finisher of our Faith, who for the joy that was s^t before him, endured the
Cross, despising the shame, and is set down at the right hand of the Throne of
God. Consider what he says, John 14. 1, 2, 3. How can their hearts he
troubled, who steadfastly believe this? but yet, O happy Souls! Ye have need of
Patience, that after ye have done the Will of God, ye might inherit the
promise; for yet a little while, and he that shall come, will come, and will
not tarry, Heb. 10. 36, 37. Be patient therefore Brethren unto the coming of
the Lord, behold the Husbandman waits for the precious fruit of the Earth,
and has long patience for it, until he receive the early and latter rain, Jam.
5. 7. He may be deceived of his crop by several accidents which he cannot help,
but it is not so with you: Do but what is required on your part; for all the
promises of God in him are Yea, and in him Amen, unto the Glory of God by us, 2
Cor. 1. 20. And we desire that every one of you do show the same diligence, to
the full assurance of hope unto the end; that ye be not Sloathful, but
followers of them who thorough Faith and Patience inherit the promises, Heb. 6.
11, 12. But if we hope for that we see not, then do we with patience wait for
it, Romans 8. 25. The Wisdom of God has excellently contrived for our Happiness,
by joining these two precepts together; for the mind is restless till it
obtains the desired good, unless quieted by divine command and pleasure; the
contemplation of those joys above would vex and torture, unless we could
patiently tarry for them. The Israelites were distressed forty years in the
Wilderness before they came unto Canaan. Jacob served seven years for Ra^hel;
in every temporal end there is foregoing labor and expectation (which none
does so much repine at) all which do instruct what is like reasonable, we
should do but the same for Heaven, as others for the things of this World. The
excellency and greatness whereof will be a more sufficient recompense for the
pains and time of waiting. The Gospel does not promise freedom from hardship,
but compares our life to a Warfare, Race, Pilgrimage which have trouble
intermingled; but there is sweetness at the very time by consideration of the
victory, the incorruptible Crown, the pleasant Country we shall at length
possess our selves of. The thoughts of this does make us fight courageously,
putting on for a helmet the hope of Salvation, run cheerfully, and pass through
this barren and dry Wilderness where no Water of true comfort is. Having a mind
whither we are going, and though they may seem a^ar off, yet even now Joy
springs up out of the Wells of Salvation. We have example in a worthy Saint,
who speaking before of bonds and afflictions, yet still reckons that Acts 20.
23, 24.
no hindrance to finish his course with Joy. None can refuse to suffer any
thing, that has in him the true and certain hopes of Eternal Life. Ye took
joyfully the spoiling of your goods, knowing in your selves that ye have in
Heaven a better and enduring substance, Heb. 10. 34. Rejoicing in Hope, patient
in Tribulation, Romans 12. 12. That looks o^t to the end what we shall come to
enjoy, not minding little difficulties in the mean while. Men do not fear the
roughness of the Ocean, Tempests, or Thunder when they make a Voyage to get
Money; they have no assurance before hand that they shall not be Ship-wrackt;
if they once set a shore, it matters not what they have undergone, but rather
it is more pleasant, the more dangers they have run through. And shall they be
discouraged at being tossed up and down in the troublesome Sea of this life,
who are assured that if they guide their course according to the rules given
them, they shall at length arrive at the most fair Haven that ever was? Come
fine weather or foul, gentle gales or Euroclydon, fears and perils they are
contented; all things are possible and sweet to them, who have this expectaon.

But the last and greatest is behind, as they are just going into harbor; It
shall bring him to the King of terrors, Job. 18. 14. How shall this be looked
in the face? Yet he who has a sure interest in the promises, may hear one
speaking unto him; Fear not, I am the first and the last, I am he that lives
and was dead, and behold I am alive for evermore, Amen, and have the Keys of
Hell and of Death, Rev. 1. 17, 18. There is no doubt of getting admittance,
seeing he keeps the Door, who therefore died and rose again, that where he
is, there his servant shall be, John 12. 26. What if the body lie some while in
the Grave, this dear flesh inherit creeping things and worms? yet when there,
it is void of sense and misery; in the mean while this is our comfort that it
will not be long there. Indeed it will be somewhat longer and to more
disadvantage, then of whom it is written, Psalm. 16. 9. All we have sinned, but
the holy one did not: But now blessed be the Father and the Lamb for it, Our
flesh shall alsorest in Hope, for it shall rise again, and be as highly exalted
as ever it was abased, John 12. 24. 1 Cor. 15. 42. and 44. Phil. 3. 21. What
need he to fear whose body is committed unto the ground in sure and certain
hopes of Resurrection unto Eternal life, and his Spirit commended into the
hands of thee O God? For so an entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly,
into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 1.
11. Sweet arises unto them out of that which to others is nothing but
bitterness; it is the messenger of God to bring them to himself, and that is
true which the Son of his love has said; The righteous shall go into Life
Eternal, Mat. 25. 46. and therefore they willingly submit unto what comes upon
this errand; All the promises are theirs, in all time of Tribulation, in time
of Wealth, and further in the hour of Death they are happy; Wherefore grid up
the loins of your mind, be sober, and Hope unto the end, 1 Pet. 1. 13.

The tranquillity of the mind was what the Wisdom of Ages did A summary of the
preceding Discourses.
labor after, but they for want of the Grace of Jesus Christ knew not what
hindered, which should be first taken away. A gross and Stupid Understanding, a
guilty Conscience, a crooked and perverse Will, strong and irregular
Affections; but Almighty God has sent him who was the Wisdom of the Father,
and has published peace, Isa. 52. 7. If our Souls be framed according to the
directions given, they must be composed and quiet. Every one who does not only
call Jesus Lord, but does the things which he says, Who being in Christ is a
new Creature; old things are passed away, behold all things are become new, 2
Cor. 5. 7. has his Passions so, as above described out of his Revelation; He
is free from those miseries which do arise from inordinate affections, and they
being in him conversant about holy things, afford more satisfaction then when
pressed down only to the things of this life. It is more delightful to love God
with all his Heart and all his Soul, then to them who are lovers of Pleasure,
Riches and Honor; He loving his Neighbor as himself, does exceed them who are
outwardly kind and civil, but within dissembling and malicious. It is better to
serve God with reverence and godly fear, and not to be slavishly afraid of any
thing. Psalm. 118. 6. Psalm. 112. 7, 8. Isa. 41. 10. Then to others who dread him
with the Spirit of Bondage, who stand in continual fear of evils to come,
Death, Judgment and Hell. There is more contentment in rejoicing in the Lord,
then worldly delgihts, loud laughter and hearing all manner of Music. Godly
sorrow and contrition has been showed to be less grievous, then cares, trouble
and discontent for the things of this World. Who is zealous for God and true
Religion, has more rest in his Soul, then those who are so for their own
honor and reputation, and are tormented with the least disgrace or evil
surmising. And lastly, the assured hope of glory brings more comfort, then all
vain, false and foolish confidences; The right use of the Affections grows up
to immortality and reward, but the abuse is only for this present and short
time; the act perishes, and the punishment is to come, besides the present
irregularity and torment of disordered Passions. Whereas he that is born again,
has in a great measure escaped the original corruption of his Nature; he is
not tossed to and fro with contrary desires and passions, within him is a great
calm; this was done by the everlasting Gospel, The Word of him whom even the
Wind and Sea obey.

It is to be understood, that none have an uninterrupted peace, Of Temptations.
for there is a Law in the Members warring against the Law of the mina, Romans 7.
23. There are some lees remaining of corruption; and then are the several kinds
of temptation from the World, the Flesh, and the Devil. Thou art too delicate,
O Christian! if thou expectest to come to Heaven without some trouble; What
Worldly good is to be had without it? Thou must withstand and go through all
these Enemies; for if thou yieldest, or art overcome, thou art undone for ever.
This is the good fight, Here is the Faith and Patience of the Saints; they
cannot now enjoy perfect and absolute happiness, but this they are to contend
for here, being reserved for them who shall be found worthy in another state.
Take the Apostles Exhortation, Be strong in the Lord, and the power of his
might, Ephesians. 6. 10. He ^here furnishes with habiliments of War from the crown
of the head to the ^ole of of the foot, see 1 Cor. 10. 31. James 1, 2, 3, 12. 1
Pet. 1. 6* 7. The Lord your God proves you, to know whether you love the Lord
your God with all your heart, and all your Soul, Deuteronomy. 13. 3. Thus he did tempt
Abraham, Genesis 22. 2. To know his obedience, or to try; but as to deceive or to
persuade unto sin, Let no Man say, when he is tempted, I am tempted of God, for
God cannot be tempted with evil, neither tempts he any Man, but every Man is
tempted, when he is drawn away of his own lust and enticed, James 1. 1, 3, 14.
And there is one called the Tempter, Mark 4. 3. Who finds something in him
whereon to ground the Temptation, as Pride, Lust, or such like. God does suffer
all this to try our Obedience, (the whole order and establishment of things may
be referred to this) See Deuteronomy. 8. 2.
none can compel, and by the assistance of his Grace, which is made known unto
Men, they may be all resisted. The excellency of Man's faith and service unto
God appears when he holds fast to that, notwithstanding Solicitations and
Discouragement to the contrary. Who would not fear God, (I had almost said even
those who sin against him) if thereby he was assured to have a ^edge round
about? but if a gap were opened, and Satan might come in and trouble him a
little, this would manifest for what reason we did, and whether we would keep
constantly to obedience. Job. 1. 10.
Innumerable are his devices, which all may be known out of Scripture; In
general they are, either to commit sin or hinder good. By the first he does
delude the wicked World, and with the latter assail Gods faithful people more
especially; though the one and the other are tempted both ways. He would first
keep them from doing the thing that good is, but if it is done for all, then he
will endeavor some way to spoil or defeat of the reward. When they have heard
the word, Satan comes immediately, and takes away the word that was sown in
their hearts, Mark 4. 15. As by prompting them to worldly talk or business
presently afterward, which makes them forget all, and signify no more then if
they never heard it; such are his ways and methods to keep Men from their good
and Salvation. Whosoever will not know when he may; and when he does, will not
counterwork and make void the design, it is his own fault if he perish. Neither
give place to the Devil, ^ph. 4. 27. Resist the Devil, and he will fly from
you, Jam. 4. 7. Your adversary the Devil, as a roaring Lion walks about
seeking whom he may devour, whom resist steadfastly in the faith, 1 Pet. 5. 8,
9. God has given us power, and here commands thus to do; We are to our sorrow
told, he is come down unto us having great Rev. 12. 12.
wrath, because he knows he has but a short time. He does not now so
universally tyrannize over the bodies of Men, as he did before our Saviors
coming into the World, but tryes by subtle windings and insinuations to glide
into the heart, or suggests evil Thoughts, spiritual Pride, Unbelief,
Disobedience. We have not an high Priest which cannot be touched with the
feeling of our infirmities, but was in all points tempted like as we are, yet
without sin, Heb. 4. 15. So temptations may be without sin, as where is no
consent unto them, but an abhorrence and utter disowning of them in the mind.
It is expedient to cry out, the Lord rebuke thee Satan; if any thing comes
never consent, the Lord pardon the iniquity of my thoughts, and reject them
with more abomination; fly to the Lord Jesus for help, for in that he has
suffered being tempted, he is able to succor them that are tempted, Heb. 2.
18. Say over his Prayer more earnestly, learn from his example, Mat. 4. To beat
back the temptation with, Thus it is written in the word of God. Then thou
may know assuredly, thou shall never fall away utterly* through all his
subtilty.

As for other Temptations of the Flesh and the World, it is the The Conclusion
of the whole Chapter.
design of the following Pages to confirm Man against them. Man has been
surveyed in his Thoughts, Words, and Actions, in the several Ages of Life, in
Body and Soul; and he may be truly Happy if governed by the Law of God. He may
enjoy greater good, and be free from more evils, according to this State of
imperfection and beginning. He is a Creature built up by the wonderful working
of God for Happiness, and another Life. All the Members of the Body are
compacted and knit together, the Powers of Soul are rightly framed, made
capable and designed for this great End. Now as all these have dependence upon
each other, for Constitution of the whole Man, they are linked together for his
Being; so every one of them singly and jointly are to be ruled and ordered by
Scripture for his Well and Happy being. If any is not, all the rest suffer;
Confusion and Misery are in the Man. One string in a Musical instrument out of
Tune spoils the Harmony of all the others. A single part which moves
irregularly, and refuses to be under him, in whom we live and move and have our
Being, troubles the whole Man. Casting down imaginations, and every high thing
that exalts it self against the knowledge of God, and bringing into Captivity
every thought unto the obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10. 5. Otherwise it would be
almost the same, to do nothing toward it. A little leaven leaveneth the whole
Lump, One reigning Sin sowres our whole Nature, and makes it unmeet for our
Masters use: The Blessed Jesus who ^itted his Commandments for our Good, gave
this to his Disciples the last we read of, and consequently of greatest moment,
a Summary Conclusion of all, that they should teach all Nations to observe all
things, whatever I have commanded you, Mat. 28. 20. These are the only terms,
upon which our Happiness is to be had, and who will not take it upon them, he
may go without, he has no share nor Lot in this Matter. This is the pearl of
great price; if he will not Sell all that he has, and give to the value the
Lord* Jesus has put upon it, it is all one as if he bid nothing, he may let it
alone. It is just, if we expect this good thing from God, that we should come
up to those Conditions, upon which, and no other he will Communicate it: For he
has created the whole Man, and therefore is no Reason, why he should be served
by piecemeal. We are bought with a price, so upon both Respects of Creation
and^ Redemption, we ought to Glorify God in our Body and Spirit, which are
Gods, 1 Cor. 6. 20.

Alas! What are we to make so much ado? That we will as it were Capitulate,
and know for what Reason, before we submit to his obedience. Man is a Worm, and
the Son of Man is a Worm, Job 25. 6. If we respect his outward shape, he seems
a contemptible Creature. When he appears nake^ and stripped off those Ornaments
he so much Prides himself in, the Beasts are not so ugly in our sight. So
little does he appear in reference to the other Works, that the Psalmist might
very well admire, O Lord when I consider thy Heavens, the work of thy Fingers,
the Moon and Stars, which thou have ordained; What is man that thou art mindful
of him, and the son of man, that thou Visitest him? Psalm. 8. 3, 4. How much do
they exceed him in Beauty, Greatness, duration and usefulness? The Heavens
declare the Glory of God, and the Firmament shows his handy work, Psalm. 19.
1. They all observe the Rules he has given them; Whereas ^ullen Man does not
ascribe the Honor due unto his Name, and will not so much show forth his
Praise as he ought; who will not speak out what he sees Psalm. 145. 10, 11, 12.
and knows, which is justly required, but perversely denied. As if this was not
sufficiently provoking, he makes it his business to dishonor God and break all
his Laws. Who is but a depending Creature, has all from him, and yet
Transgresses his most reasonable Commands. But how will he Answer, when God
shall plead with him? How will they be able to stand before him? Who dwell in
Houses of Clay, whose Foundation is in the dust, which are crushed before the
Moth, Job 4. 19. Yet this vain Man, whose breath is in his Nostrils, who is not
to be accounted of (I tremble to think upon it) continually displeases him, who
keeps it in, who holds his Soul in Life. This Worm wriggles and shows all the
spite it can against his Master. Most certainly these things ought not so to be.

The Lord has made all things for himself: yea even the wicked for the day of
evil, Prove. 16. 14. If he is not glorified in our Salvation, he will be in our
Destruction. When God arose to judgment, surely the wrath of man shall praise
thee: the remainder of wrath shall thou restrain, Psalm. 76. 10. The
Condemnation thou inflictest on the wicked shall tend to thy Glory, and yet
thou shall curb them, that they shall do no more so wickedly. Thou had
rather, O God, that Man were Righteous, but if not, thou art not the less
glorified. Whether he be so or not, redounds upon himself. If he will be Happy,
nothing is wanting on Gods part to make him so, if he will go in the prescribed
way; but if not, he perishes of himself only. I have no Pleasure in the Death
of him that dies, says the Lord God, Ezekiel. 18. 2. and therefore does not in
any wise contribute toward it. Whatever be his final Condition through his own
doings, in the beginning he was made to praise and serve God in this Life, be
contented in so doing, and at last enjoy him, that is Blessed for ever; this
may be the Reason why in all Men, who are equally born to this great end, there
is such an earnest and natural desire after Happiness. That this might be the
more effectually obtained, God has showed out of his written Grace and
Revelation, to all Sorts and Conditions of Men. A plain intimation, that as he
has made known his ways unto Isa. 2. 3.
men, so he would have them walk therein. As they have Power given them to
know, so to do. As God would the means, so Mich. 4. 2.
the end; all are put in a possibility of the Crown and Reward. All the ends of
the World shall remember, and turn unto the Lord, and all the kindreds of the
Nations shall worship before thee, Psalm. 22. 27.

CHAP. III. OF KINGS.
The necessity of Government in Order to Preservation and outward Peace. Of the
Person of Kings, wherein it is showed particularly, that all their enjoyments
cannot make them Happy, but their Happiness is to be had in God only, with an
Exhortation and Direction thereto.

I Have said, ye are Gods, But ye shall die like Men, Psalm. 82. 6, 7. You are
Partakers of the same Flesh and Blood, subject to the same weakness and frailty
with the meanest, but that Divine stamp of Sovereignty makes the difference
There is no Power but of God: the Powers that be, are ordained of God. He is
the Minister of God to thee for good, he bears not the Sword in vain, for he
is the Minister of God, a Revenger to execute wrath upon him that does evil,
Romans 13. 1, 3, 4. Should the King immortal, eternal Exercise the Authority by
himself, we are not now able to endure his glorious Presence: We cannot see him
and live. When he revealed himself upon Mount Sinah, and all the People saw the
Thunderings and Lightnings, and the noise of a Trumpet, and the Mountain
smoking, and when the People saw it, they removed and stood afar off; and they
said unto Moses, speak with us and we will hear, but let not God speak with us,
least we die, Exodus 20. 18, 19. We walk by Faith, and not by Sight, 2 Cor. 5.
7. it would be no Trial of our obedience, if he should appear visible upon
Earth, at whose sight all Nations, must tremble. God has ordered it as it is,
Heaven is ^y Throne, and the Earth my Foo^stool. He commands over all, And
still the Most High rules in the Kingdom of Men, and gives it to whomsoever
he will, Dan. 4. 32. He has sent his Deputies among us, Spiritual and Civil,
whom though he has been pleased to Honor with his own Title of Gods and
Lords, yet they are in the likeness of Men.

The World cannot subsist without Government, for since there are in us the
Seeds of all manner of Evil, and especially those which are prejudicial to
Society; Pride, Revenge, Envy, Hatred, Malice, Oppression, Theft, Covetousness
and such like; if these were not restrained by present Punishments (for who do
not regard God, fear these) there would be no living amongst Men. We must lurk
in Dens and Caves of the Earth, to hide and preserve our selves from wrong and
injury: We are worse then Bears and Wolves, Tigers and Serpents, for they do
not bi^e and devour those of their own kind; whereas Man is ready to do all
kind of hurt to his Fellow, if none would fall upon himself. If there was no
Law to bind him, then his Strength would be the only Law of Justice. The good
things of the Earth would not be distributed according to right or deserving,
but fall a prey to the Sons of Violence. There would be no Trade or Commerce,
for then People would not barter for Commodities, but take them by force. When
the mighty Man has got them, there comes a stronger then he and spoileth him
also, and a third trys to Master him. A gap would be opened to all Rapine and
Injustice, and none could say that any thing he did poss^ss was his own. Men
are as the Fishes of the Sea, if they have no Ruler over them. Upon the least
Provocation, or without any (for a malicious Hab. 1. 14.
mind with seek occasion, which may be easily found) they would destroy and
hurt one another* Our lives would be in continual jeopardy of merciless Men.
Something we have spoken or done, mi^-construed, surmised or falsely accused,
would render us liable to another Strife and Cruelty. We are by Nature
Children of Wrath, of him whose Name in the Hebrew Tongue is Abaddon, but in
the Greek Tongue has his Name Apo^^yon, Rev. 9. 11. We are rather descendants
from Cain, then the Cad^ean Seed. Even now wilful Murder is punished by an
ac^^^sed Death, yet still it is too often practiced among us, but if it were
reserved only to the future Judgment of God (that being at a distance, and not
believed by reprobate Minds, or thinking to come off there by a slight and
superficial Repentance in the mean while) too many moved by a revengeful or
covetous Appetite, would no more stick to shed Blood, then refuse meat when
hungry. In Wars (where all Laws, Justice, Reason, and Humanity are banished)
what B^^chering of one another there is? What strange Instruments of Death they
have invented, being Witty to mutual Destruction? They spoil Countries, send
the devouring flames into Va^^eys of Corn that before did Laugh and Sing,
plunder poor People of their Cattle and Livelihood, rush violently into Houses
and ^ob of all. They kill and slay, have used unheard Cruelties toward Women
and innocent Children, who should have been Objects of Compassion and not of
fury. The finest Cities are turned into ruinous heaps, and laid in Ashes; all
things are converted into Desolation. They insult over poor Captives, binding
them with Misery and Iron, feeding them with Bread and Water of a^^liction.
What Pity it is, that Man who is endued with such rational and excellent
Principles, and thereby exalted above the rank of Beasts; yet should Act such
mad things? As if they were not otherwise subject to ^iseries enough, but they
bring more upon their own Head. We see how far the Corruption in us would go
(if not hindered) even to all manner of Evil; and iniquity like a mighty Torrent
would bear down all before it. If Men were left to themselves, and might do
what was right in their own eyes (as they were once in such a Condition, when
there was no King in Israel, as is declared before the most horrible Judge. 19.
Relation ever done under the Sun) there would be nothing but Tribulation and
Anguish, Weeping and Lamentation through the Earth: continual Fears would arise
from the strivings of the People. But Blessed be our God, who stilleth the
noise of the Waves when they arise, and rules the raging of the Sea, and the
madness of the People: If that had no bounds it would quickly overspread the
Face of the Earth, and the other if not kept in, would bring an universal
D^l^ge, not only upon the Vngoaly, but the Servants of God, and the Compass of
this lower World would be one entire Aceldama, a Field of Blood. He has sent
Kings and Governors for the Punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of
them that do well. 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14.

The Word which God sent unto the Children of Israel, preaching Peace by Jesus
Christ, he is Lord of all, Acts 10. 36. Amongst other D^ties does Command
submission to Kings and Magistrates, and forbids the contrary. No Rebellion
whatsoever is lawful: A real good end will not sanctify it, much less those
false and specious Ones wherewith it is often accompanied. It is a slanderous
Report of the Gospel, That some affirm thereof, as if it did allow to do evil,
that good may come, Romans 3. 8. God revealed himself otherwise of Old. He is the
Rock, his Work is perfect: for all his ways are judgment, a God of truth, and
without iniquity, just and right is he, Deuteronomy. 32. 4. Thou art of purer eyes
then to behold evil, and can not look on iniquity, Hab. 1. 13. For I the Lord
love judgment, I hate Robbery for Burnt-offering, Isa. 61. 8. Will ye speak
w^^kedly for G^d, and talk deceitfully for ^im? Job 13. 7. The Lord is
righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works, Psalm. 145. 17. More Texts
might be alleged to manifest, that his Glory is not to be advanced by sinful
means. Indeed this cannot be, for it would be contrary to his infinite purity
and uprightness, with whom dwells no shadow of Evil.

But Experience has discovered, that when some have designed Rebellion for
their own Ambition, Interest and Revenge, they must have a Fig-leave to hide it
from simple People, whom they 2 Samuel 15. 8. 11.
draw on their side: And what can be better then Absoloms Vow, Religion and the
Glory o^ God as has been the method of former Ages; this has been made use of
as a Pretense to further their own damned Enterprises. Good God! That thy Name
should be so abused by vile Miscreants, that thou who do abhor, and have
revealed thy Wrath against all unrighteousness of Men, should Romans 1. 18.
be made use of to Patronize it; as if thou were such an one thy self. I am
astonished to think of this horrible perverting of thy Ways and Nature. Men
would not dare do thus, but thou hold thy Tongue, Hab. 1. 13. Otherwise
there could be no Trial, whither they would do thus or not. But notwithstanding
all the Practices of wicked Hypocrites (through which Strangers and the
Ignorant may mis-apprehend the God whom we serve) thou will be justified when
thou speak, and clear when thou judge at the last and great day. And even
now thou art in this, and all other Matters as thou speak in the Word.

The Author of the New Testament observed by his own Example, what he taught
and commanded to others; when he was betra^ed into the hands of wicked Men,
though he could have had more then twelve Legions of Angels, yet made ^ot the
least opposition. He was the Son of God, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, and
consequently exempt from paying of Tribute to Mat. 17.
them; yet rather then he would give offense, he wrought a Miracle for the
Payment thereof. And has left this standing Commandment to all his Followers,
Render unto Caesar the things which are Cesars, Mat. 22. 21. which is more
particularly explained, Romans 13. Render therefore to all their Dues, Tribute to
whom Tribute is due, Custom to whom Custom, Fear to whom Fear, Honor to whom
Honor. Ye must needs be subject, not only for Wrath but for C^^science sake.
These things are as much due to the Supreme Magistrate, as it is from a Child
to a Parent; he has Right to them from his Subjects, as they have to their own
Goods or Estate. The Doctrine of Loyalty and Obedience to Governors is laid
down in as plain Terms, as any other Duty in the Gospel; and are sufficient to
convince him, who Acts in Sincerity and Truth.

But those which are Presumptuous, Self-willed, 2 Pet. 2. 10. of turbulent and
factious Spirits, have found out some little and trifling Evasions against
these express Texts. There is a way in the World of putting Interpretations,
when there is no more need of them, then of the most plain obvious Expression:
But this is a Trick either to wrest, or make the Commandments of God of none
effect. The wicked thus vindicate or pal^iate their Transgression, and others
in alike manner justify Rebellion. Let all Men in general remember and take
heed, that the great ^awgiver, when every one comes to give Account before him,
will not be trifled with. Such ways and devices will not now pass in Humane
Courts and Judicatories. They have so much the more to Answer for, by
prevaricating the way of the Most High; making his Word as it were a Nose of
Wax (some have Blasphemously called it so) to stamp any Impression, and mould
it to any shape as serves their base Sinister turns: In the end such Men will
find, that the All-wise God will not be outwitted by them. The Criminals are
not to make their own Construction of the Laws, against which they have
offended, but must receive according to his righteous Judgment, when what is
written, Romans 1. 18. Romans 2. 8. Shall be executed, and found true.

Thus some (who seem to be Religious) Confess, Men ought to pay Obedience unto
Governors; but then they say, these Commands extend only to those Kings who
love Christ, and themselves live obedient to his Law. And whether they do or
not, private Persons are made Judges; and if they think such an one does not,
Subjects may lawfully disobey and rebel against him. If this should be granted,
No King howsoever good or righteous would be safe in his Person; for so apt are
Men in judging the worst, especially of those above them, that they would
censure him to be a profane Prince or Hypocrite. If he was another David, a
man after Gods own heart (why he was hated and spoken against) he would not be
after their liking. Then they would not have this Man reign over them; they
will outwardly conclude him to be an Enemy to Jesus, and pronounce it as lawful
to destroy him as Bears and Wolves. Whether he is so or not, an uncharitable
Opinion or false Accusation is sufficient ground with them to kill the Lords
Anointed, against whom none could lift up his hand and be guiltless. This has
been the Divinity of some, and mischievous in its effects; but let it be
examined by that word, which is to try the Doctrines whether they be of Men or
no.

Christ delivered that command of Obedience to Magistrates at that very time
when an Heathen Emperor was in the Throne, when Herod and Pontius Pilate were
subordinate Governors; when he was Sentenced to Death by unjust judgment,
Peter would have hindered the execution, but was commanded to put up his Sword
in the Sheaf His Apostles Preached the same Doctrine after the Kings of the
Earth stood up, and the Rulers were gathered together against the Lord, and
against his Christ; which does manifest that some have interpreted the Gospel
contrary to what the first Founders of it intended, and have put that
restriction which they never designed. O ye perve^ters of the meaning of the
Holy Ghost, What authority have ye to do these things? By your expositions and
glosses, you have diminished from the universal obligation of the commands;
Wherefore do you make distinctions, where the Law makes none? To come to the
Old Testament wherein ye so much trust, what do ye think of Saul from whom God
had rent the Kingdom, and gave it to one better then he? and though Saul did
seek after his life, yet David's faithfulness and duty to him may be seen, 1 Samuel 24. 5, 6. 2 Samuel 1. There were many wicked Kings in Israel, yet to none
did the people hence take occasion to rebel, or refuse their lawful
injunctions; neither is the least intimation from Gods Word so to do. It was
not because they were Jews, and so the anointed of the Lord, but even Cyrus a
Gentile is thus called, Isa. 45. 1. And unto Nebuchadnezzar God gave the
Kingdom, Dan. 2. 37. So they are indefinitely called Gods Ministers, Romans 13.
6. It is not said of that single one, but all in general; The Kings rule
several Countries, but over them all is the Great King or the whole Earth, the
Lord and Governor of the World.

Thou shall not speak evil of the Ruler of thy People, Acts, 23. 5. Upon no
account, although he does what he should not. In the original place, Exodus 22.
28. It is doubtly forbid to lay on greater enforcement. How can Men overlook
such plain places, when they are quick enough to spy out any thing that may be
wrested to serve their wrong designs? When they meet with such, they have set
their brains on work for a p^^^sible interpretation to delude the hearts of the
simple. They neglected to put them in mind to be subject to Principalities and
Powers, to obey Magistrates, Tit. 3. 1. Whereas if they could bring any thing
out of the Old Testament, of zeal for the Lord of Hosts and ^ighting his
Battles, this was managed with all their skill and dexterit^, to stir up
Sedition and Rebellion; but for those against them they did either omit, or
fasten their own sense quite turning that of the Holy Spirit. To apply Man. 2.
7, 8. The Priests lips should keep knowledge, and they should seek the Law at
his Mouth, for h^ is the Messenger of the Lord of Hosts. But th^se departed out
of the way, they have caused many to stumble at the Gospel by Preaching
contrary thereunto, they have corrupted the covenant of race, and been partial
in the Law; otherwise they could not turn Religion into Rebellion, for this
does not allow the least Wickedness, so neither that which is the greatest sin,
that is ordinarily committed against Man.

It is against the immediate O^dinance of God, which he does commonly punish
and defeat in this life; One would think, Men might have taken warning by them
that perished at the gainsaying Jude 11.
of Core, how the Earth opened and swallowed them up, as if not ^it to live
above ground, who would have disturbed that order and government there. Though
this was set forth for an Example, for all that hereafter should act
rebelliously, yet the Spirit of disobedience has so worked in the minds of
Men, that they have not refrained from doing the same things. Every Age since
has produced instances of those, who ^ave not d^ed a death common to Men; It
would be endless to Number all the Traitors that have been in our own Nation, I
am unwilling to accuse mine own Country Men, but I am afraid we are a reproach
to Ezza. 4. 15.
our Neighbors, that we are a rebellious Country, and Enemies to Kings as by
our Records and Histories it does appear. If we consult them, we find that
several have came to a miserable and untimely end; If the business of Dathan
and Abiram was afar of, and long since, these are later and come home. What if
in our our Memory some have been destroyed in a rebellious War, others dyed
like Dogs, and had their Carcases hanged up for a Spectacle. The Apostle 1 Cor.
10. mentions the punishment which fell upon the Jews, to dehort others from
those sins which were the occasion thereof; so that may be here represented
according to Truth which fell upon them, that we may not commit Rebellion as
some of them committed, and fell, and became as the dung of the Earth. All
these things happened for ensamples, and are written for the admonition of
those that come hereafter.

One must be moved with indignation to hear the Enemies of the Lord Bl^spheme,
and the way of Truth evil spoken of, to which nothing has given greater
occasion then the carriage of the pretended Religious, especially in two
things, Disloyalty to the State and knavery between Man and Man. Then which
nothing is more forbidden in Scripture, which, if rightly understood and
obeyed, would make the best Men and the best Subjects in the World; he who
lives accordingly is an Enemy to none, much less to him whom God has placed
over his people.

Government is as necessary to the well being of the body politic, as health
to the Natural. The ligatures and strings do hold together the several parts,
so that does join the Members of the Commonwealth dependant and subordinate
one to the other, and prevents that confusion which would otherwise ensue.
Every Man enjoys his own, his Person Fame and Estate are preserved from wrong
and injury, he has all the outward good which can be desired in this World.
God has in a wonderful manner from time to time been pouring forth his
benefits upon the undeserving Sons of Men; he has given all his Law to make us
happy, and excellently contrived that part which rela^es to keep^ng up that
order which he did first establish among us. The whole course of nature is a
Lecture on this Subject of Government, so those which would have none, must
turn the World up-side down. Who d^^es such a strange attempt? But as there
have been unusual and prodigious Comets, which have blazed for a while, and
threatened destruction; so there have not been wanting incendiaries here below,
who endeavored to set the Earth on a Combustion, but themselves at last were
consumed in flame they kindled. There have been some Enemies to all Government,
but very few: All Mankind of every Country, Nation, and Language (who have not
extinguished their reason, nor been transformed into the Satyrs of the
Wilderness) have alwa^s had among them some kind or other; when they have
pulled down one Form, they have set up another: There is no living amongst Men
without any.

But this sort of alteration is commonly long before accomplished, and there
are in the mean while violent contentions among the people; some crying for
this, and another for that, and perhaps none know wherefore. Then the word is
drawn against our own Country Men, One is dashed against another, even the Jer.
13. 14.
Fathers and the Sons together, Neighbors and Kinsfo^ks pursuing one another
to death; for every battle of the Warrior is with confused noise, and garments
rolled in blood. We may see goodly personages wallowing in their own gore,
trodden under foot and no Isa. 9. 5.
Man to regard them; we may hear the cruel instruments of death bellowing forth
woe and destruction, the skreeks and groans of dying Men. There is a multitude
of slain, and a great number of carcases, they stumble upon their co^ps^s; a
real landscape of misery, occa^oned by their own sin and folly. They thought it
at first a Nahum. 3. 3.
fine and gainful thing to be disturbers of a quiet state, and it is to be
feared further on, for seditions exclude Men out of the Kingdom of God, Gal. 5.
20, 21.

So they hinder future happiness, and also the present both as to others and
themselves; such have an inward ^ret, and are tormented at (as they think) the
ill administration of public affairs. Like sick stomachs which turn sweet into
bitter, so their fancy does misrepresent even the good and just actions of
those in Authority. They have a strange art of interpret^^^ all things to the
worse, so when they come to consider and chew the cud, they relish nothing but
bi^terness; they spend their days in Sorrow, which is wholly their own fault,
and their life becomes uneasy to them. If they have some natural courage
(which in proper acceptance is not, for they cannot bear the present evil and
run blindly into the other) they conclude death is rather to be chosen. When
this principle is once taken up, then through instigation of the Devil (who is
never wanting when he has opportunity of suggesting mischief) they form
desperate designs, not caring for their own, they will attempt another life;
and him they lay in wait for, whom they vainly and falsely think the Author of
all their misery, reasoning within themselves: If their wicked imaginations
should take effect, then they shall be eased of all their grief, but if they
should miscarry, they would be freed from a wretched life, which before was so
grievous that they can as willingly endure it to be taken away by the hands of
an Executioner, as their own. And indeed if it was not for the succeeding
Eternity, these Sons of Belial, these accursed Traitors were wise in their
undertaking; but they are blinded, or holden up by Wine and Pride as not to
consider of this; or otherwise they would never by such steps ascend up to this
high crime.

The Law is good if a Man use it lawfully, knowing this that the 1 Timothy 8. 9,
10, 11.
Law is not made for a righteous Man, but for the lawless and disobedient; for
those that despise dominion, speak evil of dignities, and do those things which
are contrary to sound Doctrine, the peace of their Country and themselves. Who
will be neither convinced by Scripture, nor Reason, nor Self-love must be
concluded under the number of those obstinate Souls, with whom nothing
prevails. The Spirit that lusts to Rebellion is too far ingrafted in them; but
surely none is come to such a degree of evil Principles, for then it would be
as vain to say any thing more to such, as to wash the Ethiopian White. And it
would be equally absurd to compare these with the Loyal and Obedient, who are
more happy in this life, as to confer bitter with sweet; for these have that
acquiescence of mind which was once in the Israelites (who were so for a
Novelty, which they were always obliged to be in duty) Whatsoever the King did,
pleased all the People, 2 Samuel 3. 36.



Fleshly Wisdom, or of natural and present preservation to inherit the Kingdom
of God; To submit to a light inconvenience for that, is very consistent with
true prudence: But this is an Argument from an abuse which may happen, and if
that were sufficient to condemn or surcease a thing, we might do so as to all,
for nothing is so excellent in its own Nature, but may be corrupted: Not one
obligation or duty to God or Man, but a seeming mischief may ensue upon it. He
has been pleased to try our obedience in such kinds of relation, if we do our
parts, we may expect the good and recompense thereof; others are to perform
theirs at their peril or encouragement. Against a King there is no rising up,
Prove. 30. 31. Where the Word of a King is, there is Power, and who may say unto
him, what do thou? Eccles. 8. 4. Against thee, thee only have I sinned, Psalm.
51. 4. Said David in his confession to God for the Murder of Vriah, which
shows he was accountable to him only for that wicked Action. In the New
Testament is a positive command of Christ, Mat. 5. 39. But I say unto you, that
ye resist not evil, which extends to what is done by those who have dominion
over us, and an injury offered by a private person. Yet I will not be afraid to
speak out, if either should take advantage over Passive Obedience, or the
forgiving temper as to domineer or affront the more, it is baseness in the mean
while; and it will be determined who acts best, they who go according to the
dictates of corrupted nature, which is Proud and Cruel; or who have it
corrected by the Wisdom from above which makes it pure, peaceable, gentle and
easy to be entreated, Jam. 3. 17. Let them be never so great in their own
Opinion, they are but Men: And there is one above, who shall out off the Spirit
of Princes, he is terrible to the Kings of the Earth, Psalm. 76. 12. When they
rage most, he can put a hook in their Jaws, and lead them back from their
purposes, see Isa. 37. 29. Ezekiel. 29. 4. Dan. 4. chapter and chapter 11. 36. Hos. 7. 16.
Heb. 11. 27. If it be his good pleasure, he can save his people from their
violence, or turn them into the rod of his anger, Isa. 10. 5. And then we are
patiently to suffer, knowing who strikes, and learn by his judgment to be
reformed from our sins; we may send up Prayers and Tears to him, in whose hand
is the heart of the King, and he turns it wheresoever he will. God can either
alter his thoughts, or suffer him to fall by an Accident, or Sickness, or which
way it pleases his Almighty Wisdom. Again they are minished and brought low
through Oppression, Affliction, and Sorrow. He pours contempt upon Princes,
Psalm. 107. 39. 40. He can do it without our assistance, he does then more
magnify his own Power, neither are we to break his commands, for then we
justly suffer as Evildoers, 1 Pet. 4. 15, 16.

It was hardly ever known, that people did endure much for being good Subjects;
or if any thing, yet not to be compared with what came upon them by being
otherwise. None is punished for living peacably but seditiously in the State,
or through false accusation he is reputed so. Loyalty is not esteemed nor
proceeded against as a crime; if any suffer innocently in life, member or
goods, that is commonly through corruption of witnesses or subordinate
Ministers, which Government and Justice is to prevent. The King is bound by
Oath to keep Righteousness, and Minister true Judgment unto his People; for the
observation or neglect of which he is to give account. Those seeds of evil
within, make all the disturbance in the World; which are provided against by
the grace of him who is greater then Solomon, and then all people might dwell
safely, every Man under 1 Kings 4. 25.
his Vine, and under his Fig Tree from one end of the Earth to the other, all
the days of our Kings and Governors.

To come unto him, who is the great instrument of our External Of the Person of
Kings.
Peace and Happiness; Under his shadow we live, Lam. 4. 20 This person is not
most happy (though great in Power and Majesty) of any in his Realm. He presides
over many violent and rotten Members, who would make a Schism in the body, and
say unto the Head (O Monstrous Folly!) We have no need of thee. But now God
has set the Members, every one of them in the body, as it has pleased him, 1
Cor. 12. 18. Yet the inferior are not pleased, because they were not supreme or
higher: And therefore will displace, or disturb. So the principle part is
obliged to stand on continual guard, to keep it self secure and others in their
due subjection; they are apt to mutiny among themselves, which this is to
suppress, and take care for all the other Members. It cannot have much leisure
to rest, the Enemies being so near, and its business so great; We should let
him be secure by whom we enjoy security, he sees that others do not molest us,
so ingenuity and gratitude require us to do nothing against his Royal Person,
State, or Dignity. But seeing his great Master in Heaven has evil recompensed
for good, even from those who are the work of his hands, and subsist upon him
every moment; the King may expect, that notwithstanding all the good he does to
his Subjects and Fellow Creatures, yet some will be his Enemies. Indeed the
malice of Men cannot reach the Most High, and if it might, could not hurt him;
yet it may hurt the Son of Man as he is; and therefore has guards to defend
himself, which do somewhat keep off outward violence, yet it must be a
Melancholy reflection that the meanest Subject has more safety of his life
then himself. Thence arise fears: And further his life is wearied with public
business, which require the greatest study and labor of mind; Vexation is at
hearing ill News and adverse Accidents, which bring carefulness and anxiety
much greater then what his Subjects have in their several callings, as the
Object is of more concern and importance. Those hard and difficult things of
Government do occasion more weariness and interruption, then he who daily goes
forth to his work until the Evening; fixedness of thought does more tire then
labor of the hands, so he has his portion of Care and Sorrow with the rest of
Mankind.

But then his Pleasures do as much exceed them: That Royal Pomp and Grandeur,
his Nobles, Courtiers, Friends and honest Subjects do all study to make his
life as happy as possible. He has all Recreations the Wit of Man can invent,
choice Meats, delicious Liquor, variety and beauty of Women, the most excellent
Conversation, great diversity of News, and remarkable Occurrences. Then he has
great Possessions, Riches, stately Palaces, Gardens, Furniture, and wants
nothing of the Convenience and Pleasures of Life.

Indeed if the World, and the things of this World can make a Man happy, then
he must be so, who has them all at his Command and Service; Certain it is,
they make a greater appearance outward, then have real content and
satisfaction. That goodly retinue (which others so much admire) himself esteems
as a thing of necessity and course. At length he does not perceive half the
pleasure as the common Spectators; even these by often seeing diminish in their
esteem, for the most excellent sensible objects by frequency tire. The
reverence from his Subjects is but their Duty and Homage they ow^ unto him;
this also by repeated and successive acts does lessen into none or a very
little delight. He is only the visible Fountain of Honor, yet not of
Happiness; for they are not convertible terms: If all Happiness did meet and
concenter in him, there would be no more need for others studying to make him
Happy, then for the Rays to convey up light to the S^n. Notwithstanding all
their Labor, this good and perfect Gift come^^ down from the Father of Lights,
and it is not in the Power of any to bestow it. They may indeed light up
Candles, somewhat take off from the Horror of Darkness and Misery; but this
Light does not shine as perfect day; neither is the Happiness they Subminister,
like that which proceeds from the Son of Righteousness. Courtiers and
Favorites provide for their Master what Pleasure the World affords, but cannot
bring also a new Relish and Appetite. They cannot take away that Irksomeness,
which arises from having the same Divertisements over so often. Let them wrack
their Brains never so much, they cannot always supply him with new Variety; and
then they cannot help, but he will grow weary of them. The same delight they
provide for him, he has enjoyed already; let them find out some new thing, or
draw out that satiating Nature in the old. Dress it several ways, it is but the
same Dish in substance still; and fresh invented Sauces will not cure the
loathing of a full Stomach. The Pleasure of eating is when one is hungry,
otherwise the Taste of Dainties is no more then of the white of an Egg. The
being accustomed makes them favor as common Meat, if never so sweet, it
continues only in the mouth, which is so short that it must be a mean and
Paltry Happiness that depends upon so Transitory a thing. The Taste of pleasant
Liquors perishes in the draught, and afterward seems as if not received in;
but if the immoderate use makes an Alteration in the Man, it is a drunken fit,
and the utmost good which arises from that, is to be examined in another place.
As Chap. 7.
for that of fair Women is no advantage (Conjugal love except) unless he gives
himself over to sinful unbounden Lust; the Consideration of which is referred
to Chap. 8. This is one of the Pleasures of sin for a Season, which destroys
Kings, Prove. 31. 3. as well as other Men. No unlawful delights can render a Man
truly Happy, but contrariwise miserable in reference to his future State. Even
now they do not yield a sincere Satisfaction. Company is one of the most noble
Pleasures of a reasonable Creature, yet if one is continually therein (as such
is the Condition of Princes) it does not always refresh, but is tiresome. There
must be some intermission from Worldly delights, or they will not Relish. It is
more Eligible to be sometimes alone then in a Crowd; he cannot esteem the
sweetness of Conversation, who never knows the want thereof: If there be an
intermixture and Succession, both contraries are pleasant; but otherwise
neither is, Let the Men you converse withal be of great Endowments of Wisdom
and Eloquence, if skilled in all the Arts of rendering themselves good Company
and acceptable to others, yet by continuance with them the Admira^^on will
diminish till it comes to nothing. In all visible things under the Sun, there
is a satiety and weariness. Even the continual hearing of News is no Novelty,
and though several things do happen, yet they are but the same under little
differing Circumstances, acted by Persons of other Names, but in substance the
same which has been already; so this Variety does not still recreate: Fine
Buildings, Plantations, and other magnificient Works please a little at first,
but in Process of time not at all. Lastly, what is reckoned worth all,
abundance of Gold and Silver; This does serve only for the procurement of the
things spoken of, and if they do not afford a true Happiness, much less will
the other. The reason hereof may be learned from Hab. 2. 13. Jer. 17. 13. and
other places of Scripture, which discover the vast Capaciousness of the Soul,
its proper End, and the Vanity of the Creature. We are designed for more noble
things, then what are here before us. We are built up, and to be prepared for
the Mansions above: And least we should be stopped in the way thither, as we
pass through this wilderness, God has suffered it to be barren and dry of the
Water of true Comfort. Such as is to be had here, may a little refresh us in
our Pilgrimage, but cannot thoroughly satisfy our Thirst, for that is only to
be done there, where he bids us come, Isa. 55. 1, 2. John 7. 37. That we may be
the more quickened to come when he calls us, he has so ordered the matter,
that if we set at naught his Gracious invitation, and going through this vale
of Misery use it for a Well, sit down and John 4. 11. 13.
tarry here, yet most have not to draw with, that is such means; but who have,
yet the Well is deep; it is trouble to draw up, and when we have drunk of it,
we shall Thirst again. Do what we will, if we only seek herein, we shall never
satisfy our Desires; nothing here can do it, they must cease after Earthly
things, and be turned unto the Heavenly. But if we co^^ne them here, though we
do pour in upon them, we are therefore no more Happy, then one in a continual
Thirst, because he has drink as often as he calls for it. The things of this
Life may for the present a little stop our Desires, but do not take off the
Which too many know not for what that is, but it is not in vain, neither was it
designed for ^^r torment.
craving somewhat more. We still cove^ after drink, and yet are weary of
drinking. We use the things of this World, and that not giving us content, we
try whether the abuse of them will, but then we are deceived in our
Expectations, and the sooner wax weary of them. They are insufficient; For the
Creature was made subject to Vanity, not willingly (for any fault of her own,
rather our Transgression) but by reason of him, who subjected the same in Hope.
Because the Creature it self also shall be delivered from the Bondage of
Corruption, Romans 8. 202, 1. God willing to retrieve poor lost Men, sent his Son
to dye for us, and make known those better things; and least we should be
detained by the present, has rendered them hungry and empty. We have here no
Satisfaction, but seek one to come.

Alas! For all things are so, we are too apt to rest on the Creature and expect
Contentment from it; but if we could once find that, we should go no further,
fix here and never come to the place God has appointed for us. He is pleased
(Oh infinite Condescension) to let us seek abroad, if we can find better
Entertainment; and if after a vexatious and dangerous Pursuit, we Luke 15.
meet with nothing but Husks (which may stuff but cannot satisfy; which are
meat for Swine, but not fit and commensurate for reasonable Creatures) we would
return unto our Fathers House, where is bread enough, and to spare; not such as
the World gives, but which he gives from Heaven, that bread of Life unto
which who so Joh. 6. 34. 34, 35.
comes, shall never hunger. Here he feeds us with the Bread of Tears; we eat
in the sweat of our brow, having Labor and Sorrow intermingled, and afterward
we hunger again. But if we would pray unto him, evermore to give us that, know
and accept it when offered, (for want wher^of those in John 6. 34, 35. missed
it, and others at this day) that is unleavened not sowred with Worldly Care, a
spiritual Manna suitable to our Taste, fills our Souls with Gladness, and
endures unto everlasting Life. That we should come and partake, is the design
of our Heavenly Father: Who satisfies thy mouth with good things, Psalm. 103.
5. Open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it, Psalm. 81. 10. Stretch out thy
Desires to their due extent, a little Earnest and Relish is given, they are now
quieted with Faith and Hope, and Patience; but will be eternally and fully
satisfied with the things signified under them.

But if they are not pointed this way: They shall eat, but not have enough. Why
so? Because, they have left off to take heed unto the Lord. Whoredom, and Wine,
and new Wine take away the heart, Hos. 4. 10, 11. and yet nothing but he can
thoroughly satisfy it. The World counts such like things the principal
Happiness of Man. But I appeal to them who have all Plenty, Whether all put
together, will amount to a ^ati^^a^tion. When you have eat and drunk of your
Delicacies, will they make you sincerely Merry? Go to you that have abundance,
study all ways to delight your selves, deny nothing your Lusts crave for, pass
away your time as pleasantly as you can, spend your wealth; but remember that
for all these things God will bring you to Judgment, Eccless. 11. 9. In the
very midst and throughout, you will weary your selves to commit iniquity, and
at last will be more discontented then at the beginning, by adding a long Train
of Sin and Guilt. Which will sit as an heavy Burden, or if dead therein, and
so not sensible of its weight, this comes near to a reprobate Sense, a Living
to fill up the measure of iniquities. Which is no other advantage then that of
respite, to ^^nd no true Comfort in the World, but spin out a wretched Life
with foolish Toys and Diversions, till Death consigns over, where is no
Stupefaction nor shadow of Refreshment. Thou art wearied in the greatness of
thy way; yet said thou not, there is no Hope, Isa. 57. 10. Thou art tired in
looking out, and running after Satisfaction, yet will go on still to expect
some, and not sit down persuaded there is none to be had in the things of this
World; but this must be done, before Men cannot be led up to another Happiness,
and seeing they cannot have it here, it is reasonable to seek diligently
somewhere else for it; this Treasure is worth Ransacking every corner of the
Earth for, yet not to be had, but by lifting up above it.

Be wise now therefore, O ye Kings, be instructed ye Judges of the Earth, Serve
the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling, Psalm. 2. 10, 11. You must
manifest your obedience and subjection unto him, For the Lord your God is God
of Gods, and Lord of Lords, a Great God, Mighty and Terrible, which regards
not Persons, nor takes reward, Deuteronomy. 10. 17. He^r ye the word of the Lord, O
Kings of Judah, and Inhabitants of Jerusalem, Jer. 19. 3. So you are equally
obliged to know his Law and Will, as the meanest of your Subjects. And upon
refusal thereof, are to Answer before him. The Officer, that is to hale before
the Judge, enters into Palaces as common Windows. They are to behave themselves
with Submission and Obedience in the mean while unto the Great Lord over all,
to make their Reconciliation with him. This kind of Discourse is slighted and
pished at by Great Men, but it is Gods word and truth, and he resents their
Contempt as done to himself. And because these pretend to put it off out of
Courage and Boldness, make a show to Laugh at the other World, yet if they do
not really fear it, let them take a Prospect of it in a dead Letter, for if
they cannot do this, it is by Reason of the horrible dread within; but if they
would, they might be secured from the Danger thereof. That is only to the
Rebellious and Stubborn, which any one may choose to be. But if they continue
so, let their Persons be never so great, There is One mightier then they, as is
manifested by the first Act we see, and more we read of. He that was surrounded
with so many Attendants and Servants, shall descend alone into the Pit; and his
Soul, who Ezekiel. 32. 25.
before made the Nations tremble, shall leap out frighted in a perplexed
Condition. Hell from beneath is moved for thee, to meet thee at thy Coming: It
stirs up the dead for thee, even all the chief Ones of the Earth; it has
raised up from their Thrones all the Kings of the Nations; all they shall speak
and say unto thee, Art thou also become weak as we? Art thou become like unto
us? Isa. 14. 9, 10, 11. There is no more Privilege for Kings then others: The
Lord on thy right hand shall strike through Kings in the day of his wrath,
Psalm. 110. 5. And the Kings of the Earth hid themselves in the Dens, and Rocks
of the Mountains, and said to the Mountains and Rocks fall on us. And hide us
from the Face of him, that siteth on the Throne, and from the wrath of the
Lamb, for ^he great day of his Wrath is come, and who shall be able to abide
it? Rev. 6. 15, 16, 17. The Lord of the ends of the Earth will ^e^ch them forth
of their lurking Holes. Who had Legions and Armies to fight for them, must
appear before his Judgment Seat. ^None of them can by any means redeem his
Brother, nor give to God a Ransom for him: for the Redemption of their Soul is
precious, and it cease for ever, Psalm. 49. 7, 8. Who was a Judge among the
People, must now be Judged himself; Who ere-while Commanded, and gave Laws at
his Pleasure, is now brought into Subjection and himself tried by the Law of
the Most High. For there is no respect of Persons with God, for as many as have
sinned without Law, shall perish without Law; and as many as have sinned in the
Law, shall be judged by the Law, Romans 2. 11, 12. What is now Acting in the
World, will be over; and when every one of us, one after another have done our
parts, we must lay aside all our Ornaments in the Wardrobe of the Grave. If we
have done any good Works, these will follow us; but if ill, Guilt sticks close;
one of these two is all we shall carry out of this World. None will have
advantage over another, but it shall be done to all according to their
deservings. At that time the things with which we are now so affected, will be
all passed away; and their remembrance as faint as a Night Vision. It will not
be the least Comfort for them to call to mind, who have lived in Pleasure on
the Earth, and been Wanton, and have nourished their hearts, as in the day of
slaughter; But who shall have the Testimony of their Conscience, that in
simplicity and Godly sincerity, they had their Conversation in the World, will
find more rejoicing, then to have had the Dominion over mighty Kingdoms: If he
that was a great Emperor, did not behave himself rightly toward God, whilst
he was in this place of Trial; his Condition will be worse then that of a
Scullion, by reflecting from what a pitch of worldly Prospeirty and Honor be
is fallen. How will he endure to see himself become abject and base for ever,
who before was had in such reverence, that there could not be respect enough
paid unto him? How will he fume and rage (and yet there is no Remedy) to see
his Principalities come down, and the Crown of his former Glory to be taken
away, Jer. 13. 18. and himself thrust into an everlasting Dungeon? For softness
and ease, to have Pain and Fire; for sweet Smells the stench, of Sulphur; for a
Bed of Damask, to be rolled up and down in a stream of Brimstone; for all
manner of Music, to hear worse noise then Screech Owls, or the yawling of
Cats. All this must be a sad Change. To Consider, that he has lived heretofore
in all Splendor, will increase his Anguish of mind. The greatest Person is as
much obliged to be obedient unto God, as he that sits upon the Dunghill. Who
will render to every Man according to his Deeds: To them who by Patient
continuance in Well doing, seek for Glory, and Honor, and Immortality, eternal
Life, Romans 2. 6. 7. The Gods of the Earth have the two first already, but not
the last annexed to it. All their Goodliness is as the Flower of the Field, the
Grass withers, the Flower fades, so likewise the Crown of their Glory sadeth
away. The Head which bears it waxes old, or is laid in the Dust before. Put not
your trust in Princes, nor in the Son of Man, in whom there is no help; the
Reason is added, His breath goes forth, he returns to his Earth, in that
very day his Thoughts Perish; there is an utter end of all his Pomp and
Greatness, Happy is he that has the God of Jacob for his help: whose Hope is
in the Lord his God, Psalm. 146. 3, 4, 5. That when all other things fail, he
may be received up unto Glory. If he has a right unto the Promises, that when
he comes to leave his fine Cities, that of his own especial Residence, all his
Courtiers, Now he is come unto Mount Sion, and unto the City of the living God,
the Heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable Company of Angels. To the general
Assembly, and Church of the firstborn, which are written in Heaven, and to God
the Judge of all, and the Spirits of just Men made perfect, and to Jesus the
Mediator of the New Covenant, Heb. 12. 22, 23, 24. What joy will he find among
the Heavenly Host? To have David, Hezekiah, Constantine, Theodosius, and other
righteous Kings gratulate his coming: With what joy will he give up his Account
of ten Talents to the great King, and receive his Commendation with a
proportionable Reward? His Authority is not taken away, but increased. He is
not troubled at the Loss of his worldly Grandeur and Pomp, Rev. 21.
for that was but as the shining of rotten Wood in a dark place, in Comparison
of what he now enjoys, which is ten thousand times more by seeing the Lord of
Glory. He did not put his Confidence in terrestial Splendor, but using it as
Convenient for the imperfection of that State. The good Kings of Israel and
Judah, had Jer. 22. 4.
their Courts and Palaces. He took a great Care not to forget God, no^ to be
litted up, but had an Eye all along upon the Glory which excels. He shall be
abundantly sati^fied with the fatness of thy House, and thou shall make him
drink of the River of thy Pleasures, for with thee is the Fountain of Life,
Psalm. 36 8. 9. And then ^e must look with Indignation and Contempt upon those
sinful Delights, for which these are too often lost. The Crown of Gold here
has a Cross upon the top in token of Subjection to our crucified Lord; (but
that is better manifested by doing the things he says) and also it was a fit
Emblem of the Concomitant trouble, for though beset with precious Stones, it
has a Pungency like a Crown of Thorns. However, he must be more exceedingly
pleased, when that which was Troublesome and Corruptible is taken away, and
there is set a Crown of pure Gold on his Head; a Crown of Glory that fades not
away, and all this done unto him by God himself, whom before having Honored,
now he is pleased to Honor; 2 Samuel 2. 30. The King had here all Conveniences
of Life, but did not place his chief Happiness in them. He then received them
with Prayer and Thanksgiving, not abusing them to sin and wickedness; they are
all past and over; now he is much more as an Angel of God, for he neither eats
nor drinks, nor stands in need of those things, which were given by reason of
imperfection. The want of that Company below, is abundantly made up in the
Communion of Saints; Here he conversed* with those of his own Generation and
Country, but there is the gathering together of every Age since the World
began, of every part who came from the East and West, and are sat down with
Abraham in the Kingdom of God. Also they are made Perfect, and all those things
done away, which render Conversation unpleasant in the World; There it is
refined, all having those excellent Qualities which endear each other, and make
Society pleasant. He had formerly sufficient to defray the great Charges of his
Kingdom, to preserve it from Invasion and Sedition, but Covetousness is
Idolatry, and expressly forbidden to Kings, Deuteronomy. 17. 17. for the Reasons there
given. Neither by the Law of Justice is he to impoverish his People; and
therefore to be avoided by him, who would come to the City of pure Gold; which
belongs to every Citizen, but is peculiar to none, as now is the Light of the
Sun. Says the Royal Psalmist, As for me, I will behold thy Face in
Righteousness: I shall be satisfied when I awake with thy likeness, Psalm. 17.
15. All Earthly and Sensual Happiness has been found vain and unsatisfactory;
but the spiritual and heavenly is sufficient to raise our utmost Affections and
Duty to the Author thereof, Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, neither have
entered into the heart of Man, the things which God has prepared for them that
love him. All the Endeavors and Wisdom of the World could not find it out, But
God has revealed them unto us by his Spirit, 1 Cor. 2. 9, 10. Which spoke by
those Holy Men of old, out of whose Writings this Description has been brought.

These things are great and wonderful, but then it is surmised, they are
distant and uncertain; and why should Men foregoe present and sensible
Pleasures for future and imaginary?

Here is the great objection of Mankind against the things of God and their own
Happiness; and therefore to press the word of Exhortation home, it is necessary
to say somewhat toward the removal thereof. As for being afar off, that should
be no prejudice; for that which is future, will be as much present as the time
now is. Time was when to day, which is called to day, was future, and yet this
is present, as were those which have been past. The next year is to come, and
that will be here as the last was, for that also was once to come, and we see
it has already been. The day of death with us living is to come, and though it
be so, none can be foolish to deny but that will as certainly be as was the day
of our Birth. All this great business which is cried up to be so much at a
distance, is only till then; for albeit the perfect consummation of bliss and
misery will be after the general Judgment, and how it shall be with us
immediately after Death, there is no plain Revelation, yet from John 9. 4. Heb.
9. 27. and alike places it appears, As the Tree falls, so it lies: As Death
leaves one, so Judgment finds him; What therefore does it signify if the
General Day be afar off, when the Day of our particular Death may be next Week,
to Morrow, this very Night God may require our Soul? The body remains
insensible in the Sleeping-House of the Grave, yet it will be awaked from
thence by the Trump of the Archangel. A Man would not go to sleep very
securely, if he knew before hand he Mat. 25. 6.
should be rouzed by his House burning about his ears; and of this we are
assured that after our earthly Tabernacle is laid down, it rises up no more,
till the day of the Lord comes as a Thief in the Night, 1 These. 5. 2. In the
which the Heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the Elements shall
melt with fervent heat, the Earth also and the Works that are therein shall be
burnt up. If we would be safe in that great day, we must before we go hence
consider and do well, that we may be worthy to escape and stand; the only
strength is innocence: Seeing then these things shall be dissolved, what manner
of persons ought ye to be in all holy Conversation and Godliness? Looking for
and hasting unto the coming of the day of God, wherein the Heavens being on
fire shall be dissolved, 2 Pet 3. 10, 11, 14. We daily approach nearer, to
morrow then to day, and thus continually make toward it. Whether we Eat or
Drink, Sleep or Play, our time passes; and whether we think of it or not, we
are always going to that state in which time shall be no more. How soon we may
be there, we know not; but most certainly we shall be there at last. Take ye
heed, Watch and Pray, for ye know not when the time is, Mark 13. 33. Who will
not obey this Commandment, but be unmindful, go to sleep and take their rest,
yet their Damnation slumbereth not; and if they put the evil day far from them,
yet still their condemnation lingereth not; and that will come do what they
can. In the days of Sodom they did Marry and were given in Marriage, did not at
all consider the things which should come upon them; nevertheless the Lord
rained down Fire and Brimstone. What are now become of all those in the
Generation with Amos, who would put the evil day far from them? Yet it is long
since come, and they could not stave it off. Those of the same mind in the time
of our Amos 6.
Fathers are all gone; and their carelessness could not preserve them from the
Pit of Destruction: They thought the very like what some do now, the things of
another World were at a great distance and they need not mind them, yet they
fell in unawares. We can no more think their misery less, then who wilfully
shut their Eyes and drop into a bottomless Gulf, whereas if they had kept them
open, they might have seen and passed by it. Like the evil Servant who said in
his heart, My Lord delayeth his coming, Mat. 24. 48. They had time enough and
to spare on the Earth, therefore they would smite and oppress their Neighbors,
eat and drink with the drunken. But the Lord came in a day when they looked not
for him, and they are reserved unto his just Judgment; if they might rise from
the dead again and have another day of grace and for bearance, they would be
other kind of Men: They would take heed and not be surprised on a sudden. But
the decrees of Almighty God like himself are unchangeable, they were told of
this before, and they might have accepted the good counsel of the Lord Jesus;
and therefore he is Righteous in his dealings toward Men. Who dyed in their
sins have no more place for repentance, for he gave them a space to repent, and
they repented not, Rev. 2. 21. But the living may as we are at this day, yet
not better then our Fathers, we must shortly dye in like manner, and are to
stand or fall to our own Master. We shall see another representation of things
then is now before us, one which opens into the eternal Countries, either new
Heavens and a new Earth wherein dwells Righteousness, 2 Pet. 3. 13. Or a Land
of Darkness, of the shadow of Death, a place of Dragons and Scorpions, the
inhabitation of Sin and Misery.

Yet a little while, and we shall be removed out of this place, and then we
shall find that the things here spoken of (though they may at present seem as
idle tales, Luke 24. 11.) will be real, and no fictions. Whosoever believes
that God is true, and that those things are so which he has spoken by his holy
Prophets, Son and Apostles, cannot otherwise then be convinced of the certainty
of them even now. If so, nothing can be more effectual to persuade: Men
futurity will be no more an argument against them, then now it is against Men's
going a Voyage to a Foreign Country, where it is several Months before they can
reap any profit. The shortness of the time before, at least by Death, the
infallibility of that, the exceeding greatness of the concern should take away
all other disadvantages; If we had but faith as a grain of Mustard Seed, we
should remove Mountains which now hinder us to behold the Land that is very far
off, Isa. 33. 17. And for all the distance it would more affect us because of
its exceeding pleasantness, then that our feet now tread on; if it does not, it
comes to pass because of unbelief. Nevertheless if we believe not, yet he
abides faithful, he cannot deny himself, 2 Timothy 2. 13. He has provided a rest
for his people, and to whom swear he that they should not enter into his rest,
but to them that believed not? Heb. 3. 18. They shall not only be deprived of
that, but shall have their part in the Lake which burns with Fire and
Brimstone, which is the second Death, Rev. 21. 8. Which they may as soon avoid
by saying they do not believe any such thing, as now they may a temporal evil
by fancying strongly it shall not come upon them. If they could make themselves
immortal by having a lively Faith that they shall ^ot die, or if they were fast
bound to a Stake and a pile of Faggo^s kindled close round about, and they
could be preserved from burning by a mere persuasion only, then also men might
escape the damnation of Hell by only thinking there is no such thing. To argue
there is no God, because the Fo^l has said so in his heart, Psalm. 14. 1. is as
ridiculous as it would be for one to pretend to extinguish the light of the Sun
by shutting his eyes. Let them think he is not, or he sleeps, does not
concern himself with the affairs of Mankind, yet himself has said, I AM THAT I
AM, Exodus 3. 14. and declares himself in that Magnificent manner, Deuteronomy. 32. 40,
41, 42, 43. So let all the world say to the contrary, it signifies not: The
word he has spoken shall stand, and he will do according to it, let all
mankind dispute or think what they will. If they will not believe, they must
perish in their unbelief; if they do that, but will not give heed to obey the
truth thereof, they also shall be punished from the presence of the Lord and
from the glory of his power. Both these are follies so great that there wants a
name to express them, yet this last seems to be greatest, for there are in
Scripture such forcible arguments to obedience, that who believes must be as
absolute a fool or madman if they do not work upon him, as he who refuses a
great Estate when offered, or run himself into a fire when he may pass by and
avoid it.

Go ye into all the World, and Preach the Gospel to every Creature. He that
believes and is Baptized shall be saved, but he that believes not shall be
damned, Mark 16. 15, 16. said our Lord to his Disciples: Which may prevent the
Whispering of Court-Chaplains that Christ gave no command to Kings; if they are
not Creatures, they have an immunity from Gods Law, otherwise not: When only in
Judah God was known, he expected Obedience from the King thereof all one as
from the People; yea rather more, for the spirit of God takes particular notice
who served him and who did not, with account of those Mercies and Judgments
they received accordingly, as every one knows who does read the Old Testament.
But now the fullness of time is come, to which belongs that ^rophesie, Kings
shall be her nursing Fathers, and Queens her nu^sing Mothers; It was some
considerable time after Christ and his Apostles were upon the Earth, before any
King or Emperor was converted to the Faith, and even now it is only so of one
part of the World defaced with much Corruption, Wickedness, and Ignorance. So
we are to expect a further and universal fulfilling of Isa. 60 3. 11. Psalm. 72
11. Psalm. 102. 15, 22. Rev. 11. 15. and chap. 21. verse. 24, 26. Themselves are
subject to the only Potentate, the King immortal, invisible and only Wise God;
if they are so ^reely he accepts thereof, but if they will reign wholly
themselves and not let him reign over them; if they do not glorify the God in
wh^s^ hand their breath is, Dan. 5. 23. he will account with them when that is
taken away, and manifest that he is stronger. They are Potsherds of the Earth,
though of the largest size, yet between them and their Maker is but alike
difference (being infinite in both) as between the High and Lofty one and the
meanest Man. They came here to the same end and purpose as others, they also
were designed to set forth the glory of God though in a more eminent manner;
they are made to act according to his Laws, both as they relate to their
private capacity as Men, and to the public of Kings, as they must answer for
themselves to the Lord, who is high above all the Earth, who is exalted far
above all Gods, Psalm. 97. 9.

Happy is he who does comply with this will of the Almighty, That has learnt
to fear the Lord his God, to keep all the words of his Law, and his Statutes to
do them, whose heart is not lifted up above his Brethren, and does not turn
aside from the Commandment to the right hand or to left, to the end he may
prolong his days in his Kingdom, he and his Children in the midst of Israel,
Deuteronomy. 17. 19, 20. In his own Country and Dominion, that ended he may be
received up into Gods Kingdom above; for this promise is come in under the
Gospel. Neither is the other taken away, but rather obscured; that is, not so
much mentioned under the Manifestation of the Greater; the like promise remains
still annexed to the first Commandment, Ephesians. 6. 2, 3. And here is the alike
reason: The observation of the conditions of the promise do according to Gods
establishment of things tend toward the obtaining of it, and so on the
contrary it is of the threatenings, which come on by sin and ignorance. But
further Gods special providence is over his own People, and more particularly
over his Anointed. It is he that gives Salvation unto Kings, Psalm. 144. 10.
Not that all good Kings have always temporal deliverances, for there is the
example of Josiah, who had that excellent Character, 2 Kings 23. 25. The reason
of whose untimely Death seems to be given in the verse following; If God does
sometimes let the Righteous fall (his ways are justice and goodness it is not
for ever, for it will be abundantly made up in the day of recompense; But
Jehosaphat sought to the Lord God of his Father and walked in his Commandments,
and not after the doings of Israel; therefore the Lord established the Kingdom
in his hand, and all Judah brought to Jehosaphat presents, and he had riches
and honor in abundance, 2 Chronicles. 17. 4, 5. Something may be hence gathered,
for God is the same still, No accepter of Persons, but in every Nation he that
fears him, and works Righteousness is accepted with him, Acts 10. 34, 35.
Let the King be assured that if he cleaves unto God with his whole heart, and
puts away Idolatry and false Worship, he shall have Temporal or Eternal
Salvation; that most commonly, this most certainly, but rather both. It is so
well pleasing unto God when those obey him whom he has placed in the highest
Room on Earth, that he rewards them here and hereafter. To rule according to
Gods Commandments is the most safe way to preserve them in the Royal Seat of
their Ancestors. In mercy shall the Throne be established, and he shall sit
upon it in Truth, in the Tabernacle of David, judging and seeking judgment and
hasting Righteousness, Isa. 16. 5. Did not thy Father Eat and Drink, and do
Judgment and Justice, and then it was well with him, be judged the cause of the
Poor and Needy, then it was well with him, was not this to know me says the
Lord? Jer. 22. 16. Every one that has but the common sense of humanity must
love, honor and obey him; and these will be such a safeguard to his person,
that those his implacable Enemies, whom no goodness can overcome will be forced
to lick the dust; for a Good man some would even dare to die, Romans 5. 7. But
for preservation of a good King, thousands will venture their lives, and
undergo the greatest extremity. He is happy in the good will and affection of
his Subjects, they will rejoice and praise God on his behalf, to see him also
zealous for his glory; that he would suffer all Godly and Faithful Ministers,
that a stop may be put to that torrent of iniquity, which is a vexation to
behold. In his days shall the Righteous flourish, and abundance of peace so
long as the Moon endures. Prayer also shall be mane continually for him, and
daily shall he be praised, Psalm. 72. 4, 7, 15. The Commonwealth will be then
happy, when Kings are Christians, not in name or title, but when they live and
govern according to the Rules of the Gospel. When they are Obedient to God,
diligent in his Worship and Ordinances, exercise all manner of Righteousness
and Justice toward their people, and themselves observe Temperance and
Sobriety; and so manage all their Actions as Men that indeed look for a
Judgment to come. There is an excellent Scheme laid down better then that of
Ancient or Modern Politicians (which stands in no need of them, for it has
Providence and Wisdom from above) and will make a Prince renowned for all Ages.
It will give him satisfaction of mind, that is, in beginning; for the utmost
happiness here is Light Sown, Psalm. 97. 11. A laying in of Joy and Peace as
Seed to the future Harvest of Ecstasy and Glory. His glory is great in thy
Salvation, Honor and Majesty have thou laid upon him, Psalm 21. 5.

I hope none of the Grandees of the Earth think otherwise, that Religion does
not thus much, but seems to them an undervaluing of Majesty, as rather
calculated for low sneaking, and not for noble Spirits. Least any who term
themselves brave Souls should say so in the heart, for they will not with the
tongue for fear of betraying their own infidelity and ignorance, let this short
question be put to them, the first words of the Creed, Whether they do believe
in God? And those descriptions given of him, confirmed by his visible works,
Deuteronomy. 10. 17. 1 Kings 8. 27. Psalm. 18. verse. 7. to verse. 16. Psalm. 113. 4. Job
11. 7, 8, 9. and 37. 22. Isa. 40. throughout, Jer. 10. 6, 10. Dan. 4. 35. and
7. 10. Romans 11. 36. 1 Timothy 6, 15, 16. and many other like places. It may not be
surmised, that the Spirit bearing Witness of it self should over magnify, for
there seems to be an higher strain then all these, Wisd. 11. 22. Ecclus 43. 27.
30. Who considers but the least of such an infinite Glorious Being, can no more
think it a dishonor for the greatest Emperor to prostrate himself with his
face to the ground in Dust and Ashes before this High and Lofty one that
inhabiteth Eternity, then it would be for the most abject fellow to kneel
before him. This comparison is sufficient proof, but comes not near; for the
distance between Almighty God and the greatest personage on Earth exceeds that
between him and the most contemptible fly; Now if the vilest in^ect should open
its Mouth and say it was as Man, should we therefore think so? Or if the
meanest beggar should speak out, that it was a disgrace for him to be uncovered
before My Lord the King, we could not but be moved with indignation at his
Pride and Folly. Yet I wish it be not thus among too many, who are neither
Kings nor Lords, but take as much upon them; who being purse* proud have not
only lifted up their hearts above their Brethren, it is for the poorer sort to
be Religious, forsooth they think themselves too good to be in subjection Deuteronomy.
8. 13, 14.
unto the Lord their Maker. If Kings and Princes are not, much less are they;
for if the matter be considered aright it must be acknowledged; Whatever the
World esteems greatness, there is none greater then he that fears the Lord:
It is meet and right so to do, even for Angels and Archangels and all the Host
of Heaven, much more is it for those that dwell in Houses of Clay; for they
also are in this little mouldring Tenement, who inhabit Palaces and larger
Buildings, and therefore let them not absurdly conceive that an under-valuing,
which is their Highest Honor to be Servants of the Lord. An illustrious
Example of this we have in David, 2 Samuel 6. When the Ark was brought up,
himself played before the Lord, and Danced with the rest of the People. And
Michal, Saul's Daughter, looked through a Window, and saw King David Leaping and
Dancing before the Lord, and she despised him, and came out to meet him, and
said, How glorious was the King of Isr^^l to day, who uncovered himself to day
in the Eyes of the Handmaid of his Servants, as one of the vain Fellows
shamelesly uncovereth himself. To be Noted by the way of the silly proud Women
of this and former Ages, who have mean thoughts of their Husbands if they serve
God, as if not so Gentile and Men of Honor as others, they will use to them or
others privately the like contemptuous Language.
David here was so far from being discouraged that he is more confirmed in his
Duty; I will be yet more vile then thus, and will be base in mine own sight.
His resolution was to do as he ought, before he examine other consequences, I
will play before the Lord. His praise was not of Men, but of God, he had rather
be approved of by him, and despised of them, then to be had in honor by them,
and despised by him. Such must be the mind of those of the more exalted
condition, who will enter into his service and expect his favor. I am the
Lord, that is my Name, and my Glory I* will not give to another, neither my
praise to graven Images, Isa. 42. 8. Nor yet to living Men, he will not allow
of, that the things which please him shall be dispensed withal for pleasing
others. Whosoever will not come unto him, or afterward leave undone several
Acts of Duty for fear of diminishing his Honor and Reputation in the World, he
may stay away, for he lightly esteems of the Rock of his Salvation. He is
unworthy of the Favor and Blessing of God who will part with them for a puff
of breath from talking Worms of the Earth, which neither is so High, Universal,
or Loud as the Wind which passes away.

Here will arise another short Gale of Exhortation, As for Man, his days are as
Grass: as a Flower of the Field, so he flourishes, for the Wind passes over
it, and it is gone, and the place thereof shall know it no more, Psalm. 103. 15,
16. An exact resemblance of our Condition in this World, but of a different
Reflection to two several sorts of Men. It is matter of Vexation to them, who
have their Portion in this Life, and have none assurance of that which is to
come. It is so irksome, that they cannot consider their Pride of Glory, Isa.
23. 9. passes away, and they make daily approaches to receive a recompense for
their evil Deeds. One that is continually going to the place of Execution can
take but little Pleasure, though he has some Miles to it, and is to pass by
Meadows, Gardens, Woods, and the most delightful Country that ever the Eye
saw; and though he is feasted with all imaginable Rarities upon the Road, has
Variety of Wine and Women, and Music, unless he does quite stupifie and make
himself unmindful of his Journeys end. If he does so, yet his Misery is never
the less, or unavoidable, but increased by the sad and dismal Change; much
worse is their Condition who spend their days in Mirth, and in a moment go down
to the Grave. What a motive is here to turn quickly aside out of this, and get
into the other way? To use all means for getting an Hope true and firm, sure
and steadfast, then is Comfort and Rejoicing, the nearer one comes to the end
thereof. The longer one walks in the path that leads to Heaven, he is better
satisfied, for it is more smooth and plain, and there are fewer steps till
arrived at the Blessed Country. This is my Rest for ever, here will I dwell,
for I have desired it, Psalm. 132. 14. He is glad at every Stage, for he is
advanced yet further in the way. He can sup Cheerfully and refresh himself with
the good things of the Inn, but he must rise up early and away. He will use
them so far, as to renew his Strength for Travel, but if he should gorge
himself, then he would not be fit to go. He is journeying to receive for
himself a Kingdom, but it is not one of this Earth, nor bringing it down here,
no more then he can keep that which he has already, but is obliged against
this shall fail, to secure unto himself, that which endures unto all Ages,
That Kingdom which cannot be moved, Heb. 11. 28. He must use Diligence and
Earnestness, for From the days of John the Baptist, the Kingdom of Heaven
suffers violence, and the violent take by force, Mat. 11. 11, 12. So that a
few and careless Endeavors will not serve the turn, there must be exercised
the whole Strength of a Man. Not every one that says unto me Lord, Lord shall
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, but he that does the Will of my Father which
is in Heaven, Mat. 7. 21. Here again is to observed, that the performance of
outward Acts of Devotion will not bring him thither, unless he does also the
Will of God; which is expressly revealed and applied to him, to keep all the
Words of this Law, and these Statutes to do them, Deuteronomy. 17. 19. Oh but it may
be said, that is impossible: Let him instance in one Commandment that is so,
and if each of them is possible to be kept, then the whole is likewise by
united Care and Diligence. But it is very hard, Nothing is so to the Grace of
God; and if it be to Flesh and Blood, the Command is, Strive to enter into the
Straight Gate, Luke 13. 24. The word in the Greek Language imports, as much as
putting forth the utmost strength, which certainly may be done. None obtains
the corruptible Crown without they run for it, so neither the incorruptible
Crown without Pains. We do not Pity those which endure great Hardships as long
as thereby they A^chieve mighty Conquests, and subdue whole Countries; this is
thought to make amends for all the trouble they have been at; and why should we
think so hardly of Heaven if we must Labor before we come there? Is no^ that
as much worth as some small spot of Ground here? We see that is had, so in the
way thither is somewhat had, which is not seen, but really perceived, viz.
Peace and Contentment of Soul. Those who have fought many pitch Battles,
undergone tedious Marches, Who seemed to be of a Gentile Nature, have waded
through a Sea of Blood; Who have been bred up to Softness and Delicacy, have
endured the heat by Day and frost by Night to obtain that end. All the Labor
and striving in the World to better their present Condition, is, if that would
give more quiet of mind. They g^udge at no Pain for the fancied means toward
it, which were wrong and false, as might have been known before, because those
who sit at the very top of Worldly prosperous Condition do most want it. You
are once more showed the alone true Happiness, do ye pause? And are ye
discouraged at it? This does not become men of great and excellent; Spirits, I
am sure a little Hardship is no hindrance in in all other Actions of Life, Why
should it be in this great and real Concern? for a false and little show
whereof they are undertaken* The difficulty should not so much frighten, as the
necessity press forward; for who misses hereof is undone for ever.

Eternal Salvation is a thing which cannot be made too sure of. In great
Enterprises Men look every way, and use all manner of Circumspection that they
may succeed. What are they for? Is not Happiness more then all that can be
named? Can thought and care be needless as to this, when so much is had about
the less material things? And if a man strive for Masteries, yet is he not
Crowned except he strive lawfully, 2 Timothy 2. 5. All Religion is to the intent
that we may please God. He who is made by him chief Officer in the Armies of
the Earth, must submit (upon Pain of his dispeasure) unto the Orders of the
Great Governor of the World. And what are they? He shall read in the Book of
the Law all the days of his Life, that he may learn to fear the Lord his God,
to keep all the words of his Law, and these Statutes to do them Deuteronomy. 17. 11.
Which it is impossible he should, unless he know them. And if he follows after
Christ, he will not walk in darkness. He is the way, the Truth and the Life.
Which John 14. 6.
the King himself is to come unto, and walk in, if he would Live for ever.

CHAP. IV. Of the NOBILITY and GENTRY.
An Exhortation for them to serve God: a Caution against Mistakes in matters of
Religion: the Unreasonableness of some particular Reproaches: Of Humility, and
the Way to Greatness: The Description of a Good Man.

I Will get me unto the great Men, and will speak unto them, Jer. 5. 5. Even
here somewhat may be Collected out of the written word of God, for their use
and benefit. Amongst his chosen People the Israelites, there is frequent
mention made of Princes, Nobles, Great Men, and Rulers. It is necessary for the
support and exercise of Government, that there should ^e subordinate Ministers.
The King having large Territories and Dominion, cannot Rule them all
immediately by himself, but must constitute Judges and Officers throughout his
Country, which is according to Deuteronomy. 16. 18. and has been the continued usage
of all Nations. As these discharge their Trust committed by their Sovereign, he
does commonly annex Honor and Profits. Thus Numb. 27. 20.
they and their Posterity become Noble according to the Titles he has given
them. David a King equal in Power and Majesty to the rest of the Earth, freely
and according to truth acknowledges, 1 Chronicles. 29. 11, 12. what some Monarchs
will not speak out. God gives Honor unto the King, who conveyeth it down, so
all is to be derived from him. This way of advancement in it self is good and
lawful, for the King is to give Praise to them that do well, 1 Pet. 2. 14. but
especially to those who with Wisdom, uprightness and diligence manage that
Authority entrusted with them. Neither was it only allowable in the time of
Carnal Ordinances, but remains now under the more spiritual Dispensation. The
Eunuch of great Authority under Candace Queen of the Ethiopians was converted
to the Faith; and after instruction therein, Philip told him, If thou believe
with all thine heart, thou may be baptized, Acts 8. 37. but did not at all
require him to part with his high place. The time would fail me to speak of
Nicodemus, the Centurion, Rich Zacheus, those honorable Women, Sergius Paulus
the Deputy, the Saints in Cesars Household, which believed on the Lord Jesus;
and of all those Persons of higher Rank, who embraced Christianity after the
Apostles times. It did not only spread into Villages and common Cities, but
that of the imperial Residence; and was received by the chief Officers of his
Army, and those next in Dignity under the Emperor. The Grain of Mustard Seed
was the least of all when first sown, but did shoot it self more and more by
Degrees. And though at the first Preaching of the Gospel, Not many mighty, not
many noble are called, 1 Cor. 1. 26.
yet we see according to Gods gracious method more were afterward; and
according to his good promises we are to expect yet a further addition and
increase, When the people are gathered together, and the Kingdoms to serve the
Lord, Psalm. 102. 22. Of every Rank and Degree, of every Calling and Occupation,
of every Generation since the World began, of every Country, Nation and
Language, and from every Corner of the Earth, there will come from the East and
West and sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the Kingdom of God. None is
excluded from thence only upon the Account of what, when, and where he was in
the World.

Some indeed do stand in more slippery places then others, they are in greater
Danger to fall, but yet they may stand if they take heed. The Rich are in a
Temptation, and a S^are (enticing and deceiving them) into foolish and hurtful
Lusts, which drown Men in Destruction and Perdition; but this Temptation may be
overcome, the Snare seen and avoided, as the Apostle shows them how, 1 Timothy
6. But yet they are a strong Allurement to Vanity and Sensuality, they can
Administer a present Gratification to the Flesh, and this makes a goodly
appearance o^ Happiness. Which has been represented in its utmost advantage,
and found false Chap. 3.
and empty. God does equally intend the Happiness of all mankind, and therefore
that cannot be the proper one which is not given to all: For they are all of
the same Frame and natural Desires, Body and Soul alike, which would appear if
they had the same Education and Circumstances. That those of upper Condition be
not exalted above measure, let them know, There is not so much in Riches and
Honor, as is commonly imagined. Gold, Pearls and costly Array are nothing of
the Man himself; they neither came into the World with him, nor shall go out
with him; and our selves would think it ridiculous, if we saw an Horse insult
and push his Fellow as if not worthy to come near, because the other has a
rich Saddle and fine Entrappings. Bare Honor is but Breath depending upon the
Speaker, and when received in may bloat up or burst the Owner; but can never
fill, or make him more Healthy. And though these Men are puffed up upon Account
of other Privileges, it might be manifested particularly what they are
sensible of by Experience, that the trouble and discontent arising from them,
will abundantly Counterpoise the seeming Good and Complacency. Besides, that
they are in no wise adequate to the Divine Soul of Man; for Sensual and Visible
things can never satisfy her which is of a different Nature, they are narrow
and finite unable to fill her large Room and boundless Desires. They may be
just taken in, but do not thoroughly replenish the least part thereof. And
further they come from without, which may be stopped by several Accidents and
hindered from within. If the Body is sick, or there be Pain in the least Member,
all those put together will not make Compensation; nor can it be driven away,
when the Patient will by all his Riches and Greatness. They cannot cure Grief
and Vexation of mind for common occasions, much less the fears and thoughts of
the World to come; for these are only to be allayed as hereafter showed: But
other kinds of Remedy are more dangerous, and in the end will prove longer
tormenting, then present irksomeness and disquiet. Indeed unless those are
ordered aright, it will spoil the Enjoyment of all; for do what he can, this
thought will ever and anon recur, That he who is Lord of so many Acres, must be
confined to such a Compass of ground which is six Foot in length, and two in
breadth, for Nobles shall dwell in the Dust, Nahum 3. 18. It will not stay
there, but go further; for who has not heard of the Rich Man that died, and
was buried, (there is somewhat worse succeeds.) And in Hell he lift up his
eyes, being in torments, Luke 16. 22, 23. If this which was spoken by Truth it
self, were duly considered of, it would make Great Men tremble, and live
otherwise then they do; for we can see no Example of their manner of Life
throughout the Gospel, but in him, who went to Hell, and there is no other
Reason assigned thereof but his voluptuous Living, and what may be gathered of
uncharitableness. Too many now adays resemble him in both, giving not much more
out of their great Possessions then a few Crumbs, which fall down of Course and
according to Custom. They had best take heed, that their end be not the same
also. Who will go on in his way, and not think thereof now, yet then He will
lift up his eyes, and consider from whence he is fallen. It will be most
afflicting to remember, that who had all things to please Flesh and Blood,
should be tormented there; who swilled down delicious Wine in abundance, should
want a drop of Water to cool his Tongue.

Be not frightened with this Severity of Words, for it is better to be
forewarned, though in the most terrible Characters, then suffer the Truth and
Signification of them. If diligent care be not used to prevent this, it will
take off from the Pleasure of your Recreations and Pastimes as they are called.
Which are said to be made use of to spend the time, as if that did not pass
away fast enough of it self: And it may seem strange, that some should so much
endeavor to throw that away, when for ought they know (unless they repent and
bring forth Fruits meet for Repentance) this is the only time of Comfort they
will ever have, and therefore they should make much of it, that it may appear
long, but not contrariwise. Which is an intimation, that their Life, which they
would have others think so Happy, yet themselves do not find it; for they that
count it Pleasure to riot in the day time, 2 Pet. 2. 13. yet are more
Solicitous to make it seem short, then poor Day-labourers. At night they fall
to the Works of Darkness, spend the greater part in Chambering and Wantonness.
When it is time to awake out of sleep, then they go to it, and reverse Gods
Ordinance of the night for Rest. By not observing the words of his Law, the
threatening is fulfilled now upon Earth, In the Morning thou shall say, Would
God it were even; and at even thou shall say, Would God it were Morning, for
the fear of thine heart wherewith thou shall fear, Deuteronomy. 28 67. As is
discovered by them, who cannot be one minute without Company, who in time of
Health must have wax Candles burning all Night. In the day they make it their
Business to stifle it more: And yet for all they would have time pass away.
Which is a manifest token of the Misery of their present Condition, for none
can desire that, unless it be out of Expectation of a future and greater
Blessedness; which they have no Prospect of, being only for the present, and
what is before them. If all this should at length end in a sad Eternity, there
is no Stupefaction, nor making the least part thereof to pass away; and it will
be ten thousand times more Vexing, then that now in the days of their Flesh.
What can be said too much to recover People out of this Condition? What kind of
Expressions shall be made use of to prevent others sliding in, but the least
toward it? To you High and Rich, let this warning be given. Who are so
desirous after it, have a care of mis-placing or seeking in a wrong way that
Happiness which is to be found in God only, and in the way he has showed; for
there it is to be had, and no where else, For my People have Committed two
Evils: They have forsaken me the Fountain of living Waters, and hewed them out
Cisterns, broken Cisterns that can hold no Water, Jer. 2. 13. Who resort to
these, will be still disappointed of satisfying their Thirst. Our gracious God
in that he would the more effectually draw us unto himself, has so provided
that we cannot be otherwise Happy, but by coming unto him, and we must be
necessarily miserable if we do not.

Man is a proud Worm, he will not stand beholden, no not to God for Happiness,
though he has brought him into Being, and furnished him with those means, by
which he will try to attain it himself, and his own way in opposition to that
prescribed unto him. It Is Riches and Honor, which lift him up to this height,
he thinks them his own, and they can make him Happy, and what need he then be
indebted to any? For he is apt to say in his heart, My power and the might of
my hand has got me this Wealth, or Deuteronomy. 18. 17, 18.
else mine Ancestors have done it for me; whereas he should remember the Lord
his God, for it is he that gives thee Power to get Wealth: It is he which
brought thee into this World by means of such Parents; if it had been the good
Pleasure of his Will, ^e might have caused thee, even thee, to have been a
Beggars Off spring, whom now he has made the Son of Nobles. Thou should
rather be the more thankful and obedient for his Goodness, and not thence take
occasion to be stubborn, or lift up thy self against him. O Generation, see ye
the word of the Lord: Have I been a wilderness unto Israel? A Land of darkness?
Wherefore say my People, We are Lords, we will no more come unto thee? Jer. 2.
31. He does as it were expostulate whether such should be the return for his
Love and Kindness? Stop a little, and think seriously. It pleases God now to
call you by his Grace; Be sure not to confer with Flesh and Blood, but examine
the things which have, and are to be delivered in the Spirit of your Minds:
Have nothing to do with carnal Reason, hea^ken not to the insinuations of lust,
or bewitchings of concupiscence: Put away all things which may hinder, As now
born Babes, desire the sincere Milk of the Word, that ye may grow thereby, 1
Pet. 2. 2. It will do you no harm.

Let us walk honestly as in the day, not in Rioting and Drunkenness, not in
Chambering and Wantonness, not in Strife and Envying. But put ye on the Lord
Jesus Christ, and make not provision for the Flesh to fulfill the Lusts
thereof, Romans 13. 13, 14. What pleasure does at this instant remain of all past
Jollities? and if none does now in time of health and enjoyment, much less will
they comfort upon a Deathbed. They are fading and unsatisfying Vanities,
delight only a very little for the present, but not yield a true contentment.
Wherefore leave them before they leave you, if you forsake them, you will avoid
all their dreadful consequents; but if you hold fast to them, they will at
length forsake you as to their refreshing Nature, for this lasts not in
Sickness or declining Age, but the guilt they leave behind, will stick close
and press you down to the lowermost Hell. You must of necessity part; you see
what difference there is, if they or you first drop away, or you come out from
among them; In the Name of God cast them of forthwith, do not cry out with the
Sluggard, yet a little Sleep, a little Slumber, a little folding of the hands
to Sleep; let me lie a little longer in my sins, and then I will rise: Thou
do not surely consider, who it is that calls thee. Awake thou that sleep,
and Christ will give thee life. Your hands have been defiled with sin and
filthiness, Wash ye, make you clean, put away the evil of your doings from
before mine Eyes, cease to do evil, learn to do well. Come now let us reason
together, says the Lord, though your sins be as Scarlet, they shall be white
as Snow, though they be red like Cri^son, they shall be as Wool. Behold what
manner of Isa. 1. 16, 17, 18.
Love and Condescension is here; The Mighty God proposes to reason with those
whom he could as easily cut in pieces as make this offer; what cause can be
assigned for such unparalled goodness, but his own gracious nature which
delights in Mercy? He does make the first proposals of Reconciliation between
himself and his stout Creature. What a wonderful thing is this, that the
humility of God, who is so Glorious in Majesty, fearful in Praises, and doing
wonders, should exceed that of Man, the Work of his hands, a small contemptible
and impotent being. And yet how strange would it be (let the Heavens and Earth
be astonished) if he who is less then nothing, should withstand and despise
such goodness? Call to mind further, he does not this because he cannot do
otherwise, for he has severity in store as he will manifest upon thy self if
thou contemnest his goodness; it cannot be, unless thou art guilty of the most
horrible incivility that ever was, thou should refuse to hearken when he
calls thee; Thou may put off thy inferiors to a more convenient season, and
whom thou do not much care for; but God is the excellent one in all the
World, who daily pours his benefits on thee, has given all thou have, who
holds thy Soul in life? Is he not worthy to have a present answer? To be
opened unto immediately, Luke 12. 36. Who is Lord of Heaven and Earth, to whom
the greatest Monarch is a Grasshopper.

If you do not hearken to this, but slight and despise; he has his
threatenings, which those shall feel who do not mind them, as Psalm. 29. Job. 34.
20, 24. Rev. 6. 15, 18, 17. Amos 2. 14. Isa. 10. 3. Romans 2. 9, 11, 12. Mat. 13.
42. You are Men and not God, you are Flesh and not Spirit, and your Flesh is
not the Flesh of Brass, nor your Bones Iron. They must necessarily turn into
the Dust of the Earth; And you that cannot now bear the least indignity offered
to your person, how will you endure to rise up to everlasting shame and
contempt, Dan. 12. 2. Or to drop into Misery in all things just contrary to
that so^tness and delicacies here. An heedless unbelieving thought will not
secure Men as to this, for what is prepared cannot be destroyed by an
imagination only. As Abraham said to Dives, the great gulf is fixed, besides
the inference he there makes, Luke 16. 26. This also follows, so that those who
are not yet in, but going the direct way to it, can neither pass it by, nor
after being plunged in, get out again by an Opinion or Wish; There are many
pretty sayings about this, but in the mean while whom shall we believe? The
Wisdom and Truth of God, or the Foolishness and Falsehood of Men; Certainly the
safer way is for every one to use diligent care and circumspection, that he
come not there which he is now reminded of; Gods Word is as true as his
Existence and seeing he has said by his Son, the Worm shall not die, and the
fire shall not be quenched, to deny it would be to make God a Liar, or the Lord
Jesus an Impostor, which none either can as to defeat what he has said, or
dare to do. Let me ask the great Men, Do ye believe these things? I know ye are
Christians, and ye do believe them; Why then will you not be moved to flee from
the wrath to come? If you are impeached of High Treason against your Sovereign,
you will use all endeavors not to be found guilty; and if you are, you will
use no means unattempted to procure a Pardon. We are all by Nature the Children
of Wrath, and consequently liable unto it, and have added further Rebellions
against the Majesty on High. Is he not as dreadful who lives for ever to take
vengeance, as Princes are whose breath goes forth and their thoughts perish?
Do ye think, ye ought not as much stand in aw of the Great Mighty and Terrible
God (for so he is still to them that obey not the Gospel) as of mere Man? Is he
not as worthy to be sought after? Ye have offended against him, and will ye
stand out still? Is it meet he should come unto you, and force a Pardon upon
you, whether you will or not? Indeed he waits to be gracious, but it is to
those who come unto him, and if you will not (to speak in the gentile dialect)
you may choose and be damned. Our selves would take it ill, if we should at
great cost or pains get a Pardon for a Servant, and he out of peevish pride or
negligence would refuse it; Now this Christ has done, he has purchased you
with his own Blood, but you must sue it our your selves, or go without it. A
condemned Criminal here is dealt bountifully withal, if his life be spared
only; but the goodness of God endures yet daily, and infinitely exceeds that
of Creatures. He does pardon, and if ye continue in his goodness (otherwise ye
shall be cut off) rewards you; This shall be the Covenant which I will make
with the House of Israel, after those days, says the Lord, I will put my Law
in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts, and will be their God, and
they shall be my People (this is the first part of it, as well as the other)
for I will forgive their iniquity, and their sin will remember no more, Jer.
31. 33, 34. This extends both to the least and greatest, for they are
expressed; He promises to be our God, which imports as much (as is evident from
the whole tenor of the Gospel) what is said 1 These. 4. 17. We shall be ever
with the Lord: Which should be desirable to those who think it a privilege to
stand in the presence of the King, much more is it before the great King of all
the Earth. In thy presence is fullness of joy, at thy right hand there are
pleasures for evermore, Psalm. 16. 11. You that affect nothing but great
Company, do likewise seek to be Equal unto the Angels, Luke 20. 36. The least
of whom does exceed the greatest of Men. Who are now in the first rank, Why
will you not in a Godly sort be ambitious of being so in the first born of
Heaven, and endeavor after a degree of Glory answerable to that of greatness
ye have here? In the Name of God try to keep your first Station, that you may
never have the least cause to remember from whence you are fallen; Never sink
below your selves, strive to attain the higher perfections, but above all take
heed of coming short of the lowest; for it is better to be least in the Kingdom
of God, then not to be there at all. Little Flock, it is my Fathers Will to
give you a Kingdom, Luke. 12. 32. And why should it not be yours to accept of
it? Who deem your selves worthy of all honor, I hope will not judge your
selves unworthy of everlasting life; for all your abundance, you would receive
a great Estate, if any of your Friends and Relations would bequeath it unto
you; And will you not accept of an inheritance, incorruptible and undefiled,
and that fades not away, reserved in Heaven for you? 1 Pet. 1. 4. if you
perform the conditions required. As for that you have already, must fade away,
for if you think the Lands are yours for ever, yet your selves are not so; they
may remain somewhat longer, but you shall be taken away before. Their inward
thought is, that their Houses shall continue for ever, and their dwelling
places to all Generations; they call their lands after their own Names; this
their way is their folly, yet their posterity approves their sayings, Psalm.
49. 11, 13. When many times they do not long enjoy their lands, for these
change owners and seldom continue in the same Family for two or three hundred
years, much less for ever. Nay, if they were secured from Folly, Prodigality,
Forfeiture, Injustice (as that is in defeating the 1 Kings 21. 3.
next Heir of the Blood of the inheritance of his Fathers) and of firm Title
and furthest from Inundation of the Sea, yet this would not endure for ever;
for the time draws near when the Earth shall be burnt up, and all the Works
thereof, so the goodliest Estate now seen is but temporal which fades away. He
that has the best tenure and most indefeasible right, yet has no perpetuity,
but himself is tenant at will to the great Landlord of Heaven and Earth; now
it is the wisest way of such an one to feather his nest, to provide well against
the time he shall be turned out. Agreeable hereunto is the Counsel of the Lord
Jesus, And I say unto you, make to your selves Friends of the mammon of
Unrighteousness, that when ye fail, they may receive you into everlasting
habitations, Luke 16. 9. It is strange, that those who have such an advantage
of Worldly outward prosperity, of which they must be one day eternally
deprived, should not take care against that fails to be provided of an
Happiness in the highest Heavens for evermore; especially if they miss thereof,
they must fall down into opposite Misery. One of these two must be your
condition, there is no avoiding of it; if you should be miserable, it will be
in a worse degree then the common sort of mankind, because of your manifold
transgressions and mighty sins, Amos 5. 12. They are against great Love and
Mercy, and when those which should have been Examples unto others of obedience
and righteous living, have most of all sinned and contemned the Almighty,
Vengeance may be taken upon them sevenfold; and when the day of their calamity
is come, that pride and pleasure in which now they so much trust, shall be all
vanished and gone, and serve to torment them yet more by sad reflections of
what they have been. For as the benefit is great, if they use Riches and Honor
as instruments to set forth the Glory of God, and maintain good Works; so
likewise is the danger great if thence they be proud and rebellious, turning
them into an occasion to fulfill the lusts of the ^^esh: it would have been
better not to have had, then thus to have abused them. It is not only because
such an one is in a higher Seat in the World, therefore he shall be so in that
to come; for there will be changes, and those that are exalted, shall be
abased: Yet to him that rightly managed the ten Talents, authority was given
over ten Cities; and he that did five, had proportionably. So Luke 19. 17, 18.
contrariwise, he that is unfaithful in most shall receive the greater
condemnation; and if he that received but one Talent went and dug in the
Earth and hid his Lords Money, was cast into outer Darkness as an unprofitable
Servant; What will become of him, who received ten or five, and used them to
rebel against his Lord? Of how much sorer punishment suppose ye, shall he be
thought worthy?

Now things are so set, that extremity and eternity of joy or sorrow must be
the final condition of every one; it may seem impertinent to bid him choose
whether he will have, as if ten thousand Talents were laid on an heap, and the
other side a single farthing, to make long persuasion that he would be sure to
make choice of the first; Or if there was offered unto him a glass of the most
pleasant Wine, and a cup of deadly Poison, and he knew before which was so.
Neither of these come up to the present Case, for the good of the one is more
beyond the evil of the other, then in any two things that can be compared.
Although there is such a vast difference, yet commonly the evil part is chosen;
and those who call themselves Men, yea, Men of Honor and Renown, are worse
then Children in understanding. They greedily catch at toys and trifles, they
are careful to learn all the punctilios of Honor, niceties of Pride, modes of
Breeding, and things which belong to their Quality; but in the mean while are
negligent of the things that belong to their peace. They run after every
imaginary pleasure, are for every thing which has the name of it, yet they
will not seek after true and real Happiness; they run on still in their course,
not considering for what end they came into the World, or what will become of
them when gone out. This is not a Gentleman's business, he is to go in the
Fashion, carry himself obligingly in Company, understand his Estate; this is
sufficient for him, What should he mind any thing else for? Let him do what his
inclinations lead him unto, such is the language of Pride and Modishness; But
what says the Holy Spirit thereto? Do ye thus requi^e the Lord, O foolish
People and unwise? is not he thy Father that has bought thee? Has he not made
thee and established thee? Of the Rock that begat thee thou art unmindful, and
have forgotten God that formed thee, Deuteronomy. 32. 6. 18. Will thou obliterate the
notions of him who has spread thy Table, and made thy Cup to overflow? Is this
the return, he is to make to his Almighty Benefactor? He may turn Mercies into
Disobedience, yet he shall not go unpunished; forsooth it is not his business
to work the work God has sent him to do, he is too good for it in his own
conceit; The Lord says, them that honor me I will honor, and they that
despise me shall be lightly esteemed, 1 Samuel 2. 30. Some may not care if they
are so, for as yet they find no harm come by it; but what will become of the
most scornful and exalted Sinner, when God shall pluck thee out of the land of
the living, and there shall be none to deliver thee? Even here, though thine
house of defense be very high, he can bring thee down, make thee a mock and
byword as he has done by some; but he does generally suffe^ Men's evil Deeds
in this World, letting them go on as they will, as he did the manners of the
Israelites forty years in the Wilderness, Acts 13. 18 Yet they shall be sure
to receive the just recompense of them in that which is to come. There is no
holding the Spirit in, it will fly out there, do what thou can; and least it
should be then nothing but shivering and horror, Repent therefore of thy
Wickedness, if perhaps the thought of thine heart may be forgiven thee, Acts 8.
22. Cast down imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self against
the knowledge of God. When this is done, thou 2 Cor. 10. 5.
wilt think it as much thy duty and business to obey God, as it is of the
poorest Man.

To the Poor the Gospel is Preached, Luke 7. 22. Those who are rich and high in
their own conceits, will not receive it so far as to obtain the benefits
thereof; Christ is a Prince and a Savior, they are both joined together; and
his government reaches to the inward Man, to allay those swelling thoughts and
order them aright. Blessed are the poor in Spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of
Heaven, Mat. 5. 3. They are meet partakers thereof, for it is not riches but
trusting in them that hinder from thence. Neither need they fear from Luke 16.
19. For poor Lazarus was in rich Abraham's Bosom; so there are of both sorts:
If they that buy be as though they possessed not, and they that use this world
as not abusing it, although they have never so much thereof, yet through the
Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ they shall be saved as well as others. They may
still conceive themselves to be so as who have not such abundance, and with
what remains over (deducting for the necessity and convenience of their
Families, out of which also a portion is to be laid aside for the Poor) give
Alms and maintain gook Works. This seems to be the design of the Gospel as
appears by the several precepts and the practice of primitive Christians (not
only of those Acts 2. 45. for that community was not then of necessary
obligation, Acts 5. 4.) but those further on for some centuries; who if they
were rich, did mightily abound in Liberality and Alms* giving for relief of
Christ's poor Brethren. I am moved with indignation as often as I think of that
Emperor, who in a pious disposition resigned the Throne, or hear of any other
who by a single and imprudent refusal at once deprives himself of Ability for
exercising a thousand Acts of Charity and opportunity of well doing, and
consequently of a greater reward; Whereas the higher station Men are in, they
may do God more service, and their goodness be exemplary: If we search to the
bottom, this mistaken way does rather proceed from pride then self-denial, for
the reason thereof seems to be, that they could not so well come down to those
base things of the World, and the things which are despised, 1 Cor. 1. 28.
Which they rightly think themselves in Conscience bound to do, but they can
better do it once for all, then several repeated times; whereas Humility is
more acceptable the more often it is used, and from those of more exalted
condition. That thing of Gentility, if strictly examined, is but a vain Word
according to the judgment of reason; and therefore people need not be so
offended, because the Christian Profession requires not to have the faith of
our Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord of Glory with respect of Persons, Jam. 2. 1.
The Apostle does not design to confound all the order that is in the World, but
chiefly intends those rich Men who were Heathens and without the Church, as
appears verse. 6. 7. For such a Character could not belong to Christians at that
time; But still it is so far obligatory, that we are not to give reverence as
the World gives, only upon the account of their fine clothes or wealth. Nor are
they hence to take liberty to wax proud and despise their poor Brethren, whom
God has chosen, rich in Faith, and Heirs of the Kingdom which he has promised
to them that love him; and therefore others should not keep them of. Nor are
they to imagine the distance between God and themselves, is not quite so great
as between him and the Poor, for what now makes the difference? Will ^e esteem
thy Riches? no not Gold, nor all the forces of strength, Job. 36. 19. That
accepts not the person of Princes, nor regards the Rich more then the Poor,
for they are all the work of his hands, Job 34. 19. so Psalm. 62. 9. He sees
not as Man sees, for Man looks on the outward appearance, and if there be
gayety without, has a wonderful conceit of him as some goodly one; but the
Lord looks on the Heart, and if that be evil, notwithstanding the fine
outside, Amos. 6. 8.
such an one is as odious in his sight as the most abject contemptible person
is in ours. Let none say in his heart, My obedience is so much the more
acceptable, and I deserve better of Gods hands, because I am Noble or Rich in
the World, and I come to serve him when I could serve diverse lusts and
pleasures. What then? It is thy bounden duty so to do, as well as it is of the
meanest; What thanks does he deserve, who does only what is Luke. 17.
his duty to do? As our Lord has told us in a familiar instance; but thou
say, thou can do otherwise, as others of like Condition do. So likewise
can your Servants do contrary to what you Command them, but what must they
expect then? To incur thy Displeasure, and be turned out of thy Service, and it
may be thou may Command him to be beaten and kicked off, this is all thou
can do. And if thy self do not obey our Master which is in Heaven, but do
thine own Will, his Indignation and Punishment will be worse then all this.
Thou may enjoy the Pleasures of sin for a Season if thou will, but in so
doing thou shall not only lose the recompense of Reward, but procure to thy
self never ending Pains, and then what will thou get by the Bargain?

Some will surmize this to be strange Doctrine to Gentlemen especially, whose
peculiar privilege it is to be devoted unto Pleasure; if it were not for this,
they would not differ from others. But are not all under the same God, and
equally obliged to do according as he requires? And surely also it is their
principal design to be Happy, both now and hereafter, all one as they desire to
live pleasantly next Year as well as this. They are, whether they think of it
or not, Strangers and Pilgrims on Earth as their Fathers were. So the present
Condition is not to be accounted of, for it is nothing in Comparison of what
shall succeed, and therefore it should be ones whole business to neglect this,
and do all things to secure a future Happiness, for this in a short time will
be done away, and seem all one as if it had never been. Even at this instant it
may be observed, all former things are gone as a shadow that departs; nothing
remains but a faint remembrance, which does not yield the least Pleasure, but
rather Anguish: We press nearer to the things which are not seen, but eternal
Refreshment or Misery. If one Man was to suffer all that could be laid on him
in this World, and to come to Heaven at last, he is no more to be pitied then
that common Labourer, who does but his ordinary Days-work, and has an hundred
Pounds for his Reward: So again, if another did enjoy all the Honors and
Pleasures that were to be had, spent forty or sixty Years in the greatest Mirth
without intermixture of trouble or weariness, (as none ever did) all would not
be a Compensation for the first hour in Hell. We cannot reasonably grudge to
pass through this present Life, (which is not so much in reference to the
other, as a minute to a Year) if the greatest Affliction and Hardship were to
be laid on us, as long as hereby we shall come to receive an infinite good
through the Gift of God, and avoid a like inconvenience. If instead of a Barren
and dry Wilderness, we were to march through a fiery Furnace to the Heavenly
Canaan; if instead of having Prosperity mingled with Adversity, all the days of
our Pilgrimage were to be continually evil; If instead of denying Lusts, we
were absolutely Commanded to cut off our right Hand and pluck out the right
Eye, and to do violence to the least natural Inclination; yet considering the
Greatness of the Joy and Sorrow set before us, these would have been most equal
Terms, if it had pleased the Great Lawgiver (who is able both to save and
destroy) to have given them. He might have done so, and still be most just and
bountiful. But so gracious has been our God (Break forth into singing all ye
Inhabitants of the Earth, and Praise his Name, which you can never do so much
as this Love deserves) to lay no more upon us, then what is summed up, Deuteronomy.
10. 12, 13. And now Israel, what does the Lord thy God require of thee, but to
fear the Lord thy God, to walk in all his ways, and to love him, and to serve
the Lord thy God with all thy Heart, and with all thy Soul, To keep the
Commandments of the Lord and his Statutes, which I command thee this day for
thy good? Which are contrived to make us as Happy in this Life, as is possible
for us to be. And though this had been sufficient requital of it self; yet
further throughout his Holy Word is manifested eternal Life. Do this and live,
under which was more comprehended then barely living here, for Transgressors
did so. This has been more clearly made known by him who came since; who has
brought Grace and Truth along with him, Who came not to destroy the Law, but to
fulfill it, and make it yet more for our Good; for albeit the Jews by reason of
the Carnality of their Hearts were allowed a more free Enjoyment of the things
of this Life, then we are now under the Gospel, which is upon better Promises:
The intent whereof is to Cleanse our selves from all Filthiness of Flesh and
Spirit, and to perfect Holiness in the fear of God, 2 Cor. 7. 1. So that
Sensual Enjoyments are contrary to the Nature of our Holy Calling. They are not
absolutely forbidden, but to be used with the greatest Moderation, and so they
do not in the least diminish from our real Happiness. Christianity does refine
the Delights of Sense, and make them more excellent. We are to remember how we
are wayfaring Men, and may receive them so far only as to refresh: But in no
sort to run after, or when obtained to dwell so long on them, as hinder our
Journey. And therefore to make Pleasure the business of Life, or the greater
part thereof, (as the manner of some) is both contrary to Duty and Happiness:
For thou^h it be imagined, such do take great Delight in them, or otherwise
would not follow them; yet there are other Reasons, as they know nothing
better, or not how to spend the time, and idleness is so wearisome, that any
thing is to be done rather then endure that; the Humor and Mode of the Age,
which they must comply with or they shall not be reputed Gentile, and such
like; for they could forsake those esteemed Divertisements, which if they
reflect on in the very midst are tiring empty and unsatisfying. The Pleasures
of this Life choke the good S^ed in the Heart, which should spring up and bring
forth Fruit unto everlasting Life* They do alienate the Heart from God. If any
man love the World, the love of the Father is not in him, for all that is in
the World, the Lust of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eyes, and the Pride of Life
is not of the Father, but is of the World, 1 John 2. 15, 16. No Man will say,
he loves these more then God (himself would then affirm his own Damnation to be
just) Who is so wicked as this amounts unto? But what are Words to be minded,
when Deeds manifest the contrary? When one who says he loves God, yet wi^^
rather break his Laws then deny his own Will; who to follow a sinful Pleasure,
will omit a necessary Duty, it may be determine^ of him; for those we love, we
will do what they will have us. He that will not part with a Paltry Lust for
the sake of God, when he requires it, if he does with his mouth make a show of
much Love, his Heart runs after that; Ezekiel. 33. 31.
God who knows all things, and from whom Dissimulation cannot be hid, will
judge accordingly; for if any loves sincerely, he will also forsake whatever
offends his Beloved. If the Pleasures are not simply unlawful in themselves,
yet all Excess is evil and to be avoided, and that is ^o when the end for which
they are used, is sufficiently answered* Or if they be attended with ill
Circumstances, and prove needl^ss occasions why others and our selves sin, they
are to be abstained from; for if we love God, we must have a care of the least
thing that does disp ease him. Only let your Conversation be as it becomes the
Gospel of Christ, Phil. 1. 27.

There are several mistakes which hinder this, for People take Of mistakes in
Religion.
up with less of Religion then they ought. And least I speaking as to them,
should be thought to run upon a mistake my self; therefore let it be considered
all along, (and not only here, but throughout the whole) whether I speak these
things as one willing to find fault; or whether the Scripture, nay, the
gracious Gospel, in which they so much trust, do not say the very same.

It is that common deciet of outward Profession and resting in the Ordinances:
This is reputed Religion, but it is shut out from governing their Thoughts,
Words and Actions. Let them be any how, at Men's own Power and Command,
following their own Inclinations and Humor, and not the Will of God; they run
on in Pride, Lust, Sensuality; and if Prayers be read in their Family, they go
to Church on the Lords Day, be sure to be a little more serious and repent upon
a Deathbed, all is well enough, there is no need of making such a stir and
ado about Religion in their Lifetime.

This is the fashionable sort of Godliness, which is used and commended every
where; but upon diligent survey it may appear, that the Commandments of God are
made of none effect by this Fasion; for the Precepts in the Gospel of obedient
and Holy Life signify nothing, Duty is neglected and sin committed. And if
they do but ask God Pardon in a formal way, then they may go on, and Transgress
yet against him, and so on. But be not deceived, God is not mocked, for
whatsoever a Man sows, that shall ^e also reap. He that sows to the Flesh,
shall also of the Flesh reap Corruption, Gal. 6. 7, 8. Every one shall receive
according to the Deeds he has done. The Sacrifice of the wicked is an
Abomination, how much more when he brings it with a wicked mind, Prove. 21.
27. It was never well with Religion since a certain Mode thereof came up, when
they do such Acts, because People of quality See Zech. 7. 5.
do the like; and they do no more then according to the common Standard. This
is the moving, though not the only Reason, for they do expect some benefit;
when they must die, they would as willingly go to Heaven as the poorer sort,
and they trust unto these Prayers which they hope will translate them thither,
for though they did live in disobedience, and run unto the same Excess of Riot
as others, yet God is merciful, and they did ask him forgiveness; He is so
indeed, but also he is Just and True. There is no respect of Persons with God,
for as many as have sinned without Law shall also Perish without Law, and as
many as have sinned in the Law shall be judged by the Law, Romans 2. 11, 12.
According as it is written so shall every one receive, although he does never
so much flatter himself with idle Fancies and vain Hopes. Take heed and be not
deceived in this great and important Concern of your everlasting Happiness or
Misery, and to this I exhort you the more, because if you do mistake once, you
are eternally Damned; there is no correcting this Error, and therefore I say
again unto you, Take heed that ye be not deceived. In the mean while you may
know this one thing, that if the fashionable sort of Godliness will infallibly
bring to Heaven, how would that be found true which Christ says, A rich man
shall hardly enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 19. 23. but after this rate
he would easily, for the modish Worship requires not much Labor or Pains. And
as the Disciples asked our Lord upon that Saying, Who then can be saved? So if
this were allowed, the question may be reversed; Who then would Perish? For who
is it that follows the Fashion in Clothes, Behavior and manner of Living, and
does it not in Religion also? We are sure God spoke by his Son, and therefore
that is truth which he says; as for this Opinion it is contrary to his
Doctrine, and we know not who was the first Author of it, unless it came from
him, who sets up his Kingdom against that of Christ, whose Employment it is
to beguile Souls, the old Serpent, the Father of Lies. And the Falsehood is so
Transparent, that if they would but look thoroughly they may easily see it;
which they also would, if it did not contradict their own Lusts, and so they
remain willing to be deceived. But if they will, they may be deceived, and
shall at last go away with a Curse instead of a Blessing. Those on the left
hand Mat. 25. it seems, did not expect to have such a dreadful Sentence for
such a Reason pronounced against them, as appears, Ver. 44. They might think
themselves safe enough, because they did not see the Lord Jesus himself an
Hungered, or a Thirst, or a Stranger, or Naked, or Sick, or in Prison, for then
they say, they would have ministered unto him. They had the Letter of the Law on
their side, yet (ma^k this) their Exposition was not allowed, but the great
Judge gave his own, and by that Condemned them. But some now adays have not so
much to trust unto, for both the Letter and direct meaning of the Gospel are
against them. This Peter teaches plainly, Forasmuch then as Christ has
suffered for us in the Flesh, arm your selves likewise with the same mind; for
he that has suffered in the Flesh, has ceased from Sin, That he no longer
should live the rest of his time in the Flesh to the Lusts of Men, but to the
Will of God: for the time past of our Life may suffice us of have wrought the
Will of the Gentiles, when we walked in Lasciviousness, Lusts, Excess of Wine,
Revellings, and abominable Idolatries, 1 Pet. 4. 1, 2, 3. An exact Pourtraiture
of our times, for though the last may seem to have been somewhat ceased among
us, yet whose God is his Belly, or who says unto Gold, Thou art my Confidence,
is also an abominable Idolater: Says another Apostle, Walk in the Spirit, and
ye shall not fulfill the Lust of the Flesh, for the Flesh Lusts against the
Spirit, and the Spirit against the Flesh, and these are contrary one to the
other, Gal. 5. 16, 17. And the works of the Flesh are reckoned up further, some
of which are esteemed necessary Qualities of a Person of worth and briskness,
and the Fruits of the Spirit are thought fit only for dull, sneaking, base born
Souls; but not for them: So the Judgment of Gentlemen is contrary to the
Gospel. And that which would render one a meet Partaker for the inheritance of
the Saints in Light, is in no wise thought comely for those of that Station.
This I say therefore, and testify in the Lord, that ye henceforth walk not as
other Gentiles walk in the Vanity of their mind. Having the understanding
darkened, being alienated from the Life of God, through the ignorance that is in
them, because of the Blindness of their Heart, (as to saving and spiritual
knowledge, for otherwise they are quick-sighted enough) Who being past feeling
have given themselves over unto Lasciviousness, to work all uncleanness with
Greediness. But ye have not so learned Christ, Ephesians. 4. 17, 18, 19, 20. Let any
compare these places, and several others in the New Testament with the present
Fashion, and then Judge; Whether true Christianity and the modish Gentility are
not as contrary and incompatible, as Light and Darkness? And though some
Menpleasers, but not the Servants of Christ would fain reconcile impossible
things; yet let none trust to what they teach or say, for we are not to stand
or fall according to their corrupt Glosses, but the secrets of all Hearts are
to be judged by the Gospel of Jesus. Who will put his own Interpretation on his
own Laws, and we are to receive from his month the Sentence of Life or
Condemnation. Let none therefore be the more Confident, or presume to go on in
his Course, because one whom he has chosen for a guide, tells him, he is right
enough, and he is willing to believe him; for such can know no otherwise then
by the Gospel, and it is agreed on all hands, that those Texts which are given
to make wise unto Salvation, are so plain and easy to be understood that they
need no Interpretation at all; and it cannot be that any, who come in sincerity
to be informed, should be deceived in them. But thus it is, Men are strangely
given to their own Lusts; they cannot endure to resist the Allurement of
sensual Pleasures, and are not willing to bring down their haughty minds, and
yet would partake of the Promises of the Gospel, and avoid its Threatenings; so
there must be an expedient found out to do all this. How ready are they to
hearken unto, and embrace every proposal made to this end? Either by their own
deceitful Hearts, or by him who works with all deceivableness in them that
Perish: Or some others have been found, who instead of showing People Mic. 3.
5, 8.
their Transgression, and the House of Jacob their sins, have soothed them up
and concealed. Who have strengthened the hands of the wicked, that he should
not return from his wicked way, by promising him Life, Ezekiel. 13. 22. Who being
willing to please their great Benefactors, do according as they would have,
Speak smooth things and Prophecy deceits, Isa. 30. 10. Who know no sooner way
to oblige them, then by dictating Doctrines suitable to their ungodly Lusts and
Inclinations; that they may live the Life of the wicked, and die the Death of
the righteous; follow all iniquity here, and receive the Crown for Well-doing
hereafter. And this is done by divulging some pleasing (but wrong and
mis-applyed) Notions of Gods wonderful Mercy; of Faith in our Lord Jesus
Christ, and relying wholly on him for Salvation; of a formal daily Repentance
which is well enough, if more sincere and perfect on the Deathbed; the
Doctrine of partial Obedience; of Desires and Resolutions (which are for the
most part Mockery or Nonsense) the mistakes of Sins of infirmity, for the
works of the Flesh and unrighteousness come under these; of distinguishing
between the Counsels and Precepts of the Gospel, stretching it further then
they have Warrant from, 1 Cor. 7. 25. What they have a mind to follow those are
the Commands, and what they have not is of the other sort, and then they sin
not in neglecting it. And such like. Out of which may be patched up a fine sort
of Divinity to please the Great Ones here, by giving them Encouragement, that
after they have gratified to the utmost all their wicked Lusts, and bid
defiance to the Almighty in their Lifetime, yet they can appease him again
slightly, and when they will* But certainly this is quite to leave the
Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, to go on to imperfection, not laying
again, but utterly over-throwing the Foundation of Repentance from dead Works,
and of Faith toward God; which if such as pleases him, must consist in
Obedience, as well as to believe that he is. But one would think some did not
so much, or what is worse, Think that the Godhead was like unto Gold or
Silver, or stone graven by Art and Man's device, Acts 17. 29. for they would
stamp their own Impressions, and more derogate from his Glory, and despise him
in their own imaginations then they did, Romans 1. 23. for these would make God
such an one as they would have him, render him a Liar, alter and change his
very Nature, beseech him to determine his everlasting Gospel, rather then he
shall not save them. Or else how can they ever dream of thrusting themselves
into his Holy City above, any other way then by which God has appointed, nay,
going contrary to what he has Chalkt out. Our Savior Jesus Christ gave
himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity and puri^ie unto
himself a peculiar People zealous of good Works, Tit. 2. 14. Now these defeat
the very end of his Coming, for according to their supposal Men may still live
in all iniquity, and instead of being zealous for good Works, they need do none
at all, but cast themselves entirely on Christ's satisfaction and Merits. The
foregoing Verse is, The grace of God that brings Salvation has appeared unto
all Men, Teaching us that denying ungodliness and worldly Lusts, we should live
soberly, and righteously, and Godly in this present World; but according to the
daubing of some, if we do the contrary all our Life-long, and we do, that is
impossible, but say or wish as much before the last Gasp of Breath is gone, we
may lay hold of it. But hold there, Salvation is not Men's to give, they cannot
so much as redeem their own Souls, much less barter with Almighty God for
others. We are to have the Reward from his hands only, and he has said already
on what terms he will give it, Christ became the Author of eternal Salvation
unto all that obey him, Heb. 5. 9. and to none else. The Priests may not
prescribe unto him (who is a God of infinite Sovereignty and Power) Laws of
their own Head, nor parcel out the Objects of his Bounty; they may never
partake of it themselves, much less be so impudent as to set it out for others.
Themselves (...)e to stand among the number of the Criminals, for since they
have corrupted the Word of God, 2 Cor. 2. 17. Instead of warning the Wicked
from his way, such have been occasion why he sinned yet more, they shall
receive greater Condemnation. Nevertheless those shall not escape who being led
away with their own lusts and enticed, do gladly receive their plausible
Opinions and Sayings, but shall perish for all, Mat. 15. 14. Ezekiel. 33. 8. Isa.
9. 16. Though the Serpent Genesis 3. beguiled the Woman, and the Woman beguiled
the Man, yet the curse was pronunced on all. And it will be no excuse in the
last day, Lord, the Teachers who came in thy name told us we might do such
things and live, for Christ had foretold that false ones should arise, and
commanded to take heed least any Man deceive you. He left his Word behind to
try the Doctrines whether they be of Men or no, by which he will judge the
World, and not by this or that Doctors Opinion: Let others now put what meaning
they will upon the commands of Christ, yet if he should interpret them
otherwise, every one knows whose must be taken, and by which we are to abide.
His judgment and exposition will be according to Righteousness and Truth,
whatever others make now: If they turn the Word up Isa. 24. 5.
and down to make a gain of Godliness, and procure the favor of those above
them, yet the Most High God remains immutable, and cannot lie; let them make
what alterations they will, yet one comes to rectify: Says Christ, He that
rejects Me, and receives not my Words, has one that judges him, the word
that I have spoken, the same shall judge him at the last day, John 12. 48. So
it is most reasonable he should, and he shall be the alone distributer
according to the very intention and meaning of them.

This is necessary to be insisted on, because there is a wonderful deceit
cherished amongst the greater sort, who though they live in Wickedness and
Pleasures, and have no real inward sense of Religion; Yet if they can get a Man
in black, unto whom they make a partial relation of themselves; that they are
sinners indeed, but who is not? Howbeit, they do this and that good thing,
which they are sure to tell him of and magnify; and then if he not making a
through examination, acquaints them in general their condition is good enough
toward God, and they will go to H^a^en through his Mercies in Christ Jesus,
and intimate as if there was no such need for more; they forthwith cry him up
for an honest fellow, and ^^g themselves, now they can have their consolation
here and hereafter, that they will go on in their course. The abuse and
corruption this way cannot be vindicated from those who call themselves Pastors
of the True Church, for there are some who understand not what they say, and
whereof they affirm, who would be glad of a good Table or Preferment; Others
know better, but speak what they should not to comply with the custom of the
World or a Potent Neighbor; but it is a^ominable among those of the Roman
Church: The Priests there have modelled such a Religion (which they call
Christian, but is contrary to the very nature, design and end of it, as any
thing can be) as is most agreeable to sinful flesh and blood. They may be more
properly styled followers of Mahomet, then of the holy Jesus, for they have
used the very same Arts and Policy, though in a different way, to ingratiate
their Religion in the World, but especially amongst those of higher rank by
adopting it to their pride and wicked desires; for if it were true what they
said, none that had Money enough could miss of Heaven. O most damnable
Impostors! as if the gift of God could be purchased with Money, Acts 8. 20. As
if that Man from whom they pretend to derive all their infallibility, were a
liar when he said, Ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, as Silver and
Gold, from your vain conversation received by tradition from your Fathers, 1
Pet. 1. 18. But according to these Men of corrupt minds, if ye have plenty of
these, ye may still abide in your vain conversation: Who have made a concord
between Christ and Belial, and laid down a Scheme how Men may live contrary to
the Gospel and yet obtain the benefits thereof; who have cried up Peace, Peace,
to that way, where is no Peace.

For if we consider seriously the great displeasure God Almighty has to sin,
as is showed forth, 2 Pet. 2. 4, 5, 6. For one single Act of Disobedience, he
entailed a curse on Adam and all his Posterity, Of six hundred thousand of his
own People, whom he had brought out of Egypt, there were but two only which
went into the Promised Land; and Moses himself who had so often stood in the
gap between an enraged God and a provoking People, yet he was not admitted
there. But to leave those under the Law which works Wrath, and by which every
Man is accursed; come we to the Gospel which takes that away, yet of the sour
sorts of the hearers of the word, there is but one good: When one asked our
Savior, Lord, are there few that be saved? He said unto them, Strive to enter
in at the straight Gate, Luke 13. 24. Which signifies the using more endeavor,
then lazy and negligent Worshippers can pretend unto. And then there is Gal. 5.
24. Mat. 11. 12. 2 Cor. 5. 17. 2 Pet. 1. 4, 5, 6, 10. If these and more places
which do declare the strictness of the Gospel Precepts, were impartially
weighed in the Spirit of our minds, not putting in the balance against them
fleshly lusts or corrupt reason, How can we imagine a perfunctory and formal
course of Godliness (though it be never so much in vogue) will ever carry a Man
to Heaven? for none can go thither who obeys not the Gospel. Let Men promise to
themselves a future blessedness upon the Whims and Fancies of their own brain,
or else the Opinion of others; yet they are to remember once again, we are not
to stand or fall by these, but the Book of the everlasting Gospel shall be
opened, and it shall be according to what is written therein without humane
Glosses, but according to the Wisdom of God, who shall judge the World in
Righteousness. Neither let any one therefore at present be fearful, least when
he has run well, he shall not obtain, by reason of some sense which God may
put on his own Laws, which his poor Servant is not aware of; for God is not
unfaithful that he should deceive any: and on what conditions the promise of
Eternal Life is given, is so clearly delivered, that it is impossible any one
who has but common sense should be mistaken as to them. The great Men cannot,
for they have known the way of the Lord, and the judgment of their God, Jer. 5.
5. The Scriptures are able to make thee Wise unto Salvation, through Faith
which is in Christ Jesus, 2 Timothy 3. 15. What pertains to this end is so clear
and obvious, that they must be damnably wrested, if any one do err herein;
There is such a wonderful agreement concerning the necessary things, and such
plainness of expression, that none can be deceived, but he who has a mind to
be deceived; nor any be ignorant, but he that would be ignorant: so all are
left without excuse.

Suffer your selves to be admonished, who now walk according to the course of
this World, among whom you have your conversation in the lusts of the flesh,
fulfilling the desires of the flesh, and of the mind, Ephesians. 2. 2, 3. Consider
well what you do: You that say it is as good to be out of the World as out of
the Fashion, can you really think it as good to be somewhere else too, as our
of the Fashion? Will Company make that more tolerable? Do not look upon this as
vain Words, for it is a certain truth; if you follow the Multitude, you will
not be among those few in the narrow way that leads unto life; and you must
then be amongst those many of the other way. It is the command of God, Thou
shall not follow a Multitude to do evil, Exodus 23. 2. Every one that lives and
converses in the midst thereof, must out of his own experience and knowledge
assent to what the Apostle says, The whole World lies in Wickedness, 1 John.
5. 19. If thou have no mind to be condemned with the World, 1 Cor. 11. 31. Do
not comply with the sinful customs thereof; Remember what thou did promise
unto God in thy Baptism, that thou would renounce the vain Pomp and Glory of
the World, with all covetous desires of the same, and the carnal desires of the
flesh, so that thou would not follow or be led by them. This thou did then
promise by thy Sureties, which promise when thou came to Age, thy self were
bound to perform; and thou did take it immediately upon thy self, either at
Confirmation, receiving the Sacrament, or full purpose of mind; or if tho^ have
not, how can thou expect the benefits thereof? How art thou in the Christian
Church? If thou have not taken it upon thee, yet God will judge thee; and if
thou have, it is a fearful thing to be a Liar unto God. If thou think this a
thing of Form, the custom of the Country, then thou art a Christian only in
Name, and for all that to have thy Portion with Hypocrites and Unbelievers.

But thou have a distinction to elude this, and all which has been hitherto
spoken, viz. The Pomp and Glory of the World there meant, and those places in
the New Testament afore-cited, refer only to the Idolatrous customs of the
Gentiles at that time, and signify nothing to those of the present Age. This
is apparently false, for in the generality of those Texts, there is no mention
made of Idolatrous Customs; but of Lust, excess of Wine, excess of Riot,
Revellings, Vanity of Mind; they are somewhat intended, but not only. A full
Answer is given to all this from Acts 2. 39. The promise is unto you, and your
Children, and to all that are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall
call. And seeing Christ is to have a Church for all Generations to come, even
to the end of the World; undoubtedly he designed the New Testament which is
Sealed with his own Blood, and become of force by his Death as a means for
those to believe on him, and as a Law to govern their Manners, not only for
those which saw and heard him in the Flesh; but for their Children and
Childrens Children, even to all posterity for evermore. It is further decreed
that he shall judge the World by the Gospel: Now if he should (as most
certainly he will) understand them according to the plain and common sense of
the same Words; What then will become of those who trust unto this Objection?
Which if admitted true would strike at the Root of all Religion, and by further
degrees banish it quite out of the World. But if here Men should shake the fear
of God from their minds, by cunning Evasions, excuse themselves from the
Obligation of his Commandments; yet they shall never escape that vengeance
which now dogs them at the heels, and will be sure to seize on them when out of
this life: all their Sophistry will signify nothing at all, when they come to
appear before his Judgment Seat. Though at present they are so pleased, if by a
nice distinction they can save themselves from the obedience of such precepts;
yet when he discovers the deceit they intended to put on him, and makes them
of none effect, How must they be confounded before Angels and Men at the last
and terrible day? Indeed if we were to be judged by those of like infirmities
with our selves, who know nothing of our thoughts, then there might be some
hopes by crafty excuses and subterfuges to palliate our case before them; but
Seeing God has appointed a day, in the which he will judge the World in
Righteousness, by that Man whom he has ordained, Acts 17. 31. Who is the Power
of God, and Wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 1 24. Who will have all the Churches know,
that I am he which searches the reins and hearts, Rev. 2. 23. How then can
they expect by some foolish fancy, to out-wit him, or that their close intents
shall not be made known in that day, when Christ Jesus shall judge the secrets
of Men according to the Gospel? And before him shall be gathered all Nations,
and he shall separate them one from another, as a Shepherd divides his Sheep
from the Goats, Mat. 25. 32. And then several, who think themselves sure enough
at present, will be deceived in their Expectation. Many will say unto me in
that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy Name? and in thy Name cast
out Devils? And in thy Name done many wonderful Works? and then will I profess
unto them I never knew you, depart from me ye that work iniquity, Mat. 7. 22,
23. Every one is sensible there is no little Torment in a Worldly
disappointment, but in a thing of so great Moment it must be inexpressible
anguish; The indignation will be so great, that they would utterly destroy
themselves if possible, rather then see themselves rejected by God and that
happiness with him, and to go along with the accursed crew into everlasting
Misery. No words can thoroughly set forth that discontent and raging those
wretched Souls must groan under; and therefore least any one who casts his eye
upon these lines, should come amongst their number, to prevent this danger, let
him look upon the verse foregoing, Not every one that says unto me, Lord,
Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, but he that does the Will of my
Father which is in Heaven, Mat. 7. 21. This place, which is easy to be
understood, should take away their confidence, who rest only in a formal course
of Devotion; for here we are told it is not that, but doing his Will (which is
revealed in Scripture) that must bring us to Heaven. What can be more plain?
and which if thoroughly confidered of, would take away all those destructive
mistakes we have been laboring all this while to remove.

Has any one a mind to go to Heaven, or escape Hell? He need not ascend up
thither in curious Speculations, or study whither it be possible to climb up,
and wrack his brains which way to accomplish it; so neither need he descend
into the lower most parts of the Earth to search where the place of Torment is,
that he may avoid it. But the Word is nigh thee, which shows the way to the one
or the other: They are both set before thee, Choose whether you will have.
Never mind what others do. Every one is to bear his own burden, and to give
account of himself before God; What they do, what is that to thee? Look thou to
thy self, thou art more sensible of thine own Happiness or Misery then all the
World besides; it were better for thee that thou were Happy and all Mankind
besides Miserable, then that thou were Miserable, and all the rest Happy.
Whosoever shall come to dwell with everlasting Burnings, it will be but a poor
mitigation that he had abundance of fellow sufferers; When any one now is
afflicted with violent pains of Stone or Strangury, it is but a small relief to
come and tell him that another person is tormented so as he is; nay, if
thousands were in the same manner, he had rather be at ease then to suffer with
them, though they be of the greatest Rank and Quality. I have heard of one, who
in the time of Frolic and Madness, did say, he was for going to Hell, because
he should have his esteemed good Company there; but none can seriously consider
and determine so, and if God should take him at his word, he would ever repent
his folly; If he could have it for wishing, he would be out of their company,
and be contented with all his heart to wander alone (as the Saints have done
here for a small time in Dens and Caves of the Earth) for all Eternity. Neither
let him think his condition will be good enough, because he shall fare as well
as the most, for the dregs of the Cup of Gods Wrath will not be less bitter,
the more are to suck them out. Who is he that will stick to his old Companions
in the day of their Temporal Adversity, if thereby he shall involve himself in
the same? Such indeed (though one of a thousand) may be found, for there is
hopes of getting out again; but what Man in his right wits would plunge himself
into a bottomless Pit, from whence it is impossible ever to recover himself,
only to gratify some Friends? Friends did I call them, who are more illnatured
then those in Hell; for the Rich Man did pray that some one might be sent to
his Fathers House, for he had five Brethren, that Luke 16.
he may testify unto them, least they also come to this place of Torment. He
did not imagine it would be any satisfaction to have the more company there;
and if some now in the flesh are of a worse disposition to require such an
unreasonable thing, it can be no incivility to deny them. They are Fiends and
Devils incarnate; What good breeding can it be to oblige such, who are willing
to bring others under the same condemnation with themselves? O come not thou
into their secret, unto their assembly let not thine honor be united, My Son
if Sinners entice thee, consent thou not, surely in vain the net is spread in
sight of any Bird, and they lay wait for their own blood, they lurk privily for
their own lives, Prove. 1. 10, 17, 18. If thou come in among them, thon wilt
endanger thine own also. Enter not into the path of the wicked, and go not into
the way of evil Men, Prove. 4. 14, 15.

It has been one of the chief policies of Satan to work sin into the Fashion,
that being the standing rule of great Men's Actions; for they are not so much
led away with Reason, as with Custom, they must do what others of like quality
do, they had rather err with them then be in the right way by themselves. But
they do not attend, that this is like natural brute Beasts made to be taken and
destroyed, and shall utterly perish in their own corruption, 2 Pet. 2. 12. For
in the mean while they follow the drove, not knowing whither they go. As Sheep
or Oxen going together to Slaughter, they pass along upon the Road not thinking
of the shambles till they come to them, and then they will give back, but are
forced in. Who are hurrying in the way to Death and Hell, when they come near
the first, they wish they had not walked in such a way, but in vain; Time past
cannot be recalled in a thought, neither will a desire at last gasp be accepted
for a well spent life. Had you not better consider before hand, and turn aside
from the vain and sinful customs of the People? It will not be a sufficient
exchange for the loss of Present and Eternal Happiness, to be a little puffed up
with following the humors of the Majority. If thou will renounce their evil
ways, another may do after thy Example, and then a third, and so the greater
part may come to serve and obey the Lord, and then the Fashion would be of that
side. I am confident there are the inward wishes of many to this; What a
blessed World would this be? In a brave and noble attempt every one should try
to be the leading Man, but now in these days the Kingdom of Heaven suffers
violence, and the violent take is by force; and to ascend up into the City of
the living God, is a more Glorious Enterprise, then to scale the Walls of the
strongest Fort in the whole Earth, yet none sets forward in this Warfare. Some
may be seen to follow afar off, but every one takes heed of being foremost; The
chief of the People do slink, and come most behind: They do not care to march
in the first Rank next to the Captain of our Salvation, nor yet to Encourage
others. How vastly different are Men's Actions in reference to Heavenly, and the
things of this World? Every one that is not a downright unbeliever must
acknowledge that they are greater then these, yet how Cold and Sluggish are our
affections to the better part? How warm and lively after these which shall fail
from us? as we see they have done, and do daily vanish from others. Either the
Possessions are taken from the Owners, or the Owners are snatched from their
Possessions. If the things of God were duly considered, they would be as much
practiced and universally esteemed as those trifles and bubbles (things of no
substance, and yet of short continuance) which the Devil offers to beguil Men
of a Kingdom. Pride and Lust are so established in the World, that there is no
removing of them, otherwise then by the Grace of God; which will effectually do
it, where it is received. There is hope yet, notwithstanding the Folly and
Degeneracy of the greater part of Mankind, that as some have escaped the
Corruption that is in the World through Lust, 1 Pet. 2. 14. Others whom God
shall bring to Faith and Knowledge, will do the like: The Lord add to the
number of them, that sin and iniquity may loose ground, obedience and
righteousness may increase and flourish in the Earth. But if this were as
universally practiced as the other, how would be seen the Trial and Excellency
thereof, for then People would See Ps. 66. 3, and Isa. 60. 14.
follow after it for the same Reason, without intention to please and Good Will
toward God, as now they do not come up to that degree which is required
thereof. To do but what is common, and others do the same, there is no thanks
nor reward for that, Mat. 5. 46. Luke 6. 33. If there was no opposition, there
could be no Virtue. And if good things were highly esteemed among Men, how
should we know whether any one would endure Shame and Reproach for them? Many
of the chief Rulers believed on Christ, but would not confess him, for they
loved the praise of Men more then the praise of God, John 12. 42, 43. And even
now several Persons of note and quality have a good liking to his Doctrine and
Commandments, and would live more exactly according to them, if it were not for
lessening their Reputation and Esteem in the World.

But let these consider, Mark 8. 34, 35, 36, 37, 38. He that loves Father or
Mother more then me, is not worthy of me, Mat. 10. 37. So neither can he be
thought worthy of him, who loves his own Honor more then him. How can ye
believe, which receive Honor one of another? John 5. 44. And though Honor is
such a precious thing through the innate Pride of our Hearts, that we can more
easily part with dear Life it self; yet he requires both, when thereby he is to
be glorified and obeyed, Here is the Faith and Patience of the Saints, Here is
the difficulty of a Christian, to forsake beloved Lusts, which are as dear as
his right Eye; to part with Honor which is more precious then his own
Heartsblood, when our Lord requires it. This makes it hard for a rich Man to be
saved. A threefold Temptation does beset him from the Lust of the Flesh, the
Lust of the Eyes, and the Pride of Life. Though all are very apt to seduce him
from the obedience and love of God, yet the last to some is of greater force
then the rest; for there be which can contemn their abundance, use, but not
trust in it; Who being of a knowing Temper can forsake Pleasures; but Honor
and Reputation they cannot, at least will not give up. They do all things to
advance it, whether sinful or not, is no Consideration, or no hindrance: They
refrain from doing that, which the Law of God and the dictate of their own
minds prompt unto, if they once think they shall lose somewhat of their Esteem.
To make a sincere and honest Profession of Godliness is not Fashionable in this
crooked and perverse Generation; and therefore though they may well approve of
it, they will be sure to keep it within, and not discover it by a suitable
Conversation. The Apostolical rule is, Whatsoever ye do, do all to the Glory of
God, 1 Cor. 10. 31. but these consult their own to the neglect of that. This is
a distinct Principle of Action, which not only makes it self equal, but exalts
it self above the Will of God, for by that they are guided, and if led to any
thing contrary to the other, they consent unto it, and put him off with a, Good
Lord pardon me. They lightly regard the Law of the Most High, and think to come
off with a Complemental Ejaculation. In Honor they prefer themselves before
him, and yet vainly dream to pacify him with a few words of Course: For which
of you would be thus served? If your own Servants should refuse to do such
Commandments of yours, because they thought it an under-valuing, and they
should lose their Credit among their Fellow Servants; what would you do to such
proud Fellows, but turn them out of Doors? And if they should come from time to
time, and formally ask your Pardon for not doing your Will; and yet still
through Pride refuse to do it, you would be so much the more incensed against
such Rascals. The Case is just the same between God and thy Self: however great
thou art in thine own and the Worlds Opinion, thou art more inferior to Him,
then the meanest Scullion beneath thy self; and it may be said unto thee, with
the same measure thou measurest, it shall be meeted out to thee, O thou wicked
Servant. What can thou expect but to be rejected by God, who in the time of
thy Trial would not do his Will, but only in what was agreeable to thy
temporal advantage and Honor. When the day comes that shall burn as an Oven,
and all the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly shall be as stubble, and the
day that comes shall burn them up, says the Lord, Mal. 4. 1. Will he accept
of Pride as an excuse for Sin, and Omission of Duty? Because thou would not
be less esteemed of by thy Fellow Servants. Whom were you bound to seek Honor
of, they or him? It is better to be despised by all the World, then by him
alone; and if that be so irksome now, much more would it be to rise up to
everlasting Shame and Contempt; and therefore it is reasonable to submit unto
the less to avoid the greater. Says the Lord Christ, If any Man serve me, let
him follow me, and where I am, there shall also my Servant be: if any Man serve
me, him will my Father Honor, John 12. 26. Resign them up all unto him, thy
Body, Substance, Fame, Friends, Liberty and Life: And it may be, he will so
dispose of them all, that thou may keep them, and be his Servant; or if any
be taken away, it may be restored double. Or whatever is lost with some, may be
gained with others. Yet if not, Obedience is more excellent and acceptable with
God, when it is with full purpose of Heart, come what will come, Life or Death,
Shame and Dishonor, good Report and evil Report. The Service is pure and
sincere, when all Selfish ends and sinister Considerations are banished. When
he Labors to approve himself unto God, and not as in the sight of Men. When he
can be content to walk in obscurity and Contempt all his Life long, and make
sure of his Approbation, which is lasting, and carries Reward with it; which
will make sufficient Compensation for want of a short and empty Applause. The
more he is despised by Men for Well-doing, the more he shall be had in Honor
by God. If the Heart be seasoned ^^h Grace, it is easy to despise the Shame,
which others would cast upon him, and then it can neither disturb, nor hinder
from going on in the good way.

Too many are beaten off by Reproaches, and others are discouraged Of
Reproaches. 1 Pet. 4, 1, 4. Romans 15. 3.
under them; and therefore it may not be improper, forasmuch as of Christ it
was written, The Reproaches of them that reproached thee, fell on me; so Arm
your selves likewise with the same mind. The common imputations, which at this
time of day are cast on them who continue in all Obedience, are, Preciseness,
Folly, and Singularity. But had those who asperse herewith so much Wit and
Ingenuity, (for such Revilings are never the effect Psalm. 15. 3.
of the Grace and Fear of God) to consider thoroughly of that Rule, by which all
Christians are to walk, and they must go exactly according to it, if they would
have the Peace consequent to so doing, and the future Reward thereof; then I
say, that they cannot reasonably condemn him who lives most according to it. It
is esteemed no fault punctually to observe National Laws, Ecclesiastical
Canons, and Humane Constitutions. And then why should they be blamed, who call
themselves Followers of Jesus, to do according to all the Laws he has given
them? Especially when himself has said, Ye are my Friends, if ye do whatsoever
I command you, John 15. 14. If he calls them Friends, there is no Reason why
others should call them Fools, unless who esteem his Doctrine Foolishness; but
most certainly they should not, who name the name of Christ, and do not depart
from iniquity; and therefore speak in Contempt of those which do, hereby to
excuse themselves from not living according to the Rules of their Profession.
But by thus doing, They add iniquity to their iniquity, and not come into thy
Righteousness, Psalm. 69. 27. It was the saying of one, The Speculative Atheist
was the greatest wonder in the World, except one, and he was the Practical
Atheist. Nothing can be so strange and foolish, as he who believes the Gospel,
and yet does live accordingly, but the greatest part of Mankind being of this
number, they would reverse this if possible, and account him a simple Fellow,
who lives according to it: So mightily has Satan prevailed in the hearts of
Men, as to make them believe any thing which may advance his Kingdom. But this
is the most unaccountable folly that can be, and not fit to be entertained
among reasonable Souls. Good God! how ridiculous is it that they who profess to
believe, that keeping thy Commandments is the way to Eternal Life, yet should
account those foolish who do them? They All agree, it is a Man's highest Wisdom
to use the right means to obtain the greatest Happiness; they acknowledge
Obedience to all Gods Laws is such, and yet they would fain esteem him foolish
who does thus: so they would raise a false conclusion from true and right
premises, which is impossible, and here as absurd, as any thing in the World
can be. One would admire that Men of understanding should swallow down such an
Opinion; it is taken in with the generality without consideration, for they
know that in wordly concerns, when one is in pursuit of a Temporal Good, as an
Estate, Office or preferment, it is Wisdom to make use of all the probable
means which may help toward obtaining thereof, to leave no stone unturned; for
they say, a Man can never be too sure: Yet these believe there is an Heaven,
which does exceed whatever is here below; that it is every Man's business to get
him an Interest therein, that the most likely way to get thither, is to do
according to all those Directions in Scripture, and why then should not such an
one be reputed Wise? He seems to Act most prudently, if judged according to the
measures of wordly Wisdom. Much more is he approved of, if determined by the
true Notions of that, which was set up from everlasting, from the beginning, or
ever the Earth was, Prove. 8. 23. Let all the World say or think what they will,
Wisdom and Truth are immutable, and cannot be tossed too and fro by the Breath
of foolish talking People; they are Emanations from the Divine Nature, and in
this corrupted State, where truth is hated, Wisdom cries out, but few hear the
voice, they are not to be found among the multitude, so that one must be wiser
then the Generality, or he will not be wise at all, as the end will prove: When
it shall be better to have been among Christ's little Flock, then the common
Herd. It is better to shine as Stars for ever and ever, although we now like
them move contrary; then to walk according to the Course of this World, and to
have a Portion with the Children of disobedience.

That Effect of Singularity which is so much feared, intitles Of Singularity.
unto the Blessing, Luke 6. 22, 23. the Hatred of Men procures unto him the
love of God. To be a Christian not only in Name, but in Deed and in Truth, is
to be a Singularist in the common Opinion; for if any observes all things
whatsoever Christ has Commanded, he is a Man by himself, an Humourist, only
because he will not serve his Lord by halves as the generality of Mankind do.
But let not this seem strange, as if some new thing happened unto Jer. 12. 9.
him; for the Saints heretofore were Singularists, Noah in the Old World, Lot
in Sodom, Abraham in Chaldea, Joseph in Egypt, Moses in Midian, Daniel in
Babylon. And by the way these were Men of higher Rank, and yet were not ashamed
to serve the Lord in wicked Generations. Undoubtedly there were others in their
days, who did so likewise, yet but few in Comparison of the Romans 11. 3, 4.
ungodly. Elias is recorded in that general Apostasy of the Jews to say, I am
left alone, But what says the Answer of God unto him? I have reserved my self
seven thousand Men, who have not bowed the knee unto the image of Baal. They
were about one in an hundred computed according to the number of the
Israelites, and then they were liable to this Denomination. God's faithful
People have been the fewest in number ever since the World began, his Church
may be compared to an heap of Corn mingled with Chaff, wherein a Grain appears,
here and there by it self, compassed about wit^ the other, but though it lies
several in the heap, it shall be gathered, Mat. 3. 12. and Singularity shall at
length cease, and end in the Communion of Saints Whilst they are in the World,
they are not of the World: A thing is called from the greater part, and when it
signifies the People contained therein, it is in Scripture Language taken for
the wicked, because they are the most. And not to do as the Generality does, is
reckoned Singularity; now to show forth a Christian Conversation in good Works,
is not what the most, but only few do: And therefore it is thus accounted of.
But let none be discouraged with this term of Reproach; for even the Men of
this World who decry it so much, would with all their Hearts be singular if
they might; none would refuse to be the only rich Man in his Parish; neither
would the Ambitious refuse an high Title of Honor, because none in the
Country besides had the like. This is the thing they aim at, to be more
wealthy and honorable then the rest of their Neighbors: Every private Person
would willingly be more Happy then others, and will use the means to be so: And
it is esteemed no fault to direct their Actions accordingly, but Wisdom for
every one to advance his own interest as much as he can, although he gets above
others. This is the Sense of mankind as to wordly Matters, and there is the
very same Reason, it should be so likewise in things pertaining to endless
Life. Every single Person would save his own Soul, and be for ever Happy; if he
should miscarry, he bears all the loss himself; and others will never be able
to help him. Why then should he be blamed, if he trys to secure himself? And
seeing there is but one way, which is Godliness, wherefore should he be
lessened for walking in it? Because others do not, that is their fault, not
his, he must look to himself. He is to stand upon his own Legs, and therefore
it must be his business to take heed he does not fall; for if he should and
others fall with him, he only would feel the Pain of it, and they when fallen
will not be able to help him up. It is commonly said, every Man has Power over
himself; let him follow his own Humor; and though if we are touched with a
feeling of Humane Nature, we should endeavor to do another Good, and be
instrumental to his Happiness; yet it must be a strange Savageness, when
instead of doing this, we are Angry and Malign him only, for endeavoring after
it himself. If he does well, who lives according to Gods word, why do we not
imitate him? If ill, then O Lord thou have deceived him, and he is deceived,
Jer. 20. 7. Such an one we neither envy nor hate, but Pity. But John 17. 17.
the Lord who Sanctifies his Chosen through his Truth, and gives them his Word
which is Truth, can in no wise be said to deceive any. If then, he that come,
unto him unfeignedly, neither does evil, nor yet is in an Error, why should
the World be so enraged against him? Either this or nothing is to hate without
a Cause, See John. 7. 7. John 15. 18, 19, 23, 24, 25. There is an Enmity in the
Seed of the Serpent against God's Children, Genesis 3. 15. Rev. 12. 17. they will
say all manner of evil of them falsely, if they think their lying may be
concealed and gain Credit with others: How glad are they of an appearance of
evil to object against them? And to spread abroad a dubious Story aggravated
with the most ill Circumstances, that malicious Wit can invent. If concerning a
Religious Person, it passes current and uncontradicted; but if of another,
there will be enough to make Excuses for him, to Examine thoroughly and detect
it of Falsehood in one part, and so dash it in the whole, but as to him they are
ready to add something to render it more odious. The wicked plotteth against
the just, and gnasheth upon him with his Teeth, Psalm. 37. 12. And therefore
they cast Reproaches, laugh and do any thing to blemish his Fame and
Reputation. This has been, and is the usage of the World. And who will come to
serve the Lord in sincerity, must provide accordingly. If your Feet be shod
with the Preparation of the Gospel of Peace, Ephesians. 6. 15. You will find therein
so many Blessings and Promises on this occasion, that notwithstanding all
hindrances you may run the way of God's Commandments. Above all taking the
shield of Faith, wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery Darts of
the wicked, Verse 16. for if you believe the good things God has prepared for
them that love him, and on the other hand his Terrors for the disobedient,
certainly such a light thing as the unsavory Breath of talking People cannot
counterpoise the Love or Displeasure, of so Merciful, so Just a God.

When any turn from sin, they must expect Mockings and Reproaches from their
old Acquaintance and Partners in iniquity; for having done it already, They
think it strange, that you run not with them to the same Excess of riot,
speaking evil of you, 1 Pet. 4. 4, 5. But rather Pity, then be terrified by
them, For these speak evil of the things they understand not, 2 Pet. 2. 12.
There is no Reason why they should deride those who leave their Company and the
evil of their doings; for they are posting on in the wrong way, and (unless
prevented in like manner) their loud and impious Laughter will shortly cease in
weeping and g^ashing of Teeth.

Thus has been viewed the great stumbling Block, which hinders Of Humility.
the Gallants of our Age from coming into the right way: They have an inward
Approbation, and would fain save their Souls; but Reproach or lessening of
Reputation they cannot submit unto. Hear what our Savior says, Verily I say
unto you, except ye be converted and become as little Children, ye shall not
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 18. 3. There are no subsequent words of
Exemption for Men of Honor and Renown; He has indeed showed how they may be
so there likewise, Whosoever therefore shall humble himself as this little
Child, the same is greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven, Verse 4. Let not the
mighty Ones of the Earth think here is running out upon strange Doctrine, for
the end why they take Pride upon themselves is to be great, and a way is showed
(though it may seem odd, yet true) how to be so. The Gospel runs contrary to
things here, If any Man among you seems to be wise in this World, let him
become a Fool that he may be wise, 1 Cor. 3. 18. And so if he seems great, let
him become little, that he may be great. By doing those things which are little
and despisable in the Eye of the World, but great and highly esteemed by God.

To lay in a greater Foundation by good Works, to abound in Christian Graces
and Virtues, is the way to receive a greater Reward in Heaven. It is
commendable to be ambitious after that, so far as to put upon using the means
to obtain. Accustoming himself to all Godly and Sober living, and to have
respect unto all the Commandments, to lay out himself which way he shall most
glorify God, and do good to mankind. To improve time and every other Talent to
the utmost, and such like as may be learnt from Duty and Example in God's word.
It is worth any Man's pains to aim at the higher Degrees of Glory, they being
much beyond the greatest trouble that can be endured here. To which he may be
quickened by considering what Austerities some have suffered to gain the
Kingdom of God, how they have tumbled themselves naked in the Winter Snow,
rolled upon Thorns, macerated the body with long fastings, submitted unto all
the inconveniences of wilful poverty, and other hardships of Popish
Superstition. But these being additional services to what he has commanded
(which many times make them neglected) and if that was not perfect, or as
though the Godhead needed any thing, Acts 17. 25. They will oblige and give
him more ex abundanti. And therefore it is to be feared, they are not so very
pleasing in his sight; even thus much we may judge of our selves, that if we
show unto those under us the manner how they shall do such things, we had
rather they keep to that, then do it another way out of their own head; for as
that argues self-conceit in him, so a distrust of our Wisdom, in that they know
better, and we cannot tell how we would be served. If there be any such
thoughts in Mortal Men or Spiritual Pride, God knows; all their performances
signify nothing, and are so far from being acceptable, that they are an
abomination unto him. Ye shall not add unto the Word which I command you,
neither shall you diminish ought from it, that ye may keep the Commandments of
the Lord your God, which I command you, Deuteronomy. 4. 2. Let him strive to perform
all them to the utmost, and if he does so, letting alone those of Humane
Invention, he will be preferred before those who have been very frank and
diligent in doing those things which were never required at their hands. It Is
not multitude of outward Acts, but deep Isa. 1.
Humility of Mind which has more acceptance with God; He that shall humble
himself, shall be exalted, Mat. 23. 12. Who is of such a disposition as to be
content with all his heart to be least in the Kingdom of Heaven, if he may be
there; and is well pleased with whatsoever God does: If so, he cannot grudge at
the good Man of the House for doing what he will with his own, if he sees
another who was not so long in the Vineyard as himself, have an equal reward,
seeing he has what was promised. He cannot fume or rage to see the beloved
Disciple lie in his Saviors Bosom, or other favorites of Heaven admitted to
a nearer Familiarity with Jesus; He is not discontented or envious to behold
white Robes given them, who were slain for the Word of God, and for the
Testimony which they held, Rev. 6. 9, 11. They all receive according to their
Works, and if he had done the same things, he should have had the same honor;
The different Crowns are set upon their heads according to their deeds, and
those which were eminent for Sufferings or Christian Graces (the chiefest
whereof is Humility) shall have a proportionable Reward.

So that, would thou be great in the Kingdom of Heaven? Learn of the good
Patriarch to take up this resolution, The Lord shall be my God, Genesis 28. 21.
and to esteem thy self not worthy of the least of his Mercies, Genesis 32. 10. Not
to say from the Mouth only, but the ground of the Heart, Lord I am not worthy
to be ^ed with the crumbs that fall from thy Table, and yet to be as obedient
Children, not fashioning himself according to the former lusts in his
ignorance, but as he which has called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner
of Conversation, 1 Pet 1. 14, 15. To be contented for his final portion with
the least mite of Gods bounty, and yet heartily labor in the mean while not to
offend him in the least point of his Law, to fulfill all Righteousness, to do
all that is commanded him, and say he is an unprofitable Servant, he has done
that which was his duty to do. He will indeed have an eye to the recompense of
reward in General, for hereby he will better despise the Pleasures of Sin, and
not be weary of Well-doing; but of what sort it shall be, whether above or
below others, that he leaves to the alone disposal of him; Such are the
thoughts of the sincere and humble Christian, his expectation is not so very
great, but that shall never be an hindrance, but further his advancement. If he
would be contented to be made as one of the hired Servants, Luke 15.
yet he may have the best Robe put on by his most Bountiful and Gracious
Father: Before honor is humility, Prove. 15. 33. By this way the great example
thereof, as may astonish Men and Angels, came to be highly exalted, Phil. 2. 6,
7, 8, 9. And whosoever will follow his steps, being meek and lowly in heart, may in
some measure be exalted likewise; You shall lose nothing in the end, if you
would at present lose that just esteem of your selves; for that the pride of
the World calls so, which is but Fancy and Usurpation. And whatsoever Station
ye are in, the command reaches you; Be ye of the same mind one toward another,
Mind not high things but condescend to Men of low Estate, Romans 12. 16. This is
the way to be had in Honor by God, and preferred even above those who call it
a Sordid and base Spirit.

Lowliness of mind, say they, is sneaking, and does not become a noble Birth
and Extraction; But are these Men of a better Parentage then the Son of Go^? Is
their Family better then his, who also according to the flesh was descended
from the Ancient Kings of Judah? Are they wiser then he? If they would
acknowledge they are not, they must think the Apostle spoke both Reason and
Sense, when he enforced this duty from his Example. Let this mind be in you
which was also in Christ Jesus, who being in the form of God, thought it not
Robbery to be equal with God, but made himself of no reputation, and took upon
him the form of a Servant, and was made in the likeness of Men. If God be above
Man, and yet humbled himself to be as the meanest, certainly it can be no
disgrace for him (who does not differ from another but by an Estate, fine
Clothes, aerie Titles of Honor) to show that civility which is due to a
Fellow Creature, partaker of the same flesh and blood, and heir of the same
common Salvation. Behold God is Mighty and despises not any, he is Mighty in
Strength and Wisdom, Job. 36. 5. The Proudest two-footed Creature on Earth must
not vie in Glory with him, and if he does not abhor Men of low Estate, why
should they who are of the same mould, and stand in the very same Relation to
him who is Lord over all? Why should they trample over those of their own kind?
Love Horses better, and look upon them with more scorn then if another sort of
Creatures? They are incensed perhaps because those which seem so despicable in
their Eyes, are of the same nature with themselves; as if they were angry at
themselves because they are but Men, or have such an high value of themselves,
that they would have nothing look like them but what is Glorious and Lovely.
How far will Pride proceed! Wherefore should Earth and Ashes be so lofty in its
own conceit? Why should he swell so much, who when his breath is gone, becomes
one of the most loathsome Spectacles in the World? Why should he show himself
more imperiously and disdainfully over those who are Flesh of his Flesh, and
Bone of his Bone, then the Lord and Maker of them all, unto whom all the
Nations of the Earth are as the drop of a Bucket? It was commanded the King
(who is as much above Nobles as they above Beggars) his heart should not be
lifted up above his Brethren, Deuteronomy. 17. 20. Much less may they, who not only
presume to be exalted in their own conceits above, but account them more
inferior then brute Beasts; although they be made in the Image of God, and are
his workmanship as well as themselves, and therefore in no sort should be
despised. This temper, though so frequent in the World, it being one mark of
Gentility to speak contemptibly of the common People, and to make them keep
their distance (another apt instance how contrary it is to true Religion) can
neither be justified from Grace nor Reason. It is contrary to the mind of God,
and his Son Jesus Christ; He was both a Pattern and Preacher of Humility;
notwithstanding his High and Eternal Generation, he kept company with Publicans
and Sinners, his constant Associates were poor Fishermen, he did one of the
meanest Offices by washing their Feet, and did not slight or refuse any that
came unto him of whatsoever condition. In the precepts he gave, he made no
distinction some to be observed by Rich, and others by the Poor, but to extend
unto all equally; Take my Yoke upon you and learn of me, for I am meek and
lowly in heart, Mat. 11. 29. Take away Infidelity, and Men are almost
Christians: Take away Pride, and they will become altogether so; for this
accursed thing hinders from embracing his whole Doctrine. The heads of the
People will not lose ought of their esteem; it is beneath them to learn
Humility, Meekness, Long-suffering, Gentleness; if they will not, they may let
them alone, their end is to be with them that obey not the Gospel.

Come to those that will, Therefore if any Man be in Christ, he is a new
Creature; old things are passed away, all things are become new, 2 Cor. 5. 17.
He is to leave off the evil thoughts, Words and Actions of his Natural State,
and to practice the contrary. Whereas in times past he had his conversation
according to the course of the World, in Vanity of Mind, and was acted by his
own humor; now it is to be as becomes the Gospel, according to the Examples
of good Men, in Lowliness, and in every thing agreeable to the Will of God. In
every Generation there were Persons of Eminency who served him, and they did
nevertheless retain their Possessions and Servants, and other things according
to their degree; so it is lawful to do the like. Another abuse does not
hinder, but the thing may be well used; In great Men's Houses their plentiful
Provision of Meat and Drink, is perverted to Gluttony and Drunkenness, their
Titles of Honor, outward Estate, and fine Clothes become Sinful through Pride;
by having many Servants, they grow Imperious, and are too much lifted up; their
several Sports and Recreations produce abundance of Idleness, and some in a
literal sense give the Childrens ^read unto Dogs: Giving that to them which
belongs to the Poor; but all these ill consequences may be separated, and
turned another way unto Good. Out of their abundance they may use Hospitality,
feed the Hungry, cloth the Naked, and themselves receive the Creatures with
Thankfulness and Moderation; If well attired, they may be humble minded, and
are so for distinction. God has as well ordained the Silk worm, as Sheep for
Clothing. The duty of Masters to Servants is laid down, and they are no where
prescribed to have such an exact number; as many they have, they maintain so
much the more, who otherwise might be destitute of convenient Live-lihood.
Neither are Titles of Honor to be relinquished, for the Scripture calls Men
Gods and Lords: Nor does it speak particularly against Recreations, they may be
laudably used to clear up the Spirits, that otherwise would be dull and cloudy.
The danger of them is excess and hindrance of more important concerns; all
things are Lawful, though subject through the corruption of Man's nature to be
abused, and therefore must be continual circumspection as to them. It is hard
to sit constantly at a full Table, and it shall not prove a snare to him; to
have all variety of Pleasant Liquor, and yet not pour down to excess; to taste
daily of sweet things, and yet not be sensual minded; It is difficult to wear
fine Clothes, to be inured to outward Pomp and many Attendants, and yet not to
be Proud; to be Rich, but not High minded. The Gospel has showed this way for
such to go to Heaven.

Greater is he that is in you, then he that is in the World; there is that
which is a preservative against all Temptation. But grow in Grace, and in the
knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 3. 18. Be not content with that
measure you have already; for the Lamp continually burning, requires fresh
supplys of Oil: There are appointed means to attain further degrees thereof,
which whoever sincerely makes use of, will be more confirmed in the good way,
and against returning unto folly. Look to your selves that we lose not those
things which we have wrought, but that we receive a full reward, 2 John 8.
Which may be by giving way again unto some paltry Lusts, or pitiful transitory
Pleasures; you have had the same already, you know how vain, sudden and
unsatisfying they are: if you entertain them again, you will receive a greater
damnation, 2 Pet. 2. 20, 21. Ezekiel. 18. 26. Heb. 6. 4, 5. All the irksomness in
Religion begins now to be over, and when thou art come into the way of Peace,
will thou leave it? O my People! What have I done unto thee, and wherein have I
wearied thee? Testify against me, Mic. 6. 3. The weariness does not lie in the
duties God has required; for by doing them they are more easily done, but that
is occasioned by hankering after old ways, and our own unwillingness to good;
but remove these, and his Commandments are not grievous.

The whole of our duty is comprised, Tit. 2. 12. Which whosoever actually does,
finds more ease and pleasure then can be had in the contrary; Besides that
great difference in the verse following, Looking for that blessed Hope, and the
glorious appearing of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ. To partake
fully thereof is the sum and comprehension of all happiness; and in the mean
while the expectation thereof is exceedingly valuable, as now it is to have
assurance of any future good.

But how is it with the wicked and ungodly? They cannot look beyond this life
without strange Terror and Amazement. When their Earthly enjoyments begin to
fail, as in Sickness, Pain, outward Calamity; or if none of these happen, yet
in declining age, how sad and miserable they are? They find no satisfaction in
this World, and having provoked God, they dare not cast a thought upon the
other; and yet they are continually going toward it, but for fear of being
Tormented before their time, must not consider before hand. Their Case is like
unto condemned Prisoners in a Dungeon, whose condition is wretched and life
grievous, and yet wish the time long before dragged out to Execution; They know
that must come, but are willing to put it out of their mind still; so these
with all outward things cannot purchase unto themselves inward Peace. They are
tired with, or cannot relish their sumptuous manner of living, which they
could willingly part with if assured their Souls might become as nothing, and
so ever remain. But there is a real fear it may be otherwise, and the sense of
future judgment is not quite razed out of their minds with all they could ever
do: so they endeavor to lengthen out an uneasy life, and put that afar off,
which they dread as the inlet to misery. What does it signify to fly a little
from that, which will at length overtake them? And how bitter will that be when
it comes to grasp, the thoughts whereof are so astonishing? Such devices do
manifest both Folly and Misery, for would it not be better for them to repent
and bring forth Fruits meet for Repentance? and then all this would be avoided
under which they groan.

For the good Man by obedience fulfills the condition of the promises, so they
belong unto him; He is continually storing up comfort against his dying day,
and therefore not tormented with the apprehension thereof. It is not unpleasant
unto him to consider of leaving his Fine House and Lands, who has a firm
expectation of better things in Heaven; The faith and hope of this do very much
Mitigate all the Miseries he meets with here, that they are as none at all. It
is generally granted, he is more happy then others in reference to another
life, and the inconveniences of this; but is he so as pertaining to present
enjoyments? Yes assuredly, for our excellent Religion does not take them away,
but only prescribe a more excellent manner of receiving them; It pares off what
is insipid and hurtful; it takes away nothing of the Man, but Folly, Falsehood,
and Extravagancies; Every Creature of God is good, and nothing to be refused,
if it be received with thanksgiving, for it is sanctified by the Word of God
and Prayer, 1 Timothy 4. 4, 5. And to our selves it is rectified with Temperance
and Moderation; for hereby a greater and more sincere pleasure is perceived,
then the Glutton or Winebibbers can boast of. Sobriety gives a relish to every
thing: Humility takes away Ambition and Insatiable desires, and brings
Contentment and Rest to the Soul. Charity delights by a Blessed Sympathy: He
that distributes willingly, rejoices with him that is partaker of the Alms. It
is more Blessed to give then to receive.

As for his Family and Government over his Servants, there are Directions
given, Col. 4. 1. Ephesians. 6. 9. 1 Pet. 2. 18. 1 Timothy 6. 2. Tit. 2. 9. Job 31. 13,
14, 15. Psalm. 101. 6, 7. Both observing their respective duties, they live more
comfortably, then where neither do.

For Company, if he does not more converse with all sorts then Necessity and
common Civility oblige unto; yet he is not therefore deprived of the Pleasures
of Society: and what delight can any one endued with Goodness or Wisdom take
amongst them, who find none within themselves bu^ in Wickedness and Folly? Who
cannot be longer Merry, then whilst Sinning. Depart from me ye evil doers, for
I will keep the Commandments of my God, Psalm. 119. 115. There is conversation
enough to be had amongst the Good, Prudent and Sober part of Mankind; He may
have for Company, Godly and Learned Ministers, who must necessarily be
acceptable to good Men, these being the two great Qualifications, which can
render conversation truly useful and pleasant.

The Scripture does admonish of our demeanor toward them, Exodus 16. 7. Deuteronomy.
33. 10, 11. Lam. 4. 16. 1 These. 5. 12, 13. 1 Timothy 5. 17. 1 Cor. 4. 1, 2. 2 Cor.
5. 18, 19. They are Ambassadors of Christ, and we signify the respect and
honorable esteem we have to any King, by showing the like to his
representatives. They are the outward Instruments through which God sends
blessings to Mankind, who instruct and exhort them to lay hold of the greatest
Good: so unless they love not the Lord Jesus, nor themselves, or are horribly
ungrateful, they must receive such with honor and good will. Many exclaim
against this kind of Doctrine, What be Priest-ridden? But who are those, which
take up such a Proverb of reproach? He that despises you, despises me: and he
that despises me, despises him that sent me, Luke 10. 16. Said our Lord to
his Disciples, from whom are derived Pastors and Teachers for the perfecting of
the Saints, for the Work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of
Christ, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12. Let people have a care how they speak contemptibly of
this order of Men. Had we lived in the days of our Fathers, in the first Ages
of Christianity; we might have seen Kings and Emperors showed them that
Civility, which now the meanest Laick will hardly vouchsafe. But let not those
who are Novices or corrupt in Life and Doctrine hence take occasion to be
lifted up with Pride (for so began the Usurpation and Errors of the Roman
Church) or expect any estimation unless like those primitive Men they are
ensamples to the Flock; who did not only Preach, but follow the steps of our
Savior in Humility, such as spoken of, 2 Cor. 4. 5. And were not puffed up,
but did thank God for the good will of the People, and were more industrious
and faithful in their duty. Such even in this time, however placed in the
Church, whether over a Diocese or single Parish, are equal Company for those of
highest Rank: and whosoever fears God, will esteem them accordingly.

In the next place succeed his faithful People, I am a Companion of all them
that fear thee, and of them that keep thy Precepts, Psalm. 119. 63. Said David
the King. Much less should it seem strange and odd for those of inferior
Quality to do the like. Why should any one refuse it? Either Pride of Heart,
which must be taken away, or Custom of the World, but an evil Custom is not to
be complied with. Why should we overlook our Brethren, or separate them from
our Company? God admits the meanest to Communion with him, and will receive
them into his Presence; Are we better then he? They are to be admitted amongst
Angels and Archangels, amongst all Saints where estrangedness and keeping of
distance shall cease: What is any (though of the most exalted Condition) to
disdain their Conversation in the mean while? If this mind be in him, he may be
contemned by God for despising his Servants, who are the same with himself; for
those things which make the difference are without the Man, and were never
given to thrust others far from him. If he thinks himself too good for their
Company on Earth, how knows he but God may not think him good enough for
their Company in Heaven? And then they will take up this Saying: Lo this is the
Man that slighted us, would not come near us, we forsooth were not worthy of
him; but see what his Pride is come unto, God has rejected him, now he would
be with us if he might, The Obad. 3.
Pride of thy Heart has deceived thee. To prevent this Danger, there is for
imitation the Resolution of the Royal Psalmist, To the Saints that are in the
Earth, and to the excellent in whom is all my delight, Psalm. 16. 3. Mine eyes
shall be upon the faithful of the Land, that they may dwell with me, Psalm. 101.
6. The Scoffing World cry out such an one to be of a low Spirit for keeping
mean Company, who does aim at as great things as they do, and goes as right a
way to accomplish them. It will be discerned who is wise, and who is not; and
even now they receive a mutual delight and satisfaction, equivalent to the
greatest Jollity. But to answer others: Who keeps the meanest Company? He that
Converses with Hawks, Hounds, and has Dogs to feed at his Table? Or who
Associates with those of the same likeness with himself, who are equally made
in the image of God? Is not a rational Creature better then brute Beasts? If
thou say not, thou art a Turk, and disparagest thy self, besides him, who
has created us Patterns of his own Eternity. But they are more lovely, who
have those Beauties of Holiness, those Divine impressions of goodness within
them; which are discerned by the spiritual Eye, and more esteemed of then the
utmost Bodily perfection. They have that Righteousness which endures for ever,
and therefore to be preferred before those pompous Titles of worth, which
shortly shall fail, and that Honor which is to be laid in the Dust. They are
Children and Heirs of God, and Joynt-Heirs with Christ, Romans 8. 17. and if we
believe these Relations do exceed those of the World, it can be no more a
Disparagement to Converse with them, then the Son and Heir of a Nobleman,
though as yet he has not one Farthing of his Fathers Demesnes. By this we know
that we love the Children of God, when we love God and keep his Commandments, 1
John 5. 2. And so again, if we love God, that will be manifested toward his
Chosen Ones, his Sons, his Elect, his Servants, and whom he vouchsafes to style
by all Expressions of kindness. We know that we have passed from Death to Life,
because we love the Brethren, 1 John 3. 14. Where is love, there an Union is
desired with the object beloved, and accordingly will be had. Let none
dissemble, God knows the Heart, and for what Reason it is, if any neglects
his Duty in this particular. If he despise the Poor and low Estate of faithful
People, What shall he do, when God rises up? And when he visits, what shall
he answer him? Job 31. 14. Let him show that he does not, by a Christian
Conversation with them; let him be gentle, easy to be entreated, use
Hospitality without grudging, speak Friendly as one Man talks to another
without scornful or ruff Language. And let them be advertised from, Isa. 3. 5.
Gal. 2. 2. not to abuse or make an occasion of Contempt another Humility and
Courteousness; for we are in no wise to confound the distinction God has made
amongst mankind.

The Blessing of the Lord it makes rich, and adds no Sorrow with it, Prove.
10. 22. so in his Word he has prescribed a most excellent way for their
Station and Circumstances, by which they are freed from those Miseries, others
of like Condition are subject unto: and then they enjoy the Comforts here, in a
much better way. The Service of God, doing good to their Country, Meditation
and Reading, the Affairs of humane Life, those moderate and innocent Delights,
do take off from the Irksomeness and Tediousness of time; so they live happily
and pass through here with more Rest and Quietness, then others who take no
Care what shall become of them.

Thus says the Lord, Let not the wise man Glory in his Wisdom, neither let the
mighty man Glory in his might; but let him that Glories, Glory in this that he
understands and knows me, Jer. 9. 23, 24. It Is not noble Birth and
Extraction, but that Relation which the Almighty vouchsafes to have toward
mankind, which makes them truly Honorable. Have we not all one Father? has
not one God created us? Mal. 2. 10. Nay, have we not the same Father after the
Flesh? Are we not all the Sons of a Gardener? In the most Ancient and
illustrious Family, if the several mean descents could be traced up, those
Ancestors would be found out whereof none has Reason to be proud of: What the
Prophet says, Ezekiel. 16. 3, 4, 5, 6. is sufficient to abase any one concerning
his Original, and should be an inducement not to trust in his own, but to seek
that Honor which comes from God only, John 5. 44. His Providence has ordered
the several distinctions in the World, and has placed them in several Seats to
work out their own Salvation. It is no diminishing, but increase of present
Happiness to comply with the Good will of God. Wealth and Riches shall be in
his House, Psalm. 112. 3. they are already; but there is somewhat better nearer
within, The Satisfaction of a good Conscience. He is Clothed well, suffers
neither Hunger nor Thirst, Cold nor Nakedness. God has given him both
spiritual and temporal Blessings. By the first he does Love and Honor his
Great Benefactor: And he does not set his Heart upon the things that are seen
(for that is the great danger of Worldly abundance) but uses them to Minister
only unto his Pilgrimage: Being assured, that though these are good, yet God
has provided better things, that when this Happiness (which is imperfect, and
for a time) is to be determined, he is to arrive at that which is perfect, and
to endure throughout all Ages. When such an one is to be taken away from his
fine Habitation, Estate, Wife, Children, Servants, and all that is esteemed
dear amongst Men; in the sight of the unbelieving World he may seem to die, and
his Departure be taken for Loss and Misery: Whereas he shall enter into Peace:
They shall rest in their Beds, each one walking in his uprightness, Isa. 57. 2.
Then only his true and uninterrupted Felicity begins, which shall never end.
Would thou be in this Man's Condition? Go thou, and do likewise.

CHAP. V. Of the COMMON PEOPLE.
It is the Duty of all to be in some Calling: An Exhortation to serve God:
Against Ignorance, and Unbelief: Some Considerations of living in the World,
and further drawn from the four last things. Of different Communions: Of
Deceits. A Description of the Wicked and Godly in this World.

OF this Order they are reputed in the World, who do not live of their own, but
follow some Trade or Employment. And here it may not be improper to speak
somewhat concerning that, and the Obligation all lie under to it.

As soon as God created Man, he was appointed some work to do, even in his best
Estate of innocence. But then was Labor without Sorrow and Tiresomeness, for
it was after added, Genesis 3. 17, 19. In Sorrow shall thou eat all the days of
thy Life, in the sweat of thy Face shall thou eat Bread. This was pronounced on
him for us all, for all have sinned in him, and who can plead Freedom from it?
If we expect the Blessing of the second Adam, it is meet we should submit to
the Condition of the first: Neither does that Dispensation wherewith Christ
has made us Free, exempt herein; for one says, who knew the utmost extent of
it. Those walk disorderly which work not at all. Now them that are such, we
Command, and exhort by our Lord Jesus Christ, that with quietness they work and
eat their own Bread, 2 These. 3. 11, 12. Intimating that it was not properly
their own, unle^s they did work for it. Not that it is necessary for all to
take manual Employments upon them, for some have not strength of Body, and
their Education is another way; but yet may do as much good, and be serviceable
to their Country, as those who do reap and sow. The Promise of eternal Life is
to keeping the Commandments, whereof the second is, Thou shall love thy
Neighbor as thy self; which obliges to do those several good and necessary
Offices for him, which we would have done for our selves. But how agrees
herewith that proud and selfish Spirit, who would have others do any thing for
him? the Poor must dung his Ground, Cut his Corn, and be serviceable unto him,
but he will not contribute toward their good in so large a manner as he
expects they should do for his. He speaks disdainfully and contemptuously of
those who drudge and slave for a Livelihood, and blesses himself, because he is
not forced to an Employment for Bread; for indeed few do take any upon them,
unless by constraint, or greedy Desires after increase; but who does so only
out of Conscience Neh. 5. 15. 18.
toward God? The heads thereof judge for Reward, and the Priests thereof teach
for hire, Mic. 3. 11. The fault is in making that the ultimate end, when they
would not do so much unless for the Profits and Maintenance belonging to such
Offices, and these are principally intended. To be in some Calling is our Duty,
and also it frees from the Misery and Sin of idleness. We have restless and
busy Spirits, which must be Conversant about something: Both the Faculties of
mind and Members of Body were designed for Proper Action, they are uneasy when
not employed. Such a kind of Life is more wretched and irksome, then the
m^anest Labor and working with the hands.

Behold this was the iniquity of thy Sister Sodom: Pride, fullness of Bread, and
abundance of idleness was in her, and in her Daughters, neither did she
strengthen the hand of the Poor and Needy, Ezekiel. 16. 49. These three go
together in too many Men and Women of this Nation, and have Connection: The last
is the natural result of the two former, for through haughtiness of mind and
Sloth, which is the consequent of Excess, comes that Contempt and neglect of
honest Callings. When the Wisdom of God has ordered Man to work and labor,
they Fancy themselves Psalm. 104. 23, 24.
too good for it. So they either think themselves to be somewhat above Men, or
that to be unbecoming them. But they should have a great Care how they despise
Divine Ordinances, because of what is written, Numb. 15. 30, 31. Heb. 10. 28.
The Son of God came into the World not to be Ministered unto, but to Minister.
But some contrariwise think, others ought to do nothing, but serve and cringe
unto them: For all their high Imaginations, they are but Men; be they never so
Selfish, they stand in need of others: so it is both Conscience and Reason they
should do as they would be done by, and be alike useful unto others. But the
nice and delicate Souls do not love Trouble or Pains; if they would thoroughly
rouse themselves from Lethargy, they would find more delight then ever they did
in the unactive manner of Life: The being accustomed to business or bodily
Labor makes it Pleasant, and takes off from the Irksomeness of Life. It seems
strange that those who greedily hunt after Happiness, should yet give way to
Idleness; which is a Torment and Vexation to the Soul. Is it because they have
more time to enjoy Pleasures? When they are had continually, they cease to be
such. Intermingle Work with Play, and both would be delightful; but if one
followed only the latter, it is more Tiresome then to go all day long to Plough
and Cart. It is not only a Matter of temporal Convenience, but is necessary in
order to eternal Rest and Happiness. So it stands as to the means of obtaining
it, and prevention of the hindrances, which are Temptation and Sin. Let the
Devil never find thee idle (was the good Advice of one) for then he cannot
tempt thee. At times of leisure he is most busy, suggesting Pride and
spiritual Wickedness, all things to begnile and lose somewhat of our Reward. In
that time also the Solicitations of the World present themselves, and we Parley
with them. But the worst of all is from within: The heart which is desperately
wicked, when it has no outward Object to fix on, that Corruption lurking there
begins to stir. It will run after Theft, Covetousness, Lust, and all manner of
Evil; which breaks forth into iniquity and disobedience. It may be observed of
several, who are rightly disposed to the ways of Good, but they have nothing to
do, and not knowing how to spend their time, resort to the Pleasures of Sin and
idle Company; which either choke, or stop the growth of the Good Seed. So
mightily has idleness contributed to Satan's Kingdom, and the Destruction of
Souls; which should have been prevented by honest Labor and Employment.

But some make an Excuse from that, because they would have more leisure for
Religion; whereas that if used aright does not thrust out, but help toward it.
They were both ordained to stand together, and Consistent with each other; for
the same God appointed all. The common mistake is of consining the whole to one
part, as placing all in Acts of Godliness and Devotion, which is but one third;
and therefore not to shut out from the other Duties: I have not caused thee to
serve with an Offering, nor wearied thee with incense, Isa. 43. 23. It Is not
required of any one to tire his Soul with long Prayers, and our Savior Christ
remarks of the Heathen, who think they shall be heard for their much speaking,
Mat. 6. 7. The Sacrifices were offered up under the Law every Morning and
Evening, but not the whole Day; except the Sabbath Day, for which was ordered a
double and continual burnt Offering, Numb. 28. 9, 10. Thereby giving to
signify, that the day which is even now set apart for the immediate Service of
God, should be wholly spent in sacred Duties. Six days shall thou Labor, and
do all that thou have to do. God could have provided things without our Labor,
if his Wisdom had thought fit; but having ordained that, a Man who is faithful
and diligent Col. 3. 24.
therein, serves him as acceptably at that time, as in holy things at another:
Nothing hinders, but that in the midst of our Work there may be a constant
Sense of God over our mind, and a fixed purpose not to offend in any thing: So
is the Will of God that none should live unto himself, but unto him, who has
called us in one hope of our Calling, and also some manner of Life, that we may
get necessaries for our Being here: And if we have them already; yet to work
with our hands to give to him that needs, Ephesians. 4. 28. If we have that also,
yet still we are to be beneficial unto others.

Not one of a thousand, who is in a Trade or Employment, neglects that for the
business of Religion: and who is in none, not this, but something else is the
real Cause. Men generally run to the other extreme, and will not allow that
time they might conveniently for the Service of God. If one should employ an
hour or two more then ordinary in a Week, he would be more accused of
negligence, then who consumes thrice the time in Drinking-houses, or Fruitless
Recreations; so apt are we to grudge in ourselves every minute more then needs
must. Who hears the word Preached, or goes to public Prayers on Weekdays, does
Act as one that believes the Gospel and lives accordingly. Acts 26. 7.
David and Daniel were both engaged in much Worldly business and matters of
State, yet we read what they did, Psalm. 55. 17. Psalm. ^19. 164. Dan. 6. 10. and
any one now may do the like, and will lose nothing by it. The Blessing of the
Lord makes rich, which is sought for, and had by Prayer. So that time, which
others think lost, may be gainful as to the present; but most certainly it is
to the future. We have known several instances of those, who through Sin or
Carelessness have came to Poverty, but never any by thus doing. That of the
Apostle is observable as if he had foreseen what People would make a P^etence
to neglect the one, or thrust out the other; and therefore he joins them all in
one Verse as very Consistent, Not slothful in Business, fervent in Spirit,
serving the Lord, Romans 12. 11.

If one did behold all the Transactions and Labor under the Sun, how those
several Stations and Employments are appointed unto Men: Every one conduces to
the benefit of the whole, and has Connection one to another, he ought to Praise
him who rules over all. O Lord, how manifold are thy works! in Wisdom have
thou made them all, the Earth is full of thy Riches, Psalm. 104 24. In another
kind it is showed in things of an higher Nature. It is all done by the same God
which works all in all, and those several gifts are for every one to profit
withal; which should be once 1. Cor. 12.
more considered by the useless Men of the World. Every single Tradesman and
Labourer does further the Need and Delight of mankind; even those which seem to
be meanest and less honorable, do necessarily conduce toward it, as
Husbandry. The several Employments in the World tend to our Good, in the
different Capacities of Mind, Body and Estate. None is to be despised, for we
have all our Treasure in Earthen Vessels, and the lower kinds of Labor are
fitted to the Sustenance and Wellbeing of them: So they likewise do contribute
to the benefit of our better part. He that is in the most worthy Station,
stands in need of the unworthy, as well as this Man does of him. The whole Body
fitly joined together, and compacted by that, which every joint supplieth
according to the effectual Working in the measure of every part, makes
increase of the Body, unto the ^difying of it self in Lev^, Ephesians. 4. 16. Let
there be no strife which is most beneficial to the whole, for all are so;
though some must be above others, or otherwise there would be a Schism in the
Body. The higher sort of Employments have proportionable sorrow and weariness
going along with them, especially such as require plodding and contrivance;
Whereas it is not so in handicrafts, for when the Art is once learned, there is
no vexation or doubt of mind to work in it. The Son of God is s^pposed to have
been a Carpenter, Mark 6. 3. And to have labored in that till thirty Years of
Age; and also the Apostle of the Gentiles did work in the Occupation of a Tent
maker, both which are reputed mean Trades; yet they having been thus honored,
none has reason to be ashamed of his of alike kind. Eyes were given to see,
Ears to hear, and also hands to work withal; so it can be no disparagement to
employ them to that for which they were designed. Those who would account it
so, and make a mock of the labor of the Poor, may be despised by their great
Master; when those who have been used to hardship and diligence in the World,
may be admitted into the Rest that remains for the people of God. They are in
the ready road to Heaven, if to their Pains they will add Godliness,
Righteousness and Sobriety; if they do these things, they shall never fail: The
temptations of the World, Flesh and Devil will not so easily prevail against
them, whose time is taken up with honest labor; The promises are more peculiar
to them, Mat. 11. 5. Luke 6. 20. Jam. 2. 5. 1 Cor. 1. 27. Our Lord chose for
his Disciples none of the learned Pharisees, or Rabbis, but Fishermen, and of
other mean Occupations; he called them at that very time, As Levi when he was
sitting at the receipt of custom, Luke 5. 27. Simon Peter and Andrew his
Brother, as they were casting a Net into the Sea. And going on from thence, he
saw two other Brethren, James the Son of Zebedee, and John his Brother in a
Ship with Zebedee, their Father mending their Nets, and he called them, Mat. 4.
18, 21. The good News of his coming into the World, was first told to the
Shepherds abiding in the Field, and keeping watch over their flock by Night,
Luke 2. 8. So God appeared to Moses, Exodus 3. 1, 2. To Gideon as he was
threshing, Judge. 6. 11, 12. Thus acceptable it is unto him when Men abide, and
are diligent in their calling; he does not esteem them the less, but rather
chooses them for the meanness thereof. In his Holy Word there are many
particular allusions to the several Trades in the World, as the Husbandman,
Carpenter, Smith, Potter, Shepherd, and such like; they are upon such sure
grounds of obtaining a future Happiness, and there is so much reason these
should seek diligently after it, that it would be an admiration if any should
miss thereof.

Yet alas! God is not known amongst them all, no, nor the greatest part; though
they are more encouraged as having the promises, of which sort was Christ
himself and the Apostles. It is exceedingly to be pityed, that the Word of God
upon them also should have no more effect; Hearken my beloved Brethren, Has
not God chosen the poor of this World, rich in Faith, and heirs of the Kingdom
which he has promised to them that love him? Jam. 2. 5. Why therefore will you
not also choose him to be your God? Some have done so, but why will you not
all? Indeed one would imagine every single Soul should do so, unless he did
cast his eyes out into the World; and then he might see Satan has a Kingdom
among these equally as the great ones of the Earth. Wickedness is not confined
to high Places, nor inhabiteth only in fine Houses; but has spread among those
of low Estate, and crept into the smallest Cottages. Oppression, Bribery, and
Injustice are in great Employments; Cousenage, Lying, and all manner of deceit
do accompany every inferior Trade: there is a knavish part, a Mystery of
iniquity interwoven into it, and is peculiar to each profession. There is a
general failure of Truth and Justice from among us; I have seen violence and
strife in the City, mischief also and sorrow are in the midst of it, deceit and
guile depart not from her streets, Psalm. 55. 9, 10. In the Country is
overreaching one another, each Man trys to impose upon his Neighbor; the
hireling loyters and is negligent in his Masters business. The poor in time of
leasing will break the Commandment for a morsel of bread and handful of barley,
if they have opportunity of taking it from the heap and not be discovered: They
are every where corrupt in their dealings, there is hardly one that does
justly. They will exclaim against the Debauchery of the Rich, and perhaps out
of an ill humor, because themselves are restrained from sinning after the same
manner through want; but they will equal them in another kind by Dishonesty,
Falsehood, and Murmuring: and the same Spirit of disobedience would lead them to
commit the same sins (they now speak against) if they had where-withal. The
Word of God is gone forth against all manner of Sin and Iniquity, and it will
signify nothing at his Judgment, to say, you did not commit such and such, if
you did of another sort; Ignorance, contempt of and repining against God,
Slandering, Lying, and Theft are as damnable as Whoredom, Drunkenness, or
Gluttony. As the rich are more liable to the enticement of these, so are you of
the others: They are more easily beset by the pleasures, you by the profits of
this World. Both are in Temptation, that the trial of your Faith and Obedience
may be had; there is no necessity for either of you to fall, the one may be
temperate even in the midst of all his abundance; the other may be honest, and
yet have sufficient for Life and Godliness. God has given the rich great
advantages to work out his own Salvation, so he is in alike danger of
miscarrying; the poor has not quite so great furtherances, but is in less
danger. This comes to be through knowledge and ignorance, the former know more;
the other not having such means, are commonly poor and foolish, for they know
not the way of the Lord, nor the Judgment of their God. Jer. 5. 4.

Ignorance has, and does yet too much abound in our Land; Of Ignorance.
especially amongst the lower sort: The causes whereof has been the
covetousness or poverty of Parents; who either would not, or were not able to
put them to School, and then it should be supplied by the charity of others: Or
else their own perverse will, who hated knowledge and despised instruction out
of a wicked mind, because they think that if once they knew the will of God,
they are to do it; which they care not for, and therefore will not seek to
understand it, vainly hoping hereby to be excused from obeying: Or thirdly, the
fault and negligence of Pastors and Teachers, who were for doing no more then
just to entitle them to their Tithes. They are all ignorant, they are all dumb
Dogs, they cannot Bark, sleeping, lying down, loving to slumber, they all look
to their own way, every one for his gain from his quarter, Isa. 56. 10, 11. And
because this might have been had with less, they have not been diligent and
earnest to make people thoroughly understand which be the first Principles of
the Oracles of God. If such hindrances were removed, all the inhabitants of
this Nation mi^ht know the Lord from the least unto the greatest. What could
God do more, then to give us the Law and the Testimony, and the Light that is
in them? To command that his Gospel be Preached to every Creature, wherein is
so plain a discovery of Himself, and his Son Jesus Christ; that none who either
hears or reads can be ignorant, let him have never so mean a Capacity, unless
he is a mere natural Idiot, of whom more is not required then is given. There
is an appointed Order of Men, who are to be Guides of the Blind, a Light of
them which are in Darkness, an Instructor of the Foolish, a Teacher of Babes,
Romans 2. 19, 20. But if they instead of speaking to Edification and sound
Doctrine, will utter dark Speeches or useless Notions; if the people will come
into the Assembly, but not hearken to what is said, or willingly forget, if
those will not search the Scriptures when they are commanded so to do; God does
move and incline, but forces none: They know not, neither will they understand,
they walk on in Darkness, Psalm. 82. 5. Come to die like brute Beasts, and then
be reserved (Hear ye all this, and tremble) until the Lord Jesus shall be
revealed from Heaven in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not
God, 2 These. 1. 7, 8. You think to go Heaven, because you live a poor laborious
life, but how can you expect that? when Truth it self has said, This is life
Life Eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ
whom thou have sent, Joh. 17. 3, Think not this knowledge too excellent for you
to attain unto it, What should hinder? If you can read, you will understand;
and then you hear the Word Preached every Lords day, you may enquire of
Christian Brethren and Friends; so having these advantages, if thou can not
read, thou may believe, and do thy duty, if thou have in sincerity a mind to
do it. Many people talk of ignorance, by which they will defend their ungodly
manner of living, which in truth is a further degree of Provocation, because
they began that first with not ^esiring the knowledge of Gods ways. Those times
are long ^^nce passed, when he winked at Ignorance, Acts 17 30. And it cannot
be now pretended under the Gospel, especially where (blessed be God) every one
has or may have the Book of saving Knowledge. The most unlearned Soul, who can
neither write nor read, has other helps to be saved, and to come to the
knowledge of the Truth; for God has appointed means to make it known unto Men.
In this Place and Generation none can be ignorant, but he who is willingly
ignorant, if rightly examined, of perverse mind and set purpose, as will more
^ppear in that day when the secrets of all hearts shall be judged. This is one
of those deceits, by which Satan works in the m^nd^ o^ M^n and Women, and holds
them Captive at his W^^l. He wh^spers that they are sa^e enough as long as they
do not know Gods Commandments, and the silly People are willing to have it so;
they will sooner give credit to him who was a liar from the beginning, and
would deceive them, then the Prophet of the Lord, who best knew his Will and
fore-warned them not to fall under his sore displeasure. It is a people of no
understanding: therefore he that made them, will have no mercy on them, and he
that formed them, will show them no favor, Isa. 27. 11. As sure as this is
Gods Word, such will neither be excused from punishment, nor ever come to
Salvation, unless they both know the things of God, and also do them.

As Ignorance is too much in our Coasts, so likewise is Unbelief; Of Unbelief.
both which are equally found among the lower sort of Mankind. Hence they know
no other ends of life then food, raiment, sleeping, and rising up early to take
pains; all their care is what they shall eat, and where-withal to be clothed,
and how to get Money for necessary things. They know no other reason of their
coming into the World, and are apt to murmur at the hardness of their
condition; the very beasts do put them in mind of their duty, and silently
upbraid them with the negligence thereof. The Ox knows his owner, and the Ass
his Masters crib, but they do not know, Although there is more reason they
should know God, for he is more gracious unto them, then themselves are to the
dumb Creatures; They understand less of the most Excellent and Glorious Being
above, then brutes do of them: For the Cattle look unto him that oringeth them
fodder; but they look not unto him who gives them their Meat in due season,
Who makes Grass to grow upon Mountains, and Herb for the use of Man; Who
causes the Seed to be prosperous, and the ground to give her increase. When
darkness overspread the whole Earth, he left himself not without Witness in
that be did good, and gave us rain from Heaven, and fruitful Seasons, filling
our Souls with food and gladness, Acts 14. 17. These things our eyes see, our
hands handle, we taste them with our Mouth, we reap the fruit and enjoy it, yet
are unmindful and consider not from whence it first comes.

It may be alleged; Did we with our very eyes so clearly see the Giver of all
these good things, as other Creatures do us when we carry them food, we should
be ten thousand degrees worse, if we did not know him.

To which it is answered; God is a Spirit, and cannot be seen with ^odily eyes.
He is so exceeding Glorious, that in this frail and infirm state no Man can see
him and live, Exodus 33. 20. But yet the invisible h^ngs of him from the
Creation of the World, are clearly seen, being understood by the things that
are made, Romans 1. 20. We must by our very reason conclude, it was some one who
made all these things, and he is God. Further he has ordered, that We walk by
Faith, and not by Sight, 2 Cor. 5. 7. So that if he should make a clearer
manifestation of himself, there would be no faith at all, and then no Trial of
Obedience; for would any one dare sin against him, if he saw him face to face
with his Bow bent, and Sword drawn re^dy to take Vengeance on him? It has
pleased the Lord to put us here, to prove us, to know what is in our hearts,
whether we will keep his Commandments or no. We are far ff^ from the
inhabitation of his holiness, but he fills Heaven Deuteronomy. 8. 2.
and Earth with his presence; And has made us to dwell here, and has
determined the bounds of our habitation, that they should se^k the L^^, i^
happily they might feel after him, though he be not far from every one of us,
for in him we live, and move, and have our being, Acts 17. 27, 28. In the works
of Creation and Providence he has plainly discovered himself, besides that
evident revelation he has made in Scripture. Considering he has decreed we
should live by Faith; What else could be done to beget in us a more full
assurance of Faith? The works of Creation are long since past, for they were
finished in the first six days; but those of Providence still endure; Upholding
all things by the Word of his Power, Heb. 1. 3. Those without life are kept up
by his Mighty hand; Every plant in the Field (was made) before it was in the
Earth, and every Herb of the Field before it grew, Genesis 2. 5. But now is
nourished and springs up from the Earth, which he has ordained to Minister
^ood to sensible things; so all proceeds from him. There are some who would
fain any way rob God of the honor due unto his Name, and therefore will
ascribe these things to Nature and second Causes; but to stop their Mouth (who
go under the name of Christians) with the word of an Heathen. What else is
Nature but God himself, and the Divine Reason interwoven into all its parts?
Says Seneca, It Is Sen. lib. 4. cap. 7. de Benef.
God who rules over all, and has given to every thing its Nature, and ordered
them to Act accordingly. Thus he has endued the Earth with virtue to bear Seed
and Fruit; accordingly being tilled by the labor and industry of Man, it does;
in the mean while he is not to Dig and Root there, seeing no further, but to
look up to that God who has given the ground power to bring forth these
things. Those unbelievers who cry up so much for second causes, do unawares
acknowledge a first, for otherwise how could there be a second? And this first
cause is God, by whom, from whom, and for whom are all things. Thou art worthy,
O Lord, to receive Glory and Honor, and Power, for thou have created all
things and for thy pleasure, they are and were created, Rev. 4. 11. Hence thou
may as easily be known by reasonable Creatures, so far as to glorify thee
as God, as themselves are known by Horse and Mule which have no understanding.
Isa. 17. 7.


No Man has seen God at any time; the only begotten Son, which is in the
bosom of the Father, he has declared him, John 1. 18. The Word clothed in
flesh, and conveyed to us by Ink and Paper, and engraven in Tables of the Heart
has made him more known unto us. The truth of all Jesus did and said, is
confirmed by Miracles, Wonders, and Signs and Gifts of the Holy Ghost; Acts 2.
22. Heb. 2. 4.
and has stood out against all the Malice of Men or Devils, armed with nothing
but its naked simplicity and reality; Which all the Gentile World were not able
to suppress, though they did try with their utmost skill and might; Which had
no aid from the World, yet obtained the victory over it: Which still increased,
though who entertained it got nothing at present but cruel Mockings and
Scourgings; Moreover Bonds and Imprisonments, nay, further the most horrid and
Tormenting Deaths that was possible for Flesh and Blood to suffer; yet through
Faith hereof endured them all with more Constancy and Resolution, then was ever
seen in the Mightiest Men of Valor. If these and several other Arguments were
duly considered and weighed, it would be the greatest wonder, that for all
these any yet should not believe; So more then abundantly has God provided for
Mankind, to bring Mark. 6. 6.
them to Heaven and Happiness.

But as if all this were nothing worth, Men will not know or not believe what
he has told unto them; otherwise they would be never so regardless thereof.
When they reverence their Landlord, but do not mind the great Lord of Heaven
and Earth; When they earnestly court the favor of a Mortal Man, and think
themselves never sufficiently diligent in getting Money, but are not careful
after those things above; Do they verily believe God is, and that he is a
Rewarder of them, who diligently seek him? When they like Beasts are only for
the present things before them, but negligent of what shall be hereafter, and
never cast an eye toward the things that are not seen; certainly these do not
live by Faith: Whose understanding is waxed gross, that can conceive of nothing
but what may be felt or seen; Who can relish nothing, but what goes between the
Teeth; these do not live the common lives of Men, being led by sense and not
reason. It is an amazing thing to consider of the stupidity and dullness of
those of lower degree, as concerning their Spiritual State and Condition. It Is
not so much down right Atheism and Unbelief, but a dead Faith which is in them:
It is not equal to that of Devils, for they believe and tremble; but this has
no such effect upon them. They fancy there may be such a thing as Heaven, they
are not su^e to the contrary; They look upon it as a place of reserve, where
they would be when they can no longer abide in the World, it is appointed for
the poor and needy; so it will receive them whether they take any care or no.
Such thoughts as these may enter into their minds, for notwithstanding they may
still go on in their course; But were they really persuaded, there are two
places for all to go into after this life, Heaven and Hell: And how it is set
down in Scripture what is to be done to obtain entrance into the one, and avoid
the other. Did they really think what an happiness the one is, much greater
then Riches and all Pleasures in this World; and the other to be a worse
Torment then any Pain or Sickness now is: they would as willingly go to Church,
and be as devout to set them forward in the way to Heaven; as now they go to
Fairs and Markets, and are intent upon their Business to get some small gain:
On the other hand, they would take as much care to flee from the Wrath to come,
as now they do to keep themselves in health and prevent the beginnings of a
bodily Distemper. They would labor as earnestly for the exceeding great reward
God has prepared for them that keep his Commandments, as now they do for a
little Money from another Man. They would act in the very same manner to obtain
the things pertaining to his Kingdom, as now they do for the things of the
Earth.

It is the property of Faith to make things which are not seen, to be as if
they were seen; and though were they both of the same value, it could not be
expected we should so willingly run after what we have never seen, as after
that which is most certain, and our Eyes see: Yet there being such an exceeding
odds and worth in the things that are to be believed over the things that are
now seen, this turns the Scales and make them hang even, yea and weigh down the
things of Sense. If we have the full assurance of Faith, that upon doing such
things we shall receive an everlasting 1 John 5. 4.
Kingdom, we should no more grudge to do them, then we do now a days work upon
another Promise of so much for our Pains. We may as reasonably trust for what
he has promised, as we do the Word of a sinful Man when we Labor for him. And
there being such a vast difference between what the Almighty will vouchsafe to
bestow upon us (worthy of God to give, and as much as a Creature can receive)
over what we can impart to another; then surely there is as much reason (I say
infinitely more) why we should serve God, as do the like for another. Would we
be as diligent to be made Kings and Priests unto God, Rev. 1. 6. as now we are
to be Servants unto great Men; endeavor as much to get an eternal Crown of
Glory, as now for those Corruptible things of Gold and Silver; Labor as
earnestly after the great things of Eternity, as is now done for the little
things of Time, we should certainly come to possess them. Neither can the World
condemn us of Folly, for we Act according to the same measure as themselves,
who are accounted Wise in their Generation. If we do indeed settle it in our
Hearts, that these things are; we should be as careful and industrious to have
them as others are of the things here; and if so, our Labor would not be in
vain. But what a faithless and stubborn Generation are we fallen into? A
Generation that will not believe, or will not set their Heart to obtain them. A
Company of Infidels and Fools, for so are all those who do not walk in the way
to the New Jerusalem. If you will not consider, you must perish in your Folly.
Look and bethink your selves, you are Men; Stand upon your Feet, and shake off
that drowsy and benumbed Disposition. Be thoroughly rouzed out of Negligence and
Sottishness: Come to thy self, and hear what shall be said unto thee.

The Lord made all things for himself, yea even the wicked for the day of evil,
Prove. 16. 4. He will be glorified in all his Works, and thou also being the
work of his hands art not to think thy self unconcerned, or nothing related to
that God, with whom we have all to do. If thou will have nothing to do with
him, he will have to do with thee. Thou art his Creature, and he will deal so
with thee, as the rest of mankind according to their deservings: Thou must be
either a Partaker of his Mercy or Wrath, There is mercy O Lord with thee, that
thou may be feared. And his Wrath is likewise revealed from Heaven against
all ungodliness and unrighteousness of Men, Romans 1. 18. But the mercy of the
Lord is from everlasting to everlasting upon them that fear him, an^ his
righteousness upon Childrens Children: To such as keep his Covenant, and to
those that remember his Commandments to do them, Psalm. 103. 17, 18. Here you
are told, how to have Title unto it: And why should thou stick, or make any
doubt to do thereafter? If the King or a Great Man should require the same of
thee, only to do as they bid thee from time to time, and would give Riches and
Honor for it, Would not thou do as much? Although that is the utmost they
can bestow; for they can neither give Health, nor preserve thy Breath from
going forth. And will thou not fear the King of Kings, the Lord of Lords, who
has a much better reward with him, Who holds thy Soul in Life, and when he
sends for it out of this Earthly house (if it be rendered meet) will receive it
unto himself in Glory? Thou do not grudge to do any thing for thy
Fellow Creature, if thou can get a good Livelihood by him; will thou refuse
to serve the Lord thy Maker, when by so doing thou shall live for ever? Thou
art contented for that to Labor and Care, this Points out something more. If
thou do willingly so much for present Food and Delight, from hence somewhat
may be observed of the Equity of God's ways in alluring us to his Service by
invisible and future Rewards, which are fitred for the invisible part of us. So
this inference arises; that if for the good and Conveniences of a dying Body
we readily Labor, we should likewise do the same as to our immortal Soul. We
Consent, it is reasonable that we should Labor for the Meat which perishes,
much more is it to Labor for that which endures unto everlasting Life. We are
glad if we can have fading necessities by following our Trade and Employment,
and are resolved to do it; much more should we rejoice in our Heavenly Calling,
which is for the Attainment of true, perfect and eternal Happiness. And we
should be determined with full purpose of Heart to give all diligence to make
our Calling and Election sure, for that will stand us more in stead, it being
both for Body and Soul, in a Glorified and united State.: When now all the
Labor of Man is for his Mouth, Eccles. 6. 7. Meats for the B^lly, and the
Belly for Meats, but God shall destroy bot^ it and them, 1. Cor. 6. 13. They
shall perish when we are taken hence, but the other shall end^re. Every thing
has Relation to ^^is end; and (I humbly conceive) God therefore ordained
things so, that by what M^n does already in the less, he should do the same in
the greater, to lay hold of the hope set before him: That he should be moved
with like Inducements to the endless Life, as to this Vapor which c^n^i^ueth
not; that he should take the same Care of the whole Man, as he does of the
Shell only; that he should alike pursue the Substantial Bless^dness, as he does
some little Circumstances, of what the World calls Happiness By what thou do
already, thou art encouraged to more; what thy self affirmest to be right, by
this thou art further persuaded. It is just and equal that he who would have
Food and Raiment should work for them, when they are so to be had; he who
neglects that and famishes, is a Fool and unpitied: So the things of ^od's
Kingdom are to be had by diligent seeking after; and he who does not,
deservedly perishes and is miserable. But the Generality of mankind do behave
themselves wisely enough as for that, and why not for this also? And ^e will
not come unto me, that ye might have Life, John 5. 40. Which manifestly imports
they might, if they would. Those which do so much immediately in Religion for a
short Livelihood, should they not do a little more for the saving of the Soul?

Thou reckonest it a great Happiness to live well at present, but consider of
them who have whatsoever can be desired for Meat, Drink and Raiment; all does
but hold up Life for a time, and less would serve turn. But they do not
continue it, for Rich Men must die as well as the Poor and Needy. We must not
live here always; and therefore are to live as People that must die, and expect
to be Happy after Death, as it is desired to be so before. Now reason with thy
self I beseech thee; all thy desire is to live handsomely in the World, but if
herein thou should obtain thy Will, thou c^^st not long enjoy it Look back to
the former Generations, What difference is between those who fared sumptuously
every day, and who had but common provision of Life? when a great Candle and a
small are both burnt out, what odds is betweem them? As is the Condition of
those, who are now gone off from the World, so will ours be in a short time. He
will be in no better Condition, who Riots and Sports himself in the Daytime,
who lives idly, and yet enjoys fullness of Bread; then he who eats it all along
in the sweat of his brow. So that a Wise Man should make it his choice rather
to live in Obedience then Delicacy, for that will bring him to everlasting
Life; whereas pleasant Meats and Drinks they shall fail, and too often proving
a Snare do sink down to that place, where he is that received his good things
in this Life.

Ho every one that Thirsts, Come ye to the Waters, and he that has no Money:
Come ye, buy and eat; yea, come buy Wine and Milk without Money, and without
Price. Wherefore do ye spend Money for that which is not Bread? And your Labor
for that which satisfies not? Hearken diligently unto me, and eat ye that
which is good, and let your Soul delight it self in Fatness, Isa. 55. 1. 2. If
a great Man gives forth that he will keep open House for all Comers, and they
shall have plenty of good Beef and Ale, we should see the Country People flock
thither in multitudes, and what a Love is kindled in their Hearts for him? but
when God makes this Invitation scarce one moves a step; a plain Evidence that
they are a very froward Generation, Children in whom is no Faith, Deuteronomy. 32. 20.
If another makes a feast for them, then they will be sure to set all business
aside, and come to partake of his good Cheer; but if the Son of God invite you
to his Supper, then your Farm or Oxen, or some other little Excuse. Are ye not
partial in this? That is too mild a Word. But are ye not Idolaters, for having
more respect to a little Creature, then the great and eternal Creator? If you
will evade that, because you are not led away with a dumb Idol, but a living
Man, yet what the Prophet has pronounced will be fulfilled: Cursed is he that
trusts in Man, and makes Flesh his Arm, and whose Heart departs from the
Lord, Jer. 17. 5. He gives even unto them all that they have, and can do thy
self more good then all the Men of the World. Though this is as it were hidden,
for Trial whether they will draw off from him, and others would run unto them.

Indeed the Kingdom of God is not meat and drink, Romans 14. 17. but things as
will better satisfy then they do now: For you eat and drink, and hunger and
thirst again: But if you would seek after that, in the mean time you would be
quieted with the hopes and Faith thereof, till you come actually to sit down at
the Marriage Supper of the Lamb. A Supper, to which all the Dainties of the
World are as stinking Carrion. It does infinitely exceed both in Delight and
Continuance, all the most pleasant things here.

What would you not do at present, if you could get such an Estate as some of
thy rich Neighbors have? you would think nothing too hard, many a Sleepless
Night and laborious Day you would suffer with all your Heart, if you might
attain it: But thou see no way or possibility, if thou would never so much
desire to do it: Well, be contented nevertheless, and assure thy self, that if
thou art not slothful, but come unto him, who will meet thee in the way of
Righteousness, and then follow hard after him, thou shall undoubtedly come to
Heaven; when the Great Ones, if wicked and disobedient, shall be thrust down
with Shame and Confusion. Or if they fear God, do thou endeavor to exceed them
in Graces and Well-doing, and so be more had in Honor by him, who rewards
every Man according to his work, not so Luke 16. 10.
much for what Rank and Degree he was in the World. If thou do obey the Lord,
thou would with Patience and Quietness of Spirit endure whatever low
Condition thou art in; and be rather the more thankful, because thereby
quickened and stirred up to a Godly Life. Sometimes to hunger Prompts to strive
the more earnestly to come to that place where you shall be filled. You have
the less Temptation to take up a Rest here, but should more seek after that
which is to come. It is an hard Case indeed never to do any thing but to take
Pains, to be like the Ox or Ass to live to no other end, but that of Labor;
but it is not so with you; for God has provided better things, if you would
accept them. He has ordained a Rest, and a Promise is left us of entering Heb.
2. 8. 3.
into it. And we are Commanded to fear, least any of us should come short of
it. Some we read of, Who could not enter in because of unbelief. And this same
is an hindrance to Men now adays; for what makes them, who do nothing but toil,
and yet are unmindful of this true Rest, unless it is because they do not
believe any such thing? But if Men are unbelievers whilst they live, they shall
not be so when they die, for there will succeed a certain fearful Expectation
of Judgment and Condemnation, The unbelievers shall have their part in the
Lake, which burns with Fire and Brimstone, Rev. 21. 8.

Says the same Divine Witness, I heard a voice from Heaven Saying unto me,
Write, Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord from henceforth, yea, says
the Spirit, that they may rest from their Labors and their Works do follow
them, Rev. 14. 13. All do not so, but only those who die in the Lord. That
Saying so common in the mouth of Country People, When such an one is dead, he
is happy (because freed from the Pains and Miseries of Life) is false when
applied to all indifferently, good and bad; for this Blessing belongs only to
those who have led a Godly Life. By Death, we fall into the hands of the living
God, and then he may deal with us as seems good in his sight; however, being
a God of Truth he will do so with all of us, as is declared in his Word which
is Truth. And therefore it will be so with us according as we order our
Conversation in this present World, by the words written in that Book. Seeing
the Case is thus, it must be the more excellent way to fit our selves
accordingly. We often provide for those things which never happen; and if they
should, are but of small moment. Shall we not much more prepare against that
which will certainly come, and is of greater Concern to every one of us, then
any thing now in the World is? All our Care now is to keep Life for the
present; and shall no Care be had to live for ever? We can never do too much to
preserve Health, and keep of sullen Death as long as we can: And shall not we
do the same to escape the second Death, that wretched Condition in which Men
shall seek for Death, and it shall flee from them? With all our Pains we cannot
hold of temporal Death, and yet we would; we may by the Grace of God preserve
our selves from eternal Death, and there we will not. Oh strange madness! O
unspeakable Folly! O ye Sons of Men, who has bewitched you to Act so
Preposterously? Death in it self is not more grievous then Pain or Sickness now
is (nay not so much, for as in Health we fall asleep when we do not perceive
it, so then those violent Pangs destroy the Sense and Feeling) but that which
comes to the wicked after renders it exceeding terrible, and that should be
most dreaded; which would not be in vain, because it would make us flee from
the wrath to come. Would we take as great heed least we die after Death, as now
we do to save our selves from Death; then Death should have no Dominion over
us, it shall not bring Evil, but Good unto us. The sting of Death is sin, but
Command is given to pluck that out. Cast away from you all your Transgressions,
whereby ye have Transgressed, and make you a new Heart and a new Spirit; for
why will ye die, O house of Israel? for I have no Pleasure in the Death of him
that dies, says the Lord God. Wherefore turn your selves, and live ye, Ezekiel.
18. 31, 32. Here you are taught, and also enjoined how, though you die you may
live again.

Look a little further then this present Life. It is of few days, and full of
trouble. Who would place his Confidence in that which is uneasy, and must an
end? Time hasteneth away, Death is coming on. Every Man must at length close
with it. He must either lie down in Peace, which is the Portion of the
righteous; or dye as the wicked do in Horror and Anguish of mind, or in a
stupid Condition, as is the Case of most. However some admire this sort of
Death, for they say he dies li^^ a Lamb, yet there is no Peace, says my God,
to the wicked, Isa. 57. 21. Such a Death is like a drunken Man's falling down a
steep Rock, his Sottishness has cast him into such a Sleep, that he knows not
whether he is tumbling; notwithstanding he comes to a fearful end. One dead in
Trespasses and Sins perceives not whether he tends, when he is just dropping
into the Fire; yet as soon as he is there, he is sensible to a Witness, and so
will remain for evermore. Whatever gnorant Bystanders may think, such a sort
of Death must be a sad sight to all knowing Christians; for who can approve of
what is occasioned by unbelief, gross Ignorance, or habitual Wickedness? All
which Seal men up to the Day of Destruction: There is a great difference
between this and the end of the Righteous; for the one is Senceless, and Calls
not upon God but in a general way, as Lord have mercy upon me, or the like,
which any one may do if he be never so ungodly: But the other can express his
Peaceable Condition, and show forth good Grounds of hope, and call upon God his
Savior with that feelingness which no Stranger to the Covenant of Grace can.
Righteousness delivers from Death, Prove. 11. 4. It preserves from all the
dreadfulness thereof, which nothing besides does: Wickedness shall not deliver
those who are given unto it; but is the cause of all that Misery, which this
binds Men over unto. Let them ruffle and sport themselves never so much, their
End is coming. They must sicken, and go away to Account for all their Frolic
and Madness. There is set before thee a good and evil Death; one you must have,
and therefore be sure to choose the best. Be good and do Good, and thou shall
never die amiss. When thou art wearied with Labor all the days of thy Life,
this will set thee at Rest; but if thou art not willing and obedient, thou
may drudge on still without any hope, for after toil here will succeed
endless pains; according as now thou behavest thy self, thou shall fare well or
ill hereafter. So will it be with Thee and Me.

For we must all appear before the judgment Seat of Christ, that every one may
receive the things done in his body, according to that he has done, whether it
be good or bad, 2 Cor. 5. 10. When the Sun shall become black as a Sackcloth of
Hair, and the Moon become as Blood, and the Heavens shall depart as a Re^. 6.
scroll roled together; The trump of the Archangels shall sound, and the Dead
shall hear, and leap out of their Graves like frighted Men. Neither greatness
nor smallness shall excuse from coming forth; The mighty Men, and every bond
Man, and every free Man hid themselves. This will be more dreadful then a
blazing Comet, or the greatest Thunder and Lightning. It may be, we have no
business at those Assizes which are holden twice a Year; but at this general
Grave-delivery, which is kept once for all, our dead bodies shall arise, and
every one of us shall give account of himself to God, Romans 14. 12. Men's hearts
will fail them for fear, and if conscious to themselves of evil, will wish that
they might return into this World again to live over their past life, for then
they would be better provided. But when the Prisoner comes to be tried, is he
let go free only upon his bare saying, he will not Steal nor commit Murder any
more? No, he must answer for what he has done. We know it before hand (that
when it shall come, we may have no excuse or plea) that of this and every day
of our life after years of Discretion we are in danger to be called to account.
Although at present we make a mock of sin, we follow it with Greediness and
Merriment, valuing it as a matter of naught; yet when God enters into Judgment,
what was formerly so light in Opinion, will ^^nk them down into the bottomless
Pit. There is no other way to escape this, but now, even now to judge our
selves that we be not judged, nor condemned with the World, 1 Cor. 11. 31, 32.
God now commands all Men every where to repent, because he has appointed a
day in the which he will judge the World in Righteousness, by that Man whom he
has ordained, Acts 17. 30. 31. The good have no reason to fear, because they
are to be judged by him who is now their advocate with the Father, and the
propitiation for their sins, 1 John 2. 1, 2. They may have boldness in the day
of Judgment, because as he is, so are they in this World, 1 John 4. 17. But as
for those, who by continued doing the Works of the Devil (in as much as in them
lies) build up that which he came to destroy, shall receive from his Mouth that
terrible Sentence, Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for
the Devil and his Angels.

When the Words are gone forth, these shall go away into everlasting
Punishment, Mat. 25. 46. Did we see this doleful herd as they are going, we
should fear: What God has said by his Son must come to pass, so it will be as
certainly as if we now saw it with our eyes. What can be more forcible to make
us take the utmost heed, that our selves be not among them? To whom the Summers
heat seems so grievous, and every little spark that falls upon the body so
painful, How can they abide to lie down in everlasting fire? Who now think it
so irksome to tarry a few and evil days here on Earth, though they have several
good ones intermingled; How can they endure to be in Hell for thousands and
millions of Years without an hour of comfort, or the least freedom from Misery?
Let me ask thee, O Man, suppose thou ^awest a Fiery Furnace, and there thou
might continue alive for a thousand Years, how much of the Worlds pleasure
would thou require to undergo the torment thereof for that time? I am
confident thou would not take all the delights under the Sun all thy life
long And why then will thou for the pleasures of sin for a season, bring upon
thy Body and Soul those Eternal Plagues? The damned are set forth in Scripture,
suffering all those evils which are now accounted greatest in the World. What
is all this for? But to make the more have to escape from the Stormy Wind and
Tempest. By the same reason that we flee from the face of a Serpent, the Sword
of a devouring Enemy, to save our selves from Fire or Water, or any thing which
would hurt; We are also obliged to avoid the damnation of Hell, for this will
more torment, then all those things p^t together. That is to be done by fearing
the Lord our God, and keeping his Commandments; for he has prepared those
things only for the wicked and disobedient, that none should be so.

As the Punishments are severe enough to frighten from Transgression, so is the
Reward sufficient to encourage any Soul to Obedience; It is described by those
things which are now most apt to raise our desires, and stir up our industry
toward obtaining of them. If one should tell a poor Country Man how he might
get Wealth, he would lift up his ears and attend readily to this message; there
is none can bring him such tidings, but let him hear what the Spirit says, I
counsel thee to buy of ^me Gold tried in the fire that thou may be rich,
Rev. 3. 18. With what eagerness do others run after Pleasures, which are
unsatisfactory and sudden? And it seems there should be the same diligence used
to be abundantly satisfied with the goodness of the Lord, to come into his
presence where is fullness of joy, and at his right hand are pleasures for
evermore, Psalm. 16. 11. The Men of this World will expose themselves to
hardship and inconvenience to get Praise and Honor, though for all their Souls
continue restless; But Glory, Honor, and Peace to every Man that works good,
Romans 2. 10. Are as worthy to be sought after and had. Heaven is represented by
the so much admired Idols of this lower World, and that with greater advantage
to give more full and lasting contentment of mind, then the best thing on Earth
now does. If the good things before us do somewhat refresh, these will much
more: and (contrary to the present) they shall never be taken from us, nor we
from them. Conceive any thing that is delightful and pleasant, it comes very
short of the joys above, as sounding brass and tinkling Cymbal compared to the
best Music; sufficient for a Man to be assured, that it is greater then he can
expect or imagine: if he hears or reads never so much of what words cannot
express to the utmost, yet when he comes to the enjoyment, he will affirm as
one did of the Wisdom of Solomon, The one half was not told me.

Some are apt to think, It is pity we may not have this great Happiness at
present; But who in his very thoughts does murmur at the good will and pleasure
of the Almighty? None accuses his Bounty, who freely gives the reversion of a
good Estate; every one bestows his gifts in what manner, and at what time he
pleases. And may not the Sovereign Lord of the World do the like? Is it not
lawful for the good Man of the House, to do what he will with his own? The
Mighty God, who is so much above and independent from all his Creatures, is
pleased (Oh the riches of his love and See Isa. 40. 10.
goodness) to deal so with them as one deals with another. None is paid till
the work done; and when we likewise have labored in the Vineyard till the
going down of the Sun, we are to receive what he has promised; The prize is
not given till the race is ended. Be thou faithful unto Death, and I will give
thee a Crown of Life, Rev. 2. 10. Behold I come quickly, and my reward is with
me, to give to every man according as his work shall be, Rev. 22. 12. Besides
present peace all along, there is somewhat given in hand, the earnest and first
fruits of the Spirit, those little glimpses of future Glory, the delights of
the inward Man; But these are not to be compared with what shall be revealed
hereafter. For since the beginning of the World, Men have not heard, nor
perceived by the ear, neither has the eye seen, O God besides thee what he
has prepared for him that waits for him, Isa. 64. 4. So it is his Ordinance,
that we should for some time patiently tarry for them; It is good that a man
should both hope and quietly wait for the Salvation of the Lord, Lam. 3. 26.
The great Men of the World have many waiting to speak with them, who do not
grudge if they can get any kindness from them, yea, they are contented with the
promise of a future favor. Is not the Lord of Lords as worthy to be waited
for, as they? Are not his Blessings as much to be valued? Are not his Promises
as sure? Nay, if I may so speak, we have more Civility from the Great God, then
from exalted Earthworms: For they are Men of Pride, look for Attendance, and
therefore will be hard to be spoken withal. But the Lord will wait that he may
be gracious, for the Lord is a God of Judgment. Blessed are all they that wait
for him, Isa. 30. 18. The things he has provided are as worthy to be waited
for, and it is meet we should pay the same and greater respect to Almighty God,
as is done to Man whose breath is in his Nostrils, for wherein is he to
accounted of? Isa. 2. 22. God does wonderfully condescend to the Children of
Men, to let his doings be judged of by them. Yet says the House of Israel, the
way of the Lord is not equal O house of Israel, are not my ways equal? Are not
your ways unequal? Ezekiel. 18. 29. Are you not bold with your Maker by finding
fault with his dispensations, unless you presently know the reason thereof? You
have a reason, but are to be put in mind he is a God of Majesty and Power;
Known unto him are all his Works, Acts 15. 18. And he is not bound to give
account of any; sufficient for you to understand, and refer them all to the
good pleasure of his Will. Thus for his Promises and Threatenings he might
accomplish them whenever he would, and so they shall be in the appointed
time; which though to come, yet will be most certainly. And considering how
much every one of us are concerned in them, they should more affect us then the
things now do before us. If it be just, that he who builds an House should
dwell in it; or he that Plants an Orchard eat the Fruit thereof: So is it most
just and reasonable, that who made Man should be served by him. Upon this
Account alone God might Challenge our Obedience and Homage without doing any
thing more ^o^ us; but further as a most gracious and bountiful Lord, he
Promises a Reward though we deserve none. And being most absolute over the work
of his hands, For has not the Potter power over the Cla^ of the same Lump to
make one Vessel to Honor, another to Dishonor? Romans 9. 21. Yet he vouchsafes
to give warning before he dashes any to the Ground. No^ consider this ye that
forget God, lest I tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver, Psalm. 50.
22. He has not threatened with eternal Death and Misery, unless we are
disobedient, which is only our own fault; so that he is most righteous in his
dealings toward the Children of Men.

Hear this all ye People, give ear all ye Inhabitants of the World. Both Low
and High, Rich and Poor together. Such is the Statute and Decree gone out upon
all Flesh. Let none think, because they are of low Degree, therefore they shall
not be regarded by the Most High: For all Men are the same to God. He has made
of one Blood all Nations of Men, Acts 17. 26. Out of the same Lump, and
according to the same Mould he fashioned them all. The poorest acknowledge,
that they are as much minded by God as the rich, and so far they are right; but
then they go further, Exodus 30. 15.
and make themselves his only Favorites. The ground of this Error is through
Mis-application of those Promises in Scripture concerning this Condition. But
let them not be deceived; for where is any mention made of spiritual good
things, it is to those Poor only, who walk in their Integrity. Has not God
chosen the Poor of this World (the Apostle does not say all of them, but those
who are) rich in Faith and Heirs of the Kingdom which he has promised to them
that love him, Jam. 5. 2. So they must believe and love God, and then they must
avoid sinning against him; otherwise they have no place in Heaven.

Indeed many of them do so; and more would if they did apply themselves to God
and the Word of his Grace, which is able both to bring in and build up. Those
whom the Proud ones call the ordinary sort of People, will make the greater
number in Heaven; We see more of them (allowing for their multitude) that
Practice Simplicity and Godly Sincerity, then we can amongst those of higher
rank; for these have altogether broken the Yoke, and burst the bands, Jer. 5.
5. Being governed by Self-will, and their own humor more then the Laws of God;
but the others are not altogether so forgetful and refractory. And have a good
will toward God in General; but the Prophet remarks truly how Jer. 5. 4.
they have not that knowledge which is to be desired for; They understand not
the things of Religion so well as they should, but follow their own Opinions
and Fancies, Satan which deceives the whole World, Rev. 12. 9. Has taken
advantage thereof, instilling into them errors and deceits; If you would indeed
be in the right way to Heaven, and not miss thereof at last, give attendance to
that Word which is to show unto all the Path of Life.

When some have well resolved, then they are distracted about Of different
Communious.
the way; one says it is this, another that. It is agreed by all that the
Scriptures do show what is right; so what they point out, it is good to ^o^^ow.
They give the Character of some who Taught the way of God in Truth, Mat. 22.
16. Acts 16. 17. And therefore according to what is Written, those both said
and did, it may be most surely trusted unto; There have been Questions and
different Opinions in past Ages, but little is said of them in Holy Writ. The
Prophets make no mention of them, speaking against Idolatry, but say nothing as
to Modes of Worship; Our Savior Speaks little concerning those Separate
Meetings in his time, and does not express much zeal one wa^ or another. His
Apostles followed the same steps: One witnesses, In every Nation he that
fears God, and works Righteousness, is accepted with him, Acts. 10. 35.
Being applied to Cornelius a Gentile, as may be gathered from Acts 11. 18 The
diversity here was greater then amongst several Communions of Christians a^
this day, and therefore much more will they be saved in each. Another Apo^^le
says, Circumcision is nothing, and uncircumcision is nothing, b(...) the
k^^p(...) of the Commandments of God, 1 Cor. 7. 19. In Christ Jesus, neither
Circumcision avails any thing, no^ uncircumcision, but Faith which works by
love, Gal. 5. 6. A new Creature, Gal. 6. 15. That was as important a Question
as those in controversy now, b^t there is not so much in them as Obedience and
Holiness; To which a^^^e the promises of God are, and nothing at all to those
distinguishing terms of Persuasion among us. It is evident from Psalm. 25. 12,
14. John 7. 17. 1 Cor. 2. 10. Phil. 3. 15. That whosoever sincerely fears God
with his whole heart, shall be directed into all necessary and saving Truth;
and then he must lay aside all Prepossessions and Prejudice, Pride, Humor,
Wordly Reasons, coming in simplicity of Soul only out of a desire to be right,
and receive the love of the Truth that he may be saved, 2 These. 2. 10. For this
is evident, Continuance in a willful and known error is as dangerous, as a
willful and known sin; and therefore to be equally avoided. The Word does
discover Good and Evil, Truth and Falsehood; so the Duty of every one is to set
his Conscience as in the light of God, with a readiness to think and do what is
most according to his revealed Will; and then he shall never perish through
error or falsehood.

All Worship is designed to please, and obtain acceptance with Almighty God.
The hour comes, and now is, when the true Worshippers shall worship the Father
in Spirit and in Truth; for the Father seeks such to worship him, John 4. 23.
But this does in no wise excuse from an humble bodily gesture and reverence of
the outward Man; the Subjection of both is to be showed: Therefore glorify God
in your Body and in your Spirit, which are Gods, 1 Cor. 6. 20. Certainly this
Apostle knew what was a Gospel and Spiritual Worship, yet He kneeled down and
Prayed, Acts 20. 36. The like did our Savior, Luke 22. 41. And Stephen and
Peter, Acts 7. 60 Acts 9. 40. It is to be observed in Public Worship, for so
did Paul, that being more Solemn and whereby God is Glorified; Though the
Lolling sort of behavior is so much in use among the Country People, when they
come into the presence of God, let them use it before their Governor or Great
Men, How will they be pleased with it? And if they will not, neither will he,
who even now remains a Great King, and his Name is dreadful among the Heathen,
Mal. 1. 8, 14. And though some may think that no more then another place, yet
they may consider what our Lord did, John 2. 16, 17. Mark 11. 15, 16, 17.
Signifying plainly that more regard is to be had to the House of Prayer so
called of all Nations and People, extending to the Gospel Isa. 56. 7.
times when they come in. The Apostle finds fault with the Corinthians, abusing
of the Sacrament, making a Common Meal of it. Have ye not Houses to eat or
drink in, or despise ye the Church Psalm. 29. 9.
of God? 1 Cor. 11. 22. The subject of that Chapter is about a comely behavior
in the Holy Assemblies; What can be said to these plain Scriptures, or how can
they excuse themselves from Sin in not observing them? Let Men put what meaning
they will, God is judge himself; and they may at the last day be severely
reproved for not obeying that command, the reason whereof is eternally
Obligatory, Ye shall keep my Sabbaths, and reverence my Sanctuary: I am the
Lord, Lev. 19. 30.

The design of the whole Gospel is Peace, Unity and Love, see Romans 12. 18. Romans
16, 17. 1 Cor. 1. 10. 1 Cor. 10. 17. 2 Cor. 13. 11. Phil. 2. 12. Ephesians. 4. 3, 4,
5. Col. 3. 12, 13, 15. 1 These. 5. 13. Religion should of all things most endear
one to another, but it is only the corruption and abuse thereof, which turns it
into matter of Quarrel, Hatred, and Animosity. Many of us differ in little
Opinions not necessary to Salvation; and therefore should in no wise for them
endanger that by not observing the weightier matters of the Law, Mercy and Love
of one another. After what manner did our Fathers serve God, who are in Peace?
They continued steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine and Fellowship; all that
believed were together, continuing daily with one accord in the Temple, Acts 2.
42, 44, 46. And the Multitude of them that believed were of one Heart, and of
one Soul, Acts 4. 32. It was prophesied of the Gospel times, that many Nations
shall Come and say, Come and let us go up to the Mountain of the Lord, and to
the House of the God of Jacob, Mic. 4. 2. Who are these that fly like Doves to
a Window? Isa. 60. 8. So harmless and peaceably should they move together; Then
would cease all jealousy and bitter envying; There would be no more heard the
voice of the Slanderer, Blasphemer and Censorious Person; then Malice, Hatred,
and the Destructiveness of exorbitant zeal would not be seen among us; but we
should all love as Brethren, be Pitiful and Courteous one to another. How happy
would it be if Christians were of the same mind? (I do not mean in every
Question, for seeing we know but in part, and all have not the same measure of
understanding, that is not a yet) but in the mean while, we might all agree to
the same manner, and meet at the same place of Worship. The pro^^es of God are
that it shall be so, as Jer. 32. 39. Zeph. 3. 8, 9. Isa. 30. 21, 26. Ephesians. 4.
13. Which was fulfilled in the Primitive Times, but in a lesser degree, as one
sheaf to the whole Harvest; and will be again more universally, when so
restored as it was then. Christ did break down the Partition Wall between Jews
and Gen^il^, and those dividing impositions are to be taken away, before all
Christians can come and meet in the same Room. However in the mean while it is
one and the same House, though there be several apartments; They are one Fold
and one Shetherd, John 10. 16. Though at present there be several dividing
hurdles intermixed of Man's setti^g up, which at length will be removed. And so
what is said of the Unity of the Church, Joh. 17. 11, 21, 22, 23. Ephesians. 4, 5, 6.
Cant. 6. 9. It comprehends all Gods faithful People in the whole World; God
sets the solitary in Families, Psalm. 68. 6. Or in the new Translation,
makes Men to be of one mind in an house: so in his good time will grant to
themall, (However distinguished or named) to be like minded one toward
another, according to Christ Jesus; that they may with one Mind and one Mouth
glorify God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 15. 5, 6.

In the beginning of time Satan beguiled Eve through his Subtlety, so does he
even now continue to deceive all her Children; Of deceits
this design of the Wicked one does prove destructive to thousands and
millions, both of learned and unlearned, wise and foolish; for the things of
God are hid from the wise and prudent, being by them accounted as foolishness.
And then Satan gets an advantage over them also; for they are not endued with
the Wisdom of God, which alone discovers his devices; He exercises his whole
craft and skill with these; But where ignorance abounds, there he abominably
thrives in the trade of deceiving, and he strangely leads away captive silly
people laden with sins. It is wonderful and sad to consider how miserably poor
mankind is deluded about their everlasting Happiness or Misery, then which
nothing can be of greater concern, and therefore we should take all imaginable
heed and circumspection least we be mistaken herein. Yet of this we use the
least care; so strongly has the evil one possessed us and lulled to peace that
we are willing to be deceived by him; we would fain have those things he
suggests to be true, and therefore presently believe them without Examination;
as if we could be saved by a lie, or excused by what draws Gods further
displeasure, the not desiring the knowledge of his ways.

Satan transforms himself into an Angel of Light, he did once tempt our Lord
with Scripture, so does he those who believe on his name, and confirms his
deceivings over again with the written Word. The Wisdom of the Father was not
imposed upon by a false application; his Doctrine is left to succor us, and
other assistances are given, so it is our own fault if seduced or overcome by
him. Innumerable are the Whims and Fancies Men have to allow themselves in some
Sin or other, ^or which they will presently cite a Text of Scripture, and then
they conclude they are right, because that in their thinking tells them so.
They reckon themselves sure, because we are to search the Scriptures, whether
these things are so; and there they find it so, what can they desire more? This
is a dangerous and common Deceit when that which should lead them into Truth,
through wrong ^uterpretation or Application is the cause of Error. Nothing is
so frequent and or^inary to be heard, as naming a place of Holy Writ in
Vindication, or mitigation of such a Sin or Wickedness. Almost every single
Person has some particular mistaken Opinions of his own, which he tells unto
others, who again acquaint him with theirs; so they are full of deceitful
Falsehoods.

The Reason of all is, We being by Nature the Children of Wrath, through
Corruption Prone to Evil as the Sparks fly upwards, and strongly inclined to
break Gods Commandments: But he having threatened, The Soul that sins shall
die, the fear of this makes us look about and stop in the Course we design to
go in. Then comes the Evil one and Whispers; that we may transgress, and if we
repent at such a time in Sickness, Old Age, Deathbed, all is well enough: Or
if we have not a mind to commit all iniquity, yet we may break this or that
Divine Law, now live in one Sin, and then another as our inclinations lead us,
for which, Psalm. 103. 14. is alleged, which is commonly quoted otherwise That
of Psalm. 103. 14. does not extend to wilful continued Transgressions, for it is
before said, such are removed from us; and then the Lord pitieth them that fear
him, so as not to impute their Sins of Inadvert^ncy, unavoidable Ignorance or
natural Weakness.
then it is in the Bible, God knows we are Flesh, and therefore it is falsely
inferred, such Works of the Flesh, as Gal. 5. 19, 20, 21. are excusable enough,
and for further Satisfaction they are mis-called Infirmities. The former deceit
is not so universally received; most considering People spy out the Falsehood,
Vanity and Danger thereof: But the last is wonderfully cherished and
entertained. Men according to their several Dispositions are more inclined to
one sin then another, some dear beloved Lust, a sinful Pleasure or Profit, They
will spare and forsake it not, but keep it still, Job 20. 13. for this they
seek out so many Excuses and Pretenses. Being resolved to hold fast, they fain
would have it not be sinful at all; or at least not in them, for such and such
such Resons. But if it be so apparently against the word of God (which makes no
Allowance or Dispensation for Circumstances, or Convenience) that they cannot
thoroughly satisfy their Conscience, though they have long endeavored it; why
then, they must grant it to be their failing. The subtle Enemy Promises, that
though they still continue, yet they shall never go to Hell for one Sin
producing such Arguments from Scripture and common Reason. And hence begins to
work in them with all deceiveableness. He represents several Thoughts to sooth
and quiet Conscience: That done, they at length become secure, and make no
manner of doubt but it shall go well with them at last. Now they are in the
Condition wished for, and whosoever would disturb them therein is no Friend of
theirs. They hold him to be their Enemy, who tells them the Truth, and
endeavors to convince them of the damnable Error they are in. They return
Hatred for Good Will, for they had rather run Blind into the Ditch, go
Hoodwinkt to Hell, then have their Eyes opened and escape it: So strangely are
they besotted by Sin and Satan. But it is reckoned no unkindness to save one
from drowning, if thereby he plucks a little Hair off from his Head; and the
Irksomeness in like manner must be endured, which is necessary for Interruption
of Security and Discovery of Deceits.

Let Men deceive themselves, yet they cannot deceive their Judge. The
Foolishness of Men shall never Out-wit the All-wise God; neither shall he be
put off with vain Excuses or Pretenses. The Lord is a God of knowledge, and by
him Actions are weighed, 1 Samuel 2. 3. He is a God of Power, and none can get
into his Mansions above without his Will; and he can make all the Devices of
the wicked to be of none effect. He is a God of Truth, and therefore what he
has spoken in these last days by his Son, shall be fulfilled. Who says, He
that rejects me, and receives not my words, has one that judges him: the
word that I have spoken, the same shall Judge him at the last day, John. 12.
48. And those idle Pleas which guilty Persons shall offer for themselves, will
not be allowed of, as appears, Mat. 7. 22, 23, and Mat. 25. 44. So is the Case
at this day; for at the Assizes no Prisoner how guilty soever would be
Condemned, if every little trifle and excuse he makes for himself, might be
received and save his Life: Whereas the Judge does not regard his idle Sayings
and frivolous Pretenses, but proceeds against him for what he has done
according to the written Law of the Land. If Men flatter themselves in Evil,
because they think they have a place of Scripture on their side; they are
further to know, that according to the righteous Interpretation of Christ, and
not their own wicked Wrestings, and Mis-applications all must for ever stand or
fall. As such are all those meanings which may seem to give allowance to any
manner of Sin: For it is a certain and eternal Rule. Whatever Doctrine or
Opinion does Countenance living in any wilful and known Sin, cannot be of God;
neither has it any right Grounds from his Word. For though Men of
Prevaricating minds do take Arguments from the Law of the Most High to favor
that which his So^l abhors, as by endeavoring to make the Holy Spirit a
defender of impurity, his righteous Statutes to maintain their unjust Actions,
by palliating a Lie with the word of Truth, and proving such a thing to be no
Sin by that which is the alone Rule of Good and Evil, and which does plainly
forbid it; but by Glosses, Distinctions, Restrictions and Sentiments of their
own devising, they would have it pass for none. This is to pervert the right
ways of the Lord, to do violence to his Law, and also they are partial therein;
for they take up what seems to make for them, and neglect others which are
manifestly contrary to what they would have. If such a thing is for their Gain
or Delight, although plainly forbidden as they cannot deny, yet they commit it
safely without fear from such an Example or Expression they found therein, and
however far fetched it shall serve to their purpose. Comes this abuse from the
Nature of Scripture, or Difficulty of understanding it? In no Wise, for it
strictly forbids all manner of Sin and Falsehood. They also do no iniquity, they
walk in his ways: Thy word is very pure, Psalm. 119. 3. and Verse 140 Sanctify
them through thy Truth, thy word is Truth, John 17. 17 And those places which
command and exhort Holy Life, are so easy to be understood, that none can be
mistaken in them. The Way faring Men, though Fools, shall not err therein,
Isa. 35. 8.

One great Reason of Deceits is from what is said, Jer. 5. 30, 31. A wonderful
and horrible thing is Committed in the Land. The Prophets Prophecy falsely, and
the Priests bear Rule by their means: And my People love to have it so, and
what will ye do in the end thereof? Those who have taken upon them the Office
of interpreting, to serve their own Interest, and to please Men, have
interpreted falsely. Being bound to maintain such Doctrines and Opinions, the,
have wrested the Scriptures in defense of them: And have concealed several
Truths which would have confuted them. Such have turned and winded the good
word of God as it seemed ^est to make a Gain thereof: Others also have hid
their Eyes from my Sabbaths, Ezekiel. 22. 26. By subtle Distinctions have made the
Commandments of God of none Effect, as the Pharisces of old did concerning the
Fifth, so some later have done concerning the Fourth. And many such like things
do ye. Who h^^e Slubbered Mark. 7. 13.
over that Particular and strict Obligation of the Gospel Commands, and out of
that have Prophe^^^d s^o^th things. Who can find a faithful Interpreter?
According to the Church or Party listed in, so they have construed. Not making
known in all things what was the very mind of God, but for the Divine meaning
have laid down the mere Fancies of their own Brain. And putting another Sense
then what they thought was true and Genuine at the time of doing it. Who
Prophecy out of their own Hearts, Ezekiel. 13. 2. and send forth Imaginations
instead of Truth. How bold are some in determining what is Sin, and what is
not? How do they Lord it over our Faith, and Magisterially lay down their
Propositions, as if they had known the mind of the Lord, and been his
Counselors? yet (a certain Contutation to that) some have done it otherwise
then from his Book, as may be observed further of them and others: They have
healed also the hurt of the Daughter of my People slightly, saying Peace,
Peace, when there is no Peace, Jer. 6. 14 Who by their Doctrines hinder Exodus
23. 13. Ephesians. 5. 15.
that Degree of Holiness and Circumspection which People should arrive at, for
they Confidently teach such a thing is no Duty, which yet is a Duty; and such a
thing to be no Sin, which yet is a Sin, if the Scripture abstracted from
corrupt Glosses may be the alone Judge thereof. They abuse the Apostles words,
by calling it an over-liberal Charity to cover a multitude of Sins; but it is
persidiou^ness to make others believe such a thing is no Sin, and so more
securely go on to Hell, because they perceive it not. These cry out horribly
against Superstition, and therefore are willing to allow so much Liberty. Which
yet, Isa. 5. 20. makes not so much against as commonly cited; for that is
intended against those who flourish over and get Reputation for wickedness,
Discountena^cing Good and confound the Nature of things, which he expresses
elsewhere. your turning of things upside down, Isa. 29. 16. And then we know
upon whom it most falls. However, if some should make that a Sin which is no
Sin (whom the Scripture do not make so much mention of, as the Voice of the
multitude falsely accuse) others should not run over to the worse and more
dangerous extreme of making that no Sin, which in truth is so. The Apostle was
of another mind, when he said, Abstain from all appearance of Evil, 1 These. 5.
22. And the great Command of loving God with all the Heart (which comprehends
all the very Thoughts and Intents thereof) dictates other Doctrine; for that
does not admit of any thing which comes near displeasing of him. In doubtful
things to refrain is the safer way; for to do without being persuaded, or
considering the Lawfulness of them, argues more of wicked Presumption, then
Godly discretion. The common Decelt is, they think it no Evil, and therefore it
is not so; whereas Christ will judge the Secrets of Men by his Gospel, and not
by their own Thoughts: in the mean while by the Law is the knowledge of Good
and Evil, and not by a private Spirit.

Thus says the Lord God, Woe unto the foolish Prophets, that follow their own
Spirit, and have seen nothing. Because, even because they have seduced my
People, saying Peace, and there was no Peace, and one built up a Wall, and
others daubed it with untempered Mortar: Thus says the Lord God, I will break
down the wall that ye have daubed with un^empered Mortar, Ezekiel. 13. 12.
and bring it down to the ground, so the Foundation thereof shall be
discovered, and ye shall be consumed in the midst thereof, and ye shall know
that I am the Lord, Ezekiel. 13. 3, 10, 14. When God arises to Judgment, What
will become of all those fine and acceptable Doctrines, Menpleasers have
delivered in their Teachings or personal Conversation? What will signify all
their delicate Soothing Men in their Sins? For we are not to be judged by them.
What will it avail if they do wrongfully apply Gods Mercies, when there is no
Conviction or humbling for Sin, for he is the alone Giver thereof, and best
knows to whom it belongs? Whatever others have built up, shall be pulled down;
the Hearts of all shall be laid open: Who have prophesied Lies shall suffer for
their iniquity, and all the World shall know, He alone is to determine of every
Man's work of what sort it is, and to give the Reward or Punishment accordingly.
Although the Pastors of all sorts to gratify their several Hearers do speak
smooth things, Prophecy Deceits, Isa. 30. 10. What stead will it stand them in
at the last day? Such are liked of now for quiet and plausible Instructers; but
neither will this help them, If they be highly esteemed amongst Men, and should
be an Abomination in the sight of God, Luke 16. 15. If they be at present
spoken well of by their Hearers, so were the false Prophets, Luke 6. 26. but
what if Cursed by them hereafter? Notwithstanding at present, the People love
to have it so: But would they then be consumed in their Errors? They cry up
those Discourses which give them ground of hope, though they still retain their
iniquity. They would have God to be all Mercy: Indeed it is greater then can be
expressed, but then why will they not in the mean time sincerely endeavor to
be so qualified, that they may be Partakers thereof. His other attributes must
be also taken in, Wisdom, Justice, Truth, and Holiness; What God was in the
beginning, the same he is now, and so continues for evermore, With whom is no
Variableness, neither shadow of turning, Jam. 1. 17. Being such as he has
revealed himself in his word, and that also endures for ever.

It is a vain and absurd Fancy, that some flatter themselves withal, that
things are so, because they wish and would have them so. If they could reach up
and pull down the High and Lofty One, lead away Captive (as has been done with
dumb Idols) the Living and Almighty God; then indeed, but not before, they
might Isa. 24. 5.
reverse and make void the Ordinances of Heaven, themselves give Laws to the
Sovereign Disposer of all things, and make them according to their own Fancy
and Desire. But still The Lord God Omnipotent reigns; and if some would not
have him Reign over them, it signifies not. My word that goes forth out of my
mouth shall not return void, but it shall accomplish that which I please, Isa.
55. 11. Should it be according to thy mind? he will recompense it whether thou
refuse, or whether thou choose, Job 34. 33. At this rate no Sentence of
Condemnation would ever pass, if the Guilty might put what Sense they would on
the Laws against which they had offended. And those eternal Decrees for the
^inal Condition of all mankind would be of as little effect as Letters written
in the Sand, which they might spoil after they had made them. Thus to imagine
is more silly then the Fool who says in his heart, there is no God; for it is
not so absurd as to think there is one, but he is to do whatever vile
Miscreants would have him: Surely among all the Foolishness of Men there is not
such to be found; yet how common is it for them to get a fine and pleasant
Notion concerning their own eternal State, and conclude themselves Happy
therein, as if it must necessarily be so, because now they Fancy so, and at
last it was to depend upon their own idle Conceits, but not the infallible
Judgment and sure word of God. But for all they cannot fully persuade
themselves of their own Deceits; a thought will return (though endeavored to
be stifled) that it may be otherwise. If they would retire into the Spirit of
their minds, setting aside that Willingness to be deceived, they would be even
condemned of themselves. If they did search and examine their own Consciences,
and that not lightly and after the manner of Dissemblers with God, they cannot
raise to themselves such false Hopes and Expectations as some do. They are
disobedient and willing to remain so, and therefore are deceived.

Why they refrain from gross Sins, no Extortioner, no Swearer, and such like
they say they are: But do they refrain from all? Whosoever shall keep the whole
Law, and offend in one point is Guilty of all, Jam. 2. 10. It is as much
opposing the Will of God in one instance as in twenty. When that commands
such 1 Kings 11 2. Lev. 26. 21 24.
a thing to be done or not done, he who does contrary (though in a small
Matter) his own Will takes place before the Will of God, which is the direct
Evil of Sin, which comprehends Pride, Malice and Stubbornness. The continued
disobedience of one Precept involves in the same Condemnation as of many, 1
Cor. 6. 9, 10. Rev. 21. 8. The Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a Treasure hid in
a Field, the which when a Man has found he hides, and for joy thereof goes
and sells all that he has, and buyeth that Field, Mat. 13. 44. he must part
with all Sin and Wickedness if he intends to come there. It may be said that
cannot be, For in many things we offend all, Jam. 3. 2. But it must of every
known habitual Sin, for that may be done. Ye have not yet resisted unto Blood,
striving against sin, Heb. 12. 4. This sounds harsh, who can do it? Any one
that will seriously, and in good earnest endeavor to do so.

What God has said and decreed cannot be altered, and therefore it concerns us
to try and examine our selves, that when the Lord comes we may be found
accepted of him, It is appointed for all once to die, and after that to
Judgment, Heb. 9. 27. When all Tricks and Evasions shall be discovered, and
fully answered to the Confusion of those, who make use of them. Men may now
excuse themselves before their Neighbors and Acquaintance, who know not as God
knows, the very Secrets of all Hearts. The Consideration of a Judgment to come
should make us suspect ourselves, for not every one that is persuaded of his
own Righteousness, is accepted with God, but whom he approves. Most commonly
People have too hasty and good Opinion of their own Condition, they presently
think themselves fit for Heaven, and they, 1 Samuel 15. 13.
have an interest in Christ, and will cry out Lord, Lord, as if they were his
own, When he shall profess to them, I know ye not, depart from me ye that Work
iniquity, Mat. 7. 22, 23. If they do that, the Lord Jesus will disown, and not
admit them into his Kingdom. All their false Thoughts will avail nothing at
that time, but now they breed Unconcernedness and Presumption. Men are willing
to be quiet and cannot endure to be disturbed, but let them consider this one
thing. That if they should perish by the deceiveableness of Satan and their own
Hearts, it will be most sad to think (and worse then it is now to have their
present ease interrupted) that if they had found it out, which they would not
when they might, they had avoided all this Misery. Those upbraidings of past
irrepairable Folly, will be no little Addition to it. After-Wit is never good,
but in a thing of this moment, where is no possibility of remedying the
mistake, is more Senseless and inexcusable. O Jerusalem, if thou had known in
this thy day the things that belong to thy Peace, but now they are hid from
thine Eyes. Could we come to speak with those, who whilst they lived, walked in
away right in their own Eyes, but find the paths thereof to have lead unto
Death: How would these wretched Creatures accuse themselves for running on
perfunctorily in their Course, without thoroughly considering whither it did
tend? They would lament their Carelessness, and neglect of making their Calling
and Election sure. I am persuaded, they would testify unto us to take all
heed, that we be not deceived in like manner. They must acknowledge God
righteous, for his word makes known all Error, and would have done good unto
them, if they had walked uprightly, Mic. 2. 7. but they did follow their own
Hearts Counsel, and would have none of his, then what they did frame agreeable
to their own. O that they might have another day of Grace, and Amendment of
past mistakes! Nothing can be granted against eternal and immutable Decrees.
But we on this side of the Grave may do it; but if we will not, we shall pass
into the same Condemnation, there is no remedy, if we will not when we may,
when we are so earnestly called upon and entreated, and showed how we may
escape. There are now abroad in the World, Men sporting themselves with their
own deceivings, 2 Pet. 2. 13. Who live in some wickedness or other, and yet
pass the time of their sojourning without fear; who stand continually at the
entrance of Eternity, but take no due care least the gates of Hell be opened
upon them; And why should any one be thought evil of, who acquaints them of
their danger, that they may go further from it. As long as they are in any way
of Wickedness, they are not in the right way; and whether such will know it or
no, Thou have rebuked the proud that are cursed, which do err from thy
Commandments, Psalm. 119. 21.

That fancy which allows in the practice of any sin, or which excuses from
obeying any one single Gospel Precept pertaining to such a Man or Relation, is
a mere deceit, and is damnable. There are many devices in Man's heart,
nevertheless the counsel of the Lord that shall stand, Prove. 19. 21. People are
very apt to trust unto those which concern their Spiritual Estate, but herein
they compass themselves about with Sparks; in this life they may walk in the
light of their fire and the sparks that they kindled; enjoy a little outward
Isa. 50. 11.
heat, but no solid warmth and comfort; have carnal security, but not Peace
toward God: But that must vanish; upon a Deathbed they may see their error,
and lie down in Sorrow; but if so blinded that they cannot see then, they will
feel, if they should be let down into everlasting fire: Why will they not in
the mean while take heed to themselves, that they be not deceived?

Wherefore lay apart all filthiness and superfluity of naughtiness, and receive
with meekness the ingrafted word which is able to save your Souls, Jam. 1. 21.
The Scriptures (as aforesaid) have proved an occasion of deceits, that was when
Men did abuse and pervert them of set purpose; but if made use of as here
directed, they do discover them all, and lead into the way of Truth. Do ye not
therefore err, because ye know not the Scriptures? said our Lord to the
Sadducees, Mark 12. 24. But who call themselves his followers of the Roman
Church fallaciously conclude; therefore Men err, because they know the
Scriptures: But this happens only through the abomination of the wicked, which
stumble at the word, being disobedient, 1 Pet. 2. 8. Whereas no truly honest
minded Soul was ever deceived by it; I do not mean in every little Question
which Ministers unto strife rather then Godly Edifying, or in matters of
doubtful disputation; but what is necessary to build up in our holy Faith, and
make for good Life. As long as we keep our heart whole with God, and continue
steadfast in his Covenant, we are safe; but if we once let in a sinful gain or
lust, then foolish imaginations come in, and we are in danger to miscarry in
the error of our own ways. If our Selves will take heed, both pray and
endeavor to hold up our goings in Gods paths, this is to keep from the paths
of the destroyer. If there be no wicked way in us, we shall be in the way
everlasting; Those which turn aside are Sin and Satan, but this is the Covenant
performed in these days; That he would grant unto us that we being delivered
out of the hands of our Enemies, might serve him without fear, in Holiness and
Righteousness before him all the days of our Life, Luke 1. 73, 74. It can be
no little satisfaction to be freed from danger; and then if it be any comfort
to have true quietness of Spirit, Joy in the Holy Ghost, firm hopes of Eternal
Life, such have all these. When those who cherish themselves with deceits, may
be like the rest of Sleep, whereof nothing is perceived but interruptions; They
have no delights in the inward Man, no rejoycings in God; but feed upon
groundless expectations, which shall perish with them. If any man think himself
to be something, when he is nothing, he deceives himself; He may indeed with
slight cursory thoughts conclude his condition to be well enough, this a self
deceiver may do. Whereas the true servant of God can descend into the bottom of
his heart, can prove his own work, and find rejoicing in himself alone, which
the other cannot: Be not deceived, God is not mocked, for whatsoever a man
sows that he shall also reap; He that sows to his flesh, shall of the flesh
reap corruption, but he that sows to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap
life everlasting, Gal. 6. 3, 6, 7, 8.

Many people intend well, but the Enemy does try all means to hinder. His first
attempt is to keep off from coming into the way of Righteousness at all; but if
he does not succeed there, he will try to turn them aside into the Bypath of
error or wickedness. Is God to be Worshipped? He represents such an Idolatry
or Heathen Superstition which he has got to be retained by one half of those
who are called Christians. Is the truth to be sought after? There is such a
false light, go after that. Has the Lord commanded to do all his Statutes,
Deuteronomy. 6. 24. He knows such a thing to be for your Happiness, and why should
he restrain you from that? Beloved do not give credit to him, who after this
manner beguiled our first Parents, in whose loins we fell, and became subject
to all those evils and dangers that now beset us.

Submit your selves therefore to God: resist the Devil and he will flee from
you, Jam. 4. 7. Ignorant people are apt to be frightened at him, but he is a
mere Coward; he cannot conquer any one unless he will himself. Though he is
full of mischief and maliciously set against us, yet he can do no harm unless
our selves give way unto him.

Draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh unto you, Jam. 4. 8. What a stir do
men make, before they give up themselves to his Obedience? How many arguments
and beseechings must they have? Though he is the God of their being and
well-being, yet what a work is it to bring them unto his service? It is their
greatest Happiness and Security, yet with what difficulty are they persuaded
unto it? They do not think so, then let them consider thoroughly the different
state of the Wicked and Godly in this World, as they are both in the same low
degree.

The former cares not for God, neither has he any regard to Psalm. 10.
keep his Commandments; and perhaps may think himself happy Of the different
state of wicked and Godly
because he is his own Man, and does follow his own humor: Who can control
him? He is not troubled with the fears of Religion; He does not stand in dread
of an Oath, but loves and dares to talk big. When he can spare time from his
work he is for any diversion or Merriment, whether sinful or not is no matter
unto him; he lives as comfortably as he can, dies when his time is come, and
there is an end of him.

But now the Lord says, they that despise me, shall be Lightly esteemed, 1 Samuel 2. 30. Whatever such say in their heart concerning the holy one of Israel,
they dare not talk after this rate to the Governor of their Country; and they
will find that they had better curse the King to his face, then conceive such
iniquity but in thought against the Great King of all the Earth. Foresooth,
they will not keep his Commandments; then they shall lose Eternal Life, and for
Disobedience be cast into a Furnace of Fire. Who think it such an advantage to
have full liberty and follow their own humor in all things, how will they like
to be tied down in Chains of Darkness, and to pine a whole Eternity in desires
which shall not be granted? God will not force them, or any else (though he
might) to his obedience; but will compel transgressors to undergo the severity
of his just judgment. In the midst of sinning they have a secret dread and
horror thereof, which unless they did endeavor to stifle, would be
intolerable to them; let them pretend or talk what they will, or conceal it
still, none fear so much as those who do not fear God. They being kept in from
the World to come (wherein he will suffer their evil deeds no longer) only by
this vail of flesh, they are afraid of every least Evil or Sickness which may
endanger that; and yet by profaning his Name, they increase their own sad
expectation: They imagaine they talk big, but do not consider he is a Great
God. It is a sad thing to consider that an Ostler, Porter, or other common
Person, who dare not give a Saucy Word to their Superiors on Earth for fear of
having his bones broke, yet should be so bold with the most High God, who can
tear him in pieces, and there is none to deliver him. If it can be no sport or
pleasure to teaze a Lion of the Forest, much less is it after such an impious
manner to provoke the Lion of the tribe of Judah.

For their liberty to follow all excess, to be drunk with good Liquor and good
Company is reckoned by some to be worth all the lusts of the flesh, because it
is of longer continuance. Yet this does not last always; for labor and other
affairs of life call of, they have some sober times; and then what thoughts are
in their mind? Call to remembrance all thy former Drunken Fits and merry
Meetings, What satisfaction does now remain? What pleasure do thou perceive
of those Cups, thou have taken off in all thy past Years? In the time of Health
and Enjoyment those delights are vanished like Smoke, and seem as if they had
never been; much more will they appear so when you come to lie upon a
Deathbed. Indeed you may before that have several other jovial Fellowships,
but they will likewise pass away as the former have done; all will come to an
end, and there will be so much the more guilt to answer for. Several Drunkards
to thy knowledge are already dead and gone, and it will be a sad thing to be in
roll of those who shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6. 10.

The wicked Man does falsely think that Death shall make an utter end of him,
for as sure as Mat. 25. 32. John 5. 28, 29. 2 Cor. 5. 10. and all Scripture is
true, so certainly is he deceived in his expectation; for he must arise to
Judgment, and if he still continues in his hard and impenitent heart (as there
are so many plagues and threatenings, which should move him with all speed to be
converted and escape) he must remain a living Monument of Eternal Vengeance. He
might all one conclude the Heavens and Earth should be dissolved, though (the
Son of God except) the death of millions of millions has not in the least
shaked them, as imagine he shall not come forth to a fearful Judgment. Persuade
thy self what thou will, but as sure as God made us, and not we our selves, as
he has power over us, and we once stand here upon the Earth, so certainly will
he account with us for our doings in another place: Men take up with the common
saying of Mortality, an end and no more, which yet is false as themselves shall
know. In this as in other things, they speak according to their wish, and not
according to their real thoughts; The sensual intemperate person would fain it
might be so with him, that as the Beasts die so he might die; who made himself
like them in his life by having no understanding, by gorging with the Dog ready
to the Vomit, and in his sottish moodes wallowing as a Sow in the Mire, so he
would his death might not be divided from them; for thy part, thou do
endeavor and desire to be like them in both: The former was in thy power, and
thou did so; the latter is not, for God has decreed otherwise: such are to
be reserved to his just Judgment.

What was it for which he must be liable to all this? When he was in the most
flourishing condition and did prove himself daily with Mirth, this did not
satisfy him. His heart was dull and heavy, when he did seem cheerful to
outward appearance, he found but little sincere joy, but few delights which
were not attended with inward damp and sorrow; if any, they were quickly over
and gone. Hardly the tenth part of his short life was spent in Jollity; for
deduct Childhood, the time of going to School, sleep, and necessary business
of the World, there is little remaining to enjoy the pleasures of sin; if
considered strictly, they do not extend to the hundredth (I should not be found
a great liar i^ I did say) not to the thousandth part of our life. What a
little must this be to lose an interest in a blessed Eternity? The residue of
time was spent in the common actions of Mankind; and these were the more
unpleasant to him who had not God for his portion. He did work for the belly
and did eat, bu^ was not satisfied in his mind, for that would be empty again;
and then he must labo^r to fill it, and so round in a circle; He could not see
any good or end thereof; He did not labor in hope; He could not expect to
increase, or get higher. He toiled all his life time, and got nothing of true
satisfaction; What profit is it to spend our days in Heaviness, and after Death
to look for Punishment? Many troubles did befall him, vexation upon vexation,
sorrow upon sorrow, in his declining years seldom a day without grief or
discontent. In the midst whereof he cannot tell whither to resort for true ease
or comfort; many a ruful exclamation within himself: Why came I forth into the
World? It had been better for me to have remained what I was an hundred years
since, to have never seen the light of the living. My life is irksome and
grievous, and I know nothing to the contrary, but when I die it will be yet
worse; fain I would not live, but I fear to die. O that I might sleep for
evermore, or return into my first nothing, and then welcome the Grave; I would
as willingly lie down there as in a bed of Roses, but my heart can give no such
assurance: It seems to foreshew more and greater misery, when the breath is
gone out of my body; I could sometimes say there would be an end of me, but I
tremble it will be no such thing. O wretched Man that I am! Who can deliver me
from present grief, and preserve me from that expectation of worse things to
come?

Thus may be seen his sad condition, and indeed it would make an heart of stone
compassionate him, and gush into Tears; but it is considered, all this is come
upon him through his own fault, for his contempt and stubbornness against our
Most Gracious God. Who would have brought him unto Heaven, afforded him means
and power, but he did re^use and not value them; said he in his heart,
wherefore should I keep the Commandments? It is vain to serve God, Mal. 3. 14.
I did observe several to go to Worship, and diligently frequent his Ordinances,
who did Walk mournfully before the Lord of Hosts; for in his Opinion they were
pitiful Melancholy Souls, they got no good by it. Not discerning future
promises and present peace, and therefore he blindly resolved, to go on in his
wonted course, which was all his life long to disregard or show himself
despitefully against the Author of his being.

But let others see and fear, what his ungodliness is come unto; If one behaves
himself Proudly and Rebelliously against the King, who received maintenance and
continual favor from him, and comes to suffer for it, the voice of the
Multitude is, Hang him, he is an ungrateful Traitor. And then if one acts in
like manner against God, who is loving to every Man, sends Rain upon the just
and unjust, gives them all necessary temporal blessings, and never intends
any hurt by whatsoever he does during the whole day of Salvation; but still
they will not be entreated by loving kindness, nor warned by the Rod that
strikes to turn from their evil way, and come into Gods ways. If these people
become wretched through their own wilfulness and perverseness, and if the Holy
Almighty God to frighten us the more from it, and to keep up his Government,
has ordered that Misery should be linked on to iniquity, and they commit this
with greediness; Who Ezekiel. 14. 22, 23.
can be moved or find fault if they have that also, which is justly the due
reward of their deeds, Luke 23. 41. The Law is not to be blamed, but those only
who do not observe or transgress against it. Though there would have been joy
among Angels and all good Men if they had repented, who would likewise have
done any thing to bring it to pass, and were grieved because they would not
suffer it; But seeing they continued obstinate, and hardened their hearts, these
shall not pity their Calamity, nor be greived when their fear comes, which
will be a further aggravation. Many sorrows shall be to the Wicked: But he that
trusts in the Lord, mercy shall compass him about, Psalm. 32. 10.

It is a good thing to have an able friend to put confidence on in A
Description of a good Man.
dangers and distress; but he that can stay himself on God the Rock of Ages,
the Lord Almighty, is in a more happy condition then he that has the favor of
all the great Men of the World. Let the Wicked reckon it a Privilege that they
care not for God (it has been showed to be a miserable one) but the Righteous
count it their greatest honor that God is not ashamed to be called their God,
Heb. 11. 16. And they poor Earthworms, may be styled his Servants. They by
Faith seeing him that is invisible, who does not despise these little ones,
however low in the World, are rapt up with admiration; Lord! what are we, that
thou should be mindful of us? For consider how great he must be, who made the
World and all things therein; how Glorious, whose is the Sun and Brightness
thereof. Others may go and please themselves with their acquaintance with Lords
and Gentlemen, but we will remember the Name of the Lord our God; who humbles
himself to behold the things in Heaven and Earth, yet admits us to come boldly
to the Throne of Grace, to present our Petitions, which he will grant if he
knows what is good for us better then we our selves, sees it profitable for
us. Those of Authority in this World say to those under them, go, and he goes,
come, and he comes, to this Man, do this, and he does it; much more may the
Lord and Governor of the whole World, unto whom the Nations of the Earth are
as the drop of a Bucket, command us to do whatsoever pleases him. But as he is
Powerful, so he is Merciful; he has showed what he does require of us, caused
it to be noted in a Book that it may be for the time to come for ever, and has
testified that no Man add unto these things, Rev. 22. 18. So we are not left at
an uncertainty how we may, or when we have done the will of God, if we are in a
readiness still to hear all things that are commanded and made known from his
Word. Herein we are more happy, then those little Spirits who endeavor to Acts
10. 33.
please Men, for their humors are uncertain, not easily known, and endless.

There is a delight in approaching to God; those rejoycings which the devout
Soul has, seem strange to the unexperienced, for they make no outward noise,
yet are as real as sensual pleasures to Worldly Men. He calls the Sabbath a
delight, not doing his own Ways, nor finding his own Pleasure, nor speaking his
own Words, Isa. 58. 13. It is the most pleasant day of all the Week; rejoicing
at this time of Vacation from worldly cares and labor, but more especially
because he can wait on the Lord in the Sanctuary; hear his Word: When he comes
home, he is better pleased with good Conference, Prayer, Reading and
Meditation, then others are in vain Talk, wretched Idleness, or Recreations;
for to them succced Heaviness in that they have not done what they should. But
with a good Man the day ends in Satisfaction, that he has done his duty by
rightly using the means of Grace, he has laid up in the Treasure of his Heart
some good things, which may carry him through Temptation, and give comfort the
week following. He has refreshed himself from bodily labor, so he can fall to
it again more cheerfully; The goodness of God is here to be observed, how the
Sabbath was made for Man, and not Man for the Sabbath, Mark 2. 27. For if he
were to labor every day, it would be intolerable and irksome: But now it is
not, because a day of rest returns so often, which also takes off from the
tediousness of the Year. Since it is thus ordained, the time of Man's labor
passes on more comfortably; and there is more variety: in the weck he is
cumbred about getting necessaries for this miserable and transitory life; on
the Lords day he provides for an Happy and Eternal being. How contentedly does
he go to bed that night with the Memory of what he has thrived in? The
merchandise of which is better then the Merchandise of Silver, Prove. 3. 14.

The next Morning he goes forth ively land willingly to the work of his
Calling, which he follows with honesty and diligence. The just Man walks in
his Integrity, does not fear to see any, for he has wronged none, has a good
Report and Commendation among his Neighbors, and they being ass^red of his
Faithfulness are willing to deal with him, so he has greater Custom and
Employment. There are opportunities when he might get more if he would Lie,
Circumvent, or take advantage over an ignorant Person; but he will not for that
lose his present Peace and future Reward. He that gets Riches, and not by
right, shall leave them in the midst of his days, and at his end shall be a
Fool, Jer. 17. 11. He shall now have no true Comfort of them, and there will be
a worse consequent hereafter But for him, That walks righteously and speaks
uprightly, he despises the Gains of oppression, He shall dwell on high, his
place of defense shall be the munitions of Rocks, bread shall be given him, his
waters shall be sure, Isa. 33. 15, 16. He shall come to Heaven, his Habitation
shall be in the place of the Most High, and in the mean while shall be sure of
a Livelihood. God has ordained, The just shall live by Faith, Hab. 2. 4. Not
serve him for Sinister Respects or present Ends: Yet they have sufficient, and
God sweetens it as much to them, as those who have abundance and Variety of
Meat, Drink and Raiment. Go thy way, eat thy bread with joy, and drink thy wine
with a merry heart, for God accepts thy Works, Eccles. 9. 7. Whatever thy
Fare be, take it with a contented mind; for he is well-pleased with thy doings;
feed on with Comfort, for he sanctifies it to thee. Is thy Bread course? Thou
have an healthy good Stomach, and be satisfied for a little while, Thou art
called unto the Marriage Supper of the Lamb, Rev. 19. 9. Is thy Liquor small?
Yet quench thy thirst therewith at present, For ye are not as yet come to the
rest, and to the inheritance which the Lord your God gives you, Deuteronomy. 12. 9.
Thou shall drink new Wine in his Kingdom; Thou shall eat the labor of thine
hand, happy shall thou be, and it shall be well with thee; Thy wife shall be as
a fruitful Vine by the side of thine House, thy Children like Olive Branches
round about thy Table, Psalm. 128. 2, 3. There is unexpressible comfort in
conjugal Love, when others in unlawful Mixtures meet with nothing Ezekiel. 16. 45.
but Repentance and Loathsomeness: and then his Children are more dear to him,
then the seed of the Adul^erer, Sons of Whoredom, or of those vilest Men, who
are without natural affection, Romans 1. 31.

Who is thus blessed at Home, does not so much resort forth to the Alehouse;
He does not wring tears from his Family least he should bring them to a morsel
of Bread, neither does he spend that for himself which they want; indeed he
has as much liberty and right to good Drink as others, which he accordingly
receives with Moderation, and so has more enjoyment of it; for he has all the
pleasure, but none of the sin and inconvenience, which attend those who add
Drunkenness to Thirst. They for the time forget then cares and misery, which
are either regrets of Conscience, or misfortunes of the World; but our good Man
has not the first, as for the latter he can comfort and remedy himself a
better way. He can trust in God, have recourse to his Word, pacify himself
with faith and hope of better things to come, look upon the example of Saints
heretofore; from hence springs up greater and more enduring comfort, then from
the sparklings of Wine or heaviness of Ale.

He has an excellent end to himself in what he does; for he labors to eat,
and he eats to live, and he lives to know and serve the Lord, which tends
toward the receiving (according to his gracious Promises) Eternal Glory and
Reward. If he does now find weariness in work, it shall not be so always, the
times of refreshing will come; This life was not given to follow after ease and
pleasure, and though the practice of several seems to the contrary, yet they
may come to affirm, it would have been better for them if they had taken the
same honest pains, as themselves saw others did. God will not forget the labor
and care of some who had just food and raiment; or not consider the Jollity and
Wantonness of others who did neither Sow nor Spin, ^et devoured the fatness of
the Earth, and were arrayed in the best apparel. All things will be set aright
at the last; the very reflection or looking back (if nothing more be added)
when they are both past will set them equal; for what difference is between him
who had a pleasant or troublesome Voyage when over? It will be an addition to
the happiness of Heaven, the more tribulation one comes out of from the World.
Let the mean person be sure to abound in love and zeal for God, it shall go as
well with him at last as with his rich Neighbors; there is not such a vast
difference (as some would be apt to think) between his and their present
contentment; if any exceeding, upon the strict survey, it may be found of his
side. That Man is most happy, who is so at the end.

Every Sunsetting sets him one step further, to Day more then Yesterday; to
Morrow he comes yet more nigh. He goes on from Sabbath to Sabbath, from one
Festival to another toward the place of Eternal Rest and Rejoicing. He
confesses himself to be a Stranger and Pilgrim upon Earth, and declares plainly
that he seeks a Country, Heb. 11. 13, 14. Not that which he is in already, for
he must not continue herein; and therefore desires a more lasting Country; let
others do what they will, for his part he will make it the greatest and only
business of his life to get thither. The bare hopes whereof do yield him mighty
support under the most heavy and wearisome labors; these will be ended and the
Angels shall carry him into Abraham Bosom, a place of sweet repose: When he
comes upon the Bed of last Sickness, he shall rest thereon. Being assured he is
going into a better State, he can lie down in quietness and have rejoicing
within, when the outward Man is giving up the Ghost: That God whom he has
sincerely served throughout his life, will deal bountifully with him at last.
Well done good and faithful Servant, thou have been faithful over a few things,
enter thou into the joy of thy Lord.

What were his past services to be so highly commended by our God? His only Son
was pleased to say, Herein is my Father glorified that ye bear much fruit, John
15. 8. Lord thou have but what is thine own, from thee alone did proceed what
thou graciously vouchsafest to accept. He gives grace to enable us here, and
rewards with glory hereafter; Who can sufficiently admire his love and
goodness? He might have commanded us to go through Fire and Water, to have done
some hard thing before we should arrive at his Kingdom; but he has brought us
into a wealthy place, where we enjoyed inward peace of mind, and had all things
necessary for our bodies, where we did meet with but little evil and hardship,
not worthy to be accounted so. What is become of that light affliction which
was for a Moment, now we are possessed of the exceeding and eternal weight of
Glory? How slender a matter is the denial of a lust or crossing a corrupt
inclination, seeing we are entered into life, and enjoy as great Happiness as
the powers of Soul are capable of receiving? Truly God is good to Israel, even
to such as are of a clean heart, Psalm 73. 1. He is loving to every Man, but the
greatest part did reject his goodness; What Enemies were they to themselves?
But blessed are those who did not forsake their God as the wicked do. Whither
should we have went but unto him, who then held forth the Words of Eternal
Life, and now gives the thing it self? When we were in the Wilderness, he was
our Guide and Comfort in the Wa^. Others caught at every thing they found
there, and could not be satisfied; whilst we used it as we passed through, did
thank our God he made it so commodious to sojourn in, but did not take up our
rest there, for we believed God had provided better things; We fully trusted
unto what some did only make a reserve of, and therefore would make sure of the
Wordly happiness (O wonderful wise in their own Opinion!) and accordingly did
run after every trifle, snatch at every thing goodly to behold; did tear their
flesh with thorns and briers, walked through deserts, and wandered out of the
way, and so missed of the place to which those who had faith are arrived. Deuteronomy.
32. 20.
It will be more Happiness to the blessed Spirits in Heaven to remember that
they came thither with more ease and less trouble, then those accursed Souls
did find in the way which led to Hell; which consideration will be a greater
degree of torment to them. This is true of all sorts and conditions of Men from
the highest to the lowest; whatever rank they stand in the World, it is their
greatest happiness to fear God and keep his Commandments, then which what more
forcible Exhortation can be desired to persuade Men? For the very same does
prevail as to all other things.

CHAP. VI.
A Survey in General of those sins which hinder the Happiness of Mankind, as
contrary to Scripture, and from the very nature of Things.

HItherto has been showed out of Gods Word what is required of Man in every
state and condition, and what is most for his own Happiness. Nothing can be
done too much to further this great end; and therefore it is necessary to
proceed unto the discovery of those things, which promise and make a show of
Happiness, but in truth hinder from obtaining. Every single person proposes to
himself some Felicity, which is the end of his Actions: Now the mistake is,
wherein this Happiness of Man is placed; Whether in obedience to Gods
Commandments; or taking the full of the things of this World, following his own
inclinations and humors.

God has given Laws to his Creatures, the transgression of which is Sin. As
soon as the World was peopled, the Wickedness of Man was great in the Earth,
and every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil continually:
for all flesh had corrupted his way upon the Earth. Genesis 6. 5, 12. Evil has
interwoven it self into every particle of his Nature; he is become strangely in
love therewith, not knowing or rather not minding that like a sweet Poison
causes Sickness and Death, so this brings Misery and Ruin: The fault is wholly
in himself, for he will be ignorant; Love is blind according to the Proverb,
and also it prejudices. The resolution is not to part with, and so shuts the
Eyes, stops the Ears, not suffering himself to be persuaded of its Deformity
and Mischief; Sin has stole away the hearts of the Men of this World, it
kisses and flatters, insinuating what a deal of good it will do them, what
pleasure it affords.

By one Man sin entered into the World, Romans 5. 12. It prevailed upon him after
such a colloguing and creeping manner; We may blame our Fore-Father for putting
the Seeds of evil in, but yet by the assistance given us, we may stop the
growth thereof. Sin has this Advantage, that it has taken Root, and has one
part, even our dear flesh to side with it: Which as so much dung and soil makes
it shoot forth abundantly, yet still as it appears above ground we may cut it
off. And if we always keep it thus short, it may indeed and will somewhat
trouble us as long as we remain in this sinful Earth, but it will not overcome
or triumph over us. Let not sin reign in your Mortal Body, Romans 6. 12. The
Apostle well knew what ^e said in calling it a Mortal Body; If absolutely
without sin, it could not be Mortal, for Death is by reason of Sin: But he
further explains himself, verse 14. Sin shall not have dominion over you, for
ye are not under the Law, but under Grace. It Is the Dominion and Power of sin
which is really and finally hurtful; from that any one may be freed who will
come unto Christ. Without me ye can do nothing, John 15. 5. And again, We can
do all things through Christ that strengthens us, Phil. 4. 13. Men are
naturally apt to give back, yea, and corruption has so weakened them that they
cannot go unto him; No Man can come unto me, except the Father which sent me
draw him, John 6. 44. And if any will seek unto God for this purpose, he will
powerfully move and incline them to be followers after Christ: When one is
brought over to a thing with great striving and unwillingness, it is a common
saying that he is compelled, though at last he yields to it freely; compare
Mat. 22. with Luke 14. 23. And so God does work by his Spirit upon the untoward
hearts of Men; He gives Grace, and corruption is there also, and these struggle
together within the Man. Though corruption has the start of being there
before, and does influence; yet Grace sollows close at the heel, has power
with God, and with Men, and will prevail. But the Question is with which the
Man will side and take part; whether he will work together with the Grace of 2
Cor. 6. 1.
God, or yield to his own corruptions, and so receive that in vain. He cannot
be neu^er or unconcerned, for the War is within him, and it is here as between
the house of David and Saul; the one grows stronger and stronger, the other
weaker and weaker according to the single Victories one has over the other. To
him that has shall be given, who uses well shall have more; but who does not,
from him shall be taken away that which he has. An old hardened Sinner bred up
in ungodliness from his Youth, is as awkward to Prayer or good Duties, as a
stone to fly upwards; yet in his life time past had Disposition and Power to
do those things, unto which now he is averse. So he who has little and few
good motions, yet if he does cherish and comply with these from time to time,
he will have them greater and more impulsive; The Spirit of God is a delicate
thing, and cannot endure to be vexed: who rebel against its dictates and
thwart its desires, do provoke him to withdraw. What passionate entreaties
does Isa. 63. 10.
he make to reclaim sinners? O! that my people had hearkened unto me, and
Israel had walked in my ways, Psalm. 81. 13. Yea, I have loved thee with an
everlasting love: therefore with loving kindness have I drawn thee, Jer. 31. 3.
Some are moved by this, and others are of such base nature as to resist it. And
the Spirit, and the Bride say, Come; and let him that hears say, come; and
let him that is Athirst, come, and whosoever will, let him take the water of
life freely, Rev. 22. 17. Here is Conscience, Christ, his Ministers, the want
and desire of good and comprehensively all other motives which invite; but none
is forced for all.

If they will come, they shall be kindly received; but if they make light of
all these Messengers, going their Ways one to his Farm, another to his
Merchandise, at their peril be it. The reason why they did, Mat. 22. was
because they had some present business which they thought of more concern then
the Wedding Dinner: In like manner Men will not entertain the offers of Grace
and Salvation made to them out of the Gospel, because they have some lusts and
covetous desires to gratify, which they think tend more to their Happiness,
then the others. That these have some delight they are sure, for they have it
in hand, but they cannot conceive any in the other, it is to be revealed
hereafter they know not when; so in their Opinion they make the better choice,
because they are certain of something, whereas others expose themselves to
self-denial and present losses, and live upon imaginary expectancies. There is
no time like the present; a slight vanity now is to be prefered before a
substantial Glory hereafter. Most excellent reasoning! and agreeable to the
Wisdom of this World, that come to naught, 1 Cor. 2. 6. It is worthy of, and
such as could be expected from Men who have no foresight of things to come: in
other things it is prudence to have an eye forward, but in this (which is of
greater Moment then all things put together) to pass on and be punished is
reckoned the wiser way. Then it will be discerned otherwise, but this is the
misery when they shall come to be thoroughly convinced of their foolishness, it
will be past remedy. This objection against the things of God because they are
to come, has been already answered; And for the delight of the sins most in
esteem and p^actice Chapter 3.
(if God permit) shall be fully examined in the ensuing Chapters. It may appear
very small and inconsiderable, for which a Man must lose Temporal Comfort and
Eternal Joys, endure the manifold evils and inconveniences of sin in this
present time, and afterward suffer endless Torment. To be excluded from Peace
here, and Glory hereafter; to be made subject unto sorrows now, and hence
forwards Eternal anguish of mind, must be prejudicial to Man's Happiness, or
nothing is.

All this is to lay stronger engagement on us to observe Gods Laws; In keeping
of them there is great reward, Psalm. 19. 11. There is happiness to be found;
but in transgression is exceeding punishment, there only misery is felt. The
way of God is a way of Peace, as long as any one walks therein he is safe, but
if he turns his foot aside, he presently falls into trouble and danger.
Obedience and Happiness are met together, Righteousness and Peace have kissed
each other: As again, Sin and Misery are coupled, Wickedness and Punishment are
joined hand in hand.

The Heavens declare the Glory of God: and the Firmament shows his handy
work. Day unto Day utters Speech, Night unto Night Of Scripture.
shows Knowledge. There is no Speech nor Language, where their voice is not
heard; Psalm. 19. 1, 2, 3. The astonishing Works of creation proclaim aloud to
all the World, there is a God who made them: The excellent contrivance of this
glorious Fabric, does show forth his great Power and infinite Understanding.
But they do not make known what the Lord requires of us; they do not reveal in
what relation we stand toward him, they cannot discover our imperfection, or
how we may please and become like unto him; they do not show the error of our
crooked and perverse ways, or manifest the true Happiness, or how we may run
toward it, and not at uncertainty: Neither does they prescribe how to remedy
our natural folly and blindness. But the Law of the Lord is perfect, converting
the Soul: the Testimony of the Lord is sure, making wise the simple. The
Statutes of the Lord are right rejoicing the Heart: The Commandment of the Lord
is pure, enlightening the Eyes. It does what all the World cannot, direct into
the way of perfect Peace, which leads up to everlasting Glory.

The Prophecy came not in Old time by the Will of Man, but holy men of God
spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 1. 21. God who at sundry
times, and in diverse manners, spoke in time past unto the Fathers by the
Prophets, has in these last days spoken unto us by his Son, Heb. 1. 1, 2. Who
whilst he dwelt amongst us, made known the Will of his heavenly Father, choosing
unto him Disciples to go and teach likewise. He instructed them until the time
of his Suffering: To whom he showed himself alive after his Passion by many
infallible Proofs, being seen of them forty days, and speaking of the things
pertaining to the Kingdom of God. And being assembled together with them,
commanded that they should not depart from Jerusalem, but wait for the Promise
of the Father, which says he, ye have heard of me, Acts 13. 4. It was the
Comforter, which is the holy Ghost, whom my Father will send in my Name, he
shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance whatsoever
I have said unto you, John 14. 26. Many things Christ did and said, which are
not written by the Evangelists, some whereof the Apostles have delivered. And
other things they have laid down out of his Doctrine by infallible inference
and deduction. They could not be mistaken, for they received the Promise, John
16. 13. The Spirit of Truth will guide you into all Truth; and for a manifest
Testimony thereof, they foretold things to come, which have been, and are to be
fulfilled.

In the old Testament the Law of Moses, the Prophets, and the Psalms so summed
up, Luke 24. 44. In the New, the Writings of Evangelists and Apostles are given
to make us wise unto Salvation. By these God will judge us at the last day. I
saw the Dead small and great stand before God, and the Books were opened, and
another Book was opened, which was the Book of Life, and the Dead were judged
out of those things, which were written in the Books according to their Works,
Rev. 20. 12. The Bible is the Lords Statute Book containing those Laws for the
Government of the world, and according as People have observed o^ transgressed
them, he will proceed to acquital, or Condemnation.

In Christ's Sermon on the Mount, before he comes to speak as to the
Commandments, he does premise: Think not that I am come to destroy the Law or
the Prophets; I am not come to destroy the Law, but to fulfill: For verily I
say unto you, till Heaven and Earth pass, one jot or one tittle shall in no
wise pass from the Law till all be fulfilled, Mat. 5. 17, 18. As for the Types
and Ceremonies they were but Prefigurations of him that was to come, so they
vanish when all was finished on the Cross. Other Statutes did relate to the
Jews in their politic capacity, which Moses did ordain from God, who was to
them immediately instead of a Temporal King and Lawgiver. 1 Samuel 8. 7.
He was pleased to be over that Nation in a more especial manner, though he was
Lord over the whole Word. But the other part was for the Government of men's
Life and Actions concerning Good and Evil, teaching them their duty to God, and
one another: which remains still in full force. Christ did vindica^e and clear
the Law from those corrupt Interpretations and narrow Restrictions the Scribes
and Pharisees had invented. He introduces it, Except your Righteousness exceed
the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven. And then he does explain the true meaning and full
extent of the Commandments. He has also filled up the Defects and
Imperfections of the Law, has rendered it holy and spiritual. By making more
known how it did reach the inward man, was a discerner of the thoughts and
intents of the Heart: for out of that did proceed the things which defile the
man, and therefore should be rightly ordered. He enjoined Purity and Sincerity
of Heart, which in Scripture language signifies the Spirit or Soul, with all
its Operations and Faculties, the whole man. Indeed the same was required of
old; but then both Priest and People did draw near to God with their Lips,
placing all their Religion in outward Performances, (the like mistake is too
common in these days) against which the Prophets in sundry places boldly
declare the Word of God, for which faithful dealing they were stoned, killed,
sawed asunder, and their Writings were not much hearkened unto; for the
rebellious People were resolved to go on in their course. There was no Prophet
among them for four hundred Years before the coming of Christ, in which space
the Jewish Nation had corrupted their Way, and those entrusted to preach Moses
and the Prophets, proved most unfaithful; for by their own Traditions they made
the Commandments of God of none effect. But he has restored again the true
Doctrine and incorrupted Word of God, and has rescued many poor and ignorant
Souls from blind Leaders. This was one end of Christ's coming into the World,
but the principal one was of offering his Soul a sacrifice for Sin, and
establishing a more gracious Covenant, as is particularly set forth in the
Gospel.

Thou art the God that do Wonders, thou have declared thy strength among the
People; thou have with thine Arm redeemed thy People, the Sons of Jacob and
Joseph, Psalm. 77. 14. 15, These things thou did of Old; but since thou have
magnified thy power by Jesus of Nazareth, a man approved of God by Miracles,
and Wonders, and Signs, which God did by him (and as a further Confirmation of
all) God has raised him up, having loosed the Pains of Death, Acts 2. 22, 24.
And declared to be the Son of God with Power, according to the Spirit of
Holiness, by the Resurrection from the Dead, Romans 1. 14. Thereby witnessing all
which he said was true. And now having done so great things for us, whereof we
rejoice, he is pleased not to multiply Miracles. It is his decree we should
walk by Faith, and not by sight, and we have sufficient for the establishment
of that. It was the saying of Father Abraham, If they hear not Moses and the
Prophets; but now since the Author of the New Testament has suffered, and that
is become of force by his death, it may be added, If they hear not Christ and
his Apostles, neither will they be persuaded, though one rose from the dead,
Luke 16. 31. For this would not be half so wonderful as what they did; and if
men will not be persuaded by what is greater, if they will not believe so many
strange Works, and such a cloud of Witnesses, above five hundred Brethren at
once, which had seen Christ after he was risen, neither will they give credit
unto a single Person that came from the Grave and testified of these things.
Men are apt to think and with in their Hearts, that they had greater Evidence
and full Assurance that these things are so; but that cannot well be, unless
the forementioned Decree is reversed, and we did now see the things of Heaven
with open face. God is not such, as he should lie or repent; neither will he
falsify and bring to naught his wise Counsels and Designs, to gratify the
unreasonable desire of sinful men. We are to be thankful that he has been
pleased to reveal himself thus far, and not as an evil Generation to seek yet a
sign, when no sign shall be given, saving that of the everlasting Gospel. He
has ordered it to be preached unto all Nations for a witness unto them, which
carries with it sufficient Evidence for convincing all mankind, and to leave
them without excuse. We ought to rest satisfied, now himself has given the
final peremptory Rule. He that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved; but
he that believes not, shall be damned, Mark 16. 16. John 3. 36. Whether men
believe the Gospel or not, they shall be judged by it: Let not this be thought
hard, for God has power over men; however, there is such certainty in the
things contained therein, that People cannot do otherwise then believe them,
unless they renounce even common understanding. But they are become corrupt and
perverse by Lusts, which make them unwilling to believe: They would not have
God reign over them, and therefore will not receive for truth what he has
revealed. He that believes not God, has made him a Liar, because be believes
not the Record that God gave of his Son, 1 John 5. 10. God by the punishment he
will inflict on such, will manifest that he is no Liar, but what he has said
will perfrom to the utmost.

What is it that moves despicable Creatures to offer such an affront to the
Most High God? Only gratifying of paltry Lusts, or a Base Interest; which has
so bewitched them, that they cannot endure any thing which contradicts it. And
the Gospel commanding the denial of them, which is enforced with Rewards to the
Obedient, and Threatenings to those that will not comply, upon this Reason some
being resolved to keep to their own wicked Inclinations, they show malice
against it: they will not believe, lest they should be induced to obey; and
thus they provoke the author thereof. But let these men know, Greater is he
whose Word it is, then themselves who will give no credit thereunto. As he is
the Lord our Righteousness, Jer. 33. 16. so will he be the Lord taking
Vengeance, 2 These. 1. 8. He has given a gracious Law; so likewise he has
annexed Severity toward those who will not observe it. They had need be well
assured that those things which make a separation between God and themselves,
do counter poize the loss of his goodness and favor, and make amends for the
power of his anger: But are they equivalent to the least of his Mercies? Or
will they take off the smart, when his Wrath is kindled but a little? They
should fully consider, whether those things God forbids, and they will do, can
yield them more contentment and satisfaction in proportionable degree and
duration, then the things he commands, and they refuse; otherwise their
Disobedience will be most unreasonable and foolish: for they lose exceeding and
eternal happiness, and expose themselves to the like misery. Certainly all the
Enjoyments of this present time cannot make recompense for the torments to be
revealed hereafter; but what if it should be said further? The pleasures of Sin
for a season, even whilst that season is, do deprive of greater happiness then
they bring; and men are made more miserable by them. In the very time they are
so eagerly followed and had, it would be better if the man had not used them.
If it can be made evidently to appear that living according to the Gospel
renders more happy in this Life, then taking the full swinge of Licentiousness;
and besides, there is the consideration of a different futurity, then it will
be clearly demonstrated, that there is no such Fool as the Sinner. And God is
most gracious in providing so well for mankind; and they without cause are
malicious, evil, imprudent Psalm. 25. 3.
and stubborn, in not complying with his Grace and Goodness. With the greatest
Reason and Equity, Judgments are prepared for Scorrers, and Stripes for the
back of Fools, Prove. 19. 29. What more could have been done to bring men unto
Heaven, then by so ordering the matter that they shall be more happy in going
the way to it, then they could in the broad way that leads to destruction?

Here a doubt may arise, from being thus differently named, Mat. 7 13, 14. They
are thus called by reason of the difficulty of the one, and out of observation
and prophetic foresight that it has, and will have so few Travelers until
the time of universal Reformation spoken of, Isa 60. 15, 21, 22. And the other
because of its easiness at first, and those many who walk therein. Now it does
not follow, because a thing is more easy, it is more satisfying; for then
slothful Persons would be more happy then those who undertake good and noble
designs, which are attended with difficulty. Since our Nature is so much
depraved by the fall, we should of our selves slide down insensibly into Hell:
And that saying of our Lord, Mat. 7. 13. Luke 13. 24. does respect us as we are
in our natural condition; for we must put forth strength to go upwards to the
holy Hill. It is said, Strive to enter in at the strait Gate (the Word imports
exerting the utmost might) but no mention is made of such exceeding striving
when one is in. It is indeed called the narrow Way, but the way of the
Righteous is made plain, Prove. 15. 19. And one may better travel in a Road
enclosed of both sides, then those who stumble in their ways from the ancient
Paths in a way not cast up, Jer. 18. 15. Or in those crooked Paths, which
whosoever goes in shall not know Peace, Isa. 59. 8. Or who wander over
Mountains, Rocks and Deserts, where lies no way; these meet with greater
Hardship, Danger, and uncertainty at long run

The great difficulty and unpleasantness is in coming into the way of the Lord;
in passing by the other (which is crowded with so many Gallants, and a great
multitude of all sorts, which also has a show of smoothness) and making choice
of this which at first seems rugged, a dry Ground, and nothing of invitation
therein. The Devil makes big and noble Promises of what he will give to those
who serve him. All the Pleasure and Contentment in the World, this they shall
have presently, and not tarry for it. When the Son of Man comes, He has no
Form or Com^l^n^ss, and when we shall see him there is no Beauty that we should
desire him. He is des^ised and rejected of Men, a Man of Sorrow^, and
acquainted with grief, and we hid as it were our Faces from him, Isa. 53. 2, 3.
We do not at first discover any Loveliness in him, there is no external Pomp or
Greatness, nor outward show to ravish our Eyes. He is laughed at in the World,
and we are apt to be ashamed of him. Such we should be our selves, look pitiful
and little not worthy to be accounted of. And then he makes no such Proffers of
present advantage, but Talks of Self-denial, cutting of ones right hand, hating
Father and Mother, and abundance of hard sayings; so that who would come unto
him? If we were to confer with Flesh and Blood, that is for present ease: And
will not admit what is in the least harsh and irksome. Yet if we would consult
with the Spirit of our Minds, which can try and foresee things; which willingly
submits to a less trouble, for Attainment of a greater good, and avoiding a
worse Evil: Which does not judge according to appearance, but righteous
Judgment; which looks upon so much boasting and pretending as the usual
Concomitants of Emptiness and Deceit: On the other hand spies out a great deal
of Excellency under a little outward show. Which is apt to suspect those, who
make large Promises, and gives Credit when no more is promised then will be
certainly performed. Such an one will go after Christ; He speaks in a modest
way: Come unto me all ye that Labor, and are heavy laden, and I will give you
rest. Take my yo^e upon you, and learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart,
and you shall find rest to your Souls, Mat. 11. 28, 29. Only Rest, the easiness
of a Yoke and Lightness of a burden may seem but small things in Comparison to
those offered on the other hand; for there is one holds forth a Mavelous
Lightsomeness, and Cheerfulness of mind to them who are melancholy and sad. If
they come unto him, he will not bring them at all into Subjection or Bondage:
Nothing shall be laid on their Necks, yet their Souls shall enjoy all
Happiness, his Service is pleasant and easy. He is wonderful frank, he is for
giving at one time all the Kingdoms of the World and Glory of them. But stop,
-- Do they all make good that Satisfaction, which mankind so eagerly desire,
and the Deceiver so much boasts of? Do they set at Liberty, or the more bring
into Bondage? For all the high Talk of him, who was a Liar from the beginning,
those seeming little and Contemptible offers of our Lord and Savior, do exceed
all his. That Joy, Peace, and substantial Blessedness Christ gives unto his
Servants, may appear more excellent; then all those Pleasures and lying
Vanities with which Satan beguiles his followers. Perhaps he has the advantage
at the beginning, but not at long run; his Proselites seem jocund and brisk at
first, but they are not so always. And if the Servant of the Most High God is
dull and heavy at first setting out, neither shall he be so always. His joy
increases, but the other decreases. He daily find^ more and more Peace, the
other Confusion and Restlessness. The one makes continual approaches to the
place of Blessedness and Refreshment; the other day by day is nigh unto
cursing, whose end is to be burned. The one makes further discovery of the
Beauty of Holiness, and perceives more Satisfaction arising from it; the other
is convinced of the Loathsomeness and Deceitfulness of Sin, and waxes miserable
by sad disappointments. The Prove. 1. 31.
more Zealous one is for God and his Commandments, he has full measure of Joy
and Comfort; but who is greedy after wickedness, finds Grief and Vexation. The
slashes of sinful Delight end in darkness, leave Horror and Misery behind. The
ba^^s of the Tempter are exactly fitted to beguil Fools, having a fine
appearance outward, but within lies Poison and Deceit. They afford some
Pleasure, but it is Paltry sudden and unsatisfying. A little Delight does
bereave of a far greater good; it does Tickle, but it is in order to catch and
destroy. Yea that Gratification is so short and inconsiderable, that a Wise Man
would not esteem of it, if without dreadful consequents hereafter. How much
more should one retrain, seeing they are contrary to the Divine Law, and for
which things sake the wrath of God comes upon the Children of disobedience,
Col. 3. 6. As such they are chiefly prejudicial to our Happiness; they are
likewise so in their very Nature, making a show of Good, but do not perform any
such thing. Of this sort are those Lusts of the Flesh and desires of the the
mind, Ephesians. 2. 3. Properly called, Deceitful Lusts, Ephesians. 4. 22. which the whole
World run gazing after, esteeming them as the only excellent things upon Earth.
They are contrary to the Gospel, and expressly forbidden under pain of
Damnation; yet these are sought after and entertained, as if they had all good,
and no evil in them. As if God, had been injurious and would deprive them of
the things which are for their Happiness; and Genesis 31. 6.
therefore they will not obey him: For why should he withold the only good
things? They will not be kept off by him. But O Stubborn and perverse Souls! as
he is a most Sovereign Lord, may he not do what he will to try our Obedience?
Has he not provided sufficiently for the welfare of Mankind, in the lawful
Enjoyment of those good things he has given us? Has he not prescribed a more
excellent way in receiving his Creatures, then in running to the full Excess of
Riot? Does he Command any thing which is Evil? or require you to abstain from
any thing really profitable for you? He has prepared for the Sons of Men Glory
and Happiness; and may he not take what ways his Wisdom thinks fit to bring
them thither? He has ordained it may be well with them whilst in the way, if
they will do according to his Directions; which are better then their own
imaginations. O ye Sons of Men, how long will ye turn my Glory into Shame? How
long will ye love Vanity, and s^^k after leasing? Psalm. 4. 2. How long will ye
run after those delectable things, which do not profit, which are empty, and do
not fill? Why will ye gather single straws and poor parcels of delight? Whereas
if you would go unto God, you shall come again rejoicing, bringing your sheaves
with you. Come near and behold, they are not altogether so good, which you
greedily catch after; look thoroughly, the works of the flesh are not all
glorious within; so neither the lust of the Eyes, or Pride of Life. There be
many that say, Who will show us any good? Psalm. 4. 6. If their hearts are not
covered over with fatness, and they have not put out the light of their
understanding, they may conceive more in the light of the Lords countenance,
then others do find in the increase and full enjoyment of their Corn and Wine.

CHAP. VII.
Of GLUTTONY and DRUNKENNESS.

BEcause general Discourses are as words spoken into the Air, 1 Cor. 14. 9.
Which fly over and touch none; therefore it is necessary to explain even common
things. Take heed to your selves, lest at any time your hearts be overcharged
with surfeiting, Luke 21. 34. When so much is received in that it does oppress
the S^ match and more then it will conveniently bear, that is certa^^ Gluttony.
Or when a Man is rendered indisposed for Business and Action, that he cannot so
well perform either: This sin is not so discernable to others, for only the Man
himself knows the measure of his own Appetite; and one may lawfully eat the
same quantity which would be excess in another. The nature of sin is fixed and
unalterable, God knows it, as also it is set down in his Word, and
Application may be made thereof to every Man by the Spirit of his own Mind.
Whether ye eat or drink, or whatever ye do, do all to the Glory of God, 1 Cor.
10. 31. What is not for this end, is evil: We are to eat so far as to refresh
and strengthen Nature, that we may be more enabled for Gods Service; but if on
the contrary we become after our Meals more unfit for his Worship, (as it is
with too many on the Lords day) or the several duties of our calling, then we
have sinned and done wickedly. If we grow sensual minded and hankering after
good Victuals as to place more delight there, then in God and the things
pertaining to him; this is a grievous Evil and abominable Idolatry. Of such the
Apostle tell us Weeping, that they are Enemies to the Cross of Christ, whose
end is destruction, whose God is their Belly, Phil. 3. 18, 19. They contradict
the whole Gospel, the end whereof is to make Spiritual and pure in heart; So
however esteemed or us^d in the World, it is no light sin, Revellings and such
like (as are excessive Eatings) shut cut of the Kingdom of God, ^^l. 5. 21.

What present good does it bring in lieu of so great a loss? Much is ^a^cied
from Dainties and Variety; but they that abound after this manner, are in great
Men's Houses, and few in comparison to the rest of Mankind. If one is resolved
not to be betrayed into excess, he sits uneasy amidst Temptations; but if he
gives way to it, then the pleasure is soon over, for w(...)n the Table is taken
away, he is in as bad a condition as before sitting down. Both uneasy; then he
was troubled with the pains of hunger, now of fullness, which is rather worse,
for the Meat being in the Belly, all the delight is gone and vanished, but he
feels the ^^og and pressure thereof. Yet his Meat in his Bowels is turned, it
is the gall of ^spes within him, Job. 20. 14. There succeed irksome laziness,
crude eructations, which sufficiently allay for the sweet whilst in the Mo^th;
when they become empty again, they are tormented with hunger and impatiency.
They are always troubled with the desire of the same things, and when obtained,
the pleasure soon passes away; yea, the desire is craving when the Belly is
full, and the Appetite remains when is no power to satisfy. Take Gluttony at
best Advantage with the greatest provisions in the very time of Health and
Enjoyment, these and such like circumstances s^wer and embitter its chiefest
delight. But there follows afar of another train of evils, as the loss of
appetite by little and little, and several sorts of Diseases creep on. The firm
and regular constitution of Body is insensibly broken by intemperance; Let
their Table become a snare before them, and that which should have been for
their welfare, let it become a trap, Psalm. 69. 22. And if that does let down
more hastily into the Pit, the poor Soul would be sadly abashed if it be
demanded; How came thou hither so soon, not having run out half thy days?
Nothing of delight survi^es from past delicacies, even when he is seeking more;
much less in time of sickness he has this way contracted. He must with anguish
recollect that his former excess should prevent the time of Old Age; he must
think with fear, when he groans under pain, and droops under weakness of body,
if he knows not how soon he shall drop into that place where he is who fared
sumptuously every day. What will it then avail to remember that in his life
time he had his good things, when he is there Tormented? They are called good
things according to the Esteem and Opinion of the World. And indeed if
moderately used, they are good to the body, but cannot make the whole Man
Happy; who does wash his steps with butter and the Rock pours him out Rivers of
Oil, who does eat and drink well every day, even he is not thoroughly satisfied,
for the Soul does hunger and thirst after somewhat more.

Some do not conceive greater satisfaction in the World then to be at a good
Feast, and of this they have an opportunity some times, but let the Question be
put to them as soon as over. Your bodies are stuffed with good cheer, but are
not your minds empty? Did you not imagine it would give you greater
contentment, then really it did? If you should every day eat of such abundance,
you would be degrees not esteem of it. Will it effectually cure Sorrow of Mind?
Do not presently conclude others more happy then your selves, only because they
can eat and drink of more choice things; Your wholesome food is as pleasant to
you as all rarities to them. In truth neither are made happy only by what you
feed on, for that belongs to those Cattle who are feeding all day long; but
Man's desire herein being so soon satisfied, seems to show he was designed for a
more noble Happiness, then the small and perishing pleasures of Meat and Drink
amount unto. But still the Carnal Person fancies there is somewhat more; let
him find it: What way can any one be more convinced then by experience? Consult
with himself, those who know nothing better may have great esteem for the
relish of pleasant things. Yet what is more outward, slight, and transient then
Taste? They must be miserable indeed who can attain no greater Happiness. Who
have the greatest admiration hereof are commonly unexperienced through want;
and then they really make themselves miserable by impatient greedy wishes after
that, which if they had, would not make them happy. This very thing renders the
common state of people more uneasy and afflicting, then otherwise it would be;
for albeit they have good and wholesome food to satisfy Nature, and to
Minister unto sober delight; nevertheless they are discontented because they
have not those Dainties and Variety the rich have, and this takes off from
their own enjoyments. A common mistake runs throughout all things of the World,
of fancying more good in them then really they have; At first glance beholding
others Table richly spread, we call them happy who sit daily the eat; but when
we come to be thoroughly acquainted, the felicity appears to be vain show,
existing more in imagination then in them who are really partakers thereof.
This would be more evident if the great Men did make a true acknowledgement,
but they to heighten their own esteem in sight of others, by cunning silence
and false insinuations will make pretenses of happiness, which they cannot
find. They would have all people be persuaded of their own fortunate condition,
yet they do not boast so much of the pleasure which results from their daily
choice food, partly because themselves would be found liars herein, and also
there is a shame consequent to Gormandizing.

In a neighbor sin, Men will glory in their shame; it is reported there are
some grown to that Monstrous height of Impiety, that Men with Men working that
which is unseemly, yet will declare their sin like Sodom, brag thereof amongst
their confidents which one cannot conceive without horror and indignation. As
for lesser acts of leudness, they have worse then a Whores forhead; for they
are so far from being ashamed, that they will tell it out of their own accord.
Were they ashamed when they had committed Abomination? Nay, they were not at
all ashamed, neither could they blush, Jer. 6. 15. This is the highest degree
of sin, which it must be a long time before any can arrive at; and even they
had a foregoing modesty which they broke through and overcame; but the general
course of transgression is, that those sins which may be hidden, whereof none
knows but a Man's own self, are not made the subject of Ostentation or
Apology; for there is no need of hiding that shame which is not visible. And
therefore because Gluttony may be practiced secretly it is not justified
openly, nor has it owners and advocates: This does somewhat manifest that
every sin is attended with shame, and also there is the witnessing of our
Spirit that the Judgment of God is d^e against them which commit such things.
Those which may be hid, none (except the Monsters aforementioned in humane
shape) will speak out to vindicate them; but what are open and themselves are
conscious of, there they seek for Excuses and Mitigations, or to shelter
themselves under the Multitude and Fashion; However, the inward disgrace does
some what* afflict which is another thing that embitters the sin of greediness,
and is the rich Man's portion.

Be not amongst Wine Bibbers, amongst riotous eaters of Flesh, for the Drunkard
and Glutton shall come to Poverty, Prove. 23. 20, 21. He goes further then his
condition will conveniently bear, so becoming subject to want and contempt. To
prevent this he is forced to shift and use indirect means; having no regard to
Honesty or Truth, he tryes any way to get what may gratify an inordinate
Belly, which again devours it as fast; the pleasure vanishes in the Throat and
the Meat is cast out into the draught. This alone cannot make sufficient
compensation for weariness of body and contrivance of mind, which way to remedy
a loss or forecast more gain; and when obtained to consume it all presently in
a good Dinner or two, this must be imprudence: To see no fruit or increase of
his labor, to lay up nothing for Children, and there are other like mischiefs
which more then weigh down all that small and seeming good of excessive eating:
Such kind of considerations prevail with the greater part of Mankind to abstain
from it. They generally go over to the other extreme, for they rather defraud
themselves to scrape and hoard up. It is strange that a reasonable creature
should not hit upon the right mean between both, but from one evil runs to
another; He might eat and drink, and make his Soul enjoy good in his Labor,
Eccles. 2. 24. But because that does not give full satisfaction, which was
designed only to refresh, therefore he falsely seeks for it in another sin of
covetousness. Even those people who are but little governed by Reason, less by
Faith, but principally led by sense and example, yet have a low esteem of that
good which arises from immoderate eating.

It makes dull and heavy, it causes a gross understanding and weary mind, and
takes away Mirth. Nature rejoices when it is relieved, not when oppressed; God
has given great variety of his good Creatures for our benefit and comfort,
Genesis 1. 29. Gen 9. 3, 4. 1 Timothy 4. 4, 5. And has showed an excellent way of
enjoying them in his Word, Ye shall eat in plenty and be satisfied (not
clogged) and praise the Name of the Lord your God, Joel 2. 26. Blessed be his
Divine goodness, we have more precious promises under the Gospel; but however
are so to receive the things pertaining to life, that we may more cheerfully
perform this duty. But if the heart is overcharged with good Victuals, then it
cannot be lifted up in thank-giving; This would be a sinful and horrible abuse,
though too common amongst the Worshippers of God; who on their Solemn
Feast-Dayes in memory of our Redemption accomplished by our Lord Jesus Christ,
instead of an offering of Praise to a Spiritual and Holy Being, as if they were
to Sacrifice to Men of like inclinations with themselves, do then load
themselves with good cheer. This is the day which the Lord has made, we will
rejoice and be glad in it, Psalm. 118. 24. But some are so pressed with fullness
that they cannot; and if they are forced to raise that with the help of strong
drink, this is not Spiritual Joy but Sinful Mirth. Do ye thus requite the Lord,
O foolish People and unwise, By keeping the Feast with the leaven of Sin and
Wickedness? Is that your tribute and return of praise, to provoke him yet more?
Is that a seasonable time of Rioting and Drunkenness, when you should put on
the Lord Jesus, and make no provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts
thereof, Romans 13, 13. 14.

When one is puffed up with Sensuality, he is apt to disregard the things of
God, and they have not a due impression on him; which seems to be the reason of
such strict precepts against it, for that is the evil of sin, to turn away the
heart, or to stifle that aw and sense of God we should always have upon our
minds; and we are to prevent all degrees tending toward it, so the single acts
of intemperance are to be carefully avoided. It is necessary to repeat again
our Lords Command, the words of expressing it are observable; Take heed to your
selves least at any time your hearts be overcharged with surfeiting, Luke 21.
34. At every Meal use the utmost caution, for you can quickly run over to
excess. It was noted of the Wicked Gnostics of feeding themselves without
fear, Jude 12. They had no regard to the sin and danger, which does easily
beset our Feasts. There are also corrupt cravings within which would betray
into it: if resisted they will at length lose their force and importunity, but
if yielded unto, they will be more urgent. If this sin deprives of a Kingdom,
and hinders from present Happiness, may it not rightly ^e named a deceiver?
Which supplants a Man twice, bereaves of good here and hereafter. And who will
continue herein is a profane Person, as Esau who for one morsel of Meat sold
his Birthright, Heb. 12. 16. All the dainties of the whole life long are not
so much to Heaven, as that single mess of Pottage to a temporal inheritance;
May he not be styled profane in that he defiled the Temple of God, by making
use of his body only to receive superfluities in, to fill and empty it again?
Let him not deceive himself, if he seems to be wise in his own conceit,
because he has something in hand by eating to the utmost and of the best; he
does see others abstemious neglecting the body, not valuing his Luxury, but he
does not perceive they get any thing by so doing. As for his part he is for
satisfying the flesh to the very full, for he is sure of what he puts into his
Mouth: But this Wisdom of the Glutton is foolishness, and so will appear in the
end. When he shall come to be rejected of God for his past delicacies, how fain
would he enter into those good things prepared for such, who through grace
qualify themselves here? but who neglected that for inordinate trifles which
then utterly disappear, he will have sufficient reason to take up an exceeding
bitter cry, when the Lord will not pronounce on him the eternal Blessing.

If there is so little good to be had by this, Will another kind Of Drunness.
of excess afford more? Come and see. By Drunkenness is understood when one
drinks so much as to lose the free use and exercise of his reason. God has
made Man for himself, endued his mind with faculties and expects to be
glorified by them; now when these are rendered unable for that, he is
dishonored, his will is contradicted, which is a provocation of his most
excellent Majesty. Herein is some of the evil, and the sin is in being contrary
to his revealed Word and Command, VVo unto them that rise up early in the
Morning, that they may follow strong drink, that continue till night till Wine
inflame them. Woe unto them that are mighty to drink Wine, and Men of Strength
to mingle strong drink, Isa. 5. 11, 22. Whom God Curses, Man Blesses; for who
is esteemed a more worthy and honest Person, then he that will not baulk his
Liquor? Surely those were strange times much differing from ours, when Paul
wrote, Not to keep Company, if any Man that is called a Brother be a Drunkard,
with such an one, no not to eat, 1 Cor. 5. 11. But now if a Man is not a
Drunkard, he is not thought fit to keep Company. He is a dull Fool, and who
will come near him? So much we (who call our selves Christians, and in things
which do not relate to Lust are admirers of Antiquity) have varied from the
primitive Fashion. Then they that were Drunken, were Drunken in the night, 1
These. 5. 7. but in this Age at Noonday they will Reel and Stagger in the
Streets: Frequency takes of Admiration, and they shall not be esteemed the
worse for it: Whilst the Liquor is working within them, they Foam out their own
Shame. When the time of Brutishness is over, and their reason returns, Dan. 4.
36. they will boast thereof, and for Confirmation will own it with an Oath to
put the Matter out of question. These kinds of exploit afford much Merry and
jocular Discourse. It Is become fashionable, both talked of and practiced by the
Gentiles of our time. Wherein they think it strange if others of alike Birth
and 1 Pet. 4. 3, 4.
Education Do not run to the same Excess of Riot, speaking Evil of them, or
fancying them odd and different sort of People. But does not this imputation
fall back upon themselves? For what are they when the distinguishing Faculty is
lost? Is that becoming the neatness of a Well-bred Man to be sitting at Tables
full of Vomit and Filthiness, so that there is no place clean? Isa. 28 8. To be
encompassed with a Cloud of Smoke, and the Defilements of Drink and Spitting. A
goodly Argument of true worth to have nothing but shameful Sp^^ing for their
Glory, Hab 2. 16. They have the greater number on their side. If only some few
Persons, they would be as Monsters; but because many are so, therefore they
would have it praise worthy, and of good Report. A strange way of Reasoning!
for at this rate the more universal an Evil is, it would lose its Nature, and
become a greater Good.

It has been the subtlety of Satan, who sets up his Kingdom against that of
Christ, to get the multitude over to his side, and to make an outward
appearance of Happiness. Thus he persuades Men to that which is neither right
nor good: In the great Temptation to Drunkenness, he is not wanting to suggest
all the Conveniences thereof, but the Evils are cunningly concealed. As it
frees from Care and Sorrow, removes heaviness from the Heart, making that light
and cheerful. It takes away Fear and every thing that vexes: Especially it does
pacify those grumblings of Conscience, which is imagined a mighty Privilege;
for as those are irksome and grievous, so it can be no small Comfort to be
freed from them. And then it exceeds all other Pleasures, because of longer
continuance. Other sinful Delights are quickly vanished, but Drunkenness does
endure for a considerable time, all is Mirth and Jollity. What Delight can be
compared to this, which may be had every day, and takes up the greater part
thereof? Who but a morose ill natured Fellow would not oblige Company upon such
pleasant and easy Terms? Does he not deserve to be thrust from the Fellowship
of mankind, who will not comply with them in a thing so much for their
Happiness? Away with Seriousness and Morality, which makes dull and miserable.
Do not reproach us with breaking the Law, for God gives Wine that makes glad
the Heart of Man, and the Lord Christ was present at the Marriage Feast, where
it is supposed they had well Drunk. He has given great Liberty, and if we do
transgress that, he is merciful to forgive, and we hope he will. God would have
mankind be Happy, and we do only endeavor to be so.

This last is true, but then they should go in the way he chooses, and not
despise his Wisdom, or distrust his Faithfulness, as if he did not know how to
bring them to Happiness, or would deceive therein. If they will follow after
those means themselves have chosen, they will be certainly deceived. Sin has
this advantage that it looses nothing for want of setting of; if out ward show
and noise (as this is the Rule whereby the World judge) will recommend a thing,
there is sufficient. Look not upon the Wine when it is Red, when it gives his
Color in the Cup, when it moves it self aright, at last it biteth like a
Serpent, and stingeth like an Adder, Prove. 23. 31, 32. Wine is a Mocker,
strong drink is raging, and whosoever is deceived thereby is not Wise, Prove.
20. 1. It Promises much Pleasure, and yields little, but has more Pain and
Torment, both at present and hereafter: This is the Deceit, Men only look upon
the seeming good it brings, not putting the Evil in Balance therewith.

Conceive it altogether in the Beginning, Middle, End, with its further
consequents. In the first is somewhat of Delight, yet the Pleasure of drink
Perishes in the Draught, and who would value such a sudden Enjoyment? As long
as they continue within the bounds of Moderation, it is none of the Pleasures
of sin; but to go over there is difficulty. When one has drunk sufficient for
Thirst and honest Refreshment, to drink yet more is Torment and Violence: The
other Glass is taken off with as much unwillingness as a physical Potion: What
Artifices are used to shift a turn or two? Several Circumstances do manifest
that it is painful and irksome to drink to Excess.

It Is only so to pun^ Drunkards, who are weak headed, and do not Practice it,
but not to those who are strong and constant. But was it not after this manner
even to them, when they first began this Trade? To use their own Phrase, Was it
not some time before they could be thoughly brought over to take off their
Liquor kindly? The Stomach does not presently admit of Excess, and there must
be many successive Acts to produce the habit of Sottishness, which were hard
and unpleasant. Those cannot brag they have served the Devil with that which
cost them nothing. If such be the Wages of iniquity at present, where he
promised all Delight and Smoothness, they might suspect further on, where he
has nothing to say. By degrees, that reluctance and Aukwardness goes of, the
Body becomes disposed to receive such a quantity without foregoing qualm or
disturbance: And then is Pleasure in the beginning of the Sin: Yet that past
trouble is to be put in the Scale over against it. Now it is habitual and
easy. Here again constancy takes off the Delight, for if one daily partakes of
choice things, he loses the Savor of them. It is granted, that the
Pleasantness does not consist in the drink, but that is in the Effects thereof.
By giving a present Freedom from Evils and Enjoyment of Mirth, unless the Man
is dead Drunk, the fancied Happiness of whom is the same with that of a dead
Palsy, which is not sensible of Pain. But in the lesser Act thereof is
discovery of Shame, Folly, and Madness. It is described, Prove. 23. 33, 34, 35.
It ends in Sleep, out of which he awakes in Sickness and Regret. Trouble and
heaviness possess again their ancient Room, and are the worse for that little
time they were driven out. Nothing remains of Yesterdays Delight, which seems
as if it had never been, but the Bitterness and Guilt survive. The first may be
cured by one days Abstinence, the other is not so easily shaken off.

That Self-Condemnation for what is past, and the fearful Expectation of what
is to come are not a little afflicting; but the Sense of this wears away by
Custom, and there is no such Remedy to take it off sooner then this Sin. The
Suggestions of Conscience at length are effectually stifled by continual
drinking, which does harden against Conviction, and transform the Soul into
Stupidity; this is esteemed a wise and cunning device: Which yet does not take
away, but only keeps the Danger unknown, till it is fallen into. What advantage
is it to go more quietly and undisturbedly to Hell? Those who would have it so
now, when they come there, the same will be their Torment. They are vexed now,
if any would interrupt their Course; then they will be plag^ed, that they did
not hearken to those who would have done this best Act of kindness. Yea they
made their Hearts as an Adamant stone, least they should hear the Law and the
Prophets, which the Lord of Hosts has sent in his Spirit by the former
Prophets: Therefore came a great Wrath from the Lord of Hosts. Therefore it
came to pass that as he cried and they would not hear, so they cried and I
would not hear, says the Lord of Hosts, Zech. 7. 12, 13. In the days of their
Flesh, they will not hear Gods Word, his Ministers, and his Spirit within; but
when the day of Judgment is come, they shall call upon him, and he will not
Answer, Prove. 1. 28. As for those Cups they are now so forward to drink, to put
all Sense of this out of their Minds, for all their Policy, one will be even
with them; For in the hand of the Lord there is a Cup, and the Wine is Red: It
is full of mixture, and he pours out of the same: But the dregs thereof all
the wicked of the Earth shall wring them out, and drink them, Psalm. 75. 8.
Nothwithstanding all the Wisdom and Consultations to be had amongst jovial
Acquaintance, you had better now foresee the Evil, make haste and escape from
it; then continue unmindful till it shall overtake you, for then you will
neither be able to avoid, or put away the Sense thereof.

Perhaps you will set at naught this Counsel, and call to thy Companions, Come
ye and I will fetch Wine, and we will fill our selves with strong drink, and
to morrow shall be as this day, and much more abundant, Isa. 56. 12. I have
hitherto been Drunk sometimes, but now I will more often: Let not the Sun go
over our head, but see some Tokens of our Joyfulness. We are young and have
much time before us, let us make use of it.

Do not reckon too fast, for unto whom was it said, but him that counted upon
many years. Thou Fool this night thy Soul shall be repuired of thee, Luke 12.
19, 20. Whatever your Age is, if you go on after this manner, you know not how
soon you may be cut off: Some will reply they do not Care, a short Life and a
merry one, as long as they live they will be joyful. This is not in their
Power: For all high Pretenses and Talk, you have many sad damps amidst all your
days and nights of Pleasure. They cannot spend all their time in Drunkenness
and Sleep. And the spaces of time between, they must fill up with business or
Recreation, otherwise they would be inconsistent and tormented; for if not
hardened with the deceitfulness of Sin, they are ever and a^on troubled with
the pricking thereof. They may just keep the evil Spirit quiet by continual
Action or Company, but no rejoicing is to be had unless by the help of strong
drink. And therefore are wishing for it, but if daily followed, it would be no
delightful Remedy: And also they would sooner fall into Sickn^ss and Death,
which however they seem to make light of, they exceedingly fear.

Some have arrived to that degree of intemperance, that they are sick and
disordered without giving way to it; such cannot abstain, though they shall
hasten Death upon themselves, for they are in continual pain by drought and
craving, They know not but Death may consign over to a greater evil, yet
laboring under a real and present misery, they dare venture upon an imaginary
and future Torment. They fancy Death may be as a sleep, and then it is rather
to be chosen; or if an inlet to a future state, God may be more merciful then
one is aware of, and there is some hopes of that, and therefore may run the
hazard; for they are miserable in this life, that ended they may cease to be
in their own imagination; however, let the worst happen, they can be but
miserable in that which is to come. Upon such like thoughts (unless they are
become altogether inconsiderate and do not look before them) they resolve to go
on in their course if they die sooner or late. This the world calls bravery;
Why then is it not so in him lying under a scorching Fever or Dropsy, who
will drink as often as he can come at it, though he knows it will be deadly
unto him? What Gallantry is to do that, which he is forced unto by the Tyranny
of a base Appetite? They had rather expose themselves to the hastiness and
uncertainty of a dissolution, then live long in a continued course of dullness
and vexation. They make light of Death because they know not how to live, nor
what it is to die; if these are signs of true courage, none are more courageous
then the Sons of affliction, such as are discontented, in distress, or deep
poverty, or the horse who knows not his end, and therefore rusheth into the
Battle.

Go to, thou that resolvest to take the full swinge of Drunken^ess, Thou art
but flesh; it is said, good liquor will make that thrive the better. The
countenance indeed may be blubbed, and the body stretched forth to some bulk,
in which some pride themselves, not knowing that it is like a Swine fatted with
whay. A sad manner of thriving to grow worse; to increase in Bigness, and lose
in strength; to be more full of grease and water, and to be minished from the
true substance of flesh and Judge. 3. 22
blood. Instead of supplying the body with due moisture, to make it a mere
puddle, as if the way for a bed of herbs to grow bette, was not to water, but
quite drown it. An odd manner of taking care for the flesh, to set the j^rring
humo^rs more at variance; An unkind provision, to throw in what may sooner
destroy it. When it is corruptible of it Self, to make it more subject to
corruption; and as if there were not sufficient already, to lay in a further
stock of pains and diseases; By intemperance somewhat of health and strength is
daily lost: Not to mention Fevers, Surset, and other violent distempers
occasioned suddenly by one single act whereby many go down quick into the Pit,
in the prime of Youth, when a little before they were lusty and strong; but
there are other sorts which creep on by degrees, sending notice before by a
little pain or illness that there is a greater approaching. The first make the
noise of mirth to cease, but when sickness comes with full power, then all past
joviality and delight will not yield a minutes refreshment; it may be whispered
by companions in iniquity to take off the blame from themselves that this might
have been if he were temperate, yet the judgment of Physicians and daily
experience of the World sufficiently manifest, that by Drunkenness Men bring
Sickness upon themselves, and do not live out half their days. He found
himself sick and ill at several times, he drank excessively, which (like
skirmishes before a battle) did proceed from the same Enemy, that now with
united force Assaults him. Before it lay quiet within his Territories, but he
has stirred and furnished it with strength for the War. Men are apt to think
it hard, that they should be sick when others of the same Age and Constitution
are well. Indeed Acts of Providence in this kind are not so easily known, but
here the Man himself has been the cause thereof. Sickness is the natural
effect of habitual Drunkenness: And it cannot be expected that the God of
Nature, who Acts according to Nature, should alter his doings, and work a
Miracle to preserve those who are ungrateful and disobedient, as Drunkards are.
Will they sin against his most righteous Laws, and yet be angry because he does
not hinder that mischief which falls upon them by so doing? Would they have
their Bodies be as Brass or Iron to receive no hurt, however the Maker of them
is provoked by being Instruments of iniqiuty? They might with as much Reason
have him to be no God, as to take away his Power of revenging all manner of
disobedience: But these are only foolish Imaginations. He that sits in the
Heavens shall laugh, the Lord shall have the^ in ^^rision, Psalm. 2. 4. I will
punish the World for their Evil, and the wicked for their iniquity, Isa. 13.
11. Let them say, or think whatever comes in their mind.

And if they be bound in Fetters, and be holden in Cords of Affliction. Then he
shows them their Work, and their Transgressions that they have exceeded. He
opens also their ear to Discipline, and Commands that they return from
iniqiuty, Job 36. 8, 9, 10. Thou who have Sinned, resolve sincerely to do so no
more. Throw thy self wholly into his gracious Arms. Commit thy whole Body and
Soul entirely into his disposal. And then if thou die, it will never be worse
for thee in so doing. Who knows but he may raise thee up, and say to the Ax
that is now laid to the Root of the Tree? Let him alone one year longer, and if
he bear Fruit well; but if not, then cut him down. He may grant recovery to
see, if thou will obey and please him by Godliness and Sobriety of living
henceforward, and when the forbearance and Long s^ff^^ing of God does not lead
to Repentance; at length the final and irreversible voice will go ou^, ^ut it
down, Why cumbreth it the Ground?

Too many have not taken warning, but died in their Sins. In what a fearful
Condition were they during the last Sickness? When they made Ship ^rack of
their Body and Soul, and are just dropping into the Bottomless Pit. Their doom
is written, 1 Cor. 6. 10 Gal. 5. 21. Drunkards shall not inherit the Kingdom of
God, and then they must go into another place, Whatsoever was not written in
the Book of Life, was cast into the Lake of Fire, Rev. 20. 5. Those that do
iniquity shall be cast into a Furnace of Fire, Mat. 13 42. Now Drunkenness is
such, being a Transgression of the Law in the Old and New Testament. Deuteronomy. 29.
19. Isa. 24. 9. and 28. 1, 3, 7. Hab. 2. 15. Joel 1. 5. Luke 21. 34. Ephesians. 5.
18. It is not a thing of naught if taken abstractedly, but this Sin seldom goes
single. Like the unclean Spirit, it takes to him seven other Spirits more
wicked then himself, it has worse Sins and Abominations going along therewith.
As hardening ones self against God, profane and idle Talk, vain Swearing,
Lust, Lying, readiness to any mischief. What evil has not the Drunkard done?
Even righteous Lot was betrayed to commit Incest with his own Daughter. When a
Man is in this Condition, he has no fear of God before his Eyes. He is not
himself, but inclined to all manner of Sin, which he will commit according as
he has opportunity and invitation. Let not the World say it is a small Sin,
for it is great in the consequent Evils, and the wrath of God is plainly
revealed against it.

There is no Reason why Men should follow it with such Greediness: know ye what
ye do, To bring on your selves swift Destruction? to plunge your selves yet
sooner into it? You are sensible of the evil and inconveniency of this present
Life occasioned by your Sin, and will you to be rid of that thrust your selves
into greater? This would be as ridiculous madness, as to divert the Pain of a
cut Finger, to pour scalding Oil upon the whole Body: There is a better way
showed by taking away the cause of the Grief, which you are exhorted unto, and
to prevent all the Misery. You cannot endure Thirst, how then would you like to
be in that place where he is, Who wants a drop of water to cool his Tongue?
Luke 16. 24. If you could have a short and merry Life, that would no more make
amends for a sad Eternity then a single pleasant dream, now does for an hundred
years Misery.

There is a Drunkard who thinks he shall escape; because he is no Murderer,
Extortioner, unjust Person, he pays every one his due, and is no Man's Enemy but
his own, he is of the good natured sort, for he cannot endure quarrelling, but
prevents it in the beginning, and is a Peacemaker. He abhors Malice, Envying,
Strife, and has several good Qualities. Perhaps he is ungodly or a Swearer,
but if not: In Truth so far thou do well, thou come near being qualified to
be one of the Saints in light; Yet lackest thou one thing, Go and put away thy
D^unkenness, forsake all thy Companions in evil, come and follow Christ, and
thou shall have better Fellowship in Heaven. Many will go away sorrowful at
this Saying, for they think the other sufficient, and this the only Delight
they have, which they care not to part with; then they have no Lot or Portion
in the Kingdom of God. Neither let them think they may retain it throughout
their Life, and leave it off in Old Age, when they cannot Taste what they
drink; or in Sickness when their Stomach will not bear it, then they will
repent of their former Excess. Thank you for nothing, you will Sin as long as
you can, and when not able any longer you will leave off. Is it good that God
should search you out? O^ as one Man ^^cketh another, do ye so mock him? Joh
13. 9. He will certainly do it. Neither will he be imposed upon by the foolish
Craft, you think to use. The Grace of God that brings Salv^tion has appeared
to all Men, teaching us that denying ungodliness and worldly Lusts, ne should
live soberly in this present World, Tit. 2. 11, 12. It is no denial of a thing,
when one cannot make use of it; neither is it living soberly in this present
World, when he is going out of it. Such Temperance as God is well-pleased with,
and will Reward, must be exercised in time of full Health and Vigor; when the
Man might run to the same Excess of Riot with others, but obedience only shall
restrain him, not Bodily infirmities or other worldly Reason. Zech. 7. 6.


From what has been already noted it appears, that there does not arise such a
mighty Gratification from this Sin: The Sea Ante, p. 284, 285.
Delight is not till, as commonly said, the Senses are lost; so when the Man
can least discern between Good and Evil, he most admires it. They are worse
natured, who require such hard and unpleasant things of their Companions, who
press that upon them which is received with Abhorrency as Sink-water; but no
fault is in them, who refuse to comply with a base Humor. Such would account
themselves good and kind Souls, the Promoters of Happiness, who are the only
Authors of uneasiness and Vexation: A monstrous absurdity and reversal of the
Nature of things. When the drinking is contrary to all Law, those are reputed
the principal Engines of Mirth who do compel; but who suffers it, is made the
Object of Reproach and Laughter. It is so among hotheaded Youths, and the
Beasts of the People. Others do use the method of fair entreaty, and
exasperating Expressions to entice unto sinful Compliance. And if after all the
Man will not yield, an ill Character is fastened on him. When he is so^^icited,
it comes into his mind. How can I do this great wickedness, and sin Genesis 39. 9.
again God? Here he is put to his Choice, Whether he will please vain and
sinful Men, or the Great and Holy Lord Governor of the World, who would have
his Laws observed, they would have them broken. If he is out of their sight,
yet he both sees and knows what they do. And he would be also in their
knowledge, if they did not use such abominable means to stifle and deface it.
But if they can apprehend any thing of his infinite Perfection, Whether it be
right to obey his Good Will, rather then comply with their wicked Humor, Judge
ye. They must acknowledge him their Superior, and they could not take it well
if any thing beneath themselves should be preferred before them. It is no
Moroseness of Temper to refuse obliging, a Man that shall die, and the Son of
Man that shall be as Grass, If by so doing he must displease God his Savior,
Who stretches out the Heavens as a Curtain.

To incur his displeasure any way must be upon dangerous terms, but here they
are not so acceptable or easy: If it be such a pleasure to drink, Why are you
angry it should be sifted out and examined? If destruction and misery are in
their ways, why are Men enraged it should be found out and discovered? Would
they rather fall into it, then be told off their danger? They cannot endure to
be persuaded of from their deceitful Vanities; Away with this turbulent Fellow,
it is not fit he should live. There is but little good to be had in this World,
and he would bereave us even of that. It does provoke and set the World in a
rage to strike immediately upon their lusts. When the two proph^^s shall have
finished their Testimony, and shall be killed, then they that dwell on the
Earth shall rejoice over them, and make merry, and shall send gifts one to
another, because these prophets tormented them that dwelt on the Earth, Rev.
11. 10. Elisha was accounted one that troubled Israel, 1 Kings 18. 17. The
History of the Prophets, Christ and Apostles show what an esteem the World had
of them, and how exasperated upon the account of their faithful dealing; who
did best deserve of the World, were least accounted of by it. How has the God
of this World blinded the eyes of Men that they should evil entreat, kill and
stone the Messengers of their Peace and Safety, even the Servants of the Most
High God which showed unto them the way of Salvation, Acts 16. 17. It is no new
thing under the Sun to have evil recompensed for good, that those should not be
thought fit to live amongst Mankind, who are most instrumental to their welfare.

Sirs, ye are deluded with a false appearance, and if ye lay hold of that, ve
lose ^he true happiness. The present deceit is used for an ease or remedy of
the evils of life; but would it not be better to be without some of them, and
have a more excellent remedy for the rest? God forbid that any should take away
the true delights of the Sons of Men; but the^ are put in mind to remove those
false ones which are not of his ordaining and to place his instead thereof,
which when themselves have ^^ly ^asted, will affirm to be better. You are not
forbid strong drink, nor Wine, but only showed a more exce^ent way of re^^iving
them; You are required to be Men still, to abide in that ho^our you are endued
with; otherwise, ^ou would be like the Beasts that Perish. Several are as
lovely to behold and if your understanding were set aside, you would become as
one of them, which this sin does for the time: I^ is hastily said, He that
drinks least, drinks like a Beast; to which it may be added by way of
return, he who drinks most, drinks like a Sow which is filthy and
abominable of all fore-footed Creatures. Into a low degree, even the worst of
them he is degenerated; for in the greatest parta^e to be seen some footsteps
of pure and uncorrupted Nature, they do not eat nor drink further then does
them good; and if Man would be well according to his sensitive part (which he
is not to rest in, but ascend higher) ask now the Beasts, and they shall teach
thee, Job 12. 7. He must receive sustenance in the same manner as they do;
There are some would fain have the stupidity and inconsideration of a Beast,
and yet would not be contented with the like Enjoyments Who would have their
reason banished, for that is the Seriousness and Morality they cannot endure;
They know not what conduces to their Perfection and Glory, they are willingly
ignorant that this assisted by Grace tends to an Immortal and Happy Being, if
they would suffer themselves to be guided by it: Take away Thought and
Consideration, Man is like a wild Asses colt, which sports for a while, but
afterward is heavy; so he may frollick it a little in his younger days, then
become dull, and spend the greatest part of his life void of true cheerfulness;
and that ended, a wor^e thing may befall him.

For Psalm. 104. 15. John 2. 10. Which are commonly alleged in vindication of
this sin, when it rather argues of more Ingratitude and Disobedience. Our
Gracious God has given this good creature for necessary refreshment and honest
cheerfulness, so there is no waste or disturbance to reason. But if Men will
not be content with this Liberty, and when God has ordered they shall drink no
more after these ends are answered, if they will go further to add Drunkenness
to Thirst, Deuteronomy. 29. 19. To force down more after they have well drunk already,
and have not the least Appetite, there is the provocation of this sin. Nothing
exasperates so much as abused favor, and because God has been good therefore
for Men to be more wicked, this makes sin to be exceeding sinful. He is most
displeased with those which are committed against his loving kindness, and
therefore because he has given great liberty to transgress that, and to
presume upon his being merciful to forgive, is a perverse way of reasoning, and
makes the sin seven times greater. To hope that God will forgive give such
Malicious and Presumptuous Offenders or Despisers is in effect that he will
prove a Liar; But I will punish you according to the fruit of your doings,
says the Lord, Jer. 21. 14. Every Man's sin would be pardoned, if hopes or
wishes alone would induce the Lord to pardon them; In truth he is what he has
proclaimed himself, The Lord, the Lord God, Merciful and gracious, long
suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth (i^ so, he is to be believed what
he says further) keeping Mercy for thousands, forgiving Iniquity,
Transgression and sin, and that will by no means clear the Guilty, Exodus: 34. 6,
7. His mercy is confirmed more then ten times before this of Judgment comes.
Think not this last hard, O ye Transgressors; Luke 21. 22. Romans 3. 5.
for whether is meet, you should turn away from your ^ins, or God should divest
himself of justice and Truth rather then punish you for the same? Which can he
most reasonably expected, either your selves must go into Hell, or that the
Words he has spoken shall come to naught? God has spoken once, twice have I
heard this that power belongs unto God, Psalm. 62. 11. Though hand join in
hand, the wicked shall not be unpunished, Prove. 11. 21. Do not think to trifle
with him, for he is a Righteou^ Judge, and a Father only to those who perform
unto him the Obedience of Children.

As for the other vain Imaginations the Drunkard has, they Antep. 288
are grounded upon unbelief or desperate folly. He cannot be so senceless to
conclude, it shall happen to him according to his unbelief, that there is no
future State, only because he thinks so, or would have it so, and thus make
void the fixed decrees of Almighty God with his own weak fancy or fruitless
desire. If he is unbelieving now, and so resolves to continue, the first thing
that shall convince of the mistake will be his own woeful experience; but when
this shall teach him, his condition will be without hope or remedy. It would be
a more wise way to believe and so avoid, then to go with an evil heart of
unbelief, till death delivers him over, where he shall be forced to believe and
tremble, and afterward see and suffer. But if he has not quite lost his
Faith, he must be convinced of a more foolish manner of Acting. He abhors and
cannot endure his present Life because it is miserable; there is the same
Reason, he should not thrust himself forward into the other; for if the
Punishment of Sin is now so grievous, that Men would do any thing to be rid of
it, what will it be hereafter when Jer. 12. 5.
God shall stretch forth his Arm to take full Vengeance on the Workers of
iniquity? These had better take warning; God has given them a space to repent
of their Drunkenness. Be sure to comply with his gracious purpose, make their
Peace with him, lengthen out their time by all lawful means, to prepare the
more for the Bridegroom's coming. But if they will go on in their own former
way, they shall Taste and Feel this to be true. Their Grapes are Grapes of
Gall, their Clusters are bitter. Their wine is the Poison of Dragons, and the
cruel Venom of Asps, Deuteronomy. 32. 32, 33.

What has possessed the minds of Men to be so in love with this Evil? All are
not, for Turks and I^fidels are not so guilty thereof as the Christian World. A
Company of People who profess to believe the Scriptures in which are contained
severe Threatenings against this Sin, yet they most of all do commit it. The
Laws and Prescriptions of Heathen Deities and false Prophets throughout the
World are observed; but here in Christendom Men do not obey the Commandments of
the Lord and his Christ. The words of Jonadab the Son of Rechab, that he
commanded his Sons not to drink Wine, are performed, Jer. 35. 14. But our
bountiful Lord has permitted the good use thereof with this charge, Be ye not
drunk with Wine wherein is excess, Ephesians. 5. 18. Yet Men have transgressed his
Voice, wherefore the R^chabites may be their Judges, and it will be more
tolerable in the day of Judgment for Mahometans and Idolaters then for this
sottish Generation. ^O foolish People, who has bewitched you that you should
not obey the Truth, before whose eyes Jesus Christ has been evidently-set
forth cruc^fied among you? Gal. 3. 1. All of you hear him Preached, and some
have drunk of the Cup of the Lord; yet you resort again to the Cup of Devils,
by Drinking after such an excessive manner, as they of old did in Sacrificing
to Evil Spirits, which also now chiefly gratifies them who prompt to sin and
disobedience.

If we did allow for the Temptations of Drink and Company; yet the loss of Gods
Favor, Peace of Mind, and health of Body will not be sufficiently recompensed
with that pretended converiency. Look not only upon the good color of the
Liquor, nor hearken to the Merriment of Companions when they are at it, but
consider the en^ Think upon the whole life and way of those jolly Persons, and
then tell me whether drunk^^^ess is not p^^judicial to Man's Happ^ness? But
could thou ^eep into the Chambers of Death (as that may be done by Faith) and
see those poor Souls who were once Drinking and making Merry on the Earth, the
Pit has shut her Mouth upon them, and now they are full of Anguish and
Indignation for their former Folly; There remains still the like Threatening to
the Drunkards of England, the Drunkards of England shall be trodden under Feet,
Isa. 28. 3. For the Judgment of God is the same against all Nations, Times and
People who commit the same offense. Why will they not be persuaded to come out
of such a way? To draw off from so great a danger? When Israel saw the
Egyptians dead on the Seashore, the People feared the Lord, and believed the
Lord and his Servant Moses, Exodus 14. 30, 31. And have you not known some who
have been as it were drowned in a Flood of Drink? Who have brought themselves
into the Dropsy and other Diseases, and several ways have came to an untimely
fearful end? And will you not fear the Lord, and believe on the Lord, his Son,
and Apostles, who make mention of worse things to come hereafter then what we
see commonly happen? How often is the Candle of the wicked put out? And how often
comes their destruction upon them? God distributeth Sorrows in his Anger, Job
21. 17. How many have we heard to have killed themselves with Brandy, who have
burnt up their own Vital Spirits with the greater heat of Liquors, and by
innumerable Accidents have been hastily cut off, and all occasioned through
Intemperance. Job calls it their Destruction, for themselves are the Author of
it; and is not God displeased with Men's doings after this manner?

Some may be apt to say, this is too home: But it is too trueby sad and daily
experience, and fit to be observed that all henceforward may take care to
themselves. Examples should be taken Notice of, and Written for our Admonition
upon whom the ends of the World are come, 1 Cor. 10. 11. In this Generation
also where Drunkenness does abound, and the Men are s^tled on their lees, Zeph.
1. 12. If any has a real love and compassion for Mankind, he is not to be
blamed if he does use the most plain and obvious expressions, to prevent those
evils which come upon them by their Sin and Folly. Any words are more tolerable
then to suffer the thing it self; Several will find fault with this way of
Writing used in this Chapter especially; But they are desired to consider
likewise, how the style of Scripture runs exactly according to those Times when
it was first Penned, and that is to be the Rule of all after Ages. If others
think that here it Psalm. 119. 42.
has been varied from, when those common sayings and excuses were inserted
which are not to be found in the Word, yet there it is said, Answer a fool
according to his fully least he be wise in his Prove. 26. 5
own conceit. It has been endeavored to convince them in their own way of
Arguing; for why should Wickedness brave it out and pass uncontradicted? We
have assurance, that one time (yet to come) All iniquity shall stop her Mouth,
Psalm. 107. 42. The means to accomplish which is to take off that Color and
Varnish of Reason, to discover that plausible show of Wit with which Men
countenance their Sin. For he flattereth himself in his own sight, until his
Iniquity shall be found to be hateful, Psalm. 36. 2. Which has been here
somewhat manifested according to the Ability God has given.

Let the Mad and Frantic World pause for a while; why, you may continue Men
still, and yet go in another way: You may still retain the same Affections and
Desires, and have them at present in a good manner contented; however, you may
refrain for a little while from the full Gratification of them. You are now all
for good Drink, the prescribed Measure is now much better then excess, but for
further encouragement Our Lord said just before his Passion, I will drink no
more of the fruit of the Vine, until that day that I drink it new in the
Kingdom of God, Mark 14. 25. And in this Mountain shall the Lord of Hosts make
unto all People a Feast of fat Things, a Feast of Wines on the lees, of fat
things full of Marrow, of Wines on the lees well refined, Isa. 25. 6 Indeed,
such gross and sensual Pleasures are not to be expected in Heaven as result
from Eating and Drinking; even here it is said well refined: But undoubtedly
others will be substituted in the Room, which shall more refresh then these do
now, according to what another Prophet says, Their heart shall rejoice as
through Wine, their heart shall rejoice in the Lord, Zech. 10. 7. It shall give
us alike satisfaction as Wine does now, but as much greater and of longer
continuance as the Infinite and everlasting God in whom all fullness dwells,
does exceed that little and empty delight which is now to be had from the
Creature. The Spirit of God condescends to our Infirmity, and exhorts to his
Obedience by promising the same things which we now eagerly desire after. Who
is all for pleasant Drink, has the very same invitation to follow after the
things of his Kingdom. If the Drunkard will leave off his sinful Courses, he
shall find more content and less inconveniency; moreover exceeding great and
Eternal Happiness hereafter.

Perhaps he will say, he has been so long used to it that he cannot. Indeed a
wicked habit is not quickly or easily shaken off; it crept on by degrees, and
will stick close, but there is an absolute necessity. Except ye repent, ye
shall perish, twice asserted, Luke 13. And that is a through change of mind and
reformation of Life; if he has been guilty of Drunkenness, let him ask Pardon
for it, and be so no more. Seek for the Grace of God, which is sufficient to
subdue the power of this or any Sin. The Man must be sure sincerely to labor
together therewith, and endeavor to be freed from Sottishness the same way he
got it; let him daily deny himself somewhat and abridge a little of his wonted
Measure; by this means he may be at length free from it.

It is commonly pleaded by him, who lies under a custom of sin that he cannot
forsake it; So he flatters and beguiles his own Soul, that either God will not
require him to do an impossible thing, and therefore he shall be excused; or he
is an hard Master to shut a Man out of Heaven and cast him into Hell for a
thing he could not help. But O wicked Servant! Wherefore do thou to keep
thine own wickedness accuse God foolishly and falsely? For he will not lay upon
Man more then right, that he should enter into Judgment with God, Job 34. 23.
Repent, if peradventure the iniquity of thine heart may be forgiven; Consider
seriously, thou alone have wilfully brought thy self under the Power and
Slavery of Sin. By former hardening thy heart, and not hearing Gods Voice, when
thou had more strength, and sin less; At the first entrance upon the Practice
of it thou could more easily have not done, then done it; after thou could
refrain with a small irksomness, till sin at length began to prevail through
thine own neglect to resist, and willingness to entertain it. And because it is
more difficult to part with, thou concludest impossible; No habit, however long
in contracting is impossible to be removed, it may be done though with
difficulty. It cannot be done in an Instant, but may in Succession of time.
There is none so far gone in the Disease of Drunkenness or other Sin, but there
is hope of Cure; Wherefore those Sinners are required to attend to the
exhortation, Romans 13. 11, 12, 13, 14. Take the Bible into their hands and read
it, whether they will hear or forbear, it has been here enforced with Motives
out of the said Book; if h^y neglect, it is at their Peril; they are Children
of Darkness; But let us, who are of the Day be Sober, putting on the
Breast-pla^t of Faith and Love, and for an Helmet the hope of Salvation, 1
These. 5. 8. And these things even now will give us more comfort and
Satisfaction, then they can meet with in Stupidity and Drunkenness.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness, Lasciviousness.

THese are some of those Works of the Flesh, Gal. 5. 19. 21. Of the which they
that do such things shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. But what present Good
do they bring in recompense of so great a Loss? It is surmised much, because of
the inclination in Man's Nature to these Lusts; they do likewise beat strongly
upon the outward Sense, and it seems hard he should be restrained to gratify
them. It is the most intense Delight Man enjoys, and why should he not find
some Pleasure amidst so many Evils and Miseries of Life? All Flesh consorteth
according to its kind, and must Man who has the same Tendency be hindered from
it? Were those Desires put in only to torment him, in that he must not Act
accordingly? Does God, to magnify his Power and Pleasure, command him to
abstain from that which by the Law in his Members, he is bound to obey? And
then how much Pleasure and Mirth does the Discourse thereof afford? More is
fancied in the Act and Fruition.

The present Design requires to set forth Sin in its utmost advantage, and
there may be other Circumstances conceived, but allowing for all the Delight
thereof; yet this is not that Good thing, which is set before the Sons of Men.
Indeed Sin is improved to the utmost: Though its Followers with all their Wit
and Contrivance cannot find out any new Pleasures, yet what they have already
they manage with so much Skill, that they receive as much Delight from them as
possibly can be had, and yet all comes short of the True Happiness. As for
these Fleshly Lusts, the trouble and expectation going before, and those
Inconveniences and Evil afterward, will more then exceed the sudden
Complacency. The Gall is much more then pure Honey, if any is to be found,
which is little, like that at the end of Jonathan's Rod, 1 Samuel 14. 43.

Many of them which used curious Arts, brought the Books together and burnt
them before all Men, so mightily grew the word of God and prevailed, Acts 19.
19, 20. And there is the same Reason still, that those Printed Songs, Romances,
Play Books, which propagate Sin in the World, and in an implicit manner (under
^eathenish Titles) call to question Gods Justice and Truth in giving Laws to
mankind, should also be burnt, as those are, which contain scandalous
Reflections upon the King and Government: And so accordingly they would be
thrown into the Flames, if the word of God did now so mightily grow and
prevail, as it did in those first and purest times. But seeing they are still
extant to corrupt the Minds and Manners of People, something is to be said more
particularly.

Behold in this thou art not just, I will answer thee, that God is greater then
Man: Why do thou strive against him? For he gives not Account of any of his
Matters, Job 33. 12, 13. He does more exceed the greatest Monarch then this
vast Globe of the World, a single Dust of the Balance; and is not bound to
give the least Account of whatever he enjoins us. Therefore shall ye keep my
Commandments, and do them, I am the Lord, Lev. 22. 31. Present and cheerful
Obedience is to be paid unto him, without perverse Disputings of corrupt Minds.
By Faith Abraham when he was called to go out into a place which he should
after receive for an Inheritance obeyed, and went out not knowing whether he
went, Heb. 11. 8, 9. Who believes in God that formed him, if he would be
justified with faithful Abraham, must perform his Commands how contrary soever
they appear to Flesh and Blood, if he does not presently understand, wherefore
the Lord should require such things, as he does commonly make that known
afterward. The Servant is to do, not to examine the Will of his Master. But
who who is like unto the Lord our God, who humbles himself to behold the
things that are in Heaven and Earth? Yet condescends to that (which the proud
Men of the World will not) as to permit his Servants to reason of his righteous
Acts, 1 Samuel 12. 7. and to judge of the equality of his ways, Ezekiel. 18. 25. and
for those who despise this manner of Goodness, there is severity reserved in
store.

The Case in hand seems opposite to carnal Reason, because Flesh will argue for
fleshly Lusts; nevertheless take it not quite away, but only its Prejudice and
Corruption; it may put in a lawful Claim without boundless or extravagant
Desires, and then Flesh it self may judge how just and reasonable the Laws of
God are. Those natural Inclinations are not restrained, but expressly ordered to
be complied withal, Genesis 2. 18. Genesis 9. 1. 1 Cor. 7. 2, 9. This one Expedient
vindicates the Justice and Goodness of God from all those Cavils of Men,
walking after their own Lusts. But as he is Sovereign Lord to exercise his
Kingdom and Dominion over Men, he does in this as in the other things, allow a
lawful Liberty, and is pleased further to try our Obedience.

The Gallants will cry Pish, a Wife is an irksome thing to Men of Fashion. They
cannot endure to be confined. The Blood runs warm in their Veins and they are
wanton; When I had fed them to the full, they then committed Adultery, and
assembled themselves by Troops in the Harlots Houses: they were as fed Horses
in the Morning every one Neighed after his Neighbors Wise, Jer. 5. 7, 8. If
these marry, it is to get Heirs to inherit their Estate, but they will not be
deprived of wonted Libertinism. They hunt out after convenient Objects, not
valuing whether they break through another Man's enclosure or sport in a Common.
Are not these brisk Men more Happy and better esteemed of in the World, then
those dull Phlegmatic Souls who keep the Marriage Bed undefiled? Most certainly
such are of the safer side as for the time to come, but for the present who
has the greater share of Happiness? It may be judged of, when the ways of the
Lascivious Wanton are somewhat laid open.

The Lord has been Witness between thee and the Wife of thy Youth, against
whom thou have dealt Treacherously, yet is she thy Companion and Wife of thy
Covenant, Mal. 2. 14. When a Man proves unfaithful, his Heart is alienated from
her who is the constant Companion of his Bed; for going after Strangers makes
affection cease toward his own: Perhaps at first it was not so much unkindness
as to gratify an extravagant Desire; but the Seeds of hatred are sown, which
spring up and embitter their other Delights. Who have sufficient of outward
Blessings, yet all is spoiled by this one acc^rsed thing. Those mutual
Heart-burnings, Discontent, sad Wishes and Imprecations take away the Relish
of other Enjoyments. It is very hard on the Woman's side, that she must be
wretched for no fault of her own, but merely the iniquity and baseness of her
Husband; who (according to the usual Methods of injustice) commits a double
Transgression; First, becomes perfidious, and then conceives Hatred, which last
is thought an excuse of the Sin, when in Truth it is a worse Aggravation
thereof. If he has the least Sense of God above, those severe girds and
twitches of Conscience do more then abundantly take off from the Sweetness of
stolen Waters. If he has any degree of common Nature, he cannot but be moved
with his own injury and falsehood toward whom he is bound to give that which is
equal, and observe the solemn Oath and Promise between them. Many particulars
do sufficiently show, that he who violates conjugal Chastity, procures
continued Vexation unto himself; and for a few hours running after unlawful
Love, he renders the whole Course of his Life miserable: This Truth is so
discernable that more need not to be said thereof. It is not altogether so
pleasant for married Men, to follow these Lusts of the Flesh: but the single
Person who has none to control him, who is tied to none, but at Liberty for
all, he finds the pretended good of them.

But it would be better for him if he let them alone, or have the lawful
Remedy. No, no, Cries the young Man. Variety is pleasant, one time for this,
then for another wherever Beauty or Change invite him: At first, this kind of
Life may seem delightful, those Preparatives do somewhat please. That obscene
and filthy Talk, lascivious Songs, wanton Dalliances and rude Gestures (for
thus the Devils Soldier is trained up and Disciplined) are a little diverting,
till abundant and repeated use does also take that away. If the stripling has
not cast off all regard to God and his Worship (as that is seldom, for the
impressions are then more strong and sensible, and it may be preserved by good
Education of Parents) then his thoughts will be apt to accuse him. It is not
meet, the same Tongue wherewith Prayers and Praises are offered up unto the
Most High God, should be defiled with corrupt Communications, or singing forth
the Encomium of sin and iniquity. Therewith to Bless God the Father, and
therewith to dishonor him. Out of the same Mouth proceeds Good and Evil; My
Brethren these things ought not so to be. Does a Fountain send forth at the
same place sweet water and bitter? Jam. 3. 10, 11. Conscience will make such
Reflections, which turn outward Laughter into an inward Sigh. This bitter allay
is mingled with the jocular and merry Discourse as it is called. And if he will
not think of these things, but go on making ^much noise, yet there is a sad
sting behind; that of the Lord Jesus shall be fulfilled, I say unto you, that
every idle word that Men shall speak, they shall give an Account thereof in the
Day of Judgment, for by thy words thou shall be justified, and by thy words
thou shall be Condemned, Mat. 12. 36, 37. Even at present a Man discovers
himself by the Talk of his Mouth; Where proceeds forth Filthiness and Folly, it
is a strong Presumption that such is he himself. A noble Subject to converse
upon, whereof a Man cannot think without abhorrence. A sign of an exalted and
raised Spirit, to depress the Mind into a Beast: Whatever delight arises
hereby, it is like that of Children or Fools. The great Talkers of this kind,
do not pretend to such a mighty degree of Pleasure from the mere Discourse;
that is said to be when Words are reduced into Actions.

Here lies a rub in the young Man's way, and this helps for removal thereof.
That shame and modesty of Nature is an hindrance to him from doing thus
wickedly. He gives back, and had rather let it alone. And therefore this must
be laid aside, (which is not done without time and difficulty) before the
expected Satisfaction can be had. The mind is spoiled of its most lovely
Ornament before he comes to the doing of those things in secret, whereof it is
a shame to speak. That Virgin blush (then which nothing is more beautiful) must
be gone. Accordingly the modern way of breeding is to drive that away as soon
as possible. It is more eminent in the Female Sex, and was formerly an
excellency, but now esteemed the effect of Country Education, laughed at, and
by keeping Company with the Town Ladies, and frequenting the Play house it is
at length utterly ^ost. In the other it goes away by associating with
Lascivious Persons, and complying with unsavory Discourse. Is this to bring up
Children in the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord? Certainly this way does
sooner lead them to commit all iniquity with Greediness, and makes them the
Children of Hell. Corruption moves quick enough of it self, there is no need of
taking away the Clog that he may run more hastily in the broad way. However it
is irksome to do that, but then he may fall to committing of Folly; for so the
Holy Ghost in a peculiar manner calls this Sin. The foregoing disturbance is
removed, there succeeds another afterward.

Those qualms of Conscience immediately after the Fact, are more bitter then
the sweet of the beloved Sin. They are equal in Degree, but longer in Duration.
That Horror and Distraction of mind for what is done, those frightful
Suggestions of having offended God, the Blackness of Guilt which comes forth
and sits heavy upon the Soul, Indignation and Anguish, all th^se stand in
opposition to the delight he had. The lustful Person is sensible of thus much
at first, which render the Sin uneasy and disquieting. He thinks to follow it
no longer: But then the Devil or his Instruments wicked Companions, or his own
deceitful Heart may dictate, That at first he will meet with such kind of
Bugbears: The Dog within will at length cease to bite, he may grumble a little,
but that is nothing. Go resolutely on and he will not find such severe
resistance. His own experience assures him every time he Practices it, there is
less Reluctance. The raw and unexperienced Soldier is frightened at the smoke
of Guns, his Heart pants at every Push or Charge, but the old Marches on
undountedly, and is not troubled with Fears. Never be discouraged if a thick
Cloud should arise in thy mind; do not value every Dart that sTrikes through
the Liver; do not fear the assaults of the armed Man within thee. The Soldier
is strengthened with Brandy, and thou may afterward resort to good Liquor to
drown Melancholy fancies, Be Patient, resist them, and they will by degrees
vanish. If thy Acquaintance find thee dejected, they will Laugh at thee; do as
they have done, and thou shall be as brisk as they. Such is the Policy of the
old Serpent, to get the young beginner into an Habit and Course of Sin, for he
knows this is the way of hardening, and then he is almost sure of a prey. It
is acknowledged that Custom will take of the Sense of this Sin, as appears from
Ephesians. 4. 19. But this is a long time in gaining, and those struglings in the
mean while do annul the Pleasure of it. Men think themselves Wise and Happy, if
they can once come to enjoy their Lusts without interruption, for then they
imagine they have nothing to do with the Powers of the World to come, but are
only for what present Pleasure they can have. Whereas in Truth they have only
hardened their Hearts and shut their Eyes, ^east they should repent and see the
Evil: But still it waits for them, and shall overtake them, whether they
believe and consider, or not. When the Eyes which they wilfully shut Zech. 7.
12.
are sunk into their Heads, and their Hearts which they make as an Adama^t
Stone shall be turned into Dust, then their Souls shall see the Power of Gods
wrath, and be so far softened, as to be made sensible thereof.

Take a further view of that present Happiness, these boast to have. It might
have been delivered before, how Nature is nipt in the Bud, and blasted like an
untimely Fruit. Even young Marriages are prejudicial, much more are forbidden
and irregular Lusts. He renders himself weakly and short lived, loses the
delica^e and ruddy Complexion, there succeeding a thin Paleness, and other ways
soyls the Beauty of flourishing Youth.

The Lips of a strange Woman drop as an Honey Comb, and her Mouth is smoother
then Oil, but her End is bitter as Wormwood, sharp as a two edged Sword, Her
Feet go down to Death. Remove thy way far from her, and come not nigh the Door
of her House, Prove. 5. 3, 4, 5, 8. We may take his Word for it, who had
experience of what he said: Whose shame is published to the World, and stands a
remarkable Penitent for this sort of Folly. He gives warning of those Evils
which himself felt. The common Reply, which has been delivered down from one
Adulterous Generation to another, is, I will do as Solomon did in younger
years* and repent, as he did in Old Age: Then I will cry out, All is Vanity and
Vexation of Spirit, when I can follow ^ust no longer. Then thou will do a thing
now, because thou art resolved to be ashamed for it hereafter, and wish thou
had not done it; for such must be true and unfeigned Repentance. And how can
that be, when thou choosest to do it now? To Sin with foresight of future
Repentance argues an evil intent of mind, so likewise it is an absurdity. It is
ridiculous to say, I will wound my self, that I may go to a Surgeon, for thou will have a certain smart and pain, when thou might have continued whole;
but how know thou thy hurt may be incurable, such that the great Physician
of Souls has vowed he will not heal, and he is not a Man that he should Lie or
alter his purpose. To despise the Riches of his Goodness, or to continue in Sin
that Grace may abound, there is not the least Encouragement from his Word or
Nature, see Romans 2. 4, 5. and Romans 6. The Great God will no more suffer himself
to be tri^^ed withal, then the mighty Ones among the Child^en of Men. Surely
you have low Thoughts of him, if you Fancy to put him off after that manner,
and huddle up your Peace with him whenever you would. You p^^^um^ upon this
instance, but we are not to Live, nor yet be judged by Examples, but by the
written word of God. And what says that? Thou shall not commit Adultery, Exodus
20. 14. Be not deceived, neither Fornicators, nor Adulterers, nor Effeminate,
nor Abusers of themselves with mankind shall inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor.
6. 9, 10. This last is not to be understood absolutely, but unless true and
timely Repentance does interpose, as is evident from the Verse following. And
such were some of you, but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are
justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. The
Apostle speaks to all in General, as to Men and Women after their Conversion to
Christianity, and so they were to continue unto their Lives end. If Men will
Confess and forsake their Sins, endeavor to reclaim others, and at last leave
it to God whether he will accept and Pardon them, as blessed be his Name, we
have abundant assurances from his Goodness, Mercy and Truth that he will
forgive such, then they may stand in Judgment. But who put off his Fear and
Obedience with a jest or scornful Neglect; Let us alone we will Repent
hereafter, who put a slight upon God, it is just to recompense them after their
deservings, to let them run through that space he gave for their Repentance,
and they repented not.

The Eye also of the Adulterer waits for the twilight, Job 24. 15. those
Intervals of Expectation are not so pleasant, Especially to him who has
disturbance and hurry of mind. A Cloud arises before the understanding that he
can conceive nothing; he lies under the base Slavery of an imperious Will, has
discomposed and ruffled Affections: And several other things forego the
gratifying a Lust, which occasion no little torment or disorder. What is it at
the time, or rather instant? I have read that sinful Pleasure is sooner gone
then well perceived, of so short a continuance that the end sticks to the very
beginning, immediately after is annoy and loathsomeness: We may use as plain
Expressions as we find in Scripture, After Amnon had forced Tamar and lay with
her, Then Amnon hated her exceedingly, so that the hatred wherewith he hated
her, was greater the love wherewith he had loved her: 2 Samuel 13. 14, 15.
And Amnon said unto her, Arise and be gone, The expected Satisfaction is come
to nothing, and the more often these Acts are repeated, the less Pleasure: Let
the Objects be never so many, different or beautiful, that will not take away
Nauseating. No Ezekiel. 16.
Variety can satisfy the Cravings of unlimited Lust, or hinder weariness. If
he does from the Similitude of Boars, Bulls, and forefooted Creatures (who go
with their belly to the ground) plead for running after the whole Sex; but the
Beasts do it only to propagate their kind, neither do they join after
conception; whereas he has no such end or confinement, for it is only to
satisfy a worse then brutal Lust. The highest happiness (if it may be so
styled) that Beasts are designed unto, is merely sensual; and therefore are
allowed a more free enjoyent in these things then Man, who is a compound of
Angel and Brute: As such he is barely to use, and pass by the delights of the
one; but to aspire after, and to finally rest in the happiness of the other.
Sense was given us just to relish, but Understanding to enjoy: Men will catch
part of a thing and run away with it, and then think they have a mighty
Argument on their side (a frequent Policy in this disputing Age) but take the
whole together and that which seemed for, turns against them. The lustful
person fancies he has the whole world of Creatures on his side, when further
the greater part Copulate at set Seasons, and other circumstances may be found
out to prove his manner of doing more unreasonable, and even in his lower
inclinations to sink beneath the Beasts that perish. He acts more foolishly and
preposterously then they which have no Understanding. They do not shorten life
and bring Diseases upon themselves, as Man does: It Is he alone who turns Good
into Evil, that is made miserable by his Enjoyments, God has set a bound to
them and then they are good, which the sensible Creatures keep within, but Man
will leap over though it be to his own Ruin: What was given to refresh and
preserve the kind, he makes an occasion to destroy himself, and to produce none
or an accursed seed.

His Breasts are full of Milk and his Bones are moistened with Marrow, Job 21.
4. But he drains it out wherein consisted his strength: When every Drac^m is
continually exhausted, the body becomes weak, and so more quickly drops into
the Pit. And then it does not only extract the sound, but brings rottenness
into the bones. It Is common that he who is addicted to this sin gets a wound at
last, which for sweet repayes with bitterness. The joviality of Youth is
changed into pains and languishing, those years are given unto the cruel, and
thou mourn at last when thy flesh and body are consumed, Prove. 5. 9, 11. That
unspeakable Pain and Weariness which some have labored under for several
Weeks, ^ea, Months together seem to have a visible pourtraiture of Hell
Torments, (the difference being in the duration of them) for here as much is
endured as the weak body is capable of. For the punishment of the iniquity of
the Daughter of my People, is greater then the punishment of the ^in of Sodom,
that was overthrown as in a Moment, and no hands stay^d on her, Lam. 4. 6. But
when one shall groan under continued Mise^y ^or half a Year and longer, when he
shall be placed over the (...)e of Affliction as if baked in an Oven, or being
alive he is used in the same manner as the Carcasses Ho^. 7. 4.
of dead Beasts are; when the i^^truments of cruelty shall search into the
members of Iniquity, and grate upon the most sensible parts; here is an
aggravation of Miser^, and it may be the^e is no remedy at last, d^e he must
though with such Vexation and Ling^ing. Did any Martyr by close imprisonment,
or thrown into the darkest and lowest Dung^on, there fed with Bread and Water,
and after haled out to the most cruel Death, yet endure so much as this unhappy
Creature has done? He all the while enjoyed the liberty of the Sons of God,
his Soul was free and li^t^d up with light from above, his Belly filled with
hidden Manna, thence supported by the Power of Gods Grace, and after received
into Glory. But the other Person did groan and Weep, still mindful of his
Wretched con^ition, and every thinking did add unto his grief; he is gone and
we know no more of him. Look into primitive story and find him out who suffered
most for the the Lord Jesus and his Kingdom; There have been likewise examples
of those who have went through a more Fiery Trial and worse hardship, only for
the ^ake of a base lust. Flesh and Blood will be apt to recoil and mormur, if
we endure any thing for God though he is pleased to recompense exceedingly our
light and short affliction; but if others endure ten times more in the slavery
of Sin and the Devil, they take i^ patiently, though this is not half of what
is to succeed in another place. Let none object to Christianity the Cross or
Persecution, when greater trouble is annexed to one single sin, (and there is
Misery linked to every one) then to the whole chain of Spiritual Graces and
Duty. He that practices them a^, finds less difficulty and tribulation, then
some have done in accomplishment of lust; Many after long and painful
contesting under it have been overcome, others have been put to more struggling
and danger to prolong Temporal Life for a little, then the worthies of old to
lay hold of Eternal Life. If some few have wholly escaped, those continual
fears thereof did take away much of their conceived and unlawful Pleasures; If
God has permitted them to act wickedly without bringing punishment upon
themselves, let them look to it, unless they repent he will not spare them
hereafter. If Judgment does not begin 1 Timothy 5^ 24.
in this lif^, it will be begun and never ended in that which is to come; in
some who follow all iniquity with greediness, may be seen the fire already
kindled, and if that be so intolerable now, what will it be when it shall burn
out for evermore? By the Severity of Gods Wrath, consider of and fear his
Indignation against sin. It is soon acted, but his Vengeance rests long upon
the head of those who do the same; He has manifested his displeasure by
Judgments of old, upon Sodom and Gom^^rah, the death of Zimri and Cosbi and
three and twenty thousand which fell in one day. It was the occasion that
Absalom slew his brother Amnon; there are innumerable Examples in common
History, and daily experience in all Places and Generations. Whether the
aforesaid Disease has been lately sent into the World to scourge the
Transgressors of these worst Ages; or was known long since and those sayings in
Scripture of Rottenness of Bones, Body and Flesh consumed have allusion to it,
is not here determined. It has, and does torment these Workers of iniquity,
and this plague will not be stayed till they cease from their evil doings; it
brings Death or great Misery; at least it makes them sufficiently roar for
giving way to a paultry lust.

But what shall we think of those who have been ^ured and endured all this
misery, yet will venture again? Surely it must be a transcendent delight and
greater then all the pain that follows it, for otherwise none would choose it:
And moreover old Persons who are disa^led, will recount their pasts Acts with
rejoicing, and please themselves with the remembrance: their old hearts run
still after Youthful Lusts, their dim eyes are full of Adultery; all which does
seem to show that great happiness does arise from this sin, notwithstanding it
is here endeavored to be lessened.

To the first instance let it be considered, The greatest Torment and pain
after it is over, is the very same as if it had not been at all. The anguish is
forgotten, and nothing remains but a saint Memory which is rather pleasant; and
therefore when this is laid in the Balance, it will not weigh down the seeming
pleasure of a present Temptation, which herein has the advantage and thus
prevails over Men: The inviting good is at hand, whereas the evil and
inconveniences are either past and then they are as nothing: Or else to come,
and that is not already, or may not be, so it stands upon the same, yea, more
unequal ground then the other did. Hence what is present is preferred before
what may be hereafter; It is a thing only possible or contingent, and so may
not happen: And therefore it is said the lust^ul person will venture again; for
if he knew the like event would come upon him, he would as certainly refrain.
The burnt Child dreads the Fire, himself also is more cautious and
circumspective ever after; If he does greatly suspect, he will decline, so that
the evil in his own judgment is greater then the good, for he will lose the
certain enjoyment of a present Object, for fear only o^ the uncertain
consequence of the other. This is his Opinion in time of ease and delivery from
former pain; but when he was smarting under it, then might be heard his true
judgment of this matter. That cursing and indignation, those real and then
hearty resolutions of never committing the like again do sufficiently evidence
the pain exceeds all the pleasure. If he does follow it again, it is because
that is vanished and gone, but the other stands before him and solicites for
entertainment. It is difficult for flesh to resist the charms of what seems
amiable, especially if it look only upon the first outward appearance (as the
sensual Man looks no further) it does as^ent. The delusion and mistake is, he
casts half and a partial Eye, There being in this and every Sin, A mixture of
seeming Good and real Evil: The first Being open and visible, the last somewhat
more within not discovered, but by a discerning sight, he just sees what is
lovely and will mind no more, but how to attain that; yea having a desire after
it, he is afraid to peep further, least he should find out something to
discourage from the other. Poor foolish Creature! Thou art afraid of losing a
Lust which is a very little Good, consequently missing thereof must be no great
unhappiness; and yet blindly dare upon a great Evil, which will make
miserable. Thou choosest Sin for that little and present advantage, but know
not, or do not consider the sad end thereof. And thus thou actest like
ignorant Boys, who in Play and Sport pull down the Prop of Building, which
falls and crusheth them to Death. It is not prudent Choice but ha^ty
inconsiderate doing; for if when tempted to this Sin, thou would stand still
and pause upon the manifold Evil conseque^ts thereof in this Life and that to
come, thou would no more yield to it, then make a mortal Wound in thy Body to
drink thine own Blood which is said to be sweet, but the other will bring Pain
and Death. Let none judge from the foolish Actings of Men, but from the reason
of things.

And though some (which should have more understanding because of length of
days and experience) yet have a mighty esteem of these sins, who are so far
from coming to repentance, that they more harden themselves and boast in
Iniquity. They should forsake when they cannot sin longer, but we see by them
this is not such repentance as God will accept; for in Truth it is none at all:
A change of Mind does not follow from Disability to Sin, nay there is only a
ceasing from the outward Act, for the heart and tongue which were filthy, are
filthy still. By such a long and continued course, they are hardened through
the deceitfulness of Sin; The Author to the Hebrews applies the Word to all
indifferently, Heb. 3.
but this in a more especial manner may be said to be deceitful above all sins.
There is a strange bewitching Nature in it, a Man is led from one sinful Act to
another, the next time he is promised more sweetness from a different Object;
if he is sometimes struck with the fear of Gods Vengeance, and he thinks of his
sin in order to Repent, then the Devil is not wanting to raise thoughts of
former delight, and instead of recollecting them with horror and detestation,
he is well pleased with what he has done, and cannot seriously repent of them
if he would. Thence he concludes it impossible, and so goes on with hope to be
excused, seeing he has tried to repent, though he is neither heartily Sorry
for what he has done, nor leaves it of: When formerly he might have refrained
from the several Acts, and so by degrees have came to perfect Abhorrency and
true Contrition. And now he might keep his Tongue from every filthy and idle
Word, confess in the bitterness of his Soul instead of Glorying in his Shame,
endeavor all ways to dissuade others rather then allure them on. But commonly
they are still held Captive, and few do recover out of an habit of Lust; And I
find more bitter then death the Woman whose heart is snares and nets, and her
hands as bands, whosoever pleases God shall escape from her, but the sinner shall
be taken by her, Eccles. 7. 26. They cling and hamper so fast, and the Man
likes them, that there is seldom any escaping when he has been long holden
under them. As at beginning of this Iniquity they climb up from step to another
till they come to the height, so they will continue there as long as they can.
And when they must let go one or two rounds, they will hold fast to the rest;
When Strength decays and Age comes on, they still commit as much of the Sin as
ever they can. Through these Men's Obduration and foolishness, others conceive
abundance of Happiness must flow from this muddy and stinking Fountain. But
shall they be Judges who are given over to vile Affections? Who can no more
know the true happiness of Man then Brute Beasts; if these dumb Creatures could
speak with Man's Voice, they might as well be called to give their Opinion, and
then no question the Heart or Goat would give a large commendation thereof. Who
know nothing better, and whose capacities (once exalted and honorable) are
sunk into low and base lusts, have a mighty Valuation for them, this being the
utmost and greatest excellency they can attain unto.

They likewise who are now fallen into the midst of these sins, know of the
things here spoken of; let them make all speed to Repent of the Uncleanness,
and Fornication, and Lascivionsness which they have committed, 2 Cor. 12. 21.
The Lord Jesus will not condemn them if they go and sin no more, John 8. 11.
Was not Rahab the Harlot justified? And from the Examples of Lot, David we may
be assured God has Mercy on such Sinners, if they do not abuse his goodness,
but leave off their Transgression and do Works acceptable and holy in his sight.

This full and plain manner of Writing was necessary to manifest the very
Truth; let none suck Poison out of that which was designed for an Antidote, nor
presume to sin yet more from what God knows was only intended to lead to
Repentance. The temptation which leads Men over to these lusts, is that they
think they shall be happy in so doing; here it is discovered to be a delusion
only, and Men would be more happy as to this present time, if they had nothing
to do with them, or make use of the lawful remedy; there is the same invitation
offered to leave of as before was to follow them. So much of lust in the
General, now briefly run over the particulars.

Every one knows what Adultery is: Stolen Waters are said to be sweet, and it
is matter of sport to beguile the poor Husband; Of Adultery.
Yet, O Man shall thou boast for ever? Know thou not it will be bitterness
in the end? Yea, there is Trouble and Vexation, Fear and Guilt all along. By
the Jewish Law which was of Divine Appointment, the Adulterer and Adulteress
shall be s^r^ly put to death, Lev. 20. 10. And so it is at this day in several
Nations of the World, Christian, Mohammedan, and Heathen, but here it is rather
fashionable and of plaufible report. Whatever credit Adulterers or Adulteresses
get, it is only among the Children of Disobedience, but the Righteous have them
in Abomination; in this life they labor under continual Disquiet, Tribulation
and Anguish, everlasting Shame and Contempt wait for them in that which is to
come.

The injustice and wrong is somewhat less in Fornication, but Of Fornication.
it is a provoking sin and offensive unto God. If any Man d^files the Temple of
God, him shall God destroy, for the Temple of God is Holy, which Temple ye are,
1 Cor. 3. 17. Flee Fornication, every sin that a Man does is without the body,
but he that commits Fornication sins against his own Body, 1 Cor. 6. 17.
A great part of the Chapter is against this particular; so that any thing may
as well be denied to be a Sin, as Fornication. If the Spirit of God says it is
a sin, and wicked Men say it is none, whose Words shall stand, his or theirs?
Jer. 44. 28, 29. And by whose Judgment must they abide? When he punishes for
the same, let them dispute away the Smart of it if they can; Even as Sodom and
Gomorrah and the Cities about them giving themselves over unto Fornication, and
going after strange Flesh are set forth for an Example suffering the Vengeance
of Eternal Fire, Jude 7. The end of being set forth for an Example, is that
others should take heed; for the like will happen to them, if they do the same
things. There does too often go along with this an abomination of iniquity, as
Murder in the Womb, those preventives of getting with Child, and wicked means
to cause Abortion or Miscarrying; Moreover there is killing of Infants to hide
their shame from the World, a manifest proof how tormenting this is that they
dare upon such Sinful and Barbarous Actions to conc^al it. If they are not so
unnatural and desperately wicked as to stifle the poor Infant, then it remains
a Witness of the Parents Transgression: But if made away, that is a double sin,
and shall rise up an evidence against them at the Bar of the General Judgment
to their Eternal shame and confusion before God, Angels, and Men. There are
several other evils, too many to be recited, but may be known by observation
which do sufficiently show that it is best for Mankind to comply with the Will
of God, even your sanctification that you should abstain from Fornication, 1
These. 4. 3.

There are several sorts of uncleanness, as if a Man lie with Mankind as he
lies with a Woman, both of them have committed Abomination, Of Uncleanness.
they shall be surely put to death. And if a man lie with a Beast he shall be
surely put to death, and ye shall slay the Beast, Lev. 20. 13. 15. so that
described, Romans 1. 26. 27. There is another kind by self pollution; If there be
among you, any Man that is not clean by reason of uncleanness that chances him
by Night, Deuteronomy. 23. 10. Which is no great fault, because it is matter of
infirmity, contingency and not wilfullness; but how much worse is he who of set
purpose forces himself to be thus unclean? It is detestable to think or speak
of, much more it is to act such things. But Fornication and all Uncleanness let
it not be once named among you as becomes Saints; Neither filthiness nor
foolish talking, nor jesting which are not convenient, but rather giving of
thanks; for this know that no VVhoremonger nor unclean Person has any
inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ and of God. Ephesians. 5, 3, 4. 5.

Lasciviousness imports Light and wanton Actions, Dalliances Of Lasciviousness.
and rude Gestures, lustful Thoughts, immodest glances of the Eye, curious
inspection upon the faces of Women. Whosoever looks on a Woman to lust after
her, has committed Adultery with her already in his heart, Mat. 5. 28. Said
Christ, who came to interpret some Laws, give others, and finally is to be the
judge of all. Those several Inclinations and Tendencies to unlawful lust are
comprehended under this Word. When lust has conceived, it brings forth sin;
and sin when it is finished, brings forth death. Jam. 1. 15. It suggesting
pleasing thoughts will be apt to procure a consent, which makes the sin; and
therefore should be stifled in its first rise. The way of avoiding Lust, is to
eschew all occasion and provocations thereof; The great design of the Gospel is
to prepare and bring People to Heaven; and then they must be pure and spiritual
to fit them for the Holy of Holies, to qualify them for the promise, Blessed
are the pure in heart, for they shall see God, Mat. 5. 8. Now lust and
filthiness is an hindrance to this, and therefore must be taken away, before we
are made meet for the Celestial Happiness.

To refrain from the aforementioned things, would be to destroy the Briskness
and refined Breeding of the World, the principal whereof is to make
complemental Addresses to young Women. What Mirth and Laughter do they stir up
amongst Promis^uous Company of both Sexes? So the use thereof may appear not
only agreeable to right Education, but also it conduces to divertisement and
happiness.

It must be acknowledged that here and in other things, Christianity is
directly opposite to the present Fashion: God and the World are contrary one to
another, his thoughts are not as our thoughts, his commands are vastly
different from the humors and actions of Men. That which is highly esteemed
amongst Men, is abomination in the sight of God, Luke 16. 15. So again, that
which he commands and will reward, is accounted little and despicable among
M^n. But he has the Breath of all the Sons of Men in his hand, which he can
and does take away in his own order. Say unto God, how terrible art thou in thy
Works! Through the greatness of thy Po^^r shall thine En^mies submit themselves
unto thee, Psalm. 66. 3. in the Margent it is, Yield feigned obedience. They
shall be forced to it just like Captives led away by a more potent Enemy, for
God will set himself in array against wicked Men. He will manifest his Power to
their utter Confusion; if they still hate him, that will provoke him to Plague
them yet more. These things will certainly be; he might even now pour forth his
full Displeasure upon them, but he has been pleased to permit their hour and
the Power of darkness, Luke 22. 53. In which they might rebel against his Will,
and not be immediately punished. It is called their hour, a very little time in
re^erence to Months and Years; and the whole Course of sinning ever since Adam
unto this Day, and what is yet more behind, is not so much as that in
Comparison of the Ages of Eternity. God now Commands, and either does not at
all, or very seldom here execute the Penalty of disobedience, Therefore the
Hearts of the Sons of Men is fully set in them to do Evil, Eccles. 8. 11. But
when their short time is ended, he will no more wave the Scepter of Justice or
Mercy over their Heads, but then he will Rule them with a Rod of Iron. If they
would obey his righteous Laws, to take off the smart from themselves, yet he
will not accept of their counterfeit and slavish Subjection, because they would
not when they might have performed unto him a Free and reasonable Service.

Things thus standing, it is not Peevish Humor, nor Self-con^eited
singularity, but bounden Duty even at the present time, to hearken unto and
obey our God when he says, Be not conformed to this World, but be ye
transformed by the renewing of your ^^nd, that ye may prove what is that Good,
and acceptable and perfect Will of God, Romans 12. 2. When the apprehensive
faculty is rightly set in Frame, it may judge this to exceed those evil and
sinful Customs of People, in whatever Vogue and Estimation they are; for what
are the Follies and Exorbitances of a wanton Age? How do they contribute to our
real Happiness? They may afford a faint and languishing Delight, but this (like
giving a single mouthful of Bread to an hungry Man) rather excites then fi^ls
the Appetite. It raises Anguish, for it is short and insufficient of a true
Satisfaction.

Man is carried with a natural desire toward the Female Sex, and therefore is
more inclined to do all things to gratify them. Indeed he does well herein as
long as he keeps within the set bound, but as in the beginning the Woman did
prevail over the Man in the Transgression, so does she now sooner draw to Sin,
1 Kings 11. 4.
then the common Temptations. But ye Daughters of Sion, who are haughty and
walk with stretched out Necks and wanton Eyes, Whether have you caused your
Shame to go? What is become of that Isa. 3. 6.
Modesty which formerly used to adorn the Virgin State? You seem to come near a
Whores Forehead, if you once refuse to be ashamed. How can you admit of that
loose Language (which though wrap^ up, Mic. 7. 3. in the Gentile wa^, is
intelligible to those Conversant therewith) or those lascivious Actions with
young Men, which go under the Name of Play and ^port. The Virgins of old did
fly from the least familiar converse with Men, and were never worse esteemed by
them, but also given in Marriage. They did it when there was more invitation to
catch at all present Good; for there was not so much Manifestation of future
Happiness, but now more Grace has appeared to the World. And whosoever would
have the Bene^i^s thereof must both know, and also show it by a suitable
Conversation, that whilst others give themselves over unto Lasciviousness
(which is the first and next step) To work ^ll Uncleanness with Greediness. But
ye have not so learned Christ, Ephesians. 4. 19, 20.

Let Men consider what a mere Cheat the Devil makes use of A general
^xhort^tion.
to defraud them of a Kingdom, and drag down to the bottomless Pit. How they
^ell their Souls for naught, and delectable things which do not Profit. They
may seem lu^cious to a mere Wanton, yet says one, How sweet is it to want
those Sweetnesses? To have Cha^^e reins and thoughts. Not to have the So^l
defiled or darkened with the filthy smoke of Lust, but always continuing clear
and bright. To be troubled with no Desires or ^ncl^nations after strange Lusts.
Either to have the gentle Stream run one way only, or to stand smooth and calm.
The single Life is preferred in Paul's j^dgment, 1 Cor. 7. who there speaks by
Permission and not by Commandment: If they continue spotless and innocent, they
are Happy in so abiding. But if all were of this Opinion. A Godly Seed, Mal. 2.
15. would be wanting: And Children would not be born to praise the Lord. It is
his good Pleasure one Generation should succeed another; and therefore he also
does well, who is Instrumental to that. Every Man has his proper Gift of God;
one after this manner, another after that. If to one is given Continency, He
may ser^e the Lord without Distraction. But where is not, there is an Expedient
for him, even to have his own Wife. He is to remember the ends of Marriage,
Procreation of Children, and to avoid Fornication; the bare quelling of Lust,
and therefore this is not to be made an occasion of heightening it. In the
Marriage Bed Temperance is to be observed. The great Happiness of this
Condition arises from constant Love of one another, from the Endearment and
Unity of heart and affections; not from the sudden and momentary Enjoyments,
which also cease to be such, if repeated as often as strength and outward
Provocation would give leave. Those Delights perish in the using, for they have
no Relation or Affinity with the Happiness of Heaven. Indeed that is s^t forth
by Feasts, Wine, Riches and Honor; so the Glutton, Drunk^^d, Covetous and
Proud have an invitation by the Promise of the like things, but there is none
to the lustful Person. The Son of God is not like the Impost^r M^ho^et (who
draws principally with this A(...)ctive) for we are told before. In the
R^surr^ction they neither Marry nor are given in Marriage, but are like the
Angels of God in Heaven, Mat. 22. 30. And there shall in no wise enter into it
any thing that d^fileth, neither whatsoever works Abomination, Rev. 21. 7.
What comes nearest to his Delight is to behold the extraordinary Beauty of that
place, which will ravish the Eye and fill with wonder; this shall not be like
gazing upon the Beauty of a Woman, but as one born blind who suddenly has his
Eyes opened and sees the Sun in its rising Splendor; which does only
transport the Soul with Admiration, and not affect the corporal fa^^lties. At
present it peeps through the Windows of the Body, seeing only the surface and
outside of things: The Flesh also is weak and cannot endure an excellent
Object. But when this Body shall be made spiritual, and that which now looks
through two little holes, shall see through every part, and through into every
Object, there it will be never tired: Especially there being an infinite and
inexhaustible Fountain of Goodness and Glory. Behold now we are the Sons of
God, and it does not yet appear what we shall be: But we know that when he
shall appear, we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is, 1 John 3. 3.
Who is the Eternal, incomprehensibly Great and Glorious God, and to see him as
he is in his very Nature, will take up the whole length of Eternity. Whilst we
behold the sum of all Perfection, the Quintessence of all Loveliness and
Excellency, the Subject of all Good and Glory; who made, contains, and is all
things. He will be a most full and delightsome Object to short and finite
Creatures for evermore. My thoughts fail on this Subject, which it is not
possible for the Heart to conceive, much less for Words to express, here we
know but in part, 1 Cor. 13. 12. And therefore am only to exhort the Reader and
my Self, to use the utmost diligence that we may come to this Blessed Vision.
The way is showed, Every Man that has this hope purifieth himself as he is
pure, 1 John 3. 4. Having therefore these Promises, let us cleanse our selves
from all Filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, perfecting Holiness in the Fear of
God, 2 Cor. 7. 1. Without Holiness no Man shall see the Lord, Heb. 12. 14. So
that the Adulterer, Fornicator, unclean lascivious Person must cease to do
Evil, or he shall be shut out from this Glorious sight: He must wash, make
himself clean, rub out the Defilements, Purge away all the remainders of sinful
Lust; other wise he shall no more stand in the Presence of the King of Glory,
then now he can fly up into Heaven, and of his own strength cause it to be
opened to receive him. Who would lose seeing him, that is ten thousand times
brighter then the Sun, only now for a little staring upon well-colored Dust?
Who would sell his part in those Celestial Joys, which shall transport the
Partakers with Exstacy for evermore, for Gratification of a pitiful Lust, which
presently vanishes and comes to nothing? If he is esteemed a Fool that sells
the Reversion of a great Estate (which would be certainly his own, if he would
wait a little time) for a single draught of Ale: A much greater is he who for a
few, sudden, foolish and empty Nothings, parts with his Birthright to Heaven.
Especially considering further, that if he is deprived of that, he must take up
his abode in a worse place. The abominable and Whoremongers shall have their
part in the Lake which burns with Fire and Brimstone, Rev. 21. 8. Hearken
you, that cannot deny a wicked Inclination, because it is urgent and
importunate, how can you endure to lie down under everlasting burnings? The
Pruriency of Lust seems hard and grievous to you to be resisted, and do you not
think it is much more to dwell with devouring Fire? What a sad Portion must
that Man have to submit to those Evils, he at present chooses with the Sin, and
then shall be given in full measure those dreadful Threatenings which shall as
certainly be fulfilled in their time, as we see of the things that have already
been. It may be, thou still cherishest thy self in thy sweet Sin, accounting it
the only Happiness of Life, but it has been weighed in the Balance, and sound
light in Comparison of that heavy Load of Guilt and Pain that follow at hand,
but less and worse then nothing of what is to succeed hereafter. I have seen
thine Adulteries, and thy Neighings, the Leudness of thy Whoredom, and thine
Abomination on the Hills in the Fields: W^ unto thee, O Jerusalem will thou not
be made clean? When shall it once be, Jer. 13. 27.

CHAP. IX.
Of COVETOUSNESS.

COvetousness is an inordinate Love and Desire after Money, as when one is more
earnest after that then God and the things of his Kingdom. The Covetous Man is
an idolater, Ephesians. 5. 5. and so Col. 3. 5. for he has a greater Love and
Veneration for corruptible Gold and Silver, then for the immortal God. Ye
cannot serve God and Mammon, Luke 16. 13. Yet the last seems to be the Prince
of this World, for it bears greatest sway. It Commands all things, procures
all things, has in subjection Man and Beast, and has exceeding Estimation;
for what is due only to the Lord Jehovah, is applied secretly within the Heart
to this Idol: How excellent is thy Name in all the Earth? Thus has it robbed
God of his Glory, for there is more Service ^zek. 14. (...).
and Valuation given to it by sottish Children and blind Fools, then is had to
the invisible Being. Some through this are dissemblers with God, who pretend to
serve him, are zealous for the outward Ordinances, and abstain from the
chargeable Sins, but do grind the Faces of the Poor, Isa. 3. 15. Cheat and
defraud others, are greedy after Gain and use sinful means. And yet seem to
have a good mind toward God, for they are diligent in his Worship. And they
come unto thee as the People comes, and they sit before thee as my People, and
they hear thy Words, but they will not do with them; for with their Mouth they
make a show of much Love, but their Heart goes after their Covetousness, Ezekiel.
33. 31. As if they could put a Cheat upon him also, by putting him off with
good words only, when in the mean time they will think and do what they List.
Thou understandest my thought afar off, Psalm. 139. 2. At the very Rise and
Conception before we know it our selves. Let this be duly considered of by
Hyppocrites and formal Professors. It will not be accepted to be double-minded,
to have one place for God, and another for the World. Neither is he to be
thrust out from the Heart into the Mouth or Lips. He knows where he is used
with neglect, and will recompense accordingly, as also where he is not obeyed
from the Heart, and where he has not the whole. The Commandment is repeated
over and over. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart, and with
all thy Soul. He requires to have the principal and whole place in Man, nothing
to be preferred before him, and all things to be done in subserviency to his
Obedience. That which was given to Minister, must not set up for Rule. What he
only allowed for Necessaries and Conveniences, that he might be served in
Holiness and Righteousness all the days of our Life, is not to come in for the
main end, nor be made an occasion to provoke him by iniquity and disobedience.
How unreasonable is it, that a little yellow or white Dust should be preferred
before God, who made Heaven and all things therein? They are accursed who
worship the Sun, Moon and Stars, which declare his Glory, but are not to
deprive him of the least degree of his own; much less may the small things here
below. God made us, preserves us, gives whatsoever we enjoy, and has provided
an eternal Happiness hereafter, if we do not by such gross Demerits as
esteeming every little thing before him (which sets forth the infinite
Aggravation of Sin) forfeit our Right we have to his free and gracious
Promises. If we might ^ender to all their due, that just Esteem they deserve
and no more. Now of God are all things, and therefore to him belong all Love,
Fear, Honor, Praise, Obedience, and whatsoever we can do to express our utmost
Acknowledgment and Worship of his Divine Majesty. Let us do as much as we can
to acknowledge His Dominion and Property, and our own Subjection and
Dependence. Let us have an exceeding high Opinion of whatever appertains to
him, and then we should have but a very little Opinion of all that is here in
Comparison of the Great things of God. Even in this wicked partial and
idolatrous World, Dung is never preferred before Crowns and Scepters: And if
the Eyes of our understanding were enlightened, and we did lift them up to the
everlasting Hills, we might apprehend such unutterable things there, that we
should no more esteem of the most magnified things of this World, then now we
do the Stones and Earth we walk upon. But all Men have not Faith, who look upon
this as mere Dreams and fine Fancies: Indeed few speak out so, but many think
thus in their minds, and therefore are for being sure of something, letting
alone these glorious Imaginations for such who believe them. It is said, there
is one Nerve more in the Eye of Man then in Brutes, by which he is enabled to
lift it up. If this be not lost for want of use, look upwards in a clear Night,
ye earthly minded. Observe the Firmament bespangled with Stars, and do ye not
really guess there may be above them some greater Excellency then Gold and
Silver which Canker and Rust? Seek him that makes the seven Stars and Orion,
Amos 5. 8. whose is the World and the fullness thereof, Psalm. 50. 12. and you
must conclude he has greater things in his disposal, then what we now see or
handle. Be not so rash and foolish to persuade your selves there are no such
things, because you do not believe them; for in your Opinion it would be an odd
kind of reasoning, that there was no such things as Riches, because Beasts know
them not: And it is alike absurdity to deny those true Riches our Savior
speaks of, Luke 16. 11. only for that covetous Worldings will not know nor
believe them. If they will not, they shall lose their part in them; and that
will occasion greater trouble, then now it is to miss a good Bargain or
Purchase. It Is perverse Humor and Opposition to the Truth that any are
unbelieving, for would they but impartially examine those Evidences of Faith we
have, they must fully assent: But this wicked and stubborn World is afraid the
Gospel should be true, and therefore will not look upon its Pillars and Grounds
of Truth, least they should be found too strong, and then such must not
continue in Transgression. They are willing to grasp and hold fast what they
have, and they take effectual Care not to attend to any thing, how true soever
which may persuade to the contrary. O profound Policy and Wisdom! To refuse to
be Happy here and hereafter, because by coveting after Riches they will pierce
themselves through with many Sorrows; and wilfully subject themselves unto
temporal and eternal Misery, only to hug themselves a little with ill gotten
abundance. What unheard of Folly is this! There being set before the Sons of
Men good and evil, they will lose the one and incur the other, by considering
of neither beforehand. Good God! That Men should set at naught the most
inestimable thing in the World, and yet blindly run upon accursed Misery.
Reason it self would tell them, that there is no harm to seek after the
greatest Good, and if it be grievous to think of the Evil, so they cannot
endure that, how much more to suffer it? And they had better think thereof and
so escape, then (as now they do) shut it out of their Minds, and thus
unavoidably run into it.

This may be applied to all manner of unbelief, Ignorance and Sin, but
Covetousness has a mixture of all, for otherwise a Man would not renounce his
part in the Portion of Israel for thousands of Gold and Silver. Were he
persuaded he has a Soul, and of its due worth, he would not lose it to gain
the whole World, when now he does to get a less part thereof, then the point of
a Pin is to an Acre of Ground. Covetousness does strangely fasten the
affections to the Earth, and takes them quite off from Heaven: The mind is
daubed over with thick Clay that it conceives not Spiritually, and so intent
upon things Temporal that he regards not the things Eternal. And thus comes in
him an evil heart of unbelief in departing from the living God; Nevertheless
let him still know he is bound to obey the Commandments. If one has never
taken the Oath of Allegiance, yet he is obliged to keep the Kings Laws; if he
does not, he shall be punished accordingly. So likewise, if one was never
Baptized nor enters into Covenant with God, yet still he lives under his Laws;
Every transgression and disobedience received a just recompense of reward, Heb.
2. 2. He is Lord over all, the Great King of all the Earth, and requires
subjection from every Creature; those his Enemies which would not have him
reign over them, he will send forth his Armies and destroy them. Who will not
mind Scripture his revealed Law, are at this present transgressors against the
same, and shall at the last day be condemned by it; For the iniquity of his
Covetousness was I wroth, and smote him: I hid me, and was wroth, and he went
frowardly in the way of his heart, Isa. 57. 17.

The iniquity of Covetous^ess consists in getting by evil and sinful Col. 3. 5,
6.
means as Falsehood or Wrong; so it is a complicated sin of inordinate Affection
and Disobedience. Another kind of Covetousness is gathered from 2 Cor. 9. 5.
Which hinders from doing good by Charity, Hospitality, dispersing abroad that
others also may live by them. Many have plentiful Estates already, who think as
long as they do not covet other Men's Lands or Money, nor do wrong, it is no
harm to keep their own, ^o save and hoard up as much as they can. If they are
willing to live in all good conscience (as that will stand them in more stead
in the day of their Death, and from thence throughout all Eternity, then
Manors or Lordships, and thousands of Gold or Silver) then let them consider
what they are to be put in mind of. Charge them that are Rich in this World
that they do good, that they be rich in good Works, ready to Distribute,
willing to Communicate, 1 Timothy 6. 17, 18. None has more then what he may know
to do withal; Others who have large Possessions find a way of disbursement
through sinful Lusts and Pride. And shall not as much be done another way for a
better Master, for Jesus and his Brethren? It ought so to be, and much more,
and time will yet be, when they shall be ready to ^sal. 45. 12
perform the same; Christianity is no Pinching Doctrine, for it does not make
the owners of Estates good Husbands, as the word is commonly used, but good
Stewards of the gifts of God. They are not to heap to themselves and starve
those round about them, but distribute Liberally according to what they have
and others need. The eighth and ninth Chapter to the Corinthians is full to
this purpose; God feeds the Fowls of the Air, Fishes of the Sea, Beasts and all
Creeping things; Neither has he left the principal work of his hands out of
his care and protection: He has given sufficient to all Men for Food and
Raiment, and they have a right thereto. He Psalm. 140. ^2.
has provided for them in his Works and in his Word; and was there a
compliance to his Written Laws, none would suffer want. But seeing we live in
an Age wherein Men are fallen away from God, who say they are Christians, but
they are not, for they do not according to what is commanded, that is not done
of all: Yet those his pecular People zealous of good Works, Tit. 2. 14. are to
show forth more charity then is to be seen among them who think they have a
well grounded hope for Heaven; and even those Rich Men who will not obey the
Gospel may see it there Written, That he must reign till he has put all
Enemies under his feet, 1 Cor. 15. 25. But if they will be wise as to submit
and come in betime, let them hearken to what he says, Lay not up for your
selves treasures upon Earth, where moth and rust do corrupt, and where Thieves
break through and steal. But lay up for your selves Treasures in Heaven, where
neither moth nor rust do corrupt, and where Thieves do not break through nor
steal, Mat. 6. 19, 20. An express command against hoarding for the use of ones
self. Our Lord in all the precepts he gave, has consulted for the good of
Mankind: Now it tends to the prosperity and welfare of a People, when Money is
still in motion and passes from one to other; for if this were kept by every
one that could, half the Nation would be in danger to perish. But our Religion
has enjoined a free Communicative temper; it lays the greatest obligation upon
Men to Communicate forth according to what they have.

Some have been prejudiced against it as an Enemy to Trade, which is thought to
be more maintained by Sin and Vanity, but let it be considered. The end of
Trade is to get a living thereby, and that all People may have necessaries and
comforts for their being here. Now the way God has appointed, does more
contribute to all this then the corrupted course of the World. To instance in
Drunkenness, which is reputed a beneficial sin to the Nation. But if Men after
they had kept within the bounds of lawful delight would go no further, and
disperse some other way the Money thus saved, others might refresh themselves
likewise, and there would be altogether the same vent. If that which is Prove.
3(...) 6, 7.
consumed by some in adding Drunkenness to thirst, were given to satisfy the
bare thirst of others, there would be the like quantity expended as now,
neither would that abundance of barley God has in mercy given us, be wasted
for want of use and receiving. It is a hard Case for those which make Oil
within their VValls, and tread their Wine presses, and suffer Thirst, Job. 24.
11. Honest laborers, who take pains in sowing and cutting down the Corn should
have more share thereof then squeezing Landlords do now suffer them to have;
when themselves neither Reap nor Sow, but* ^at of other Men's labors. Thou
shall not muzzle the Mouth of the Ox that treads out the Corn; does God take
care of Oxen? 1 Cor. 9. 9. Much more for those of his own likeness. Many are
forced to eat and Drink very course Bread and Water or Beer not much differing
from it; these also deserve help not pity, and should come in for a
distribution of the good things, for the Earth is the Lords and the fullness
thereof. In the Primitive Church they had a Feast, where poor and rich did sit
down promiscuously together, but there was a fault that in eating every one
takes before another his own Supper, and one is hungry, another is drunken, 1
Cor. 11. 21. It is more Unreasonable and Antichristian that some should live in
Rioting and Drunkenness, others pine in Hunger and Thirst; But the Gospel sets
this at right by paring away the Superfluity of the one, and giving it to
others. So it may be said to the Vanity and inordinacy of Apparel. Thy People
also shall be all righteous, Isa. 60. 21. And then there will not be such a
Catalogue of Women's Bravery, Isa. 3. and more things added thereto by the
Fashion of these times. As iniquity has abounded so the number of those have
increased of that Trade which Borders upon it, but some of them might have
resorted to other Employments, and those might sell nothing, but what was
really useful and decent. Were the same spent in Hospitality and Charity, as is
now in Gluttony and Drunkenness. Were the same laid out in Clothing the naked,
as is in strange Apparel, Zeph. 1. 8. Did every one expend to some good use and
purpose, what others do in Pride and Vain Glory. Were every one liberal
according to what he has, and Covetousness (which is not to be named amongst
Saints, Ephesians. 5. 3. but found among Hypocrites and Unb^lievers) utterly banished
from among us: There would be better Living, then in this World of iniquity.
Righteousness exalts a Nation, but Sin is a reproach to any People, Prove. 14.
34.

Covetousness is the Plague Sore of the Commonwealth, who is addicted to it
will make empty the Soul of the Hungry, and he will cause the drink of the
Thirsty to fail. The Instruments also of the Churl are Evil, he devises wicked
Devices to destroy the poor with lying Words, even when the Needy speaks
right, I^a. 32. 6, 7. The covetous Man does not only diminish the Livelihood of
the Poor, but is still speaking against them when they seek for honest relief,
and is upon Designs to make them yet more low. He gets all that he can from
others, and nothing is to be had from him, but for things of absolute
necessity. If he is of sufficient Estate already, then he injures by sordid
keeping his own, by raking clean, and leaving no Gleaning to the Poor, he does
no good, not so much as with the Superfluities of his Estate, but lays up for
further Purchases. Woe unto them that join House to House, and lay Field to
Field, till there be no place, that they may be plac^d alone in the midst of
the Earth, Isa. 5. 8. The Scripture does not say any thing in vain, for all
must be fulfilled. It is too well known already, that a covetous Man whether of
the greater or lesser size is far from doing Good to others, that he is very
prejudicial to Community.

All the pretended good is to himself, and he has a conceited Happiness. If
there was a strife among the Sins which was most delightful and expedient to
single Persons, Covetousness would have the more general Approbation, for it
seems to bring more durable good by getting Money, which prevents all the
discontent and murmuring occasioned through want thereof, and furnishes with
all the necessary helps for wordly Happiness. The wiser sort are given to this,
whilst they laugh at the vain gayeties and unsatisfying pleasures of others,
how they destroy themselves in pursuit of those things which do not profit,
when they can wax rich and live long. There is a lasting and real pleasure in
this, as in other works of the Flesh.

It is granted that all sin has some delight or convenience, but then the pain
and evil is much greater; and so it is here, for Covetousness does outwardly
make a show of Happiness and Wisdom, but when a little laid open, there may be
seen more misery and folly.

The love of Money is the Root of all evil, which while some have coveted
after, they have erred from the Faith, and pierced themselves through with many
Sorrows, 1 Timothy 6. 10. The immediate grief of the Soul is irksome as pain of
body, and Covetousness causing that is ^qually afflicting, as what only brings
trouble to the flesh. Whatever delight arises from this sin, is chiefly by
administering proud and pleasing thoughts, and the Torment which does accompany
it, is also by Vexation of Spirit. Cares and distraction do prey upon the
inward parts. The Man is as it were to^^ asunder with anxious forecasting how
to accomplish more gain. Some thoughts pluck one way, some another, then are
perplexing fears lest he should choose the worst way, there is agi^a^ion and
restlessness of mind till he is resolved upon somewhat, and again trembling
succeeds of the event. It may be after all he is disappointed of the expected
lucre: When the affections are extremely set upon a thing, there is
proportionable grief to miss of it; and it is a further aggravation, if it
might have been had unless for such a mistake and foolishness. This often
happens to every one that is greedy of gain, for he does not catch all he hunts
after, so he suffers Weariness in the pursuit, and more Sorrow in the loss
thereof. But when he does obtain, does not that make amends for other
disappointments? Indeed there is some comfort when things happen according to
desire, but then likewise is more trouble when they do not; one gainful design
that is defeated, brings more Torment then twenty which succeed well. A little
evil will counterpoise much good, for that makes a lasting and deep impression
of Sorrow, when this does only cause light and sudden degrees of Joy; Which
proceeds from Man's corruption and punishment since the fall, and instructs him
if he would learn so much, that his Happiness is not of this World. It is so in
them who have their affections most regulated, but much more where those are
loose, headstrong and outrageous.

The covetous cannot obtain all he proposes to himself; Many things are out of
his power, and what are in, there are several accidents and hindrances which
grieve him at the heart. Moreover, Fire, Theft, Deceit, Tricks and Lawsuits,
and such like things, do often rob and spoil of a considerable part he
possesses. It is irksome to reflect that what was gotten with so long pains and
diligence, should be thus taken away; If the murrain falls upon his Cattle, a
blast or unseasonable Weather upon his Corn, he never thinks upon God so much
as then, for his heart to fret and conceive horrid Imaginations which he is
ready to out with (the Lord knows them all one as if he did) but refrains, for
he would meet with the utmost detestation amongst Men if he should through his
own covetous mind Blaspheme the Holy one of Israel. If he does not come up to
this Abomination of Wickedness, yet who is besotted to his abundance cannot
endure any part thereof to be diminished without impatiency and murmuring. He
has sufficient left in another Opinion, but not in his own, and therefore is
enraged; O if it had not been for this pull back, how wealthy he had been; why
you are so still, ay, but he had been more wealthy, and there is the Vexation.
When that is taken away which was glewed in, it is as if part of his heart was
rent away therewith.

It is a leading step toward Happiness for a Man to order aright his desires;
if these are fixed upon a sure and lasting good that cannot be shaken, then he
is happy; but if he will let them out only upon an appearance of good, which
besides is tottering and moveable, then his happiness is such also, a mere
delusion, uncertain and without. It may be compared to a Wave of the Sea driven
with the Wind and tossed. Sometimes it is near, and again afar of: Labor not
to be rich, and cease from thy own Wisdom, VVilt thou set thine eyes upon that
which is not? For riches certainly make themselves VVings, they flee away as an
Eagle toward Heaven, Prove. 23. 4, 5. They are from without, and who places his
love upon them, it must be subject to the same inconstancy. They being in a
continual ebb, the Man's Soul moves with them, being now a little puffed up and
then is brought low. He is harrassed between joy and grief, the one lifts up
the Waves when there is emptiness underneath; the other presses down with full
and real cares, which being close and compact sit heavy and grievous upon him.

Suppose a Man set on work to make an endless Chain which he begins link by
link, ever and anon one which he has already made is broken, which is
vexatious to go back and mend. If he does daily add more, and make it longer,
yet he will never have done, for it is endless. He vainly pleases himself with
the additions he makes, but cannot come to true contentment; for he will never
see an end of his labor, and at last if it should reach from one corner of the
Earth to the other, it would not fill his mind. In like manner, he that
gathers Riches does often lose somewhat he has already gotten, this is
disquietude; If he does daily make his heap greater, he hugs himself with a
slight fancy or Opinion, but when will his work be at an end? For there is more
to be gotten still. If he should compass Sea and Land, get the whole World into
his possession, yet all would not satisfy his Soul. If raised up to its due
pitch, all the Gold of Ophir cannot satisfy her exceeding desires, which reach
after greater things. Do ye think those who have the Stars under their feet
value these little things here below? The faithful Christian whilst in the body
with his mind ascends up, and thence casts a contemptuous eye upon the little
dazzling things here, with which he thinks irksome to abide. A Chest cannot be
filled with Wisdom, nor a Bag with understanding, no more can the Soul with the
corruptible things of Gold and Silver.

I may here appeal to the unbelieving earthly Man (who makes the worst use of
reason by employing it to so mean purposes as to lade himself with thick Clay.
Is there need of much study and polite learning to fill a Dung-pot?) How much
have thou got already? If a cartload of Coin and many thousand Acres of Land,
yet do thou not covet more? Have thou not pulled down the Old, and built
greater Barns? Have not thou forgotten thy former little requests, and is not
thy appetite stretched out larger to receive yet more? The greater extent his
Estate is of, the more parcels of ground lie adjoining to them, which would be
Commodious; and so he is led on with endless desire. Well, reflect upon them
altogether, and do they yield true and real contentment? Are thy desires abated
with daily Multiplying? It is strange that a reasonable Creature should set his
Love upon, and be hankering after that which does not satisfy. When he has
long tried and cannot stop the least craving, yet still to go on, making it the
more importunate and urgent. If thousands of Gold and Silver will not content a
single Desire, how can it be expected, that adding a few hundreds more should
presently dam up the whole Current of them? If a Gallon of drink will not
quench the Thirst of a Dropsy, much less will a spoonful. There is a wrong
Application and Remedy to cure the disease of the mind; for so it may be here
called, in that it does torment, and only through this mistake bring evil upon
Men. That constant and endless Thirst after Happiness, They do not take the
right Course to allay, or to obtain what they so much long after. Some make use
of one thing, some of another; but here the Man trys if he can do it with
inconstant and perishing Riches, so unsuitable; but further because the thing to
be redressed is within, and this is without. Was ever such Sottishness, when
one is ready to perish with Hunger and Thirst, only to give him Gold to smell
unto? And there being as natural a Desire in the Soul after Happiness, as the
Body after Food and Moisture, how can Money truly ^ase that which is of a more
noble and different Nature, when it will not so much as the earthly part of us?
What Pleasure is to behold that, when the Sun and other parts of the Creation
are a more excellent Object? What advantage to claim Property in that, wherein
is no real Worth and Excellency?

It is not so much the glittering of Gold for that becomes Dim, nor the ^ine
color of Silver for that appears as Dross, which does ravish the Eyes; but the
Pride of Life invites, and then Covetousness begins. When it is considered how
much respect it Commands, how such an one is honored by the People because he
is Rich, this rais^s in another a Desire of being so likewise. The Nature of
Man is very prone to Pride, he Aims at something wherein he may exceed the rest
of his Brethren; and this vain persuasion of Happiness puts them upon their
several Designs. Learning is esteemed but Pedantry, by those who do not
understand it: Wisdom is justly preferred before Rubies, but that is stretched
up above present things, and few do apprehend its excellency, because there is
no such visible advantage. Honor is Prove. 8. 11.
a puff of Breath and the appendant of Riches; so they have the precedence
before all things, and thence most try to abound with them.

Behold his Soul which is lifted up is not upright in him: But the just shall
live by his Faith: Yea also, because he transgresses by VV^ne he is a proud
Man, neither keeps at home, who enlarges his Desire as Hell, and is as
Death, and cannot be satisfied, but gathers unto him all Nations, and heapeth
unto him all People, Hab. 2. 4, 5. An ex^ct Description of the great and
covetous Man; He is exalted and grown stately, if he has a large Estate
already, then he will not deny himself the best Liquors, but take them of to
Drunkenness; he does not value to save so small a Matter, as that would amount
unto: He is not contented with his own Possessions, but goes abroad, and seeks
for new Purchases. Shall we therefore conclude him to be an Happy Man? No more
then the Grave is filled, if Carcasses are daily put into it, for it i^ still
open for more. When he obtains he has not enough; he was impatient before, and
restless now. All inordinate Affection has torment according to its Being more
or less inordinate: And why then should a Man heighten that in himself, seeing
thereby he increases his own Misery? If he were so eagerly desirous after some
real good thing, this were not to be blamed: For though there is Vexation in
being so, yet if the thing be had it recompenses; if not, the Expectation did
somewhat lessen, and it is some Comfort at the last, that he did not Labor for
the VVind, it would stand him in stead if he had accomplished it. But when one
runs so earnestly after an appearance of Satisfaction that has often deceived
him; when he has proposed in the mean while such Contentment, yet has been as
often disapointed; and of this he may be every day more convinced, yet still to
go on. What does all this, but fulfill the Scriptures, Their Silver and Gold
shall not be able to deliver them in the day of the wrath of the Lord: They
shall not satisfy their Souls, neither fill their Bowels: Because it is the
stumbling block of their iniquity, Ezekiel. 7. 19. Behold is it not of the Lord of
Hosts, that the People shall Labor in the very Fire, and the People shall
weary themselves for very Vanity? Hab. 2. 13. According as his Divine Wisdom
has established things, and all to bring back to his Obedience, that they may
go and return to their first Husband, for then was it better with them then
now, Hos. 2. 7.

There is an Enemy which lets from this; and he whispers to those he withdraws,
that hence it appears there must lie hid some great Good, which they cannot
have before they have long wrestled. He would fain insinuate of a Satisfaction
behind that will not be had, unless they take Pains for it, and the greatest
things are reserved at last. If the covetous Man could get so much, then he
would have Happiness and Contentment. That at length is obtained with much
Sweat and Drudgery, but then his mind is altered, he has need of more, and so
on; he has not yet laid hold of that Satisfaction he looked after, it is
further off ^^ill, and so continues to make toward it. Thou mistaken Fool!
There is neither Satisfaction at the end; and if there was, thou could not
come to it. How much do thou propose to thy Self? Why, another has the same
already, and he is not satisfied; and why should thou in the same Condition?
Thou have lower Thoughts, but they will Rise with thy Wealth, and if thine
should come to be equal with his, thy Thoughts would be the same also. He that
loves Silver shall not be satisfied with Silver, nor he that loves abundance
with increase: This is also Vanity, Eccles. 5. 10. Every one cries for what is
sufficient, but how much is that? If it were stated according to the desires of
Grace, Nature, and Convenience, it might be quickly had. If People would use
only Honest and diligent Endeavors in their Calling, and expect Gods blessing,
let him judge what is the Competency, and not we our selves. But if it is
measured by the covetous Man's Opinion, when he shall cease to ask any further,
then is no hope to obtain it: For he may as well think when he goes as far as
he can see, that he shall touch the Horizon, as that he shall be satisfied,
when he gets what he now proposes within himself? If any do desist in going
after Wealth and the Promised satisfaction thereof, it is not because that it
is obtained, for the use of Riches as they Subminister all Plenty of Meat,
Drink, and Raiment do content the Body, but will not thoroughly satisfy the
mind of Man, much less will the bare keeping of them in a Chest. What does it
signify if one has a rich Neighbor, and finds no benefit at all by him? And
it may be the same if not worse (for the Fear and Care of losing Property
Torments more, then the Privilege of having it amounts unto) with the Man to
whom God has given Riches, Wealth, and Honor, so that he wants nothing for
his Soul of all that he desires, yet God gives him not Power to eat thereof,
but a stranger eats it; this is Vanity, and it is an evil Disease, Eccles. 6.
2.

Be exhorted to put an end to thy Covetousness and wearisome Labor. Woe to him
that increases that which is not his, how long? And to him that ladeth himself
with thick Clay, Hab. 2. 6. Thy Life draws to an end, and then it is not thi^e;
how soon thy years may be run out, thou know not. Consider to what purpose
do you consume strength and time? Shall you give account to God how careful you
have been to the World, and in the letteral Sense of the Parable, What a good
Servant you have been? How thou have put thy Money to the Exchangers and Usury,
and have gotten so much Mat. 25.
by other ways of dealing: God does not require any to be Rich, but all to be
innocent. He would have his Servants do that he gives them in Charge, viz. Obey
his Commandments. When he calls to Account, Then it will be demanded, whether
we have inclined our Hearts to his Testimonies, and not to Covetousness:
Whether we have loved Gold more, or it has divided our Love with God; whether
we have broken his Commandments for Gain, or neglected Duty for present
advantage? Such things will be required. Wherefore let him that been an
id^later or unrighteous, repent and be so no more. Do not transgress the least
Precept for the greatest Profit. The getting of Treasures by a lying Tongue, is
a Vanity tossed to and fro of them that seek Death, Prove. 21. 6. You must ere
long part with whatever you have, and have a Care you do not lose your self.
You will be stripped naked, destitute and forsaken of all, and how sad would it
be, If you should be condemned for what you must leave behind, and cannot carry
with you? VVash ye, make ye clean, put away the evil of your doings from before
mine eyes, cease to do evil, learn to do well, seek ^udgment, relieve the
oppressed, plead for the VVidow, Isa. 1. 16, 17. Leave off your former
Greediness and unjust Dealing, be bountiful and Charitable, Act with all good
Conscience and Honesty, stand up for them you have wronged heretofore. And
which should be done in the first place, (for Mercy is before Sacrifice, and
Justice before Alms giving) Be sure to make restitution and satisfaction for
all the injury you have done according to Numb. 5. 7, 8. Do not think to bring
the price of a Whore or a Dog, to give Alms of See Deuteronomy. 23. 18.
Goods unjustly gotten: If ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat the good of
the Land. But if ye refuse and rebel, ye shall be devoured with the Sword, for
the mouth of the Lord has spoken it, Isa. 1. 19, 20. Under the show of
temporal Calamity, the eternal threatening of God is veiled throughout the Old
Testament. It is a little more drawn aside, Isa. 33. 14. but expressed in the
most plain words under the Gospel. God is truth and has not frightened People
with a Lie: He who is as good as his Word in all things, (as all believe he is
in his Promises) does not threaten that which is not, or he will not perform.
It is a sad adventure for any one to run, either God must prove a Liar, or
himself be turned into Hell; he might equally throw himself into the Fire to
try if it will not burn, For our God is a consuming Fire, Heb. 12. 29. And so
will at length appear to the miserable experience of the ungodly and
disobedient; that they may tremble and fear to continue so. Will they not be
persuaded to make all haste to flee from that? Whereof the thoughts only are so
very dismal, that People are afraid to entertain them, but take no due Care to
escape the thing it self. That which is irksome to the apprehension, will be
much more to the Sen^e; and what is dreaded afar off, will be more terrible
when it comes n^gh. It vexes now the thought for a moment, but will be more
tormenting when it comes to be in reality for evermo^e. The surest way never to
come to Hell, is to hear of it often; and this is a thousand times better then
not to suffer the bare Report, but blindly go on and drop into it. It is better
to be foretold and foresee, and so avoid; then run on Deaf and Blind to the
place they did so much fear, whilst it was but in sight and hearing. The
froward hardened Sinners will neither think of, nor let another tell them what
they are liable unto; whereas this would somewhat remove their Obstinacy and
Senslessness, and then way is made for Gods Grace, and so they might be saved.

It is almost the same thing to speak to an Herd of Cattle as Worldly Men; they
will keep their head downwards a grazing, and these will mind their sinful gain
let what will be declared unto them. And the Pharisees also who were covetous,
^eard all these things, and they derided him, Luke 16. 14. They may (...) off a
conviction with a scorn and neglect; Others know not what this means.
Unregenerate Men who have long continued so, and their hearts are pinioned to
the World, understand not much more of Spiritual things then Beasts do of
reason. But God will take care that what he has said shall come to pass: And
those who are so stout now to value his Words as an insignificant sound or dead
letter, may at length find they will cause an hideous yelling in themselves,
^zek. 6. 10. and Dan. 12. 9
and be a savor of Death unto Death: As the Words in a Statute Book do now
cause several to suffer loss of Libe^ty, Life and Member and other ways of
Punishment: from Truth all that is rightly inferred, is Truth. Let people
resist the Truth, 2 Timothy 3. 8. or disregard it, still that remains, and however
in the mean while stifled or prevaricated, that will rise up at the Judgment of
the Great Day. Whether they will read or not, these words are laid before them,
that they might have turned from their evil ways.

Take heed and beware of Covetousness, for a Man's life consists not in the
abundance of things he possesses, Luke 12. 15. It Is enforced with a double
caution to prevent the least beginning thereof, and an excellent Reason added.
And though the Wisdom of the World seems to confront this, for they would
account none truly Wise, but who gets Riches, and so again whosoever does, he
must be necessarily Wise; yet as sure as God is, and we have any Revelation
from him, there is another Notion of Wisdom. Man was sent into this World, and
endued with understanding that he should be Wise. He is not to continue here,
but only pass through and so away. Now that he should do nothing but pick up
Dirt in the Road, seems a most Senseless thing: For though he was made of
Earth, yet this here treated of is no part of his Nature: it neither came into
the World with him, nor shall go out with him. Our days fly as a Post till the
last comes, and in that day all our Thoughts shall perish, all the Labor we
have taken under the Sun signifies nothing. The end of that was to Minister
things for Life, but when this is demanded, all those things likewise vanish
which did relate thereunto: there is no Jer. 51. 13.
more rising up early to eat the Bread of Carefulness, Bodily work cease,
Worldly business is at end. It avails not to have been cumbred about many
things, to have heaped up Riches and gotten Gain. A Man shall not by having so
done redeem his Soul, nor give to God a Ransom for it: But he is to be
examined, whether he was more employed about the one thing needful, which shall
not be taken away, and will stand in stead, when all these things shall fail.
When a Man comes to die, if he had all Pleasures, Riches and Honors, he is not
therefore in a better Condition; much less is he who has bestowed all his time
to be a little more Rich then his other Neighbors, and for this he has
for^eited his Right to the Heavenly inheritance, which otherwise he might have
been Partaker of. He counted himself a cunning Fellow whilst he lived, because
he knew how to get Money and keep it, thinking others Fools who had not such a
high value thereof as himself. And perhaps, thought them unwise who mind
Religion, which was an hindrance to Gain, and also Chargeable, he did not see
them get any thing by it: Whilst he letting alone Words, did Compass real and
substantial Coin: For all he hugs himself so much in his own Wisdom, he shall
be the meerest Fool. He is sensible what a Vexation it is to lose a Pound to
save a Penny (for this commonly happens to covetous Niggards) and the torment
will not be less when he shall come to know, that for a little earthly Pelf he
is deprived of a Kingdom. The opinion of the World is, if they see one always
diligent in business and he grows Rich, they conclude him to be a very Wise
man; another does not neglect his Calling, but Labors therein so far as to
provide things necessary and convenient. But in the first place does carefully
observe his Duty toward God, and will sometimes lose a temporal Profit, rather
then let slip an opportunity of doing his Soul good, him they term a foolish
and simple Fellow. Whatever Men think now, at length it will be plainly
discerned between him that serves God, and who serves him not, and which of
the twain is most Wise. Even now we perceive the one has hopes in his Death,
the other goes away not knowing what shall become of him. Men think it enough
if they do but mind their business whilst they live, besides they understand
not what they should do; but what Wisdom is it to be employed about that, which
shortly shall cease, seeming all one as if it had not been at all, and to leave
that undone, for which they must eternally suffer? They have nothing to trust
unto but this Life, of which they are not assured for a Week nor a Day, before
they are convinced of the greatest and Remediless Folly that ever was.

For their Wit and Contrivance in getting Money: It is to be observed how
corrupt Nature is carried violently to evil. It is easy to Swim with the
Stream, so to find out those crafty and hidden things of dishonesty. They are
learnt from one to another, any one may know them, that will look into the
Practice of the World. And the Devil will be ready to suggest more. However it
signifies little if he is Wise in the way, if he is not so in the end. He who
makes a Journey to such a place to no purpose, if he does go the right and
nearest way, is a Fool for all that. And if Covetousness is not the principal
business, and end of Man's Life, he can never Act prudently who Labors for it
all his days, though with the utmost Skill and Dexterity. He that is very
diligent in gathering Straws, and leaves none behind him, will never pass for a
Wise man. Let the bundle be every day bigger, yet if never so great, it is all
to a vain Purpose.

The result of the whole is, that God has provided for mankind Bags which wax
not Old, a Treasure in the Heavens that fails not, Luke 12. 33. unto which he
now calls and invites them to accept of: in the mean while he Commands to
abstain from what is an hindrance to this, which also is hurtful and
disquieting. It is better trusting unto him, then seeking unto the Creature:
His Goodness and Wisdom are justified; yea, to be admired and complied withal.
Let your Conversation be without Covetousness, and be content with such things
as ye have: For he has said, I will never leave thee nor forsake thee, Heb.
13. 15.

CHAP. X.
Of Anger, Wrath, Hatred, Malice, Envy.

BEfore has been considered that inordinate Love and Desire after Meat, Drink,
Women and Money, the several Idols of this lower World, which draw after them
such a multitude of Followers by holding forth the outward show of Good and
Happiness. But upon the strict and through inquiry every one must acknowledge,
it is not in me. The Man is cheated all the while; he may stumble over, among,
and within them all, seeking Rest and finding none. God is the chief and only
Good, Who ever left him and prospered? It is as impossible to be Happy without
him, as that there should be light of Noonday, when the Sun is under this part
of the Earth.

Nothing is more miserable, and yet nothing more Proud then Man, was the
observation of a very Heathen; but we know whence to derive this accursed
Nature. It came down from his Forefather, who would be as Gods knowing good and
evil, Genesis 3. 5. the Author of his own Happiness: We are his Children, and
would be working it out of our selves. Let the only Wise God declare unto them,
it is in the way of his Commandments, that he is the Lover of mankind and
ordained such for their Good, yet they will think otherwise, and so despise his
Wisdom and Truth. Which is such an iniquity as themselves shall find their own
Conceit of Happiness to be Folly, falsehood and disappointment; and shall be
recompensed with abhorring and Confusion of Face for evermore. Isa. 66. 24.
If that wherein they most trust, deceive them; much more will those things
wherein they do not place so great Expectation. If the Principal faculties of
Soul when they stand in opposition to God, will not afford true and real
contentment; much less will the inferior Passions, which disjointed from him
do nothing but torment and make miserable. When neither desire nor love with
their several Objects are able to make a wicked Man happy, much less will the
other parts of his Soul which condemn and vex him; His understanding does
reprove his Ways, the other Passions do torture or Discompose. If it were not
to keep him in life, he had rather have no Soul at all, but would become
altogether flesh and sense, that he might have all things to relish, but
nothing to embitter his delights. This wish is impossible, as it is mean and
degenerous; for He who fashioned every part of us both of Soul and body, has
likewise so ordained that if they be not brought into Obedience, Sanctified,
and made Happy, then as they were the instruments of sin, so of punishment, and
to render Miserable: Pain and Sickness to the body, or if that be not, Grief
and Indignation to the Soul. As hereafter there is no middle state between
Heaven and Hell, nor any standing still now between both, so it is of Happiness
and Misery. If that which is given to promote the one is not made use of
accordingly, it will tend to the other: If the Soul is not brought into
Obedience unto Happiness, then it falls down into Destruction and Misery. How
we are to be regulated throughout has been showed Chap. 2. Where the whole Man
was taken in pieces that he might be set in a right frame; The Understanding,
Will, and Affections were surveyed. In the two first, both the good and evil
were discovered; the affections were treated of as tending to good, if Governed
by the Law of God. Now it remains according to the proposed method to speak of
that evil and misery they occasion by being ruled according to the Law of the
Flesh. The corruption and abuse of Love as to its several Objects has been
handled in the last foregoing Chapters; When the good and evil of a thing is
laid open, the one may be chosen, and the other avoided. And hereby it may be a
little more particularly manifested unto Men (would God it were done by a
better instrument, but here it is endeavored according to the ability himself
has been pleased to give.) Thou art good, and do good, teach me thy
Statutes. Righteous art thou O Lord, and Upright are thy Judgments. The
Testimonies that thou have commanded, are exceeding Righteous, and very
Faithful, Psalm. 119. 68, 137, 138. Though he has the greatest Sovereignty over
Creatures, and he might (as some earthly Potentates do by their Vas^als) have
exercised his authority over them by enjoining them such and such things, which
would not be for their good, but only expose them to hardship and
inconvenience. But God is not as the Son of Man (who is Ignorant, Proud and
Cruel) for there is an intrinsic worth and excellency, a real goodness in the
very nature of all things our gracious Lord requires; as on the other hand
there is Baseness, Deformity and Evil in forbidden things. Seek Good and not
Evil, that ye may live; Hate the Evil, and love the Good, Amos 5. 14, 15.
Beloved follow not that which is Evil, but that which is Good, 3 John 11. This
is the Law and the Prophets, It is the sum of all the Commandments of God.

We are required to put off Anger, Wrath, Malice, Col. 3. 8. Hatred, Variance,
Envyings, Gal. 5. 20, 21, 26. So certainly there is Evil in them, and they
hinder our Happiness. All anger is not sinful nor forbidden, but when without
cause and immoderate; Either without Provocation, or upon little and trivial
things. Such a temper is contrary to the Peace and Tranquillity of Mind: When
the Winds blow, and Storms arise, there succeeds a troubled Sea, the Waves
roaring: Not much unlike is the Soul of Man, when Contempt, Affront, or other
cause has moved him, that which before was Calm and Smooth, begins to Rise and
Swell, and violently beats upon the Banks. The fierceness of the inward Man may
be discerned, when the Eyes shall roll up and down like sparks of Fire among
the Stubble, the form of his Visage changed, Multitude of Words do press at the
door of Dan. 3. 19.
the Mouth, that none are able to get forth but stammering and confused noise;
The Hands are with difficulty kept from doing mischief, the Teeth grind and
chatter, Reason is banished, and nothing but Rage to be seen; all these outward
signs do discover that strange agitation and restlessness the Soul is in. This
is properly Wrath, the highest degree of Anger. Man is despicable to look upon
abstractedly, but when thus stirred, one would admire so little a Creature
should do so great things. His Soul is never so much discerned to be confined
and pent up in a narrow Room as then; it would break through the Walls, and
causes those about him to fear. Then is raised a ferment and heat of the Blood,
which is no more true courage (though it has a show thereof) then desperate
acts and ravings of distracted Persons; Neither is it Wisdom. The Fool rages
and is confident. He that is soon angry, deals foolishly, Prove. 14. 16, 17.
The discretion of a Man defereth Anger, and it is his Glory to pass over a
Transgression, Prove. 19. 11. Who knows the utmost that is in an injury, is
least moved with it; and also this is a sign of a truly great and exalted
Spirit, for Reeds and not Oaks are shaken with the Wind. A little and empty
Soul is tossed to and fro with every breath of provoking Language. He serves
like the fightings of Wild Beasts to divert Spectators, only such an one is
worse and more destitute of understanding, for they bite others, but he teareth
himself in his Anger, Job. 18. 4. The whole Man is hurry and division from
himself, for the time he knows not what he does; That inward Vexation and
Perplexity, that Impatiency and desire of Revenge, those Malicious Wishes of
Hurt, if they should not come forth into Act, do certainly hurt himself.

But commonly it proves Mischievous to others, both to Multitudes and single
Persons. Many thousands in the prime of Age have went down to the Slaughter,
have joined to Butcher one another, as if they were to make a Feast of their
own Flesh to the Destroyer; Surely he laughs and Smiles (if we may suppose that
of the infernal and accursed Spirit) to see poor Mortals do the work
themselves, and of their own accord fall a Prey into his Teeth. Let none say
this evil is from God, for he has no pleasure in the destruction of the
living, He makes Wars to cease unto the end of the Earth, Psalm. 46. 9. So
Isa. 2. 4. Mi^. 4. 3. Psalm. 68. 30. Which with the Parallel places shall be yet
fulfilled. He has sent his Son the Prince of Peace, who has promulged such a
Law to the World, that if observed, there would be no Wars and fightings among
us, but they come from Men's lusts, Jam. 4. 2. Ambition and Revenge are the
great Incendiaries, which sprang from him who would be like the Most High and
thence fell from Heaven. And therefore now continues his hatred against God by
withdrawing as many as he can from his Obedience; and also his own envy at the
Happiness to which Men are appointed, which he hinders as much as he can. It is
his employment to nourish and instill in the hearts of Men all things that may
do hurt, amongst which Rage is one Principal Instrument for carrying on his
Pestilent design. It works Transgression against God, and Mischief to Men, both
the Actors and Sufferers: It goes forth by Armies, or two by two. When People
have not opportunity to assemble themselves by Troops to shed Blood, the Devil
takes care they may do it by single parcels. If he, who is placed under God for
this purpose, keeps the whole Community in Peace and Q^ietness; yet the Spirit
which works in the Children of Disobedience stirs them up severally to
kill or maim one another, which it is impossible for Humane Government wholly
to prevent, for that does not reach within, and therefore can no more stop the
beginning of Passion, then the first breaking forth of fire.

If it be possible, as much as lies in you, live peaceably with all Men.
Dearly beloved, avenge not your selves, but rather give place unto Wrath: For
it is Written, Vengeance is mine, I will repay, says the Lord, Romans 12. 18,
19. This is pished off and slighted without duly considering the reason of the
Command. It is matter of the greatest astonishment, that so little and
contemptible a being as the Son of Man is, should behave himself stoutly and
disdainfully against the Lord his God; that he who in himself is very fearful
and trembles at every thing, should dare to provoke his Maker. The reason of
such abominable presumption is, That God having here ordained a life of Trial
and Obedience of Faith, The place of his Especial residence is in Heaven which
is afar of: And he remains invisible, undiscovered to the blinded world. So
they either not know, or not think of him, and therefore use so much boldness
and contempt toward him. But should he be pleased to manifest himself a little
more, had they but the least beholding of his Majesty and Greatness, these same
persons would creep, who now lift up themselves against the Holy One of Israel.
No Question, there were some of as daring Spirits (as any now among us) who
stood by Mount Sinai when God descended there, and we know what effect it had
upon them; The like is not to be expected again in this World, but yet they
shall be summoned to meet with that God against whom they have been
disobedient, and shall have a more sensible and lasting apprehension then the
Israelites had, for their Souls will be terror round about. Men may be
Rebellious, and so indeed are in the days of their Flesh; but when they shall
drop out of that, Nothing hinders from certain fearful looking for of judgment
and fiery indignation, which shall devour the Adversaries, Heb. 10. 27.

Go to the proud Men and tell them, they must not revenge their Injuries, but
leave them to God, for he says, Is not this laid up in store with me, and
sealed up among my Treasures? To me belongs Vengeance and Recompense, Deuteronomy.
32. 34, 35. They will be ready to Answer, like unto Pharaoh: Who is the Lord
that I should obey him? They are for using it themselves. To which it may be
replied in the Words following, Their foot shall slide in due time, for the day
of their Calamity is at hand, and the things that shall come upon them make
haste: And then they shall know who is the Lord, and wherefore he Commanded so.
It is a received Rule among the Men of Fashion, if any receives an Affront, his
own Sword must do him Right, and he will venture his Life to accomplish it:
Thinking that if he is killed, there is an end of all his Vexation for the
given Injury, and he had rather die then endure it; but if he should overcome,
then he gets Honor and is revenged on his Enemy. But is ^e resolved to kill or
be killed? Let him be told before he goes, that he Acts like a Fool; for if he
gains the Field, his dis^ontent will not be washed away with the Blood of him
that caused it; his mind will not be more Cheerful when clogged with Gore and
Guilt. If himself is slain, then he falls into the hands of the Living God, and
he would entrench upon his Prerogative, who says, Ah, I will ease me of mine
Adversaries, and avenge me of mine Enemies, Isa. 1. 24. Do not cajoul your
selves with a Lie, for Death is not an end, but unto wicked the beginning of
Sorrows. It is commonly s^id* Revenge is Sweet, but it has bitterness in the
end: If any pleasure arises, it is like one laboring under Pain and Rancour,
who has it stopped for a Moment, but it returns with more violence th^n ever.
The mind is upon the Wrack till the furious Person has performed his cruel
design, and then is for a Minute taken of, but presently comes a worse
instrument of Torture. A Murderer walks only two or three turns by the Carkase
of the Slain, he Triumphs but a very little time before fear and self accusing
Thoughts set a worrying of him. There have been too many sad Examples of this
Nature, who after they have commit ed ^^is crying sin, if they escape J^stice,
or another takes Satisfaction for the life of the Murderer contrar^ to Numb.
35. (...). Which obliges Kings, Judges, and Potentates as much a^others; yet
Vengeance suffers them not to have comfort of li(...) b^t they betake
themselves to So^^ishness to make them ^^mind^ul of that for a little time,
whereof they are to be sensible for all Eternity. They seldom come to true
Repentance for wha^ is past, but go on to stifle the sense thereof till they
come to (...)e their (...)t in the Lake which burns with Fire and B imst^^e,
Rev. 21. 8. Against which they will find nothing to harden themselves.

The least tendencies toward this sin are to be avoided, as may be seen by the
strict manner of those Precepts, Mat. 6. 14, 15. Mat. 18. 21, 35. Which
indispensably enjoin the duty of actual forgiveness of injuries as is possible
for Words to express. If you have a mind to be revenged, why should not God
take revenge on you for the affronts you have offered unto him? He will
certainly deal so with you, as you do with others, and then avenge your selves
if ye dare. He will be more too hard for you, then you can be with one another:
You had better be still, for he is ready to execute upon you according as you
smite your fellow Servants. Have they injured you? You have more offended God,
and it is a good way to come off, to forgive them that he may forgive you also;
Be patient toward all Men, see that none render evil for evil unto any Man, 1
These. 5. 14, 15. It is for our present good to compose disturbed thoughts, to
allay the swelling of mind; The God whom we serve is a sufficient comfort under
all reproaches, we may appeal unto him, Be thou my judge, for I have walked
innocently: Though they curse, yet bless thou. Follow Peace with all Men, and
Holiness, without which no Man shall see the Lord. Looking diligently l^st any
Man fail of the Grace of God, lest any root of Bitterness springing up trouble
you, and thereby many be defiled, Heb. 12. 14, 15.

It is to be admired that the Devil should make use of and prevail with a
Temptation, as is wholly made up of Torment. He who knows that natural temper
in all (and accordingly prepares his others baits) of being willing to be happy
and averse from Misery, yet through his subtlety has made so unpleasant a
thing be received by them. These are some of the depths of Satan, Rev. 2. 24.
But if we found this, it is bottomed on Pride, for having suggested to the
hearts of Men; Nothing does so much conduce to their Happiness as to seem great
and be highly esteemed, to be set above that none should dare to offend them;
to maintain this Principle he makes them submit to much uneasiness and trouble,
as is done by swallowing down those black sins, Anger, Wrath, Malice, Revenge,
in order to gratify a proud Humor.

But there comes another Spirit more black and ugly which Of Envy.
crawls by it self, viz. Envy: At first sight we know not whether it should be
ranked in the same Legion under the Command of Pride, for as it proceeds from
an abject and base mind, so it does confess it self. The envious ^erson
acknowledges himself inferior to whom he envies, for he sees in another
somewhat above which he has not, and that raises the Gall within him. It gnaws
upon the Spirit and Flesh, it wilfully brings (what God intended to others for
a curse) leanness into the Soul, and makes the outward Countenance appear
Meagre and Ghastly. Neither Meat and Drink will nourish what this pines and
consumes away: for wild Beasts to devour alive is more tolerable, for they make
a quick dispatch, but this is as little Vermin continually feeding on the
Liver. He breaths forth sighing and grief, within is anguish, a little further
is fretting, without is evil speaking and injurious action; It rejoices in
evil, and is sad at the good which comes to another; It will misconstrue every
thing that is capable to be so. It is sullen, and will not speak out of others
well doing, which they cannot gainsay, and should glorify God for the gifts
he gives unto Men. What is the occasion of all this evil and misery? Not
pleasing the flesh, only another Happiness; Because such an one is contented
and has good things, he is murmuring under vexatious Thoughts, As he sees it,
he is grieved, he shall gnash with his Teeth and melt away, Psalm. 112. 10.

O ^ursed ab^minable Nature to be spi^eful against the welfare of others! O
thou Child of the Devil, enemy of the happiness of Mankind, who hinders it as
far as he can* Who set thy self principally against Numb. 11. 29. Psalm.
106. 16.
faithful Teachers, the instruments of public good, resisting honest and
worthy actions. When Sanballat the Horonite, and Tobiah the Servant of the
Ammonite heard of it, it grieved them exceedingly, that there was come a Man to
seek the welfare of the Children of Israel, Neh. 2. 10. Woe unto them for they
have gone in the way of Cain, Jud. 11. Upon you may come all the Righteous
Blood shed upon the Earth; from the Blood of Righteous Abel unto the Blood of
Zacharias Son of Barachias, whom ye slew between the Temple and the Altar, Mat.
23. 35. This he charged upon them who afterward for Envy delivered him, Mat.
27. 18. The Son of God was used as a Servant, that eminent Manifestation of the
Love of God to the World was vilified through their Spleen and Hatred; The Holy
One, The Prince of Peace endured such contradiction of Sinners as was never
heard of before. The Glory of the only begotten of the Father was rejected and
despised of Men. What can be said more to aggravate the Abomination of Envy?
Then that it caused the Death of our Lord.

What Storms and Persecutions has it since raised against his Members? Has
kindled a fire and shed the Blood of thousands of his Servants because they did
receive his Doctrine, and were more Righteous then the^^ Tormenters? If they
have persecuted 1* John 3. 12.
me, they will persecute you also, John 15. 20. Said their forerunner, and it
has been fulfilled to a Witness; look upon that vast Army of Martyrs, Who have
washed their Robes in Blood, and came out from great Tribulation, unto whom it
was said in the days of John, That they should rest yet for a little Season,
until their fellow Servants also, and their Brethren that should be killed as
they were, should be fu^^illed, Rev. 6. 11. Which since his time has been done
in great measure, and the end is not yet; Who slew all these? An Enemy has
done it, through whose Envy Death came first into the World, and he has
employed his Instruments ever since for accomplishing all the mischief that was
ever done. It has inflicted cruel Mockings and Scourgings* Bonds and
Imprisonments, and found out all ways to torture and make miserable (if that
were possible) the elect of God. When his only Son, the first born among many
Brethren was slain, he prayed for his Murderers, Father forgive them, for they
know not what they do, Luke 21. 34. But one would think by this time they have
been so long used to this accursed Employment, they should know what they do,
and who sets them on, Even the Dragon who has so long made war with them which
keep the Commandments of God, and have the Testimony of Jesus Christ, Rev. 12.
17. When People hear their good Confessions, with what Faith and Constancy they
suffer for the Name and Truth of the Lord Jesus, When they neither suffer as
Traitors, Murderers, Thieves or Evil doers. When they are neither Blasphemers
nor Heretics (for an Heretic is condemned of himself, Tit. 3. 11. Convinced
to the contrary in his own judgment, and such are they) though their
Adversaries would cloth them in the skin of such, but it is so thin that
themselves and all the World man see their innocenc^ through it, but Wickedness
wants a pretense, and some they would make use of to hide their own Malice and
Envy; Can they hide their Counsel from the Lord? Isa. 29. 15*
Or conceal from him before whom all things are naked and opened, Heb. 4. 13.
The wicked plotteth against the just, and gnasheth upon him with his Teeth
(here is the beginning, but a little further) The wicked have drawn out the
Sword, Psalm. 37. 12, 14. And when they have had Power a^^ Authority, they have
executed it. O ye Sons of M^n, wherefore should you do such things? Why will ye
b^ Tools to do his Work who has great Wrath, and but (...)le time? Sa^an is
not divided against Satan, We do not R^ad that the Devils ^o^ment those of
their own kind. Why should, on carry your selves cruel^y and despite^ully
against the sa^e F^^^h and Blood? They are the Servants of God, of whom it is
said. He that ^o^cheth you, t^ucheth the Apple of his Eye, Zech. 2. 8. The Lord
Christ takes it immediately upon himself, when any of his Mem^ers suffer, I am
Jesus wh^m thou pers^cutest. It is hard for thee to kick aga^^st the Pricks,
Acts 9. 5. And therefore you had best have a Care what you do to these Men.
Your Breath is in your Nostils, which will one day go forth, and then God will
suffer your evil Deeds no longer. You can only lift up your hand and heart
against Heaven, and manifest a little spite against your Fellow Creatures, but
will you contend with him who lives for ever? Who can cast both Body and Soul
in Hell Fire, it will be manifested who is stronger, and who will have the
worst o^ it at last: Con^^der of this before hand. Life is lent to a^l Men to
work out their own Salvation, and escape the Wrath to come. And what madness is
it to bereave others a little before, to send them into the place of Rest, and
Doom your selves unto Torment? You think evil against them, but God will turn
it into Good; the more mischief you do, he will change it into a greater
Benefit. There are no such Fools in the World as Persecutors, for they miss of
the thing they aim at, it falls out contrary to what they would have. And have
feared every day, because of the fury of the Oppr^ssour, as if he were ready to
destroy, and where is the fury of the Oppressor? Isa. 51. 13. What is now
become of all those stirs they have made in the World? The Dust is cast over
them, and they are quiet; their ^ands are tied up and fettered in the Grave
from doing any more violence, the wickedness of those wicked Men is come to an
end, but where do their Souls abide? In what Condition are they? How vexed and
enraged are they at their past Rage? With what Fear and Trembling do they look
for the Resurrection of their Bodies, when they must come ^orth to Judgment.
And those who did ^eretofore ruffle and bluster in humane Courts and
Judicatories, will be forced to behave themselves in another manner, at the
Judgment Seat of Christ. Those mighty Emperors and Tyrants will find one
higher then they; the inferior Officers and Magistrates will meet with one,
whom they were as much bound to obey as their respective Masters. The great
swelling Words will be changed into doleful Cries and Lamentations. Instead of
Domineering and insulting over those they had once Prisoners before them will
succeed trembling at their Presence, and will be strangely aba^hed to see them
become their Judges. God will arise and maintain his own Cause, and ^^e boldest
Persecutors shall at length find, It is hard to kick against the Pricks, the
fiercer they do it, the deeper they wound themselves. Their Sword shall enter
into their own Heart, and their Bows shall be broken, Psalm. 37. 15.

If you are Men and not savage Wolves, Be reasoned with a little. Wherefore
should you deal so cruelly against those who believe on God and obey him? They
must acknowledge He is greater then Man, and should be served by us. Is their
hatred against the mighty One, because They would not have him R^ign over them?
Luke 14 14. And because they cannot hurt him, will they hurt his Servants? He
sets himself on their side. It is impossible to resist him. It is m^dness, but
to attempt it. If it be of God ye cannot overthrow it, lest happily ye be found
even to fight against God, Acts 5. 39. He searches the very Secrets of all
Hearts, and if their Rage is against him, Isa. 37. 28. he knows it. There is
a Root of bitterness growing within the Bosom of Persecutors, an Enmity against
God. Either it must be this, or hatred against the Persons of good Men in whom
shines forth his Image, or both; as is most common. The first is Ignorance and
strange iniquity; the second upon Inquiry will be found unreasonable and
without cause. Do you hate them for following that which is good? You will not
acknowledge so, for an evil Work you pretend: Why, look thoroughly, and you will
see no such thing. Examine impartially both sides, and it will appear good; but
then arises Envy and Hatred, that such should be better then your selves. Then
in your Opinion they do good, Why will you not also do the same? In a temporal
Matter none Envies another, for a thing which himself may have, or the other
would willingly help him unto. This turns into Thanks and Goodwill. And why
should it not be the same in reference to the things of God? Is another
righteous, and do thou secretly imagine him Happy therein? Thou may be so
likewise, if thou would do the same things. God is no respecter of Persons,
and he will give his Grace to thee, if thou will seek after it as he has done.
In my Fathers house are many Mansions, said the Son of God, who came down from
Heaven. Another striving will not prejudice thee; if only some few might come
there, we might well be angry at those who would get before us: But seeing God
would have all to be saved, and Christ tasted Death for every Man, there is no
fear but thou may be Partaker also, if another does endeavor after the same
Grace and Glory. He will do his endeavor that thou may come also, but this
thou do not like, Why should he be a Busie-body in another Man's Matter? But
consider a little, if a Man had incurred the Displeasure of the King, and so
was liable to Imprisonment and Death; a Friend would put him in the way to
preserve and restore him into Favor, is not this esteemed a kindness? A wicked
Life and Conversation renders liable to the Wrath of God and Damnation of Hell,
and therefore he is not to blamed, who would persuade to repent and escape it.
When one is ready to perish, What fault is it for another to put him in mind to
return to his Fathers house, who will receive with all Loving kindness, that
hence forward he may live in obedience and favor of so good a God, die with
Comfort, and enjoy him in Glory. What harm is in all this? Shall evil be
recompensed for Good? For they have dug a Pit for my Soul; remember that I
stood before thee, to speak good for them, and to turn away thy Wrath from
them, Jer. 18. 20.

Ay, but such an one believes we shall be damned and miserable, he thinks so of
us, as if he would have it; surely he is to be justly hated for this.

This seems to be the very Reason why the wicked have been so despiteful
against the Godly in all Ages. Though they will not speak plain, they will hint
as much, and therefore it is expedient that such things should be laid open,
that all mistakes might be rectified, for want of which is occasioned all the
Hatred and Heartburning of the Sons of Men one against another: Amongst which
this pestilent surmise has done so much mischief. What was it that set the
Jews first, the Gentiles afterward, and all wicked Men ever since in such a
Rage against Christ and his Followers? He told the Jews, I am the way, the
Truth and the Life, No Man can come unto the Father, but by me. This is Life
eternal, that they might know thee, the only true God and Jesus Christ whom
thou have sent, John 17. 3. He sharply reproves their Sins, Fill ye up then the
measure of your Fathers. Ye Serpe^^s, ye Generation of Vipers, how can ye
escape the Damnation of H^ll? Mat. 23. 32, 33. So the Jews unless they repented
and believed, were shut out from the Mercy of God. In like manner were
concluded the heathen World from Acts 4. 12. 2 Th^s. 1. 8. Rev. 21. 8. And that
saying of our Lord, John 5. 2^, 29. reaches unto all wicked Men, of all
Generations and Places. To be deprived of (...) great a good, and threatened
with al^ke Evil, has set Men a madding, and has made them spit out their
Venom against the Asserters of these Truths, as if our selves were the Authors
of them, and so would have it be. But yet they need not be presently enraged,
for the Promises and Threatenings of God are not absolute and irreversible, but
the one obtained, and the other avoided by Repentance ^n the mean while. So
there is a door of hope open to the worst of Men to come in, unless they are so
mad to shut it against themselves. Though they do wickedly now, they may cease
to do so as soon as they will, and come in whilst the day of Salvation lasts.
When the Long-suffering of God wa^^s 1 Pet. 3 20. that Men should be more
forward to hasten Destruction upon themselves, is a strange and unnatural
Consequence, as if they sworn to be miserable, and like desperate condemned
Rebels which might have their Pardon, yet they will be stub^orn, not to sue for
it, but do all the mischief they can before they die. If they are so perversely
resolved, they will see who will repent of it first, Go ^or themselves. He that
made Men has power over them; and seeing he has revealed such Decrees
concerning their final Condition, what are we, that we should not believe him?
We must, or we mak^ God a Liar 1 John 5. 10. which we will not do for the
despitefulness of all the World. Be it known unto you, that the God whom we
serve, is true and will perform what he has said. He has threatened a great
Punishment to unbelief, Heb. 3. 18, 19. R^v. 21. 8. and therefore we dare not
in the least give way to it. But is to be understood, that our speaking of them
do no more make them then a Proclamation of the King is by talking thereof
among fellow Subjects. The Galph is already fi^^, our* Thoughts and Words did
not make it; so such would nevertheless drop in, if we should think or say they
would not: In point of Prudence it is better for Men to turn from their Sins
and Vanities, then to run the dreadful event thereof. Indeed we do believe the
Scripture is the Word of God, and all things contained therein are true, and
therein is plainly declared a place of Punishment; but that we would have it
so, is nothing to us: We are but Servants, and to be contented with whatsoever
pleases our great Master, for we dare not prescribe unto him, or tell him what
we would have: If we did, our selves being in the Flesh we should rather take
part with that, for our selves are in danger, and we should rather desire there
was none, but we submit to the Good will of our God. What Jeremiah says of
himself, is the mind of all sincere and real Christians. Neither have I desired
the woeful day thou know, that which came out of my lips was right before
thee, Jer. 17. 16. They are bound to believe and speak ^orth Gods Truth, but
yet far from wishing the Misery of those who are Flesh of their Flesh, and Bone
of their Bone, of the same common stock and likeness with themselves. However
they must love God more then Man; and be more zealous for his Glory, Truth and
Justice, then the welfare of others. They had rather that wicked Men turn and
live. They would have such part with d^cei^ful Lusts for true Happiness, and do
use their utmost endeavors to accomplish this blessed Work; but if they
continue still in an hard impenitent heart, If they persist to hate, provoke,
and despise the most Lovely, Excellent, Glorious One, who has not in the least
deserved it from them: If they abuse his Goodness and Long-suffering, which at
length is worn out, and their day is past. Let God arise, and let his Enemies
be scattered, let them also that hate him flee before him: As smoke is driven
away, so drive them away: As Wax melts before the Fire, so let the wicked
perish at the Presence of God. But let the righteous be glad, let them rejoice
before God, yea, let them exceedingly rejoice, Psalm. 68. 1, 2, 3. They will be
pleased when they behold God glorified in his Justice upon the wicked, as in
his Mercy on themselves: Even they will fully acknowledge, the Lord is
righteous, he has dealt with them accordingly to their deservings, they had
the^r Choice, and he did all things to bring them* to Heaven, and avoid the
evil; but they maliciously refused the one, and did run blindly into the other.
If now they would lay aside prejudice and false judgings, and debate the Matter
seriously in their minds, they must Confess the Goodness and Justice of God in
the Government of the World, as to future Rewards and Punishments, though we
are now in the Flesh, and have not so very clear a discovery of things; much
more will it appear when we shall be stripped and dispossessed of all, when the
Judge himself shall testify against us, Psalm. 50. 6, 7. And plead with the
Inhabitants of the Earth, give a large Account of what he has done for his
Vineyard, and leave us to judge what he could do more, that he has not done,
Isa. 5. that every mouth may be stopped, and all the World become Guilty before
God, Romans 3. 19. The Righteous will say, If thou Lord had been extreme to
mark iniquity, who might abide it? Even they would be Condemned: But they fled
to him, who was set forth for an Advocate and Propitiation for our Sins; they
entered into that Covenant of Grace which was made through him between God and
Man, and sincerely performed the Conditions thereof (O what magnifying will
there then be of the Mercy of the Father in sending him, and his Love in doing
so great things for mankind) But for those his Enemies who would not have him
Reign over them, who did Call him Lord, Lord, but did not the things he said,
who did mock and trifle with him, these shall find to be true what is written,
2 These. 1. 7, 8, 9. Rev. 2. 23. The Secrets of all Hearts will be manifested,
all Tricks and Evasions will vanish, and themselves will really assent to the
Truth and uprightness of Gods proceeding against them. They will be forced to
know these things, when knowledge will do them no good, but to aggravate their
own Folly, that they would not know them beforehand, that they were willingly
ignorant, 2 Pet. 3. 5. Who are now of a different Opinion from the Godly, and
so exasperated against them, will find those things to be true they told them
of, and will wish they had hearkened to them.

In the Word of God is such abundant Conviction for all sorts of wicked Men,
but especially the worst sort of Persecutors, that when they hear these things,
the former must be pricked in their Heart, Acts 2. 37. and so bring them to
Repentance; the others cut to the Heart, Acts 7. 54. which would stop the way
of them. But if they are desperately resolved and gnash with their Teeth, then
they must Cry with a loud voice and stop their Ears, Verse 57. and run upon
mischief: Making the outward noise to silence the Cries within them. Be sure
not to hear what can be said against their wicked Designs, for then they could
not do them. They must violently rush on, for they cannot go soft, deliberate
and do this. They hasten on with hurry and Passion, for let them take sober
Council they will never Act such things. If they take advice from Scripture,
they will be found mad, and Enemies to themselves. If by Reason, that will
pronounce them to be Fools and cruel to others. And therefore if their Hearts
are fully set in them to do evil, they must consult with neither: And this is
the very Reason why they go on in their Course, as is generally of a wicked
Life, to resolve first to hear nothing to the contrary. But if one was
thoroughly bent to commit Theft, Robbery, Treason, and thereupon think himself
safe, because he would not know the Kings Laws, should we think him so? He
would be hanged for all that. In like manner God has published his Word to the
World, and whether Men will take notice of the Truths of it or no, they only
lie dormant for a while, but he will judge and condemn by it; and their
ignorance will not excuse, but aggravate their Guilt, because it was malicious
and wilful. They might have known in this their Day the things which belong to
their Peace, but when they are hid from their Eyes, they will be plagued that
they did not know them, and what they now account a Privilege will be one
degree more of their Torment.

Let others have a Care how they become the Authors of Reproach and
Persecution, which begins by the steps of Malice and Ill Will. Our Lord himself
laid open the unreasonableness thereof, for having before showed why they
should not, he s^i^h, Yet they both hated me and my Father, but this comes to
pass that the word might be fulfilled, which was written in their Law, they
hated me without a Cause, John 15. 25. He told his Disciples that they also
would be hated, and so it has appeared of his true Followers in all Ages ever
since.

But why should thou Labor so much in this Point? Seeing those who are
Hated, Slandered, and Pers^cuted, are Par^ak^rs of the Blessing, and obtain a
Reward for it; and consequently it is better for them to be so entreated.

This is a right Julian Scoff; yet we have our Savior for an Example in
vindicating himself, and the ^oly Ap^stles maintaining their Innocence, and
showing the u^reasonable^ess of their Adversaries rage against them. However
God is pleased to ^urn the Sufferings of his Servants into good, recompense
them with Comfort here, and Glory hereafter, yet they are to be put in mind,
not presently to suffer without using all law^ul means for their own
Preservation. God is to be glorified in their good Confessions, they are to
acquaint the wicked World of their iniquity, and unreasonableness in doing so
against them, and to take off from all manner of false Accusation, that the
generality of Men may be thoroughly convinced, that these do not suffer as evil
doers. And if after all this they suffer, it is according to the Will of God
(for holding fast to his Ways and Truth, and so as he would have them behave
themselves) They may commit the keeping of their Souls to him in well-doing, as
unto a faithful Creator. Neither are those who inflict it to be excused, for
their intentions are Malice and Evil, they did as much mischief as they could,
they did kill the Body, and would have killed the Soul if that were in their
Power. Those who be^eaved of Life, would hinder them of the Crown of Glory if
they could, and so that is given, the utmost thanks are due only to our most
Wise and bountiful Lord, and not in the least to horrid Miscreants. Such
Considerations may be of use to prevent their own wickedness, to hinder that
Misery which will come upon all those, who hereafter shall presume to do thus
ungodly; that they may fear and refrain.

What is prejudicial to the Happiness of mankind, is to be taken notice of,
that it may be avoided; this has been showed to spring from that mingled Seed
of Malice and Envy, and so it aptly f^ll in our way. The Heart is the principle
of Action; for the hands execute that which the Man thinks fit to be done, and
therefore it is necessary to prevent evil and irregular Actings to look unto
the first Rise and rectify that. If those destructive and poisonous Seeds had
never been sown, or picked out, or the growth of them hindered, then all this
mischief had not been. If we could take away all Malice, evil Surmisings, and
Envy, there would be no Persecution in the World; for though it may See Isa.
26. 11.
also arise from blind and sinful Zeal, yet where this is, those things are
also intermingled against their Persons. If there was Love and common Humanity,
they would search and have the Cause known; but when they either hate or grudge
to gratify these wicked Humors, they may think they do God Service. When they
have private Peak of their own, they will play the Hypocrites, pretend to be
like God, and be clad with zeal as a Cloak to hide that, not considering the
All-seeing Eye: Ambition and Covetousness may have some hand, but Hatred,
Malice, and Envy do still creep in among them.

It is the very constitution of the Prince of the Power of the A^^; the Spirit
which works in the Children of Disobedience. It Is that which sets him walking
about seeking whom he may devour, which he privily conveys into the hearts of
Men, and works mightily to resist the servants of God, and for advancing his
Kingdom of Darkness. Pride and Envy are the great setters of it up; the first
is the Capital sin, the other does truckle under it. Though it seems sneaking
and low, yet it is founded on the Proud aspiring Humor of Man: Every one has
too good an Opinion of himself, and thinks he deserves as well, yea, better
then others; and therefore if they are above him in other advantages, he is
discontented with himself and secretly envies them. Why should they be in a
better condition then himself? What reason is it they should be more Happy? Are
their Merits so transcending his own, or his Provocations more then theirs? And
thence he begins to murmur at the good Man of the House* That God whose Wise
Providence governs the World. But hear what he says, Is it not Lawful for me
to do what I will with mine own? Is thine Eye evil because I am Good? Mat. 20.
15. Why should he be quarrelling and repining at the Gifts of God, who is
Sovereign, and obliged to none, but disperses to his Creatures according to his
own good Pleasure? We cannot comprehend the reason of his doings, but he has
said to whom he has given much, of them he will require more; at last it will
appear that God is no respecter of Persons, and he gave to all sufficient means
to work out their own Salvation. We may judge that there must be inequality to
make Order and Government, there must be strings of a different size toward
Harmony and Music. If one Star is greater then another, yet the less is as
full of light according to its Proportion. Zacheus who was little of Statute,
was as much a Man as the Giants of Old: We think it hard when we look with the
Carnal Eye on the mere outside, but how know we that God therefore purposely
ordered it to be differently with Men for a greater Exhortation to lay hold of
the Hope set before us? We cannot endure another should be more happy then our
selves, Why then should not we endeavor to be Happy likewise? And in the mean
while take away these unpleasant thoughts, rise up and be doing: Cease from
Anger, and forsake Wrath, fret not thy self in any wise to do Evil, Psalm. 37.
8. There is but one true Happiness set before all the Sons of Men, of which
every one may be partaker: That is Heaven and the way to it. If others either
not come in, or straggle out to gather a few ^ading delights, do you keep close
in, and you will be more Happy even now, and also at the end then they.

It is thought by some that all have an equal share and degree of Wordly
Happiness; those who have greatest enjoyments, have allaies answerable to them,
and who have a less quantity of outward Blessings, have less of tormenting
desires and more contentment; there are Divertisements to all sorts of People,
the meanest rub out their time, all on as those of more exalted condition. Upon
a strict and through enquiry, allowing for the necessaries and some few
recreations of life, whatever is more, is so little that it does not deserve
any strife or contention. Every Night shuts up not only the delights of the
Day, but of a Man's whole life past, and in respect of that there is no
difference of Happiness or Misery: And there is so little in them, that it is
the same thing whether Pleasures be had or not, they are not worthy to be
sought after for the future. If we reflect upon things according to common
Observation and Experience, there is no room left for Envy, for that is
remedied by having a true estimate of the Nature of things. But if we should go
into the Sa^ctuary and consider the end of those Men, who turn their
Employments into the pleasures of Sin for a Season; Who disobey God and draw
his displeasure upon them, losing the recompense of reward for that which
satisfies not, and come to the place of Torment for those Delights which did
perish whilst the^ were had; Can any one envy the Glory of such? Good Men have
been offended at the prosperity of the Wicked, we hear frequently thereof in
the Old Testament, but not so much in the New. Those who had chiefly Temporal
Promises to Encourage them to Obedience, might well startle when the
Disobedient also received the same in effect. Verily I have cleansed my heart
in vain, Psalm. 73. 13. T^ere was not then a clear revelation of a judgment to
come, and the succeeding Eternity, which is to make a vast difference between
the Righteous and the Wicked: This would have instantly satisfied all their
doubts. But now Christians who are assured of all this, have no reason to let
their thoughts be disturbed this way; Yet, Do ye think the Scripture says in
vain, the Spirit that dw^ll^th in us lusts to Envy, Jam. 4. 5. The difference
between sins of Regenerate and Unregenerate is, The first have little motions
and tendencies toward them which are crushed and kept short; but the others
suffer them to break fo^th into open act. And so there are in sincere good
People some little inclinations to Envy. They are apt to be grieved that those
who provoke God, should flourish and seem outwardly in better plight then
themselves. There is a carnal intermixture, something for themselves when they
cry out, How long will thou suffer them to do in this wi^e? Such thoughts are
evil, perhaps God gives them their portion in this life; However, we are to let
him alone with the ways of his providence, for he (and not we poor Wretches)
knows what he has to do. How he deals with others, What is that to us? We
may rest fully satisfied with what the Wise Man says, Though a sinner do evil an
hundred times, and his days be prolonged, yet surely I know that it shall be
well with them that fear God, which fear before him, Eccles. 8. 12. God cannot
be unrighteous, and if he deals more bountifully with the wicked in this life
then with you, Certainly you will fare better then they in that which is to
come. Faith and Knowledge will cure all manner of Envy.

The Grace of God does not destroy our Affections, but only turn them from evil
upon that which is good. Anger and Wrath may be changed into Zeal for the Glory
of God, and Indignation at every thing that displeases him. There is a Godly
kind of Revenge, 2 Cor. 7. 11. to be acted upon our selves: All Hatred and
Malice may be confined to a constant Detestation and Abhorrence of sin in our
selves or others; with this caution, that nothing of private Spleen does come
in, hating the Wickedness in them, but not the Men. Do not I hate them, O Lord,
that hate thee, and am not I grieved with those that rise up against thee? I
hate them with perfect ha^red, I count them mine Enemies, Psalm. 139. 21. 22.
Says the Psal^ist. It must be only for this Reason, because they 2 Chronicles. 19.
2. Rev. 2. 2(...)
hate the Lord: And whosoever loves him, most necessarily be vexed with such
who without cause do have him that is most Good and Gracious; It is the utmost
perverseness that makes any to be malicious and stubborn Offenders. It is
observable what our Lord commands, Love your Enemies, bless them that cu^se
you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use
you and persecu^e you, Mat. 5. 44. But are we to do all this to those who carry
themselves after this manner against God himself? Let us do any thing to reform
them, pray for them, endeavor by kindness and all ways to persuade them off
from their evil ways. But if they continue froward and despisers, let no
fawning be used toward them; Let nothing be done to nourish them up in their
Rebellion. We are in no wise to bless them that Blaspheme the Holy One of
Israel, and curse by his Name, or to do good to them that hate him, no
otherwise then to draw off, not encourage them in their Transgression.

And lasty, Envy is to give place to an honest emulation (for those only which
have affi^it, to Hatred, Var^ance, Wra^h, and S^rife amongst which it is
ranked, Gal. 5. 21. are sinful and excluding. Every one would fain be as Happy
as another; Improve that principle to the utmost, but go only in that way God
has showed (for there is no other) and there try who can walk fastest. A
blessed contention when Christians strive who can most grow in Grace and in the
knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; Who can most abound in Good
Works, and live in all manner of Obedience. Let us consider one another to
provoke unto love and Good Works, Heb. 10. 24. A noble competition and well
pleasing unto God, when his Children strive together who shall lay up the best
Foundation against the time to come, who shall get most of his Love and Favor,
who shall give most Diligence to make his Calling and Election sure. In this
good Emulation none envies another, every one trys what he can do for his part,
if another does better, he is glad and glorifies God on his behalf. He is
quickened thereby to do more for himself, but in the Name of God let every one
seek* to serve him to the utmost; It is a common Salvation, and the more
earnestly others contend for it, there is room left still for thee. If others
glorify God by their light shining before men, you may make it up another way
in Humility and Thankfulness. It may be you have not such opportunity as he
has, if thou have and do not come upon him, it is thy own Omission, thou
may do more; To apply here Phil. 1. 17, 18, 19. If others serve God more then
thy self, thou do rejoice, se^ing that God is served, yea, and thou will
rejoice, for thou know that this shall turn to thy Salvation through the
Prayer of your Brethren and the supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ.

Even those Passions which through Disobedience do cause misery to the Sons of
Men, may be Converted into Vessels of the Sanctuary, help them now their daily
Ministration, and tend to their Reward hereafter.

CHAP. XI.
OF FEAR.

FOrasmuch as Fear is implanted in all Men, and has relation to somewhat, the
subject of this ensuing Discourse will be, Whether it is better to stifle,
disregard, or to provide against that Fear? Not to Fear at all is impossible,
so not desirable by a prudent Man, for it serves to diverse good Ends and
purposes; but not to be afraid with any Amazement, 1 Pet. 3. 6. Not to be so
horribly afflicted with it as generally People are, is a thing which may be
attained; And if Religion shows us the only good and wise way, which is more
safe then any other, herein it tends very much to the Happiness of Mankind. We
are all poor imperfect Creatures, Men and not Gods; yet of such a strange
aspiring Temper, that we are apt to forget what we are: So it is necessary as
to us all for the Lord to put us in fear that we may know our selves to be but
Men, Psalm. 9. 20. When we are lifted up, this depresseth us low again; we are
swollen with Pride, but contracted with Fear. That is Big and Stately, this
shrinks into its due Posture; That struts and thinks it shall never be moved,
this reminds of the Truth that he is subject to injury and falling. What a
Monstrous thing would Man be, if there was nothing to allay the proud Humor?
Whither would he be carried, when every little thing does puff him up as it
does a Bubble, if there was not to pull down? A small conceit of Happiness
transports him beyond himself, so it is requisite a sense of that Misery within
him, and he is further liable unto, should humble and reduce him into right
Frame. That he should not be always cheated and exalted with a Lie, but be
truly informed of his own State and Condition. Let him not imagine he is come
only to Swagger here, or think himself the chiefest in the Creation; Our Lips
are our own, who is Lord over us? Psalm. 12. 4. For assuredly there is One
greater then he: Who made him, and gave himself power thus to Domineer, must be
more great: And it is he who is infinitely above us, and him we ought to Fear.
As he made, so he can dash in pieces. He has fashioned us subject to Frailty
and Consumption within, to Hurt and Casualty without. He does good, so likewise
he can Punish: He is the great Lawgiver who is able to save and destroy.
Indeed the sense thereof is the cause of all the Fear in the World, tho Men
would fain stifle the Apprehension of God, which he has ordered to be conveyed
unto them by their own Fears; yet they will not acknowledge him, whom they do
Fear. What malicious stubbornness is this? What absurd folly? Besides natural
awe and reverence, Romans 1.
they do dread him by reason of Transgression, and they will sin yet more by
not owning him. They will not speak out what they can hardly conceal; They
would shut him out of their mind who is in every part, and visible in all the
World besides. All the faculties of the Soul do discover him, the inclination
of the understanding to know him, the desire and will to enjoy him, and every
affection does somewhat manifest him.

The Lord Reigns, let the People tremble, Psalm. 99. 1. Some foolishly
disdaining to be kept under (who ignorantly would have been freed from what is
their greatest honor and good) have hence attempted at the very foundation;
but by so doing they only ^urt themselves, and provoke him yet more. God is
above, and has power over Men; they can neither make him nor themselves cease
to be, or preserve themselves from his Dominion. Neither let the Worldly Wise
Men think themselves secure, because they will drive the Sense and Fear of God
out from within them. But he remembers their despising and negligence of him:
They do only for a little time put off their Fears and Doubts, which will
return sadly upon themselves when past remedy. I also will choose their
delusions, and will bring their Fears upon them, because when I called none did
Answer, when. I Spoke they did not Hear, Isa. 66. 4. In this short and vain
life, Men may cast out of their hearts the Fear of God, and harden themselves
against him; but from the day of their Death, they will be forced to Fear him,
when Fear will do no good. Their Soul will leap out nothing but fright and
consternation, and their Tormenting Passions will be stretched out to the
utmost. In temporal evils the fear is often greater, but it is contrary as to
Eternal. Who knows the Power of thine Anger? Even according to thy Fear, so
is thy Wrath, Psalm. 90. 11.

And however some will not Fear the greater, yet they do the less. If they do
not choose the Fear of the Lord, they are afraid of every thing besides which
has the least Power to do hurt; let them pretend what they will, they do
secretly, but unwillingly dread him: And this is the reason of that universal
practice amongst the Men of this World, to hear or think as little of him as
may be, for they are uneasy and disturbed every time they hear him named,
unless by way of customary Oath and Provocation. Which is one reason that makes
the sin of rash Swearing and taking Gods Name in Vain so much in use upon
frivolous Matters and Idle Expressions, for hereby it is made so familiar and
common as takes off from that inward trembling they have at the least serious
thoughts of him. This is directly contrary to the third Commandment, which
seems to have been therefore given, that this Glorious and Fearful Name, THE
LORD THY GOD, Deuteronomy. 28. 58. should not be made vile and cheap, for that would
destroy the reverence we owe unto him; But this is a silly device of the
wicked, for thus they sin yet more, and by only stifling the sense they do not
take away, but increase the cause of their Fear; So it is likewise of their
talking of Religion in their Drunken Fits, which is laughed at for a merry
Fashion, but is Abominable and Provoking, and is because they cannot bear the
sober thoughts thereof. If one was to unravel the whole Mystery of Iniquity,
how much folly and contradiction would he find therein? But for all Men's doing
they will never be too strong for the Almighty, nor 1 Cor. 10. 22.
too cunning for the All-wise God. How much better had they submit and confess
unto God, Thou, even thou art to be feared, Psalm. 76. 7. Sanctify the Lord of
Hosts himself, and let him be your Fear, and let him be your Dread, and he
shall be for a Sanctuary, Isa. 8. 13, 14. They must necessarily, and also do
Fear somewhat, and on whom should it be placed, but who is most worthy thereof?
With God is terrible Majesty, touching the Almighty we cannot find him out, he
is excellent in Power and in Judgment, and in Plenty of Justice, he will not
afflict; Men do therefore fear him, Job 37. 22, 23, 24. Take God in both his
Natures, When he is Angry or Merciful, he is to be Feared: Our God is a
consuming Fire, Heb. 12. 29. And it is no disparagement for the stoutest heart
to run from that, yea, he does. And if some out of damned Pride may pretend to
slight this, thinking it cowardly to fear invisible powers; yet the time of
Trial will come upon themselves. And he that is courageous among the Mighty,
shall flee away naked in that day, says the Lord* Amos 2. 16. Zeph. 1. 14. His
Power and Indignation will command Fear from the greatest of his Enemies; so
his Majesty and Goodness do require Reverence and Godly Fear from all his
Servants. Who would not fear thee, O King of Nations? For to thee does it
appertain: Forasmuch as among all the Wise Men of the Nations, and in all their
Kingdoms there is none like unto thee, Jer. 10. 7.

Wherefore does the wicked contemn God? He has said in his heart, Thou will
not require it, Psalm. 10. 13. Another reason is before assigned, verse. 4, 5.
God is not in all his thoughts, thy judgments are far above out of his sight.
They pretend to despise whom either they not think of, or not know; or not
believe; for if they did, it is impossible to disregard him. A blind Man may
run to the side of a steep Rock, or brink of a River, and yet not be concerned
at it, for he sees not where he is: And when the fool says in his heart there
is no God, nor will admit the least serious thoughts of him, then he may say
within himself, Tush, God I care not for thee. He may bid defiance when he
perceives no danger; Things at a distance are not feared, and some are apt to
conclude, God is in Heaven, that he does not mind what is said or done here,
that he is slow to take Vengeance, and will be pacified again. Such are the
real Causes why Men are so bold to Transgress against him; Because sentence
against an evil work is not Executed speedily, therefore the hearts of the Sons
of Men are fully set in them to do evil, Eccles. 8. 11. They have naturally an
awful apprehension of God, and at first are fearful to offend him; but when
they see others provoke him and no harm happen unto them, yea, sometimes
Prosper, they take Heart by little and little to sin against him, especially if
they find no hurt upon themselves. The sensual blinded World judge Ezekiel. 12.
22, 23, 24.
very much by Events; and because they see no such dreadful Judgments poured
down upon Sinners, that all things happen alike to all, and continue as they
were from the beginning of the Creation, Men may do as they will: it is the
Preachers trade to cry out against Sin, but they are vain Words, for they come
to nothing: Whereas they speak of future Rewards and Punishments, and the time
of Decision is not yet come. In this may be seen a Wise ordering of Divine
Providence, that a Life of trial might be had, that we might walk by Faith, and
not by Sight. Men might discern, and comply with the Patience and
Long-suffering of God, and not despise it as now they do. However, they carry
themselves toward God, it is neither Courage nor Boldness; but proceeds from
the Principles of a corrupt, base and timorous Nature, as will be more
manifested an^: Or they do, they know not what. These People, Who upon through
scrutiny will be most convinced thereof, do object Fearfulness to Religion, and
that this does not take away, but cause it the more.

This is acknowledged, our excellent Religion does not absolutely take it away,
but the Pressures and Vexation thereof. It is necessary to prevent the Evils to
come, and therefore to be retained; but a truly Religious Fear is not slavish,
nor has torment. By Fear of God we acknowledge our Subjection unto him; and
this being mixed with Love makes Reverence, which the Soul is pleased should
have a constant abode over her. This makes the Man to walk humbly with his God,
and not dejectedly. Every one does startle or shrink a little; but to have a
trembling Heart, and to Fear day and night, Deuteronomy. 28. 65, 66. to be for the
most part tormented with it, is the Curse of the wicked, and not the righteous
Man's Portion. He fears nothing, but what is natural or reasonable to Fear.
Indeed Gods own People have committed single Acts of Sin, besides infirmity,
which he is pleased to chastise in them, that they should not be condemned with
the Worid, 1 Cor. 11. 32. So they may be sometimes in great Fear, as there are
Examples in Job, David and other Saints. We are not to judge by what happens at
some particular time, but the general Course of Life: And even this does show
that Fear is the constant follower of Sin and Guilt; take away this, and the
other will cease. All Fear is because of some evil which may happen: Now if it
were not for what Scripture makes known, no other evil would come upon Sinners,
but present and temporal inconveniences, which they now see, But they do not
Fear these at all: They know and can bear with Worldly evils; but further there
is a Sense that they have not done what they should, that they have offended
one Higher whom they were bound to obey, he is ready to inflict a Punishment,
which they are conscious that themselves do deserve, this makes them afraid.
This is matter of Fact as every ones Conscience can bear Witness to it; for
those secret and unknown Sins to the World, there is a dread of unseen things.
The Care to sti^^e and put away the Sense of this, does discover it to others,
though they endeavor to keep it never so close. And again, when Men live in
Holiness and Righteousness, they are without Fear.

Even those who do not seriously addict themselves to the Worship and Knowledge
of God, herein are found fearful: They cry Religion will make fearful, and
themselves are so, because they have not to do with it as much as they should:
They are afraid to embrace it wholly through wrong apprehensions and prejudices
the Devil has put into their Head, and yet they are afraid to let it alone.
They falsely think that will disquiet them, and they are certainly disquieted if
they neglect it. They are in a Strait, which puts them upon the outward
Profession, to satisfy their Fears and Doubts in this matter. The World runs
upon mistakes; for that Religion is their Duty, they are rightly instructed by
Fear, which is the beginning of Wisdom; but that this which is the only Remedy,
should bring them into the Bondage thereof, they are falsely informed by him,
who was a Liar from the beginning. His subtilty lies in this; for he suggests,
that if a little smattering of Religion is irksome and will make fearful, much
more will a great deal thereof; and therefore it is better to have but little
to do with it, to prevent further uneasiness. Whereas indeed a through
Compliance does bring sweetness and assurance: And to them only it is dreadful
who do enter, or go but half way. What they do therein, may pacify natural
Conscience; they may be soothed up with vain Hopes or Deceits, but they have no
delight in God and his Ordinances: They dare not thoroughly examine their
spiritual Condition, for then they would grow fearful, and hence look upon much
Religion as a terrible affrightning thing. So their business is to do just
enough as they think will save the Soul, but are careless and negligent as to
more. Those Men bring an evil Report upon the good Land, who go only to the
Borders, or half the way, and give occasion to Strangers to conclude it very
formidable; for these seem in the Eye of the World to be Religious, and
therefore it is judged of by them. Not as though the Word of God has taken
none effect, for they are not all Israel, which are of Israel, Romans 9. 6. The
Scripture in what it asserts, is nevertheless true, though People will not come
up to it. There is a difference between outward Professors, and who obey from
the Heart, Romans 6. 17. And again is to be discerned between them, who do with
the whole Heart, and who do not; Who comply with all the Counsel of God, and
who keep some of the Commandments and neglect others. Amongst all those
multitudes who in these days flock after Christ, hear him Preached, and go
under his Name, there are but few, who observe all things whatsoever he has
Commanded, Mat. 28. 20. such are his Friends, John 15. 14. and will find
acceptance with him. These are in Truth Religious, and Peace shall be upon
them; for they can apply the Promises to themselves, which will be made good to
them; for As sure as God is, he is true. These see themselves already acquitted
in that Word, by which all are to be judged at the last day. Her^in is our Love
made perfect, that we may have Boldness in the Day of Judgment, because as he
is, so are we in this World. There is no fear in Love, but perfect Love casts
out Fear: Because Fear has torment; he that fears is not made perfect in
Love, 1 John 4. 17, 18. When the Life of Jesus is manifested in us, and we love
God, then we expect nothing but good from him; we are certain of it because we
have his Word, wherein it is impossible for God to lie; so here must be strong
assurance.

They are safe as to the things eternal; and for temporal Evils they are well
provided from, Eccles 9. 1. Romans 8. 28. Psalm. 34. 4. Psalm. 46. 1, 2. Psalm. 56.
3. Now those and alike Promises may be applied to any particular Person, who is
obedient as the Saint was, to whom they were first made, See Romans 15. 4. Heb.
13. 6. None have reason to Fear when they know, Greater is he that is for us,
then those who are against us.

But of all Worldly Dangers that do beset the Sons of Men, the greatest are
from those of the same kind. A Man is worse then a Wolf to another; by Reason
of his mischievous Nature (otherwise he is Contemptible and of small Power) he
is exceeding dreadful to us. Yet the good Christian is secured against him by
the Promises of God. Will the Men of this World frown and look sternly upon
him? Be not afraid of their Faces, for I am with thee to deliver thee, says
the Lord, Jer. 1. 8. Do they threaten? The Lord is on my side, I will not fear
what Man can do unto me, Psalm. 118. 6. Do the greatness of Men terrify him? He
need not fear the Wrath of the King, seeing him who is invisible, Heb. 11. 17.
Do they endeavor to vex and torment him as much as they can? I, even I am ^e
that com^or^^th you. Who ar^ thou that ar^ afraid of a Man that shall die, and
of the Son of Man which shall be made as Grass? And forg^tt^st the Lord thy
Maker, that has s^r^^^^d forth the Heavens, and laid the Foundation of the
^arth? Isa. 51. 12. 13. God is sometimes pleased not to interpose in mediately,
but suffers the Blood of his Servants to be shed; yet still they ^ave no cause
to be afraid, for he will give strength that they may be able to bear, and
assuredly reward them plentifully in the other World, who have endured so much
for him in this. In all troubles which do ^ot tend thus far, his Grace is
sufficient and suitable to them. Are they despised by Men? Yet they are esteemed
by God, and have a Sense of that favor; and so would be of all good Men, if
they could alike discern their Sincerity and Uprightness. We are troubled on
every side, yet not distressed; We are perplexed, but not in despair;
Persecuted, but not for saken; cast down, but not d^s^^oyed, 2 Cor. 4. 8, 9.
All their Evils are outward and seem grievous to those, who judge according to
the Flesh, but themselves perceive that inward Rejoicing and Comfort, which
mo^e then abundantly make up for all. Whatever seeming hurt should come upon
them, God makes amends for it as to the present time; so they have no Reason to
fear, or be troubled before hand at the thoughts thereof: As long as they
continue in his obedience, and put their trust in God (for otherwise they are
none of his) they live contented with the present, and do not disquiet
themselves for what may be hereafter. They are only to look to the things that
certainly shall be, for they are revealed in his Word, and to provide
themselves accordingly: But it is not for them to know the other particular
Dispensations, which the Father has kept in his own Power. In general we may
think, Shall we receive good at the hands of God, and shall we not receive
evil? Job 2. 11. We know what has been, and what is just before us, and we are
told what shall be after this Life; but of the things that may come to pass
between this time and the day of our Death, We are assured nothing can befall
us without the Will of our Heavenly Father, and we are contented to submit
whatever it be. That these things are concealed, is one of the doings of the
All-wise God. For he remembers that we are Dust, Psalm. 103. 14. He considers
how impatient and fretful our Nature is. And if we did certainly foreknow what
might happen hereafter, we should torment our selves before our time. It would
take away the Relish of all mean Enjoyments, and bitterness would be the
Portion of every Cup, by Reason of that we must such a day Drink of. Take
therefore no thought for to morrow, for to morrow shall take thought for the
things of it self, sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof, Mat. 6. 34. All
endure Vexation in this place, but God is pleased to Comfort his People, and
show them a way that it may not be so grievous unto them as to others. Fears
and Cares have filled the Earth, and do fall upon the dwellings of the
righteous; but they are not so much afflicted under them as other Men. The
great Fear is over, and they have no constant dread.

He shall not be afraid of evil tidings: His Heart is fixed, trusting in the
Lord, Psalm. 112. 7. The wicked flee when no Man pursues, but the righteous are
as bold as a Lion. Prove. 28. 1. And the work of Righteousness shall be Peace,
and the effect of Righteousness, quietness and assurance for ever, Isa. 32. 17.
More Texts might be alleged, ^ut the great staggering and objection is in that
they are so seldom fulfilled in the Persons of Men. They may talk hereof in a
general way, and seem to apply to themselves; yet when it is come upon them,
they faint: We do not find any such effectual Remedy against Fears. It is
granted, that Religion does not unman us; it does not take away the Sense of
Affliction, nor root up that which is so fast implanted in our Nature, but does
cure the Grievousness of them. We are still in the Flesh, and nothing is
absolutely taken from us which is common to Men. And then the Faith of us all
is subject to doubts, from whence sometimes arise Fears in our minds, but yet
we do not Labor continually under them, we are not troubled in that measure as
others. We may through God triumph over the worst Evils, that nothing shall
oppress or cast us down. We trust we have a good Conscience, willing to live
honestly in all things, Heb. 13. 18. And though that may not utterly take away
all Fear, yet it does qualify, yea, and destroy the unpleasantness of Fear.
Some will be apt to look upon this as Proud and Vain boasting; but we owe it
only to Psalm. 66. 16.
the Goodness and Grace of God, and therefore it is thankfulness to speak
thereof. It is Duty to encourage others, that they may come and see how
Gracious the Lord is, Blessed is the Man that trusts in him, Psalm. 34. 2, 8.
Whosoever will perform the Condition upon which the Promises are, may attain
unto this: But for want hereof it is that the Word of God has so little effect
upon Men, either to allay their Fears, or Comfort them in their trouble. They
do assent that is good and true; but then is a secret Thought, it does not
belong to them, and therefore find no benefit. They do not love God with their
whole Heart, nor continue steadfast in his Covenant, and therefore cannot lay
hold of the Gracious part thereof. But those who are redeemed from all
iniquity, a peculiar people, Tit. 2. 14. come nigh to innocence (it must be
allowed for real infirmities) and so are free from Guilt and Fear; these do not
dread any Punishment in the World to come. Whether Men do comply with the Word
of God or not, that has provided an effectual Remedy for Fear; the more they
conform thereto, they are free from it; and again, when they turn aside, they
are subject unto it, so that it does either take away the Fears of M^n, or
wi^ely provide against them. Not by way of negligence or hardening, for these
make the frightfulness cease for a short time, but brings into the real Danger;
whereas an hearkening and ^ielding Prove. 1. 33.
unto the spiritual Wisdom, does also keep off the slavish dread, and moreover
sets safe and sure as to the very things themselves, Herein it conduces
exceeding much to the Happiness and sa^ety of mankind. This may be somewhat
more manifested by a view of the contrary; for let us look upon the Armor of
Sin and Disobedience, What Proof they are against the Evils that threaten us.
Consider its Devices to get out of the Danger.

Sin and Religion are contrary one to another, as a Rebel is to his rightful
Lord; the one would have the Laws of God observed, the other trangresses
against them: So upon first sight it may be discerned, which is most likely to
get the Favor or avoid the Displeasure of the Mighty God, who made and is
above us all. He has said, I will punish the World for their Evil, and the
wicked for their iniquity: And has made as severe Declarations from Heaven
against those who offend or despise him, as any Earthly Isa. 13. 11.
King does to those under him. He is true, as certain as he is God, so that he
will accomplish what he has spoken. And then the wicked and ungodly expose
themselves to a real Danger from his Wrath and Indignation. The fancied
security they have against this is to forget God; they conclude that as long as
they do not think of him, it is well enough. Something may be done according to
the Custom of the World, and so far they go to Church, and do some Religious
Duties. But after that they will have no more to do with God, he must not be in
their Feasts, Worldly business, nor Company, they neither think nor speak of
him, but he is out of mind. This Principle consists of Stubbornness and
Contempt; for they are not only resolved wilfully to break his Laws, but also
make him as it were an underling, as not to suffer the Sense of him to be in
their Heart and Mouth, but when please them; which is to thrust off his
Authority and Government, for that is over the Hearts of Men: from this manner
of evil doing, there comes to be in them a slavish Fear and Dread, that they
cannot endure the alone imagination, or to hear any thing of God, by way of
Truth and Seriousness. How uneasy and disturbed are they to hear him declared
faithfully in his Word? Horror and Doubt do possess them instantly. Who object
to Christians as Guilty of Cowardice in fearing that, themselves are
affrightened at the very Thought and Rumor of the same thing. It shall be a
Vexation only to understand the Report, Isa. 28. 19. They are more afraid of
hearing only the Words of God preached or spoken of, then others are at what is
signified by them. Now who have most of tormenting Fear, They who cannot endure
to hear God named in Praise and Instruction, or who can speak of him with
Gladness and Comfort? They who tremble to go into the Sanctuary, or those who
can boldly and reverently approach to the Throne of Grace? They who cannot bear
sound Doctrine, or those who contentedly hear the whole Will of God. They are
afraid to hear God speak unto them by Earthen Vessels, Men of the same Passions
and Fellow Creatures; but how astonished and cast down would they have been to
have heard him from Mount Sinah, and will be when they come to die, and after
that to Judgment. The boldest Workers of iniquity dare not go to hear those who
expound and apply the Word in Truth, but if to any they had rather sit under
those deceitful handlers; who most of all betray a Cause, and hence others take
Courage in their evil ways.

Even in the wicked there is an acknowledgment and persuasion that God is to be
Feared, and they could with they did likewise. But here observe the strangeness
of the Devils Work, how subtle his devices are, he drives them off through
their own Fear; there is a little harshness in Religion at first, and by fear
of this they are kept off. Fear is by reason of any supposed evil, and they
have had some little experience or imagine it is so in Religion, and therefore
stand off: The harshness is not in the thing it self, but the fault is wholly
in themselves their own contrary Nature and sinful Habits. The whole head is
sick, Isa. 1. 5. and therefore cannot Re^^ish what is Good, but it seems
bitter. Notwithstanding that they should be startled away, as it is a sign of
their Fearfulness of Spirit, so it is most unreasonable and foolish. To flee
from that which is frightful in your imagination, and your selves have made so
into a real Danger; to run from that God who would have you be saved, into the
P^ws of the roaring Lion, who walks about seeking whom he might devour, is a
Fear without knowledge. The striving to put out the Thoughts of what you do
Fear, is the certain way to bring your Fears upon you. It is only smothering
them for a little time, when they will Rise up worse and more tormenting. It is
the Sense of us all, that when we have off^nded God like our Fore-father, Genesis
3. 10. We are afraid and would hide ou^selves. Indeed if the Godhead were in no
wise appeasable, it would be natural and prudent to keep off our Punishment,
and al^o the Thought thereof as long as we could: But now seeing we have so
plain Revelation throughout his whole Word, what the Apostle says, 2 Cor 5.
1^, 19, 20. He is to be reconcil^d and he ca^^s upon all, Let the VVick^d
forsake his way, and the unrighteous Man his Thoughts: And let him ret^^n un^o
the Lord, and he will have M^rcy upon him, and ^o our God, for he will
abundantly Pardon, Isa. 55. 7. The guilty Sinner will be apt to imagine his
offense greater than can be forgiven. Himself Answers that in the Words
following, My Thoughts are not as your Thoughts. He speaks by another Prophet.
Thou have played the Harlot with many Lovers; yet return again to me, says the
Lord, Jer. 3. 1. Whatever any Man's past Sins have been, yet still he need not
Fear to come unto God through Jesus Christ, who came not to Call the Righteous,
but Sinners to Repentance.

These Doctrines are good and true* but trifled with and abused. What was
designed to give all People Comfort and Hope for amendment of Life, the wicked
make use of for Presumption and continuance in Sin; but they will find God is
not so easy as they would think or wish him. They must not dally with him, as
they dare not with their Superiors on Earth. Remember he is Almighty, so he is
the All-wise God; and will no more admit of those repeated Provocations, then
now Men of Authority and Wisdom, do with those who carry themselves
despitefully and disdainfull^ toward them. This slighting Temper is very
common among People, they say God is merciful, and though they sin against him
yet he will be pacified again, which is (as they make it) as if he was what I
am unwilling but to name. However these Proud Scornful Sinners laugh inwardly
at their own conceits but if they did consider thoroughly, trembling would arise
within them that it may be otherwise then they imagine, and so it will be.

But to pass by them, Come again to those who are less Wicked, who stand of in
some dread and reverence, who think they have so highly displeased God, that
they dare not approach to him to beg Pardon. Herein is some manners and
goodness, and such may be assured there is mercy with him sufficient to do away
their Transgressions, notwithstanding all their Multitude and Aggravation. Come
now and let us reason together, says the Lord, though your sins be as Scarlet,
they shall be as white as Snow; though they be Red like Crimson, they shall be
as Wool, Isa. 1. 18. Sinners need not be afraid to return unto him from his
Word or Nature; there is not^ing af^rightf^l in him to the VVil^^^g and
Obedi^nt, those beginning the good work, or who are perfecting the same.

There is one who s^cretly represents God and Religion to be very dismal, and
happy is he that has least to do with them. But they are false and lying
Words: There may be some difficulty at first in the act of Repentance and
Conversion; but when that is got over, the way is smooth and plain. But if it
were never so rugged (as it is no^) yet let those fearful Souls whom the Devil
holds Captive by this snare, consider: God has the upper hand in the World, He
has sent a Message to the Inhabitants of the Earth, commanding subjection from
them, He has given them a Law whi^^ if they do, they shall live by, otherwise
the^ shall die eternally: This present life is appointed for time of Trial.

Things thus standing, What safety does Satan provide for those he draws unto
Rebellion? surely none other then this, not to think of their Case and Danger.
A poor miserable shift by not seeing to run into it, whereas had thy seen they
had avoided it; Be ast^nished O Heavens, be confounded O Earth! If I might call
the Angels to come and behold the utmost folly of the Sons of Men. Were they so
as those who befool them, in the state of Devils irreversibly doomed to
Damnation, then in truth to put in mind of God and Eternity would be to Torment
them before their time; But seeing they have a day of Grace and Salvation, it
is both natural and reasonable to consider that they may make sure of it, and
to be told of the Wrath to come that they may flee from it; for it were
something if they could turn away the evil by not thinking thereon; but the
Gulf is fixed, the fire is prepared, and they cannot be removed or quenched
only by the carelessness of those who go the ready way to plunge themselves in.
They foolishly think to escape by this their design, not attending to what is
Written; The wicked is snared in the Work of his own hands. The Wicked shall
be turned into Hell, and all the Nations that forget God, Psalm. 9. 16, 17.
There is no safety for the negligent and careless World. If their heart was not
darkened or become altogether inconsiderate, they might reason thus with
themselves. Am I terrified with the uneasiness of Religion, and shall I to
avoid that for a little time bring upon my self Eternal Anguish of Mind? Are
the strivings of Gods Spirit irksome now for a Season? They are only so because
you will not comply with them, yet will you by resisting them draw on the
Spirits of Darkness to Torment for evermore? If that be so grievous which is
now for a short time, it will be much more so that shall last to all Eternity;
and therefore the less is to be submitted unto to avoid the greater. We count
him Childish and Foolish who will not take a bitter Pill to recover Health; And
it is ten thousand times more so in him who will not sorrow after a Godly sort,
2 Cor. 7. 9. To prevent the damnation of Hell. That is afraid to shed a few
Penitential Tears, to avoid Weeping and Gnashing of Teeth; To stand in awe of a
little thing, and run into a greater, is as if we should run from the shaking
of a leaf into a place of Dragons and Scorpions. Men conceive more hardship in
the ways of Godliness then really there is; Strangers are affrightened at that
which the acquainted find to be Pleasantness and Peace. All the uneasiness in
Religion is at first, or to those who will not conform wholly to it, which true
Courage and Resolution might go thoroughly with, and then that would wear off.
The Grace of God does very much assist those, who seek and work together with
it.

The two Principal hindrances are Fear and Enjoyment of Lust; they may be
comprehended under one, for there is a Fear of Misery in missing it, but the
frightning of trouble of Mind, and a little heaviness hinders from coming to
Repentance. That which was implanted in Man to bring him unto God, is so
transversed as to keep him off; such is only a foolish and more exceeding Fear:
And yet these would be thought to have least who indeed have most. The reason
why thy seem Fearless in the ^ight of the World, is because they make a show
not to care for God and Religion, insinuating they let that alone for Fearful
People. It is manifest what sets them a talking at this rate, their negligence
and st^pidity, Ignorance and unbelief, their inconsideration and hardness of
heart; their continued endeavors to stifle the sense of God, to be so narrowly
confined within themselves, that they look only upon themselves, not into the
World, or who made that and gave them Being. They grow up they know not how,
neither do they mind it: and then they look only to the present time, and what
is just before them. By such kind of ways they come to be Despisers and
umindful, but that it is not through want of Fear may be further illustrated by
their fear in reference to other things.

That keeps them in ungodliness and transgression, so it has a main influence
on the common actions of Life. This being contrary to their Proud Nature, they
endeavou^ to conceal and keep close as much as they can; in their words they
would make a show of the contrary, but truth will come forth: Fear (as has
been said) is by reason of any thing apprehended as evil. If they have had some
experience of it, the^ dread the same thing for the time to come; or if not,
they imagine it may be evil, and consequently are afraid to fall into it.
Indeed those lesser and ordinary evils of life being so common, it does not put
them into trembling and amazement, but they are concerned so far as to avoid
them. When they fly from the least evil and the shadow thereof, who cannot
endure the least Pain, Grief, or Discontent, and can only subject themselves to
dangers because they are unknown and future; this argues a timorous
disposition. Their resorting continually unto all Pleasures, proceeds from a
kind of Fear to lose them, and also of suffering Vexation: It Is not altogether
sweetness which invites (for constancy makes them satiating) but they are
sought after as a preventive of inward Sorrow they should otherwise labor
under. What makes Men thrust themselves into all Company? The delight whereof
ceases when continually had, but they are afraid to converse with themselves,
least their own thoughts should begin to accuse them. They will offend God who
is not seen, if thereby they may please their superiors; The lower sort are
the instruments of great Men's Oppression and Injustice: they accuse and inform
of one another to get the favor and avoid the displeasure of such a Rich and
mighty Neighbor; And again, he is afraid of those above, equal, or under him.
Even the greatest have inward tremblings, and are willing to content the
people: If they do not fear God, they do fear Men: and who make a pretense not
to regard them, yet they are horribly afraid of many things besides, as
Disgra^e, Pain, Sickness and the event thereof. So Fears do go round, and though
they do not fix on the right Object, yet on every thing besides that has the
least power to do hurt, and all is by reason of that. They fear the Work of his
hands, but do not fear the Maker of them all. And the only Reason of that is,
because they neither know nor see him, and he keeps silence: for would not
these very Isa. 57. 11.
Men who adore visible Greatness and tremble at every thing, do the like also
if they perceived the least Glimpse of Gods Glory, or had the least
Manifestation of his dreadful Majesty. They would then crouch and creep, as now
they lift up and exalt themselves. An Examp^^ we have in Nebuchadnezar, Dan. 3.
Verse 15, 19, 24, 27. Upon the least showing himself ^orth, the mighty Ones do
submit presently. But if he did so always, or for the most part, there could be
^o Trial of free obedience. It would be no thanks for them to fear the Lord,
for they could not help it. And they might Fear him as Slaves and Captives, not
as Saints and Children; They might stand in awe of, and yet not obey him. Those
who commit so many Sins to avoid little temporal Inconveniences, it is because
they are afraid of them: And they venture upon the other, because as yet they
see no harm happen, but did they behold that Furnace of Fire which shall be to
the Workers of iniquity, these same Persons would be as much afraid of that,
as now they are of the Temptation which leads them over to it. Who are now
fearful of every Evil, would be the same as to those of the other World, had
they but such a sight thereof as departed Souls have. The Wicked and Profane
would presently become as Religious as the most strict and rigid Fellow is now
in the Worlds Opinion, and still no thanks to them; for what is it in any that
arises out of Bed and Shifts for himself in a Night Fire? There would be no
Faith nor Love, nor any thing worth the least Acceptance. And those things are
removed out of sight for exercise of them all.

There is that in the natural Man, which if he would turn and order aright,
might bring him to Heaven and Happiness. The Lord knows our Frame, Psalm. 103.
14. And has put those things in us all, that if we would comply with them, we
must necessarily lay hold of the good and avoid the evil set before us. That
Fear which now drives from every little thing, would much more oblige us to
make haste to escape from the stormy Wind and Tempest, the Damnation of Hell.
It seems strange that though God has done so much for Mankind, who gives to
the worst such offers and assistances of his Grace that they might do otherwise
if they would, yet so many should perish; but none ever did or shall hereafter,
unless he both resists the Grace of God and does violence to his own
Inclination^ and Passions. Self-preservation and Fear which make up so much of
every Man would have kept him, if he had wisely considered where the greatest
dangers lay, for all of this short and vain life are not much to be valued. And
yet the affrightfulness of them would have stirred up a greater care against
those which are not seen, but revealed by that God who cannot lie to be much
more terrible then what we now see and endure.

It would be endless to trace out all wicked Men's Actions, for having run from
the way everlasting, they are gone into many Bypath and wand^ings, but
leaving these, we may at last bring them a^^ up to these two heads of Pride and
Fear, which might easily be altered into Hope of Eternal Life and Fear of the
Wrath to come; Then they would be converted and become Christians. However, at
present they esteem the Actions of those foolish and rid^culous, yet in this
they condemn themselves; for they act after the very same manner in reference
to the things of this life, as the others to that which is to come. We are all
Men still, and though our Actions d^ffer as Heaven from Earth, yet they all at
first spring from the same common Principles. Are the Men of this World willing
to be happy? So are we. Are they afraid to be Miserable? So are we. But then
they look only for the present time, and we do the same, taking in also that
which is to come. They mind the things of the Earth, we think of them as much
as they are worthy of, and have our conversation in Heaven.

All their devices perish in the using, their endeavors after Happiness lie in
present enjoyments which cease and come to nothing whilst they are had: their
preventives of misery are only stupefactions to make them unmindful of that for
a Moment, of which they are to be sensible for evermore. The time of Hardening,
and the day of Provocation passes away, and they haste to come into his power
against whom they have behaved themselves Rebelliously and Contemptuously. All
their safety consists in their hands in the days of their flesh, and that only
because God is pleased not to interpose, which he might if he would, but
ordinarily does not till toward the Conclusion of their space of wickedness.
There is but poor protection in it, we see the whole in this life: a little
Worldly prosperity and sensual Pleasure is all they must ever trust unto. And
this mixed with so many Fears, Disquiets and Miseries, that it is not worthy to
be accounted of; as also it flies so quick, and will stand in no stead. ^^e
days past are the same as if they had not been at all, the present slips
between their fingers, every minute some of the gratif^ings of the flesh are
lost, and the fewer remain behind. Which will be caught at, and pass away in
the same manner; then comes the end when they shall be bereaved of all, when
their merry life, as they called it, but did not find it so, just like a sleep
when one awaketh every now and then disturbedly; but when they have slept out
their sleep, they have found nothing that will avail them in the only time of
need.

We have looked upon the Fears of Men in the midst of life; Of the Fear of
Death.
We have seen how they behave themselves when they are lusty and strong; We
have heard their disdainful Talk and proud Boasting, which in some measure has
been detected of Hypocrisy and Falsehood. What are their Thoughts and Provision
against Death, either when it is afar off or it approaches nigh? Now it is
certain we do not (nor before) enter upon mere Words, but reality; for all the
living know they must die, and every one is sensibly frightened with the
apprehension thereof. Bildad styles it the King of Terrors, Job 18. 14. As such
it possesses the minds of all Men at first, this is not denied: And the other
also would be no controversy, unless contrary practice did make it doubtful,
Whether Wickedness or Obedience is the best preservation against the Fear and
Danger of Death. If it be made evident for the latter, the same conclusion
again follows that Religion tends necessarily to the Happiness and Safety of
Mankind.

In Truth, this point is most worthy of Observation and insisting upon; for
though we are so much taken up with present things, we snatch at all Ease and
Pleasure, and decline every little pain or Vexation; yet Worldly Happiness or
Misery is not much to be valued, seeing the best which happens here will never
make one truly Happy, nor the worst Miserable: It so soon passes away whatever
delights or disquiets. Nothing is so good here as to be truly desirable,
Nothing so bad but what can be endured: There is little difference whether we
have a Calm and Smooth Voyage, or are tossed to and fro with Tempests; but the
only thing to be minded and care taken for, is, where we set a shore on the
land of Eternity, for here we have no continuing City, Heb. 13. 14. One
Generation comes and another goes, Those that were before us, are gone, we
living drop away, now one and then another, the people which shall ^e born,
they shall die in^ike manner. This we know, though we do not so much consider
of as we should, we are all concerned in it though too many are unmindful. Wise
and Foolish comprehend all Mankind, so they may be distinguished and known by
this one thing, for nothing is so worthy of the concern and regard of a wise
Man as death is. It is prudence to keep off and provide against all evils, and
if the World calls those wise who are so busied about Toys and Trifles, about
the attainment of every little good and avoiding of every little evil, much
more is he who does the same as to the greater. If every one is diligently
employed how it fares with him now, so does an understanding Man look about
what shall become of him after this vain, short and uncertain life is ended.

In this great matter there are two designs in the World: the one is to drive
out the thoughts of Death as much as they can, to be unmindful of their dying
day that it is grown into a Proverb, till it is upon them, and so they go away
when their time comes. The second is of them who both pray, and also put in
practice So teach us to number our Days that we may apply our hearts to Wisdom,
Psalm. 90. 12. Which of the twain is most wise and happy in their way, may be a
little cleared.

The reason of the first manner of doing is because the thoughts of Death are
Melancholy and Uncomfortable, so they think they do well to be rid thereof.
Amidst their jovialties sometimes a word or accident puts them in mind they
shall die, which raises an inward damp. I know there are many sayings and
sentences concerning Death in a Ludicrous and Ignorant way; But this talk does
likewise proceed from the same reason as one is of vai^ Swearing, by commonness
of Speech to take off the dread, bu^ still they ^ea^ it may be otherwise. They
have not so much courage as ^he Epicures of Old, who would have a Skull or
Sceleton brought up to their Feast, and Carouzings to make them improve their
enjoyments to the utmost. Now there has so much light and revelation came into
the World that the most jolly persons cannot do this to increase their Mirth.
They can run with a certain violence toward Death, hear a witty Expression, if
it comes out of the Mouth of U^believers, but to ^it down and deliberate, to
examine the evidence of things not s^en, they are afraid to do that, but yet
must be let into them: There are some in these days who will speak out in a
Bravery, as if they wished the time of Decision would come, they do not care
how soon they are satisfied, whether things are so as declared from the
Pulpi^s. They would be no longer held in doubt or uncertainty, Whether there be
a life after this, not much unlike those in the P^ophets time, Isa. 5. 19.
Amos. 5. 18. It is all but proud Discou^se; for would they have it experienced
in their own Persons? They do not care for that, however they shall in due
time. Or would they have one rise from the dead and declare it unto them? Why
the Son of God who came down from Heaven out of the Bosom of the Father, and
known his counsel, has declared as much: and there shall be no other sign
given. If things were made a little more plain and revealed then they are
already, there could not be the least doubtfulness, for every one must assent
where is no possibility of denial, and then there would be no Trial of Faith or
good Life, there would be no discerning what manner of persons these are, who
speak arrogantly against the wi^e Counsels and determinations of God. But since
God is pleased to hold his Tongue and is gone afar off, the words of some are
Saucy, and their actions Contemptuous against him; yet these very Men dare not
commune with their own heart after this manner: out of Pride and affectation of
Wit they will thus talk in Company, and also they think themselves more secure
and exempt from inward Horror when amongst their Companions in sin.

Others oppressed with affliction or Weariness of Life or now and then in a
sullen Fit may pretend to set light of Death; but there is no real Comfort for
the wicked against it, they are not absolutely freed from the Fears thereof.
Some will acknowledge as much, but then they say it is natural, and every sort
of Creature does the same. This is true, for Self-Preservation runs through all
that has Life and Motion, and the same is in Man also, he has the like things
pertaining to Life, the same natural Inclinations and Aversations which the
sensitive kind ^ath. All Men of both sorts good and bad, He that Sacrifices,
and he that Sacrifices not, are willing to continue, and they abhor
Dissolution. As their Flesh is common so are they Partakers of the same things,
Thus far they are equal: but then comes the difference, for there are Fears and
Hopes which point beyond all this amounts unto. The Beasts know nothing what
shall become of them, and fear to die; now if a Man were to die as a Beast
dies, he would know the worst of what would happen unto him, to turn into
Corruption, and be i^sensible of all things. Indeed there might be a trembling
and surprizal at this, yet this alone would never cause such strange Terrors
and Amazement as are in wicked Men, neither would there be such joy^ul hope and
expectation in the righteous. If there was an end, and no more, it would be all
one as before we were born, and we cannot apprehend any thing extremely
dreadful in that. Many would be contented that they might for all Eternity thus
remain in silence, and really wish they had never seen Light. But this is not
all, The bare lying in the Grave is the least of the fear of Sinners. The Body
turns into Earth, but the Spirit returns unto God that gave it, and to find him
angry, It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God, Heb. 10.
31. None but he, or the Executioners of his wrath are dreaded. But the upright
Man can see through Death, and behold Life. He looks even through the Land of
Darkness, and Light rises up unto him. The wicked does not fear the natural
Effects Death more then another. If he thinks or is told any thing of God or
Judgment to come, he is troubled above measure: The Darkness of the ^ower parts
of the Earth is not so affrightful unto him, as the Horrors of utter Darkness:
He had rather his Body were rotting in the Dust, for it is there without Sense,
as be painful or languishing in the Bed, but the Co^sternation of his Soul
flying out he knows not where, makes him desire to continue in that miserable
Condition. It is not Corruption he is so much afraid of, as that his Body
should rise up again at the last day; if he might have his Will it should
continue for ever where it was. The Miseries and Tiresomness of Life could make
him contented to sleep for ever more, but then some Glimpses of a restless
eternal State makes him wish to stay here. These things and more of the like
sad Nature, the considering Sinner finds to be true, both in the Course of his
Life, and more especially toward the Close thereof; he fears Death with
another kind of dread then what is natural, or other Creatures of the
samelikeness, (but not of the same wickedness) do.

Here again it may be surmised, that he is frightened with Tales and Stories as
Children that go in the dark. Whence do they come? Is the Scripture a cunningly
devised Fable? 2 Pet. 1. 16. Are all Children? Are all Fools? How comes it to
pass that the Wisest, yea, and those who set themselves not to believe these
things are still terrified by them? Surely there is Truth and themselves
(though they never so much endeavor) cannot shake it off. They will hastily
Prate (for they cannot speak soberly and say so) that all Revelation is
Fiction; but their own Fears give them the Lie, for they most of all Fear the
dreadful part thereof. The Threatenings are only to the ungodly and disobedient,
which any one may cease to be, and so avoid them.

But instead thereof Men betake themselves to the old general Policy of not
thinking beforehand. What Senselessness is this? There being a certain and
future evil to run into it, because they will not foresee and avoid it. The
foolish and opposite Actings of Men are a Confirmation of Faith, for hereby the
Scripture is found true, particularly what is written, Rev. 12. 9. Is Death
evil? It is only so to evil Men, which any one may refrain to be. Is Death
evil? Why it will remain so if you do not think of it; and if it be so sad,
that you cannot think thereof, to endure it will be worse, there is a way
showed to take off the sadness from your present Thoughts, and the real Danger
that follows. What can be more unreasonable then not to endeavor to avoid
that, which every one may and is called upon to do. Cast away from you all your
Transgressions, whereby ye have transgressed, and make you a new Heart and a
new Spirit: For why will ye* die O House of Israel? Ezekiel. 18 31.

The purpose of God is fully Ratified and Confirmed, whether Men believe or
not; Revelation and Reason do make it the more known and manifest unto us. Life
and immortality are brought to Light through the Gospel, 2 Timothy 1. 10. and also
there is an assured Testimony within us Witnessing the same: Both which are
sufficient to leave us without excuse, to clear Gods Justice, and aggravate our
own Folly and Condemnation, if we do not take notice and provide accordingly.
There have already came Messengers from God to make the Careless Ethiopians
afraid, Ezekiel. 30. 9. to make the negligent World look about themselves. Christ
has those which declare the same every Lord's Day. So there is none living in
this Country, but either has or might have heard of these things. And yet can
they show themselves unconcerned? When immortality and endless Life are
discoursed of, are they so stupid to care for none of these things? Who are so
busied with the little Affairs of this present time which shortly shall end,
and to be unmindful of that long Tract of Eternity which will quickly begin,
but never end. Whether you shall take up your everlasting Habitation in Heaven
or Hell, does as nearly concern you, as now what you shall eat or drink, how to
obtain such a Profit or such a Pleasure, and avoid a loss or inconvenience. If
you will not have to do with these things, have to do with nothing at all, for
nothing comes more near, or is more worthy of your serious regard. If you are
Wise you will take heed to your selves in Worldly Matters, for some m^schief
may otherwise fall upon you, which by Caution might have been prevented. And
suffer your selves to be forewarned, that only the Breath in your Nostrils
holds you as yet from being plunged into the greatest Evil, and deprived of the
greatest Good. You will be liable to this as long as you remain inconsiderate,
and that you cannot long neither, for you must die, that is certain as you now
live, and the time thereof will be as surely here as the present Day is, and
after that you will be mindful of the things we are speaking of, do what you
can. All negligence will instantly vanish in the other World. When you are once
shut under Hatches by Death, you will sufficiently lament for your former
Carelessness and Stupidity, and will be infinitely more vexed, that you did give
way to that with which you now please your selves. In the place of Darkness, it
will be no small Addition of Misery to remember that Light which you despised,
and was offered you, that you might no^ come there.

What can be said more to that universal destroyer of Souls, Stubbornness and
Negligence? There has been too much said already, for it has a present Answer
to all, which may be alleged to the contrary, I will not read, I will not mind
it; all that can be written may signify no more then blank Paper But yet
others may know, and themselves will find, that whatsoever is delivered by
necessary Consequence from Scripture will be fulfilled. Truth is Gods, and
bears his Image and Superscription. And who despises the one, will be as much
despised by him. If People will stamp the Kings Coin under foot, or are
wilfully resolved not to receive it, he will resent and punish the Affront. The
Lord and Governor of the World will not suffer without Punishment himself to
be dis-regarded by Earthworms, who are as nothing in Comparison of him: Judge
your selves, whether it is equal? When he acquaints Men of Heaven and
Happiness, showing them the way to it, that they should scorn the pleasant
Land, and give no Credence unto his Word: When he would set up his Kingdom in
the Hearts of Men; that they should thrust him out, and will not have to do
with him. Consider he is God, and you are but Men, what vast difference these
two import. Is it not meet to pay as much respect to him, as we do to our
Superiors on Earth? The King who rules over us, has the Subjection of the
outward Man, in things pertaining to the Welfare and Peace of his Kingdom, and
it is freely given him, though there is no other benefit, but to live for a
while safely under his Protection, and that we think (as it is indeed)
sufficient. The Government of God reaches further to the Thoughts and Intents
of the Heart, all one as Words and Actions, even the whole Man: But then it is
for his present Peace, and he will reward him with eternal Happiness hereafter,
which none of our Masters upon Earth would or can do. As much as God is greater
then Man, so it is just his Command should extend further; and yet if the
Monarchs of several Nations were so despised by their respective Subjects as
God is by us (to our shame be it spoken) but more especially by the ungodly
part of mankind; how would they take it? And God is pleased to declare that he
will deal so with us, as we do with one another. The abomination of iniquity is
set forth in Scripture by those who say unto God, Depart from us; for we desire
not the knowledge of thy ways, Job 21. 14. By not regarding his Work, and
despising his Word, Isa. 5. 12, 24. so Psalm. 50. 17. and such like, which
plainly declares, that he resents it all to the utmost. If we did not conceive
of Sin this way, by Men's behaving themselves Contemptuously and stubbornly
against an infinite and Glorious God, we should think hardly of his Justice in
preparing such exceeding Punishments, for what are called light offenses, but
as great as despising of him, who does so much excel the Stout Inhabitants of
the Earth. If there was but a Probability, Mal. 3. 13.
as we have full Evidence and Demonstration of his Reigning over us, yet we
should not carry our selves in a slighting manner toward him. I tremble to
think seriously of our demeanor and Arrogance toward him, whom we call the
Lord our God. Such usage might be befitting a Baal and Ashtaroth, Heathen idols
and the work of our own hands, but in no Wise to the Living Lord, The Great
King upon all the Earth, the HOLY, Psalm. 130. 3, 4.
WISE, LORD GOD ALMIGHTY. If thou O Lord should mark iniquities, O Lord, who
shall stand! Lord help our unbelief, help our ignorance, help our infirmities.
We are in a World of sensible things, which betray us too often to forget thee,
but we will not always do thus wickedly, or put thee off with Scorn and
Neglect; ^or a willing and continued Transgression after this manner there is
no excuse. When God sends a Message to take no notice of it, is the height of
impiety; I will judge you according to the Fruit of your do^ngs, O House of
Israel. Is your Faith at an uncertainty, and does that make you regardless?
Why, you are required to use the means, to attend unto the things that are
spoken, and weigh fully with your selves, whether indeed they are ^o. Before
the Gospel was written, Faith came by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God,
Romans 10. 17. So it does now, and also by reading, that Testimony, Miracles,
Arguments and Demonstrations which must prevail when admitted into sincere
Consideration, but this you will not do; Beware therefore least that come upon
you, which was spoken of in the Prophets, Behold ye Despisers, and Wonder, and
Perish, for I work a Work in your days, a Work which ye shall in no Wise
believe, though a Man declare i^ unto you, Acts 13. 40, 41. God will ^ot take
advantage over mankind, without first making known his Good Will and Pleasure,
what he requires of them: For we may be bold to say, it would not have been
consistent with Justice to punish Creatures for what they knew ^ot, or could
not know. Shall not the Judge of all the Earth do right, Gen 18. 25. The Case
of the Heathen World is showed, Romans 1. throughout, and Romans 2. 12, 14, 15.
Acts 15. 17. And though of old Revelation was more Exodus 19. 5.
peculiar to the Land of Judea, yet that was further a sign to all the Nations
of the World; but he will be pleased to deal with them most certainly according
to Equity and Right. But to us the Gospel is fully made known. It was necessary
God should discover himself to Man some way; where he did it by implanting
natural Principles of good and discerning of Evil within himself, he will judge
by them. But in these latter days, he has revealed his Word more fully and
universally, and ordered it to be written in a Book that it may be for the time
to come hereafter. Nothing in the whole World can be said to be the written
Will of God, besides the Scripture, wherein are Prophecies fulfilled. God
bearing them VVitness both with Signs and Wonders, and with diverse Miracles
and Gifts of the Holy Ghost according to his own Will, Heb. 2. 4. Who spoke
this Word that is come down to us, which testifies of Resurrection of the dead,
eternal Judgment, Heaven and Hell in as plain Words as possibly things can be
expressed.

How fain would People either cause the Holy One of Israel to cease from before
them, Isa. 30. 11. or themselves cease and come to nothing? That whilst they
were living they sinned against him, so when Dead be as nothing, and not the
Objects of Punishment. They would willingly exempt his Providence from them,
but not lay aside their Transgressions against him: and then would utterly
perish to avoid his Truth and Justice. What Tricks and Shifts are Men put unto,
to gain truce and safety for their Wickedness? But they may have a Truce for a
little while, but all their Devices cannot attain unto safety. They may take
the several kinds of Opium, Ignorance, Unbelief, Negligence, hardness of Heart,
perverse Disputings; but they will be all spent as soon as their Souls depart
from the Body. If it was for a thousand, or ten thousand years (all that would
have an end) it were something; but when only for seventy or eighty years,
their Crafts and sinful Provocations are the more foolish. To be soothed up a
little when it ends in Ruin, when this manner of doing does the more ascertain
Destruction to themselves, and make it worse, for they might otherwise have
prevented it, What can be more imprudent? Let them take as much Pleasure in the
mean while as the World affords, their whole Life is but running toward Death.
And therefore let them make speed, and hasten out of the Evil way; for God has
most certainly ordered a Life after this, either of eternal Happiness or
Misery. This is taught, this is affirmed constantly.

And though some may raise Questions and Scruples, How can these dry bones
live? Or the Soul exist separately? Yet they err, not knowing the Scriptures,
nor the power of God. He can do more then we conceive or imagine. We are not to
measure his Omnipotence by our weak understanding. He has said it shall be,
and we are to leave that to him, which himself will accomplish.

For the Lord God of Recompenses shall surely requite, Jer. 51. 56. He could
always do so in this Life if he pleased, but his general Decree is to spare Men
here; this is the space of Forbearance and Long-suffering, but afterward is
Punishment. This is the time of Trial, but hereafter is retribution. Why will
not Man know of this beforehand? Yea, the Stork in the Heaven knows her
appointed times, and the Turtle, and the Crane, and the Swallow, observe the
time of their coming, but my People know not the Judgment of the Lord, Jer. 8.
7. They will not thoroughly consider thereof. They may just call to mind, how
they shall be deprived of all things in this World, of that Pain and Sickness,
distortion of Countenance, pale Aspect that Death makes, they are forced to
think of these things, because they are visible; but the only useful part is
neglected as it is an inlet into Eternity. If there was no more in Death then
what we now see in its worst Circumstances, it were not worth while to concern
ones Self so much concerning it, but endure it when it comes, and there is an
end. If attended with some weeks Sickness or Pain, we suffer as much in the
Course of our Lives, and for the last struggling or gasp, that is seldom longer
then a single day, and then the most acu^e Pain do destroy the sensible parts,
and a dangerous Sickness is least felt: There is no need of making so much
Provision against it. But now we have assurance, that this current of time is
swallowed up in the Gulf of Eternity, and therefore it is worthy the business
of all our days, to take heed into what kind thereof it enters. Especially when
by the Grace and Power put into our hands, we may make it to end into which we
will. And though none covet Death, yet God has ordered, that if we will not
accept of his Goodness, we must be liable to the severity of his indignation.

Here Man would draw back and not run the hazard of either. He would be
immortal and not die, this is a fore-shewing of his future Condition, but it
cannot be here. Then he would live as long as he can: In Gods name let him
endeavor so, but withal go the way to make Death Comfortable. Is he afraid
when it approaches nigh? And will he not take away the cause of his Fea? Let
him repent and turn from every Evil way, and then it will do him no harm, come
when it will. In past Ages many were desi^ous to live some few years longer,
yet they are dead, and what does the short respite avail them, if not employed
to the foresaid use? Those who are so over careful of their Health, if not of
their Salvation also (as these things have been too often put asunder) do
notwithstanding go away at last: as to the first they were cumbred in vain (but
the other Labor would not have been so, 1 Cor. 15. 58.) for perhap^ they might
prevent Death a little time, but yet still it comes and will be more terrible,
if the only thing needful be not as much minded. Let the wicked World search
after all the Policies that can be had, do all things to pacify (for satisfy
they cannot) their minds, yet they have no Preservation against the Fear and
Danger of Death. There is more help to be had in Faith and Obedience then all
their Stratagems. However they Brave it out in time of Health and Vigor, yet
the wickedness of the wicked will come to an Numb. 32. 13, 14.
end. The Generations of them have been, and are in Rebellion, but the single
Persons fall away day by day. Now goes one and then another. An Evil, as only
Evil, behold is come, an end is come, it watches for thee, behold it is come,
The morning is come upon thee, O thou that dwell in the Land, the time is
come, the day of trouble is near, and not the sounding again of the Mountains,
Ezekiel. 7. 5, 6, 7. The time of last Sickness and Death has already came upon
many Millions of wicked Men, several at this instant lie struggling, and those
who now walk so disdainfully, and do not value any sort of Sin, in a short time
themselves will come to be in the same Condition. And then if they are the
least sensible or apprehensive, What Fear and Horror are they in? What dreadful
Thoughts do arise in their minds? They having not given Glory unto God, but on
the contrary dishonored him, must be horribly surprised about their Feet
stumbling upon the dark Mountains; as their Souls do look over into the other
World, they shrink back and would fain stay where they are: Now a flashing of
Thunder makes them startle, Hell opens a little as ready to receive them, and
they leap back; then a sad presage does discompose and trouble them. If they
would but at the last give Glory to God, discover the utmost they suffer to
warn Bystanders, to acknowledge Gods Justice, and their own Sinfulness, Who
knows how kind^y he may take it from them? see Jer. 3. 12, 13. But some as they
were disobedient in their life time, are sullen in their Death; or ashamed and
not willing to take discredit upon themselves, for Pride goes out last with the
body of sin. Otherwise they might own as much, as indeed some have done and it
was never the worse for them. And who have strove to conceal, yet sudden words
drop forth, and other signs manifest their sad Condition. All their sinful
Pleasures are vanished away like smoke, and leave this blackness behind; If
never so much has been done to please Men, that signifies nothing, for they
cannot support him, they are under the same Law and shall not be able to
deliver themselves. The World and all things therein are passed away, what he
has done as to them stands in no stead, that was the Enemy which beguiled, now
shrinks away, and leaves him in this fore^orn Condition. His body is to descend
into the Bars of the Pit, which till the Resurrection will be no more then a
Stone or any other lump of Clay under the Earth, but where the Soul shall be
received, is the Anguish and Vexation. If sin was a thing of naught, as we are
apt to Imagine, God who is good, and his Judgments are Righteous altogether,
would never inflict such ^^nishments for the same, as we see he does, when his
Wrath is kindled but a little, when he begins to execute. Sin receives its
aggravation from the Person of him against whom it is committed.

The end is come, it watches for thee, Ezekiel. 7. 6. It is strange that the
living will not take warning by what they see has happened to others. Have
thou known, or heard of any one that has died in his sins? All the pleasure of
them is gone, and the same thing with him as if it had not been at all as to
the delightful Nature. Was he in an Agony or Stupid at the last? Do not thou
think it would have been better for that same person, if he had lived in
Holiness and Righteousness instead of Sin and Iniquity? For the fancied
trouble, but the real delight of the former would have been past and gone, as
the clamorous and outward Pleasures, but the silent and inward Vexation of the
latter now is. Then he would have had something to trust unto, but now he has
not. If thou continuest in sin (which God forbid) just the same will be thy
Case: Whether thou mindest it or not, the day will come when thou shall be like
him. The Scripture testifies sufficiently unto all that they do not those
things, the end of which is Death, Romans 6. 21. To be wretched in this life and
afterward also is a sad thing. What can be done too much to prevent either,
but especially the last? The first may be somewhat eased, the latter may be
wholly taken away. And the only means to do it is by Submission and Obedience
unto Almighty God: That in this time which he has given to prove us, we may be
such as he would have us be. All reasonable Creatures are either obedient
Subjects or Enemies. He holds all our breath in for a space, he takes it away
and we die: The Wicked is driven away in his wickedness, but the Righteous has
hope in his Death, Prove. 14. 32.

Now that relies upon the promises of God, which are as sure The condition of
good Men in their Death.
as the Foundations of the Earth; He upholdeth all things by the word of his
power, Heb. 1. 3. And also he does support the Faith of his Servants by the
Word of his Truth. Innumerable are the places of Holy Scripture to give them
the most perfect assurance that it shall be well with them after Death, as Mat.
25. 34, 40, 46. John 8. 51. John 3. 16. John 6. 33. John 12. 26. John 14. 2, 3,
19. John 20. 17. Rev. 14. 13. Phil. 1. 21, 22. Col. 3. 4. 2 Cor. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4.
Romans 8. 1, 15, 16, 17. 2 Cor. 1. 20. Ephesians. 1. 13, 14. 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8. Romans 2. 7.
Tit. 1. 2. I might transcribe the whole Gospel, for it has relation to this
purpose to promote a conversation according to it whilst we live, and the
Happiness we shall be partakers of after we die; as sure as God has spoken to
us by his Son, all this shall be fulfilled. The Lord Christ must be a deceiver
if these things be not so, rather then which in the least to think I would say
in good earnest and upon deliberation, all Men are Liars. With him my Soul is
contented to embarque for the Land of Eternity upon this persuasion and
confidence, God must be good and true, He has made known his Will concerning
us Men by him, that is the true and Faithful Witness, who has done it
accordingly. God has appointed a day in the which he will Judge the World in
Righteousness by that Man whom he has ordained, whereof he has given
assurance unto all Men in that he has raised him from the Dead, Acts 17. 31.
By Christ's Resurrection the Apostle spends a whole Chapter, 1 Cor, 15. To prove
the necessity of ours. And in other places of Scripture are such convincing
Arguments, which are able to beget in us a lively Faith as is equal to
knowledge and demonstration in other matters, which we cannot so properly have
of any thing that is unseen and future, as this Article of Faith is.

Now my days are swifter then a Post, they flee away, they see no good, Job. 9.
25. It is evident they do roll over our heads, we have no true and lasting
Happiness, but what is in expectation of that to come; nothing we do signifies
but which tends to that. We cannot well think that God (who made this lower
part of the World for our use has p^t all things under our feet, Psalm. 8. 6.)
Whose works are manifold, and in Wisdom has made them all; Should make us to
serve to no purpose, that we should not have also our proper end; and we have
no end at all unless it is to glorify our Maker. We have no work to do, unless
it is that he has revealed for us here to do; Is it to shine in Pomp, or wear
fine Clothes? In all our Glory we are not arrayed as the Lilies of the Field:
Is it to show our care by provision before hand for Earthly things? The Ants
and Bees do the same, only we are found more unreasonable, they lay up only for
the Winter time, but we who know our selves Mortal, covet as if we were to
abide here for ever. Is it merely to sport and play? The Leviathan takes his
Pastime in the deep. Is it only to keep company? There are some sorts of Birds
and Beasts that continually flock and herd together, still this is not all. God
made Man for himself, has endued him with Powers which rise higher then any of
these ends; To know and serve him here in order to more fully praise and enjoy
him hereafter. He has provided other kind of things for us then we now see or
have; Every one that is not Brutish in his Imagination does find in himself
Expectations after that which this World cannot give; something that points out
beyond the compass of the Earth, and the Deep says, it is not in me. The good
and allwiseCreator will not cousen or beguile him with that which is not, will
not always feed him with bare longings or false hopes. No doubt, but if Man
will believe and have patience for a little while, he shall have his full
satisfaction.

These things are superfluous to Mention, bu^ there are many unbelievers in
these latter days, who by sayings and ca^e^ess actions cause the Faith of some
to stumble; Others have taken up Christianity as a thing of course and outward
custom of the World, they know nothing more in it. I have heard it Talked and
Whispered as if dead and gone, there is an end and no more. It was needful to
say somewhat that these might in due time have perfect knowledge of another
World before they are actually entered into it, for otherwise it is sad and
lamentable. And also that those who have some belief, and not bare profession,
might be under a more lively sense thereof, for this very much helps to
ordering the conversation aright. Nay, who have all faith and come to the
greatest degree that usually Men arrive unto, yet these have need still to seek
out further establishment and confirmation thereof. God having reserved that in
Heaven, and it being not so agreeable to a state of Trial, is pleased not to
give unto any of us absolute perfection in Spiritual Graces or natural
accomplishments. Who has received a faith which cannot be shaken, at least in
some of its Branches? It does lie upon us all to make it as sure as ever we can
by the means given that it may help in time of need. When we come near to Death
that is such a time, the greatest Temptation with whichSatan does at last
assail us, is commonly to unbelief, taking advantage over bodily weakness and
drooping. So that he who is wise will endeavor to lay up in store against that
time; and also it is necessary in the midst of life, then indeed it may be
accompanied with little doubts, but at last with desperate plangings. It is
requi^te to do all things to believe, yea, and steadfastly to believe.

No Man can be too well assured of the Truth of Scripture, and which is
included in them a life to come: Let him endeavor still to be more and more,
for then he may securely triumph over the last Enemy, Death, look it in the
face and yet not be dismayed: His business is, when he believes the Scriptures
to be most certainly true, to act accordingly, and then he is safe: When he can
apply those promises to himself in Truth, and without deceit, he is as sure as
i^possible for any to be on this side of Heaven. Says Christ, Whosoever
hears these sayings of mine and does them, I will liken him unto a wise Man
which built his House upon a Rock, and the rain descended, and the flood came,
and the Winds blew and beat upon that House, and it fell not, for it was
founded upon a Rock, Mat. 7. 24, 25. This he applied to his whole Sermon on the
Mount; Who does observe that, particularly what is said, Mat. 5. 19, 20, 29,
Mat. 7. 21. Shall have this commendation in the mean while, and shall at last
find it to be true to his endless comfort.

But there is a deceit amongst Christians, who think if they can apply one
single Beatitude to themselves, they are well enough. Indeed if they are so,
not because natural disposition is more inclined to such a Grace, but purely
out of obedience to Christ and no other reason, the blessing may be theirs. And
if they were so alone out of that Principle, the very same would oblige them to
other things also. He that is careful to approve his Obedience sincerely unto
God, will do it in all things he requires, as well as such a particular
instance. If he is acted by love and subjection unto him, he will do a thing at
his command contrary to natural inclination or fleshly interest. In all the Law
given us there is no exception left to the natural humors and desires of Men,
those are to be contradicted and brought into Obedience. If some are more prone
to this sin, and again some to another kind, their forbearance and practice of
the contrary duty will be more excellent and have a proportionable reward. All
Gods Precepts Jam. 2. 10, 11. 1 Cor. 12. 8.
are linked together, But as in the Gifts of God, a Man has the common measure
of all, yet one is more eminent for this: So in Obedience and Christian Graces
one is obliged to all, but then a single one shall shine forth more then the
re^t; and to such besides the common reward, a more especial blessing is
promised.

This is not a needless digression, for the Doctrine and Practice of Universal
Obedience is necessary against the Fear and Danger of Death, as we learn from
Ezekiel. 18. 31. 1 Cor. 15. 56. That gives title to all the promises: who complies
therewith is sure, and none besides. Righteousness delivers from Evil, Prove.
11. 4. From the Fear whilst he lives, and the Danger when it approaches ^igh.
The body will a little tremble at its dissolution, for that is natural; But
Christ came to deliver them, who through Fear of Death were all their life time
subject to bondage, Heb. 2. 15. And this be^^fit he has procured to his
Servants, for they believe the Scriptures to be true which are fulfilled in
them, so they are assured no evil can happen unto them after Death, and
therefore are not ^^^mented with the apprehensions of it. They do not (...) or
drive it out of mind, for there is much advantage from the Meditation thereof:
It is a great help to right and good actions; What will this signify and avail
when I come to die? It quickens to do whatever his hand finds to do with all
his might, for there is no Labor nor Work in the Grave. There is but one of
Trial, the days pass away, are accountable for, and do not return; this puts
upon doing every thing to the utmost to have the favor and acceptance of
Almighty God.

The World judging by themselves look upon those as Melancholy, who are so wise
to consider their latter end. But is there no difference between the Righteous
and Wicked? There is much in their manner of Conversation all the life long,
and so is at their death. There is difference in Prisoners between the innocent
and guilty as to their looking for the day of Assizes, and shall the last Judge
of the comfortable expectation of the other by his own Fears and Dread? Because
some are afraid to appear before Christ, are they also who have the certain
promise of Being with him? The one does not live like the other, they are
contrary in their Thoughts, Words and Actions before, their manner of
Dissolution, that vast and endless parting they must make one from another. It
is the greatest Happiness to the one, and misery to the other, and therefore it
may be well supposed to administer different thoughts to them.

It is impossible to obviate all the sayings of Men, for they are endless, and
most are so trivial that they do not deserve any answer, but yet may be judged
of by this one Observation, viz. There is nothing so good and true, but
something may be said against it; Nothing so evil and false, but something may
be said for it. But in every proposition, let it seem never so true or strange
at first sight, examine the Arguments of both sides without prejudice or
partiality; and then that side which has most reason and probability may
determine our assent. This does make for the honor and reality of Truth, that
the reasons whereby (inferring one thing from another) we come to know it, are
clear, deep and convincing. Truth must prevail where it can be manifested;
Which is of such a Divine and excellent Nature that the whole does not come
forth on a sudden, but has been struggling in the Womb some thousands of Years.
There is great opposition to it by the powers of Darkness and their Sophistry,
as may be seen; for the Objections against it are Dark, Perplex, Contradictory,
Slight and deceiving. It is reciprocally so with falsehood, though it has
passed current and been a long time received. This may be applied to
innumerable instances.

But to our purpose, The noble Martyrs of Old, did not decline Death in its
most terrible shape when they might glorify God and avoid sin: they were
called Melancholy, Sullen, Obstinate, Foolish, haters of Mankind and such
like. When they were in the very prime of Age, of excellent natural
disposition, of a vain conversation before and that changed by Christianity
into a more happy manner of living, when they were wise and understood what
they did as well as ever Men did, and did show themselves as sincere and
affectionate to one another. The Devil is never wanting to set himself against
the doings of God, to whisper into the hearts of Men to hinder their Faith and
returning unto him; but then they run away with that, and will not consider
what can be said on the other side; this is one cause of unbelief, the many
objections and prejudices they have against the truth. They are resolved to
take up therewith, and not hear from themselves or others a full satisfactory
answer; Is the least thing muttered against God? Their ears are open
immediately, it is forthwith unanswerable; But if spoken out for him, then like
the deaf Adder they stop their Ears, and refuse to hear the voice of the
Charmer, charm he never so wisely: They think it can never be wise that makes
for Religion, as all things are which make against it. Whilst they are willing,
Satan should hold them at this catch, it may be here applied, Because they
received not the love of the Truth that they might be saved, for this cause God
shall send them strong delusion, that they should believe a lie, that they all
might be damned who believed not the Truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness, 2 These. 2. 10, 11, 12. They might consider which was most
safe, as well as most reasonable to believe: In the likeliest probability when
such multitudes of Men, Women (more fearful by nature) and young Men, who may
rush upon Death in a heat of passion, or out of Gallantry and Honor, not with
a deliberate advised mind, When it was esteemed infamous and foolish by the
World, yet still to embrace it rather then sin against God and deny the Faith,
this must be the power of his Grace which did arm their mind against all Fear
of Death, both in its natural dreadfulness, and also heigthened by the malice
and cruelty of Men.

That was an extraordinary Case, but what is it to the Fear of Death now a days?

Very much, for though Men do not continue in the World by reason of Death, yet
that still continues. It reigned as an evil from Adam unto Christ: But now he
has taken away the sting and frightful nature from it. When he made his Soul
an offering for sin, and took upon him the person of the Wicked he drunk of the
Cup of Gods Wrath; Was there any such love that he by the Grace of God should
taste Death for every Man? Heb. 2. 9. Taking away that exceeding bitterness in
it, for all those who will comply with the ends of his death; Who can withstand
such goodness? The full Cup was taken off, it matters not if a drop or two is
left behind, that we may just relish how exceeding bitter it was to him. Behold
the Lamb of God, which takes away the sin of the World, John 1. 29. Even
Jesus which delivered us from the wrath to come, 1 These. 1. 10.

Says David of Old, Yea, though I walk through the valley of the Shadow of
Death, I will Fear no Evil, Psalm. 23. 4. He speaks a little doubtfully, as may
be observed by the Particle, ^ea, though, Heb. 12. 27.
He is apt to believe he should not, he hopes so: As one to whom Immortality,
Resurrection and Eternal Life was not clearly revealed, see Psalm. 6. 5. Psalm
88. 10. Isa 38 18. They lived under that dispensation which gendred Bondage;
but now we know what is written, Heb. 2. 14, 15. Rev. 14. 13. It is said from
henceforth, which has been accordingly fulfilled: Immediately after Christ had
suffered, how did the Saints grapple with Death? Notwithstanding that fury and
rage of his Enemies, we find not Stephen in the least surprised, nothing that
betrayed any Fear. He prays for his Murderers, and when he had said this, he
fell asleep, Acts 7. 60. Observe the phrase of the Holy Ghost, it was no more
trouble or concern to him, then an ordinary taking rest by night. Paul triumphs
over it in behalf of all Christians, 1 Cor. 15. 54, 55, 56. 2 Cor. 5. 4, 8. and
for himself declares, Phil. 1. 21, 22. Tertullian describing the Happiness of
Christians in his time, after he had reckoned up many parts thereof, brings up
as the most considerable of all, That they have no Fear of Death. He speaks
generally of all, not limiting it only to the Martyrs, Tert. de spect.
though indeed it did appear more in them. Our Fathers have told us what great
things God did in this Nation, in those who suffered for his Truth and the
Testimony of a good Conscience in the time of Queen Mary. The Promise is
certain and applicable to all, God is our refuge and strength, a very present
help in trouble, Psalm. 46. 1. Amongst all the Extremities which befall poor
Mortals, that seems the sharpest which denominates them such. The last Enemy is
Death, and all other Evils are the more feared, because they may bring on that.
So we may be bold to say, God is obliged by Promise to succor his Servants at
that time, and may humbly entreat him to make good his Word, which he does
accordingly, The continuance of his Spirit that it has been, now is, and ever
shall be, is plainly asserted, Hag. 2. 5. Isa 59. 21. John 14. 16. Whatever is
requisite now adays to turn the Hearts of the Fathers unto the Children, and
the disobedient to the Wisdom of the Just, to make ready a People prepared for
the Lord, Luke 1. 17. there is the same Reason it should, and it does still
abide among us, as our Forefathers. God will have a Church in the World to the
end of time, so all along his Promises do extend, and he does provide things
Convenient for the building up, Stablishment, and Comfort thereof. The Spirit
is called the Comforter, not that he does deliver from Evils, but support under
them. And it cannot be tho^ght, whose business is to this very end, that this
should not assist in the last of all. In the time of common Sickness and Death,
many good People go out of the World at this day with Peace, and as it were
rejoicing. Nay, when the Horror of Death approaches, we may see the show of a
Smile in their Countenance, how they do insult over this Enemy, for do its
worst it can do them no harm. It is not thus always, for several things may
stop the exerting forth of this Cheerfulness, yet what the Apostle says is
Peremptory and true, If any Man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of
his, Rom 8. 9. And that will yield some Comfort, it does shine in the Heart,
though it may be darkened and over clouded: I would in no wise discourage any
one, who has sincerity and the true Fear of God, who are willing to please him
in all things, though their beginnings may be imperfect, For who has despised
the day of small things? Zech. 4. 10. and yet are taken away, God will Judge
according to the real Intentions, for this is accepted if it would indeed come
forth into Act, as may be learned by comparing Heb. 11. 17. with Genesis 22. 10,
12. And so if they should not live to perfect the good Work: He who knows the
very secrets of the Heart, accepts of the Will for the Deed, and will deal with
them as he knows their Obedience would be if they should live longer; these may
be in doubt and uncertainty, yet go off safely. But there is a vast number of
Hypocrites and almost Christians, who hinder from discerning the Truth, for it
is more judged of by these Examples, then the written Word of God. Whereas they
do confirm it the more. There is a difference between seeming and reality,
those who make goodly appearances may be full of Rottenness within, and again
those who boast they keep all the Commandments, may yet want one thing which is
necessary to give them Title to Heaven. They live in some reserved Sin not
discovered to the World, or Om^ssion of Duty which makes them horribly afraid.
There is a way showed, that the Scriptures may be fulfilled in Men's Persons.
Let them do what is therein required, and the Promise of good things does
belong unto them: None can with just reason conceive the least unfaithfulness
in God, or Falsehood in his Word, if himself does not wholly conform to it.
Whether Men will or not, that remains the same: The Scripture cannot be broken,
John 10. 35. If it is not fulfilled by their ob^dience unto Happiness, it will
be notwithstanding in their wickedness, by acquainting them what they shall
experimentally find, Destruction and Misery are in their ways, and the way of
Peace they have not known, Romans 3 16, 17. As the Salvation of the righteous and
Condemnation of the wicked will at last tend to Gods Glory; so even at this
present time, they do set forth and manifest his Truth. If one finds no Comfort
or benefit by the Word, it is a sad Sign that it is taken from him, and he is
yet in his Sins. It is because he does not order his St^ps in Gods Word, but
some iniquity has Dominion over him, Psalm. 119. 133. for we must Sincerely
endeavonr the things we pray for.

Mark the perfect Man, and behold the upright, for the end of that Man is
Peace, Psalm. 37. 37. Not Stupidity or Senselessness, for he that has truly
served God in his Lifetime does not go away after that manner, God does not
cast him off in the time of Age, nor forsake him when his strength fails,
Psalm. 71. 9. So neither will he be unmindful of his God at that time. He can
pray servently, hear and think of him with the greatest quietness and Confort.
Concerning his Soul he has well grounded hope and assurance. But there will be
a little aukwardness in parting; The Spirit is willing, the Flesh is weak: This
will shrink to be dissolved, and when being united to the Soul, it considers of
seeing Corruption, to be covered with Dirt, and lie mouldring there, here is a
little trembling and unpleasantness. But give me leave to put you in mind (and
this is for the Comfort of good and bad, their Body being the same) not to be
troubled about this thing; for there is no such dreadfulness in it as we
imagine. The Soul only is the Man, and the Body is but a Lump of Clay; when
that is gone out, the other is no more to us, then now any common piece of
Earth or Stone. One that has a Leg or Arm cut off is not much concerned, what
becomes of that, if a Beast devour it, or burnt with Fire, or is buried under
ground, he indeed misses the use thereof, ^ut feels not whatever Alterations it
run through. It is the same as drops of Blood or Spittle fallen to the Earth,
he minds it not. Our own Corpse will be no more to us when dead, then that of
another to us whilst living. The Soul makes the difference, for though there be
several sorts of Complexion, Stature and such other Accidents, yet there is no
more between Bodies, then of one piece of Clay from another: I must shortly put
off this Tabernacle, 2 Pet. 1. 14. so 2 Cor. 5. 1. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. It is Leaving
of an House for a time, which we do not mind longer then we are in, let it fall
or sink, afterward we shall not feel that. The Soul is carried into Abraham's
Bosom, Luke 16. 22. and is not concerned for the Mantle 2 Kings 2. 13.
that fell from her, for it shall be put on again, and made Glorious according
to Phil. 3. 21.

But here Faith may begin to fail, If the Soul be immortal, of such
transcendent Excellency, and distinct substance from the Body; How comes it to
pass, that she Sickens, Droops, and seems to dye with the Body: Nay, our
dissolution does seem as a loosening of the Contexture of parts, when the
Spirits of Life shall cease, and are turned out of Order: The Wheels are
spoiled or taken away, and so the Motion is stopped: In the Death of every one
there is some natural and visible Cause, so it is doubtful, whether there is
such great Matter in it, as we are told of.

I desire the Reader in this and other places, not to conclude any thing
unanswerable, because here he does not see a clear Answer unto it; for if I
cannot, another may, and if he should not, still it is unjust, that the Truth
of Divine Revelation, should stand or fall by the weakness of a Man. Faith
relies upon that, and not upon Humane reasoning; however this may seem to make
more probable the things we believe, yet they cannot be made so very certain,
as to take off all manner of doubt: There is something left to exercise the
Faith of Gods Servants, for if it was evident with open Face and past Question,
What reward has it? Immortality is plainly declared in the Scriptures, whereon
the Promises of the Gospel are founded. We have the Testimony of God and his
Son Jesus Christ for it, and it is the Excellency of our Faith to cleave unto
that, notwithstanding all the objections of Flesh and Blood to the contrary. I
know whom! have believed, and he that made me at first out of nothing can raise
me again out of Dust and Ashes; he that breathed into me the breath of Life can
preserve it when it is gone forth; it is easy for the Spirit to return to him
that gave it. God works in a natural and ordinary way, as he first endued the
Body with Life and Motion, fashioning and uniting all its Parts, so he
qualifies it for such a long continuance. With the greatest Humility and
Reverence, by judging according to what is revealed, and that Reason himself
has been pleased to give, I conceive, That as in common Works the Artificer
does frame a Motion to last so long, It may be supposed, the Maker of all
things does the same as Man does, to whom he has given that knowledge. After
the Springs and Wheels are set a going, it will move for the determinate time
of it self, and will not cease unless by the hindrance of some Accident. In God
we live, and move, and have our being, Acts 17 28. It was he alone that gave
all this to us, and even now holds our Souls in Life. At last he does take away
our breath and we die, yet he does it always by some natural Cause. He might do
it by mere Substraction of our Breath, but when he is pleased to bring any to
an untimely end; he either sends Plague, S^ckness, Sword, Famine, or suffers to
fall under such a Casualty as are many Examples in Scripture. Men cry out still
upon second Causes, but yet they might look up unto him, who holds the first
link in his hand of this great Chain of Things, who says to this Disease, Go
and cut down such a Man, or else shake him. Who has the disposal and ordering
of every Accident, who can withdraw his Protection, and let such an Evil
destroy us. Seeing his days are determined, the number of his Months is with
thee, thou have appointed his bounds which he cannot pass, Job 14. 5. Even
Reason it self does manifest thus much, for a Candle always burning, if it be
not blown out or wasted sooner will last but such a time. The Vital Spirits
continue only so long, if no Accident or Distemper come between. And therefore
the Psalm. 55. 23.
rule is certain, none goes beyond, but many come short of their appointed
time; to prevent which every one is in Duty bound to use means and all good
Care. Life consists in the Union of the Soul and Body, they are so near and
interwoven, that whatsoever happens to the one, the other has a touch and
feeling thereof. So it is in time of Health, much more in Sickness; the one is
sensible of the Pain and Languishing of the other. But it can be in no wise
concluded, that because she Sympathises, therefore she does die with the Body.
The Spirit is the Light of the Body, it may waft up and down a little before
its Separation, but is not to be seen. Who knows the Spirit of Man that goes
upward? Eccles. 3. 21. And where the Wise Man says, Ver. 19. That which
befalls the Sons of Men, befalls Beasts, even one thing befalls them, as
one dies, so dies the other: He speaks according to common appearance, as one
that lived under the Old Testament which does not so clearly manifest
immortality as the Gospel does, Luke 16. 22, 23. Luke 23. 43. Phil. 1. 21, 23.
Heb. 9. 27. Rev. 6. 9. Besides are innumerable places to prove Resurrection,
eternal Judgment, and Life everlasting. Things are fixed, and not according to
Men's Fancies one way or another; those Decrees and Ordinances remain still the
same in Heaven. Of which we could know no more, unless they had been ^old unto
us by the Son of God, who came down from Heaven, and the Spirit from above,
then one now lying in the lowest Dungeon does know of what is done in this
World. And they do not vary, change or alter with our several apprehensions of
them, whether of assurance or doubt, no more then the Sun ceases from shining,
when only a Cloud comes between. Let the sick Person use continual
Ejaculations, Lord increase my Faith, And God will not leave him, But he shall
receive the end of his Faith, the Salvation of his Soul.

There cannot be too much Strength or Comfort laid up against this Day: it
should be the business of a Christians whole Life before, for it is the
entrance into an endless Life. It is the fulfilling and Manifestation of
whatever he has heard, Read or done in Truth pertaining to God and Religion.
And indeed it is worth while to do all things to go off safely. He will have
Peace in his Life, and strong Consolation in his Death. Let him observe all
parts of Duty to God, his Neighbor and himself throughout the Course of his
Days. Let him do what he can in Sincerity and Truth: Whosoever does these things
shall never be moved. He that has an Ear, let him hear what the Spirit says
unto the Churches: He that overcomes shall not be hurt of the second Death.
Rev. 2. 11. Being confident of this very thing, that he which has begun a good
Work in you, will perfect it until the day of Jesus Christ, P^^l. 1. 6. We may
be certain of using the means of perseverance, for God has put them into our
Power, and as long as we rightly use those means we shall infallibly persevere.
So that in the mean while we may be assured, and at last have true and
cercertain hopes of Resurrection unto eternal Life. And there cannot be such
Fright and Amazement concerning that which is to make the everlasting Decision,
either when it is far off, or near at hand. If any one has, let him search and
examine his Conscience impartially; either he does something which he ought not
to do, or he leaves something undone which he ought to do, this makes him
horribly afraid, and must be amended before he can be freed from the Danger,
which the Fear gives warning of.

A true Christian can contentedly look for the blessed Hope, even in the midst
of Life he can find Comfort and sweet in the thoughts of Death, as that which
will free from the disturbances of Flesh and Blood, the Molestations of an
unthankful, unbelieving, ignorant World, from the Miseries and Labors of Life,
and send him over unto eternal Rest and Rejoicing. To come to the Enjoyment of
our Lord Jesus Christ, to be admitted into Fellowship with Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, all the Good and Wise Men since the World
began, to be gathered unto his Fathers, to see his Godly Friends and
Acquaintance of the same Generation with himself just gone before, all this
must be a desirable thing. The dead may be supposed to be about five hundred to
one more then the living now are, those whom thou leavest behind shall in a
little time follow thee, and the People which shall be born shall die in like
manner, and shortly God will accomplish his whole Elect. None has advantage,
who goes before or after. And seeing the River must be gone over, it is small
difference who has a longer or shorter Passage, so we avoid the Rocks and
Dangers in the way. The pious Soul will be in a Strait willing to stay, and yet
have a mind to go; and there is some Irksomeness to leave the World, as now it
is to change the place where we have long dwelt: Our Nature is something made
up of Contraries, willing and yet unwilling; but if God does really send as we
know not his Pleasure until after the use of all prudent Remedies the Sickness
proves unto Death, Fear not to go, for he calls thee. Remember that Petition
thou have often made, Thy Kingdom come, and when it is, will thou then shrink
back? One end of Sickness is to make us the more willing to leave the World.
Whatever is sudden, does surprise for the time, but then it is soon over,
whereas that which comes on by Degrees and expected, is longer, but then more
easily born. Good Men have been divided in Opinion about this thing; those who
have been for a sudden departure, have rightly thought, the only Preparation is
by an holy Life, for the Gospel speaks of no other. It Commands to Watch, to
have our Loins girt, and our Lamps burning, and this is to be done in the midst
of Health, Life and Vigor. There is much Talk in the World about providing for
ones latter End, but unless to settle temporal Affairs from the example of
Hezekiah there is not so much said thereof throughout the whole Word of God. It
is the beginning of Error and Deceit, when People depart from that. It is Non
sense and Contradiction to the saying of our Savior, John. 9. 4. to put off
the working while it is day, till the night comes when no Man can Work. Who
purposely put off the working out their Salvation till that time, had best have
a great Care what they do, for besides the hazard of being taken away by sudden
Death, yet if they should have considerable time of Sickness, or Old decrepit
Age; they have no such Warrant of being accepted. Hear what God says, Mal. 1.
8. of offering the Blind, the Lame, the Sick for Sacrifice.

But if some are against Death by the ordinary way of Sickness, because that is
tiresome, and may be an occasion of murmuring Distrust, Unbelief, blasphemous
Speeches, which proceed from violent Distempers, yet we should not refuse to
suffer whatever God thinks fit to lay upon us. He knows our Condition, and will
not enter into Judgment for the mere Sin of the Disease, no more then he
imputes the Follies of Childhood. We are to receive for the things done in the
Body, 2 Cor. 5. 10. to be judged according to the general Tenor and Bent of
our Life. Neither will our most merciful God take advantage of any infirmity or
slip at the last. He will not suffer us for any Pains of Death to fall from
him. The Church prays so for more abundant security, and also to deliver from
sudden Death; O Lord thou know what is best for every one of us, Thy Will be
done. Whether this first coming of the Son of Man finds in the Field, or in the
Streets, in the lower parts of our House, or our Closet, or upon a Sickbed we
may go hence securely; though upon the last we may glorify God, show our Faith
and Sincerity, Comfort and exhort Bystanders, manifest to this unbelieving
Generation the truth and reality of Religion, that it can free from the Fear of
what has been called the most terrible of Terribles.

The Sayings of Philosophers and Wise Heathens will make a fine jingling and
noise, they will sound magnificently or delight somewhat whilst Reading; but
even then it may be observed, they do not afford sufficient Strength and
Comfort against it; but when it approaches nigh, none at all. Men may a little
please themselves with a Sentence or two whilst they live, but still it may be
otherwise, it does not satisfy; but when they come to die, all those brave
Words vanish and signify nothing. Nay, all the Discourses of mere Reason will
not avail as to this thing, for let there be never so much ingenuity or show of
arguing, yet there is a Possibility of mistake, and they can never reach to any
assurance. To Examine that admired Saying of Seneca, Death is either an end or
a passage; if the first, never Fear to cease to be, for it is the same as not
to have begun; neither to pass, because I shall never be so narrowly confined,
Sen. Ep 65. As for the first if it is so, he argues rightly, but not all the
Wise Men of past Ages or the present, can give certainty that it is so; Neither
their study and searching, nor the ingenuity of some or Carelessness of others
at this day can thoroughly satifie the mind of any considering Man. And so they
could not secure the World from Danger, for let them say and do what they will
it may be otherwise, which is as sure as the Scriptures are true: But then it
must be a passage according to the other supposal: From that he Reasons weakly
and deceitfully, for it would be a poor relief, to be out of the Prison of the
Body, and in more Misery. In that it is dreadful; because it consigns over to a
State of Happiness or Misery. What will the Disputer and Wise Man of the World
say to this? What help can the Philosophers find out against it? And let them
tell what the Lord of hosts has purposed upon all the Generations of mankind.
It is no more in our Power and Wisdom to hinder Punishment after Death, then it
was to hinder our own Being. That God who took us out of our Mothers Womb, if
we are not reconciled unto him in the mean while, will raise us up again to
s^ffer worse things then we have d^ne here. The sense of this being put into
our frame is sufficient to make us afraid, and not without cause.

Says one, It is ^est not to be born, or to die very quickly. But seeing we
are born, how can he ass^re us of that? To have but one Trial for endless
Happiness or Misery, when all that can be done is little enough to make sure a
thing of that importance as la^ing hold of the good and avoiding the evil; this
is not to be done hastily and well. If he means to die quickly because we shall
be as nothing, Produce his strong reasons and all will not amount to a
Certainty, no nor a Probability. The Spirit of God says contrary, It is
appointed unto Men once to die, but after this the Judgment, Heb. 9. 27. He
that made them and sent them into this World, knows best what shall become of
them when they are gone out, and of him we have this Revelation.

Let the Wise and Prudent go away with their fine expressions, let Infidels and
Fools go on in their Denial and Negligence; the Word of God abides sure, that
will discover all their Errors and Mistakes. A day of determination draws
nigh upon the living, as it has already passed upon many Generations: If they
were suffered to come from the D^^d and testify of these things, we should
have a vast cloud of Witnesses. God is not pleased to permit this, and
therefore doubts first, and then unbelief do spring up in the hearts of Men;
Neither do any go there whilst living, and return. There is no intercourse
betwixt the two Worlds; Things then would be so certain and past doubt, that
none would serve God for ^ought, for the alone hope and expectation of unseen
things. But people would traffic for Heaven as they do to Jamaica or the
Indies, and all still for love of themselves, not out of any love to the Lord
of that Country. What a company of Me^cenary Souls should we have? Then the
Church would be flocked unto, even upon Weeks days as the Exchange. Then
Worldly minded Men would become the best Christians, those who are all for
themselves, use Religion only now to serve a turn or for a reserve; but if
there was such sensible profit, such would do most therein, and still do
nothing only for Gods sake. There would be no work of Faith or labor of Love,
but all selfishness; God has most wisely ordered it as it is, that the Trial
of Faith might be had, that the excellency of Obedience may be seen. We must
needs die, and are as Water spilt upon the ground which cannot be gathered up
again, 2 Samuel 14. 14. It appears so in our sight, but the eye of Faith can
reach further to an Immortality and Resurrection. Again, all things happen
alike to all, there is no visible and eminent reward to Righteousness or
Iniquity, this will manifest of what sort our Obedience is. If we can deny
present ease and pleasure, submitting our selves to loss and inconvenience for
that which no Man has seen, this is such love and trust in God to which he
has promised a recompense of Reward. If we believe his Word speaking of
Futurity, though we see nothing in a dead Man to give Warrant or Ground for it,
there is some commendation in this Faith; that the Soul which seems nothing but
Breath vanished and gone, does yet live: That such a clod of Flesh which must
first turn into Stench, then common undistinguishable Dust, that the Bones
shall be disjoynted, and themselves though somewhat longer become Dust also,
that these shall become Bones again and there shall be Resurrection as
described, Ezekiel. 37. There shall be a shaking and the Bones come together, Bone
to Bone, Sine^s and the Flesh came upon them, and the Skin covered them, which
shall be performed in a literal sense at the last day, and as they were
dissolved so to be raised again, though it will be done more suddenly: This is
something above what is common to believe. As Acts. 1. 11.
Christians, we judge him faithful that has promised. As reasonable Men we can
thus deem that he who made the World and our selves of nothing, can also
restore out of pre-existent matter.

We have also a more sure word of Prophecy, whereunto ye do well that ye take
heed as unto a light that shines in a dark place, until the Day dawn, and the
day Star arise in your hearts, 2 Pet. 1. 19. The meerest unbeliever and natural
Man may look upon the Scriptures which testify to the contrary, and give a
luster to his dark mind; it may be otherwise then he is apt to wish or fancy.
But would he come to be more intimately acquainted with them, and once begin to
direct his Actions accordingly, he would have that inward Assurance and
Satisfaction, that his former ignorance and unbelief would vanish away.
Whosoever applies to that Holy Book with candor and ingenuity, to search
whether these things are so, if he comes with an upright sincere mind to be
informed, God will reveal it more perfectly to him; Grace does accompany the
appointed means, He that thus reads, shall both understand and believe. He
cannot meet with so much assurance in all the Books of the Learned, in all
humane Reasoning, in all the Tricks and Devices the wit of Man can find out, as
in that one expression of our Lord and Savior. Verily, verily, I say unto y^u,
H^ that hears my Word, and believes on him that sent me, has everlasting
Life, and shall not come into Condemnation, but is p^ssed from Death unto Life,
Joh. 5. 24. The only danger that threatens Mankind after this life, is from a
greater Power, and here we have assurance from the greatest that is or can be,
from God himself and his Son Jesus Christ, that to do thus is the Way to get
his Favor and avoid his Indignation. We have as much assurance from his
Goodness and Truth, as if we were placed above all hurt or injury? He
commands all the powers of Darkness, has in subjection every thing that can
be Named, so that they cannot possibly hurt without his Allowance, and he will
never suffer any of his Servants to be in the least To^mented by them. In this
life God spares Sinners and chastises the Righteous; but in the next he will
spare them and condemn the others. He will not forget the insulting of his
Enemies, or the contempt and low estate of his own peculiar People. Shall the
wicked Blaspheme God for ever, and vex his Servants? No it cannot be: Whilst
they are in the way they may be exercised with S^orms, Tempests, Troubles, but
not when they are at the end. Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord from
henceforth, yea says the Spirit, Rev. 14. 13. We have his Testimony for it,
and what is wonderful to agree therewith, the consent of the whole World both
good and bad. The wicked will confess the same, however they vary from them in
course of life, they account the Godly more happy in their end. In the time of
Health and Jollity they may put off Holy things with a contemptuous smile, look
with an Eye of scorn and disdain upon the Religious Fools, but when themselves
come upon the bed of Sickness, then Horror and Vexation succeed for former
Laughter. When the shadow of Death sits upon their eyelids, then they look
otherwise: The Scales of Lust and prejudice fall off from the heart of the
Sinner just before opening into the other World, then he is changed in Opinion
and has other kind of Thoughts. What would himself give if he had been such a
fool whom now he knows to be the only prudent Men? Wishes are vain and to no
purpose, that miserable saying, I did not think of this before, does no good to
the person himself, but serves to warn others that they be not such fools, and
even he might have known as much before. When Wisdom is not only justified of
her Children, but approved of by the disobedient; what they utter against it is
nothing but the effect of Folly and Madness, but when they come to their right
Wits and Sobriety, they turn and pronounce of her Side. When Malice and Envy
are forced to speak Truth, Stubbornness is overcome, but above all lust the
great blinder of the mind begins to vanish away, and it apprehends all things
in their true shape. Every thing besides is cried out for Vanity and Vexation
of Spirit, and this judged the only real and substantial good, all the rest
have been deceivers, and this alone true. The pleasures and conveniences of
sin did not afford Peace and Happiness whilst had, and yet are fled away as if
they had not been. Now it is fully discerned what was best to have done, and
what is the only thing to be trusted unto. It is certain there is no profit in
Wickedness, for it stands in no stead; and again, there is a certain fearful
expectation of the end of those things; which is Death. If they own not as much
in Word or Action, yet they are forced to it in serious thought and inward
apprehension: there is the real assent of every kind of Men, He that walks
uprightly, walks surely, Prove. 10. 9. We all make haste toward the finishing
of our course, and there is no way to be safe and blessed in ones Death, but by
an Obedient and Christian Life.

CHAP. XII.
Of Religion, Faith, Repentance, Obedience, against Ungodliness: Of Preaching,
Prayer, Praise, the Sacrament. That Religion does not consist only in the
outward Ordinances, but a Divine inward Frame and Disposition, which if
universally complied withal, will give Peace and Rest to the Soul.

Without Faith it is impossible to please him: for he that comes to God, must
believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him,
Heb. 11. 6. A firm belief is sufficient that he is greater then we can conceive
or imagine; Whilst we are absent from Him in the Body, it is not possible to
see or know him as he is known. This puzling thought often recurs, What is he
in whom thou believe? God is a Spirit, infinite, Eternal: And we that are
flesh, limited and our Age is as nothing, cannot have a full apprehension of
him. We easily judge thus much, that he must be greater then we can know; Shall
the Mole deny there is any such thing as Man, because under ground he does not
see him? And we are altogether as unable with these eyes of sense to see him
that is Spiritual and Invisible. Shall even brute Beasts who look upon us,
conclude we have no Reason, Society or Government, because they do not
understand the manner of it? It would be alike impious and absurd to disbelieve
the mani^old Wisdom and Works of God, because we do not know them all, or any
perfectly. God is ten thousand times ten thousand greater then Man, more then
he does exceed the Creatures under him: A more full discovery is reserved in
Heaven, for now we see through a Glass darkly, but then face to face, 1 Cor,
13. 12. He has ^een pleased to discover himself in the Works of Creation,
Providence, and Holy Scripture. We plainly perceive by the things made that he
is; and he has also given us so much power that we may do the things he does
require of us; they are made known in Scripture, which is given by inspiration
of God, 2 Timothy 3. 16. We are to believe him to be true, and then all must be so
which is contained in that Book.

God does encourage to his service with a Reward; so that he who labors to
please him acts after the very same manner, tho in a much more eminent and
greater degree, as another who studies to recommend himself to the ^avour of
the King or any Superior. The utmost visible greatness is Low, and but a
shadow of Majesty in comparison of this High and Lofty One, dark as to his
Brightness, and soon passes away, when He inhabiteth Eternity. However,
Religion (which is our whole Duty toward God) is looked upon as a little
contemptible thing, laughed at by the Ignorant Scornful and Proud Men, yet is
as much greater then any Temporal Design or Business as God is greater then
Man, Heaven then Earth, Eternity beyond time, a most perfect and everlasting
Happiness above the fading imperfect trivial conveniences here. We may as well
trust God for the great things to come, and labor after them, as we do for our
daily Food and those little things that are present. And though he now gives
common Mercies to the unthankful, yet they must use some means after them; but
for the better hope, the exceeding great and precious promises of unseen and
future things, those are only for them who glorify him here, and seek after
them. Faith makes these things as absolutely true and certain as those now
before us; Whosoever believes on him shall not be ashamed, Romans 10. 11. Faith
toward God is reckoned among the Principles of the Doctrine of Christ Heb. 6.
It being that upon which not only those there recited, but whatsoever is said
throughout the whole Book of God does depend; Which whosoever believes
steadfastly must necessarily be a Christian, not in Name and Profession, but in
manner of Life; or otherwise he will act more unreasonably and foolishly then
ever any one yet did as to the things of this World.

The Scripture does contain things to be believed, and things to be done: The
first are comprised in a brief form of sound Words, commonly called the
Apostles Creed, which is believed as it stands upon certain and evi^ent places
of Scripture, and the outward confession of them is necessary to Salvation,
according to what may be gathered from John 5. 24. Romans 10. 9. Mat. 16. 16.
John 3. 15, 16, 17, 18, 36. Luke 6. 47. The great danger in not believing any
Scripture is what the Apostle Speaks, He that believes not God, has made him
a Liar, 1 John 5. 10. Which is more provoking then living in known Sin and
Wickedness. But this none that believes other things will dare to do; the
General Question and debate is what God intended in such a place. It is agreed
on both sides of the Truth of some sense and meaning, but what that is, is the
rise of controversy and dispute. In Paul's Epistles are things hard to be
understood, which they that are unlearned and unstable wrest, as they do also
the other Scriptures unto their own destruction, 2 Pet. 3. 16. But since we
have had those who were learned and resolute in their way, who have done the
same to carry on an interest, to maintain the grandeur and infallibility of
such a Church, to espouse and propagate all the errors of such and such
parties. There has been horrible perv^^ting and seeking out Evasions; not to
the establishment but ov^rthrow of the Truth. The pure and true Word of God
has be^^ made use of to defend corruptions and m^i^tain error; ab^^dance of
this kind of iniquity will be disclosed at the revelation of all things.

It is sad to reflect that the only thing necessary in Religion is the only
thing neglected, how people fly about the skirts and borders, not coming into
the substance thereof. The Church is pulled asunder into this or that parcel of
Christians; every little difference in Opinion must forthwith make a distinct
party, they cursing and damning one another. It is the greatest part of the
Christianity of some to be exclaiming against such a S^ct or Communion; so that
if our merciful God should proceed according to the Anathemas,
Excommunications, Wishes and Impretions of one against another, No flesh would
be saved: What is the cause of all this stir and madness? The Wisdom from
above is first Pure, then Peaceable, Gentle and Easy to be entreated, full of
Mercy and good Fruits, without Partiality and without Hypocrisy, Jam. 3. 17.
The Gospel is good and plain, made up of simplicity and purity, so that is not
the occ^sion thereof. But an enemy has sown these tares of division, who works
mightily in the hearts of Men to deceive, and has taken this course to hinder
the good seed, to sti^le those practical truths which would bring forth fruit
unto everlasting life. Men rightly think they must have something to do with
the things of God, and some falsely think these vain disputations will serve the
turn. These are speculative not falling upon lust, and they hope a zeal for
this one way or another (it is something for God) and therefore shall come in
for atonement of other sins; And in conclusion tends to that, he fain would
save himself by condemning others. What else makes him so extraordinary zealous
for such a way and against such an opinion, when himself in the mean while
lives in Habitual sin and unrighteousness, which is more dangerous to Souls
then errors of the understanding, if they were really such? Here some drive on
an interest of their own, but who do not, are led by such an impulsive cause.
In those that have set up for Guides and Teachers there has been, Doting about
Questions and Strifes of words, whereof comes Envy, Strife, Railing, evil
Surmisings, perverse disputings of Men of corrupt minds, and destitute of the
Truth, supposing that gain is Godliness, 1 Timothy 6. 4, 5. This was their end,
but the silly people were by them told that was most for Salvation, which made
for their own profit, and thus they have came to that height of zeal and
giddiness. Do they not place more in their petty differences then in the
weightier matters of Law? Judgment, Mercy and love of one another: That all
this is a mere delusion may be further seen, because it quite vanishes when the
Man approaches near to Death, and apprehends things according to sincerity and
Truth.

How earnestly does the Apostle express himself against these disputes even at
their first beginning, Romans 14. 1. Phil. 2. 14. 1 Timothy 1. 6, 7, and 6. 20, 21.
2 Timothy 2. 14, 23. But what would he say if he had lived at this day to see so
many volumes of controversy, to have heard of so many go about as have
troubled Christians with words subverting their Souls, Acts 15. 24. Shattering,
if not making to fall the foundation of Faith and good manners; How Religion is
as it were turned into an endless prate and talk about controverted points.
They have unsettled well disposed minds, by taking them off from the Doctrine
according to Go^^^ness: They have turned out of the way of Truth into Errors
and Deceits. The Infidels, Scorners, Carnal and indifferent Persons have been
confirmed in their ungodliness, thinking it as good to be of no Religion at
all, as to profess one with so much wrangling. They make sport with the
Absurdities, and fallings out of the Religious. Also the Hypocrites and
Adversaries under the shelter of them, do throw out their Reproaches; and
hereupon the Presumption of them which hate God, increases yet more. Whereas
it might be considered, that notwithstanding they differ and squabble, yet they
all agree in this, That Obedience and Holiness is the only way to Heaven. If
they contend about Circumstantial and positive Duties, it is about the manner;
In this they concenter, that God is to be Worshipped: And they all stand up
with one accord for the Moral part, the immutable Laws of Good and Evil.

There has been an expedient proposed, and only wants to be put in use; if
what some would Arrogantly have in their Church, be it no wise granted to them,
but (what is most reasonable and due) that there should be an implicit Belief
in Scripture, the Word of God. In all plain places believe them as they are,
but in the hard and difficult so believe in general, whatever the Holy Spirit
did intend was the very meaning of that place. Whosoever believes thus much,
shall certainly be saved. Nor does this shut out knowledge and industry, for
that is a necessary Duty, but after that used to rest in what we apprehend the
meaning, and that if any other is, so we believe it, See 1 Cor. 2. 10, 11.
Phil. 3. 15. Psalm. 25. 12, 13, 14. The way to Truth is by good Life, and
direction from above. God is Gracious and Merciful, he threatens none but only
those who shall not believe on him, and his Son Jesus Christ. All Ignorances,
Errors and Mistakes that are neither wilful nor affected will be pardoned. Let
no Man lay any other Foundation, and every one keep fast to that. There is a
great stir about an infallible Judge of Controversy, and an unerring
interpreter of Scripture. Whereas the common and ordinary places do no more
need any Interpretation, then every common expression; of this Nature is most
part of the Gospel, but for the Mysteries and dark Speeches throughout Holy
Writ, God will unfold and bring them to Light in his due time. We ought to
pray, and through his Grace endeavor to be meet for the Holy Spirit which
searches all things, yea, the deep things of God, 1 Cor. 2. 10. We are to set
our Seal that God is true, and so is every thing contained in his Word, though
we do not presently understand it. God may reveal many things in Succession of
time, and what he does not, none shall mis-carry for not knowing them. The
Promise is annexed to Obedience and not Opinion: do this and live: Yea, Faith
it self is in order to Practice, Unto you first, God having raised up his Son
Jesus Christ, sent him to Bless you in turning away every one of you from his
iniquities, Acts 3. 26. All that Jesus did and said was to this end. And
whosoever does really believe that he was sent from God, if he is fully and
effectually persuaded, that those things are so which our Savior has made
known, that Person can never live ill if he let them sink deep into his Heart.
The whole Scripture as well as that particular Gospel. Luke 1. 1. Is an orderly
Declaration of those things, which are most surely believed among us. Whosoever is
of this number, will order his Conversation accordingly.

In this fallen and corrupt State of mankind, Religion begins Of Repentance.
by aversion from Sin and Conversion unto God, which is Repentance. We are by
Nature the Children of Wrath, the Seeds of evil grow up into sinful Acts and
Habits. As soon as ever we come to years of the least Discretion and Knowledge,
there is set before us the good and evil way: And this last seeming pleasant
unto us from our Infancy and Childhood, (for therein also Sin breaks forth as
soon as the outward Powers of sinning appear) is most commonly chosen. Should
our merciful God have given us but one time to make our Choice, and thereby
eternally abide, we must all have perished, or not one of a thousand would have
been saved of what are now. For who is he, that to his Original Corruption does
not add actual and continued Sin? That to natural Depravation does not add
fresh Perverseness of his own? All we like Sh^ep have gone astray: We have
turned every one to his own way, Isa. 53 6. We do err and wander of our selves,
seeking out for green Pasture, for those foolish and sinful Delights which we
know not would rot and destroy us. We would sain be Happy as soon as possible,
then that luscious and present appearance of good does draw us away after it:
Did none take Care of us but our selves, we must be consumed in this our Folly;
for we go away from the Supreme and only Good, and snatch at those things which
are hurtful. It pleases the Lord to put before us the good and the evil to
prove whither we will be obedient unto him: Whether we who were purposely made
for him, will by any thing be taken off from him: Whether we will follow after
what he recommends and eschew what he forbids so approving our selves obedient
Children; but alas! We will not believe his Word, for we would willingly have
some Trial by experience, whether it be so or not. We are not contented to
trust unto his Goodness and Truth, but for knowing of our selves. What
ingratitude, Contempt and dis-belief do we show unto God, who is so infinitely
above us? What unparralled Condescension and Goodness is in him, that he should
be pleased to suffer it in this Wise? When not only by the Excellenc^ of what
he Commands, but by the sensible disappointment and deceitfulness of what he
forbids, we may Taste and see that the Lord is good, 1 Pet. 2. 25. We cannot go
back of our selves, he sends his Son and Bishop of our Souls, who is the way,
John 4. 6. so we may know it; he sends his Holy Spirit to stir and push us
forward, so that we may do it. If that when it is fully known what is the
utmost good in all the Pleasures of Sin, when not withstanding all their vain
Promises the Man is fully convinced of the Hunger and Emptiness of them. When
he is ready to perish, Luke 15. 17. for want of true Satisfaction and Content,
and might have more in the ways of God; if then he would return and come over
unto him, it is accepted. Read and consider well the third Chapter of Jeremiah,
especially Verse 1, 7, 12, 13, 22.

It is the great Aggravation of the Sin of Apostasy, concerning which the
Apostle speaks so dreadfully. Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6. and Chapter 10. 26, 27. Who were
once enlightened and tasted of the Heavenly Gift, and were made Partakers of
the Holy Ghost, and have tasted the good Word of God, and of the Powers of the
World to come, If they shall fall away: When one formerly has had experience
of the ways of Sin, and then by Conversion has full experience of the ways of
God, to fall away again from them is to pronounce on Satan's side, that he is
the best Master, as who has judged of both, and then resolvedly with
Deliberation to determine for him; which must be an exceeding Provocation to
the Divine Majesty. In like manner the next Degree to that is, when one has
perceived to the utmost all the Delights of Sin and Vanity; when he has went
from Flower to Flower, and is either wearied in the Range, and by insufficiency
of some, may be fully persuaded of the like in the rest; yet still to cleave
unto these nauseating empty and deluding Follies, to seem to give Gods word the
Lie which speaks of the Misery and Deceitfulness of them, by owning the
Happiness of them when he is convinced to the contrary; to refuse to be
reformed; to show himself despitefully and disdainfully against the ways of
Holiness, to give no Credit to the real good that is in them, or when he
assents there is not to follow after them, but keep the preference to Old
dreggy Lusts, making his boast of them; to stick unto Harlots when their Skirt
is uncovered, and the Filthiness of them fully known, yet to esteem them before
the true Beloved, the chiefest of ten Thousand: When he has sufficiently found
how little Fruit there is in those things, whereof he was at first ashamed, but
still continues in them, and hardens his Face: When he is told, the end of them
is Death: When for some considerable time sufficient to make a true and
impartial Decision, and by reason of use he has had his Senses exercised to
discern good and evil, and he remains in the last still: when all these things
have been done, and yet he perseveres wilfully and stubbornly to follow them
against the Commands and forbidding of his Maker: All these are sad Signs and
Prognostics, that such an one will never come to Repentance, but it is just
with God after repeated Provocations of this manner to give him over to vile
Affections, and then he may dote upon his Destruction, and be utterly estranged
from the way of Salvation.

It is necessary to consider the Nature and end of things in order to state
them aright, many Souls have perished by mistakes and false Notions of
Repentance: Who have fallen from this Plank and been drowned in the Waters,
which would have carried them into the Promised Land, if they had relied upon
the whole, instead of a part thereof; or had not suffered it to slip from them
by intending to lay hold on it, but were not able, it being gone too far from
them.

To prevent as much Danger for the future as may be, to have this sure and
steadfast, let the Reader be once more put in mind whereof he has read or heard
often, that the word in the Greek Language Metanoia, by which Repentance is
signified in the New Testament, imports a Change of mind, and is expressed in
words at length, Romans 12. 2. Gal. 6. 15. Ephesians. 4. 22, 23, 24. 2 Cor. 5. 17. It
is Superfluous, but yet safe to set down, though the Observation has been so
often made already of Metamelia and Metanoia in 2 Cor. 7. 8, 9. Where Paul
speaks of himself, I did repent, that is, I was vexed for the time, he
Expresses it by the first Word, but when ye sorrowed to Repentance, Godly
sorrow works Repentance to Salvation not to be repented of, He Expresses that
by Metanoia; which plainly manifests that Metamelia is such as must be again
repented of, and does not avail to Salvation. Repentance in the Old Testament
is seldom named, but is intended by that Phrase of turning away from your
iniquities, to this give all the Prophets witness, which might be done as to
the outward Act. The Evangelical Prophet Isaiah goes further, Let the wicked
forsake his way, and the unrighteous Man his Thoughts, Isa. 55. 7. but the
Gospel in a more especial manner is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of
the Heart, and makes use of this word Repentance which reaches to the very
ground of it. So that it is not a bare ceasing to speak or do Evil, and
retaining affection to the same in the Soul; but that must be altered into a
real dislike and hatred of Evil. As Sin does first take its Rise from the
Heart, pr^cur^ng a Consent there, and thence come forth into Word and Act; so
in the forsaking, it may go backwards; and by first leaving of the Actions and
Speeches, we may at length come to have an inward Detestation of it, for less
then this is insufficient to perfect the Work of Repentance. Let nothing be
said here, or in any other place to exclude that growth and Proficiency of the
Christian Life, for that (as none of Gods Works are done of a sudden) with the
beginnig, increase and exercise thereof is the great end of our abiding in this
World. The method of the working of his Grace (like driving out Exodus 23. 30.
the Canaanites from within) is by little and little. None need to be perplexed
or disturbed about this; for if any should be taken away in the midst of his
days and of the good Work, yet if our merciful God sees a sincere tending
toward it, he accepts thereof as if actually done. God forbid on the one hand,
any thing should be said to give License or Encouragement to Sin; so again on
the other, let all things be done for the Hope and Consolation of all those,
who will come in due time and accept of Mercy. This being the peculiar
Privilege of poor mankind, and the means which our most merciful God has
ordained to save themselves from the Wrath to come, far be it from me or any
other to shorten the extent of it, or to prescribe exactly at what time, or to
what pitch of abhorrence and Contrition it must be; Even such as our Supreme
Judge will be pleased to accept of. God is not tied to the Fancies of Men, if
some Prophecy smooth things, and others too hard Speeches, he will not Ratify
what they say, but condemn whom Man absolves, as again acquit whom Man
condemus. Nevertheless he has declared, He will Judge the World Psalm. 96. 13.
in Righteousness and with his Truth. And will rectify and excuse if it should
be here mistaken on the severer hand, as it being against our selves we are not
apt to do, neither indeed ought, for Mercy rejoices against Judgment. Yet for
the safety of all; as to give warning against the presumptuous Sinner, who
turns the Grace of Romans 2. 4.
God into Wantonness, who trifles with that which should lead him to
Repentance, who deceives himself with a slight Remo^se and Sorrow, but
continues impenitent: And also to aff^ighten malicious Transgressors, who sin
yet more upon the fore sight of future Repentance: To make the Professor of
Christianity look about himself, who does this or that deliberate Sin, as
opposing Gods Truth and Servants of set purpose to comply with the humor of
the World, and thinks to come off afterward upon a general Repentance, or
secretly asking Pardon, or the like, and upon this he did trust before; I say,
to make all these thoroughly consider what they do, and not to be deceived in a
matter of so great Concern, it is necessary to explain the true Nature of it
more fully.

When the mind is now to do such a thing upon through Consideration, Mat. 23.
30.
how can they say afterward, they would not have done it? or else to trick
with the Almighty by not giving way to that, because he hopes to have this
excuse for his Sin, to be willingly ignorant, and to do a thing hastily with
that reserve, this is to disobey that God, who twice Commands to consider our
ways, Hag. 1. 5, 7. to endeavor to out-wit him, who is all-wise, or seek to
hide their Counsel from the Lord, Isa. 29 15. Shall not God search this out?
For he knows the secrets of the Heart, Psalm. 44. 21. And hence may be
observed a great difference between the Wor^s of the Flesh, and Perversities of
the Spirit: The former being through infirmity of the Flesh, transient Acts and
of sudden surprizal may be more easily repented of, because through their
Deceitfulness and Temptation the Man may be beguiled or overtaken, and when he
comes to be convinced of their true Nature, and recover out of them, he may Act
Indignation and Revenge upon himself for the same. But for the latter sort,
when they are resolved on, and all the 2 Cor. 7. 11.
Circumstances fully known; when neither surprizal nor ignorance, but what was
wilful can be pretended for it, this makes the Sin of a very deep dye: And when
the mind is now to do it, and either does, or may foresee the reality thereof
with its Consequents, How can such an one expect that if it were to do again
upon the like Circumstances, he would not, when now he does the very same? I
mean advised continued Acts of Sin, as that Spirit of Stubbornness and
Perverseness, opposing the known Truth, Persecution, for which Paul gives the
Reason why He obtained Mercy, because I did it ignorantly in unbelief, 1 Timothy
1. 13. which implies that if it had been knowingly done, it would not have been
so easily Pardoned. Think upon the Case of Persecutors and Heretics, who have
persisted so after a full Conviction that they were in the wrong, and how many
of them have you heard to have came to Repentance? What they have done in
secret, it may be a Question, whether that will be accepted; for as their
offenses have been done openly, so should their Recantation be likewise, if
they would have it avail. It is necessary not only to be sorry, or secretly to
bewail, but further to undo the fault, as much as it can be. And as God was
dishonored publicly, in like manner to regain his Favor, they should
acknowledge their Error before Ezra. 10. 2, 3. Lev. 26. 40. Josh. 7. 19. Ezra.
10. 10, 11. Mark 1. 5. Acts 19. 18.
all: To speak after the manner of Men: That God should have repair for his
hurt Majesty, have Glory given unto him by Confessing their own Shame. We must
do as much to reconcile our selves unto an offended God, as the Great Ones of
the Earth require from all that displease them And this i^ the end of
Confessior, those things done in private may be there acknowledged unto
Almighty God, but in other things the acknowledgment must be as public as the
Sin was. Of all that mischief done to the Church of God, by Error or Violence,
smiting with the Tongue of Fist, there have been but few instances left on
Record of Penitents of this Nature. Do not those who have Acted cruelly, die
su^lenly? And in those fierce Disputes, where one side must be convinced to be
in the wrong, by the Power and clearness of the Arguments of the other side,
yet out of Pride, O^^tinacy or Interest, they will go on and seek for E^asions
where they cannot Answer; but how few will openly declare themselves to have
been in an Error? Where it is purely a defect of Understanding, and a mind
willing to be informed, we have some Re^ra^tations; but when the perverse
Spirit is once mingled with them, it is seldom that they come to Repentance.

We, who are short-sighted and know little, but what we gather by Reason and
Experience, which requires Succession of time, are admitted unto Repentance,
which may supply these Defects; and space and Liberty is left unto us of a full
advised Choice of Good or Evil, Life or Death. Now when there is a through and
firm persuasion of the Vanity and Vexation of Sin, when he does not barely
commit it once, twice, or so often as to know what it is, but still continue in
v^miting; not to be contented to lie only, but to Wallow in the Mire, is a Sign
that he has 2 Pet. 2. 20, 22.
made that his Choice. Again, when God calls by his Word, his Spirit, by his
methods of Judgment and Mercy, the Sinner to be reconciled unto him, yet he
stands out continually, surely then he does not Choose the Fear of the Lord,
Prove. 1. 29. But is Rebellious, Disobedient, refusing that reverence and
subjection he owes unto his Maker. And if at length, when he finds he shall be
punished for the same, then he will make a pretended submission. Or stood out
so long of set purpose, think to pacify him with a slight Sorrow, and going
softly for a time, by a partial and imperfect Amendment of Life, God will judge
of this. Repentance is never too late, if Fruits meet for Repentance are
brought forth afterward, if there does succeed the Christian Life in all
Godliness and Honesty, But if the ^icled will turn from all his Sins that he
has committed, and keep all my Statutes, and do that which is lawful and right,
he shall surely live, he shall not die, Ezekiel. 18. 21. God is sometimes pleased
to bring home his Servants by Affliction and Sickness, and therefore if in that
which proves unto Death, there is a true turning of the Soul unto God, and he
knows the Man would really order his Conversation according to the Gospel, and
for sake all his former Sins, this Man has good grounds of Hope for Mercy and
Forgiveness. But for him who puts it off all his Lifetime before, who thought
it soon enough to make his Peace with God in Sickness and Old Age; who was for
enjoying the Pleasures of Sin as long as he could, and when they leave him to
come in just soon enough, as he imagines will save his Soul, all for himself
and nothing for God, shall find how it will be accepted. If we had right
knowledge of the Godhead, it would prevent abundance of mistakes and deceits in
Masters of Religion; Consisider him as All wise, All-knowing, with whom is
Majesty and Honor, Goodness and Power. It is the wickedness of the wicked to.
Think that God was altogether such an one as himself, Psalm. 50. 21. But
whatever is of good report amongst Men, there seeing himself is pleased to make
such resemblances, we may conclude that he will deal so with us as one
Superior deals with his Inferior, for which he is not blamed, but commended
in the sight of the World. The Prophet Mal. 1. argues after this manner very
much to the present purpose, and concludes the Chapter, for I am a great King
says the Lord of Hosts, and my Name is dreadful among the Heathen. Conceive
him therefore so, and we are obliged to do as much to please him and make way
for his Acceptance, as any Earthly Monarch whatsoever.

Is it irksome? It would indeed have been better not to have sinned, but seeing
thou have, thou must suffer the difficulty of Repentance or that which is
worse. Put on a good resolution and the irksomness will wear of; Be encouraged
by what the Lord Jesus says, I am not come to call the Righteous, but Sinners
to repentance, Mat. 9. 13. Joy shall be in Heaven over one sinner that
repents, more then over ninety nine persons which need no repentance, Luke
15. 7. When any increase is mace to Christ's fold besides those they had before.
Our nature is something awkward and averse to repent: What to undo and recant?
to accuse our selves of fault, folly and shame, seems hard in our natural proud
state. Yet it is not unreasonable to confess what we cannot deny, our
imperfection and want of foresight. It is an act of prudence to return from an
error, and of such an one who is able to discern what is really good and
profitable. It is an advancement to a better state, Was it not more
unreasonable to do those things at first, then it is now to leave them when
they are discovered to be false and evil? But chiefly which should have been
mentioned in the first place, seeing we have offended against a Great and Good
God, we are required, Only acknowledge thine iniquity that thou have
transgressed against the Lord thy God, Jer. 3. 13. What is more just and equal?
What has God deserved at our hands that we should be so Rebellious against
him? Whatever pride may suggest, it is no undervaluing for us poor Worms to
fall low on our Faces before his Footstool, to lie down in confusion, and our
shame has covered us, to make our Sabmission unto him. He is worthy of the
greatest prostration from far more excellent Creatures, and they pay it
accordingly: Whatever the profane foolish and scornful Men think of Religious
Sneakes, yet the God whom we serve is of such Greatness and Glory, that ten
times greater reverence is most due unto him then either we do or can give; but
the day will come when they shall more creep before the Holy One of Israel,
When God shall tread down his Enemies. Let them inwardly laugh or smile at our
crying peccavi, they do the same unto their Superiors who are but Earth Worms,
and they shall further take up the very same voice when it will be disinal and
fruitless, When they shall be rejected and find no place for repentance, though
they seek for it carefully with Tears, Heb. 12. 17. We do bu^^ now what through
the goodness and Mercy of God may avail to his forgiveness and reward, what
they shall be forced to in vain to turn from themselves Gnilt and Condemnation.
We have no reason to upbraid or look little upon one another for so doing, for
it is the case of us all; we have sinned and are worthy of punishment, he alone
is Happy and Wise who uses this means to prevent it.

It is just that the Soul should be in the utmost subjection to the Father of
Spirits, that it should both pray and endeavor to be turned at the command of
him who fashioned it, to comply with the will of him who did both create and
also would renew it. The first was done without our consent and power, the
second will not seeing God is to be glorified by our free obedience, and
himself has enabled us to give it, without our working together with him who
transforms the hearts of Men. Because we can just refuse, must we necessarily
do so? He has ordered the heart so that it may turn either way, and should not
it go toward its first mover, turn unto the Lord our God? Turn thou me, and I
shall be turned, for thou art the Lord my God, Jer. 31 8. Turn unto me, and I
will turn unto you, says the Lord of Hosts; Zech. 1. 3. There must be some
work of our own to concur with Gods Act, and be partaker of his gracious
Promise. The heart is re ^less and dissatisfied until fixed on its proper
Object, which is God alone. It covers after this or that thing, but still does
not find content, wandering up and down in its pursuit after Happiness, but
never meets with it: Every least appearance and shadow is catched at, but the
only true and chiefest good is not minded, nor sought after. My people has
been lost sheep, they have gone from Mountain to Hill, they have forgot their
resting place, Jer. 50. 6. As the Soul has a natural desire to know God, not
in those who have defaced it with sensuality and brutishness, but who exert the
operations thereof as they should; so when it comes to be ac^uainted with him,
is in peace. It can be contented for the present, and wait some time for the
full enjoyment of him; When it is once sensible, God is willing of his
Creatures Happiness, has placed them here only to try them, and all his
dealings are Wisdom, Truth and Righteousness: When it comes thoroughly to know
the order of divine affairs, then it both admires and is satisfied with the
whole will and good pleasure of our God, sits down contented, and patiently
bears with the things of this present time, and hopes for, nay, is assured of
good things to come. But however, has not the least doubt or fear of future
Evils; which is a very considerable difference between the Righteous and the
Wicked. Repentance first brings into this happy state, frees from the Spirit of
error and giddiness, makes him to leave off those unsatisfactory Vanities,
suffers him not to be still deluded with false Imaginations, tedious travel,
and after all Vexatious disappointment. When by reason of the pain and
insufficiency that is in all things of this World there is an utter despair of
Happiness, this shows him where it is. My heart and my flesh fails, but God
is the strength of my heart and my portion for ever, Psalm. 72. 26. We know him
as yet by Faith, and our rejoicing in him is according to the measure of that.
Whatever good and comfort is in pure and undefiled Religion, in an universal
and constant compliance with it, which is much every way (as may be partly seen
by what has been, and is to be said) but much more would be perceived by him
who makes a through experience of it; all this comes in by repentance, which is
the beginning thereof, for it forsakes sin and keeps the Commandments.

This was the first Doctrine John the forerunner and Christ himself Preached,
Mark. 1. 4, 15. And it was also the message in which the Prophets before came;
Moses speaks very little thereof. He that despised Moses Law died without
Mercy, Heb. 10. 28. God gave his people at first severe and strict Commandments
without making so full a discovery of Pardon and Forgiveness, but then those
who became obnoxious to the guilt and judgment of the Law, did not know how to
escape. The Lord who is rich in Mercy, did in time reveal it more and more to
those who would turn from their evil doing. Before the last threatening there
goes out another warning and invitation to submit, Thus says the Lord, Behold
I frame evil against you, and devise a device against you, return ye now every
one from his evil way, and make your ways and your doings good, and they said
there is no hope, but we will walk after our own devices, and we will every one
do the imagination of his evil heart, Jer. 18. 11, 12. Strange Stubbornness!
that Men should be thus provoking to God, and act so madly against themselves;
we see what a mighty force there is in Lust and Pride. They sinned yet more in
not believing his wonderful offer, they incensed him yet more in not being
overcome by his goodness, but he abounded in this as they did in iniquity,
confirming the truth of the Prophet, Let favor be showed to the wicked, yet
will he not learn Righteousness, Isa. 26. 10. All Gods doings are gradual and
successive, both his Works of Nature and Grace: The most inestimable and
accomplishment of all Mercies was in the Redemption of the World by our Lord
Jesus Christ; of this discovery was made to the Fathers by little and little.
If I may so speak with the greatest reverence and adoration with thanksgiving,
for such his gracious Methods, God showed himself the most hard Master at
first. The Law given, Genesis 2. 17. was peremptory and penal, then he begins,
Genesis 8. 21. and Genesis 9. to release off his severity, and then to Moses he
proclaims himself Merciful and Gracious, long Suffering, Exodus 34. 6. But yet
did not so fully make known to him the Doctrine of Repentance as he did
afterward to the Prophets. Then comes John the Baptist, Mat. 3. 2, 3.
Afterward He (who was bringing into the World so long before, and to whom all
the Old Testament has Relation) came Preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom of
God, and saying, the time is fulfilled, and the Kingdom of God is at hand,
Repent ye and believe the Gospel, Mark 1. 14, 15. And now it is established for
all persons, times and places, as appears, Luke 24. 46. Man must not presume to
sin yet more, upon hopes of more Mercy; For as Christ was once offered to bear
the sins of many, and unto them that look for him shall he appear the second
time without sin unto Salvation, Heb. 9. 28. So for those who despise and sin
wilfully, there is a dreadful threatening, Heb. 10. 26, 27, 28, 29. God now
commands all Men every where to repent, Because he has appointed a day in
the which he will judge the World in Righteousness by that Man whom he has
ordained, whereof he has given assurance unto all Men in that he has raised
him from the dead, Acts 17. 30, 31. The whole Counsel of God is contained in
Faith and Repentance; compare Acts 20. verse. 20, 21. with verse. 26, 27. To
believe and to do is the substance of all: That is Faith, and Repentance puts
upon the second. Cease to do Evil, learn to do Well.

It is not only to be sorry for the past, or a little displeased for Of
Obedience.
the present, but shows it self by Obedience for the future. To this the
promises belong, If thou will enter into life, keep the Commandments, Mat. 19.
17. said he, Who though he were a Son, yet learned he Obedience by the things
which he suffered: And being made perfect he became the Author of Eternal
Salvation to all them that obey him, Heb. 5. 8, 9. The Book of Deuteronomy is
wholly on this subject; there is scarce one Chapter throughout the Law of
Moses, the Psalms, Prophets, Gospel and Epistles, but has somewhat relating to
this. Every where is line upon line, line upon line, precept upon precept,
precept upon precept, here a little and there a little, and all to this purpose
that Man should obey God, for he has an absolute Dominion over us all by
Creation, Preservation, and Redemption. Ye shall do my Judgments and keep mine
Ordinances to walk therein; I am the Lord your God, Ye shall therefore keep my
Statutes and Judgments, which if a Man do, he shall live in them: I am the
Lord, Lev. 18. 4, 5. So in the Preface to the Ten Commandments, I am the Lord
thy God, and as he was the God of the Israelites by bringing them out of the
Land of Egypt, so he is of us Christians by redeeming us from Spiritual
Egypt, the Bondage of Satan, Sin and Death.

Even we require Obedience and Service from the Horse and Ox; nay, from the
very same Creatures as our Selves, Children Mal. 1. 6.
and Servants, and they do such things only because we command them, and think
it no shame or discredit. And we may allow our selves to be ten thousand
degrees more inferior to Almighty God then they are unto us; neither should we
be unwilling or ashamed to do such things purely and principally for his
Commandment. This is properly Obedience, and no other God will accept of. When
ye fasted and mourned on the fifth and seventh Month, did yet at all fast unto
me, even to me? Zech. 7. 5. Observe the patheticalness thereof in that it is
twice repeated, and this is applicable to all the actions of our life, do we
this or that thing only 1 Cor. 10. 31.
to glorify God thereby? and have we no other motive but in Subordination to
that? And when ye did eat, and when ye did drink, did ye not eat and drink for
your selves? verse. 6. Some private ends of your own, or moral considerations.
Do not dissemble, for one knows the very secrets of your hearts; There is a
proud principle nourished by some, who are willing to save their Soul, and
think if such a thing is done, it is well enough, but do not regard with what
mind, vainly imagining God would have his. Work done any way so it be done, but
does not regard with what affection they do it. And therefore if they practice
Righteousness or Temperance, though they will speak out to the World that they
do it for Health or Reputation, and if they have a little respect to God in the
heart they refuse to utter that. They will declare openly, they do such a thing
because the King or some Superior enjoin them to do it, but either through
bashfulness or pride on which that is founded, will not make it known that they
do such things, because it is the Commandment and Will of God. They may talk of
the fashionable Virtue, but not of Grace. They will speak in the Words of
Seneca, but not the Language of Canaan; but if they have a serious mind to get
the favor of God and be saved, let them consider what is Written, Joel 2, 26.
Mark 8. 38. If their actions are not principally because God requires such,
howsoever specious and upright they may appear before Men, he is no more
pleased with it, then you with the work of your Servant, when he does it of his
own head, and is ashamed or disdainful to do it upon your commanding him. When
Courtiers and Servants of Noble Men will own their condition before all, and
speak of their respective Masters, should we not much more do so as to our
Master which is in Heaven? Is he not greater and better then they? Let your
light so shine before Men, that others may see your good Works and glorify
your Father which is in Heaven, Mat. 5. 16. His Servants may praise him for
such an ones well doing, and glorify God for your professed subjection unto
the Gospel, 2 Cor. 9. 13. And strangers may conclude, God is in him of a Truth,
that he has some real and invisible principle of action which he keeps unto
through good report or evil report, notwithstanding all profit or
inconvenience. It tends to the Glory of God here on Earth, when things
pertaining to him are done openly before all, and not in a Corner: He that was
not heard to cry or to lift up his Voice in the Street, who did not love to be
taken notice of for his Miracles and doing good, neither did for affectation
show ^orth his Extraordinary zeal and service to God, yet has two observable
sayings, John 3. 21. John 18. 20. If one designs nothing but pure Obedience,
neither credit nor interest, not the least leaven of by-respects, the more
publicly it is done, the better it is: If he finds himself ashamed of well
doing, let him do violence to that sinful humor and make it more visible unto
Men; if on the other hand he believes he may have praise of Men, there let him
do it in secret, and thy Father which sees in secret, himself shall reward
thee openly, Mat. 6. 4. The reason of things is to be attended unto. Our God
whom we serve is a Jealous God, and his Glory he will not give unto another; So
is he more pleased with Men's Obedience when it is pure, incorrupt, and nothing
a sharer with it. How does he resent it? When their fear toward me is taught
by the precept of Men, Isa. 29. 13. Which makes directly against compulsion to
Religious Duties, for that destroys the Nature of true Obedience. Does God want
the aid of Man to make others Obedient unto him? If it could be done, What
Glory would it be unto him? But they cannot by outward violence, they may bring
one like a Beast to the Sacrifice, but still there is nothing of the subjection
of the mind. God cares not for Hypocritical Services, or a bare outward
Submission; He may as well be glorified in Beasts, the Blood of slain Bullocks
of Goats, for there is a subjection of those Creatures even unto Death. The
Brute is knocked down before the Lord, but he is better pleased when the Will
of a free and reasonable Creature is Obedient unto his Will. When we do not
follow our own ways in opposition to the guide of the Lord: When self-will is
not cringed unto, but the Word of God complied withal.

He created all things for his own Glory, and Man the Principal inhabitant of
the Earth cannot show it forth in a more excellent way. Let him offer up every
Creature for a Sacrifice, do more then Solomon did to set forth the
Magnificence of his Temple, yet he adds nothing to what God had before, for the
World is mine and the fullness thereof, Psalm. 50. 12. The merciful God delights
not in the blood of dumb Creatures, he received them only as some atonement for
Man's transgression, and as a type of that great Sacrifice which was once
offered for all. Herein he showed Mercy that he would accept of the life of a
Beast for a more noble offender; Sacrifice and burnt Offerings thou would
not, but the doing of thy will. He is subject to no necessities, imperfection
or low desires, and therefore thousands of Gold and Silver are nothing to him,
they are his own already; He did first create, and now disposes of them; but
there is something still, which I do in no wise say, he has put out of his own
power, yet he is pleased not to accept of it unless freely bestowed. My Son
give me thine heart, Prove. 23. 26. O that there was such an heart in them that
they would fear me and keep all my Commandments, that it might be well with
them, and their Children forever, Deuteronomy. 5. 29. He seems to long for it, and
that for their good; for he who has so much already and will be likewise
glorified on them if they refuse, cannot receive any addition by so small a
Mite. It is only that another should do all things to obey him.

Yet wretched and froward Man who knows not, nor will be persuaded what is for
his good, who would fain be reconciled unto God, a Being so much above, and
mightier then he, though it be more out of fear and selfishness then love, for
that he is willing to give any thing rather then the right one; with what
anguish and earnestness, but upon mistaken Grounds does he expostulate? Will
the Lord be pleased with thousands of Rams, or ten thousand Rivers of Oil?
Shall I give my first born for my Transgression, or the fruit of my body for
the sin of my Soul? He has showed thee, O Man what is good, and what does the
Lord require of thee, but to do Justice and to love Mercy, and to walk humbly
with thy God, Mic. 6. 7, 8. Then thou must submit thy Will unto his Will. Many
do offer up the Sacrifice of Praise, use much Devotion, will bestow liberally
Alms to the poor, frankly part with their Money, but not their Lusts, make a
show of Subjection unto God, yet keep their own Humors, and will not cast down
imaginations and every high thing that exalts it self against the Obedience
of Christ; yet this one thing is more then them all, and which God principally
insists upon. He that Prays, gives Thanks, or receives the Sacrament does he
them out of Obedience? Then that is to oblige him to other things of Duty. Does
he not them to the intent that he may be better enabled to this? Or is he
determined not to do this, and put God of with only begging Pardon? When a
matter is in Controversy, and the adverse party will not give it up unto him
who has Power and Right on his side, but think to come of by asking formal
Forgiveness for the Omission. What would your selves conclude of such dealing?
God is neither to be mocked nor trifled wi^hal; he will not accept of
Lip-labor instead of Obedience of the Heart, outward Services will not pass
with him for inward Transgression of the Will. If I regard iniquity in my
Heart, the Lord will not hear me^ Psalm. 66. 18. It is rather a Voice of babbling
or whining then of Prayer and Supplication, if there is the Spirit of
Stubbornness within: But however if done in a right manner, still he is better
pleased, when we have a good and honorable Esteem of his awful Majesty, then
by speaking forth of the same with our Lips. If he did hear only by the hearing
of the Ear, our Voice how loud soever would not reach unto Heaven; and if it
did, What are a few good Words unto him, unless our selves do really assent
that it is so? What do signify putting up Petitions unto him, unless we
endeavor after the things we pray for? We do rather dishonor him by asking
for Grace and his Holy Spirit, if when he gives we receive them in vain by not
working together with them. In the Sacrament we express our Love to the Lord
Jesus, we try to exalt him, and show our selves thankful as much as we can, but
still there is something more he looks after, then strains of gratitude and
Complemental Expressions, Why call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the things
which I say? Luke 6. 46. The end of all the Commandments, of all the Duties of
Religion, of all those Transactions that ever passed between God and Man, and
whatsoever he has revealed of himself, is Obedience.

We cannot imagine any other way of approving our selves unto him; those who
have the best Esteem of us, and are willing to do every thing we would have,
they get our Love and Favor. Would we carry our selves after the same manner
to the God of all things, He is pleased (Oh infinite Condescension and
Goodness!) to manifest his Love, call us Friends, Jam. 2. 23. John 15. 14. and
has promised a Reward. We have Kings and Governors of our Flesh which rule
over us, and we give them reverence; shall we not much rather be in Subjection
to the Father of Spirits and live? For they verily, for a few days here on
Earth exercise Dominion over us after their own Pleasure, and for the public
Good, but he for our Profit that we might be Partakers of his Holiness, have
some little Taste of good things here, and be ever Happy with him hereafter.
There are the Arguments of his Sovereignty, Acts 17. 28.
Greatness, Right and Propriety, but there is one more to which the Judgment of
an Heathen, and the Sense of all mankind besides Witnesses, Says Aristo^le,
All People obey that which is profitable for them. And upon this Reason our God
does deserve Arist. Rhet. l^b. 1. cap. 8.
Obedience from all Nations and People of the World, for now he has made them
so as they are, that he might set before them the good and the evil, He has
most excellently consulted for their Being by giving them Statutes so righteous
and holy as he has done, which are to make them as Happy, as considering their
imperfect Condition, they can be whilst in this World.

O what great Exhortation has our God given to bring all the Sons and
Daughters of Adam over unto him, that if they will hearken unto, and consider
thereof, if they would Psalm. 22. 27.
Remember, they must be turned unto the Lord their God. He would be reconciled
to the World, or he would never make known so many pressing Motives to it; that
whosoever would attend to them, and not suffer the Temptations of Satan or his
own Flesh to draw him aside, it is impossible he should stand out still in
Rebellion against God. There is some mis-apprehension which is one cause of
that Enmity and Backwardness in the Heart of Man toward him: If it was the
Pleasure of our God that the greater part of mankind, or that any should
perish, he would never have done so much as he has that all should come to
Repentance. He has given them Power to 2 Pet. 3. 3.
Act freely and of themselves, suffering them so to do (as is very agreeable to
a Life of Trial) God has done all that lies on his part, affording to Man
Revelation, his Word without, his Spirit within, and has Commanded to comply
with them.

But if he will not do this, if he continues willingly ignorant, if he of set
purpose refuses to hear or read Gods Truth. If he will not make use of those
means of Grace and Salvation which are appointed, and he is Commanded to do,
this is despising knowledge, and refusing Subjection unto the Almighty. Upon
this Hinge turns the whole of Man's Salvation; for by Thought and Reason he
Acts, (none is mad at all times, but has Consideration even of that kind of
Life) and if he first determines not to be acquainted with the ways of God,
then that natural Aversation (which is too much in us all, and would likewise
hinder the best if not thus prevented) will certainly keep him off, and that
will increase more by Sin and evil Habits, and so Satan will get him at the
first Assault. Strange! that this wilful and stubborn Temper, should creep into
that Ingenuity which all pretend unto. That this way of Destruction should be
chosen against that Self-preservation, and willingness to be Happy which is in
all Men. That reasonable Creatures should obstinately stick to that which is so
full of Danger, and forsake that wherein is all imaginable Security. Is there
in the only way of Peace any thing hard and a^kward? Why should he lie under
those Thoughts? Consult thoroughly, and they will prove otherwise. Incline your
Ear and come unto me, hear and your Soul shall live, Isa. 55. 3. Knows he
not, that if he will do this, he shall be saved? And what is he unwilling or
afraid of that? If he would weigh the Arguments he must both believe and
consider, and then let him Act contrary if he can; but he does not care to be
persuaded to be a Christian. Then, O Man, thou have destroyed thy self: Who can
Pity him that perishes by Hunger and Thirst, when Victuals are set by him, and
he might receive them if he would? If People are destroyed for lack of
Knowledge, Hos. 4. 6. What can we say to it when it is their own Fault? It is
at their Peril, if they refuse and contemn those means which God has appointed
to bring unto eternal Life, without which they must mis-carry: For if the Word
spoken by Angels was steadfast, and every disobedience received a just
Recompense of Reward, How shall we escape if we neglect so great Salvation,
Heb. 2. 2, 3.

The Promise in sundry places of Scripture is unto Godliness, Of Ungodliness.
Psalm. 4. 3. Psalm. 101. 2. 4. 1 Timothy 4. 8. and the threatening is against
ungodliness, Psalm. 9. 17. Romans 1. 18. 2 Pet. 2. 6. 2 Pet. 3. 7. Jude. 15^ Where
is a right use of the Ordinances and positive Duties, all Obedience will
likewise follow. On the contrary when they are neglected, it is Disobedience
and Contempt to that God who enjoins them. Many are Friendly and just toward
Man, temperate as to themselves, but yet are ungodly. The World thinks, What
harm do these? Why, may they not go to Heaven? Not considering what the great
Provocation of ungodliness is, and they do mistake in not seeing the first
Reason of the Commandments of God: Which in Truth are for the welfare of
mankind, but this is not all; for the good or inconveniences, consequent to the
Observation or Violation of them, as pertaining to short-lived mankind, do not
Rise so high as to have or deserve eternal Rewards or Punishments. The Act of
Sin is small and weak, but the strength of Sin is the Law, 1. Cor. 15. 56. It
receives the Aggravation from going against that High and Divine Authority
which has established things so: For it is too much a fond and proud Opinion,
that all things are for our selves, if I do neither harm to my Neighbor nor my
Self, and I commit Sin, What great Evil is in it? Is a common Question. Whereas
they might look up and consider, that God in his doings toward the Children of
Men, designs his own Glory in the first place, as well as their Good. Now if
there is Disobedience and Contempt toward himself, and Transgression of what
he has Enacted, here is the exceeding evil of Sin, though no prejudice comes
thereby to any mortal Creature. It is what lies in them, making void Gods
Dominion, and in plain terms, that he shall not Reign over them. The great
matter is, Whether his Creatures are subject unto him, they are so indeed: But
whether themselves think so, and will show themselves to be such, as the
ungodly Man does not: Thou have said in thine Heart, I am, and none else
besides me, Isa. 47. 10. And hereby may be seen the Hainousness of his
iniquity, for he is an open Rebel, who refuses to tread Gods Courts, he is one
of himself, and will not acknowledge dep^ndance from an higher Power. He
neglects for his part, what all the World thinks due, viz. The Worship of God.
So that it will fare better with Superstitious Christians, unbelieving Jews,
and Pagan Idolaters; for they intended some Homage though a ^i^^aken one, to
the Great Lord of all things, but he does none at all. He says within himself?
It is vain to serve God, and what Profit is it to keep his Ordinances? Mal. 3.
14. Whereas it is his own Fault, for he might know if he would wait all the
days of this short Life, for the exceeding and eternal weight of Glory. He
might in the mean while perceive some good in the Solemn Meetings if he would
come with a pure mind, and behave himself as he should. But he is glad of any
excuse, when in reality that (as other Excuses) is a further Aggravation of his
Sin, and so it will appear, When God who now knows, shall manifest the secrets
of all Hearts: for People who are born in the Christian Church, entered by
Baptism, and afterward wilfully make themselves Strangers from the Covenant of
Grace, and be without God in the World; What is this, but as much as they can
to exempt themselves from his Government, and because it may hereafter Rise up
against them, they would utterly destroy it if they might. Whoever impartially
judges of these things, may perceive the exceeding Sinfulness of ungodliness.
It is the greatest degree of Sin that Men can arrive unto. How many times is
mention made in Scripture of re^using to hear the Word of God, and not calling
upon him, There is no Fear of God before their Eyes, they forget him; and such
like Expressions, by which the Abomination of iniquity is set forth. All these
Sins are immediately against God himself. If one Man sin against another, the
Judge shall Judge him; but if a Man sin against the Lord, who shall entreat for
him? 1 Samuel 2. 25. When God does set up his Kingdom, for such to endeavor to
get from under it, must be a great Provocation. As now if any Prince should
issue forth his Proclamation, and Order it to be read and fixed up, He would
certainly be displeased at those who stop their Ears, and take no notice of it,
and so it will be as to all those Potsherds of the Earth, who show the like
Stubbornness or disdain against their Maker.

In good Manners we are to hear what God will Command us, Of Preaching.
before we put up our Petitions unto him. The Master is at Liberty to speak
before the Servant utters his Supplication: Yea, all that the Lord has said we
should do; so that is first to be known, for the end of Prayer is to ask
Forgiveness for former Transgressions, to beg Grace and Power to be more
obedient for the future. When God delivered his Law in that terrible manner on
Mount Sinah the People were afraid, that they said unto Moses, Speak thou with
us, and we will Hear, Exodus 20. 19. and it is promised further, We will hear,
and do it, Deuteronomy. 5. 27. This way our Fore fathers chose, and accordingly he did
during his Lifetime, and left written a Copy of the Law which should be for
ever. Moses of Old time has in every City them that Preach him, being read in
the Synagogues every Sabbath day, Acts 15. 21. He was both Preached and Read.
The Jews received the Law by the Disposition of Angels, and have not kept it,
Acts 7. 53. But Christians received it from a Greater, even the Son of God
himself, and have not obeyed it. Christ has those who continually Preach him
as Moses had, by how much he is not only greater then him, but the very Angels
of God. And receiving it immediately from his Father, he came down and made it
known upon Earth. Who had a Voice out of the Cloud, which said, This is my
beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased: Hear ye him, Mat. 17. 5. The Author to
the Hebrews insisteth upon the same Argument and Comparison, See that ye refuse
not him that speaks: For if they escape not, who refused him that spoke on
Earth, much more shall not we escape, if we turn away from him, that speaks
from Heaven, Heb. 12. 25. Who though he is long since ascended on High, and
sits at the right hand of the Father, yet speaks to us even now by his Word, He
that rejects me and receives not my Words, has one that judges him, the
Word that I have spoken, the same shall judge him at the last day, John 12.
48. And if we will not hear them, neither would we be persuaded, if Christ
should come once again into the World after the same manner as he did. He has
sent forth Laborers into his Harvest with full Power and Commission, He that
hears you, hears me: And he that despises you, despises me; and he that
despises me, despises him that sent me, Luke 10. 16. These are to do the Work
of their Great Master, to seek them that are lost, and endeavor according to
their utmost Power to bring many unto Life.

And he showed me Joshua the High Priest standing before the Lord, and Satan
standing at his right hand to resist him, Zech. 3. 1. When any thing is
designed for the good of mankind, he will be sure to hinder it as much as he
can. And it is observable among all the parts of Religion: None has been so
much stifled, refused or corrupted as the Ordinance of Preaching. Nothing is
more muttered against, or endeavored to be put off as the Faithful handling
and Application of the Word. The great prejudice against it is Lust, and
Consequent to that an affected ignorance. Seeing Men will not do accordingly,
they think it the better the less they know or hear of the things of God;
whereas this being wilful and out of a wicked mind, makes their Disobedience
yet worse, because they add this as the beginning and cause of all, They desire
not the knowledge of Gods ways, Job 21. 14. Thou hate instruction, and
casts my words behind thee, Psalm. 50. 17. This is the principal Device Satan
makes use of to deceive the whole World, by false and sly Suggestions he keeps
them off from being acquainted with the Way and Truth of God, and thence
springs up a secret Enmity in the first place against the Word, and those who
divide it aright, giving to every one his Portion. There is none grown up to
that height of wickedness, as to belch out Blasphemies against Heaven, or speak
openly against Scripture; yet in the Heart of the natural Man does lie hid an
Hatred, and this shows it self by opposing them, who are set in defense of the
Gospel. The real cause is concealed, but then he Picks some little Exceptions,
or seeks out for occasion (as that may easily be done by an evil mind) to Speak
or Act against them. Miserable infatuation! That Men should set themselves
against those, who in good Conscience and the greatest Earnestness endeavor to
lead them up to the Holy Hill. It can be no harm to rescue any from the place
of Torment, to pull him (though never so much against his Will) like a Brand
out of the Fire.

Now go write it before them in a Table, and note it in a Book, that it may be
for the time to come for ever and ever: That this is a Rebellious People, Lying
Children, Children that will not hear the Law of the Lord: Which say to the
Seers, see not: And to the Prophets, Prophecy not unto us right things, speak
unto us smooth things, Prophecy Deceits, Isa. 30. 8, 9, 10. for they can hear
and approve of such, and too many are carried away with this Temptation. The
Prophets Prophecy falsely, and my People Love to have it so, Jer. 5. 31. It is
not so much taken notice of, because it suits with their Humors and
Inclinations: For want of Love they think his Commandments grievous when
delivered aright and pressed home to the Conscience. It is observable, the
Spirit of God speaks very much of the abovementioned Corruption, but little or
nothing against those severe and rigid Men, against whom the World cries out so
much, See Isa. 9. 16. Isa. 58. 1. Jer. 14. 14. Jer. 23. throughout Ezekiel. 13.
and 34. Chap. Lam. 2. 14. Jer. 48. 10. Mal. 2. 8, 9. Mal. 3. 3, 4. Luke 20. 21.
2 Cor. 4. 1, 2. Gal. 1. 10. 1 Cor. 4. 1, 2. 2 Timothy 2. 14, 15, 16. Tit. 2. 1, 6,
7. 1 Pet. 4. 11. Mat. 15. 14. There are more Texts concerning this horrible
abuse, and for the Remedy thereof, all which are fulfilled in these days, and
should be amended. That which moved Pilate to deliver our Savior, does move
these to betray his Heritage: They are willing to content the People, Mark 15.
15. and therefore suffer them to lie still in their Ignorance and Disobedience.
Her Prophets are light and treacherous Persons, Zeph. 3. 4. they betray the
Cause of God, for they do not enforce it with that Power they might. Some, as
if they were ashamed of his Office, do not deliver his Message, do not use the
Arguments he has given, but are Foolish Prophets that follow their own Spirit,
Ezekiel. 13. 3. as if their Whims and Notions were better and more persuasive then
the Oracles of God. He would be reconciled unto the World, as they would
willingly be at Peace with him. And what hinders this blessed Accommodation? I
have not sent these Prophets, yet they ran: I have not spoken to them, yet they
Prophesied. But if they had stood in my Couns^l, and had caused my People to
hear my Words (Mark that) Then they should have turned them from their evil
way, and from the evil of their doings. Jer. 23. 21, 22. If they would insist
on those Motives which flow from the Word of Truth, and let them run with their
due Cogency, we see here what would have been the Effect of it. The foregoing
words are, In the latter days ye shall consider it perfectly. In the end of
time many will reflect, that if those set over them had done as they should,
and their own Conscience did stir them to do; such Evils might have been
escaped. Thy Prophets have seen vain and foolish things for thee, and they have
not discovered thine iniquity to turn away thy Captivity, Lam. 2. 14. They have
not used their utmost diligence, to keep off from that threatening which is now
manifested under the Gospel.

What could God have done more for his Vineyard then he has done? His Decrees
and Dispensations concerning mankind are righteous, He has done things
sufficient for them to be Happy and avoid Misery. Only he has permitted them
as free and reasonable Creatures to Act of themselves. He does move and stir up
their Wills to that which is good; Those whom his Providence suffers to be
Pastors, He prompts by his Spirit to be faithful in that Trust reposed in them.
To the hearers are committed the lively Oracles, their own Conscience, there is
the opportunity of good Books and Conversation with other helps and advantages
which might be improved for the benefit of mankind. But the only thing is, they
are not forced, and it is expected what they do, it should be with a willing
mind; considering which they have Assistances sufficient to work out their own
Salvation. God has been pleased to establish all things in an orderly way.
What pertain to his Kingdom over the Sons of Men, have their Rules and their
appointed means, and his Blessing does always Accompany them. He does not work
Miracles, where the thing may be done in a way he has already showed. To turn
the Hearts of the Fathers unto the Children, and the Disobedient to the Wisdom
of the just, to make ready a People prepared for the Lord, Luke 1. 17. He gives
his Word, Spirit and Ministers. By the help of them, and putting forth the
strength God has given us, all this may very well be accomplished. As the
great Super-intendent in his Works of Nature has left them to go in their
Course, so in his Kingdom of Grace which is over the Souls of Men, he has
ordained alike Method to spring forth and increase by appointed means.

The great and only business which has passed between God and Men, is
concerning their Obedience in this World, and their Salvation in that which is
to come. And therein may be observed from the very first Creation of them a
most wise contrivance of things on Gods part; but the utmost folly, giving back
and rebellion on ours. Had we consented and for us performed what we might have
done, there had been no separation between God and us, which our iniquities
have now made. Wilful ignorance and sloth has occasioned this evil, by not
improving the Talent, but hiding it in a Napkin. Would any one act according to
the grace and power given him, and according to the way showed, he shall never
miscarry: Christ has made up for Adams Transgression, so that the Lord being
our helper, we may do the things well-pleasing in his sight, if our selves will
sincerely set to do them. God is faithful, and would not try our Obedience by
more then we are able to perform; he gives aid, and offers more if we would but
seek and make use of it. Does any one desire to be saved? Who does not? Why
then there is no more required but his real working together with the grace of
God, and according to his means. It is astonishing to consider, that seeing God
has given all those great and powerful Arguments to stir up Man to his Duty,
and then all the faculties of his Soul have a tendency toward it; yet so few
are brought over to a right sense and universal practice of Religion. But Satan
trys all ways to drive them off, and then is their own aversation through
corrupt nature to the things of God* but here again, if they would consult his
Word, they would not be ignorant of those devices of the Enemy, which might be
rendered ineffectual, and then by striving contrary and giving diligence, that
aver^ation would by degrees wear of. There is sufficient done that all might
come to life, It is not the Will of your Father which is in Heaven that one of
these little ones should perish, Mat. 18. 14.

Some do needlessly inquire concerning the number of those that shall be saved.
When the Question was asked our Lord, Luke 13. 23, 24. he gives no direct
answer to it, but commands to take care for themselves; and if every one did
so, there would be no need to ask such a Question. This is certain, every Man
or Woman may perform those conditions to which Salvation is promised; each
single person may obey God, keep the sayings of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, and patiently continue in Well-doing. The Scripture observing the
Irreligion and wickedness of Men in Gal. 3. ^.
those Generations when it was Penned, and foreseeing how it would be in
following Ages, speaks in that wise as it does; but yet the same word says,
All the ends of the World shall remember and turn unto the Lord, and all the
kindreds of the Nation shall Worship before thee, Psalm. 22. 27. which is to be
fulfilled, as the others have been, and are. Every one is called upon to this;
it is in the power of all to hear or read the Scriptures, to Pray, to examine
further evidences of it, and Faith comes by these things, and ^e will believe.
He may again attend to the Word of Exhortation, and then he will do: For that
is to be said for the excellency of our Religion, that never any one could see
all that may be said for it, and then reject it; If the wicked Man would suffer
himself to know what might be alleged for Obedience unto God, himself would
not refuse it. He is afraid, and dares not consider of the Arguments which
enforce the same, for then he would be converted and healed; and therefore it
is not without cause the subtle Enemy labors so much to hinder from that.
Whereas if he is in the most natural state, yet if he is endued but with common
Wisdom, he should not presently set that at naught which in this carries so
much of its Divinity and Truth. And he should suspect his own course because he
does as it were distrust those excuses and pretenses (for Reasons he has none)
for his Wickedness, in that they dare not in the least stand in competition
with what may be said for the contrary Way.

Men could never go on as now they do, unless worse then the deaf Adder, they
stop the Ear and refuse to hear the Voice of the Charmer, charm he never so
wisely. They act commonly by slight apprehension of things; as for those of
this World, they suffer to sink deep and lie at the very ground of their
Hearts, but for heavenly they either shut them quite out, or they lie scattered
at the top, and have no deepness of Earth and no Root, Mat. 13. 5, 6. It is
seldom that things are done altogether in a hurry, but generally people act
what they think best to be done. In the very heart there is an approbation of
them, they may outwardly commend another kind, but then they have within them a
secret reserve, and give preference to what they do, or else hope to escape the
danger. The great controversy in the World is, Whether Men should obey the Law
of God, or the Law of Sin; Whether they shall do according to his Will, or be
Master of their own Actions. None will deny that God is to be obeyed, nor can
they gainsay against his Law which is Good, Just and Reasonable, this is
allowed of even by the transgressour: But then for following his own course, he
has some fancies which are kept secret within himself, and are at the very
bottom of his mind, which with him do weigh down those general Considerations.
The present Pleasure, Profit, or Conveniences, or thinking to repent and avoid
Gods indignation, and such kind of thoughts which the Tempter does suggest, and
his own heart does receive and improve to the utmost advantage, that they stand
in opposition to those considerations which the Spirit and Word of God would
subminister: But either he does not admit them, or they lie scattered and loose
to be taken away, and are not lain to heart. When there is a voluntary yielding
to Temptations, a glad hearkening to all the Whispers of Satan, and a turning
back from those good Motions or willing unmindfulness of them: When there is a
complacency and attendance to the flatteries of sin, but a dislike or only a
sudden thought concerning Holiness, there the Man, may and also does run to all
sort of Wickedness; even in all Thought is the principle of action. And
therefore it is said, Let the Wicked Man Jer. 16. 12.
forsake his way, and the Unrighteous Man his Thoughts, Isa. 55. 7. Which
walks in a way which is not good after their own thoughts, Isa. 65. 2. As sin
is shameful, so the inducements to it are concealed; but there was never an
advised act of it committed, but those conceits had a greater influence over
him then other considerations, which either did not appear to him so forcible,
or were slightly, or not thought of at all: and these deliberate acts determine
the condition of every Man, as to future Happiness or Misery: Even that which
they commonly allege for excuse is advised also, their Ignorance and
Inconsideration, for they might both know and consider if they would, and are
commanded to do, and then they would have acted just contrary.

Hear now O House of Israel, Is not my way equal? Are not your ways unequal?
Ezekiel. 18. 25. Why should not that be allowed the same foregoing thought as your
own? Judge of them both alike, and be not wholly taken up with the imagination
of your own evil hearts. That gracious promise to the Wicked Man's Repentance,
verse. 27. is observable for the reason added, verse. 28. Because he considers
and turns away from all his Transgressions that he has committed, he shall
surely live, he shall not die. As before he had some seeming reason why he did
wickedly, so having attended and fully weighed what was offered on the other
side, this makes the stream of Action run the right way. I thought on my ways
and turned my feet unto thy Testimonies, Psalm. 119 59. Not with a slight fancy
or cursory approbation only of one side, but with a through and full
deliberation, and upon such a debate let any one cast out the commands and
proposals of our God who can. An unwise Man does not know this, and a bru^ish
Man does not understand it. He is guided by Sense, and some little shows of
Reason; but then he will not let reason have its perfect work, he will not
exert it to the utmost, for then he could not live in doubt and misery all his
life long, or miscarry as to the future. If when he is in honor and has no
understanding (for that is the same when not used) but becomes like the Beasts
that perish, being moved only with sensible and present objects; yet he knows
why he does thus wilfully degenerate himself, and he might be otherwise if he
would. There is some reason which lies at the bottom, and shoots forth into all
Men's Actions; in some it is Carnal, Brutish and kept under; but in others it is
pure, rectified and ascending.

So that, would the skilful Workman in the Vineyard dig to the very root and
lay dung there, endeavor to persuade from the first Principle of Action,
bringing the like reasons against Ignorance, Sluggishness and Sense which he
has for it; even this barren Tree through Gods Blessing might be so cultivated
as to bring forth Fruit. How forcible are right words? Job. 6. 25. They
subminister right thoughts, and those are the original of Action. Yea, they are
the very grace of God, as may be gathered from Acts 20. 32. Ephesians. 4. 29. Tit. 2.
11. What is that, but promptings and inclinations in the Soul to Holy and good
Things? Now right words do afford these; the Spirit makes them to be
understood, warms and enlivens, setting them home to our hearts (for otherwise
they may be as a dead letter, an unintelligible flat sound, Riddles or
Mysteries) and this as well as the other is from God, from whom all good
proceeds. As Meat and Drink nourishes the Body, and preserves Health when
dressed aright, so the Word of God (both being through his appointed Blessing)
do make the Soul grow up in Grace and Knowledge. Wherefore laying aside all
Mali^e, and all Guile, and Hypocri^ies, and Envies, and evil speakings; as new
born Babes desire the sincere Milk of the Word that ye may grow thereby, 1 Pet.
2. 1, 2. If there have been no prejudices before, this has a mighty effect
upon the Soul. It is observed that young Men are more easily persuaded and
receptive of good, for they have not those habits of sin which strive against
sound Doctrine, they have not so long resisted the Grace and call of God as
others. If they are not seared with custom, nor hardened with the deceitfulness
of sin, they may indeed a little struggle through Lust, yet are to be wrought
on by the Word. If not utterly to forsake, yet to stop a little in their
course; and if they would attend constantly to right exhortation, they would be
converted: But conceive him who is a pure Man not corrupted any way, that has
the common principles of Nature; and come to instruct him in the ways of God;
He will forthwith assent to them, he will judge it the most reasonable thing in
the World, That Mortal Man should be subject unto the Almighty and everlasting
God, for a Creature to be governed by his Creator, especially when he sees it
enforced with that demonstration and power as it may be. As soon as they hear
of me, they shall obey me, Psalm. 18. 44. Every unprejudiced mind must condemn
that wilful ignorance and stubbornness, which hinder all that do not come unto
God. The Lord looks upon all the Inhabitants of the Earth, he fashioneth
their hearts alike, Psalm. 33. 14, 15. The very frame and making of all Men
being alike (none need labor under particular constitutions, for they make but
little difference and may be overcome) are exactly fitted by our wonderful
Creator for those tenders of universal Grace and Salvation, he has given to
all not one single Soul excepted: and then the Word is sufficient as may be
seen, Luke 2. 30, 31. There is nothing wanting but the will of Man to comply
with Gods gracious purpose, and every one may submit and comply his to that.

If those who take upon them the Ministry of the Word were thoroughly concerned
and affected with the good of Souls; If they would be as diligent in the point
of everlasting Happiness or Misery to promote the one and hinder the other, as
now to do a little kindness and prevent a trifling inconvenience, which one Man
does to another, and it is well accepted of. If they are but lovers of
themselves, and did believe the Scriptures, not only by saying so with the
Tongue, but in Reality; let them see Ezekiel. 3. 17, 18. Heb. 13. 17. Which should
oblige them to act accordingly by making it their principal business to Turn
people from Darkness unto Light, and from the power of Satan unto God. If they
would insist earnestly upon the word of Exhortation, do all things to persuade,
making use of the Arguments that God has given that people might do also the
things well pleasing in his sight. As the Scriptures are indeed the Word of
God, so respect is to be had to them accordingly; as the Holy Ghost has
consulted for all times, Persons and Places, so application is to be made. The
reason of things is general, and God is dishonored in alike instances as those
there particularly spoken against. The Law of God is perfect, Psalm* 19. 17.
Reaching to all the Thoughts, Words and Actions: his Government extends over
the whole Man, and there is no action exempt from his Commandments. As we were
allowed of God to be put in trust with the Gospel, even so we speak not as
pleasing M^n, but God which ^rieth the hearts, 1 These. 2. 4. Not handling the
Word of God deceitfully, 2 Cor. 4. 2. Which is either done by concealing the
cogent arguments, or not pressing them home but superficially. There are
further directions from Acts 20. verse. 20, 26, 27, 28. 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5. Heb. 4.
12. Isa. 58. 1. Jer. 26. 2. If all this and much more which every Teacher
knows, and is convinced to be his Duty, were carefully observed, it would tend
more toward the reformation of the World. The Church has ordained Prayers to
be used before the Solemn times of Ordination, That God would give his Holy
Spirit to them that shall be called to serve in the Ministry, that they may
set forth his Glory, and set forward the Salvation of all Men, which words if
according to their part they did turn into faithful and diligent endeavors; if
they did their utmost according to the power and means given them; more would
be done toward it then now is. I^ they would show themselves as much
concerned, as an Ambassador is in a Negotiation for his Prince, Men are
reasonable Creatures, and they might at length yield to the good will of God
who would have all to be saved. And though all have not Faith, which is the
Groundwork for Spiritual Exhortation to be builded upon; yet they have
Judgment and Understanding to consider the probability of those things, which
are required to be believed.

But to this great and good Work there are (amongst others) two hindrances,
Pride and want of Resolution. If they should use this kind of Preaching,
expressed by a Canting and Fanatical.
disdainful contemptible Term, they should lose their Reputation and Good Will
with the People, and they could not show their learning.

The Word of the Lord was made a reproach unto me, and a d^^ision daily, Jer.
20. 8. Said the Prophet in his times: And it may be a Question, Whether it was
not by some like saying as that so common in ours. Whatsoever shift and meaning
they pretend, yet he who knows the secrets of the heart, is judge himself; Men
show their contempt toward him accordingly as they use his Word or Servants,
which he resents as immediately upon himself. And therefore all should have a
care how they take into their Mo^th any Proud or Scornful expression of what
relates unto him. Neither should others be discouraged by it, if they would
learn what their great Master says, John 7. 18. The Doctor of the Gentiles h^d
as eminent Gifts and Natural Accomplishments as any now amongst us, yet he did
use the foolishness of Preaching; But he says, the foolishness of God is wiser
then Men, 1 Cor. 1. 26. So in his Word are contained greater Treasures of
Wisdom and Knowledge, then in all humane Writings whatsoever. There is the
Wisdom of God in a Mystery, even the hidden Wisdom which God ordained before
the World unto our Glory, 1 Cor. 2. 7. Which by degrees has shined forth, and
still there is more to be seen, and so will be unto the end of the World. The
well is deep, and there is much Water, our Forefathers have not drained it,
there is something left for us, our Children, and for all Posterity for
evermore. There lie Isa. 45. 15.
hid many Inferences and Deductions by which God may be more known to the
World, his Works and manifold Wisdom more discovered: All has not, nor is
manifested to past or present Generations, there is left for succeeding ones to
exercise themselves withal. And had all Learned Men applied their study, time
and Prayer more closely unto this Book of Divine Revelation, there had been
much more made known then is now amongst us. Whatsoever things are true,
Whatsoever things are honest, Whatsoever things are just, Whatsoever things are
pure, Whatsoever things are lovely, Whatsoever things are of good report,
Whatsoever tends to the real happiness and good of Mankind are here contained,
the which cannot be said of that vast Multitude of Books in the World taken all
together; In them are things false, merely conjectural, impertinent, when here
all is true, certain and very proper to the great end of Man.

Since he is beholden to God for his Being, and for discerning those things in
himself which is properly Knowledge; Where can he better improve that then by
the immediate help given in his Word? This being Divine, and for the assistance
of all, Men should no^ set up so much as to be called Rabbi, when all are
Brethren and Fellow* helpers. Where they deliver any thing that necessarily
flows from the Word and is Truth, there we ought to receive it and be thankful
unto God, who has made it known by such an instrument; for it is one of the
Ra^es which comes down from the Father of Lights, and leads up where we shall
see Light, Psalm. 36. 9. But if it is mere fancy and opinion, if it neither
rises from the Fountain of Life nor has any taste of it, such as gratifies an
itching Ear or curious Humor, this is not to be ^ed principally on, nor to
keep off from wholesome food. The goodness of a thing is measured by the end,
and what has the most sublime object, God and immortality, and that which
conduces to present and future Happiness must necessarily excel that which
delights only while it is read, and perishes in the using; for which none is
more happy in knowing, or if he does meet with any benefit, it is small and
signifies nothing beyond this vain transitory life: But the Word of Life, 1
John 1. 1. should affect us much more then those little and paultry things we
now grasp, of which we must in a very little while be bereaved for ever, when
those great astonishing things shall be both present and visible, and so remain
to Millions of Ages. It tends to those things which always endure, and that is
life indeed: But whatsoever pertains to this dream, to this dream of a Shadow,
which has no substance, is declining and makes haste; and therefore what
consults only for the conveniences of this, signify not so much in comparison
to the other, as a tale that is told, is to the greatest affairs.

It is granted by all that the Bible is the most wise and excellent Book in the
World; all Christians acknowledge it to be the very Word of God, and those who
have either studied or taught Holy Things refer all to that. Yet here again,
the subtle Enemy of Mankind has found out a way even to deceive the Learned
and Disputers of the World, who pick out every thing that is less material, and
by their own spinning it out render it unprofitable. Who omit the one thing
needful, and seek after every thing they may turn into nice speculation or vain
jangling. Every thing of curiosity or doubtful disputation, is sifted out to
the utmost, but the great things that belong to our Peace, are not so much made
known as they should ^e. A wise Man begins from the end, and then those
important Truths of temporal Peace and eternal Salvation should be perfectly
understood, and pressed home to the Consideration of the World before those
things which float in the Brain, and not sink into the Heart; which are unless
when known, and hinder from fighting the good Fight of Faith, keeping the
Commandments of God, and laying hold of eternal Life. The Pillar and Ground of
Truth seems to shake by those high, tottering and needless Superstructions.
Those School-niceties have made to be thought more incredible the things we
believe The Absurdities and Fopperies of Superstition, have strangely
prejudiced against the very Worship of God. That Controversy and Humor of
disputing, have called the Fundamental Truths into question, it being an easy
inference for ignorant Souls to deny that in which the Contenders are not
agreed; and to conclude all is feigned and false, because Additions and
Corruptions are so. That squabbling about trifles, has very much taken off
from the Gravity of Religion, and undiscerning People have thence imagined it a
light thing.

An Enemy does craftily work in the minds of Men; but it is their Sin and
Folly, that when they do already or might know this, yet still they are
instrumental in carrying on his design. That wise Men should be taken in this
Snare, as it is a sign of his exceeding subtlety; so of their inconsideration
and want of Prudence, for this is another thing then what is commonly called
Wisdom. When those who should turn many to Righteousness, turn aside to vain
jangling; instead of instructing and exhorting them in the few things to be
believed, and many things to be done, they fill the Head with idle Opinions,
confound with endless Arguings, and not touch upon Practice, but in a general
and superficial way, here is a Stratagem to deceive themselves, and those that
hear them. Besides the word of Truth, which does clearly convince of this
mistake, they might look into themselves, attend unto the frame and desire of
their own Soul, for that aspires after Happiness and Perfection, having a
Complacency in those things which tend to it, and a dislike of the contrary. It
gladly receives all Divine and substantial Truths to be nourished up by them,
and shows an Aversation to what does not mediately or immediately promote this
end. As an Evidence of its immortality, it earnestly desires after those things
which are not to be found here, but have Relation to an endless Life. She is
for knowing those things which are to be known, that she may fix upon Rest and
blessed Expectation, be safe as to the doubtful uncertainty, and have strong
hopes for better things hereafter. Then she is truly pleased when things are
done in pursuance to this great end. She craves after knowledge and truth as
the Stomach after food, but in Disputings it is long before attained, and then
proves hungry and empty: Whereas the practical and useful kind is both suitable
and satisfies the understanding. One may run over many Volumes of Controversy,
and yet neither be wiser nor better; and perhaps he had a more true and clear
apprehension of the thing in Dispute, then after he sees it so perplexed and
obscured. The necessary Truths explicitly to be believed, are few and plainly
revealed; and further in all Mysteries, a Captivating of Reason unto the
Obedience of Faith is more acceptable in the sight of God, then curious prying
into unsearchable things. One may be sooner saved in a general belief and
particular Practice, then by minutely Contesting about every thing, and a
general observance of Gods Law; which as it is commonly inculcated and used, is
next to downright Disobedience.

In Truth all Men are in an imperfect State, but then they Act only half way of
their imperfection, and will not stretch that out as they might. Let them wind
up to the very top their Principles of Action. Would Man use the Powers of Soul
according to that degree God has given and put them forth, he could never miss
of Happiness. If he would lift up his Eyes, and see beyond the common end of
things, think of something that may be after this short time, be as desirous of
future Happiness and Safety, as he is of present Good and Convenience which
slides away; then he may do what he shall judge fit to be done. If we would put
the question to our immortal Soul, (as we have regard to the Body, which fades
as a Leaf) What will it avail me, to teach or study this or that thing, when I
shall put off this Tabernacle? When I must for a while live separate from it,
and afterward assume it for evermore. If such kind of thoughts were put home
to our minds, we might come to the same resolution with the Apostle, Yea
doubtless, and I count all things but loss for the Excellency of the knowledge
of Jesus Christ my Lord, Phil. 3. 8. To fully understand and declare what he
has revealed in the Gospel, is a knowledge that passes knowledge, more then
all wise Men of this World could discover; and extends further then this place,
which takes in all the Good of this present time, which is the utmost of all
great and generous Acti^ns, but then leaves them and reaches forward to
Immortality and Glory, to infinitely greater things both in degree and Duration
then what are admired, and eagerly sought after here. So that either he must
teach what he does not believe; or is a Fool in that he does not know nor
understand, if he is ashamed of the Gospel of Christ. Or thinks it a lessening,
which is the highest Honor, That publishes Peace, that brings good Tidings
of Good, that publishes Salvation, Isa. 52. 7. To acquaint the World what they
are so impatiently desirous after, where they may find Rest to their Souls: How
they may live in Hope and comfortable Expectation of that immutable and
infallible Promise of Eternal, exceeding and perfect Happiness.

The unbelieving Senseless World are enraged at this, which Heb. 3. 10.
may be thought Nonsense and Contradiction, yet they are at the means which
God has established to bring them to obtain it. The time will come when they
will not endure s^und Doctrine, but after their own Lusts shall they heap to
themselves Teachers having itching Fars, and they shall turn away their Ears
from the Truth, and shall be turned unto Fables, 2 Timothy 4. 3, 4. Which has
been sufficiently, and continues to this day to be fulfilled. They do no^ like
any thing that is the very Truth or convinces of Sin, Job 34. 32.
but are for quaint idle Notions, which signify nothing but to please Men; and
not so much neither, but as they divert from that which they most ought, and
are afraid to know. But however, the Teachers should consider what is written,
Ezekiel. 3. 17, 18. and Chap. 33. If the Watch man sleeps and gives no warnning,
or if he sees the Enemy coming, and will not ^ound the Alarm, because he will
not disturb out of their beloved Sleep, and so through his negligence the Enemy
kills or takes Captive, we know what all Men think of such unfaithfulness, or
foolish Pity. Themselves as well as indifferent Persons would be displeased
thereat, and would not trust unto him. It may be observed of that peculiar
manner of Penning this Command. And what I say unto you, I say unto all,
Watch^, Mark 13. 37. Every particular Person is to take diligent Care unto
himself, besides those Instructers set over him; for the Word of Truth says,
Be sober, be Vigilant, because your Adversary the Devil as a roaring Lion
walks about seeking whom he may devour, 1 Pet. 5. 8. Satan which deceives
the whole World is come down unto us, Rev. 12. 9. 12. He uses all imaginable
Tricks to keep People off from the good set before them. When a strong Man
armed keeps his Palace, his Goods are in Peace, Luke 11. 21. By observing his
methods of wilful ignorance and carnal security, his principal Device appears
to lead People quietly and undisturbedly to Hell. Now i^ those Commanded by God
to rouse others out of the Spirit of sloth and slumber, that they may see and
avoid the Danger, and not fall into it; But they neglect this for fear of
displeasing: If they will not teach knowledge and how to build up a
well-grounded Hope, because it will be irksome to lay open their silly Fancies
and Deceits, How do these in the mean while observe what is written, Acts 20.
26, 27, 28. If the People love to have it so now, they will wish otherwise
hereafter; as Contrariwise, who were so enraged against faithful Teachers, then
will have the best Opinion of them, and desire exceedingly, that they had
hearkened unto them.

It is one principal Stratagem of the Enemy of mankind to procure a liking unto
his ways, and a secret Hatred to what is contrary, to hate everlasting
Happiness, and love Destruction, or if that is impossible, yet thus they do to
the way and means of one and the other. And thereupon he represents those as
Troublers of Israel, as their Enemy who tells them the Truth, Gal. 4. 16. as
Tormenters of the Inhabitants of the Earth, Rev. 11. 10. Whereas indeed their
own Sins and Enmity through wicked Works, their own deadness in Trespasses and
Sins which cannot endure to be quickened, is the occasion of this disturbance;
which also would cease, if they were truly repented of and forsaken: But if
retained, there Springs up Hatred, unkind usage to the true Ministers of the
Gospel, not caring for their Company, speaking Evil of them, fancying them as
Tyrants, who are Men of like Passions with our selves, that are willing to take
part with the Condition of mankind, and have a Compassionate resentment of it.
But they dare not be unfaithful, and turn against him, who has sent them. They
know and endeavor to appease the living God, They must declare whatever he
Commands in his Word. They carefully seek for Men's Salvation every way, and try
the utmost to accomplish it; yet these for their Love have their Adversaries.
And have evil rewarded for good, Psalm. 109. 4, 5. They meet with Evil entreaty,
by lying Stories, Separating from Company, Reproaches: Luke 6. 22, 23.
They have the imputation of Moroseness, ill Nature, Envy, Pride, Self-conceit,
Willingness to find fault, and such like. Indeed there is nothing in the World,
to which a saying may not be affixed; for Malice and uncharitableness runs of
both sides as may be seen, Mat. 11. 18, 19. But to avoid the foresaid
Inconveniences and Temptations, (without which there could be no Trial) too
many have been carried along with the Generality, though it be in Corruption
and Wickedness. Who cannot endure to recede from common use, to molest mankind,
to see others shy and afraid of their Conversation, to be slandered and spoken
against. The like excuses (without question) had those four 1 Kings 22. 6.
hundred in Ahabs time, and the false temporizing Teachers in the several
Generations, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Hosea, Malachy speak of. Sin and
Corruption have always since the Word began, had the Majority and Fashion on
its side, (even when there was as much of the outward Worship and Service of
God, as at this day) and then they had the like Plea. This is the great
unhappiness, that God and the World, (though he has done all things for his
part toward a Reconciliation) have not yet been agreed; for as he would come
unto them, so they fall off from him, And he saw that there was no Man, and
wondered that there was no Intercessour, Isa. 59. 16. Very few, or none at all
that would stand up for the Cause and Honor of God. But notwithstanding as he
Ezekiel. 22. 30.
is most essentially Good and Righteous, and so approves himself in all his
doings toward the Children of Men, it is better to endeavor rather to please
him, then a wicked Apostate World. Especially those ought not to be evil
surmised of, who are to build up the Old waste places, to raise up the
Foundations of many Generation; and thou shall be called the Repairer of the
Breach, The restorer of Paths to dwell in, Isa. 58. 12. Who are purposely sent
by him to turn iniquity from Jacob, to remove that which has separated God and
us, and have hindered good things from us. Who is a God like unto thee, that
pardons iniquity, and passes by the Transgression of the re^nant of his
Heritage? He retains not his Anger for ever, because he delights in Mercy,
Mic. 7. 18. He might ca^^ off his People for being Rebellious, punish them, and
have no more to do with them: But he sends Prophets, his only begotten Son,
Scribes, Wisemen to the several Generations and places to be reconciled unto
him. Now it is evident, they should be faithful in this Work of the Lord, and
also discover what hinders the Accommodation, that it may be taken away, and
then the business is done. It is not to lead People on in a bare outward
Profession, or a partial Observation of the Law, but to bring them over unto
universal Obedience. And he who either will not, or dare not do this* is not
fit to be a Labourer in the Vineyard. But unto the wicked God says, What have
thou to do to declare my Statutes, or that thou should take my Covenant into
thy Mouth? Psalm. 50. 16. He had better seek any other way for a Livelihood,
then to take the oversight of the Flock of God for filthy lucre, 1 Pet. 5. 2.
and be negligent thereof.

Why a good Nature cannot endure to disturb, but he must when it is to prevent
a greater Evil. Who finds fault with a Surgeon that Pricks to let Blood in
order to Health, which as it is common, so most kind and reasonable. All the
irksomeness that can be to further our everlasting Happiness, and hinder alike
Misery, allowing for the exceeding Greatness thereof, will not amount to so
much as Men endure, and take it patiently in Case of a slight temporal Good or
Evil. And I beseech you Brethren, suffer the Word of Exhortation, for I have
written a Letter unto you in few words, Heb. 13. 22. There must some ha^sh
sayings now and then drop from the Preachers mouth, if he does according to the
Apostolical injunction, make full Proof of his Ministry, 2 Timothy 4. 4. The
Hearers must bear them patiently, and do thereafter if they intend to be saved.
They are to receive as Eli did from the Child Samuel, who told him every whit,
and hid nothing from him, and he said, It is the Lord, let him do what seems
him good, 1 Samuel 3. 18. Or as Hezekiah heard the Prophets sad Message to his
Posterity, Good is the Word of the Lord which thou have spoken, Isa. 39. 8.
There is an unwillingness to speak of Gods threatenings; The Prophets of Old
would fain excuse themselves, yet they would not be disobedient to the Spirit
of God, and it was with kindness to the People by first exhorting them to
Repentance to prevent the approaching Ruin. And I do not believe any good Man
does love to tyrannize over the Hearts of others by putting them into fear and
dread, but knowing the terror of the Lord we persuade Men, 2 Cor. 5. 11. They
do not otherwise declare the whole Counsel of God, and they must to keep People
from falling under the severity thereof; for it would be an odd kind of
Mercifulness to let them slide down into Hell, because we will not beforehand
disturb them a little with the Rumor thereof. Does any one who forewarns
another, such an Evil or Inconvenience will come upon him unless he hinders it
such a way, therefore meet with unkindness? In no wise, but on the contrary all
thanks and Good Will. There is altogether the like Reason, it should be the
very same as to the things of God and Eternity. Besides it is not he, but the
Word which does it. No Post or Herald can be justly blamed, for publishing what
we Fancy severe Edicts and Proclamations, for they are Servants, and must do
what their King Commands, but if any injury is offered them, Mark 12. 4, 5, 9.
He takes it as upon himself, and will punish accordingly. He that is sent a
Minister of Christ's Church did never descend into the deep, nor has he seen
any of those dreadful things of the invisible World. He is only to make known
and proclaim what he finds in the written Word of God. Who considering his
infinite Greatness (more then the Ocean is to a single drop) over those who are
but mere Creatures the Work of his hands, has made righteous Ordinances
enforced with suitable Rewards and Punishments, notwithstanding the latter may
seem hard and grievous to us. Yet how great soever they are, miserable
experience shows they are necessary to preserve his Government, and to keep
us in Subjection and Obedience.

In Truth we cannot well show it otherwise, then by a reverent Regard and
Conformity to his Word. No Man has seen God at any time, John 1. 18. Nor does
now hear his Voice. In what manner then shall he show himself subject to this
infinite Being? Let him show forth never so much Will Worship, Humility or
neglecting of the Body, think to gratify with something of his own; (as
corrupt Nature is too fond of its own Inventions)* yet if he has not regard to
the prescribed Pattern, all is esteemed as cutting off a Dogs neck, the Reason
is added, Yea they have chosen their own ways. If he offers up never so much,
or seeks to please Isa. 66. 2, 3.
him, that signifies nothing, For all these things have been says the Lord:
But to this Man will I look, even to him that is of a poor and contrite Spirit,
and trembles at my Word. If God should shake the Heavens and the Earth, the
most stout Inhabitants here would tremble, and they could not do otherwise: But
now he sanctifies the Lord and makes him his dread, who shows himself awful and
pliant at hearing, or reading of his revealed Will. If he did roar from Mount
Zion, or utter his Voice from the Battlements of Heaven, then the People would
presently cry out after their wonted manner, All that the Lord has spoken we
will do: But when the noise is gone and the fear is over, they would forget
that, and return to their own ways. Now it remains written in a Book that it
may not be once, but for ever, and there is the still Voice of the Spirit which
would set it home to our Hearts, and by this way he is pleased to try our
Obedience. And indeed how can it be better shown forth then by sincere doing,
according to that which we surely believe to be the very mind of God, what he
would have us to do.

Yet alas! What struggling and contesting is there against this? A manifest
Token of that disobedience which lies hid in the heart of Man, and puts it self
forth by Cavil, Distinguishing, Evasion, or setting themselves against those
who keep close to it. All this proceeds from that Root of Enmity and
unwillingness to comply therewith. He that is of God, hears Gods words, John
8. 47. When ye received the word of God, ye received it not as the word of
Men, but (as it is in Truth) the word of God which effectually works also in
you that believe, 1 These. 2. 13. All is but vain and deceitful words, which
have not Relation to this Rule, either by necessary Consequence or Connection.
God is Truth, and his word is Truth, John 17. 17. and if we say we love God, we
must also in the Apostles Phrase, receive the love of the Truth that we may be
saved, 2 These. 2. 10. That People may not be left at uncertainty to know what
it is, it may be discerned by the Touchstone; and also it has a full
Conviction over the Heart and Conscience. Notwithstanding the Shifts and
Tricks, the Disputing or cra^ty Eluding, yet there does remain a firm
persuasion in the mind, which cannot be got off, And let all have a Care how
they oppose or seek to Prevaricate that. When the Spirit of the mind suggests
to the Man, That is the very Truth, it is exceeding dangerous to resist or do
despite to that.

Should the Almighty have erected his Throne visible on Earth, People might be
overawed with the Sense of his Majesty and Greatness: Or else be invited by
that Splendor and Glory, to run unto him as now they do to Kings and great
Personages. So they might, and would yield a feigned Submission and love unto
him. But the Kingdom of God is within you, Luke 17. 21. He has established his
Government in the Hearts of Men. The Law he has given is in a Book which may
be read or heard to lay up in the Heart, and do accordingly. Such of the People
as shall be willing and obedient, will show themselves this way: and those who
refuse and Rebel, will do so likewise. Who now live by Faith, and approve their
Subjection unto his revealed Will, would do so much more if they had a sight of
him, or hear his Voice, as they shall have both to their exceeding and endless
Comfort: But to them, who now will not believe nor hearken Psalm. 107. 11.
to his Word, when he has made himself known after this manner, neither would
they do it from the ground of the heart, but might be frightened or led by a
mercenary Spirit if they had seen his power and Glory, as they may to their own
confusion and anguish of mind.

Why do the Heathen rage? And why do the People imagine a vain thing, Psalm. 2.
1. None but the Tyrants of Old or a mad Julian flies openly in the face of
Heaven; there may be found who does say in his heart, Tush God I care not for
thee, for there do lie strange imaginations within; But he does not lift up his
eyes and say so with a loud Voice, unless he is a Fool or Frantic: Ignorant
people have an impatiency at his Government, whereas they might know this would
not be for their hurt, but exceeding benefit, unless by restlessness and
provocation they draw the severity Jer. 25. 6.
of it upon themselves. Be still, and know that I am God, Psalm. 46. 10. There
is no removing the Government from his shoulders, nor getting themselves from
under it: How much better had they be quiet and obedient when he will love and
reward them for being so, then toss to and fro to no pupose, but to gaul
themselves the more? Accordingly they are to show themselves unto his
Ambassadors, who come with the Word of Reconciliation. Now then we are
Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us, we pray you in
Christ's stead be reconciled unto God, 2 Cor. 5. 20.

Paul as his manner was reasoned with them out of the Scriptures, opening and
alleging that Christ must needs have suffered, Acts 17. 2, 3. Who is the great
Mediator, all that he did and said was to bring people unto God; and so should
every one do in a point like necessary as that was to the unbelieving Jews.
This person did not try to please his Auditory, but does oppose the greatest
fault and sin in them as here, and so before Felix he reasoned of
Righteousness, Temperance and Judgment to come Acts 24. 25. All which have
Foundation in the Word, but the phrase reasoned is observable, and always to be
imitated in subordination to that; The Scriptures do contain general commands
and rules of Holy Life, to which those who are Contentious and obey not the
Truth, Romans 2. 8. can frame distinctions and find out evasions to deceive and
keep quiet their own Souls; but the particular handling and application of
them, convinces of sin and turns to Righteousness. The Holy Ghost has provided
for all Generations, Countries and Languages, and Penned them after this manner
for those who in their several Places and Ages should be entrusted therewith
the more fully to expound and apply the same, so as to teach the way of
Salvation perfectly and truly. It is the proper Office of our understanding to
collect one thing from another; Whatsoever is rightly inferred from the Word of
God, is the Word of God, and will be fulfilled; for nothing but truth can
follow from truth. There cannot be used too much care and circumspection
concerning this Ordinance of Preaching to manage it aright, because so much
depends thereon for the present Good and Universal Salvation of Mankind, which
is to be revealed and determined in a short time; for the World will quickly be
at end with us living, and how many Generations more may succeed, God knows,
but we may understand and trust unto what he says and promises, And they that
be wise shall shine as the Brightness of the Firmament, and they that turn many
to Righteousness, as the Stars for ever and ever. Many shall run to and fro,
and knowledge shall be increased, Dan. 12. 3, 4.

When we hear or read the Word, God speaks unto us; but when we make Prayers
and Supplications with Thanskgiving, we Of Prayer.
speak unto him. This is the intercourse between God and Man. That God should
hearken unto the voice of a Man, Josh. 10. 14. seems wonderful, if we have but
those just and raised thoughts of the Deity, and the true knowledge of our
selves. However, the foolish proud unbeliever thinks scorn of this Holy
Ordinance, yet if himself had but such a sight of the Lord sitting upon his
Throne as Isaiah had, Chap. 6. or Dan. 7. 9, 10. he would conclude it no
uncomely thing, but most bounden duty for such poor Creatures as Men and Women
to kneel before him, yea, if they were like Worms crawling in the Dust, lying
on the Ground with shame and confusion of Face, yet this would not be
submission enough to such a Mighty Being. It is seemly for the Body to bend and
lie prostrate before him that made it, and millions of the same kind. What is
Man that thou art mindful of him? Psalm. 8. 4. Even he who is most great in his
own or the Worlds opinion, who is lifted up with Pride to the Highest; yet this
same Person if he had Faith and Knowledge, would take it in extreme Anguish if
the Lord should cast him off or not mind him, as we are foretold will be the
condition of some, 1 Samuel 2. 30. Mark 8. 38. Those who now aspire after
greatness, abhorring contempt and low things will meet with intolerable
Vexation to be rejected from the great things of his Kingdom. There are some
now a days, who if they should see one in that posture as Elias was upon the
top of Carmel cast down upon the Earth, and he put his face between his knees,
1 Kings 18. 42. would think him either to be Mad or a pitiful Sneak, not
knowing the Object of his Worship and Adoration. Notwithstanding those High but
silly Imaginations 2 Cor. 10. 5.
of Men; yet themselves judge that the more an ordinary subject is in favor
with his Prince, and has access unto him though in never so submissive a
manner, it is more for his honor. And then as much as God is greater then Man,
so must it be more dignity to be allowed approaching unto him. If we consider
it thoroughly, Should not his Excellency make us afraid? There is awe and
horror to address immediately to so Glorious a God; and therefore it is
necessary to have express invitation from him first, as (Blessed be his
Glorious Name for ever) we have De^t. 4. 19. Psalm. 50. 15. J^r. 29. 13. and
throughout his whole Book. But more especially in these last days by Christ
Jesus our Lord, in whom we have boldness and access with confidence by the
faith of him, Ephesians. 3. 11, 12. We are required to ask in his Name, John 15. 16,
and 16. 23. Who also through his transcendent greatness expressed, Phil. 2. 6.
Heb. 1. 3. might keep us off, yet he humbles himself to take upon him our
flesh, to become as one of us, and more familiar to our Nature. Such a Mediator
and intercessour was expedient for us, who by his relation to God might prevail
with him, and seeing he was pleased to become as one of our Brethren, we may
the more presume to address unto, and through him. Seeing then that we have a
great high Priest that is passed into the Heavens, Jesus the Son of God (a
double exhortation follows) let us hold fast our profession, Let us therefore
come boldly unto the throne of Grace, that we may obtain Mercy, and find grace
to help in time of need, Heb. 4. 16.

For what Nation is there so great, who has God so nigh unto them, as the Lord
our God is in all things that we call upon him for? Deuteronomy. 4. 7. Is he a God
sometimes near, and sometimes afar off? Or can we with our Prayers bring him
down from above? No, God abides still the same and equally near, he
continually ^ills Heaven and Earth with his presence, but the Word and Prayer
makes the Sense of him near upon our Minds. The Lord is nigh unto all that call
upon him, to all that call upon him in Truth. He will fulfill the des^^e of
them that fear him, Psalm. 145. 18, 19. Which is the greatest and most
inestimable privilege that ever did or can belong to the Sons of Men; It
raises a dread and love for the Divine Majesty; It astonishes with his infinite
condescension to admit thereof. To fall low on our knees before his Footstool,
is an higher advancement then to converse with Angels, or talk familiarly with
the greatest Monarch on Earth. And so it would more appear, if God did keep us
at a distance, as our Superiors according to the flesh do through
imperfection; for if they should make their company common, it would have
Contempt instead of Estimation; but the more one knows of God, it raises more
admiration and delight. How strange is it! that Men who believe God is, who is
so Great and Glorious as his visible Works do manifest, and may be more
understood by his invisible things; yet should think any thing low or mean
which has relation to him or his Worship. God stands in the Congregation of
the Mighty, he judges among Gods, Psalm. 82. 1. Yet many do refuse to bend the
knee when Prayers are offered unto him, when if the same Persons were to
deliver a Petition unto the Kings of the Earth would kneel before them. Such
are Proud and Ignorant who perform Worship with carelessness or irreverent
gesture.

But what is to be said of the natural ungodly Man? who slights that relation
which God does vouchsafe to continue this way toward us. Since thou wast
precious in my sight, thou have been honorable, and I have loved thee, Isa.
43. 4. And so it will illustriously appear, when we who know him by Faith,
shall after this life come to have the fruition of his glorious God head.
Should we be ^eparated from any affinity to him; had we nothing divine within
us; or when we are in honor, will deface his Image, and provoke him to disown
us wi^h, I never knew you, Mat. 7. 23. We should be but pitiful forelorn
Creatures at present, as those will be who work iniquity and transgress against
him. They shall go forth and look upon the Cark^ses of the Men that have
transgressed against me, and they shall be an abhorring unto all Flesh, Isa.
66. 24. Observe the slighting kind of phrase the Holy Ghost makes use of, that
such little, despicable and vile Beings should behave themselves contemptuous
and stubborn against a Most Excellent and Glorious Majesty. If he who will at
last reveal himself, were not now out of our si^ht, there could be no trial of
this, whether Men would do so or not; as at present there is, and therefore
they do it. Had we not a spiritual and immortal Soul, which has a near
similitude of the Divine Nature; how mean and frail should we be? To be just
enlivened with naked and vile bodies, subject to all the miseries of Nature,
liable for a prey to the stronger Beasts and every Creature might insult over
us, which also they would if they had the same corrupt Seeds of Evil, for we
should be more destitute then they, having no reason to arm and secure our
selves. And then we could not so much as get the dominion over them, much less
lift up our selves against the Great Creator of all things. Now mark the
strange degeneracy of Humane Nature, let the whole World stand amazed at it;
Hear O Heavens, and give ear O Earth: For the Lord has spoken. I have
nourished and brought up Children, and they have rebelled against me. The Ox
knows his owner, and the Ass his Masters Crib, but Israel does not know, my
people does not consider, Isa. 1. 2, 3. That power which was given to know and
glorify him, is turned to contemn and dishonor him. We are but mere
Creatures, the very work of his hands, all our good and excellency we receive
from him, What least part of us did we make our selves? Shall the Ax boast
himself against him that ^eweth therewith? Or shall the Saw magnify it self
against him that shakes it? as if the Rod should shake it self against them
that list it up, or as if the staff should lift up it self as if it were no
wood, Isa. 10. 15. There is a vain persuasion in Man that he is his own, that
he is independent, exalted, and beholden to nothing; though in his body are all
things to humble and contradict this Opinion, Infancy, Childhood, continued
Weakness, Mortality; Yet he still bears in mind what the Serpent told his
Forefathers, Ye shall be as Gods, Genesis 3. 5. In a worse sense of
self-existing: What lofty thoughts are in this poor Creature? A certain token
there is something more in him then that receptacle of Flesh we see; and whence
came that? But by creation from God. And should that just now come forth into
Being, start up and disown its maker? Which has received a capacity to imagine
high things, should that presently do so against him from whom it was derived?
But will thou know, O vain Man, unless he had made thee in this exalted State,
thou could not if thou would never so fain thus magnify thy self against
him; Because he made thee to serve him, and gave thee power to do it freely,
what an horrible thing is it that any should instantly turn, and refuse
subjection unto him?

I know the heart of the Reader will rise at this; Who ever arrives to such
strange kind of Wickedness, and most base ingratitude? In plain terms all those
do who make no Prayer unto God, for they show no submission unto and dependence
on him. Have the Workers of Iniquity no knowledge? Who eat up my people as they
eat bread, they have not called upon God, Psalm. 53. 4. A ^it preceding Isa.
64, 78.
Question, for the other is consequent to it; and then this ignorance, the not
calling on him is refusing Obedience unto him, or a secret disowning of their
dependence on him, for all, High and Low, People as well as Priest are strictly
commanded in sundry places of Scripture to do both. It signifies little to say
with the Mouth according to the common form, if one thinks otherwise in the
heart, God knows that; or if he does really Judge, God is to be obeyed and
Worshipped, it is to be showed forth by outward Action. As in the public
Assemblies, Jer. 10. 25.
Family Worship, which is rather to be done though it be taken notice of, and
perhaps laughed at by our ungodly Neighbors; for then we do it not to get
praise, but out of a sense of Duty: Sayings and the custom of others are not so
much to be regarded, but every one in his House ought to show forth a visible
subjection unto God before the World.

By Prayer we acknowledge Gods Authority over us, we confess our selves
Servants, Subjects, and Children that live upon his good Providence, and that
all things come from him. We believe on him whom we have not seen; We give
credit to his gracious promises, and stand in aw of his threatenings, and
thereupon most of our Petitions are founded. We are in our proper Office when
we lift up our Soul, and our Desire is unto him. God is most pleased in actual
Obedience, working of Righteousness, and bringing forth fruits of Well-doing;
yet by Prayer there is a tendency and inclination in the Soul to them, there is
a begging help and willing mind to do according to the power given us, there is
an asking forgiveness for what we have done amiss, and to perform better
Obedience for the time to come. What can God require more of his poor imperfect
Creatures, then to do according to their Ability, and to help out their
infirmities by humbly craving a Pardon for them, and sincere desires that they
were better? He is Faithful and Good, knowing our frailty and condition. We
have an High Priest that is touched with the feeling of our Infirmities, he
has purchased a Salvation and Reward if we do according to them, his
Righteousness and perfect Obedience supply our defects.

Hear what he says, and how he affirms it; Verily, verily I say unto you,
whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my Name, he will give (...) you, John 16.
23. Now the desirable thing is Heaven and Happiness, but there is no leaping
into it without going in the way; for this is Gods immutable decree, and
nothing can be granted contrary to that, which is by Obedience and Holiness,
the contrary is sin: And therefore we are to beg forgiveness of that, and to
ask for the Holy Spirit by which we may be enabled to live according to the
Will of God in all things. Provided, when that prompts to do such a thing, we
be sure to comply with it, and so when we have dictates to leave another thing
undone; for God will not be so put off, that when he inclines toward the doing
of his Will and we do it not, but only pray that we may do it. If thy Servant
should come from time to time for aid and assistance to do such a thing for
thee, and thou grantest him his request, yet he never does that which he
pretends he would if he had such help, would thou not say he did mock and
slight thee? The beginning of a thing is a desire toward it; when that is,
then if there is power, it will be certainly done. So that if there is an
unfeigned desire to keep Gods Commandments, this will seek out for strength and
ability to do so; Ask and it shall be given you, seek and ye shall find, knock
and it shall be opened unto you, Mat. 7. 7. The command and promise is not
given only to Disciples or chosen Ones, for every one that asks receives,
and he that seeks finds, and to him that knocks it shall be opened, verse.
8. Here Man will fly back again and say he cannot ask, But yet he can ask
Bread, Fish, or any good thing of another; and why then will he not ask good
things of our Father which is in Heaven? Has he a real desire to be saved?
Why, there is a willingness in all Men to this Blessed end. But here is the
difference between the Fool and Wise Man, the first would have it without the
means, the latter knows it is impossible, and therefore must have both or
neither. Indeed there is an a^kwardness against the way to Heaven, a rumor of
the Sons of Anak, some strange difficulty next to impossibility. The Man is
frightened and gives back, and therefore it is necessary for him to have a true
report abstracted from the lies and false Imaginations, to have all the
encouragement that can be given, to be urged with the absolute necessity, and
that it is an exceeding Good* land; all that Men can possibly do is little
enough to get possession there. They do already submit to more hardship in
getting those things which are not the ten thousandth part so valuable; such
like persuasions by degrees change the man's mind, for he did not hear or not
know of as much before; this conquers natural aversation, and puts him upon a
firm advised resolution, and the next thing is to get ability to go through
with it.

In the work of Man's Salvation the Word and Preaching are before Prayer, for
how shall they pray for what they have not known, or for what they have not
heard? And therefore it would be a good Method in the Education of Children to
instruct them with some principles according as their tender Years will bear,
before they are taught to say Prayers by Rote, or to make them somewhat
understand what they say. In those of riper years Knowledge and Reason should
go before Action, or else it will be blind and signify nothing; Some having
constantly used a course of Devotion, confine themselves barely to that, which
is but a means to somewhat more, unto which they should still press toward.
Prayer is properly Mark 11. 24.
desire (which argues a necessity of attention, for we cannot desire those
things which we do not mind) and all forms are that we may live an Obedient and
Holy Life; Now it would be strange if we should pretend to desire that which we
neither do, nor endeavor after.

To imagine God is pleased with the bare saying of Words, when they are neither
minded nor understood, it may be more truly thought, that he likes better the
Chirping of Birds, then such Service from reasonable Creatures. There has been
a deal of Chaunting forth of Mass, and Toning out of Prayers. But how well they
have been sung or spoken forth, we must have unworthy Thoughts of the Godhead,
if we suppose him to be delighted with the mere outward noise, or reciting only
such Words before him. Which of our selves considering thoroughly can approve of
it? They must be Fools who offer such Sacrifice, or think he will accept of it;
for he that gave to Man knowledge, shall not he know? When that can find, and
offer a better Worship, will he not expect it? Those who have been blind
Worshippers of this sort go hastily in their way, For they consider not that
they do evil. Be not rash with thy Mouth, and let not thy Heart be hasty to
utter any thing before God: For God is in Heaven and thou upon Earth: Therefore
let thy Words be few, Eccles. 5. 1, 2. In those private Books of Devotion,
which were designed for help of the ignorant, they too often show themselves
more ignorantly, for many say over the very Words, not considering the Sense,
and say unto God, It is so with them, when it is not; or Confessing what they
have not been Guilty of, or making Purposes and Resolutions which they never
intend afterward, or saying several things which do not belong to them in
Truth: But so far has ignorance and blind Custom proceeded, that they think it
enough if the Work is done, so much read over, the meaning is the least they
consider of. I will pray with the Spirit, I will pray with the Understanding
also, 1 Cor. 14. 15. Says the Apostle; but they pray only with the Lips or the
Ear. This People draw near me with their Mouth, and with their Lips do honor
me, but have removed their Heart far from me, Isa. 29. 13. This is not so much
intended against that infirmity of wandering thoughts in Prayer, but when of set
purpose they keep their Heart to themselves, not giving it to God, but imagine
to put him off with such outward Service. What prodigious Folly is this, to
think to deceive God, whom every one that believes must also conclude, that all
things are naked and open in his sight, Heb. 4. 13. And every one that spies
out a deceit intended to be offered unto him, does reject it with Abomination.
Neither the Calves of the Lips, nor the various inclinations of the Body will
serve without Confent and Subjection of the Soul. It is not bowing before the
most High God, nor falling prostrate with our Face to the ground, for such a
Submission may be ^eigned, and the Body may be bending and creeping, when the
Heart in the mean while is lifted up and exalted; our selves are not pleased
with a Crawling posture, where we think it is not sincere: But He above knows
all things. The true Worship of God does not consist in turning the Face such a
way, or being very nice in all Punctilios of outward posture, though these are
decent if they express the very Sense of the mind, of entire Submission unto
the whole Will of God, a through persuasion, Thou have beset me behind and
before, Psalm. 139. 5. Not to think him more in one place then another. But if
those externals should be separated from that Worship in Spirit and in Truth,
John 4. 23, 24. which the High Priest of our Profession has said, should be in
these days, they do much more displease then are acceptable unto God. Such Men
worship they know not what, or they will not know; for had they right
apprehensions they could never imagine, that the bare outward performances will
be received by that God with whom we have to do. If any one of these should
look here, they will still go on in their own way, and so let them, but take
heed that at last they be not deceived of their Expectation and Reward, let
them see, Hag. 1. 5, 7, 8, 9. They are only put in mind how their Service may
be so ordered, that God may accept it, and be glorified therein. In things
pertaining to God, we know but little without he had revealed himself, and what
he does require: So they must take Counsel or his Word how to please him, if
they wou^d partake of his Goodness and not be disappointed at last. Which if
they had done in Sincerity and Truth, they would never have been so abominably
mistaken, as a great part of the Christian World has been, and is to this day
in Matters pertaining to his Worship and Service.

The Scripture in many places does show the true Nature of Prayer, Psalm. 10.
17. Psalm. 73. 28. Deuteronomy. 4. 29. Psalm. 119. 145. Jer. 29. 12, 13. 1 Samuel 1. 13,
15. Mat. 7. 7. Romans 8. 26. Mat. 18. 19. and 21, 22. Luke 11. 18. Ephesians. 6. 18.
Phil. 4. 6. Jam. 11. 5, 6, 7. Jam. 5. 16. 17. 1 Pet. 4. 7. Heb. 10. 21, 22.
Which set it forth as the earnest desire of the Soul. When we do ask and praise
God for his benefits, this is a reasonable Service, being agreeable to what he
requires, and the utmost next to obeying his Will, which we can render unto him.

The Sacrifice of the wicked is an Abomination unto the Lord: But the Prayer of
the upright is his delight, Prove. 15. 8. It is styled by another Name, for such
do not really Pray; Can he beg Grace to forsake Sin, which he does not dislike?
Or for the Holy Spirit and good things, when he has not the least desire, but
aversion to them? He may pray for a general Admission into the Heavenly
Kingdom, and to be preserved from that of darkness; but in vain, for the things
cannot be separated which God has joined together: Those Ordinances, Mat. 13.
42, 43. Mat. 25 46. John 5. 29. are ratified and unalterable. Though besides
their own Prayers, Noah, Job and Daniel, and all the righteous Men that ever
were, should pour out their Supplications before the Throne of Almighty God,
for the Salvation of wicked and unregenerate Men, yet it would not be granted.
The Case of Esau is lamentable, and stands for a warning to all Generations, of
those who now for the Pleasures of Sin ^ell their Birthright and Title to
Heaven; For ye know how that afterward, when he would have inherited the
Blessing he was rejected, for he found no place of Repentance, though he sought
it carefully with Tears, Heb. 12. 17. When all the Wicked shall come to be
fully sensible of what they have done, as they will when their short time is
ended, they would be saved, and Happy for ever as other People: Nay their
willingness to be Happy, was the Cause of their Transgression and this
Remed^less mistake, which then they might have turned the right way, and they
will take up doleful Cries and Lamentations, that God would receive them unto
Mercy, when he will not hear, for his Words are gone out to the contrary; The
only Remedy is to be warned of this in time, as they were and might have taken
warning, as all that are now living may. If they would have the Blessing, they
must have it in his way, or not at all, which is as Peter told the Jews, and in
them all mankind, past, present and to come; God having raised up his Son Jes^^
Christ, sent him to Bl^ss you, in turning away every one of you from his
iniquities, Acts 3. 26.

Obedience gives Title to the Promises, which are now apprehended by Faith,
until there be a certain performance of them. And though God has Promised such
things already, yet still we are to pray for them, for the Promises are to them
that ask, Mat, 7. 7, 8. Mat. 18. 19, 20. Luke 18. Mark 11. 24. John 16. 23.
They are to be had upon means and Conditions which are to be done before, and
Prayer helps as to them, and are effectual when they are also used.

From the Conversion of the Eunuch, Acts 8. of Saul Acts 9. of Cornelius, Acts
10. and what is said, Acts 11. 14. Acts 15. 7. It appears that God works by
outward means the Preaching of the Gospel. And therefore our Prayers for the
Conversion of the Heathen World, or of any one else are not likely to be
granted, unless the like means be used toward the Accomplishment thereof. And
that may be done by the pure reformed Church, all one as it has been attempted
by corrupt and cruel Popish Emissaries. If the words of eternal Life be simply
and sincerely declared Psalm. 138. 4.
unto them, as the Apostles and Primitive Teachers did to us, who were in
darkness: How know we but the time of the Promise draws nigh, that the fullness
of the Gentiles may come in? Acts 7. 17.
Let not those whom the Lord shall move by his Spirit to this blessed Work, be
Rebellious unto it; but go forth accordingly. I am sought of them, that asked
not for me: I am found of them that sought me not. Isa 65. 1. when it is
through unavoidable ignorance, who never heard so much before. But not of those
who wilfully put him off, or refuse the means of Grace and Salvation.

God is still Sovereign and a most free Giver, he may scatter the Mercies of
his left hand, or suffer those to come at them, who do not seek unto him: Yet
it is but a small thing to have their portion in this life, though it is
present and visible, and the low Spirited World esteems every thing that is so;
still it is little, for it comes exceeding short of a true Happiness, which
signifies little when had, and nothing when it is over, and by being too often
abused, it tends to the hurt of the owners, bringing upon them a greater
condemnation. If all those in past Generations, or who have been with us, and
are just now departed hence, would stand up and tell us what avails all the
Worldly prosperity they have had: If those who are now in the midst of it would
speak their minds sincerely, that the days past are vanished away as nothing, if
they would freely declare the Irksomeness and Satiety of the present; if they
would acknowledge that doubtful Expectation, how it shall be with them after
these things are ended, and they haste not knowing how soon; if all this were
considered, there is no such Cause why they should speak loftily against
Heaven, or say in their Hearts, How does God give them these things? They are
proud and disobedient against him, who in his Providence either ordered or
permitted them to have what they make matter and occasion of being so. But
however, because they have these things without Psalm. 140. 8.
or with asking, they will seek for no more. O that they would know for their
Good, as otherwise they shall be sensible to their Cost and Disappointment,
that there are others they now set at naught ten thousand times more valuable,
then those they now so boast themselves in.

Even those the Apostle makes mention of, and is thankful for, Blessed be the
God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with all spiritual
Blessings in heavenly places in Christ, Ephesians. 1. 3. Which are reserved to be
fully had there, and for ever to remain. It is the greatest Happiness here
below to have those things, which are in order to the Attainment and making
sure of them: Of which we have sometimes a little Glimpse and soretaste, and
even they exceed all the Pleasures of this World. So it is reasonable to pray
earnestly for the common Salvation, to pour out our Soul in Supplication, and
set our hands to do accordingly; for Prayer signifies nothing without
Endeavor: There must be a Begging, Compliance, yea, and working with the Grace
of God, or otherwise it is received in vain. God does not bestow his spiritual
and eternal Mercies, his Jewels of real Worth and Excellency to those who do
not seek unto him for them: Who think them not worth asking for, may go without
them, and make much of their lying Vanities, which both deceive and slip away,
leaving the Possessours in despair and misery; When the Gift of God is eternal
Life, and he alone is Happy, who both prays and uses the means to receive it.

The great prejudice that Flesh and Blood which is dull and unbelieving has
against this Ordinance, because it thinks there is no present and visible
benefit thereof. Did the Exhalation of our Prayers fall down again in a shower
of Blessings which might be seen or had, then more would be offered up, and
also with diligence and earnestness. But now whether we pray for temporal
Mercies, or against Evils, yet all things happen alike to all, and it may be
just the very same as if none had been. If it is concerning Hab. 1. 2.
spiritual and future Good and Evil, why these are not seen, and they may be
all but Fancies, and imaginations; or God may no more mind as to them, then he
seems to do the things before us: So our Prayer may appear to be vain, the
sending forth of words and breath into the Air.

This mighty Stumbling block does quite keep off the ungodly Man from making
any Prayer at all, for he sees it is the same with him that Sacrifices, and him
that Sacrifices not. Even he does sometimes try, and if he finds no present
Good of it, he leaves off and is confirmed more in ungodliness. The steps of
the good Man do also well nigh slip: He has Temptations to desist, and some
little questioning within, whether th^se things are so, for he sees no
difference in outward things between him, who goes into the Sanctuary, and who
does not. A wise Providence orders all things in Heaven and Earth, yet they
go on in the wonted manner. Thou that hear Prayer, seem as if thou
heardest it not. A thousand kind of thoughts may arise in our minds: Whereas it
is our infirmity and ignorance of the ways of God: It is our Sin and
Provocation that makes him so far from us, and from hearing the Voice of our
Supplication, and moves him to have no more to do with us, unless his Goodness,
Condescension and Truth, and also some chosen People did preserve his
Protection and Care over the Inhabitants of the Earth. So foolish was I and
ignorant, I was as a Beast before thee, Psalm. 73. 22. I did no more understand
of the ways of God toward the Children of Men, then those dumb Creatures do
apprehend his doings. Besides original Blindness, Sin casts a Cloud over the
understanding, deprives of the knowledge of the things of God, that seeing they
may see, and yet not perceive, and hearing they may hear, and not understand,
have a general understanding, but not attain to the Divine Sense of things. For
what Man knows the things of Man, save the Spirit of Man which is in him?
Even so the things of God knows no Man, but the Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2. 11.
Even this which has been the occasion of so much unbelief and falling away,
may be clearly understood out of the Scriptures, his revealed Will. Seek ye out
of the Book of the Lord and read, Isa. 34. 16. If Men did according to Duty in
their doubts, Difficulties and Temptations resort to that, this would satisfy;
but the cunning of Satan keeps them off, and they would apprehend the things of
God, any other way then his Book, by which only they are to be known.

The Foundation of all Religion is Faith, The just shall live by his Faith,
Hab. 2. 4. Whatever he sees and observes abroad he resolves all upon this
Principle, and sticks firm to that. This is the first thing insisted upon and
required. It is observable, though God has done all things to beget a more
full assurance of Faith, yet there is nothing so very evident, as takes off
from all manner of doubt, for this would exclude and destroy Faith, which is
the first Decree and Ordinance of God. And therefore he hides himself, Job 23.
8, 9.
and his doings so far as to exercise that: Notwithstanding all the Arguments
and Demonstrations that are pretended, we must at length resolve it upon that
of the Apostle, Through Faith we understand, that the Worlds were framed by the
word of God, Heb. 11. 3. We know that God is by natural Reason and perfect
Demonstration; but for things done heretofore, and things to come, there we
believe him true who has said and promised, which is the Office of Faith. Let
no Man lay any other Foundation, or seek to undermine this which God has laid,
for this stands sure, being much more evident and credible to the Hearts of
Men, then all those intricate Discourses are to those which understand them,
but insignificant to the People, and Difficulties still arise to the learned.
Reason is very serviceable in its due place of Subordination, but it rather
confounds when it sets up equal, and would seek to overthrow Faith; for this
first begins all Discourse and inference as to things Divine, for we must
believe some to be fixed before we can reason from one thing to another. When
all is done there must be Faith. To maintain and keep this up, all Gods doings
may be observed to be wisely ordered. His letting of things go on in a natural
and orderly way may exercise the belief of a Providence, for some may be
tempted to ascribe them unto Time and Chance. That many more of his things are
invisible, some may thence incline to doubt of and deny them. But Faith
receives them as revealed? And Reason will come into assistance, that it may
not be thought incridible; for it is evident there are some things which are
not seen, as a Sound or Smell, yet these are perceived by the Ear and Nose: And
so we have as great a certainty of them as the things we see. God is invisible,
and so are the things of this Kingdom, yet they are as evident to our own
Souls, as Carnal things are to Bodily Senses. But still we cannot remove all
Difficulty, We must at last resort and cleave unto this, I believe in God and
the Revelation, he has made of himself in Scripture. Men would fain climb up
to certain Evidence, then they would serve God, and be such as he would have
them: But thank you for nothing, this is purely Selfish and Mercenary: Those
who will not do it by the way God has prescribed of Faith and waiting for him,
may let it alone, he cares not for their Services. It is so established that
Men may believe, and yet room may be left for infidelity; that all may use the
means to come unto Faith, and yet some by too curious and wrong inquiry, others
by Carelessness and neglect may be still unbelievers.

And therefore Scripture seems to have Penned Mysterious, and perplex in many
Places, that the Trial of our Faith might be had even as to that, how every
Title is true, and shall be fulfilled, though some things may appear next to
impossible, contrary and false by daily Experience. Have Faith in God, for
verily I say unto you, that whosoever shall say to this Mountain, Be thou
removed, and be thou cast into the Sea, and shall not doubt in his Heart, but
shall believe that those things he says shall come to pass, he shall have
whatsoever he says. Therefore I say unto you, what things soever ye desire,
when ye pray believe that ye receive them, and ye shall have them, Mark 11. 22,
23, 24. yet himself, who said this, did certainly desire with Earnestness. If
it be possible let this Cup pass from me. But himself practiced what before he
taught us, Thy will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven, Nevertheless not as I
will, but as thou will, Mat. 20. 39. So we may at this present time pray for
something against, or not consistent with the Will of God, and therefore it is
not granted. We know the Will of God by what he has revealed: In these last
days under the Dispensation of his Son, there is little said of temporal
things. And therefore we have no Promise of Gift or deliverance, as to the
outward Good or Evil of this present time. Ye ask, and receive not, because ye
ask amiss, that ye may consume it upon your Lusts, Jam. 4 3. Even what may be
occasion of Sin, Pride, Vanity, Dis-esteem or Forgetfulness of God; And
therefore he in Goodness denies it. And this is the Confidence that we have in
him, that if we ask any thing according to his Will he hears us, 1 John 5.
14. Whatsoever we ask we receive of him, because we keep his Commandments, and
do those things that are pleasing in his sight, 1 John 3. 22. This
Qualification is too often wanting, for some make many Prayers and give no
Obedience, or an half one with reserves, and so their Petitions are not granted
as is employed from Deuteronomy. 4. 29. Isa. 59. 2. Jer. 29. 13. Again, The effectual
fervent Prayer of the righteous Man avails much, Jam. 5. 16. but that does
not which is Lazy and Negligent. And then want of importunity, Luke 18. Such
Causes may be assigned out of the Word, why there is not so great return to our
Prayers as may be expected: And whatever People think the fault is only in
themselves, they have not those necessary Qualifications, or do not order their
Prayers according to the Rule. Gods word is Truth, but Men do not obey, and are
not guided by it. The Promise is certain, Mat. 7. 7. Romans 10. 13. but they do
not perform the Conditions; and to excuse themselves would imagine there might
be falsehood in that which came by Inspiration from him.

If mankind would remember where they are, that is, they are going in the way,
and therefore should be contented with the Patriarchs request of Bread to eat
and Raiment to put on, Genesis 28. 20. Let none fear, he that does Gods Will, and
uses the appointed means shall be assured of this. That Petition, Give us our
daily Bread, Christ never put in vain, neither is his Promise, Mat. 6. 33. come
to an utter end. More then this we have no where License to ask, neither has
God passed his word to bestow. We are apt to grudge at such a small Pittance as
we would think it; But do we not believe what is to come? Do we consider
wherefore this is desired (...) contentment and delight: Now God can, and also
does add as much of this into a moderate competency as in all plenty and (...).
In truth happiness does not consist in these things, which serve only for the
body the worse part of us, and then it passes away instantly, and the pleasure
is the same whether had or not had. The desire of the obedient Soul is (if he
has sufficient for Life and Godliness) not that God would give him more, but
ble^s and sanctify that which he has; and then he will perceive as good a
relish as others do from their abundance. To the truth of this many thousands
in a lower condition can bear Witness; God puts joy and gladness into their
hearts with what he affords them, as others have in their full increase of Corn
and Wine.

As for Praying against Temporal Evils or Judgments, whether National or
Private, there is little said in the Gospel, the Motto whereof may be, For we
walk by Faith, and not by sight. Here again is a trial of it, for they seem to
happen at all peradventure, and are the effect of natural causes; some have
been hereupon tempted to deny immediate Judgments sent by God, or think that
affliction springs from the dust, the ill constitution of that part of us, or
the common Malice and Injury of Men. Indeed God has permitted and ordered
Nature to go in her way, and does seldom contradict that: But here it comes to
pass, that the Ax is li^ted up above the Carpenter, what the Workman does is
imputed to the dead instrument, that cannot move or do any thing without the
hand that sets it a going. Nature does all things according to the common voice
of the generality, which proceeds from unbelief or sullenness: Whereas they
might know this nature must be from some one else, who makes it to act in so
regular and constant a way. Nature of it self is blind, and could never bring
forth things in such an exact orderly manner, unless directed by the Wisdom
above; It is turned and winded, and whence should this be, but from the first
mover of all things? The infidels, when they are beaten out of every hold and
shelter, will run for refuge underground, their last resort is to the workings
of Nature; but these turn against them, and prove contrary to what they would
have, so they had better now, then be forced to it at the last day, to move out
of their holes like Worms of the Earth, they shall be afraid of the Lord their
God, and fear because of thee, Mic. 7. 17. They had better acknowledge that now
unto His Glory, and to obtain his Pardon, what they will at last be compelled
to do to his Justice and Truth, but their own Shame and Confusion of Face. Even
hard hearted Pharaoh understood more then they, for he did not cry out it was
the Wind that brought the Locusts, he knew the hand that smote him. The Lord
brought an East Wind, and the East Wind brought the Locusts, and the Lord
turned a mighty strong West-wind which turned away the Locusts, Exodus 10. 13,
16, 19. He might have magnified and made himself more visible by bringing them
a strange way, but he was pleased to make use of a second cause as he does
generally in all his doings toward the Children of Men, whether in sending
Judgment or Mercy; As afterward in the Manna and Quails, Psalm. 78. 23, 24, 26,
27. Unless a Man is low and short in his reasoning, he must at last reduce all
to the first cause of things; Hos. 6. 3.
Though one acts by subordinate instruments, yet still he is at free liberty to
act or not act; and again after this or that manner. God has the disposal of
all second causes, and what we esteem accident is wise design or permission,
which he can either hinder or intend as he pleases, so his providence is still
the same. Who brings on evil by its next cause, can also remove it; He who
suffered them, can also take away the impediments; as he does shut the Womb, so
he does open it; For the Pillars of the Earth are the Lords, and he has set
the World upon them, 1 Samuel 2. 8. All things are his, and then certainly he can
turn and dispose them howsoever he will: Though he has now appointed things to
go on in such a manner, yet he sits at the Helm and manages the whole course of
Nature according to his good pleasure and Sovereignty. But because it goes on
most commonly in the same way there do arise doubts, when it is thus wisely
contrived, that all who consider thoroughly, must believe a Providence for
things here below; which again continue as they were from the beginning of the
Creation, this exercises the belief thereof. We may pray against outward evils,
that God would be pleased to remove what he does send. Shall there be evil in a
City, and the Lord has not done it? Amos 3. 6. Come let us return to the Lord,
he has torn and he will heal us, Hos. 6. 1. That want of universal reformation
is many times a cause he does not remove public or private Calamities;
sometimes he does, but not presently to try our faith and trust in him, when we
know the Rod, and who has appointed it, though we saw no hand lay it on or will
take it off, Although the Fig Tree does not Blossom, Hab. 3. 17. There is no
outward appearance of help or means, yet God can furnish and put in mind of
them in due time. As to this our Prayers are often heard and granted, he stirs
up the heart and affections of Men toward us, makes the Bones that were broken
to rejoice, heals our Diseases and Sores by directing to the use of fit
Remedies, and first putting that virtue in them. All this seems to be alike to
them, who pray not, which is to be imputed to Gods gracious Nature, to try the
Faith of his Children, to manifest their unbelief and unthankfulness; If they
have escaped Worldly danger and evil, yet worse things wait for them, from
which they will not be delivered unless they both pray and also use the means
to avoid them. But that there is a real and sensible difference between the
Righteous and the Wicked as to outward good and evil may be known by this, that
the one has a more sweet enjoyment and comfort in them both, which no wicked
Man has or can pretend unto. So that as to the present time and less material
things, notwithstanding what profane sinners say, or others think, It is not
vain to serve God, Mal. 14. and they have profit who pray unto him, Job 21. 15.

But much more does it avail to procure inward and Spiritual good, to hinder
from temptation and evil; It does help in things which pertain to present Peace
and future Happiness, for preparation and joyful expectation to a perfect and
consummate Glory, and to get safe from the evils of the other World. Now we
come to the Man, which is within: for outward good and evil is light and but
for a Moment, the one faintly delights and vanishes away, the other vexes a
little and will have an end; But what has relation to Eternal Happiness and
Misery, What is beg^n here imperfectly, and will in a little time be fully made
manifest in a perfect and irreversible state of one or the other; Here if our
most fervent and devout Prayers to God will do any service to obtain the good,
and escape the evil set before us, they must be necessary and highly important.
We have all the assurance in the World if any thing which is spiritual and
inward, is somewhat more then fancy and imagination, that these things are so.
As certainly as our Souls are something more then mere Breath, so that inward
sense of Religion (which is properly Religion as the other is the Man) is real
and something besides imagination or outward talk. It is certain, the fruits of
its Obedience and good works do appear without and are seen; but the Root and
Principle is within, Conscience toward God: And again it is evident that many
do act only by this Principle contrary to their present ease and convenience in
the World. The work of Religion is real and the effect thereof, Thou will keep
him in perfect peace whose mind is stayed on thee, because he trusts in thee,
Isa. 26. 3. Now indeed this cannot be so perfectly demonstrated to the natural
ungodly Man, but the experience is so well known to the happy possessors of it,
that they esteem it before all wordly advantages whatsoever. It is so in
universally good and sincere People, but then it is surmised, fond hopes and
expectations will cause complacency of Spirit; Whereas herein may be observed
the difference between the reality of the one and falsehood of the other, for
the first will bear all Trial and Examination, and still show forth reasonable
and certain grounds of trust and confidence, but the other cannot do this; he
must go on in his way, not enduring the touchstone; a convincing Argument, the
first is true, the other false and counterfeit.

Besides there is a sensible growth in Grace and Knowledge, a more confirmed
purpose of Obedience, a mortification of sin, an assurance of Gods favor and
the well grounded hope of Eternal Life, That conversation in Heaven and
antepasts of it, that rejoicing and strengthening in the inward Man; All these
are as truly perceived as others find exultancy in their honor and esteem in
the World, in those vain projects which are doubtful and come to nothing; When
there is the promise and word of God for the reality of those before spoken of.
It is but a small pleasure which results from the grasping and enjoyment of
temporal things, but that conceit which goes before, those promises of good and
the proposed satisfaction whilst but in pursuit, are equally if not more
delightful then when the thing is actually, had and present. And yet the first
is a mere fantastic happiness (as none of this World is much better) which yet
is sensible and pleasing. It is an invisible, but real delight, though it
relates to visible and corporeal things: Every scheme of satisfaction Men raise
to themselves in this World, they find the first apprehension thereof good and
pleasant, which is wholly within. Hereupon they act further, exposing
themselves to pain and trouble, and perhaps this is all they will have, for
they may be disappointed at last, either by missing the thing they aim at, or
proposing to themselves more contentment then realy it has. Let the ignorant
and brutish laugh at inward good and satisfaction, yet the outward deceitful
vanities of this World make a show of this, or the Man would not seek after
them. Even the pleasures of sense afford most delight to the imagination before
hand, for when they touch, they are unsatisfactory and instantly perish.

If the things we see, handle or hear, are more especially perceived from
within, How much more may we conclude of the things that pertain to Gods
Kingdom, which are purely Spiritual and Invisible, which are exactly fitted to
the reasonable Soul, that these also are most real and certain. What the
Apostle says, 1 Cor. 2. 14, 15. is true, but though they may seem foolishness
to him, yet let him not judge them to be vain or false, if the natural man
might be somewhat recovered out of his State, for by reason alone he may judge
there is something in what is here treated of.

God's faithful People are fully satisfied in their own Hearts of the truth of
these things, and may be offended that they are offered for proof, which are so
very plain and evident to them, but some are to be spoken unto as Carnal, 1
Cor. 3. 1. to lead them on to spiritual things. But for the confirmation of the
Christians Faith, we may thus manifestly conclude; if the first fruits are
true, then is the lump also: If the earnest and pledge is certain, so are the
greater things to come: If the Scriptures are fulfilled in the Way, as that is
known by experience, they will be so in the end: By what God has already given
and done for us, he is faithful that has promised, he makes good his word in
this life, and will do so in that which is to come; this supports in the time
of faith and waiting: As the Patriarchs received the promises of the Heb. 11.
13.
Messiah, and did desire his days, but did not see them: So our Forefathers
saw him in the flesh, we do now in his Grace and Revelation, and have known and
heard all those things to be exactly fulfilled of him written in the Book of
Moses, Prophets and Psalms; It remains that we who have received of his Grace,
expect but a little longer till we shall be fully partakers of his Glory, when
we shall ever be with the Lord, 1 These. 4. 17. We now read, hear, believe and
have earnest expectation of these things; but they shall at length be openly
revealed, and for ever remain present to us. 1 Kings 8. 56.
All the mean acts are already done and fulfilled, as they were foretold and
promised; and therefore we may well believe and be assured, that what God has
begun, brought on so far, he will perform to the utmost; For yet a little
while, and he that shall come, will come, and will not tarry, Heb. 10. 37. All
things happen just as they are spoken of in Scripture, in this life of Trial,
Faith and absence from the Lord, and then certainly here is sufficient
demonst^ation. Blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have believed, John
20. 29. As to the things heretofore, so further on, Blessed are they that
believe, for there shall be a certain performance of those things which are
told concerning the day of recompense, of seeing God, and for ever being with
him. Your life is hid with Christ in God: when Christ who is our life shall
appear, then shall ye also appear with him in Glory, Col. 3. 3, 4. The phrase
of being hid is remarkable, for it cannot be made so evident to others:
However, it is as sensible to those who have the life of Jesus manifested in
them, as any inward act of Religion is to those who have the least apprehension
of it.

Indeed all the other is but the Shell, for the substance of Religion is inward
and invisible; which is as certain and apparent to the mind, as outward things
are to the S^nses. If that may be deceived by fancies and imaginations, so may
they by delusions: But whatever is truth approving it self to the understanding
and rational part of Man (for this is a distinct thing from the fancy) of this
there is as much assurance as what we either see or hear. And still if the Soul
is deluded in its proper objects, so the outward and sensitive faculties are in
theirs; and then we may as well say our selves are but shadows and apparitions,
the World and all things therein are but a dream and painted show, there is not
the least substance in it, which would be a monstrous absurdity and
impossibility. If there is any thing real, Religion is so likewise: As God is
who made all things, and by whom they subsist; so he made us also to know,
glorify and obey him, has given us power to do many things in relation to
him, which is our proper and only end; If that which gives life, can give
assurance; If that is satisfied of things of lesser moment, and grounds a full
persuasion as to them; much more may we give heed to that full acquiescence of
Spirit it has as to things divine. As sure as God has revealed himself to
mankind in Scripture, and they have a through acknowledgement and abundant
conviction within them that it is so, if they would not wickedly struggle
against or seek to stifle it, which is to do violence and act contrary to the
best of their knowledge and understanding, witnessing for the certainty of
these things, which deservedly renders liable to Gods Wrath and Indignation.
But if they deal sincerely, and seek after God with the best powers they have,
which they are required to do, and then they shall find what will demonstrate
to them beyond all contradiction, that all things indeed are so which are
spoken of in the Word.

And then to prove that sincere and devout Prayers are beneficial, would be all
one as to labor by argument to evince that the Sun shines at midday. They
perceive those returns, which Strangers and Hypocrites may call folly and
Enthusiasm: Indeed there are some who in a storm of Affliction take shelter in
the Sanctuary, or out of a sudden heat and willingness to be saved run to the
House of Prayer: And if they do not presently find ease, or lasting
inclinations to good afterward, they are still disquieted and continue in the
same mind, making an hasty conclusion that it is the same thing, whether they
make Prayers or not. Perhaps the first sort enquire unto God to be rid of the
trouble that lies upon them after they have used pleasures, Company, worldly
Means, and tried every thing besides for help; and when they will not do, God
is the last resort whom before they put of in their prosperity, of such it it
is Written, Jer. 2. 27, 28. Judge 10. 13, 14, 15, 16.

Let others examine themselves, whether there be not remaining iniquities which
separate between their God and them. Do they turn from every evil way, and come
with a firm resolution to be his Servants? Then they must patiently expect his
time. It is a common error, and proceeds from being unacquainted with the ways
of God, to think that things are done on a sudden, the Graces of Faith, Trust,
Resignation, and waiting are to be exercised. There are to be found examples in
Scripture of those who did many things, who rejoiced and brought forth fruit
for a season, but miscarried at last; for the promise is to patient continuance
in well doing and perseverance unto the end. Those sudden fits toward good
proceed from a selfish Principle, and want of due consideration. They would do
all things for themselves, and nothing for God: they are willing to be happy,
but not upon his terms, and he discerning the secrets of their heart, it being
not right toward him suffers them to go on in their own was, and so they
either grow weary or turn aside. Their purposes not being built upon the sure
and lasting foundation of Faith and Love sink and fall upon every Wind of
temptation; and having not thoroughly considered how much they must do to be
saved, and when they find it to be more then they first thought, they start
back and go no further. They would have the time of labor short, but the
reward be given quickly: God will not alter his doings to gratify any one.

We must live by Faith in this World, all the days of our appointed time we are
to wait till our change come. What is promised at present, is granted now:
according to our Faith so it is, and so will be as to what shall be revealed
hereafter; There is encouragement and sufficient certainty that our Breath is
not spent in vain. The Incense after it is gone off from the Altar presently
vanishes out of sight, and after those breathings of the Soul are passed forth
the door of the lips they may seem to be lost and gone, but they ascend up unto
Heaven to the Vials full of Odours, which are the Prayers of Saints, Rev. 5. 8.
Some descend again into invisible but sensible. Blessings, working for us an
exceeding great reward against the time we shall be admitted there. For this
shall every one that is Godly pray unto thee in a time when thou may be
found, Psalm. 32. 6.

Let us lift up our heart with our hands unto God in the Heavens, Lam. 3. 41.
There is one thing destroys the Nature and Efficacy of Prayer, viz. Want of
Attention, wandering Thoughts, that heavy yawning and negligent way of devotion;
now this cannot be utterly hindered, for the flesh is weak, corruption clogs, a
Multitude of outward and sensible objects do press into the mind, The necessary
affairs of life are too apt to intermingle with holy things; Yet this being
offensive and unbecoming the Majesty of God, Those who love and fear him, will
endeavor what they can against it. Look up unto Heaven, and think unto whom ye
speak, who dwells on High and fills all things, this will stir up Reverence
and Godly fear: With how great awe and seriousness do the Seraphims praise him,
Isa. 6. 3. And can thou pour out words before him with sluggishness and
negligence of Soul? Look unto Jesus the Author and Finisher of our Faith, who
in the days of his flesh offered up strong crying and tears; And why may thou
not strive to do so likewise? Call to mind thy past acts of Supplication, how
happy it would be for thee if they had been performed in an attentive earnest
manner; let this quicken thee the next time to give heed to the present, and
use diligence for the future, that no opportunity may slip from thee without
effectual fervent Prayer. Say every Sentence with all thy might, for there is
no Praying in the Grave whither thou art going. If thou can mind one, why not
another? So a Third, and thus go through thy whole Devotion. Suppose thou were
to die to Night, and make thy Supplications all one, as thou would do then.
And though it may be ten thousand to one whither this is thy Case, yet
certainly this is and of us all, that we must ere long appear before the
Judgment Seat of Christ, to receive for the Good or Evil we have done, so it is
near the same thing. Reflect on the gliding Nature of time, and as that passes
on, try to make it as it were stand still by the most intense Prayer, and other
Good Works; for all other things fail and perish, when these are done in Order
to what shall endure for ever. Do not grudge at the loss of tir^^, for can it
be laid out to better purpose? Can thou with more Comfort give up thy Account
for this precious Talent, then so many hours expended in the Worship and
Service of God? It will turn to more advantage then worldly Pleasure or Profit,
Trade and Employment, idle Company or Recreations, for all these with the
living are just ready to be done away, as they are already with those that are
gone before. But for what time is improved in the means of Grace and a Life
answerable to them, it tends unto immortal Glory. There is more then a thousand
years recompense for every minutes Work here on Earth: For what do thou come
before the most High God? Are they not The things that belong to thy Peace, of
greater Concern then Houses or Lands? No Man that warreth, entangleth himself
with the Affairs of this Life, that he may please him who has chosen him to be
a Soldier, 2 Timothy 2. 4. It is not said he does not meddle at all, but does not
involve, plunge himself in, for this is a mighty hindrance to the things of
God. There can be no Prayer made unto him whilst the desire sticks here below;
and again take it off, and the Man can lift it up to God, his Lot and Portion.
And therefore let him drive away all Earthly Cares, or leave them behind when
he goes up to Sacrifice. If Prayers are offered up in a right manner, they will
stand in more stead then getting an Estate and laboring to be Rich. We should
take as much Care in them as others do in their proposed Ends, which quickly
come to nothing. The more one is abstracted from the World and present things,
he is better enabled for the Worship of God. In private he may shut his Door,
endeavoring to keep out all Divertisements. In public, look to himself, not
observing others Devotions, and neglect his own: Every Person shall receive the
Reward of his own Labor. What others do, what is that to thee? Mind thy Self.

The World imagine this to be flat, dull and tedious; they speak as they find,
for it is so where the Heart is unrenewed and under the Power of any Sin. Who
are alienated, and Enemies through wicked Works, it is awkward to draw nigh
unto God: It is violent and contrary to lift up their Souls unto a pure and
Holy Being. But it is not so with them who are cleansed from all Filthiness of
Flesh and Spirit, who hate every false way, and in some measure are Holy as he
is Holy, and therefore he is suitable to their Desires. Those fervours of
Spirit, that Joy of the inward Man, are Riddles and Mysteries to those that
pass by, who have only a little taste by lip Labor or bodily Service, but not
thoroughly acquainted what true Prayer is. The Morning and Evening oblation are
acceptable to the obedient and devout, as their Meat and Drink; yea, more, as
the Gratification of the Soul does exceed that of the Body. It is an exceeding
satisfaction to propose a right and sure end to ones self, and then all the
mediate Acts toward this yield present Comfort, and a blessed Expectation. The
great end of mankind is God, He is worthy of all they can do for him, of their
utmost endeavor to please and approve themselves unto him; For thou Lord art
good and ready to forgive: And plenteous in Mercy unto all them that call upon
thee, Psalm. 86. 5. There is a rejoicing, when we do any thing according to Gods
Will, a certain Argument that we were made and sent here for this purpose only.
The Sun rejoices as a strong Man to run his Race, Psalm. 19. 5. So it is in all
created Beings, We are the disobedient part of the World. Thy Will he done in
Earth as it is in Heaven, he left for a standing Petition, who likewise told
us, Joy shall be in Heaven over one Sinner that repents, Luke 15. 7. When a
single Person among such a Rebellious and froward Generation, as the
Inhabitants of the Earth are, do begin to do it. The whole Happiness of the
World and things therein, is to obey the Law of their great Creator: Every
thing in Relation to him is delightful. When we beg good things of him* we are
assured, he gives liberally and upbraideth not. Praye^ conduces to our present
Establishment and Security; it begins and helps toward the true, Perfect and
never ending Happiness.

For Mercies received the just Consequent is to return thanks. Of Praise.
Now of God are all things, From whom every good and perfect Gift proceeds,
Jam. 1. 17. there arises up toward him the Duty of Praise and Thanksgiving. We
at first judge it a most reasonable thing, to give the Lord the Honor due unto
his Name, and our selves have a strong resentment of Benefits: But then
Corruption begins to work, and turn the Stream of our Gratitude unto
subordinate and lesser Objects. We are very thankful to the Instrument or next
hand that does convey unto us, but unmindful of the Author and Fountain from
whence they all spring. Those Blessings that are become constant and common,
which should most set forth the bounty of the great Benefactor, we wrongfully
esteem our due and desert; and then whatsoever is more, this is looked upon as
an Addition to what was our own, and is taken kindly; Whereas in this we might
have seen his Providence, that either furthered or could have hindered this good
thing from us: And at last if we provoke him by unthankfulness, he can turn it
into a Curse instead of a Blessing.

When thou have eaten and art full, then shall thou bless the Lord thy God, for
the good Land which he has given thee, Deuteronomy. 8 10. He first created the Earth
with Virtue to bring forth Fruits, and has given unto Men that power and
understanding to Till it accordingly; Who gave them Life and Being to receive
these things, and has allotted to them severally as he will. Yet these being
visible and nearest are too often by ignorant unbelievers, more thanked then
the Author of all things. The Conduit which of it self is dry, is more had in
Admiration, then the Fountain which sends forth the Water. God expresses
himself severely against Idolatry. How many Cautions are there least we Worship
the Sun, Moon and Stars, which are useful to mankind; but he made them so. He
is a jealous God, and would not that they should draw off the least Glory from
their Creator. Much less should earthe^ Vessels come in for sharers of his
Glory, Especially when his only begotten Son disclaims it, John 8. 50. and so
do holy Men, 1 These. 2. 6. 1 Pet. 4. 11. Mark 5. 19. Acts 3. 12. Acts 12. 23.
Acts 14. 15. Even of temporal and outward Mercies, we have an immediate
ascribing them unto Almighty God, the Patriarch Jacob presently ascends above
all second Causes. The God which fed me all my Life long unto this day, Genesis
48. 15. He does not say his Estate or fruitful Seasons, the Good Will of such
Friends, Money, Food; but he refers them all higher. In the New Testament he is
styled the Father of Mercies, and God of all Comfort, 2 Cor. 1. 3. He gives
Gifts unto his Children, whether immediately as spiritual Blessings, which are
not in the power of any to give or take away; And therefore to him in a more
peculiar manner belongs all the Glory. But for the temporal good things he
sends by the hands of another we are to give our most humble and hearty thanks
to the Great Master, but in no wise to thank the Servant more then the Master,
nor to exclude the Sense and acknowledgment of the Great Lord over all.

O that Men would praise the Lord for his Goodness, and for his wonderful Works
to the Children of Men, which is thrice repeated, Psalm. 107. To speak forth his
Goodness is that which God delights Isa. 12. 4, 5.
in. This Duty is expressed in a public and outward manner, Make known his
Deeds among the People, talk ye of all his wondrous Works, Psalm. 105. 1, 2. My
tongue praises thee with joyful Lips, Psalm. 63. 5. Make the Voice of his
praise to be heard, Psalm. 66. 8. Examples of this are Luke 1. 64. Luke 17. 15.
Rev. 5. 12. The Holy Ghost by this signifying, that we should speak out when we
praise God, and not do it inwardly in a whispering manner, or in a Corner, as
if we were ashamed of what we did. It is not said thus concerning Prayer, for
there the inward reserved way is rather commended, Mat. 6. and 1 Samuel 1. 13.
But the great things God has done for us, they should be showed forth amongst
Men. There is no mention in Scripture of giving thanks only in secret, but in
the Assembly of the upright, and in the Congregation, Psalm. 111. 1. And also
among others, that they may be brought over to partake of the Goodness of the
Lord. Nothing but Praise breaths forth through every Verse of the Book of
Psalms, or something which may be matter and occasion thereof: It is inculcated
throughout the Old and New Testament, This People have I formed for my self,
they shall show forth my praise, Isa. 43. 21. The Earth has he given to the
Children of Men, Grass and Herbs are for Beasts, and both for our use. And what
were we made for, but to Confess openly the Glory and Greatness of our Creator,
to see and consider this vast Fabric of the World, to admire and magnify that
God who made it. But ye are a peculiar People that you should show forth the
Praises of him, who has called you out of Darkness into his mavelous Light,
1 Pet. 2. 9. Here is yet more matter of Praise, and also to encourage free
Obedience; for to live only for a short time would not be altogether so much,
though God owes nothing to his Creatures, and as he brought them out of
nothing, so he could turn them to nothing again; But he has given most full
assurance, that we shall have and see greater things then these. The Bread of
God is he which comes down from Heaven, and gives Life unto the World, John
6. 33. That Revelation to mankind by Christ Jesus, all those unspeakable
Mercies contained in him, The means of Grace and hope of Glory, do justly
require such abundant Exaltation of our God, that our Soul and all within us
cannot worthily Praise him. 'This would take up all our Lifetime here, as it
will the whole length of Eternity. As for Preaching, Prayer, and the Sacrament
they shall cease, when we shall perfectly know, and be obedient unto him; when
we shall have the full Accomplishment of our desires; When we shall see him
Face to Face, whom we now remember, but Praise abides to eternal Ages. I will
be bold to say, When we shall be invested with this exceeding and enduring
Happiness, our thanks will not be so much; now is the only time of Faith and
Thanksgiving, This is the only day to magnify our God, for giving unto us
exceeding great and precious Promises.

Who is like unto the Lord our God, who dwells on high, who humbles himself
to behold the things that are in Heaven and in the Earth? Psalm. 113. 5, 6. He
who made, does now preserve, govern and dispose of them according to the good
Pleasure of his Will. So we are to acknowledge and offer up thanks for all his
Mercies, and wonderful Works toward us: Whether in Relation to Soul or Body,
this Life or that to come. It is an imperfection of ours to judge any Mercies
to be small, for God gives nothing unworthy of his Majesty, but the littleness
is in our selves, his Mercies are fitted to our mean Capacity. Knowledge and
Instruction are not imparted to Horse or Mule, neither are we to expect the
understanding of an Angel, for our present Condition could not bear it,
According as his Divine Power has given unto us all things that pertain to
Life and Godliness, 2 Pet. 1. 3. Even what belongs to this dying Life and vile
Body, yet there is such a necessity and Connection of them in order to greater,
that they call for our most humble and hearty thanks. That prepares for an
immortal Being, and we have all our Treasure in this earthen Vessel, which also
is to be changed and made Glorious and Incorruptible. In our Body every Bone,
Artery and Vein is Subservient to the whole; so the manifold Blessings of God
are for our present and eternal Good. Giving thanks always for all things, unto
God and the Father, and in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 5. 20.

This is a most just and reasonable Command, notwithstanding it may seem odd
and precise in the sight of the World when done as to common things. But if it
were not thus esteemed, the Duty would not be so Excellent; for that more
appears when one is contented to suffer shame, and be accounted strange and
ridiculous only for the sake of God. It seems uncouth through Zech. 3. 8.
disuse, and because it is not generally Practiced: The want whereof is through
Pride and Sullenness, disobedience and ungodliness, ignorance and unbelief,
which in these corrupt times bear sway over the greater part of mankind: But if
these wicked hindrances were removed, there would be giving of thanks at all
times, and in all places from the greatest to the least. A Son honors his
Father, and a Servant his Master, Mal. 1. 6. Themselves would not like to have
a kindness and good turn requited with slight, Forgetfulness and Ingratitude.
But they do not perceive the Goodness and Mercies of God, as they do other
things which come from one another, which they bring, take, Or get by their own
Power. Let any one that imagines so, stand forth Deuteronomy. 8. 18.
and answer. Who made him to be a Man, and gave him Power to do whatsoever he
does? What have thou, that thou did not receive? Now if thou did receive
it, Why art thou not thankful? One cause is (what is of all Irreligion and
Wickedness) that thou have these things nevertheless. God is kind to the
unthankful and evil, Luke 6. 35. (observe who is ranked first) and therefore
they remain so. If God should make known himself and his Works a little more
then he has done already, there would be no Trial of any ones Submission or
Thankfulness. Because now he would prove whether Men will bless his Holy Name,
therefore they refuse. But let such know, they may have their good things and
Consolation, and hence pass to his Judgment Seat, of whom they have been
unmindful and sullen. Hear ye, and give Ear, be not Proud, for the Lord has
spoken, Give Glory to the Lord your God, before he cause Darkness, and before
your Feet stumble upon the dark Mountains, Jer. 13. 15, 16. If I may use such a
familiar Phrase, Do but behave your selves Civil toward God in this World,
that you may meet him with Comfort in the next.

Let us offer the Sacrifice of Praise to God continually, that is the Fruit of
our Lips, giving thanks to his Name, Heb. 13. 15. This is no hard thing. It is
so small a Duty, and under the Majesty and Greatness of God, that we need an
express Revelation, to assure that he accepts thereof. If himself had not said,
Whosoever offers Praise glorifieth me, Psalm. 50. 23. A considering Person could
not believe it, for he might easily think thus; There is more distance in
respect of Superiority between God and Man, as between Man and Flies: Now if
they should buz forth in Commendation of us, What Glory would it be? God is
gracious and infinite in Condescension, If he does set his Heart upon Man, Job
34. 14. That he does at all look upon our low and mean Services. He is
Glorified in all his Works, and this with ordering our Conversation aright, is
the utmost we can do. Or who has first given to him, and it shall be
recompensed to him again? Romans 11. 35. But he has first given unto us, and
expects the return of good words to our Maker. Only acknowledge and Confess
with the mouth what we have received, and have Good Will toward him, and speak
out of Things truly as they are. Lord, Who would not Praise and magnify thee?
Forasmuch as among all the Beings of the World, there is none like unto thee,
thou art the Maker of all, and they from thee. Thou art worthy, O Lord, to
receive Glory and Honor, and Power, for thou have created all things, and for
thy Pleasure they are, and were created, Rev. 4. 11.

The larger Potsherds of the Earth lifted up with Pride and Vanity, do not
value nor mind the good Expressions of a Beggar and a mean Person, though they
believe it to be sincere. It Is their Sin and Weakness to slight their Brother
of the same likeness, and as much a Man as themselves, with all the Privilege
and Advantages of humane Nature. But God is not like unto them; He that first
made, does not forsake the Work of his hands, Psalm. 138. 8. 1 Samuel 12. 22. Isa.
44. 21. He is pleased with, and hearkens unto the Voice of his Children. He who
formed them after that manner, and for this purpose, does accept the Fruit of
our Lips.

They that know God, and have such raised thoughts of him, as his visible Works
do set forth, are apt to doubt, that he who is so much above and greater then
mankind, should at all mind them, they being little and below his Cognizance:
But Scripture does most evidently satisfy to the contrary. There is the very
Image of the Godhead upon our selves, and a Capacity to know and Worship him,
all which give perfect assurance that we are related, and the Objects of his
Concern. That (...) does, and will punish the World for their Evil, and the
wicked for their iniquity, Isa. 13. 11. is manifested when his wrath is kindled
a little, for sometimes Punishment does begin to seize on the ungodly Sinner,
even before he goes to receive the full recompense of his doings. By that
abundant Misery which is every where, he does let all the Earth know, that he
has indignation against Sin, and this the place thereof. Again on the other
hand, By seeing the felicity of his Chosen, by that little taste of Happiness
he gives unto his dutiful Children, He does thereby assure, that he designs to
bring them unto greater, to encourage here, and reward hereafter. Their
affliction and trouble does manifest the Sin, even these have; They are
chastened of the Lord, that they should not be Condemned with the World, 1 Cor.
11. 32. That liberal Provision and plenty the Evil and unthankful have, is for
Trial or Retribution; for even these do some little good. So that a Man shall
say, Verily there is a reward for the Righteous: Verily he is a God that
judges in the Earth, Psalm. 58. 11. The Lord looks from Heaven: He beholds
all the Sons of Men, from the place of his Habitation, he looks upon all the
Inhabitants of the Earth, He fashioneth their Hearts alike, he considers all
their Works, Psalm. 33. 13, 14, 15. God does care for us, and we have to do
with him, Heb. 4. 13. notwithstanding his infinite Greatness, for he has been
pleased to admit thereof.

The Word, Prayer, and Praise do keep up this astonishing intercourse. They
expel the former Hatred, Aversation and Strangeness. Can two walk together
except they be agreed? Amos 3. 3. But they may, when they are. Acquaint now thy
self with him, and be at Peace, Job 22. 21. Abraham was called the Friend of
God, Jam. 2. 23. Many like sayings the Holy Ghost makes use of as may create
Humble Boldness and love to him. There is nothing affrightful in him to good
Men, but perfect love casts out Fear, 1 John 4. 8. When this once begins to be
established and rooted, it is no harshness to make mention of his name; then to
talk and think of him must be exceeding delightful. The very reason why natural
and disobedient people cannot endure to hear or speak of God is for want of
what is here mentioned; and they judge of others by themselves: But examine
your selves, is there any torment to speak of what one loves? There is such a
thing as love of God; if themselves would turn from every evil way and come
near^^ they might be happy partakers, and not only conceive but be sensible
thereof. It is the whole required of Man to love God with all his Heart, all
his Soul, all his Strength, and all his Mind, to love him better then any, yea,
all things besides: As much as he can, and to use sincere endeavors to love
him more. The first thing to be done before any can come unto that, is to hate
evil, Psalm. 97. 10. And then we may love the Lord, which gives a delicate
relish of every duty we owe unto him; O how love I thy Law? it is my Meditation
all the Day, Psalm. 119. 97. My Meditation of him shall be sweet, I will be glad
in the Lord, Psalm. 104. 34. My Mouth shall be satisfied with Marrow and
Fatness, whilst my tongue praises thee with joyful lips, Psalm. 63, 5. Praise
ye the Lord, for it is good to sing praises unto our God, for it is pleasant,
and praise is comely, Psalm. 147. 1.

But God commends his love toward us, in that while were yet sinners, Of the
Sacrament.
Christ died for us, Romans 5. 8. Now it is just and reasonable that wonderful
and gracious works should be had in remembrance. To this end our Lord
instituted the Sacrament of his Body and Blood that we may call to mind, the
one was broken, the other shed for us to obtain the forgiveness of our sins.
This do in remembrance of me, Luke 22. 19. Here is a positive command, and the
refusal is an act of Disobedience; It is called by his own name, the Communion
of the body of Christ, and the communion of the blood of Christ. 1 Cor. 10. 16.
The Psalmist seems to have intended it in a prophetic Spirit, when he said, I
will take the Cup of Salvation, and call upon the name of the Lord, Psalm. 116.
13. So that it may be applied to this, Every transgression and disobedience
received a just recompense of reward, Heb. 2. 2. Again, He that despised Moses
Law, died without Mercy, Heb. 10. 28. That Soul which did not receive the
Passover was to be cut off from his people; And ought not the Mark 12. 6.
Son of God himself be as much reverenced in the Commandments he gave us? Did
he not work for us a greater Salvation, then the other did for our Forefathers
in delivering them from the Land of Egypt? May it not be fearfully expected,
that those who either contemn or wilfully neglect this divine institution,
shall not be admitted into that eternal inheritance Christ has purchased for
us? And where I am, there shall my Servant be, John. 12. 26. But he is none,
who will not do the things Christ says and commands. Let all consider of this
and fear, and lay hold of opportunity for this duty.

That of 1 Cor. 11. 28, 29. should not keep people away, for this is a certain
Rule, That if one truly repents, and discerns the Lords Body, that is, esteem
it more then common Bread and Wine, he can never eat or drink unworthily. A
common and ordinary capacity does not judge of more then he sees or handles:
Indeed there are too many, especially in Country Towns and Villages that are
sunk into gross Ignorance and Darkness as to spiritual things; who was in the
fault, will be judged at the last day: There being throughout our Land like
Priest, like People, both backward and unwilling, the one to give, the other to
receive instruction. Yet any one that is a Man and reasonable Creature
(otherwise he could not do the common business of life) may conceive thus much,
that God is, who made the World and all things therein; The Bible is his Word,
and whatsoever is written therein, is most true and certain: When this is heard
or read sincerely, it will by degrees let in more Light into his Soul:
Especially if he goes to the place where it is Preached and Expounded. He may
come to understand the sense and meaning, for the Scripture in necessary things
is very plain, and then to conceive thereof in his mind. There he may learn
that under the old Law God instituted many Ceremonies, and required the
punctual observation of them; and though the beggarly Elements and carnal
Ordinances are done away, for they were Types of Christ our Passover who is now
risen; yet since his supper is ordained to be kept in perpetual remembrance, it
must be by that way and manner himself has prescribed.

As Parchment and Wax are little worth of themselves, but yet useful and
significative of conveying Land one to another; So our Lord may Minister unto
us his grace and benefits by the outward signs of Bread and Wine; and when
they are received in this Ordinance, they are more to be esteemed in respect of
the thing signified, then in our common eating and drinking. The Bread broken
sets forth how the body of our Lord was torn upon the Cross, the Wine poured
out puts in mind of his side being pierced and the shedding of his blood. As
often as ye eat this Bread and drink this Cup, ye do show the Lords death till
he come, 1 Cor. 11. 26.

The like Figure whereunto even Baptism does also now save us, not the putting
away the filth of the Flesh, but the answer of a good Conscience toward God by
the resurrection of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 3. 21. That is, not so much the
sprinkling or dipping in Water as the thing signified. The Apostle does not
speak to exclude it, for himself used it, and so did the other Apostles who had
the Spirit of God, and all the Church down ever since. Now there is the same
prejudice as to that, What does the mere Water signify? They might have put
the same question to the Apostles themselves had they been in their time, or to
our Lord in the institution of his Supper: There is not so much only in the
outward sign, but there is in the thing signified.

Many remain still in Ignorance and Sin, but if they would be saved, let them
come out from among their Sheep and Oxen, and lift up their eyes to Heaven,
considering who inhabits there. They must not always be confined in a Barn, or
with Saul hide themselves among the Rushes, or be wholly taken up with the
little things of this short life, for they are called out and invited to
receive a Kingdom. This is spoken in good earnest: Your only end of coming into
this World is to serve God, and to know the things pertaining unto him, and
hence to be translated up to receive it. If they do that for a while, they will
at length perceive there is something more in the Ordinances, then what they at
present imagine through the darkness and blindness that is in them; None can
think slightly but who do not understand. If they do really believe on Christ,
it would seem no strange thing to come unto his Supper.

The Man is to raise up the highest Love for God and his Christ, Remember the
holy Covenant that has passed between them, with a continued firm stedfastness
and sincere purpose to perform the same. He may refresh and strengthen his
Faith, especially on the Death of our Lord, and the Truth of his whole Gospel;
he is to lift up his So^l in the most hearty Praises and lively Devotion^ where
is a constant ^ear and obedience to Almighty God, if he comes unexpectedly
where the Sacrament is Administered, upon a little examination and reverence of
mind he may receive. But where he has notice before hand, and he may lay aside
some of his Worldly Business as this may be done thrice in the Year at least,
there let him not approach to this Holy Mystery without Solemn preparation
before, for it is altogether of as high a nature, and deserves as great
reverence as the Passover of Old. We are always to have Oil ready in our Lamps,
but then we should trim and make them ready at the meeting of the Bridegroom.
It is not an humbling or carefulness for a day, nor a fit of holiness for a
Season only, for this is the practice of them Who are Foolish, Disobedient,
Deceived, serving diverse Lusts and Pleasures, Tit. 3. 3. who fondly think to
make atonement by this Ordinance, not considering that some will be rejected
who have eaten and drunk in Christ's presence, Luke 13. 26. But a due
preparation consists in a constant course of keeping the Commandments of God;
There is a building up in our most holy Faith, and a progress in the Christian
Life, so that whosoever is sincere and willing as to that, may partake of this
Supper to his comfort and benefit.

Give not that which is holy unto Dogs, is the express command of the Master of
this Feast; Since the Church has been remiss to this thing, and promiscuously
admitted all, the Sacrament is become common and disesteemed; When she kept to
the rules of our Lord, people were earnest and desirous to come, and sorrowful
to be kept away.

If the Government of God over the World were not in a manner made precarious
by those who take upon them the Office and Administration thereof, Men would be
more willing and obedient under it. Neither would themselves be so contemptible
and base among the People, if they had kept up that authority in word and power
which the Lord had given. When a thing stoops or becomes easy, the consequent
is to trample upon and not care for it; they are to answer before him, who in
their several Generations have thus managed the cause of God. They have not
done according to their direction in his Word, for that is with Authority, and
would if truly Preached, command the most Rebellious and Proud hearts of the
sons of Men. God is greater then Men, and as those who exercise Authority,
would not suffer it to be brought low, neither should his Kingdom and rule over
them diminish. Truth was once stablished in the Earth, the Kingdom of God was
once set up with Power; but now through the treacherous yielding of the
supporters, it has been long falling away and loses strength. God is not the
least beholden to his Creatures for serving him, as Genesis 4. 7. So afterward
his Commandments are given in a Majestic and Authoritative manner, Exodus 20.
And though the stubborn Sinner says in his heart, which he Manifests in
practice, I will do this and that just contrary; yet he shall be answered again
in Plagues and Punishment. In like manner did the Lord Jesus give out his
Commission of Teaching; Go ye into all the World, and Preach the Gospel to
every Creature: He that believes and is Baptized, shall be saved; but he that
believes not, shall be damned, Mark 16. 15, 16. If People do their duty, it is
accepted; if not, they are to expect the danger: There has been a wonderful
deal of begging, yea, moreover civil Authority must be called in for aid to
bring Mankind over to the ordinances of their God, and all will not do. When
their fear toward him is taught by the precept of Men, they may come to
perform such a Worship as is described in the foregoing part of the verse, of
drawing near with their Mouth, and honoring with their lips, but have removed
their heart far from me, Isa. 29. 13. and that cannot be hindered by all legal
constitutions. What Glory is it unto him to have a mere outward and feigned
submission? If all things were done only according to direction in Scripture,
if there was sound Preaching which makes not ashamed, we should see other
effects of it, even in this degeneracy and corruption of Times. Notwithstanding
the conceit of Humane Isa. 29. 14.
Wisdom in opposition to the Divine, yet those ways which are only of Gods
ordaining are much better for carrying on his Work and Glory, then the
pretended helps Man fancies of his own invention. Those who are concerned
herewith, may know what they have to do, and remember that Judgment Seat of
Christ they must appear before; they are going out of the World, as their
predecessors already are.

O that Religion which has been so long declining, might flourish once again!
Ye that make mention of the Lord, keep not silence, and give him no rest till
he establish, and till he make Jerusalem a Praise in the Earth, Isa. 62. 6, 7.
That the Church Militant on Earth might be more Pure, Universal, Bright, and
excellent toward the consummation thereof; for now it comes near to be
Triumphant in Heaven: We have the Grace and Word of God which are sufficient to
accomplish it, and it is left to us whether we will do thereafter, as we might
if we would. Every one may sincerely strive for his part and to the utmost, and
then the whole will be done: As it may by reducing the Ordinances of God to
their right use, purging out the Old leaven, and taking away that corruption
which has been so long in them. In our good undertakings, God shall bless us,
and all the ends of the Earth shall sear him, Psalm. 67. 7. By the help given
and that is further offered us, by the way showed we might do great things if
we would shake off unwillingness and Sloth. Then labor and be diligent, and
the Blessed Work would begin; Things may be brought to such a pass, that all
shall know the Lord from the least of them unto the greatest of them, Jer. 31.
34. Heb. 8. 11. They may come to discern what is pleasing unto him, and do
thereafter, that it may be well with them and their Children for ever.

Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy Voice like a Trumpet, and show my people
their Transgression, and the House of Jacob their Sins. Yet they seek me daily,
and delight to know my Ways as a Nation that did Righteousness, and forsook not
the Ordinance of their God, they ask of me the Ordinances of Justice, they take
delight in approaching to God, Isa. 58. 1, 2. Even at this time they go by
Multitudes unto the House of God, and are constant to hear his Will, they are
inquisitive after it, and make a show to observe it, and as if they had not
departed from that established order of things he has set up. There is as much
Profession and Devotion in the World as ever; But if it is out of a right
Principle of glorifying God, then they will hearken to any thing which tends to
that. Nay, if it be out of mere selfish saving the Soul, and are endued with
real Wisdom, and they would not be willingly amongst those many who will seek
to enter in at the straight Gate, and shall not be able, Luke 13. 24. Then I
say, themselves would be gladly informed if there may be any mistake or deceit
in this matter; in those times of general back^sliding and revolt from God he
speaks of by his Servants the Prophets, there was as much of his visible and
outward Worship as in these days. They did cry out, The Temple of the Lord, the
Temple of the Lord, Jer. 7. 4. and did frequent it as now people are zealous to
go to Church, or such a Congregation. But that stubbornness and disobedience in
the heart, their sinning which they would excuse and make atonement for by this
way, did justly make God angry, and to abominate their Hypocrisy. When the
outward duties (as it is with some) do make up the whole of their Religion; Who
know not or do not practice any thing more then going to Church, hearing
Sermons, using Prayer, receiving the Sacrament; all this is but vain, and will
signify nothing; for these are means of Grace and in order to something more.
Now it would be strange (though common with many) to be hearers of the Word
and not doers of it deceiving their own selves, Jam. 1. 22. So is Praying to
comply with Gods Will, and yet not endeavoring to do so; or to Remember the
Covenant in Baptism, and yet not observe it, or only with slight purposes and
resolution at that present time, when the words thereof are to Obediently keep
Gods Holy Will and Commandments, and walk in the same all the days of our
Life. It is mocking and dissimulation with God if they do not sincerely labor
after, what they seem unto him with their lips and outward gesture to desire.

Indeed the Ordinances are part of the Commandments of God; we use them out of
Obedience and Homage unto him; He commands to hear his Will, to call on Him,
and to receive his Sacraments; but then there is a further reason of all, to
make ready a People prepared for the Lord. It can hardly be expressed how
averse our Nature is God and the things of his Kingdom, how hard it is to
cleave unto him as he requires, and how easy it is to fall away and start
aside. Only take heed to thy self and keep thy Soul diligently, lest thou
forget the things which thine eyes have seen. Take heed unto your selves lest
ye forget the Covenant of the Lord your God, Deuteronomy. 4. 9. 23. The outward duties
put in mind of this, and are to be retained all the days of our life, for
whilst we are here in the body, Temptations from without and Corruption from
within would betray us into sin and forgetfulness, unless prevented by that
Grace which is conveyed through these means. Our goodness would be as the
morning Dew, or as an early Cloud so soon passes it away, we should soon
become Barren and Unfruitful, unless God was pleased to instill more daily
through his Word and Ordinances. My Doctrine shall drop as the Rain, My Speech
shall distill as the Dew, as the small Rain upon the tender Herb, and as the
Showers upon the Grass, Deuteronomy. 32. 2. Otherwise the manifold Solicitations and
Objects of this World would be apt to scorch and make us fade even in our good
Ways, but that received in, renders the Vineyard meet for our God. If his Word
falls upon the dust of the Wilderness, or Stony and dry places, it may seem
lost and ineffectual, not for want of Worth and Excellency in it self, for it
is the same Rain there; but the incapacity is in the subject which does not
profit, because it is not mixed with Faith in them that hear it, or they suffer
it to run off again as useless Water.

But if it takes Root, there succeed those accomplishments of the inward Man,
and there spring up the Fruits of the Spirit. That the Soul may be renewed
according to its first Creation from whence it was fallen; But now it is to be
restored to the likeness of God, and become partaker of the Divine Nature, The
old corruption may be in a great measure taken away or subdued, the seeds of
good may be cherished and grow up into acts and habits of doing well.

Were Men assured the things of God were for their Happiness, they would be for
them; they are indeed called the things that belong to our Peace, but that is
hereafter; they make a promise of safety, when no danger is seen; but now they
seem to trouble and disquiet.

Much has been said already as to every part of this surmise; And what if the
carnal Man should be gratified yet further, and it could be made probable unto
him, yea clearly evidenced, if he would try what is here affirmed, that they
are for our present good also. Let him ask those who have had experience of the
Way of the Lord, who have trodden the Path of Peace: If they be thought partial
Judges in their own Case, let him enquire from himself, or others of the way of
Sin and Wickedness. He can find nothing from those who have been thoroughly
practiced therein, but outward Smiles, for they can give no true Commendation,
but Silence, sad Wishes, Hypocritical Looks do betray their inward dislike and
sorrow of heart. The open Testimony and Acknowledgment of the first concerning
the excellency of his; the others feigned Laughter, deep Silence, or vain
drol-Drollery would weigh somewhat with a Wise Man, concerning the Goodness of
the one, and Suspicion of the other. They have various and different Effects in
the Persons of Men, but if moreover he would diligently examine the Nature and
Reason of things, and find them accordingly, If they are both the same in
Speculation, and also in Practice (for these go together in things Divine, when
they are rightly understood and univerversally complied withal) What can be
more desired for the full Satisfaction of a prudent and considering Man? If he
sees others already at Peace, who have went the same way, and also can be
justified from the very thing; And further might be seen, felt and understood
within himself, if he would make a through experience, and continue it for some
time. What is for our Good, Peace and Benefit, has a show at first of Evil,
disturbance and inconvenience; this frightens the Foolish Nature of Man, who
does not perceive what is hidden under the different disguises of things. The
mere outside and covering is the least, but thought should be had to what is
substantial and within.

In short, Good is Happiness, and Sin is Misery; the more a Man has of the
one, and less of the other, so he has the blessed Effects, and is freed from
Vexation. Whosoever is born of God does not commit Sin, for his seed remains
in him, and he cannot Sin because he is born of God, 1 John 3. 9. And then he
has not disturbance nor Restlessness of mind, neither is he in danger of the
Punishment to come.

In Truth, we do many times disquiet our selves in vain, being vexed for, and
desiring we know not what: But this proceeds from the evil of Ignorance, a want
of understanding the Nature of things, which would take away all this Misery. A
right understanding puts upon diligence and endeavor to provide our selves, so
as to keep off the Evil and obtain the Good set before us. And we are not
perplexed with those common things, which either do not at all, or not much
concern us. What Solomon says, In much Wisdom is much Grief, and he that
increases knowledge, increases Sorrow, Eccles. 1. 8. That is, When it is only
confined to the things before us, and of this Life, for then it quickens the
Resentment of Miseries here, and finds out no Remedy: But if extended further,
as the Excellency of the knowledge of Jesus Christ our Lord does, there it
mitigates the Vanity and Vexation of the present by hope of better things
hereafter; satisfies of our imperfect State, in order to being made Perfect;
and prompts to the doing of all things, to make that sure unto our selves. A
little smattering of knowledge makes more miserable, but if thoroughly improved
and stretched out to its due pitch of Gospel Revelation, the succeeding
Eternity, and as it enters within the Vail, there it is a necessary help, and
if thoroughly complied withal, it will secure us of the blessed End.

The first Man is of the Earth Earthly, the second Man is the Lord from Heaven.
As is the Earthly, such are they also that are Earthy: and as is the Heavenly,
such are they also that are Heavenly, 1 Cor. 15. 47, 48. As Man was made in the
image of God, which was chiefly in Holiness and good upon his Soul, from which
he by Transgression fell; So when he is born again, he is transformed into the
Likeness of his Creator. Whilst on Earth he ascends as it were into Heaven, the
place of perfect Felicity, as this is an intermixture and imperfection of both,
that below is of deplorable and absolute Misery. The utmost Happiness which
only arises from the things here, makes the Soul cleave unto the Ground, and at
last sinks into the lowest Hell; but the true, as it came down, ascends again;
Like Stocks planted by our Heavenly Father, which are grafted and shoot forth
into Trees of Immortality. What is begun here, God is pleased to add, that it
may grow, till it reaches above the Clouds, and is perfected in the Regions of
Bliss. The one is Earthly, Sensual and Devilish expressed in its three Degrees
of sinking, till it comes to the lowest. But the Wisdom that is from above is
first pure, then Peaceable, Gentle and easy to be entreated, full of Mercy and
good Fruits without Partiality, and without Hypocrisy. And the Fruit of
Righteousness is sown in Peace, of them that make Peace, Jam. 3. 15, 17, 18. In
the time of imperfection here, we begin to lay a Foundation, which will be
builded on, and made consummate in the Heavens. Be ye therefore perfect, even
as your Father which is in Heaven is perfect, Mat. 5. 48. As he which has
called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of Conversation, 1 Pet. 1. 15.
And every Man that has his hope in him, purifieth himself as he is pure, 1
John 3. 3. We are sincerely according to the Grace and Power given us, to
imitate him in all his Communicable Attributes and Excellencies. All our
Happiness should tend upwards, or otherwise it is a vain show and deceit; for
assuredly as we hope that we might be Partakers of his Holiness, so we must
expect to be Happy, as he is Happy. It was an excellent Act of the Old Heathens
(to the shame of Christians, who seek for boasting) in taking upon them the
Name of Philosophers, that is Lovers of Wisdom, for they said truly, none but
God should be called Wise: So he is styled Only Wise, Romans 16. 27. Our Savior
checked one for calling him Good upon the same Reason. In like manner none
should be called Happy (which is the Comprehension of all) but we are in the
way, and do endeavor after Happiness only; And when we shall come there, we
must with the four and twenty Elders fall on our Faces to ascribe Greatness and
Blessedness unto our God only; for he has created all things, and of him are
all things, and they do but partake of his Fullness, and all they have is from
him.

But hold we are now in the way, and therefore are to be more careful about
this, then what shall be at the End. We should know, and do what helps toward
this perfect Happiness. The Goodness of a thing lies in its right Temper and
Equality; Health of Body consists in a due Circulation of the Blood, in the
even and usual Proportion of moist and dry, hot and cold. So there is Peace in
the Soul, when the understanding does its Office, the Desires and Passions keep
still in their just place, and each does what he should do: For if they do
nothing all, (as it is the wretched Condition of many? Whose Soul as it were
sleeps in the Body, just keeping Life and Sense, who in Laziness and Sloth do
rather snort then live out their days) this deceives into Misery. It has a
show of Peace, but it is Stupidity, descends into the lower parts, and utterly
hinders from coming up to Heaven. And this (though it makes no such great
noise) is the Destruction of the World; their refusing to exercise that Ability
God has given them, either by not using the powers of the Soul, or not doing
it to the utmost on its proper and excellent End. Wherefore is a price put
into the hands of a Fool, and he has no heart to get Wisdom? Let the latter
sort consider this Command of our Lord, strive to enter in at the straight
Gate, for many, I say, will seek to enter in, and shall not be able, Luke 13.
24. Do but really endeavor according to what thou can; for not those who
Strive, but Seek, that is in a careless and negligent manner, who miss thereof.
We being now in the way to the Rest that remains for the People of God, must
go on and be traveling; or we shall never come to it. Again, all things
succeed well when they keep within their own Station and bounds, and move
according to their several kinds; more then this is Confusion and Disorder,
I^ss is lying still and involves in the doom of unprofitable Servants.

In the things Commanded us, some may seem to thwart our Nature, yet only as it
is corrupted; but they are not contrary to it, when considered in its Original
purity. If any thing seems harsh and i^ksome, it is to better and to advance,
to heal that which was sick, to restore the fallen, to recover sight to the
blind, to give Liberty to the Captive. It is reasonable to undergo a little
trouble or inconvenience in order to a greater Good; that also is in our
selves, for we sinned with our Father, and have since added fresh Provocation
to his Disobedience. Now the Law is ordained to help and retrieve the Condition
of poor Man, that he may come to himself, Luke 15. 17. take Care that he do not
sink below himself, to bring him into his due posture, and then to raise him
yet higher. By setting before us, and then stirring us up to endeavor after
those great and precious Promises, that by these you might be Partakers of the
Divine Nature, having escaped the Corruption that is in the World through Lust,
2 Pet. 1. 4. First to make us Men, and then to be as Angels, and thence to be
translated into a Greater Similitude unto God himself.

The End of the Commandment is Charity, out of a pure Heart, and of a Good
Constience, and Faith unfeigned, 1 Timothy 1. 5. Love to God and Men, a right
inward Disposition of the Soul is the whole required of us. There are indeed
some things given to prove our Love; Obedience and Faith; Of this sort are the
Precepts of Self denial, Taking up the Cross, hating Father and Mother,
subjecting our selves unto Persecution, rather then offend God. This exercises
Faith and Love in a high Degree, because we endure real, present and visible
inconveniences, only out of Respect to him that is invisible, for future, but
certain Rewards. Even now he gives Grace and Strength to bear, hereby assuring
he will give Glory and Recompense hereafter. God does by inward Consolation or
outward Help, arm his Servants against all Sufferings. There are none of his
Commandments (though they may seem austere to the ignorant and disobedient) but
tend to the Happiness of those, who do thereafter. God is good to all who
believe, wait and trust in him. But these are extraordinary Precepts, which are
(as Abraham's offering up his Son) that the Trial of us might be more perfectly
had, to which particular chosen Ones are called out. They happen only at some
Seasons according as his Gracious (for so I will call it here) Providence is
pleased to Order. Persecution, Reproach, Losses are not all the days of our
Life, these are shortened for the Elects sake. For the Rod of the wicked shall
not Rest upon the lot of the Righteous, lest the Righteous put forth their
hands unto iniquity, Psalm. 125. 3. they also are but Flesh. There is a taking
up the Cross daily, Luke 9. 23. but that may be understood of a Preparation
against it, or a suffering in lesser inconveniences; Yet still it is so
ordered by the Goodness of God, that his Servants may pass the greater part of
their time in Rest and Quietness. If they have Evil returned for Good, this
does not arise from the Commandments of God, but from the iniquity and
perverseness of Men. Those are good and reasonable, but the inconvenience
Springs from the Malice and ^olly of others; Take away that, and there would
not be the least outward harm in obeying God. The greater Persecution arises
from hence, for it is not through following of good only, if they keep that to
themselves: The wicked may hereupon conceive secret Rancour and Indignation,
yet this does not commonly break forth into open violence. But then for the
other part when they come to meddle with the People, to tell them of their
Transgressions, and seek to reform them, this was the unwelcome Message that
stirred them up to Hatred and Cruelty. Now consider the thing abstractedly, a
King sends a Messenger to his Subjects, to acquaint them of the Violation of
his Laws, He would have them make acknowledgment and do so no more, then they
shall have Protection and Peace, otherwise they shall be destroyed. As God is
greater then Man, Why should he be hardly thought of, for keeping up his
Government over the work of his hand? Wherein is his Messenger to be blamed?
What fault is he in for doing only what he is Commanded to do?

It is secretly conceived, that Religion is prejudicial to the Happiness of
mankind, in that it is the disturber of Society, and an hindrance to the
Peaceableness thereof. This meddling vexing Humor spoils all: What Reproof is
to private Persons, that is faithful Preaching to the public; They fancy, it
serves only to terrify and disquiet Men. But as all Government and Community
is founded on Religion, the difference of Good and Evil, right and wrong: These
would be mere Words only if not attended with Rewards and Punishments; And
these would not restrain neither, if not for God and the Conscience of Men, as
also their Concern of a succeeding Eternity, for otherwise Rapine and
Injustice, discontent and weariness of Life would Attempt strange things. And
therefore the Wise Politicians and ungodly Men of the World would just have so
much Religion, as to prevent this and no more. But what unworthy thoughts have
such People of Almighty God, that his Service must be brought down only to
their purposes, his Kingdom and Dominion over Men, must come under theirs,
whereas it is now in its due place of Subordination unto that of God. How do a
small number of Grasshoppers here in the Earth think of, and would do toward
the Great Lord of the World? How do Men that shall die and must appear before
him in Judgment, demean themselves toward him, now they are but a little while
in the way? It is strange, there should be any such Pride or Rebellion of Heart
in Christendom, yet there is more here as may be perceived by the wicked Talk
of some, then in the Nations which have not known God. To silence the Blasphemy
of these, and to allay the thoughts of Heart: Consider, That all ungodly Deeds,
and all hard Speeches against Jude 15.
the Lord, are for want of a perfect understanding of him and his ways. Let
them reflect, who it must be that made the World and all things therein, and
then speak lightly of him if they can; Let them observe that great Order which
is in every part thereof, and then they can never conclude him to be a
disturber of Affairs here below. It Is only the abuse and non compliance with
Religion that is the disturber of the World. Those who do violence to the Law,
Zeph. 3. 4. and pervert the Gospel, Gal. 1. 7. Bring in confusion and every
evil work. There is an inclination in the Nature of Man to accept of Gods
terms, to arise and be saved; and he not giving way thoroughly unto that, is
vexed and troubled. It Is Hypocrites, Partial Christians, and those convictions
of wicked ungodly Men, not knowing what to do, which is the Disturbance of the
Inhabitants of the Earth. Let God be true, and every Man a Liar; surmise what
we will, all the evil is from our selves, but we have that abominable
disingenuous way of taking it off from our selves, and would with our
Forefathers impute it somewhere else, by this owning we are the Children of
him and partakers of his Corruption. Whom would we plead Genesis 3. 12.
with, or excuse our selves before? Are we not to supplicate to God for his
Mercy? And is this the way by false unjust insinuations to provoke him yet
more? At last these things will be discerned plainly, as they may be at present
known out of that Book by which all are to be judged; Righteous art thou O
Lord, and true are thy Judgments; they are ordained to give Peace on Earth, and
good will toward Men. If it happens contrary, it is because horribly abused or
not observed: It tends to the Happiness and benefit of Society, for what does
more then those Duties of Love, Justice and Mercifulness as they are strictly
enjoined by the Son of God? What can be more endearing then to strive together,
and help one another forward to the common Salvation?

In the natural body each part is joined and does depend upon the whole, and
the good of this again upon the good and order of each part; so in the Soul as
to things invisible (but to her sensible) there is an happy connection of them.
One tends to the good of her in this Capacity, another to that according to its
several workings, and all together for the benefit of the whole. Gods Power and
Wisdom is to be seen in such a contrivance and order of things. 1 Cor. 12.
To Nature and the dictates thereof, he has superadded Grace and Commandments
both to will and to do further; He that has done so far, will certainly bring
us to Happiness at last. We can well judge of the goodness of his Nature by
what he does; He who has given Being, and ordered all things for our well
being, if we do comply with, and not resist his Will, shall also perfect the
same at last. Lord thou will ^ordain peace for us: for thou also h^st wrought
all our Works in us, Isa. 26. 12. And whosoever does not find it so in him, it
is by reason of what the Prophet adds further, O Lord our God, other Lords
besides thee ^ave had dominion over us, verse 13. There is some other reigning
sin, but whosoever will give up himself wholly to the guidance of our God,
shall find this blessed effect; I say again, he shall certainly find this
blessed effect. All his Commandments even as this present time belong to our
Peace, which is begun and imperfect here, but will be finished and thoroughly
consummated in Jerusalem that is above, the vision of Peace.

CHAP. XIII
Of WISDOM and PRUDENCE.

I need not spend many words to show that Wisdom tends to the Happiness of
Mankind, for this is acknowledged; but the enquiry will be, Whether Religion be
this true Wisdom or not: and if this can be made to appear to them, who know
not much more then the talk and rumor thereof. For there are some who think
all is but prate, and that things happen at all peradventure; and therefore are
for catching what good they can, and bear the evil when it comes, for there is
no remedy. But none reasons after this manner as to the Actions, and what are
esteemed Accidents of this Life. It is evident, that things are and may be
obtained by prudent care and foresight, and by a wise management: So the
miscarriages we fall into might have been avoided, if we had done such and such
things. All Transactions and Affairs, whether of greater or smaller moment,
depend upon sore going means. It is the Office of Wisdom to make choice of the
right and best; and of Prudence to make diligent use of them accordingly. He
that discerns not thus much is a Fool and knows nothing, and to go about to
convince such an one with Arguments, is what Solomon says, To bray a Fool in a
Mortar amongst What with a Pestil, yet will not his foolishness depart from
him, Prove. 27. 22. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of Knowledge, but
Fools despise Wisdom and Instruction, Prove. 1. 7. These also are in direct term
called Fools; for notwithstanding their own self conceit, they might thus
apprehend, that there is yet more to be known and put in mind of, as there was
before they had learned and gathered what they now seem to know. None will own
openly (though some may be found not to follow it) that there is no need of
good counsel, and circumspect action as to the things of this World. Many
confine it all here, but think Wisdom avails not to any thing beyond. In a
Christian Co^ntrey few will proclaim their Unbelief, yet the secret
imaginations of Thousands are to this purpose. That Religion is a res^rve, and
a thing of doubt. What may befall hereafter in another place, they see it not;
or it is decreed one way or another, the fewer thoughts they have of it, the
better, but however j^st so many as will serve turn.

Such is the reasoning in their minds when it is half way, but stretch it up
higher, and it will dictate thus much. There is not one thing under the Sun,
wherein Reason is not necessary one way or another, and will, if made use of
thoroughly, find help. But first of all, it leads out of this labyrinth and
perplexity of things here below, and looks up unto God who made all things, and
has established a course of things. Who gives grass to the Eater, and
ministers seed to the So^er; for Cattle which cannot use the means, the Earth
brings forth of it self, but not Corn unto Man without his right way of Labor.
To whom he has given skill to improve nature, that she shall bring forth her
increase more abundantly. Those which cannot Spin nor Sow, have Food and
Raiment without; but Man who knows both, must be Naked and Famish if he does
not; so the Wisdom God has endued him withal, continues his Life: see Isa.
28. 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29. And then he being in a frail Body, what instinct is
to brutes, that is reason to him (if he would act according to the best of it)
to preserve from Sickness, and outward evil Accidents. When they befall, there
his understanding would do somewhat toward remedy, by looking unto and
removing the cause of disorder: and after all, that which is weak and mortal
must sicken and die. The Body is purely natural; we neither made, so we do not
preserve it, which breaths and moves when we neither know, nor consider, nor
take care; but increases and decreases of it self, yet (under the Protector
above) a right understanding helps toward the well-being of that during the
time appointed. If it does to this which is subject to nature and necessity,
that it cannot always relieve; much more would it as to that part of us which
is both free and immortal, God having made it so, which has knowledge of good
and evil given unto her, and also power to embrace the one and fly from the
other. The Body forgets what is past, being only for the present, and knows not
what is to come; but the Soul remembers the things that have been, casts a
transitory glance on the present, and knows the things afar of which pertain to
her. She believes him faithful who has promised, and true who has
forewarned. The Prophets in old time were called Seers; for having their
Knowledge from God of what was to come, they saw it, as if then actually before
their Eyes. And we have as great certainty of the things to come, as they had
of their particular Messages. This one capacity of knowing before hand, would
render mankind safe and secure, if they would give way and act according to it.

It is evident, that the things before us are temporal and do pass away: It is
a folly to fix up a rest where we do not continue, a mere deceit and
disappointment to place Happiness in what does not satisfy. It is reasonable
to take care about the things eternal, and where we are to live for ever; as we
make a great stir to have somewhat a longer and better Passage through this
World. This Life will as certainly have an end as it did begin; and therefore,
thought should be taken about that which will follow and always endure, as
concerning that now which draws on toward its end. By Faith and Consideration
the invisible and future things of the other World are seen, and also present;
then the Man acts to them, as to the things before us. By what has been
already fulfilled, and now is, he concludes that it shall still be; by what is
evident and certain already, he may prepare for those things which are no
otherwise uncertain then as to come, and in another place. He must be so great
a Fool, that one would think a reasonable Creature cannot be, who believes the
Gospel and considers, and yet does not live accordingly. To do both is not in
the power of any, and therefore the last is neglected. But can they judge any
evil the less, which happens upon them through their own inconsideration? Is
not this a stinging aggravation thereof, and so will be much more when there is
no possibility of redress, as such are the concerns of Eternity. The Ungodly
and Sinner expose themselves to a real and intolerable danger, without any hope
or design, having no security or preservative against it.

There are many wise considerations which move people when they are afar off,
to come unto God; but when they approach somewhat nearer in his Word, there is
such power and demonstration of the Spirit, that the obstinate cannot gainsay.
The first makes to be Religious in general, to be almost a Christian; The last
does it particularly and altogether: And hence Satan who deceives every way,
will suffer Men thus far; but tryes to keep off from the Scriptures, which are
able to make wise unto Salvation. The first may bring to the outward Worship of
God, a moral Conversation, but all upon selfish Principles; the last raises
that excellent foundation of Faith and Love, teaches to Worship in Spirit and
Truth, ends in all Obedience and good Works. Let them be advertised, that whose
Religion is built only upon Prudential motives, though this is a good
preparatory to go further, yet they alone are not sufficient to Salvation, for
without Faith it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11. 6. it must be done in
order to him; and not merely out of respect had to ones safety, or providing
for the uncertainty. And how can it be expected, God should reward Men for that
which they do with no intention to him? They serve God in a careless
indifferent way, just to save their own Souls, and no more. They do such things
out of respect to themselves, and not out of Love and Duty to God. Their
Principle is Wise Caution, but not Faith. The mistake is, they rest in that,
and do not come up to the other; whereas true discretion would bring them on to
those means of obtaining and confirming Faith, if they would still act pursuant
to it. This suggests not to labor in vain, not lightly to endeavor, but
surely to get the thing we aim at, when it may be certainly had by giving all
diligence to make our Calling and Election sure. He that goes but half way will
no more come to his Journeys end, then he who does not move one step toward
it; when he has gone so far, Reason prompts to go on thoroughly, because there
is so much behind, and a little more will set him at the desired end. What did
induce to begin, does urge to press forwards still, and to use those further
helps which are necessary toward it. He is an unthinking Fool who is
regardless of his own Happiness or Misery, especially when a slight appearance
of the first, and not enduring to be interrupted, makes him willing to be thus;
but as he loves his own pleasure or ease, let him endeavor to preserve it
still, by taking care against this shall fail what will be hereafter. Every
Soul must go into Heaven or Hell, there is no avoiding of it: We are invited to
the first with Entreaties, Solicitations, gracious Methods, and all good ways.
God would have all Men to be saved, so there is a willingness in them to be
saved likewise. But the difference is, He would have it only in the way of
Obedience and Holiness; they are for any other then that, or not going, or not
continuing therein so much as they should. Now when it is taking care for
themselves, or a fear of the Wrath to come, they imagine less will preserve
from that; an indifferent outward Conversation and not open Ungodliness, or
abstinence from such scandalous Sins will set them safe as to all. But had they
a true love for God, they would think nothing they could do too much for him.
The other thoughts will be quieted by Deceits and false Presumption. But
further, when a Man sees a good set before him to be had at such a time, there
he goes on contentedly, with such a course of action and endeavor, as he knows
beforehand is necessary to obtain it. Neither is he impatient if not had
sooner, for he knew before it would not be until then. The recompense of reward
is much more valuable then all those little ends Men propose to themselves
here, and will abundantly answer for all seeming disadvantages it has over
present things. But it is reserved in another World; we must in a short time go
out of this, and in the mean while use those means which God who has promised
it in his Word, has there taught as necessary to be partaker of it. What our
Savior advises of a King making War, so we may consider of the terms on which
we are to enter into Gods Service; only Grace here, and Glory hereafter;
necessary accommodations for our Pilgrimage, but the true rest to come; of
which we have this assurance we must depart from this we are now in, and he is
as good as his word in what things he promised as to the present: And therefore
we may trust further on. However, if he should suffer us to continue in the
dust of the Ear^^, it is but what we were before, we can lose nothing; we have
his Word that he will not leave us there, but raise us up again and reward us.
Whosoever is wise, and will observe these things, even they shall understand the
loving kindness of the Lord, Psalm. 107. 43. They shall see the Justice and
Equity of his proceedings, in that they shall certainly have what he has
promised; only it belongs to them to be meet partakers thereof. The sure way
to obtain is to have Faith in God, and to love him with all our Heart. Never
any perished that had these. Moses indeed came on Mount Pisgah, he saw an
earthly Canaan, and never came into it; but now is in a much be^ter viz. the
Heavenly. Men may be, and are disappointed in their pursuits after earthly
things, though they used diligence and wisdom, and were ready to lay hold on
them; but none that does so as to Heaven, who has the Hope which enters within
the Vail, and such a (...) thereof as to overlook present things, who takes up
this firm resolution, for that will I labor and care all the days of my Life,
he shall not miss thereof. Be ye steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the
Work of the Lord, forasmuch as you know your Labor is not in vain in the Lord,
1 Cor. 15. 58. Willingness to be happy, self-preservation, and knowing the time
to come will be as much present, as what now is: these set forward; but then
godly Discretion, and the Wisdom from above make a perfect and a blessed Work,
to be such as to entitle to the promises, to strive earnestly; the first points
at the good, this puts in a certain way of having it.

It is one prejudice against Religion, that Men may do much therein; and yet
all do not come to Heaven, that propose this to themselves. It is most certain,
that without Obedience to God there is no Salvation to be had. For the Nation
and Kingdom that will not serve thee, shall perish, Isa. 60. 12. which is true
as to every particular Soul. And though several bear Fruit for a season and go
aside, others continue longer in a blind course of partial Obedience, and yet
miscarry for all; this is their want of consideration of what God does
sufficiently fore-warn them in his Word, as Mat. 5. 20. and in other places.
They might do more, if they would: They might obey and follow the direction of
Scriptures; but some are for seeking Salvation any where else, would work it
out of their own wi^ and fancies. Surely it is convenient to stand beholden
unto him for that which himself promises, and shows the way, and is the only
Author of. If the Man would please and get the favor of God, it is requisite
he should hearken and attend unto what is his Mind and Will. If he would not be
mistaken in the only way to Happiness, it is reasonable he should give up
himself to this guide of the Lord. The Wisdom of the prude^^ is to understand
his way; but the Folly of Fools is deceit, Prove. 14. 8. There have many
perished through the subtlety of Satan, and the deceitfulness of their own
Hearts, through their wilfulness and inconsideratiou, not suffering themselves
to be instructed aright; or they will not seek out true Information, as all
wise Men are very careful to do in their Titles to their Estate, or making sure
of any temporal good. And they would do the very same in reference to the
eternal, if they did thoroughly exe^cise that Wisdom God has given them; which
dictates to make use of his Grace and Means, his Word and Truth. In all those
Fancies, Excuses and Deceits which beguil so many, if they would give their
thoughts full scope, something would come in to de^ect the falsehood of them;
but they greedily take up with the whim and conceit, but stifle and not attend
to that which may be aledged on the other side, and so they willingly err in
their Hearts. The two great acts of Deliberation are about coming into the way
of Salvation, and doing enough to obtain. For the first, none can think but he
must presently determine for it; but to the latter there is the general
deceivableness. But in those manifold thoughts concerning that, there would one
come in still (if not crushed) to press forward to do more; for such an
exceeding good cannot be made too sure of. We have an example in an holy Man of
old, who says, If by any means I might attain unto the Resurrection of the
Dead, not as though (...) had already attained, forgettin those things behind,
and reaching forth unto those things which are before. I press toward the
Mark, for the price of the high Calling of God in Christ Jesus, Phil. 3. 11,
12, 13, 14. What earnestness of expression is here, which only acquaints with
his alike endeavors?

But this would lead to that strict precise way, which goes under the name of
Folly and ^rensie. It is called so, yea, and esteemed with the uppermost
thought: They cannot thoroughly judge and pronounce it so. Let those who have
any reverence for God, take heed how they speak of Him and his Ways, which
shine forth in his Servants. We be F^ols for Chri^^s sake. for whether we be
besides our selves, it is to God, 2 Cor. 5. 13. If any thing is done that may
have the imputation of Folly and Madness, let not those of the same Profession
endeavor to exposethem to the wicked and ^^godly World. Christ himself had the
same scandal, Mark 3. 21. John 10. 20. so others, 2 Kings 9. 11. Jer. 29. 26,
27. Hos. 9. 7. Acts 26. 24. The Jews were the Object of Scorn and Laughter to
the Nations of the World. The Adversaries did mock at her Sabbaths, Lam. 1. 7.
Their Circumcision was a Proverb of Reproach. So Christianity at first was
esteemed foolishness by them, and the Heathen World; and these Scoffers are
come down among us. Who seem Wor^hippers of God, and say they are Christians;
yet these call others Fools and Madmen, for what they do only by direction of,
and obedience unto his Word. They assent to the truth of that; and therefore by
that may be now discerned (as it will be determined at last) Who is wise or
not, if such an one is in his right wits or no. There are many things, which
eve^ among the Religious are passed over for mere niceties, and vain Scruples;
which are the Observation of some of the lesser Commands, and seem to have been
therefore given for trial, whether we would suffer Shame, Reproach, and be
accounted Fools for the sake of God. That abstaining from all appearance of
evil, seems ridiculous for no other reason, but because it is not commonly
practiced. Where the Love of Christ is shed abroad in the Heart, care is had of
the least thing that displeases him; as also it puts upon every thing, which
may be acceptable unto him. Why may not such a comparison be used, when the
Apostle does the like? 2 Cor. 11. 2. Where is Love, there is Fondness, and many
odd things are done which are well accepted. And if we suppose this of the Soul
^owards God, there may be even further those excesses and nimieties in
Religion, which undoubtedly are well-pleasing in his sight, though they may
seem strange unto the Ignorant.

As to the other charge of Madness, let this be answered. Where the Spirit of
God is in a greater Measure in some then in others, things may be done and
proceed from this cause, which are so commonly esteemed. We must expunge many
places out of Scripture, confirmed by experience, if we deny workings of Gods
Spirit in these days; but it is subject unto, and keeps within the bounds of
his Revelation. The true Prophets of old did for the time show forth some signs
of Madness, at least to be reputed so; though they did still retain, and had
afterward the free use of their Reason and Faculties. Satan, who does
continually set himself against God's Ways, to keep up the mist o^ ignorance
and unbelief, did endeavor to imitate in like things, by showing forth
Fanaticism and appearance of divine Frenzy, with consternation of Body and
mind, that it might go off, and seem only as an ordinary Distemper or
Irregularity in both. There has been observed a manifest diversity between the
Prophecyings and Miracles of God, the Illusions and lying Wonders of Satan. The
difference of things is very nice and critical, which should be curiously and
strictly examined; and this would be as much to the confirmation of Faith, as a
slight view does unsettle it. Observe further between what things are in
themselves, and what they appear to others: According to the capacity and
understanding of the Judgers, they are thought true or false, whereas the
nature of them is still the same in it self. Many things, which are the effect
of natural Wit, Art and Invention, pass with the ignorant sort for Conjuring.
What does exceed common apprehension, may seem, yea and be called by them
Madness. Or if they can a little conceive of its Worth and Excellency, then the
spirit of envy may find fault and misname it, because of the consciousness of
the want thereof. The Heathen Festus cries out, Paul thou art besides thy self,
much Learning does make thee Mad, Acts 26. 24. He spoke at a venture, he did
not know what to think, when Agrippa who had some knowledge (though he would
not utter it in his vindication) did imagine otherwise; he was better then some
now who profess to believe the same things, and yet would have seconded Festus
his Imputation for the latter Reason. In the matter of Religion (which makes
such a stir in the World, where it is not understood, nor universally complied
withal) the great Object thereof is Spiritual and Divine things. The carnal
earthly Man does not know what that means, he may look upon it as the talk of
those in Bedlam, Spiritual and Divine, What is that? Whereas if he has common
sense, and is exalted above the Beasts, He may conceive thus much. What is that
Reason which is within him? May it be felt or seen, and is it not only to be
understood? That discourse and inferring one thing from another, those pure
acts of the mind may give him light and glimmering, that there are other things
of the same nature. By this he may consider of Romans 1. 20. and then he may come
to judge of all divine Revelation. The future things are said to be within the
Vail, and therefore cannot be seen as yet; but take away that, and they are
described by the same in a more excellent degree then what is now before us.
The Promises of God are declared by Meat, Drink, Riches, Pleasures, Gold,
Peace, Joy and such like, of which we now taste and feel; so the threatening by
what we abhor and dread. God deals with us as Children, he trains us on by
little and little; by what we do guess and understand, he leads us on to know
more things then these. The Law was our Schoolmaster to bring us to Christ, it
taught by rudiments and beggarly elements, this was necessary to bring toward
more Perfection. By him we have more knowledge of God, and more yet when we
shall come to the sight and fruition of him. Who did first think of Heaven by
outward things, may conceive, that there they shall have that most complete and
satisfactory Happiness, which these are a faint Shadow and Representation of.
Our Bodies and all Sensible things shall be made spiritual: This Heaven and
Earth shall be done away, and a new one succeed more glorious. Then spiritual
and invisible things will be as perfectly known, as what is carnal and we now
see. We begin with Sense, then comes Reason, and after succeeds Faith, and
further we cannot go whilst here in the Body, then to conjecture, and be able
to act hereby after things unutterable. Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard,
neither have entered into the Heart of Man the things which God has prepared
for them that love him: But God has revealed them unto us by his Spirit: for
the Spirit searches all things, yea the deep things of God, 1 Cor. 2. 9, 10.
What was at first esteemed Madness and Strange things, will at length appear to
him that shall attend and consider thoroughly, the exaltation of our
Understanding; to be Wonderful indeed, but yet most True. There is hardly any
thing but has an extreme: And though the Soul of Man be of large extent; yet
she has her bounds now in the Prison of the Body. It is possible she may
transgress and go beyond them, and so turn into Distraction. Knowledge is her
proper Work, but herein she may exceed, that is, When she would find out
something, which neither is to be known from the Book of Creation, nor
Scripture, neither Truth nor Reason, neither from without of what she sees,
nor from within her self: Where is no foundation nor ground from any thing
besides. Of this sort are those wild Fancies and extravagant Notions,
unwarranted Revelations, those portentous Opinions, which like Monsters in
nature serve for nothing but make manifest what is Perfect and True. When the
strings of a Musical Instrument are scrued too hard, they are next to be
broken; Even the Faculties and Powers of knowing, may by the unadvised owners
thereof, be stretched so far as to lose themselves; for if people will go
further, and besides what God has revealed, they will not be sooner amazed and
confounded then at Divine things. The smoke and thick cloud at Mount Sinai, and
the bounds there set Exodus 19. Clouds and darkness are round about him, Psalm.
97. 2. The Habitation of his Throne being in Heaven, and his discovering
nothing more of his wonderful work of Creation, then this Earth the least part
thereof; all these may instruct in that Lesson of Moses his Servant, The secret
things belong unto the Lord our God: but those things which are revealed belong
to us, and our Children for ever, that we may do all the Words of his Law,
Deuteronomy. 29. 29.

Which is well worthy of consideration, (for this makes the way to Heaven so
straight and narrow, that it consists in the middle between two extremes, which
is easy to run out of one into the other) and the Ignorant World willingly
continue to abuse the aforesaid place; for they cry out against vain curiosity,
as an excuse for their blindness. But here may be plainly discerned the limits
to confine all Knowledge unto, that is in the things revealed. The visible
works of Creation Isa. 42. 20. John 5. 39.
are to be observed, the Scriptures are to be searched, and the Understanding
within us to be looked into. Whatever is contained in, or may be manifestly
inferred out of these, and which may incline us unto universal Obedience to
Almighty God; all this ought to be known. It is true what God says by the
Prophet, My People are destroyed for lack of Knowledge; because thou have
rejected Knowledge, I will also reject thee, that thou shall be no Priest unto
me, Hos. 4. 6. The Teachers may impart superficial slight Knowledge, their own
Opinions; or enlarge upon, and confine unto instruction of what is thoroughly
understood already; but wilfully put off the learning, and communicating of
more. For the Priests lips should keep Knowledge, but they have been partial in
the Law, Mal. 2. 7, 9. So in the understanding thereof, they think of many
things which they do not speak out; they may just consider of the whole, but
they do it not thoroughly.

If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them, John 13. 17. said our
Lord to his Disciples. Every one knows the Commandments of God more then he
does observe them, but yet that must be before the other: And one may have a
slight apprehension of good, and yet neglect it; but if he would suffer himself
fully to know, and consider thoroughly all the reasons that persuade to it,
there he cannot so easily go back, but would perform it, as we find in things
of daily use and experience. If a Man would admit of that Knowledge of God, and
his Ways, which he is commanded and required to have, he would obey and walk in
them. Forty years long was I grieved with this Generation, and said, it is a
People that do err in their Hearts, and they have not known my Ways, Psalm. 95.
10. so it has been ever since the World began, and the reason is here added.
That of Titus 3. 3, 4. does show the very reason of their ceasing to be
Foolish, Disobedient, Deceived, serving diverse Lusts and Pleasures. But after
that the Kindness and Love of God our Savior toward Man appeared. When they
were informed of that, and another Happiness provided, they changed their
former course. There may be a Professing that they know God, and in Works they
deny him, Tit 1. 16 and a saying, I know him, and keeps not his Commandments,
1 John 2. 4. but if it is full and perfect, This is life Eternal, that they
might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent, John
17. 3. Again, Destruction is threatened to them, Who know not God, and (what is
the consequent thereof) Obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, 2 Thessalonians.
1. 8. so 1 Samuel 2 12. John 16. 3. 1 Cor. 2. 8. Acts 3. 17. and several like
places do import, that where is a true and full Knowledge, there will be
Obedience also; as again upon the neglect and refusal of the first, is
Disobedience and every evil Work, Indeed it is possible for a Man to act
contrary to the best of his Knowledge, but then he is a great Fool, and Men do
not usually thus; so he may do a thing upon a little Knowledge and Inducement
to it, which is seldom: But he would do much more both ways, if he had lesser
or greater degrees thereof; And therefore a through Knowledge as it comprehends
Instruction and Exhortation is a necessary help; for so averse and froward is
our nature, that we should never come unto God unless for both; as again there
being those principles of Wisdom, self-Love, desire of Good, that when we are
fully taught and stirred up, we can hardly do otherwise. It is not without
Reason that the duty of Knowledge is so very much inculcated in Scripture,
which was given to make us wise unto Salvation, see Deuteronomy. 4. 5, 6. Deuteronomy 32. 29.
1 King 3 9. Psalm. 119. 66, 73. Pro. 1. throughout, Hab. 2. 14. Hos. 14 9. Luke
11. 52. 1 Cor. 15. 34 2 Cor. 10. 5. 2 Pet. 1. 5. and 3. 18. Ephe. 5. 17, 1 Cor.
12. 8. The increase thereof is promised as a Blessing, Jer. 31. 34. Dan. 12. 4.
The neglect hereof is threatened and condemned, Isa. 1. 3. and 5. 12. and 27.
11. Jer. 10. 14. Psalm. 3^. 9. Jud. 10, Prove. 27. 12. Jer. 8. 9. Psalm. 14. 4.
Ephe. 4. 8. Psalm. 82. 5. Psa. 92. 6. 2 Pet. 3. 5.

As for that common Deceit Men raise to themselves from Luke 12. 48. They do
not consider that was spoken of those before the Light of the Gospel came into
the World, but says he, whose found is gone out into the ends of the Earth, If
I had not come and spoken unto them, they had not bad Sin; but now they have no
cloak for their Sin, John 15. 22. All mankind wherever the Gospel is
Published, are obliged to take notice of the truths of it at their peril. Every
one does, or may know if he will, and that is the same thing. So he is bound to
prepare himself under the penalty, Luke 12. 47, 48. The wise Man says,
Knowledge is easy to him that understands. So Obedience is easy to him that
knows, for he does more willingly and cheerfully perform the same.

Knowledge (as has been observed of all Good) has a show of Disquietude and
trouble, as Ignorance seem^ to give Security and Peace. They cry out of many
things, it is better not to know them; such are the Evils and Miseries of Life,
and what may be hereafter, they vex enough when they come to pass, we need not
anticipate them before their time This is the sense of the World, Who will show
us any good? is the question of everyone: But the Contemplation of evil is a
Melancholy subject, they have not so much Courage as to admit of that. But can
they consider of thus much? Whether it is not better to think of evil, then to
suffer it? nay, if by so doing they may avoid it, then by not thinking at all
to let it come upon them? Is it not better to walk in the Light, so see the
danger and pass by it? Or else to go on in Darkness, not to be sensible of any
evil, but to drop irrecoverably into it? If there was no redress nor help to be
found for the preventing thereof before it comes, then not to consider
beforehand was the happy way. If there was no hope nor provision to be made
concerning Death, that the Sting might be taken away; if it was irrespectively
determined how it should be afterward, for my part I do sincerely wish, and
would have people continue as ignorant as possible they can, that they should
not plague themselves beforehand with the fearful Expectation. The more they
did know or consider, it would give a more deep resentment of Misery. Let them
whilst here enjoy all the good they can, and be wholly unmindful of what is to
succeed. Comfort themselves for the days wherein they shall suffer Adversity,
Riot and Sport themselves before the time of Darkness draws on. But I cannot
tell, Whether I should recommend this or no, unless those Pleasures which now
die in the enjoyment would be utterly forgotten, for otherwise the remembrance
of them would heighten the Misery and make it worse. If things were so, we men
were of all Creatures most miserable. But Blessed and ever Blessed be our God,
it is not so with us. He has been pleased to order and establish, that every
one may be happy that will, and none is miserable but by his own fault. All
things are contrived in his Word for the Salvation of all; in every single Soul
there are powers implanted to work it out, and means are afforded. Mine Eyes
have seen thy Salvation, which thou have prepared before the Face of all
people, Luke 2. 30, 31. It is laid before them, And all things are ready, Mat.
22. 4. It is only left to Men, whether they will come. So they are warned to
escape the evil. There is no way of keeping off all evil whatsoever, but there
is of avoiding the great and dreadful one, and turning all the lesser into
good. There is no safety by not knowing it, for then it will certainly come and
prevail over the Man; but by seeing thereof he may hide himself. And this can
never be done unless by the Knowledge thereof; so it is equally necessary to
our Happiness and Safety, as of Good. This is that excellent Wisdom fully to
perceive and know all humane affairs, both good and bad; to think such a thing
may happen even before it does, and prepare accordingly; in some things it may
prevent, or get shelter against the Storm. Not to be careless and neglectful,
so that he may afterward repent when past remedy; to be sure against fruitless
Wishes, or the Fools saying; to foresee what does nearly concern him, and that
nothing shall fall out unthought of, or unexpected. The Way of Life is above to
the Wise, that he may depart from Hell beneath, Pro. 15. 24.

Men are affrightened with slender appearances; for this horrible thing, the
meditation of evil, to him that approaches nigh, and is acquainted therewith,
is not so irksome as at first imagined. It is the policy of Satan to keep off
from all Knowledge that may do Good or hinder Evil; but when the Soul comes to
be thoroughly sensible thereof, she will pursue after it, and resolutely pass
through that little harshness and difficulty, which it makes a show of at
first. It is not such an unpleasant work to avoid a trouble or inconveniency,
and to do this it is necessary to consider of it thoroughly: In like manner it
is to those evils which would be worse and more intolerable, if not prevented.
The most terrible things are Death, Judgment and Hell: But there is a way found
out for every one that will live unto him, to die in the Lord; and so he is
blessed. By loving and imitating of him now, He may have boldness in the day of
Judgment, 1 John 4. 17. for the last and most dreadful of all, he shall never
come near it. As he may be thus secured when future things shall be present; so
even now he may think of, and provide as to them, that he is not tormented at
the apprehension of them. In this he is more safe and happy then those heedless
ones, who are afraid to suffer the thoughts of them in their mind, but blindly
go on and expose themselves to the full danger.

The Promises of God here are with exception of the Cross, to comfort and make
able to bear it, to carry us through this imperfect and miserable condition;
but those to come are absolute and gracious of enjoyment of all Good, and
freedom from all Evil. Even these which seem harsh dispensations of Providence
work together for our good, and so come to pass as are spoken of, or may be
learned out of the Word. As to those future rewards and punishments, The
Kingdom prepared for us, and the Fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels: We
may perceive him even now subtly insinuating himself into the Hearts of Men,
seeking all ways and means to keep and turn people from God, and that which is
good, to hinder them from his favor and Heaven appointed for us. The Tempter
and Abaddon does try to hurt and destroy; he is the Author of all evil in the
World. If we are afraid we shall fall by his hands, it is only our own sault;
for we are called upon to come under the Protection of our God, who has given
his Word and Truth, to discover all the Falsehood and Deceits of the Enemy, and
then they may be easily avoided.

The most valuable things in the World are least regarded. How does Wisdom
expostulate, Prove. 1. And though it happens so with her before Men, yet all she
says there is true, and especially at the conclusion of the Chapter, Whosoever
hearkeneth to me shall dwell safely, and shall be quiet from the fear of evil.
The reason why she is slighted, is because they refuse to hear her voice. They
put it off with Scorning and hating of Knowledge; But if they would attend to
her Words, the whole World would go after her, as much at she is contemned now.
And this would be true of the Power of Godliness, as it is now of the Form
thereof: Which indeed has the vogue and esteem, but the other lies under
despising and reproach. These are the Refuges that ignorant and mistaken Souls
betake themselves unto; for it is reasonable to use the same diligence after
the good things to come, as themselves seek earnestly after present and fading
Delights; and to secure our selves against the Punishment threatened, which is
just begun here, and ^^lly to be manifested hereafter, as themselves are so
over-careful and solicitous to avoid present and little inconveniences.

It is easy for some to asperse what they do not understand, and others thus
cunningly seek to hide their own falsehood and error. Reflections come in to
supply the defect of Reason on their side; and through the wicked Pride, as
slight of Men, they would seem to pass it by as weak, which indeed is too
strong for them to get over and answer. The highest Wisdom, even the Wisdom of
God may be ridiculed; but when it is only so, it is a certain sign that it
cannot be resisted. The greatest Truth may be depraved and reviled; but when it
is only so, that is firm and unanswerable. And further, those do always decline
from it, By Reason of whom the way of Truth, is evil spoken; which show the
general sense of mankind, that they approve of this as excellent, for they find
fault when those persons who seem Religious, do not live accordingly. Even
Hypocrites tend to the glory of our Religion, as appears to him who examines
thoroughly. But God is outwardly dishonored by them; Either when themselves do
not believe what they profess, and then what lies in them, they turn the Truth
of God into a Lie. Or they surmise before the World that the thing is
impracticable, and so render him liable to the imputation of an hard Master,
and that his Commandments are grievous; which is abominably false: Or when the
Doctrines of God are judged of through the practices of Men, then indeed those
which are Holy and Good, may seem to be Abominable and Evil; whereas they do
not keep close, or pervert and turn them through their evil nature. When they
who shall confess with their Mouth that God is only wise, and so is his Law;
but yet not observe or transgress it out of a pretense to Wisdom and
Discretion, Do not these contradict that in their deeds? And for this cause God
may be evil thought of by Strangers, and that his Sanctions are not so wisely
contrived for our living in this World.

The temporizing accomodating Humor, those cunning ways of avoiding present
inconvenience, or saving themselves from loss and danger, those compliances and
actings contrary to Conscience and Duty toward God, all these pass current
with some for excellent prudential Rules, any Law or Ordinance to the contrary
notwithstanding. Indeed the Commandments of our God are with great Wisdom
ordered to try our Love and Obedience unto him, but not so much for present
ease and security in the World. It is called the Doctrine of the Cross, Yea,
and all that will live Godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer Persecution, 2 Timothy
3. 12. Neither let any pretended wise Christians (who call themselves so) stave
it off as long as they can; and when the methods of their own Wisdom are run
out, or they are confounded and baffled, then only apply this to themselves.
But whosoever, even in these days, will strictly and universally observe his
Laws and Directions; who is fully resolved to keep a good Conscience in all
things, shall endure Persecution or Reproach, and other Worldly losses or
inconveniences. And yet all this (a strange Paradox!) is very reconcilable
with true Wisdom; for what can be more reasonable, then to submit to a little
Evil in order to a greater Good? to suffer Loss for Gain and Advantage, to
willingly undergo an Inconvenience to obtain a greater Benefit? this is the
same what is practiced every day. Now Christians do believe the Gospel to be
true, and then what our Lord says may be relied on. There is Mark 10. 29, 30.
no Man that has forsaken Father or Mother, Houses or Lands for my sake, but
shall receive eternal Life. That God who will reward us for the least act of
Obedience, even to a Cup of cold Water, will also take notice of whatever
Trouble or Loss we endure purely for his sake. We may trust him as to that: If
this be foolishness we will be accounted so, and wait till it is manifested to
be the highest Wisdom. The promises for Suffering and Loss are so full and
many, that one may more safely venture on this bottom to be returned into the
other World; as daily Wise Men do to remote Countries when Shipwreck,
Casualty, their own Death frequently hinder themselves from being partakers of
what they certainly parted withal. Whosoever does not only say so, but really
believes on God, has more assurance from him, whom it is impossible to lie.
His good things promised and reserved are altogether as worthy to be depended
on. And though they surmise, the return may be long; however it is short
before, and certain that we go hence, and we will trust our God for what may be
hereafter. But what if it should be said, that as to this present time we are
no losers? All things are desired for Contentment and present Happiness; again,
we abhor and are afraid upon the account of Evil and Misery. Now if God does
continue this still, without so much of those outward means; if he only permits
the superfluities to be taken away, but instead of them gives greater Peace and
Satisfaction then they would yield, What harm is in all this? Those who take
joyfully the spoiling of their Goods, as some have done, are in the same or
rather a better condition then those who have kept them; for they have not that
degree of rejoicing. And so he that can finish his Course with Joy, Acts 20.
23, 24.
when Bonds and Afflictions every where abide him, is as happy as those at full
Liberty; for they do not so. Indeed all the inconveniences of this Life are
little; but when they are willingly submitted unto out of Conscience toward
God, he sanctifies and sweetens them unto us, and we are contented as if we had
them not all. It is small whatever we can do to testify our Love and Obedience
unto God, the utmost is to part with Life for his sake when it is taken away by
Wicked Men: God is pleased to try many of his Servants thus far, to see what
they will endure for him; and to let the wickedness of Men go on, that he may
behold what they will do against him. Let none object foolishness to the
Sufferers; For in their falling they stay on him, who gave them and all Mankind
Life and Breath. What can be more reasonable then to Sacrifice that up unto
him, which he lent them at first? to Glorify God by their Death, when he will
raise them up again and reward them? In all Christian Sufferings it is to turn
gainer for the other World; the more thou shall endure, the more thou shall be
Crowned; it is a laying in a Foundation against the time to come, and (if I may
so speak) a putting Isa. 61. 7.
in for a greater share of Glory. The more thou art despised and abhorred by
Men, the more thou shall be had in honor; for cruel Mockings and Scourgings,
there will be Commendations, and those shall be healed and done away: for being
Destitute, Afflicted, Tormented, will succeed greater degrees of the contrary
Happiness. I do not admire that those Primitive and Blessed Souls, when they
were lodged in the Body as we are now, and beset with the same Temptations, and
of like passions; yet did so desire Martyrdom, and seek after Suffering, even
so far, that they did run to a pious extreme of well-meaning forwardness. We
again decline it as much; their Faith was more lively, but we, that do stand in
the latter days on the earth, find that decay thereof our Lord foretold; which
makes Men willing to shift it off by lawful or unlawful means; and when all
these fail, then only they are for turning Martyrs and Suffering for Christ. It
is a good expedient to begin by little and little, and try first whether we can
hold a Finger in the Flame before we expose the whole Body to the Fire; Whether
we can endure a little Reproach, Loss, to be forsaken, and other trifling
Inconveniences, before we come to the greater Afflictions of the Gospel. The
least have their reward. If this be absurd and simple Doctrine, it must be only
so with Unbelievers. Let a Plutarch or Epictetus (who did see no further then
this present time; who might talk, but did not know of more then the
convenience of this Life) deliver that prudent Aphorism, 'He that accomedates
himself to the present affairs is Wise, But we have not so l^^ned Christ, Ephesians.
4. 20. Indeed he has taught us to flee from Persecution, to avoid it by speed;
but we are to decline it by nothing, which in the least tends to the dishonor
of Him and his Religion, by nothing that betwrayes Unbelief or Distrust, or is
any ways contrary to the Doctrine he gave us. He left no Rules of Policy or
common esteemed Wisdom; for that may prove an occasion to being on sinful
compliances, and after making a question whether they were so or not, see 1
Pet. 4. If any one suffer as a Christian, not according to the common n^tions
thereof, but as it is written in the Word of God, by living according to the
Rules and Directions there, And the Man is persuaded so in his mind; that which
now invites and approves of him for so doing, will be his witness hereafter, to
find acceptance with Almighty God. There is no great danger of being mistaken;
for the lines of Good and Evil, Duty and Sin are so clearly written in the
Hearts of all (especially of those who arrive to that eminency as to suffer for
God's sake) that he may perfectly understand them. Such a one must for some
time have done the Will of God, and then we know what is asserted, and by whom,
John 7. 17. for outward Profession or Hypocrisy may go a great way, but not to
part with worldly Interest or Life it self. Whereas sincerity will oblige on
still; and he that really designs for the Kingdom above, will pass through the
Tribulation which lies in the way. Therefore it is to be presumed he knows it,
and cannot avoid without going out, which he will not do. It is truly said, The
Cause and not the Passion does make the Martyr; yet if he who has no Pride nor
Vainglory, no Sinister impulsive, but is acted by the alone Principle of a
good Conscience, whereof no Man can judge but himself; however, if he should be
deceived as to that, seeing it is not out of wilful ignorance (for that is far
from the Godly) without question God will be Merciful and reward his honest
meaning to serve and obey him. An upright and sincere mind is very acceptable
with him. I will spare them, as a Man spares his own Son that serves him,
Mal. 3. 17. Now if a Child should do a thing with a good intent to please his
Father, though he did not require it, yet still the good will and intent is
accepted; the same it is of God toward us Men. If this be not true Divinity,
we are left at the greatest uncertainty that can be; for we are all but Babes
and Sucklings to God, the highest acts of our Soul are but ignorance before
him. We cannot be Wise beyond our selves, and we take the same manner to please
him, as our Superiors on Earth. And according to this is the whole Scripture,
his own Revelation to mankind. Only let us have a good mind toward God; and
the Spirit he has given us is to judge and make application of his Word to our
several Act^ons. Let others censure such an one as a rash unadvised Fool, an
ignorant deluded Soul, or an hundred kind of surmises; by which if it was at
their disposing, he should lose his Reward in Suffering for the Truth and
Well-doing; yet God is Judge himself. Wherefore let them that suffer according
to the Will of God, commit the keeping of their Souls unto him in well-doing,
as unto a faithful Creator, 1 Pet. 4. 19. Let others suspend their verdict, and
judge nothing before the time. There is as much certainty in this Duty as any,
and here we may go upon sure grounds: As heretofore Christ Crucified was to the
Greeks Foolishness, 1 Cor. 1 23. so even at this day, that Appendix to it, the
thing of loss and inconvenience is reckoned Folly by those who hold fast the
Name of Christ; but unless they have denied the Faith, they cannot really think
so, for before them this Wisdom is justified; and may be done before the
Heathen World.

It has been demonstrated beyond all contradiction by our ancient Apologists
and Writers, that Christianity is the best Wisdom in opposition to that of
Philosophers and Wisemen of the World. Theirs was defective, could not reach
any assurance, and for the most part was about things of this Life; which are
but Dreams and Bubbles, the exercises of a Childish mind, for all things of
this World are not worthy of the utmost concern and regard of the Rational and
noble faculties of Man, unless now as we are assured it be in order to those
great, perfect and durable things to come. They of old did talk bravely, but by
actions did manifest that themselves were not Persuaded so. Though they did
pretend to set at naught the World and the greatness thereof, it was because
they had it not; for when it came in upon them, they became Servants to it. The
like we have in our days, who will talk yet higher in contempt of those things,
and yet more eagerly seek after them; who catch at what they can, get as much
as they are able, and then speak forth in contempt of the rest. I am afraid
this will be the Condemnation, that Men will not do that for the Grace and Fear
of God, what others formerly did by Philosophy and vain Boasting. That we who
know and profess to believe greater things enforced with Promises and
Threatenings, yet will not do so much toward renouncing unlawful and
abstracting from present things, as they did. The Wisdom set before us is
greater, but Man will not believe or not conform to it: both which are
unreasonable and foolish. There is certainly some secret Enemy of mankind whom
they see not, that keeps them off. Men could not do this of themselves, for
they may be assured, Heaven will not drop into their Mouth: it is as worthy to
be sought after as the things of this World, and doing but the same would bring
us to the other. Only as to this nothing stops, but to that One does let, and
will let until he be taken away; He stands at our Elbow, and therefore let us
know so much, bid him stand off, pray against his Temptation, go to the Word of
God and we shall not be ignorant of his devices, and so be too cunning for him,
as we may by the assistance offered us. If it was a matter of indifferency, we
could never be so backward to a thing that appears so very reasonable, and
makes such exceeding and assured Proposals of Good. Who is Wise, and he shall
understand these things? Prudent, and he shall know them? Hos. 14. 9. And unto
Man he said, Behold the Fear of the Lord, that is Wisdom, and to depart from
Evil is Understanding, Job 28. 28.

CHAP. XIV.
Of RIGHTEOUSNESS and JUSTICE.

THerefore all things whatsoever ye would that Men should do unto you, do you
even so to them, for this is the Law and the Prophets, Mat. 7. 12. Consider
your selves exactly in the same circumstances and condition as the Person is
with whom you deal, and then let sincere and impartial Reason determine what
thou would have done to thee, and so do unto him. Here is a plain Rule given
to know what is Just or not, whether one does Right or Wrong. Thou shall love
thy Neighbor as thy self, is the Epitome of the second Table; and the
particular Precepts thereof, are but to give him what is just and equal
according to the relation he stands in, and that we should do him no wrong in
those Instances, or whatsoever comes under them. The Prophets did mightily
insist and press to the observation of the Law; throughout all their Writings
are Inculcations to Judgment, Justice and Righteousness; and much Threatening
from God against Oppression, Theft, Deceit, Lying, Bribery, and such like. Isa.
1. Jer. 7. 9, 10, 11.
They did unvail the Hypocrisy of those, who did make pretenses to Devotion,
and thence think they might commit injurious Practices; because they did ask
God forgiveness, and yet retain the Sins of griping the Poor, spoiling the
Fatherless and Widow, and the several acts of Unrighteousness. This enraged the
People, for so does any thing which lights upon Lust or fancied Interest: And
they to conceal or excuse their own Shame, did fall from one Wickedness to
another; from a lesser to a greater degree of Wrong; from being injurious to
their common Neighbors, to Persecuting their own Prophets also. They might
thus Palliate the matter before short-sighted Men, But all things are naked and
opened unto the Eyes of him with whom we have to do. Heb. 4. 13. And by this
way they did provoke him yet more. Even now, Whosoever is an Enemy to Religion,
or to those set up in defense of it, he does something which that condemns; and
therefore shows forth Spite and Malice. There does not arise such a bitter
rancour in the minds of Men against the Word and Ways of God, if it is only for
Sin as to themselves, because for this they may have some Extenuation and Pity
from others through infirmity or pleasing of the Flesh; But the Wrath of God is
revealed from Heaven against all Ungodliness, and Unrighteousness of Men, Romans
1. 18. and for the several acts of the last they become destitute and odious to
all that know thereof. We are strictly commanded whatever is Just, Honest and
of good Report; and we are forbidden the contrary. Justice is more enjoined in
Scripture, then Piety toward God, which is in the first place; or Sobriety to
our selves. Whether the holy Spirit foreseeing it would be more difficult to
keep people unto it, for they sooner decline and turn aside there being more
Temptation of Worldly Advantage, then is to be had by Ungodliness, or they
might mistake and suppose to have Devotion pass for an Atonement and
Commutation of their Sin; Or God willing the Happiness of his Creatures as they
lived in a community; yet he has aid more throughout his Word of our Duty to
our Neighbor then that we ow immediately unto himself; Though in Truth all is
Homage and Su^jection unto God, For we are to do Justly and love Mercy, because
he does require it of us, Mic. 6. 8. This is agreed to be good by all mankind:
Uprightdealing and Almsgiving have been, are, and will always continue
Honorable and of good esteem amongst Men, both good and bad. We may see by
this they have a real desire after Happiness; for they countenance what they
see furthers it, and show themselves displeased at whatever is prejudicial
thereto. They approve what is just and equal, when Offices of Kindness and
Compassion are done to one another; and contrariwise they seek to hinder, if no
other way, yet by casting Shame on the Authors of Wrong and Injury. There is a
general sense and good Nature to others, though it may be brought home to
Self-Love at last; yet if he loves others also, it is no harm for a Man to love
himself, he cannot do otherwise; and where all things may stand together, there
is no need of shutting one from the other.

I might from this Observation just ask, if this Principle be in all; and
Religion only comes on this Errand, as certainly it does, and for no other; for
God sent not his Son into the World, not to condemn the World, but that the
World through him might be saved, that is, eternally Happy. Why then should so
many thoughts arise in the Hearts of Men concerning it, as if it were a
Troubler and Disturbance to them, or as it were a Snare? Exodus 10. 7.
What mean those silent Murmurings, those secret and strange Imaginations?
Concerning this one thing of Religion, There are great Thoughts and searchings
of Heart. But it is only the Divisions, and the not compliance with it in all
things, which occasions all this. There is a secret Enemy which does all he can
to raise Prejudices and wicked suggestions, to turn (if possible) all people
from the good that is set before them; but he does the greater Part. There is
something in the nature of Man, which catches at every little thing that is
present, visible and certain, but neglectful of what is not altogether so;
though Prudence would direct that in a thing of infinite greater concern, he
should also use the same Care and Caution. He does indeed wisely as to the
little things of this Life; but then he should go on as he has begun, doing
the same as to those vast concerns of the succeeding and endless Life, and then
he acts like a Man indeed; for a Beast has that instinct to take care and
provision about what is before and useful unto him, and to avoid things
hurtful: and so far let him use those faculties he has, but for them which
rise higher, let them be advanced to the higher end. The Principles of
self-Love and willingness to be Happy, are as fit to build the Doctrines of
Christ on as any, for as in the things of this World, when a Man comes to know
they tend to this, he presently desires and seeks after them; so if he
understands the other are for his good and security, it is then left unto him
whether he will follow after and practice them.

None can so much as in thought accuse God for those Laws and Statutes he has
given to Mankind as they live in Neighborhood and Society; for those things to
be done between Man and Man, every one knows it would be happy living, if they
were by all persons and in all things observed, that every Man might have his
own, and get what he can more, that we might live Lovingly and Peaceable with
one another.

But seeing the World is turned aside from this good Establishment, The Answer
is throughout the ensuing Discourse.
What shall we do now? He that departs from Evil makes himself a Prey, Isa.
59. 15. One may do Wrong to make up for that which he has received; there is
little to be got by the strict way of Justice. If one will come to any thing,
he must make use of good and evil Arts; the first to get a fair Reputation, but
it is good to have a double Advantage. All people are for living in the World
as well as they can. If I had an Estate, or sufficient besides, I should never
have been put upon this Temptation; but it is hard to perish for want, there
can be no Sin when Necessity compels. Moreover, Honesty is poor and laughed at,
so it may seem neither agreeable to Wisdom nor Happiness.

One would admire, when things were so well ordered and disposed of at first,
and such excellent Rules made concerning them, that they should ever be
departed from; But Evil presently came into the World, the Sons of Violence and
Transgression sprang up, Wickedness quickly got the greater part of its side.
But now hereby is had the exercise and trial of Good, for that could not be
unless there was some of the contrary. Nay, it would not be so much commended,
unless there was great abundance of the contrary, and much opposition as now
there is; so that Righteousness may appear more Righteous. It relies on Faith,
and so is more precious then of Gold that perishes, (then of the gains of
Falsehood, which are quickly left behind and come to nothing) though it be tried
with Fire (that is with difficulty and resistance) might be found unto Praise,
and Honor and Glory at the appearance of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1. 7. If there
was nothing more then what we now see, only Buying, Selling and getting Gain;
If after this busy Life we were to lie in the sluggishness of eternal
annihilation; nothing in the World besides Earth; no Time shall be after we are
gone out of the World, or there should be an utter end of us; if there was
nothing besides what we in the hurry of worldly Business think of, which is
evidently false; or nothing would ever befall us then what we consider of
before hand, as many things do now; I say if things were so, which are
manifestly contrary, then all that aforementioned would be wise Counsel, and
method of Action. The Men of this World run a little too fast, they would take
up that for granted which is not so, and then all along act upon a false and
mistaken Principle: for whether they first debate it in their minds or no, they
do after that manner, as if there was no Immortality and Resurrection; If they
would allow an eternal Life after this, as it is the same whether they do or do
not, it being not what Man fancies concerning himself, but God has Decreed)
all this stir of living in the World would fall to the ground; for then natural
Reason would make this inference, That the time of our Sojourning here, if
Seventy or Eighty Years, is not so much to that as the twinkling of an Eye to
our whole Life; and consequently there should be as much care had to live
happily for ever, as now for this short time. If both cannot stand together,
there the least must give place to the greater; for more concern is to be had
for a Year then for a Minute only.

Said one, Who received the Spirit which did lead into all Truth, Know ye not
that the Unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? nor Thieves, nor
Covetous, nor Extortioners shall inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10.
So what are accounted the ways of thriving in the World, are an absolute
hindrance to their Title unto that. Men are to be judged by the Scriptures, and
according as they have done or transgressed are to be admitted or shut out: Now
this Book Condemns all the proposed Schemes of advantage. What is a Man
profited, if he shall gain the whole World and lose his own Soul? Or what shall
he give in exchange for his Soul? Mat. 16. 26. The Word of God is different
from ^ain and common received Opinion. The Tempter first instills those
principles of Dishonesty: Have they not read, how he was a Liar from the
Beginning? He insinuated to our Parents that the forbidden Fruit should do them
no harm; he beguiled them with a promise and appearance of Good, but we have
found the contrary. The Commandments of God have a show of inconvenience: and
Transgression may seem expedient at first; but examine things thoroughly, and
see how it will be then.

The great Objection against this Duty, and therein it has a show of Folly,
that hereby we become liable to be imposed on, suffer Loss, and are deprived of
opportunity of more Gain. Our Lord's Counsel and Command is, Be Wise as
Serpents, and Innocent as Doves. Be cautious that you do not receive any
Injury, and be sure to do none. Every Man may preserve his own, and use a
lawful redress where it is taken away by Wrong. The fault found by the Apostle,
1 Cor. 6. 6. is when they go to Law before Unbelievers, but in the fore going
verse he seems to admit thereof before a Christian Magistrate, or rather in the
first place they should refer it to an Arbitrator. Or if it be for trifles,
there one may suffer himself to be defrauded, and pass it over as not worth a
wise Man's regard, for that is not extended to little things. Christianity and
Prudence are not in themselves inconsistent; but the Error is, that some frame
notions of Wisdom according to the Opinion and Practice of the World, and by
that would state the obligations of Duty, whereby they make the Commandments of
Christ of none effect, or by distinctions would correct them. But let nothing
be done contrary to the least of them what^ver inconveniences may ensue. If we
suffer Shame or Loss for the Doctrine of Jesus, we may trust him; a more
enduring substance in Heaven will be a sufficient requital. It does seldom
happen that any considerable disadvantage does fall upon any for keeping
steadfastly to his Laws, when that only and no other is the Reason; or if it
should, it would be made up another way here or hereafter. The Meek shall
inherit the Earth, Mat. 5. 5. He dwells safely, and none cares to molest or
disturb him. And though the baseness of some little poor Souls may extend so
far as to Cheat, Defraud and take Advantage over his simple Honesty (as they
phrase it) yet this is done privately and in small instances, which either he
does not know or not mind, and so lives well and contented for all. The Unjust
knows no Shame, Zeph. 3. 5. He may come at length to be so brazen-faced that
he does not value the judgment of Men, but so far only is kept in, least humane
Law take hold of him; yet through restraining Providence he will sooner do
Wrong to any one, then the universally sincere and good Man. Who did ever want
Food and Raiment convenient for him, only by keeping Gods Commandments? It is
somewhat hard to Flesh and Blood, but it is safe. Blessed is the Man that
trusts in him. O Fear the Lord ye his Saints, for there is no want to them
that fear him. The young Lions do lack and suffer Hunger; but they that seek
the Lord shall not want any good thing, Psalm. 34 8, 9, 10. It is Gods Will that
they shall comply with his Ordinance of Labor, and not be slothful in
Business; so they being in some Calling and adding there to Honesty and
Diligence, do not want what is good or necessary for them. The Eyes of the Lord
are over the Righteous, but then they must not tempt God, or expect a Miracle
that he should feed them as once he did the Prophet with Ravens, but they are
to use the means he has appointed. Though we do live by Faith, and God is not
willing that any thing should be made too evident, for that would destroy this
noble Principle, and take off from the excellency of Obedience; yet to
establish our Trust and Dependence on him, he discovers himself more then in
any thing. We may as it were see with our Eyes his Watchful and especial
Providence over his own Servants; Those peculiar ones redeemed from all
Iniquity do get a livelihood. Or if they are disabled and hindered from Work or
Employment, he provides some other way. Still he acts most wisely who lives so
in this World that he may live for ever. He that walks Righteously and
speaks uprightly, He that despises the gain of Oppression, that shakes his
hands from holding of Bribes, Isa. 33. 15. Who uses Lawful and prudent means
according to the Trade and Occupation he is in, and rejects whatever is of
Craft and Evil. It is sometimes seen that he may prosper and increase in the
World. His Seed shall be mighty upon Earth: the Generation of the Upright shall
be Blessed; Wealth and Riches shall be in his House, Psa. 112. 2, 3. This was
often fulfilled in old time under the Jewish Dispensation, who had great
measure of temporal Blessings. At this time it may be observed, whether for
their Worship and Service of God, or the favor he retains to the Children of
Abraham the Sons of Jacob and Joseph, or whatever Reason we may in Humility
guess at; yet they are generally in good estate and plenty, though scattered in
the World. But to us Christians are promises of better things of the Life that
now is, and that which is to come, one in order to the other, as the divine
Wisdom thinks fit. Those who are Heirs of Salvation, for whom the greater
things are reserved, do commonly live by his Grace and good Providence here in
expectation and pursuit after that. More is not desired then sufficient for
this. They look further then barely to live, but do something worthy of Life,
which is only toward that to come. As they get means for the first, they press
forward to the high and eternal Calling.

There is much talk of living, and living well in the World; this is the
principal Mark at which most aim, to get in an high condition, and as much as
ever they can. It may be observed that whilst in our Mothers Womb we grow up as
Plants, afterward like young Beasts, we Eat, Drink, Sleep and Play till the
Organs come to be fitted for the exercise of Reason, then we become Men; but
yet many live like Beasts all their days pursuing only the same end: and that
which was designed to seek after divine things, degenerates and serves only to
minister unto the Brutish part of Man. If he would keep in his honor and
understanding, and advance further; if he has really Prudence and Discretion,
he might know thus much, that when the Lower ends are attained, he should rise
higher. When Hunger and Thirst are satisfied, what is all this for, but to seek
after the Bread of Heaven, and to thirst after the Wells of Salvation? When
what he eats every day with his Mouth is cast into the draught, and signifies
no more but for the present, hi^ common and daily Work according to Gods
Ordinance supplies him with that; when he sees this comes to no more but just
to keep life for the time, this suggests not to labor for the Meat which
perishes, but for the Meat which endures unto everlasting Life. When our
Clothes wax old and new are had, which are daily put on and off, there is
dressing and making neat; What is all this for, but to fit us unto something
else? to seek unto the Lord to be Clothed with the Garments of Salvation, and
to be covered with the Robe of Righteousness, Isa. 61. 10. to be arrayed in
fine Linen, clean and white, Rev. 19. 8. Does not the Body wax old with the
Raiment it wears? Has it not the like changes? going to Bed puts in mind of
laying aside these Rags of Flesh in the Chamber of the Grave; The Morning may
be an Emblem of the Resurrection; our doing the same things shows forth the
Happiness of Heaven, which does not so much consist in infinite and successive
variety, but all imperfection and tiresomeness shall be done away, and we shall
have full and satisfactory Objects for our desires. The washing and making neat
prompts to cleanse our selves from all filthiness of Flesh and Spirit. The
rubbing away the dirt contracted by the sordes of the Body or outward things,
teaches to be pure Men and Women just, as we were made, without additional
Plaistering or Color. This again puts upon adorning the hidden Man of the
Heart, which is not corruptible; and all in order to be glorified both in Body
and Soul hereafter. Still Men do act but half way; this living in the World
points out what is to be done toward, and as it were shows unto us the endless
Life. This Life is lent to make ready for the other. It is an essential part of
Wisdom to refer all things to the most excellent end, to have an Eye still fixed
upon that, and then order our going accordingly. Wherefore do I live here these
few days, and full of trouble? To behold the Heavens at a great distance, and
see the outside only, as we do not much more of the Earth we tread on; to run
through that Succession of Day and Night, Summer and Winter, and that small
variety of things nearer to us, Company, Business, necessary Actions, we are
quickly weary with all this; but there being much more as Gods Revelation
speaks of, our Life was given to great ends and purposes, wherein the Almighty
Creator has manifested his own Wisdom and Glory. And then, Is not Immortality
more to be minded, then a dying Life? Is not Perfection rather to be sought
after, then to lie down under our Imperfection? If one was wholly to be given
up, yet still the greater good is to be preferred before the less; but when
they may both stand together, nay, if the less is better managed when it is
toward attainment of the other, this will be a mighty Argument for the
equality of Gods Ways toward Men. If the Life that now is may as well, yea be
better continued and preserved by ordering it so as God would have it in
pursuance to the eternal Life he has promised, this demonstrates him to be
most Righteous, but our selves unreasonable and foolish if we do not comply
therewith. This is done by getting necessaries and conveniences, then in the
use and exercise of them. The Grace of God has excellently prescribed for
both, Teaching that we should live Soberly and Righteously in this present
World, Tit. 2. 12.

But we are to be advertised of what our Lord says, A Man's Life consists not
in the abundance of things which he possesses, Luke 12. 15. It requires no
more then Meat, Drink, Raiment, Habitation convenient for him, remembering still
what he is, where he is, and whither he is going. A noble Soul enrapt in Flesh,
and therefore is for the pure desires of that only: By the Well and in the
Wilderness; and therefore is to have a refreshment, no continued sitting down;
some divertisement and delight, but no perfect and lasting Happiness till he is
come to the place God has provided for him. Since things are so as we are told
in his Word, and find True by Consideration out of it, If we might not be
carried through here by going his Way, and according to his Directions, then
there was some excuse for distrust and revolt from him, as now there is none at
all. On whom may we more safely depend, then the God who gives Food to all
Flesh? Who seedeth the Fowls of the Air, albeit they Sow not, neither do they
Reap, Mat. 6. 26. much more would he feed us also, as we are better then they
in the Rank of Creatures; but yet more, as we would show our selves Obedient
Children.

This is the more certain way of getting a comfortable Subsistence, for every
one both Just or Unjust, would willingly have to do with an honest Man, so
hereby he has more Custom or Employment. This is so evident, that all at least
pretend and make a show of being so, though few act according, and keep close
to the true rules thereof. It is just and equal that one Man should live by
another, that another Calling should maintain him, as we are willing our own
should as to us: This is agreeable to the Royal and Fundamental Law; provided
that no Deceit, Lying, Overreaching or other Sin be committed on this excuse,
for under this they do shelter Unrighteousness and Wrong. The nature of Evil is
fixed in it self, and is not to be done under any pretended Good. None would
care to be imposed upon, or served after an indirect manner himself. The Sin of
Dishonesty is so shameful, odious and prejudicial to Interest in the World,
that those who do not fear God nor have regard to futurity, will conceal or
mitigate it as much as they can; for their Credit is their Livelihood, and if
they lose that they lose all, none will deal with them. So Honesty is the best
Policy in this World; the form thereof is for temporal Advantage, and so is the
thing it self. It is thought otherwise; the best way is to have the outward
Reputation, but privately to do any thing for Gain. This is the received Maxim,
but contrary to Christian simplicity and sincerity, nor yet so very
reconcilable with Prudence; for the most hidden Deceit, especially when long
used, will some way or other manifest it self, so far at least as to render him
suspected, if not known; and then he shall lose more of honest gain which he
might have had, and will not be recompensed with all the Wages of Iniquity. If
it be strictly considered in ordinary Trade or Business, how much may be really
gotten within the bounds of Uprightness, what is to be had more, by going over,
is so little and inconsiderable that it does more harm then good. All Actions
proceed from the mind, and as that is disposed so are they; if to injustice
then either by continued close acts thereof, or by despising those little ways
of Dishonesty, and by proposing some one considerable Oppression or Deceit,
which makes his Fortune; this is reckoned the wiser way, by which they come to
somewhat, when before by being exact and true in lesser matters they were loss
suspected.

All Unrighteousness is Sin, 1 John 5. 17. It (...) the worse sort thereof,
being an advised deliberate Transgression, a Disobedience upon full
consideration, and commonly long allowed in. This is not The spot of Gods
Children, for it is wilful corrupting Deuteronomy. 32. 5.
themselves, and not of sudden surprizal; and therefore far from the Godly.
Paul confesses himself to be injurious as he was, Acts 8. 3. for which he
obtained Mercy because he did it in Ignorance and Unbelief: but otherwise of
all the failings of the Saints Recorded in Scripture, there is no particular
act of Wrong done to the Estate of ones Neighbor (as I can call to mind) But
since it has been said, Who are greater Knaves then the Religious? How many
Examples of this sort? Their Griping and Covetousness, their secret acts of
Knavery and other Abominable doings, make all considering people take heed and
beware of them. Many that seem to be so, have given sufficient occasion for
this. Some by Rebellion in the State, others by private Dealings between their
Neighbors have made the Way of Truth evil spoken of. But does this allow of
their doings? Do they not vary from it? Who can help but there will be
Hypocrites? The Word of God is full and manifest against all manner of Unjust
doing, The Rule is strait and right, for Hypocrites (who would be accounted
Righteous when they are not) pretend to Religion, because that requires
Honesty, and under that Cloak they would cover themselves. If their Practices
are contrary, that makes known their Religion to be vain; they have only an
appearance, but not the reality thereof, for notwithstanding this still remains
Just and Good. There are three general Principles of Action, Conscience, Honor
and Interest; the first is a sure restraint, the second is none at all where
the thing can be done secretly, as too many acts of Injustice daily are; And if
Men are Honest only for their Interest, they will be likewise Dishonest when it
is their Interest so to be, as that often happens. * The Temptation of Interest
is so prevalent, that he must be a perfect Man indeed who is not wrought on
thereby, One who is endued with a good measure of the Grace and Fear of God;
but he that has not, will be quickly overcome, for he who does not seek his
Happiness from God, will be working it out himself; and this being the
Principal Instrument that helps to all things of a Man's own Happiness, he will
be sure to manage it to the best advantage he can: By Right or Wrong, Lawful or
Unlawful means is no matter to him, who is for getting every way. There is no
check nor stop to the violent driving on of Interest but Religion. Why should
that hinder the good of any Man? It does not in any wise. It provides against
wrongfully taking from another. But would thou stand still, and pause a
little.

Wherefore is the beloved and magnified Interest desired? Is it not in order to
the attainment of Happiness, and if that may be had in a better and only true
way, What harm is in all this? you are not forbidden to Trade or get Gain, you
are required to provide for your House and Family, but you are denied the
Superfluities of unlawful Profit. Both the necessaries and Conveniences of
Life and Contentment withal, may and are only to be obtained by keeping within
the fence of Duty. The Blessing of the Lord makes Rich, and he added no Sorrow
with it; So that is rather to be chosen then filthy Lucre, the great Gains of
Oppression and Injustice to which a Curse is annexed, Job 15. 29. and Job 20.
18, 19, 20, 23. There may be a Curse in the Mouth, and such may have no true
enjoyment of what they obtain this way. They are continually plagued with
secret and invisible twinges, which themselves feel and seek to stupifie by
Drunkenness, Gluttony, constant Company, great hurry of Business, and the other
Arts of hardening. A little that a Righteous Man has, is better then the
Riches of many Wicked, Psalm. 37. 16. He has a more comfortable enjoyment of
what provides against Hunger and Thirst, is a defense against cold and
nakedness, and as to them he rests satisfied. Whereas others can do no more
with abundance; and if they give up themselves to their own Hearts Lusts, they
may glut themselves, but yet crave; have their belly filled, but not their
desire; They may drink on, and still be dry; be safe from cold, but not the
uneasiness of pride. Honesty and Diligence do more conduce to present Peace and
Comfort, then that distracting or wearisome Pursuit after immoderate and
forbidden Gain. For there does arise disquietude from Guilt and Discontent, the
first tormenting him for what he has done, the second making him restless to
push forward to add yet more; and thus he knows not what to do, being tossed
between two Furies, which keep him uneasy and troubled. Let Injustice put in
what Plea she will; make a noise for living in the World: yet both for that and
being Happy here, the best way is to live Righteously.

The Lord thy God has Blessed thee in all the works of thy Hands, Deuteronomy. 2. 7.
He gives thee Skill and Understanding; and his Providence watches to prevent
the mischievous devices of the Sons of Violence and Falsehood. As none is
without Afflictions of Body and Mind, so not without losses in Estate. These
are suffered for Trial and wise Reasons, but most commonly it is so ordered
that hereby they are not disabled from their several Employments; So it seldom
or never happens in a good Man for his Losses to be his utter undoing, or to be
absolutely deprived of a Livelihood. That comes to pass through Negligence,
Folly, Prodigality, or some other Sin; but not by keeping close to Duty. And
though he may receive some little injuries, yet he lives contentedly, at
present applying the Promise, and patiently expects the Reward for doing the
Will of God. He need not return Evil for Evil, or more injuriously make honest
People pay for the harm Knaves have done unto him. These are for the most part
trivial Instances, and our Obedience is to be proved as to them. God has
ordained that Man should Labor, and he will prosper that to which he intends
it, Mine Elect shall long enjoy the work of their Hands, They shall not labor
in Vain, nor bring forth for Trouble, Isa. 65. 23. His word does as it were
stand engaged that such who live according to his Will should be mantained: To
supply real Wants, not unnecessary Lusts. And it may be observed of the greater
part of mankind, who have no certain Dependence nor Estate, but the casual
income of their Trade or Emploiment from day to day, yet still they are
provided for, some one way or another. So there is no need of repining at the
great Landlord, whose is the Earth and the fullness thereof, for not giving an
Estate; Why he has given enough for all; the Fruits and Cattle (Blessed be his
goodness) are abundantly sufficient to maintain all its Inhabitants. But he
has set Limits, Bounds and Landmarks that every one might know what was his
own. And then some by Industry obtained what others through Negligence and
Idleness parted withal, the World going on in the usual way as it does now.
This diversity is suffered by the divine Wisdom for trial of that particular
Virtue now insisted on, and of others. All cannot have Estates, not such as
they desire. Every one ought to be contented with that condition he is in; if
he will work with his Hands there is no fear of want. Never any is driven so
hard as to be forced by necessity to Sin, if he will use all lawful means
first. Then Honesty is so far from being poor and laughed at, that those who
observe it, are generally thriving, and have good Reputation; but if mean, yet
attended with that satisfaction of mind which others have not in their
abundance. If at any time ridiculed, it is by knavish Men who seek this way to
extenuate their own Guilt; for his well-doing brings their Sin to remembrance.
And truly this is the cause of that Reproach, Slander and Contempt cast upon
the ways and People of God; not that they in any wise deserve it, but all good
esteem and honor; But those who do not live accordingly, are privately
convicted they are in a fault; and therefore seek to discountenance that, which
they should have done. An odd way, not to be contented only to offend God by an
Omission or Disobedience; but to Sin yet more by fastening contempt on his wise
Sanctions, and to hinder others also.

Mark the Perfect Man, and behold the Upright, for the end of that Man is
Peace, Psalm. 37. 37. which is more valuable then all the fine Houses or Estates
in the World. Seeing it is the entrance upon an Immortal Life, it is more then
enjoying the greatest Revenue for an Hundred Years. But further he has Peace
throughout his Life. Herein exercising himself to have a Conscience void of
Offense toward God and toward Man, he is in favor with both: and freed from
that Trouble and Vexation, which does always arise when the Duty to our great
Creator is neglected, or those just Offices between Man and Man. The Lord is
Righteous in all his Ways, His infinite sovereignty over Creatures is
attempered with an excellent goodness: His great Power himself has been
pleased to limit by a gracious Word, and many other things, if we could clearly
understand as we shall, do manifest him to be exceeding good and Ioving to us
Men; so we are to do one to another, Little Children let no Man deceive you. He
that does Righteousness is Righteous, even as he is Righteous. In this the
Children of God are manifest, and the Children of the Devil. Whosoever does not
Righteousness is not of God, neither he that loves not his Brother, 1 John 3.
7, 10. That no Man go beyond and defraud his Brother in any matter, for the
Lord is the Avenger of all such, 1 These. 4. 6. Though we do not see him, yet he
sees us; Though we may think him to be in Heaven at a distance, he is there,
and yet not far from every one of us: He stands by, and beholds all the doings
of the Sons of Men, and considers all their ways. He does see if any one will
do justly, and live according to the Laws he has given; they may be broken
secretly, but it is known unto him; The hidden things of Dishonesty may a
little while remain undiscerned to our sight, but not before him who in his
appointed time will reveal them openly before the World. All things are now
disposed of for this Life of Trial and Temptation. He who is Unjust may be
Unjust, and he that is Righteous may be Righteous still. The Threatening and
Reward are annexed accordingly. With us that are living, and for a short time
in the way, the thing is in suspense. And the Work of Righteousness shall be
Peace, and the effect of Righteousness, Quietness and Assurance for ever, Isa.
32. 17.

CHAP. XV.
Of TEMPERANCE In Meat, Drink, Apparel, Recreation; Of the passing away of TIME.

THis puts in mind of our imperfect and wanting Condition, that stands in need
of so many things from without. The God, who made us, put us in Flesh, and in
this place, who has ordained such things to nourish and sustain us for a
while; He could also have kept us in Being and Continuance without them. All
things are equally possible to an Almighty Power. He both frames the means and
the end. he is free and unlimited to the use of them, or can perform whatever
he pleases with such means, or without any at all. Who fed the five Thousand
with five Loaves, could have caused that they should not have Hungered at all,
as he did not, during the Forty days and Forty nights, for He was afterward an
Hungered, Mat. 4. 2. Man does not live by Bread only, but by every Word that
proceeds out of the Mouth of the Lord does Man live, Deuteronomy. 8. 3. We are not
to be perfect before our time; Even now by the Divine goodness and appointment
we are in good Accommodation by the help of those outward things, as indeed can
be well required for Creatures and the state of Imperfection; all this is only
for a while in expectation of, and in order unto greater things. Meats for the
Belly, and the Belly for Meats, but God shall destroy both it and them, 1 Cor.
6. 13. Our Feet and Eyes supply that to us as if we were wholly made up of
motion and sight, they are sufficient for the business we have to do. Food and
Raiment through Gods Blessing keep Life and Strength, and provide against
Hunger and Cold; so as to them we suffer no decay. They supply the defects, so
that still we are rendered fit for our Masters Service, and for what he does
require of us. They come into help against those Evils which would otherwise
Oppress, and for a Prop when we are beginning to fall. It is manifest they
should only do unto what they serve, assist, but not clog or burden; they
should refresh and enable to stand, not stifle or fit heavy upon us. Hence
Temperance appears to be pure and natural; it requires what ever is convenient,
but rejects and casts forth what is more. That there be nothing wanting or
over: That the Body be preserved in its due Temperament, That it spring up and
run through its several alterations with daily Bread, the constant and even
course of Blessings of Heaven and Fatness of the Earth, the moderate use of
those good things God has prepared for it. Like a Isa. 65. 22.
Tree planted which neither has too much Dung at the Root nor stands in a
barren Ground, but receives nourishment from the Earth, Air, Rain, kind
influences of the Sun, until it grows up to full bulk, and thence it will by
degrees wither and perish. Continuance is his only to give who was the first
Author of Being: to every thing here is the appointed time to go on during that
by further Laws and Rules. By a narrow and strict observation of things we may
discover the Glory and Wisdom of our God; our Reason was therefore given to
Praise and Magnify him, to know and do things profitable for us.

Many do miscarry and come to an hasty end by not attending this, by making
that an occasion to destroy themselves before their time, which was therefore
designed to carry them through unto the Period thereof. When the Table proves a
snare, and that which should be for their welfare, is a Gin to take themselves
withal: When that which should water and moisten, does drown or over-whelm; so
again when these are denied, there succeeds an ill constitution of the whole.
Sickness does arise from irregularity of Meat and Drink. And though it is
commonly imputed to such accidents or second causes, yet there is the gross and
ill affection of Humors, which by that have been rendered jarring, and such a
thing sets them in actual falling out. Temperance is the best Physic according
to the old rule approved of by universal Experience since the World began;
nothing does so keep off and prevent Distempers: and when they are on there is
no such general and good prescription as Fasting and Abstinence, that nature
may at length expel what clogs and has disordered. Health is the greatest good
pertaining to the Body, which nothing does so much preserve as Sobriety. And
this may be one reason why Beasts are not troubled with Sickness and
Indisposition as Man is; the Body of both is near the same, but they live
according to nature, only supplying the desires thereof and no more; whereas he
does add Drunkenness to Thirst, and Gluttony to Hunger. What brings him back to
the first and true use of things, this tends to his well-being.

He that keeps Israel neither Slumbers nor Sleeps, neither Eats nor Drinks, nor
is Clothed. He needs none of these things, for he is God in whom is all
fullness, Perfection, Self-subsistency, Eternity, and whatever can be thought of
him who is all in all, to whom cannot approach the least evil or hurt. So
Temperance is not in him, being conversant only about the use of those things
which denote Imperfection. Yet this Fruit of the Spirit, Gal. 5. 23. makes us
little and finite Creatures have a faint resemblance to the God of the Spirits
of all Flesh, by reducing them to the state they were first made in of his
Image and likeness. We hardly know what the Soul is in it Self, being covered
over with Sin and Sensuality, but when stripped of these it returns to its first
condition. It is active in a healthy and sound Body, but is pressed down even
to the Earth with loads of Meat and Drink. Then that which is linked on, is
drenched and immersed further in, so is hardly discerned to be Spirit. For it
becomes in a manner carnal and partakes of the Fleshly part of us, which is a
degeneracy and sinking; so when these hindrances are taken away, there is a
rising up again. The workings of our Soul are naturally upwards, if the weight
is removed.

Temperance does further moderate our desires; it does not make them absolutely
cease, for that is impossible, but takes away the torment of them. When
gratified, they are the more eager and impatient, but when resisted they are
less. This brings into that lovely temper of using as not abusing, Not to be
overcome with the Temptations to excess, they will become less by denial; and
it may be as irksome to admit thereof, as for the sensual minded to resist it.
Sobriety perceives all the good in the Creatures abstracted from the evil: It
has all the relish and sweetness in them, separated from eructation and
bitterness. Which keeps within the just bounds, and knows not the trouble of
going over; which frees from the pain of Hunger, and uneasiness of satiety;
which preserves Health, and not destroys it. The Body is of a more strong and
vigorous temper, and the Man is rendered Prove. 13. 25. Isa. 23. 18,
fit for his general and particular Calling. He is loving and thankful to the
giver of all good things. He does cheerfully perform his Duty to him, and those
Offices due unto his Neighbor, and that Business himself has in the World.
This Grace puts joy into the Countenance, and liveliness into the whole Man;
whereas one extreme is attended with heaviness and sorrow, restlesness and
discontent, the other makes pale and weak.

It is hard to hit upon the exact mean wherein lies good, but generally in the
denial of things is the more safe error; in some it is Duty. John had his
Raiment of Camels-Hair and a Leathern-Girdle about his Loins, and his Meat was
Locust and Wild-Honey, Mat. 3. 4. The Son of Man came Eating and Drinking, Mat.
11. 19. God is glorified both ways, but the latter is our Example. Who has
left direction concerning Fasting, Mat. 6. 16, 17, 18. And a standing Precept
against Intemperance at any time, Luke 21. 34. But though that macerating the
Body has made such a mighty noise in Religion as a great meritorious Act; yet
so much stress is not to be laid thereon, either by Command or Example from
Gods Word. In the old Testament there is little or no mention made thereof by
way of Command or Duty. In the Gospel little is said, unless Col. 3. 5. which
is in order to abstain from other Sins, and if that may be done without, the
Reason of the Precept ceases. And so of 1 Cor. 9. 27. The Body may be kept
under and brought into subjection without so much pining or starving thereof.
The Apostle says verse 25. Every one that striveth for the mastery is
temperate in all things, alluding to those who did Diet themselves for the
Olympic Games: Which plainly implies, that we are to manage our selves so as
to be more fit for the Service of God, and that we may get to Heaven. Now it is
evident, we can better serve him in Health then in Sickness; and it is more
accepted when done with a willing good Heart. If we may be still spiritual
minded, not taking off our Affections from God and the things above, to set
them on small and perishing comforts; If we can avoid Sin without so much
rigor, If we set a part some time for Fasting and Prayer; I know not what mean
those harsh disciplines, that famishing all the Life long; for it is not a
shriveled skin nor pale looks, nor a lean Carkase which commends unto God; but
A broken and contrite Spirit, a Soul little in its own esteem, contracted and
become in entire subjection unto him which has the Body under, and both in
obedience unto God. That extreme Mortification has been turned into a gross
mistake and Superstition: The cruel afflicting ones self comes near to the
Prophets of Baal, who cut themselves after their manner with Knives and Lances
till the Blood gushed out upon them, 1 Kings 18. 28 so are the self-Whippings
and Scourgings of Pagan Christian Rome; and alike are the ways of the Heathen,
and false Religions throughout the World. But the King of Israel is a merciful
King: He does not require these things at our Hands: He does not Afflict
willingly, nor Grieve the Children of Men, Lam. 3. 33. Neither should they do
it foolishly themselves. What deserving is there utterly to refuse what God
does give? God would have in this place the Humiliation, but in no wise the
Misery of his Creatures; He at present keeps them off from true and perfect
Happiness, that being reserved elsewhere; but denies not their Comfort and
Refreshment. He is not now unwilling that we should be Happy, but then we
should be so puffed up that we would not have him Reign over our Hearts. He
would not have us run away from those things which are set forth for a trial of
our Obedience, having as it were hedged us in by ordering that to be had in
things absolutely necessary, which we cannot be without.

Another kind of Moderation is conversant about Apparel, which was designed
against the pain of Cold and shame of Nakedness. Of Apparel.
This calls again to remembrance our Misery and Want, for such an help is found
against it; and therefore those who place Happiness in Meat, Drink or Raiment,
consider not that it is only as Physic for remedy against foregoing Evils,
Hunger and Thirst, Cold and Shame, and how much better it will be when we shall
be made Perfect and altogether without them, as it is to be whole and have no
need of a Physician. God in clothing us at present with Garments of Flesh,
which are weak and filthy, mean and contemptible, seems to check hereby the
aspiring temper of Man, for nothing is so much provided against Job 33. 17.
as Pride; Though he endeavors to strive against it, making that an occasion
to lift up himself, which should humble and abase him.

The Word of God is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the Heart.
Neither is there any Creature that is not manifest in his sight, but all things
are naked and open unto the Eyes of him with whom we have to do, Heb. 4. 12.
13. He will judge and recompense according to the secrets of the Heart. Those
who are to discover in order to turn away Iniquity from Jacob, by laying open
the Aggravation and Sinfulness thereof, may by a malicious Interpretation be
thought like him that accuses our Brethren before God day and night: But then
this Charge would fall upon the Prophets, Christ and Apostles, and all faithful
Teachers. The case stands thus, Every Man's final condition is to be determined
by God and his own Heart: He knows all things, and that knows its own Sin.
It Is the motions of that which commit the evil: And those who are to convince
of Sin, are to reprove and not to be our Judges; to Warn, but not to Condemn;
If the thing be so, they must repent and amend; if not, they only admonish and
exhort to take heed, and there is no harm done. They enjoin no Duties, but set
up the Mark again which was almost fallen, to direct in the Way to Heaven; They
make no Sins, but raise up the float which was sinking, to keep people from
Shipwreck and Perishing. The great Policy of the Deceiver of mankind is to
bring them off from God, to lose their Knowledge of him, and the Sense of Good
and Evil; whereas on the contrary it has been the Business of all true
Messengers sent from him, to Isa. 58. 12.
restore both as much as they could. The less Conscience and particular
Examination of their ways, the less conviction of Sin there is, be sure no
ripping of it up from the bottom; the generality of the World think so much the
better. For ever, O Lord, thy Word is settled in Heaven, Psalm. 119. 89. Those
Laws and Rules of Obedience and Sin have been long since fixed up, and all the
World shall be judged by them; so they are to take notice of, and prepare
themselves accordingly now they are in the way.

What Sin or Harm is in Clothes? is commonly asked. In truth none, but in the
Pride and Excess of them, for otherwise the Word of God would not make express
mention of them as it does, Isa. 3. 16. etc. Isa. 32. 11. Jer. 4. 30. Psalm. 73.
(...) Z^ph. 1. 8. 1 Timothy 2. 9. 1 Per. 3. 3, 4. Evil does intermix with every
thing here, even to what we are fed with and do wear. The evil accompanying
Raiment is Pride; which divides it self into forgetfulness of God, or despising
our Brethren who are not so arrayed. Yet they that wear soft Clothing are in
Kings Houses, Mat. 11 8. So they may be used for distinguishing of Condition.
Let thy Garments be always white, Eccle. 9. 8. which intimates another end of
Decency and Comeliness. If fine Apparel does not take off from the Love and
Service they ow unto God; If they do not set at naught or less esteem him in
vile Raiment; If they do not place more Happiness then as it barely ministers
to Warmth, Modesty and Comeliness; If it does not engross too much time and
other evils are separated; then they may use what God has afforded for
Clothing, improved with that Art Psalm. 45. 13, 14.
and Skill he has given to Man. But considering withal, The Soul is more then
the Body, and the Body is more then Raiment, Luke 12. 23. And more care should
be had for them both, then for these appendages to the latter. There is a
Resurrection and Immortality; and taking care for the Body, all one as the
Soul, for they will fare alike, and be in the same condition. The Garments of
Salvation and Robe of Righteousness, the fine Linen clean and white, to be all
glorious within, and adorning the hidden Man of the Heart, these will be found
altogether as necessary and convenient as now it is thought to deck with
Ornaments and adorn with Jewels; for it is evident they must, and are deprived
of these. They must strip and mak^ bare, Isa. 32. 11. (as they do every night)
till they put on a Shroud or Winding Sheet, and then nothing will stand them in
any stead but what is aforementioned. Then Dust shall be the only Powder and
Paint, Instead of sweet smell there shall be stink, and instead of well set
Hair, Baldness, Isa. 3. 24. The holy Spirit speaking of this Excess, makes
particular application to Women, for they are most subject to this Sin and
Vanity; they are the weaker Vessel and presently taken with a slender
appearance of Good. A ^ine outside and gaudy show (though it is not much more
then the color of a Fly do exceedingly transport them whose thoughts are not
fixed on the true and substantial Good. Who pursue no certain end may be
observed to catch at every fantastic Image that has the least sign of
Happiness, though it be a mere shadow, varnish and next to nothing. Again who
have a right sense and belief of spiritual things, they do not in the least
esteem of Toys and Tri^^es. As Women professing Godliness differ from those of
this World in manner of Life and Conversation, hoping to be unlike them in
their Death; so they should appear outwardly not to run to the same
Extravagancy of Apparel. They may be of the same Fashion with others, but more
modest and less expensive. Not setting themselves out in the same manner as the
vain Women do of like Rank and Quality. What is saved this way and given to the
Poor, will avail more then Conforming to this World, and the empty applause of
their Acquaintance. Though people are so admired or envied for fine Clothes,
yet the principal delight arises to the owners from this ignorant miserable
nature of lookers on. Good God! that the Soul which was designed for great
things should ever be brought so narrow and low, as to take pleasure in bodily
Vestments! That she who is brighter then the Sun, if she knew her self, should
at alL mind the glittering of Gold or Embroidery! That she whom the whole World
cannot satisfy in her due stretching forth, should seem the least contented
with what is mere outside and color. She must be extremely fallen from her
noble and exalted Nature. She must lose much of her original Honor, before she
can set any estimation on them, which are only useful and convenient for the
Body, but not worthy of her Care and Affection.

Temperance extends yet further to Recreations: The necessity of them appears
in that we are Flesh and not Spirit, that Of Recreations.
will tire and grow weary. It is as needful to Refresh as to Eat when Hungry.
We do not read that Christ used Recreations, his Meat and Drink was to do the
Will of God; But we are not as he was, without Sin and Corruption. We cannot be
always conversant about holy things; an Intermission and Freedom is allowed as
appears by bodily labor God has Ordained, and when tired by that he affords
Divertisment. Provided, that we do not shut out the sense of him from Worldly
business, or deny our Subjection unto him in those Portions of Good he has
given. Be thou in the Fear of the Lord all the day long, and then do what thy
hands find to do: If we acknowledge and preserve our Obedience unto him, and
then delight our selves as much as we will. Looking unto the end and design of
a thing, which in Recreation is to fit us the more for his Service, and works
of our Calling; And therefore are not to be made an occasion to turn our Hearts
from him, or neglect the other. It is lent to refresh, and not to fill; to
delight, but not to satisfy; to use, but not to rest in them; We are not to be
happy before our time. Even this may be learnt out of the nature of
Recreations, for they are hungry and empty; and when immoderately pursued, they
are wearisome and cease to Recreate. They please and divert when sparingly
used, but still are not found an adequate Happiness to Man. That irksomness and
not satisfying, that constant seeking after variety though little to be had,
not being contented even when one is tired with them, make known all this. Can
Men feed on still and be nourished with Sauce only? These do not gratify the
Soul otherwise then by rendering the Body more fit for her operations, which
cannot be always working: Now what diverts, makes them to stand still; but when
she is somewhat eased and relieved, she has an inclination to return to her
proper Employment, and has regret to be hindered. Happiness is the end that she
drives at, which is kept in another World, we being only to prepare for it here
in that method and way God has Ordained. In our course we are assaulted by
many Temptations and proposals of Good, which would deceive and turn aside, God
saw every thing be made, and behold it was good, Genesis 1. 31. Every thing that
is not expressly forbidden, may be lawfully used; but an intermixture of evil
came in afterward, so it may be turned and abused. If Recreations are had
according to the prescribed limits of Moderation, they help to our Comfort
there and Happiness hereafter; but if excessively dwelt on, they tend to
Distraction and Misery. The great danger of them is that then they hinder the
Love of God, make to forget him, render us earthly-minded and quite estranged
from spiritual things, they consume precious time which should be spent in
working out our Salvation, and doing good to others. The faculties of Soul are
not exercised on those great and suitable Objects to which they were designed,
but are taken up with little and vain things. Had we been only made for them to
skip like Lambs, or with the Leviathan to take his Pastime in the deep, the
same and ordinary endowments which they have, would have served us also. There
would have been need of no more then power just to sport and play; Reason might
have been spared, and the other Accomplishments of a Man. We may observe in the
lower rank of Creatures after the briskness and festivities of Youth are over,
they do not leap up and down, but serve only to the right end of their Being.

Because Recreations are commonly used to spend Time, the tediousness Of Time
and the passing away thereof.
whereof is so afflicting to some, it can be no improper digression at least
from the general Argument to say some what thereof. If Man did reflect within
himself, and on the nature of things, he might somewhat understand what he has
here to do. All the powers of Soul and Members of Body ure fit^ed for Action,
they crave after it. Here is the Right and the Wrong, something he must do: and
if he mistakes to the latter, there is Regret and Discontent. Even when he is
exercised about vain and insignificant things, which must be done rather then
none at all; or if about more material, in which there is some but little
profit; yet still he knows he is not in his proper work. The usual scene of
Employment lies in Recreations and business of Life; the first does not so much
satisfy the mind as the other, and this does it not altogether, for there is
something further which is so little regarded because wilfully shut out of the
mind, and through the Craft of the Adversary, these are made an occasion to
stifle it, or to divert so much from it as should be done. To speak plainly it
is God and Religion, To seek after and know him, to conform to his whole Will,
This O Man is what thou have to do; and all other things which come not under
here, are avocations from the one thing needful. Said our Lord and Forerunner,
I must work the Work of him that sent me while it is day: the night comes when
no Man can work, John 9. 4. His was laying the Foundation for all to build on.
He finished the Work God gave him to do, and every Soul is to work out that
which he has wrought and accomplished for us all in this Life, which is the
accepted time; for the darkness draws on, in which nothing of this is to be
done. And therefore if we neglect, Woe unto us, for the day goes away, for the
Shadows of the evening are stretched out, Jer. 6. 4. We haste on toward the
Period, so uncertain is our stay here, that the Sun sets while it is Noonday,
yea at all times, so we are to be as those which wait for the coming of the
Bridegroom, not knowing when it will be.

Time was given us that we might prepare for Eternity: It seems to point forth
the other, as also we may know somewhat of our own frame. We have immortal
Spirits which began to be, but shall never end; for if we look back upon
Eternity, that vast space which was before we came into the World, we are
consounded: We that came forth in time cannot imagine that which was from
Everlasting; but who have assurance of continuing for evermore, We can very
well conceive what shall be to Everlasting and shall have no end. Now Time
stands between both these, as a little Creek between two Seas. And this may be
considered in the motion of the Celestial Bodies since they have been Created
until they shall be dissolved: And then Time is that space during those several
Generations come and pass through here as God has ordained. But to bring it
more close to our selves, it may be taken for that while every particular Man
is in the World. One is more to himself then all the World besides; and
therefore he is not so much concerned with others, or the days before and
after, but whilst himself is here, that is his Time. Whilst he is in Life, the
Springs and Wheels thereof continue in motion; so that if the Sun should stand
still, yet unless the Hourglass within did cease to run, the Garments of Flesh
wax old, it would be no advantage to Man; for the moving of those things within
determine his space, and not the common measure of Days and Nights, Months and
Years. Since the World began it was never heard that they did stand still with
any Man, but the Pulse is continually beating toward its last stroke. We all
do fade as a Leaf, Isa. 64. 6. When it first springs and buds forth, it hastes
toward being blown off, or withering, and so dropping down. My times are in
thy Hand, Psalm. 31. 15. during the while God shall hold our Souls in life, and
the Tabernacle remain fit for our Habitation.

As sure as Time now is, so it will be when Time shall be no longer, Rev. 10.
6. As Days and Nights pass with us, so the duration of Eternity will begin. As
manifestly as there is something above the Sun, which was set in the Firmament
to give light upon the Earth, Genesis 1. 17. but beyond is an eternal and
unchangeable Light. The Darkness is no Darkness with thee, the Night and Day
are both alike. We are to be Translated thither, where is no Sun, for it has
no need thereof, for the Glory of God does lighten it, Rev. 21. 13. so neither
to divide the Day from the Night, nor for Signs, nor for Seasons, nor for
Years; for this is only the manner of these lower Regions of the World. One Day
is with the Lord as a Thousand Years, and a Thousand Years as one Day, 2 Pet.
3. 8. There is no respect at all of the numbrings of Time with the High and
Lofty One that inhabiteth Eternity, Isa. 57. 15. And so it will be when he
shall be pleased to admit ^s there.

Have thou (courteous Reader) a warm and serious Apprehension of this thing?
When thou art pressed with the tediousness of Time, think upon Eternity; And
then know thou not how to make use of the flying Moments before thee? Is it
nothing to secure unto thy self the Everlasting Mansions? no while to be
allotted for getting an Happiness which endures unto all Ages? Only a spare
Minute and the refuse of Time will this serve toward obtaining that, to which
Millions of Years are but the twinkling of an Eye? Will the Ancient of days
accept of that opportunity of serving him, when not detained by vain Company or
Pleasures? He will not be dallied with by foolish and proud Creatures. Heaven
and Immortality are for those who strive, Luke 13. 24. labor, 1 Cor. 15. 58.
seek diligently, Heb. 11. 6. who make it their constant business throughout
their Life. Are thy desires a little quickened? What would thou do toward
the blessed Enjoyment and Possession of them? Thou art yet in Time, upon the
right use and improvement whereof all this does depend.

It is commonly consumed either in ill-doing, or doing nothing, or something
besides what is proper to do. Separate these three Falsities, and the right end
will come in of course. The first tends directly to Destruction and Misery; the
second and third to the loss of the Good set before us. Wisdom and Experience
do sufficiently manifest that they cannot profit, for they come to nothing at
all. The Pleasure or Convenience of them perish in the using, and appear the
same as if not had at all. Whatever is to come, is of the same nature; just to
be had, and vanished away as the forme^ things; and all will come to an end.
Sin, Idleness and Covetousness beguile Men of their precious Time; for thus it
irrecoverably glides from them without benefit, and for all these things God
will bring them to Judgment. Yea, those which seem more significative, in which
considered abstractedly there is no ill as ingenuous Arts, unnecessary Learning
and several other things may be used as Recreations only; but if insisted on,
they are something besides the matter in hand, and at last tend to nothing but
to further the great loss. It would appear so whilst the Man was in the midst
thereof, if he did not go on in a blind hurry and inconsideration, but it will
be plainly discerned toward, and at the conclusion. I have seen an end of all
Perfection, but thy Commandment is exceeding broad, Psalm. 119. 96. Nothing
remains in a Man, besides what he does in the Service of God and for the good
of his own Soul. That the Body is a consuming, but the other part a more
enduring substance may be a little seen by this; because all Acts done as to
the first, do just serve the present end and then utterly perish; they are
determined with the day whatever is done in order thereto, yesterdays Eating
and Drinking does not satisfy present Hunger. But the Soul is even now
bettered and improved for what she received some years ago. The incorruptible
Seed of the Word springs up that was sown long since; and though immediately
at first it may seem buried, it will rise up and bear Fruit to everlasting
Life. This is the proper and adequate thing for her Spiritual and Immortal
nature. The words of Eternal Life make her increase, whilst the Flesh
decreases. He that has my Word, let him speak my Word faithfully: what is
the Chaff to the Wheat? says the Lord, Jer. 23. 28. Even now the difference
may be perceived, for the one does not nourish like the other; this abides for
ever, when that shall be utterly blown away.

Examine all the Actions and Designs of Men of whatever Nature and great
Reputation they may bear in the World; though many are long in compassing, yet
the several intermedial Acts pass away like the trace of a Cloud. When the end
is obtained, it is little, unsatisfactory and perishing; and at length as they
might have been put in mind by so many little Deaths foregoing, Death comes
indeed, and there is an utter end of all they have done, which avails nothing
at all. But the business of Religion all the Life long is Firm and Steadfast,
Real and Constant, there is a sensible growth in Grace and Knowledge, a renewal
of the inward Man day by day, a building up in our most holy Faith, a laying in
a Foundation against the time to come by good Works; And at last it ends in
Peace according as the Scriptures speak, which being found true, is an earnest
and assurance that it is finished in Glory. I humbly conceive, God therefore
put such a vain and transitory Nature in whatever is here below, that Man might
the more lay hold on this substantial and enduring thing. For who knows what
is good for Man in this life all the days of his vain Life, which he spends
as a shadow? Eccles. 6. 12. Nothing but the fear of God and keeping his
Commandments, as he concludes the whole, Eccles. 12. 13. What is before us, is
the principal hindrance to this great and only end. We have another divine
Writer speaking on this wise, Love not the World, neither the things that are
in the World, 1 John 2. 15. One Reason of mighty force and cogency is added,
verse 17. The World passes away and the Lust thereof, but he that does the
Will of God abides for ever. All our Life from Infancy and Childhood to the
present day, whether in Manhood or Old Age, to Forty, Fifty or Sixty Years is
but as yesterday. Of the things heretofore done unless relating to our Immortal
continuing part, Nothing survives but a saint remembrance; Many more are
forgotten as if they were not done at all. For the time past of our Life may
suffice us to have wrought the will of the Gentiles when we walked in
Lasciviousness, Lusts, Exc^ss of Wine, Revellings, Banquetings, 1 Pet. 4. 3.
Call to mind all the Enjoyments you ever had, and what does result out of them
at this instant? You are not desired to make the Reflection in Sickness or on a
Deathbed, but even now in the day of Health and Fruition. Are they not the
very same, as if never perceived or had? Thou can think upon such a day that
was Past in Joviality and Merriment, and another which went away in vexation
and dullness: Compare them both now, And what advantage has the one over the
other? There is no difference of Happiness or Misery as to the past

God has so ordained, that according as we spend these days of Vanity in his
Service and Obedience; or if in the neglect thereof, so there abides an
eternity of Pleasure or Pain. And therefore it must be the greatest Wisdom to
improve them to the utmost for attaining the Eternal Good, to lay hold of every
opportunity for Well-doing, to do all things in the first place to secure the
principal end, and then to husband every moment, to continue in all Duty, to
abound in every Virtue and good Work, that we may be found accepted of him who
Rewards every Man according to his Deeds. It is an exceeding satisfaction to
look back upon well spent Time, when some things have been done rightly
heretofore, he is for securing the present, and has a joyful Hope and
Expectation further on. Whatever trou^le and weariness is in the Christian
course, those Temptations and Trials, the evil usage and inconveniences from
the World, all these go off, making a way for a greater Reward. But call to
remembrance the former days in which ye endured a great fight of Afflictions;
Think upon those Reproaches, Hard^hips and Difficulties you have suffered; the
irksomeness of them is past, the pain is gone, but still God will not forget
them: for your denial of Pleasures, Profits and Honors, it is now the same as
if you had catched at them all. In keeping the Commandments there is great
Reward, Psalm. 19. 11. There was a concomitant good and satisfaction which you
had; for the inconvenience or disquiet occasioned not through them, but the
Devil, your own Corruption, or this wicked World, (God suffering it so to be to
keep his Servants here in Trial and Warfare) that also is over and gone, and
appears to be the like as if you had endured none, or Pleasure instead thereof;
but further on is a day of Recompense which will make amends for all.

The Ungodly are not so, Psalm. 1. 4. They are for the Pleasures of Sin for a
Season, for all the profits of Obedience and Transgression; as sure as Gods
word is true, there does belong to them an Eternity of Sorrow and Repentance:
an Hundred Years pain is a sad requital for the joy of a Minute. But take them
whilst their day of Rejoicing lasts, as to the past the poorest Beggar is as
Happy as they, all the pleasure of their whole Life being no more then last
nights Dream. It is finished, and an end put to it hitherto; all the pretended
good vanishes away immediately with the several Acts. They dare not call to
remembrance for Anguish of mind and sad Sighing, they are more afraid to
consider further on. They desire to live over their time again, not that they
did find it altogether so pleasant, but to be further off from what is behind;
this wish is as fruitless, as it is tormenting. The longer they continue to
follow after sinful Pleasures and Profits, They Treasure up Wrath against the
day of VVratb, and Revelation of the Righteous Judgment of God, Romans 2. 5. Now
consider this ye that forget God, least I tear you in pieces, and there is none
to deliver, Psalm. 50. 22. Let the time hitherto suffice to have Sinned and
Disobeyed your Maker; But do so no more, enter upon another Course of Life,
walk contrary to the former. In that vast difference of the Actions of Men as
to Obedience and Transgression, the Convenience and inconveniency, the Pleasure
and Pain pass away with the very Acts; but the Good and Evil, the Commendation
or Guilt, the Reward or Punishment they remain.

When things in this Place are done and over, they are exactly the same as if
they had never been at all; and so is the nature of whatever is measured in
Time, but Gods Works are still worthy of himself. For behold I Create new
Heavens and a new Earth: and the former shall not be remembr^d, nor come into
mind, Isa. 65. 17. They shall be much more glorious, substantial and enduring.
We that are Creatures of a short Time here on Earth, 2 Cor. 3. 10, 11.
shall also with the Transfiguration of the whole be advanced, and made capable
of being for ever. When things are first done in a lesser degree in order to a
greater; When they are carried from Imperfection to Perfection; When they are
launched out from Time to Eternity, th^s raises the greatest Admiration of the
Wisdom of the Agent, O Lord how great are thy Works? thy Thoughts are very
deep, Psalm. 92. 5. I know that whatever God does, it shall be for ever, nothing
can be put to it, nor any thing taken from it, and God does it that Men should
fear before him, Eccles. 3. 14. There is no annihilation in things without
Life, so there may be no utter end in things with Life. We have no express
Revelation that Beasts, Birds and Creeping things do Absolutely and Eternally
Perish. And as there is a strong desire in us of being for ever, so the same
instinct may be there ingrafted. How know we, but God to manifest his own Glory
and Goodness may in the great Renovation of all things, raise them up also to
an higher state answerable to that they had here? See and Consider well of
Psalm. 104. 29, 30, 31.

We see things come into Being, which before were not all; so to us they seem
to cease again, and just the same as if they had never been. Such is Man
himself, whose Resurrection we do not behold as yet, but it is made known to us
from God that it will be; and observing the like in Nature and even our Reason
inferring the same, which bears a lesser Testimony unto Faith, that all things
indeed are so. Time and Motion do now divide the World, and this tends unto,
and as it were shows the Eternal Rest.

Of all the Revolutions of the Sun over our Head we enjoy nothing but the
present. Thoughts ma^^ run backwards or forwards, but the impression of them
now a^fects; and so it is more of things of sense, they Delight or Torment only
whilst had or suffered. The present soon passes into the condition of past.
Like Water that runs apace, the Streams are gone whilst seen, others succeed
which are just looked on. One thing is catched at, and the other drops away;
and so the one part perishes, whilst the other is had. There is no Time like
the present, and yet it is the least of all; for compare it ^o what has been,
and shall be, and it is but a Moment to Years and Ages. It is short, but the
tediousness thereof most Afflicts. Those Pastimes which are said to make the
Time pass away, do it no otherwise then by taking away the Thoughts thereof. So
it is in Business. Time in it self always passes with a certain and equal
space, but idleness makes most to think thereon, and so it seems to delay.
Which shows how Man's Nature is designed for Action, and abhors Misery; for he
is Tormented with the tediousness of Time, wishing that would have away, when
he is free from the one and oppressed with the other. Which prompts him to his
right end, and to that he is further quickened by Consideration of the
Threatenings; for if the least evil is so irksome and grievous when it is now
light for a moment, yet that is desired to pass away, or the removal thereof;
much more should he endeavor to avoid the exceeding and eternal Misery. When
our mind is restless and uneasy, it is a sign that we are not about our proper
Business, not in the right way, nor going to that place where all are called
and invited. But when our Spirit is thoroughly pleased and satisfied, when we
can prove our selves and rejoice in our own work, then things are as they
should be. There is a natural and strong Inclination in the Soul to be Happy,
she is for doing those things which tend to that, and is vexed at what is
contrary or hinders. Commune with your own Heart upon your Bed, and be still,
Psalm. 4. 4. Enter a little upon Retirement, and get free from the Disturbance
of outward things, and then conclude what is to be done. The shortness and
determination of all things of this World, does manifest that they are not the
proper end of Man; they either go away from him, or he from them. And then what
prudence is it to be still doing which profits but little at the very instant,
and nothing at all afterward, which thrust out greater concerns, that are now
to be begun and to remain for ever?

God now Commands all Men every where to Repent, Acts 17. 30. The Language of
Canaan, like the Author thereof, runs in the present Tence, which though it may
be understood of this Life, this being the same to the days of Eternity, a^
this Minute to all our Time here; Yet seeing we live in this point only,
Whosoever does the Work of God, does it at the present Time; for whatever we do
is present and just before us. And therefore it is a foolish delay and excuse
with which the Devil deceives reasonable Creatures, who ca^e not to do a thing
now, but hereafter. Whereas if they are against it only upon the account of its
being present and would put it off, they might know; Either the future
opportunity will be, or not; if the first, then it will be also present with
more disadvantages and difficulties; if not, then they Perish and are Miserable
for ever. So much of their Life is already slipped from them: Such opportunities
have been lost of receiving a greater Reward which are gone irrecoverably in
vain and useless things. Again he limiteth a certain day, saying in David, To
day after so long a time, as it is said, To day if ye will hear his Voice,
harden not your Hearts, Heb. 4. 7. Then they are to bring forth Fruits meet for
Repentance, to grow in Grace and Knowledge, to continue in all Obedience, and
be Watchful that he in no wise offend the i^finite God. They may seek out and
embrace all occasions of doing Good, and be ready to the performance of it.
Forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching forth unto those things
which are before, Phil. 3. 13 Unto which Promise our twelve Tribes, instantly
serving God day and night, hope to come, Acts 26. 7. The Vanity and
Transitoriness of our condition in this World, may be somewhat taken of by real
and enduring Actions. The Solicitations to Evil may be more easily avoided,
because they are momentary and sudden. Thou, O Man, art made for greater
things, Thou art passing toward an Eternal Happiness, Have nothing to do with
sinful Divertisments, Dearly beloved I beseech you as Strangers and Pilgrims,
abstain from fleshly Lusts which war against the Soul, 1 Pet. 2. 11. The
Pleasure ^oon after is the same as if never had, and i^ would have hindered in
the Good Wa^. Here is the Christian Life, this is to make use of the present
Time: Then you may with Comfort and no Sorrow think how it hastes away. We
must unavoida^ly lie down under the Laws of Mortality. Whosoever does these things
is not troubled about that, but though it shall be placed in the Dust, still he
lifts up his Head that his Redemption draws nigh. Our s^lves also which have
the first Fruits of the Spirit, even we our selves groan within our selves,
waiting for the Adoption, to wit, the R^demption of our Body, Romans 8. 23. We
are not yet come to our Rest, nothing here does truly satisfy, but what comes
from above; the same thing returns over so often that we are even weary of it.
We are confident, I say and willing rather to be absent from the Body and to be
present with the Lord. Wherefore we labor that whether present or absent, we
may be accepted of him, 2 Cor. 5. 9. Resolving still to do our Duty. Whether
God has more for us to do, or to make us more desirous of Him and his Kingdom,
or to prove us longer, or to exercise our Patience, after we have done his Will
we may be assured he has wise and good Reasons for our tarrying here a little
longer. We ought to be quiet and thankful, not knowing how soon we may be
removed hence, our Warfare accomplished, and our Sin pardoned. The particular
Season is not for us to know, it being Gods Attribute of seeing things to come,
as he manifests by so many Disappointments of our own fore-casts. We are to
keep within our boun^s of Creatures, to see no further then he has ordained.
Not to reckon upon a longer Time of stay then we are certain of, which is not
one Moment longer then we have and do now live. Did we thoroughly consider by
how slender Threads Life is tied, which may be broken from Casualty without or
Disorder within; but One holds our Soul in Life under whose good Providence we
live; So we are satisfied, but not confident. Did we again reflect that he can
stir up a Disease from within, (there is no n^ed of pouring down Judgments upon
us, as he did upon the Cities of the Plain) he may suffer such an evil Accident
to befall us, or to be Consumed in our own Folly, we would tremble and fear to
do Wickedly against him: We should not dare lift up our selves against the Lord
of Heaven, the God in whose hand our Breath is, Dan. 5. 33.

It is a vain and foolish Presumption to Sin yet more, because he counts of so
much Time to live, being Young, Lusty and Healthful; or to be puffed up with
present Enjoyments, for they shall continue so long. But admit God should
suffer the Light to burn clear out, though he can extinguish it in the mean
while whenever he will, yet all will be wa^ted out: If they make these
outward things an occasion to forget God, or behave themselves contemptuously
toward him, and he should be pleased to permit thereof; What he says by his
Prophet is true, The things that I have given them, shall pass away from them,
Jer. 8. 13. The fancied good days will be all vanished and gone, as the past
have been already: That can be no Happiness which hatb an end. Nor whatever the
Sensual Worldly minded think, can there be any in departing from the Lord. We
may in general judge thus much of our Time to come in this World, by remembering
what has been already with us, or happens to others of such years, Condition,
and Circumstances; it may be somewhat like with us, for there is no great
variety in the things of this World: we have Seen, Heard or Read the like
fulfilled in our Brethren. As the past has, the present does, the future will
pass away in the same manner till the last Hour comes and shuts up all; as this
does all the past Time of my Life in which I am Writing this. An end will come.
But this I say Brethren, The Time is short, it remains that both they that
have Wives be as though they had none, and they that Weep as though they Wept
not, and they that Rejoice as though they Rejoiced not, and they that Buy as
though they Possessed not. And they that Use this World as not Abusing it, for
the Fashion of this World passes away, 1 Cor. 7. 29, 30, 31.

CHAP. XVI.
Of COURAGE.

TO bring people out of the wrong and mistaken Apprehension of things, to help
somewhat toward their Good, it will be necessary to explain what Courage is,
and how it promotes their Happiness. Many excellent things have we heard of
this Virtue, but still as to the particular nature thereof most are ignorant,
Extolling they know not what, they know not wherefore. Neither shall the due
estimation thereof be lessened, so it be justly stated as it is for the
security and well-being of Mankind; for even this Temptation the Destroyer
makes use of to ensnare and beguile Souls unto himself. They are taken with
nothing so much as what looks great, To despise Evil and laugh at Fear, not to
value their own Lives, to run on with a certain blindness and hurry toward the
land of Darkness. Not to regard the worst things that befall the Sons of Men,
or threaten afar off; all this he has gotten to pass for Courage and
Magnanimity in the World. And Thousands deluded with this false Imagination of
things come to dye as Fools. They did not mind the things that were told them,
as a Man is Cheated of himself, so are they who so pass through this World, as
if certainly there was an end of them and no more. Their doings turn upon this
Point, Whether there be an Immortality and Resurrection. Which themselves do
not absolutely disbelieve, but not examine nor consider of. What vast
Multitudes have been cut off before their Time, by Engaging themselves in
unnecessary Wars, Duels, Reveng^, and many more by the murdering Sins of
Gluttony, Drunkenness and uncleanness. All these make a show of Courage. Tush
they are not afraid of Death, or what may be afterward. They would not seem
concerned for these things. This their way is esteemed Gallantry of Spirit, a
Noble Resolution, a Worthy Temper: But what if upon the strict scrutiny it
should appear to be Folly and Madness? strip them of their Armor and
Habiliments of War, look underneath, and we shall see a dull inconsiderate Soul
under the Vizour of Courage.

That properly consists in the middle between Fear and Boldness, for it is
Miserable and foolish to fear where no Fear is, it is often an hindrance and
keeps off from obtaining Good, and therefore true Resolution drives away all
this; so on the other hand, to thrust ones self upon Evils is mere rashness,
for it proceeds from Ignorance and Inconsideration of them, and that is an
insensible Boldness, like the Horse they ride on to rush into the Battle; Or if
they have a little foresight, and will dare on through Pride of Heart, this is
Folly. In every thing a Wise Man takes in Hand, He first debates, Whether the
Good he shall gain, will be greater and weigh down the Evil he shall subject
himself unto? Whether the talking Breath of others which perhaps he hears not,
or if he does, would but slightly affect him, yet this will not make amends for
sensible and lasting Pain. Or if he goes further to give up his Life, Is it
prudence by having not made preparation before (as commonly such is the case of
those we speak of) to plunge themselves into that dreadful uncertainty of the
other World for a light and short Commendation in this? and here they will be
forgotten, but their Souls will be still mindful, and it may be with Anguish
Condemn them there, for what they sought to be applanded in this.

This Argument is to be applied to those who erect wrong Principles of Action,
to prevent Men's making themselves Miserable; but when they are set aright as in
Obedience to God, or comprehended under that, in Duty to the King, this same
will turn on the other side; for there the promised and assured Good is much
greater then the Evil exposed unto, as may be surther showed anon. If there may
be less Lie and more Truth, that reasonable Creatures may not be deceived with
a Shadow and Appearance only, but lay hold of the real Happiness: That
foregoing the false, they may learn the true Courage. Unless it be guided by
Wisdom it brings no Good, but Harm unto Men. Some Imagine these stand in
opposition; A Wise Man is seldom Courageous, for he quickly perceives the
danger, and thence^useth means to prevent or not to expose, which is contrary
to what is commonly called and esteemed Courage.

But if we consider that Establishment and Disposal of things God has fixed,
how they are exactly ^itted for this Life of Trial and future Reward, there is
a Wise and Wonderful agreement and connection of them all. Pleasure and Pain are
the two Hinges on which all our Actions turn. God, Whose Thoughts are not as
our Thoughts, takes a contrary method to be glorified in his Creatures, by
requiring them to go against what they are commonly inclined unto. His
Commandments are made up of Negative and Positive, what he forbids, and what he
enjoins: In the first is a semblance of Pleasure, and that is to be resisted;
in the other is a show of Irksomness and Evil, which is to be chosen and got
over. Here is the exercise of our Courage, for it is necessary to the keeping
of the Commandments. Be ye therefore very Courageous to keep and to do all that
is written in the Law of Moses, that ye turn not aside therefrom to the right
hand or to the left, Josh. 23. 6. ^o of whatever is Commanded by Christ in his
Gospel; Who has further manifested an exceeding Reward and precious Promises,
which shall be certainly fulfilled. These things indeed are not seen, and
therefore the Worldly Man knows them not, but they stand upon the same Truth
as all Religion does. It is evident there are desires and faculties in us which
reach further, and are capable to seek after greater things then the greatest
here; there are vast powers of Soul both to will and to do, and there is
somewhat provided answerable for them, they were never put in to no purpose.
All those Generous and Honest Actions in resisting of Evil and following Good,
are more then laboring for the Wind. An empty short applause, which vanishes
with the Breath that gives it being, is not a sufficient compensation from
them. Most commonly they have not so much as this, for indeed the Fashionable
Piety, and Pharisaical Holiness may be highly esteemed amongst Men; but the
sincere Acts of Goodness, that Zeal for God and Approbation of ones self unto
him only, the opposing Corruption, meet with Dishonor, Hatred and evil Report
from the World; so the more excellent things have no present Encouragement or
visible Benefit, and there is need of much Resolution to perform them: for the
Difficulties and disadvantages are seen and felt, but the Crown is afar of,
above the Clouds, and not to be seen with Mortal Eye, Faith makes it as certain
as if seen, a noble stedfastness of mind that will not be shaken nor terrified
with present Hardship and Inconveniences, which is to be learnt by Diligence
and Exerting it self in lesser Acts before, puts upon doing of those things
which are necessary to the obtaining thereof. Set your Heart to this, that all
Gods Revelation is true; and then be steadfast, immovable in doing thereafter.
Add to your Faith Virtue (the Original Word properly signifies Courage) and to
Virtue Knowledge, 2 Pet. 1. 5, 6. Implying, that a real Persuasion that these
things are so, an unshaken Resolution of Soul, which is not afraid of any
amazement, and goes not rashly on but understands what he does, this makes up
the Christian Courage: Which differs from that according to the World, for this
is after a little Temporal Good, the other in pursuit after a Great and Eternal
one. The utmost here is uncertain, for many labor after what they do not
receive, and if they do, it signifies not much when had and fades away; But to
us he is Faithful that promises, if we indeed strive and perform the
Conditions. It is worthy of our Thoughts being that we have not here, a full
satisfaction which shall not be taken from us, nor we from that. Be thou
Faithful unto Death, and I will give thee a Crown of Life. It is reserved in
the Heavens for us, The Inhabitants of the Earth see the outside, they die and
go away; Many of them (would God they were more) perform the Work he requires
of them; we all depart hence and shall find whether he will fulfill his
Promises, for which now we have his Word and his Oath, Two immutable things in
which it is impossible for God to lie. Ce^^^ ^^ it is, that those several
designs of Pleasure, Riches and Honor are little, unsatisfactory, pass away
and come to an utter end. When our selves act upon probable, yea, assured great
and rational Principles; Others have nothing but the multitude and common
Practice to Recommend them: How then comes that wide difference of the Actions
of Mankind? so many are led away by the worse, as manifestly appears by the
least Reason and Discourse; and themselves at length find by sad and too late
Experience. The Apostle in the forementioned Place after summing up the
Christian Graces, says, But he that lacks these things is blind, and cannot
see afar of, 2 Pet. 1. 9. He is wholly taken up with present and sensible
things, which fasten his Eyes down to the Earth and hinder looking up; whereas
they were made to look upwards all one as downwards, to see afar off as near at
Hand: His understanding was given to apprehend things to come, and make
reflections upon the past, to conceive and know things proper for her; To seek
after and work out our true Happiness, not only to mind perishing and trivial
Conveniences; to propose and follow after an end which is worthy, and not
still to be deluded with the vain Fancies and Opinions of the People. There is
nothing which is seen and commonly practiced among Men, but may be made an
Argument for God and Religion. Himself in the wise ordering of things has been
pleased to Establish it so, that Men might have greater Motives and Exhortation
to come unto him, and be left more inexcusable if they do not.

As for those of a Generous temper, who are acted by a sense of Honor, who
pretend unto Courage and Greatness of Spirit, in their proposed ends they rub
through Difficulties, and go on still: If we examine them in their very nature
upon what grounds of Probability they are undertaken; The^e are long in
expectation, they do many things for what is a voice and nothing else; or a
Rattle which they know not how soon may be taken from them, or they from that;
or those delectable things which expire like Lightning, or the dim light of a
Candle, which gives a faint Refreshment but wearisome, which only provides
against a continual Darkness of Soul, and of all these there must be an
absolute Deprivation for evermore. There cannot be used too ^lighting
Comparisons to manifest how short these things come of the true Happiness of
Man, which also are of his own Invention and going after: But if he would do
the same for what God has set before him, in compliance with the Divine Will
what others do out of their own; use the same Constancy, and be contented to
live by Faith and Hope, as they do by Expectation; not sink under a little
doubting as they go on notwithstanding their many Disappointments, then he may
accomplish his whole Warfare on Earth. In all the steps of his Christian Course
let him be fixed and taken up with that of the Psalmist, Wait on the Lord, be
of Good Courage, and he shall strengthen ^bine Heart: Wait I say on the Lord,
Psalm. 27. 14. There is much need of it in performing those several Acts of
Duty, in resisting the Allurements of sensual Pleasure and the assaults of
Evil, To choose Labor and what is irksome to Flesh and Blood, To take up the
Cross, suffering Reproach and Persecution, to be subject unto hatred and
solitariness, To incur the Displeasure and Evil entreaties of Men, rather then
be carried away by them in Sinful Complyances, To constantly speak out the
Truth, and thereby to draw on Hatred, ill will, lessening of Reputation; all
which might be declined by little Acts of Excuse and Disobedience. Which he
will not admit of who is fully resolved to please God in all things. There are
many things at this day which will sufficiently exercise Courage to go through
with and overcome. When his Good shall be evil spoken of, his fixed purposes
not to offend shall be called Humor, what are the effects of Faith and Love
shall be reputed Ignorance; To Arm our selves against all hard Speeches, Not to
be afraid of the Faces and Frowns of Men, not to be shaken with the Blast of
the terrible Ones, to adhere universally unto the Will of God rather then do
what others would have, and further not to love their Lives unto Death,
entertaining it in the most terrible and afflicting manner, and many other
instances might be named, whereby Holy Men have, and do act Valiantly; Not to
be frightened, but willingly sustain Evil and Hardship. To do worthily for God
and his Glory, against all oppositions of the World and powers of Darkness:
yea, the several Acts of the Christian Life are more properly Courage, then is
to be found in those generous Actions according to the estimation of the World.
A wise Man in what he takes in hand proposes what good will come of it: If it
seems uncouth and contrary to his nature, yet the Prospect of Good shall back
him on. Now he that does not think the Recompense of Reward from God is as
High, Excellent and Worthy to be sought after as a little Honor, Wordly Pelf
or Rest, it is because he does not understand or not believe it. There is no
good even here to be had without Trouble or Labor, so it is in the things of
God. There must be a Striving, working out our Salvation, giving Diligence,
which is more unpleasant and awkward to the Flesh, than secular designs and
enterprises. Yet this is not esteemed fortitude amongst Men, but on the
contrary, lessened and despised. It is no matter what they think, but what God
will judge at last; their Opinion will do none, or a very slight Good, but his
approbation is Life and Happiness. Things shall be at length naked and opened,
they shall be thoroughly dissected and laid before the view of all, and then
they will appear contrary to what they do now. The secrets of all Hearts shall
be made known, then private judgments shall be discovered against what they
seem now outwardly to commend, The close Acts of the mind shall be brought to
light, That Hatred and Averseness to God shall be manifested, which was the
cause of their Contempt, Sullen Silence or speaking evil of the things
pertaining to him. That wilful and affected Ignorance, that partial knowledge
of considering one side, and obstinacy not to go further, that self-Conviction
which was stifled shall break forth, and then will appear another face of
things What shall at last be fully disclosed, would somewhat even now, if Men
would suffer a particular Examination out of the Word of God, the very Truth
and Reason of things. Christianity will evidence it self to be greater Courage,
then what pasleth for it in the judgment of the World. Which is sign of the
more resolute Spirit, that both fore-sees and considers the Evil and yet
subjects it self thereto upon assured and beneficial grounds as did the
Martyrs, Confessors and godly Sufferers; or those who go on with a certain
Violence, without Knowledge and Consideration, as do others? Who can lay down
their Lives with a deliberate choice, retaining their perfect Reason and Sense
or those in a sudden Passion and heat of Blood, who are pushed on by Malice
(like a spurred Horse leaping down a Precipice) or foolish pride, who make
themselves half Drunk and then go on not knowing what they do. But consider all
the circumstances of the Christians Actings and Sufferings, and his Courage
will be found more Real and Fminent. Through God he does Valiantly, Psalm. 60.
12. Whose Grace is sufficient and inspires him with an Heart to overcome all
difficulty and danger.

Now that according to the World if strictly surveyed will be reduced very low,
for abstract that Disposition of Children and Madmen, who are not sensible of
the danger, and therefore dare rush upon any thing; If they be neither Fools
nor Blind, as not to know nor see any thing; If their Souls be not rendered
Earthy through Sensuality, and so fear not; If they are not quite stupefied
when the Heart is become like the nether Millstone, which does not tremble
because it has no sense; If they have no need of Wine nor strong Liquors to
support. If all Disguise and Hypocrisy could be discovered, and their
concealed Fears seen when big words make a show of the contrary, and are used
as an Artifice to hide them: Take away from them all Gutward Advantages and
Helps, and they will be as other Men; keep them from the opium of continual and
immoderate Eating, let them renounce the assistance of strong Drink, observing
only the just rules of Temperance. And then see, whether their Courage will not
grow faint and languish. Were that predominant thing of Pride rooted out, which
makes them endeavor to stifle their Fears: Then they would be brought back to
the common nature of Mankind, which they would lift up themselves above by the
aid of the aforesaid things. We see evidently when these fail, they are the
same as others. As in Sickness or in a sober approach of Death, but more
certainly when their Souls are stripped naked and sent into the other World, no
mention is made of their Courage in that place, And the mighty Men's Hearts in
Moab at that day shall be as the Heart of a Woman in her Pangs, Jer. 48. 41.
Men are generally the same, There may be some little degrees of Difference, yet
they are all but Flesh still. The Lord is the Maker of them all; He has not
made some to be Men and some to be Gods, some with Fear and some without; but
this Plant is implanted into all, And ordered so, that it may be improved or
abused, corrected or prevaricated, besitting this Life of Trial. But the Wicked
strive against God, they would expel that out which he has placed in, which
they cannot, but do as fa^ as lies in them; for what they cannot utterly
extinguish, they endeavor to hide and stifle. Sanctify the Lord of Hosts
himself and let him be your Fear, and let him be your Dread, Isa. 8. 13. and to
this end all Fear was put into Men: But if they do not fear him, this is not
their Courage, but Ignorance and Forgetfulness of whom they see not. And then
for their making a show not to value Death, No more do Sheep going to the
Slaughter; for these Men just know they shall die, yet mind no more what shall
become of them afterward, then those dumb Creatures passing on the Road do
think of what we know shall befall them. Can those Reasonable Souls indeed rush
into the other World, who cannot hear a true report thereof in an aerie sound?
Can they indeed step forth upon the dark Mountains, who cannot see a Map
thereof in Paper and Ink? They foolishly build up their Confidences, and in
common Vogue would pass for Men of Valor, because they can slight and contemn
Religion. But stand to it, for you are Challenged into the Field, and see
whether you do not betray Cowardice herein? What if it should be said, You that
can hear Drums and Trumpets, the roaring of Canons; yet the voice of God you
cannot endure to hear, which is full of Majesty and shakes your Hearts. When
he Thundreth in the Air, it will make them quiet and still; but when he
speaks from Heaven, when he sends his Waters through a Pipe, or gives life
to a Psalm. 8. 2.
dead Letter, this you have not Courage enough to receive or read. You set at
naught and despise his Ordinances when they are not rightly managed: You can
smile at the flat and insipid discourses of Ignorant and Unfaithful Teachers,
but not at those who both understand and do as they should. You that will not
be out-Hectored, yet ye are frightened with Words, a sure proof that they are
not vain, but both true and significative. You that do not value Sword nor
Spears, yet dare not contest with the Rod of his Mouth, Isa. 11. 4. What is
lighter then that? but when God is pleased to use the meanest thing, it can
make the stoutest Oak of Bashan tremble like the Leaves of the Forest. Gather
your selves O ye Mighty, and try to show your Courage, which if you can, you
also will; for the great Importance and Necessity will press you forward if you
have so much power to get over all this. Can you sit for a while, and tremble
under Gods Word? Will you admit of a second hearing, and not be frightened with
Felix to put it off to a more convenient season? Are you able to stand before
him who Fights with the Sword of his Mouth? who Wounds that he may Heal, who
Condemns that he may Justify, who as the Prophet speaks, Slays the Wicked,
casting them down that they do not come again; but for those who are not so
fearful to run away, as Christ would have none to be so, he will not show
himself always thus terrible to them. Stand but the first Shock, and then you
are Men. It is only in order to bring you unto Conviction, to be Humbled under
the mighty Hand of God, and then this Dreadfulness will go off, that you may
serve him with Reverence and godly Fear. It Is Pusillanimity and a more
exceeding Fearfulness that keeps Men off, even in those who would be thought to
have the contrary; for could they attend to the Word of Exhortation, bear for a
while a little Irksomeness and Sorrow; Had they Resolution to do some things
contrary to corrupt nature, and undergo a little hardship in the Service of
God, as others do for their Prince; If they would suffer a short dullness of
Spirit as they go on through Fears and Cares for their earthly Sovereign; then
the blessed Work would begin, continuing in Obedience and Godliness. And
Courage would carry them through all the Stages of the Christian Li^e. It is as
well employed this way as to get Honor, a great Name, and advance his Fortune.
It is as valuable a thing, For the Righteous to be had in Everlasting
Remembrance, as to be slain in the Field, knocked down under the Walls of a
City, buried in the Rubbish, affording talk thereof for two or three days, and
so be utterly forgotten. The Inheritance incorruptible undefiled, God has
promised; that Honor which shall be to those that Honor him, do remain, when
all their Riches and Renown are expired and gone. If it is not so, let them
accuse us as False Witnesses, who from Gods Word and Spirit have testified of
these things. If they have fought the good Fight, and the Crown is not given
them, let Me be found one of the Imposers upon the World; let them suspend
their Censures and Frowns until then, and I cheerfully submit to the great
Event of all things.

Certain it is, the Courage according to the World comes to nothing, with all
the Castles Built in the Air, the fantastic Projects, those devices of Man's
Invention, the Rumors, Stirs and Commotion of Wars, that Domineering, being
Great and Terrible; all these are Bubbles of a little longer continuance, which
break and dissolve into nothing: Fenced Cities turn into ruinous Heaps, and
these in process of time are so changed, that they are not discernable from
common Earth, but by a small Hillock or Rising we know not what it means. Those
goodly Armies that once looked big and blustering, so stately and of large
extent; yet after the day of Slaughter they are thrown into a common pit, and
all their Carkases will not amount to so much as an ordinary pile of Faggots.
Their Name and Memorial is perished with them. As natural brute Beasts made to
be taken and destroyed, 2 Pet. 2. 12. Or rather worse, in that they go about
sowing Death till they fall themselves, a parallel of which cannot be found in
whatever lives upon the Earth besides. Who can refrain to burst forth into
Tears for the Folly and Misery of Mankind? that foregoing such excellent and
worthy Principles they should take up with base and destructive ones. God has
showed them a way how they should exert their Valor and Activity for noble and
assured ends, to take his Kingdom by Violence; All the mean Acts are as
reasonable and praise worthy as in Conquest of the Kingdoms of the Earth. When
they are called up to the Heaven of Heavens, which are so exceeding Great and
Eternal as may be seen by the outward Courts; yet they should scramble for a
few Mole-Hills, which are quickly overthrown and turned into Dust, or
themselves before. In the Christian Warfare there is no hating one another, all
are Contenders, and there is room enough in the Celestial Mansions for ten
Thousand times more then all the Inhabitants of the Earth; Yet here they
continue to Kill and Slay, not out of Necessity as we do Beasts for Food, but
to gratify Pride, Ambition and Revenge, to dispossess them who have more right
then themselves, to turn them out of the World, because they will not make way.
This is repu^ed Gallantry and Honor. A strange way to Immortality, as those of
old foolishly imagined to Butcher here; and by cutting off before the time, to
make Mortality more Mortal. What fancies does the Abaddon instill into Luct. de
falls. Relig.
Men? Lactantius observed of his times, and they now continue the same; That to
Kill or bring into Bondage free People, the more Men did Afflict, Spoil or
Murder, they would account themselves more Noble and Eminent: and being taken
with a show of vain Glory, put the name of Virtue to the greatest Wickedness.

This may be interpreted to weaken the Hands of the Men of War, Jer. 38. 4. But
it is only what is agreeable to the Laws of God and Truth, which set up the
Happiness of Mankind, as going back from them is Destruction and Misery. Reduce
all Men's Transactions and Affairs to their Good, that whatever makes for it,
may be followed; and what does not, may be taken away, for that tends to the
contrary. There is no indifferency in things; such as are said to do neither
good nor harm; for they do one or the other, either Save or Destroy. We know
who came on the first Errand: The Prince of Peace, whom God has raised up to
be a Prince and a Savior. So he is to all those who obey and entertain him.
But upon refusal of subjection to his Laws comes in the other of course, who
has his name, Apollyon. These two divide the World: The one has honest
meaning, and the excellency of Reason, which should still put it self forth.
Satan to keep up his Kingdom has all the Tricks, Devices, cunning Delusions to
befool poor Mankind, representing such glorious Conquests, such Fame and
Briskness; and secretly sets forth Religion as dull and regardless of any
thing, fit for little and narrow Souls, it emasculates the Spirit, making Men
fearful and despicable. The doubt lies, whose Affections are catried toward
the more Noble end. The one is for Heaven and Eternal things, the other for
Earthly and Temporal; The one for what comforts in Hope and Expectation, being
most satisfactory in the end; the other is concerning what breeds restlesness,
regret and disappointment. The one is for what has all safety and real good to
Men, the other has nothing but uncertainty and evil.

If Christianity were universally observed, there would be no Sword or Spear to
be seen throughout the World. There is no harm in this. But now it is only by
some, and not by others, thence do arise Wars and Fightings. Yet whatsoever
Kings will go according the direction of the Gospel, (as it is at their Peril
if they do not) must engage in no War at all but Defensive, or for Reparation
of great Injuries, and that all fair means used first. If it be possible as
much as lies in you, live Peaceably with all Men, Romans 12. 18. Some are such
Enemies, that when we speak to them thereof, they make them ready for Battle;
so they are to be brought over this way. Here our excellent Religion suffers
thereof for the Wickedness and Baseness of those, who have no Understanding,
and must be held in with Bit and Bridle, Psalm. 32. 8. And when they break out,
are to be tamed with Whip and Scourge. Those Primitive Christians who did Fight
under the Heathen Emperors, did altogether as Valiantly as others. We have
heard of several Armies of the Religious that have acted more worthily by the
Grace and Fear of God, without Drunkenness, Inconsideration and Unbelief, as
who have went upon these Principles. The Objection is concerning Fear of the
other World, but that is taken away; for any Man may by well-doing make the
Promises of God applicable to himself, and he is in a warrantable Calling as
John Baptist resolved: Seeing we must all die one time or another, it is as
good first or last, with the assurance of his favor unto whom all Flesh shall
come. This should make them more Courageous; for they are upon certain grounds.
But for those careless ones I admire how they can be Courageous unless
stupefied and made Blind, the ways heretosore mentioned; for they being subject
to evils from the World to Come, it is a marvelous Policy so to beguile that
they fall in before they took any care to prevent, or were thoroughly put in
mind of them. It must be Barbarous, and a siding with the Deceiver of Mankind,
to contrive on set purpose to keep them ignorant, and as they think sor the
better accompishment of a present Design to suffer so many to go into Eternal
Misery. Whereas if care be had to instruct them aright in the Knowledge and
Obedience of God, then they would have a well grounded Hope, and are 2 Samuel 10.
12. Isa. 28. 6.
under his Blessing and Protection, who is the Sovereign disposer of all events
of War. As Health is the greatest good to the natural Body, so is Peace to the
Public. It is better to have a constant Health, but when interrupted by
Sickness, then a proper Remedy is seasonable to restore. So in this World of
Sin and Confusion, it is better to prevent the mischievous effects at first;
but when they come forth they must be suppressed again, which may be closed up
and mollified with Ointment instead of the severer Remedies. It Is those corrupt
Principles of Evil within us that breed all the Disturbance throughout the
World; (which are not to be seen in Beasts, and we the more excellent Creatures
might have been without them also, but God is to be Glorified in our Trial and
Obedience) Now what takes off from the Malignity of them, What does Heal and
Recover, This does good to Mankind, which begins with the causes and removes
them, such are Ambition, Revenge, Covetousness and Oppression. As the direction
of Gods holy Word does all this.

Those are only against Religion and Reason, whose ways are condemned by it;
The chief Captains and mighty Men will smile at this Discourse, and say, It was
never well with the World since so much Arguing came in; why Evil and
Irregular Actions are for want of Prudence and due Knowledge; either not
thoroughly giving Prove. 28. 2.
way to it, or then not being guided thereby. If Sin and Passion did bear all
the sway, the compass of the whole Earth would be a larger Bedlam; And they
that dwell therein must be Chained up in several Cells, or there would be no
living amongst Men. Even those Nations which know not God have some dictates of
the natural Law concerning Good and Evil, and also Reason, by which they frame
Rules and Orders of Government; Otherwise it were not possible for any Kingdom
or Community to stand. Counsel is mine and sound Wisdom, I am Understanding, I
have Strength, By me Kings Reign and Princes decree Justice. By me Princes
Rule, and N^bles, even all the Judges of the Earth, Prove. 8. 14, 15, 16. The
lesser Degrees are necessary; much more is an higher improvement beneficial to
Mankind. Which advances further then to carry on the Course of the World, or to
secure Men in their respective Rights and Possessions: But it leads them up to
the Knowledge and Favor of God, raises their Apprehensions from little vain
Temporal things, to those which are Great, Eternal and Perfect, and at last
in^tates them therewith. Which sets before them things altogether worthy of
Humane Nature, To climb up the Everlasting Hills, To Fight with those three
Legions of Enemies, the World, the Flesh and the Devil, To March through
Difficulties and Oppositions, To be laden with Spoils and get ground, all
these are fit exercises for a Man. It is said, Nothing is hard for him, but he
dares break through all things. Then in this show thy Honor and Renown, Gird
thy Sword upon thy Thigh, O most Mighty; Be not afraid nor discouraged, thou
have the Grace of God for assistance, and as long as thou put forth thy
strength together with that, thou will go on Prosperously and Victoriously.

But how is all this Hardship reconcilable with present Happiness? Very well,
and he that knows it not, either does not consider, or not understand the
nature of things: We were purposely made to over come difficult things; We love
to have some Opposition, and Rejoice to get over it. It is more satisfaction to
resist then to yield unto a soft Temptation, for to that succeeds Repentance
and Vexation; but for what looks uncouth and frightful, yet resolutely to
grapple therewith, and subdue it, there follows a Blessed Approbation and
Complacency of Soul. In all Acts of Temptation, when it is complied with, and
thoroughly put forth, it is always found true, Greater is he that is in you,
then he that is in the World. And this holds firm throughout the several steps
of our Christian Warfare, but when it is all accomplished at last, there is
such abundance of Comfort, that it may be better conceived then can be
expressed. That pleasent looking back upon past Labors, that sweet Reflection
on what he has done and suffered in the Service of God, the Pain and
Irksomeness is over: the more has been undergone, there arises a greater
perfume, making way for a greater Reward. The memory thereof is so delightful,
that if he were to lie down in the Grave and be no more for ever; yet it is
enough to have lived according to the Will of God, who will deal yet more
Bountifully. Tell me, O ye Sons of Men, that have loved Vanity and sought after
Leasing, that have Fought pitched Battles to get Fame and Honor, when you come
to stand upon the Confines of this World and the next, can you call to mind
with Joy and Comfort for what you have done? But ye Christian Soul^ can bear
witness to this thing, you that have set your selves against every Enemy, and
hated every false way, do not Repent what you have done. You are more pleased
with it, then if you had Conquered Kingdoms. You wish you had done better. You
have cleaved unto the Lord with full purpose of Heart, not terrified with your
Adversaries, Hypocrites and Unbelievers, who tried to have beat you off, the
Suggestions and Resistance of Satan and your own Flesh, yet by the help of God
you have passed through these Tents of Enemies, and in all have come of more
then Conqueror. What Triumph and Exaltation must this be just as the Soul is
slipped out of this place of conflict, and Presented before the Lord of Hosts,
the God of the Armies of israel, to receive his acceptance, and the
Congratulation of those who a little before had done the same things. O Blessed
day which opens into Immortality, where he will be always Praising and made
Happy for ever? How should this stir up others to do the same? the whole being
comprised in this, to believe and to do, The Apostle furnishes as to both in
two words, Add to your Faith Virtue, 2 Pet. 1. 5.

CHAP. XVII.
Of HUMILITY And PRIDE.

ALL useful Knowledge may be reduced to that of God and our selves; in what
Relation we stand toward him, what he does require of us, and what we are in
our very Nature. God takes a contrary Method to be Glorified in the Sons of Men
then according to the course of this World; for says he who knew and revealed
to us his Fathers Will, Whosoever shall Exalt himself shall be Abased, and he
that Humbles himself shall be Exalted, Mat. 23. 12. accordingly are fitted
those Commandments, which were given to Mankind to prove whether we will
observe them or not. Whether they will indeed cast down Imaginations and every
High thing that Exalts it self against the Knowledge of God? Whether they
will receive the Kingdom of God as little Children, Luke 18 17. And be
contented to remain so all their Life long; Not doing their own will, but the
Will of their heavenly Father: Or on the other Hand to see if they will be
their own Men, and follow their own Humor, disdaining to be in subjection unto
any. If they will aspire after those little Greatnesses the World presents them
withal; To be lifted up above their Brethren, and exalt themselves in their own
esteem as is possible for such Creatures to be. One may stand am^zed at the
Monstrousness and Absurdity of Pride, for a little mortal Being, who is like a
Frog in a vile Body, to style himself Lord of Lords, Commander of the Sun, Moon
and Stars, as Heathen and M^^ometan Kings have done. Even that Man of Sin, the
Son of Perdition, who opposes and exalts himself above all that is called
God, or that is Worshipped: for that he as God, s^^eth in the Temple of God,
showing himself that he is God, 2 These. 2. 3, 4. There have been those who have
fulfilled this Scripture, and have fooli^hly arrogated to themselves
Blasphemous Titles. And even Christians who would be like God in Greatness but
not in Knowledge, 1 Samuel 2. 3.
have taken upon them the communicable attributes, as Most Gracious, Most
Excellent, Most Mighty, which is expressed in so exalted a manner, that there
cannot be given greater in the like Words to God himself. However, this be the
Custom of the World, yet themselves being Subjects of the Great King of all the
Earth should not use the very same Title with him, as they will not suffer
their under Officers and Lieutenants to bear the same with themselves. Men of
Understanding may thus judge what is likely most to avail them, when God who is
jealous of his own Glory, will recompense every one according to his deeds.

How strange are the excesses and runnings out of Pride! The nature of Man does
not lie sluggish, for if it does not grow up the right way in Knowledge and
Obedience, it will shoot and sp^e^^ forth in Vain and Fantastical Principles.
If he does not walk H^mbly with his God, Mic. 6. 8. he will do Proudly against
him by Stubbornness, Contempt or Negligence. Whatever we are in the common
nature of Man, or however placed in those different Ranks in the World, yet
Humility requires to do any thing at his Command, to observe every title of our
Duty nevertheless, and also a right Carriage to our Brethren of poor and low
estate. We are required to do things not properly beneath or disgraceful to our
nature, for nothing is so in the most submissive Acts of Religion, but what
looks little and contemptible in the Eye of others; On the contrary, to despise
those things which are highly esteemed amongst Men; Not to affect or run
greedily after them, for this would be to give an implied preference to them
before the things of God.

Pride is an appearing above what one is in himself, and discovers it self in
Disobedience to God, and lifting up above the Brethren. It is set down in
Scripture by lifting up and exalting, 2 Chronicles. 26. 16. Jer. 48. 29. Jer. 49.
16. 1 Samuel 2. 3. Isa. 2. 11, 12. Isa. 13. 11. Isa. 14. 14. Ezekiel. 28. 2. Dan.
11. 36, ^7. 1 Cor. 4. 6, 7. 2 Cor. 12. 7. Romans 12. 3. A thinking himself above
what he ought, a being puffed up with what he has not, or setting too great a
value on what he has, or concluding them to be his own which he has received.
Whatever is contrary to that just true Knowledge and Esteem of himself, is
Pride. And this is not to be measured according to the opinion of others, but
the reality of things. Humility and Pride branch forth into two several
Principles of Action; Which is the more worthy and likely to tend unto
Happiness will be proper for present enquiry; and let us not judge by the
multitude of one side or fewness of the other, but from the Truth and Reason of
things.

Humility at first seems Sneaking and Contemptible; Which was not so much known
before Religion came into the World. But this has been said to unman us,
making us to stoop and press down to the Earth. Some think those Prostrations
and humble Gestures in Divine Service unbecoming the erected Stature of Man;
Neither is it for him to be curbed and restrained in his way. To fore-go those
great things of the World, and have a mean opinion of himself, as if he did not
understand or know; all these are not suitable with the lofty nature of Man.

Such are the first and sudden Apprehensions, but not a full and serious
Thought. It cannot be the least undervaluing for Man whose Breath is in his
Nostrils, within a little compass, to be subject unto him, whose Spirit fills
the World. It is meet and right that the Knees shall bow and bend to him, who
made them thus Psalm. 95. 6.
Flexible. It is the greatest Honor that can possibly be to Mankind, that so
Glorious a God does vouchsafe any relation to us: He is most worthy of our
Obedience and Service. Does any one ^efuse or set at naught to be the adopted
Son of a King, who yet is not so much to the Almighty, as a Toad to the
goodliest Personage on Earth? It is seemly for a Worm to lie prostrate before
the Lord and Governor of the World, to whom Angels and Archangels cover
themselves, and fall on their Faces. It *is reasonable to give up our will to
his Will; It was thy own will and power at first God having left it so, and he
is willingly obedient unto his Maker. What he has chosen is a Law of Liberty
and Excellency; the particular Acts are as worthy, and rather to be followed
then those of a Man's own Invention and Fancy. He is a Servant to God but none
else, neither the Devil, nor Lust, nor other Men; And therefore is more
Honorable then those who have them for their-Masters, as all have one or the
other. For his stupidity and narrowness of mind in not caring for the things of
this World, will the Men here of join lssue upon this Point, and try whose Soul
is most enlarged and has the more noble desires? The one seeks for the great
things of God and Eternity, the Glories of his Kingdom, that most perfect
exceeding and enduring Happiness, yea, every thing so vast and Wonderful, that
the Temptation to U^belief returns, They are too great to be true. But it is
easily beaten back again; for we may well judge of the Greatness of the things
which are not seen, by the Greatness of them which are seen. How we shall come
at them we may thus know, The same power who sent us hither, will convey us up;
and also the pure and holy Soul freed from Sin and Earth-Iiness, has such
Aspirings and Flyings up, that she would even now break out unless kept in by
these Chains of Flesh; but when the Angel shall come and they fall off, then
she immediately Acts 12. 7.
ascends toward those High and Blessed Mansions. Is this pressing down to the
Earth, or exalting up to Heaven? Who now willingly fall down, that they may
rise up again. Humble your selves in the sight of the Lord, and he shall lift
you up, Jam. 4. 10. They choose to be despised in honoring of him, that he
may. Honor them Humility is a great help in the several acts of Obedience, and
enables to resist Temptations. It renounces little and present things in order
to the future, which are so exceeding that it is not possible to utter. Who go
in the way to obtain that Eternal and not far distant Happiness, they have some
likewise in the mean while; said our Forerunner, the great Example of Humility,
Take my Y^ke upon you, and learn of me, for I am Meck and Lowly of Heart, and
ye shall find Rest to your Souls, Mat. 11. 29. That gives Peace and Quietness,
Contentment and Satisfaction, Moderates our desires as to Temporal things. The
humble Person acknowledges to have received every thing he has, and is far
from Glorying as if he had not received it, so likewise from Murmuring if not
given; for he can withhold his Hand, and who may find fault? There is not so
very much (God having been pleased thus to order it for wise and good ends) in
those Blessings of his left Hand; sufficient indeed to excite our Thankfulness,
but not to place our Happiness in; so neither to Fret or make our selves
Miserable for want of them. A lowly frame of mind brings Good and Comfort in
every state or condition, and hinders from all that Vexation which is
occasion^d through Pride. The Patient in Spirit is better then the Proud in
Spirit, Eccles. 7. 8.

When a Man does not seek for that Happiness which comes Of Pride
from God only, he will endeavor to build up one to himself, to Advance and
become as Great as he can, by all manner of means, without Respect had to the
Divine Commandments. And this either in the improvement of what he has
already, or looking out and laboring after more. There is a Consciousness of
his imperfection by Nature, how small and of no Reputation, How Mean and Poor a
Being he is, and a secret Vexation thereat; whereupon he is resolved to redress
this as much as lies in his power. And indeed if he would go in Gods Way, he
were to be commended herein; for he made us so low in order to Exaltation, that
by complying with his Grace we should be brought unto Glory, by following of
him we should ascend higher; but alas! we for sake him and will go in our own
way, according to our own thoughts. The reason of our mistake Psalm. 73, 5 6.
is, because there is no present and visible Increase in the one, whilst there
does seem to be in the other. But as our Lord said of those who did their
Religious Duties for the Glory of Men. Verily they have their Reward, Mat. 6.
2. So it holds true of all Sin, Lust, Stubbornness and Humor, and more
especially of all manner of Pride. It has the present Convenience and proposed
Good only, but no more, As here getting Honor and preventing Contempt, or such
like. Now if these do not amount to so much as the probable Good of the other
way, a wise Man knows what he has to do and choose. We are assured what is
the utmost of Pride or worldly Greatness in Men or things; and see whether they
are worthy to be compared with Angels, Saints or those Glorious things that are
spoken of thee, thou City of God; this will manifest who sets before him the
more Honorable end.

I have often admired what the Psalmist says, The Wicked through the Pride of
his Countenance will not seek after God, Psalm. 10. 4. When it is verified by
Experience at this day: Religion is a little contemptible thing, it is for the
lower sort of People to mind that, but some fancy themselves above it; Whereas
if they had but so much Wit and Reason as to make an Inference, they might
conclude, As sure as the Object thereof is R^al, (which is as certain as that
there is a World and any thing in it) and themselves cannot deny, but are such
Fools as not to understand, or not consider: So every thing is vast and
astonishing which relates to that God, with whom we have to do. His dimensions
may be seen by his Works. Heaven is my Throne, and the Earth is my Footstool;
he measures it with a Span, who holds the Waters in the hollow of his Hand,
fills all places and all things, from Everlasting to Everlasting. He does so
exceed Man's Apprehension, that to speak of him does lessen his Majesty and
Greatness.

But come to debate the Case ye Sons of Pride. Are not your ways little? your
great Company are but Men and Women, who also are sormed out of the Clay, Job
33. 6. Are not those Honorable Titles a mere Voice, which have their being
only upon the Breath of the Speaker, and are nothing besides? What are fine
Clothes, Gayety and Retinue? Not so much when compared with the Dazzling of
Seraphims, as the paint of a Butterfly to the Sun. What are a few little
Creatures going together, when considered with the innumerable company of
Angels, one whereof is greater in Power and Might then an Hundred Fourscore
Thousand of us? Behold all the Kingdoms of the World, and the Glory of them;
they are not dispersed throughout the Earth, but comprised in a lesser Part,
one City in a Nation, and within a few Houses. But what is that taken in with
the whole together? Lift up your Eyes on high, and behold who has Created
these things, lsa. 40. 26. And then determine which is greatest. Open the Doors
of your Understanding that the whole may come in; and then conceive who is more
Honorable, The Servant of him whose is the World and the Fullness thereof, or a
Lord of so many Acres of Land. Those Palaces and great Houses are not so much
as the Dwelling of Ants to that Habitation of his Holiness, the House Eternal
in the Heavens prepared for all those who diligently seek to come there. I ask
no Man's Faith for this, but appeal to his very Sense if he looks upward, or how
far the East is from the West. The Eyes of our Understanding being enlig^tened,
do as clearly perceive the invisible things within, as the outward Eye does
what is before us. So that let none talk of uncertainty and fiction, neither
put off the minding them. The Proud and Scornful Men are in truth low-Spirited:
A Glass of Liquor or the sparklings of Wine, the gratifying of a lower
lnclination, a Whore and well colored Dust, a few little parcels of Land is
what they concern themselves about: Not regarding the Rivers in the Paradise of
God, the Glory and Exstacy of that Place, the Inheritance reserved there. You
are for a blast of Wind, which does no good but puffs up a bubble for the
lightness thereof. You are for a small Reputation and Applause from talking
Worms, and seek not the Honor that comes from God only, John 5. 44. That
gaudy show goes away; As a Dream when one awak^th: Isa. 23. 9
So O Lord when thou awakest, thou shall despise their Image, Psalm. 73. 20. As
they are mistaken in their conceit of Greatness, so likewise of Happiness,
being there for little and Vain things, for trifling and fading delights before
Great and enduring Peace. They are for those things which depart and come to
nothing with the day, before that satisfaction which is just begun here, but
finished and perfected through infinite Ages. Is this your Honor? It is such
as has no Understanding. Is this your Pride? it is both a Deceit and a Lie:
for small things it bereaves you of greater, it makes a show of what is not,
pretends to Great and Honorable, but it is Pitiful, Low and Contemptible. Are
these fit to be made an occasion to forget God, or despise what belongs unto
him? Their Heart was Exalted, therefore have they forgotten me, Hos. 13. 6.
It Is by reason of those paltry things, that some come to that pass as to do
according to their will, notwithstanding Gods Commandment to the contrary; if
not to speak out, yet to think Mavelous things against the God of Gods, Dan.
11. 36.

This does show forth the great and enlarged faculties in Man that can stretch
thus far; but again this betrays his Degeneracy and Folly, that he should do it
upon such a small and light occasion. For one that might be partaker of the
Divine Nature, to Jer. 2. 11.
vaunt himself in beastly inclinations and desires, this really brings down to
the Earth. And did debase thy self even unto Hell, Isa. 57. 9. For him that
is called unto Precious and Inestimable things, to Pride himself in those of no
value, to be listed up with mere Vanities when they are capable to inherit
great Excellencies; which they set at naught, because they understand them not.
It will be the Exclamation at last, What has Pride profited us, or what good
has Riches brought us? But this voice signifies nothing to Men in Desperation
and Misery. Whereas if now they would lay it to Heart, it might bring them out
of this Temptation and Snare of the Devil. Every one would willingly be Happy,
and use the means to be so; Now there are but two ways in the general, Either
by following Gods Grace and Direction, or their own Fancies and Thoughts; which
they have from a slig^t apprehension of the thing, or the opinion and multitude
of others. That the generality of Mankind are not yet in the right, is as sure
as Gods Word is true. Even in this doubt wherein the World stands divided, One
that has common Wisdom and discerning in every Action he takes in Hand, or in
every thing he proposes to himself, might reduce it all this. Whether the good
or evil of a thing will be greater, considering both what is present and what
is to come, for this will as certainly be here as the other: And this should
determine every ones choice in the way to Happiness, which indeed must, if he
would make sure and not be deceived therein. We call the Proud Happy, Mal. 3.
15. Mark the Phrase, for it is only so with word of Mouth, but we cannot
conclude it so upon Consideration and Discourse; for that will make to appear,
it brings more Evil then Good unto Men.

It is the cause of Disobedience unto God, for it foolishly disdaines to be in
subjection unto him, and prefers its own will before the Will of God. This is a
very great temptation, for it is not so much the Pleasures of a Wicked Life, but
a Proud thinking to have the alone Command over himself and his own Actions, to
be governed by none, and who shall control him? This makes to slight and seem
to laugh at the Word of God; They reckon it a piece of Bravery that they can do
contrary, They despise the means of Grace and Salvation, They pish at
Instruction, and those who are appointed to make it known. Shall a few Men take
upon them to be Wiser then the rest, or to Reform others, or shall they do
according as they are bid? But all this is easily answered, for God fpeaks unto
the World by those of the same likeness with our selves; it is nothing to us
let Men do as they will, no more then it is to the Post whether the
Proclamation be complied withal or not. His Laws are set before us by his
Servants the Prophets, Dan. 9. 10. We observe them not as the words of Moses,
Prophets, Evangelists, Apostles, but as the very Commands of God and his
Christ. There is an Obedience due to the Romans 2. 8.
Truth as being from him, but not at all because such a fellow. Creature says,
or would have it so. Tribulation and Anguish is denounced against those who
will not obey it now, and they will really wish they had. And those who
purposely go against those Pillars of Truth, will find that they had better run
their Head against a stone-Wall, which may dash out their own Brains, but that
remains unshaken. But the Proud Men will not hear nor read, or if they do, they
will not obey; for say they in the deep of the Heart, they have power over
themselves, which is the beginning of their Disobedience and Transgression,
they are liable to the Misery and Threatening annexed, which will certainly come
upon them if they continue in that wicked mind. The Stubbornness and Contempt
is much worse to the great God over all, then if a Son or a Servant is
perversely resolved not to hear Jer. 13. 15.
and know what his Father or Master would say, or not give heed to it. All Men
are not thus abominably Wicked; but this accursed thing of Pride hinders others
from obeying the whole Will of God, and so keeps them off from peace of Mind,
and deprives of that future recompense which is to those who love the Lord with
all their Heart and all their Soul, for there is a reserve of some Sin, or
omission of some Duty, because they would not lose their Reputation amongst
Men. Said our Lord to the Pharisees, Ye are they which justify your selves
before Men, but God knows your Hearts, for that which is highly esteemed
amongst Men, is an Abomination in the sight of God, Luke 16. 15. To do no more
or otherwise in Religion then is fashionable or commonly practiced, God knows
the principle thereof being to recommend themselves more to the World, then to
him only. Example (except that of 1 Cor. 11. 1.
Christ) is no Rule of Action: We are to ^ecede from the Majority of Men, even
of the same Christian Profession, if Conscience and manifest Duty require it,
for to be led away with the Error and Corr^ption of the Generality, and to have
that for an excuse, against which Ex^d. 23. 2. 2 Pet. 3. 16, 17. are so
express, He that truly fears God, will not admit thereof. Which yet is hard in
that it ^enders one obnoxious to reproach and evil speaking, which one cannot
so well bear unless the high and corrupt ^uclinations are subdued. Pride does
at first stop from coming into the way of godliness, and afterward from
walking and (...) therein. Humility brings in, fixes his steps close and
sted^ast that he does not turn aside. If one could be contented to be a Fool
for Christ, to be rejected and despised of Men, (as the humble Soul may) H^w
great and worthy things might he do for his Kingdom? All the advantages off
Pride will not cou^tervail the Misery, Loss and Danger thereof. This Serpent
does strangely transform it self, for first it beats of from Obedience at all,
and then from Universal; but when that is endeavored to be performed, yet
still this creeps in, being a device of the Enemy of Mankind, to turn them from
Gods favor and acceptance. They also do no Iniquity, they walk in his Ways,
Psalm. 119. 3. Then comes into their mind a conceit of their own Performances,
aspiring Thoughts; which if consented unto and cherished, they have their
Reward at present, but no more. But if endeavored against, then is Vexation,
Fear and Caution, which do cause more trouble then the complacency of the
rising Humor. Ha^. 2. 4.


The connection of the Happiness of the Life that now is, and that which is to
come may be seen, for what is an Impediment to Heavenly and future things, is
also to those of this place and time; for here Pride is the chief if not only
things which hinders our Peace and Contentment. This is the Sting of every
Affliction, making the sense thereof more continual and grievous. The Thoughts
are restless and turbulent, which should be quiet and composed, the high
Imaginations are stopped in the flight, or the Foundation is taken away, so they
must either fall or be kept up with difficulty. Here is labor and struggle
without profit, here is disquiet and hardship to keep up the tormenting
inclination without any Advantage: Many times they wilfully deprive themselves
of what would do Good, be an ease or remedy from such an Evil upon a slight
opinion, It is an undervaluing and they scorn it; when it is none at all, or if
it were, yet in Prudence should be submi^ted unto for the greater benefit. If
this word Undervaluing were a little examined, how would it appear? for if
taken in a right sense to admit of nothing beneath the dignity of Humane
nature, to do nothing below a Man, let every one keep up this Principle to the
utmost, and act accordingly. But here it is found that those who seem most to
abhor it, yet willingly inc^r the just Imputation by unnatural and worse then
beastly Lust, by Lying and Falsehood, by Oppression and Dishonesty. As they
Debase themselves, so another way they Exalt themselves above measure: for
being only in an higher Form, They forget they are Men, or imagine those in a
lower condition to be quite different from them, and therefore disdain to do
the same things. As among the Angels and heavenly Bodies there is a different
Size and Glory, so God has established a distinction among Men, King and
Subjects, Parent and Children, Master and Servants, High and Low, Rich and
Poor. And nothing is to be done to break this order, yet still all are Men of
the same l keness and common privileges. Whatsoever is more then to keep up
this order and diversity, is P^ide. And what is no Reproach for a Man to do,
neither is it an Undervaluing although he is in a Noble and Exal^ed Condition.
As we are advancing and going toward Happiness, every thing is to be laid
aside that hinders from it. And then Pride would be dismissed with all its
Followers. It would be endless to represent to view how cunningly and variously
it works in the minds of Men, interweaves it self throughout their whole
Nature, has to do with all their Actions. And what is the result of the whole?
Is there Good missed of, or Evil ^allen into? Pride is some cause thereof, but
most commonly the principal Survey the Miseries and Griefs that people grean
under, they will be likewise found owing to this corrupt (...)

God expresses his Displeasure in several places of Holy Writ against Pride: It
is not put amongst the excluding Works of the Flesh, Gal. 5. or the deadly ins,
Rev. 21. 8. But it is Comp^ehensive of the whole Mass and Leaven of Sin, and
leads on to that which hinders from Heaven and brings down unto Hell; For if
God spared not the Angels that sinned, bu^ cast them down to Hell, 2 Pet. 2. 4.
how shall he spare them who are guilty of the like Transgression? He that does
Resist, Hate and know the Proud afar of, will not suffer them to partake of
those good things he has prepared for them that love him. It is strange that
men who believe the Scriptures should give way to it, for they speak how it
leads to Destruction and bringing Low, Job 20. 6. 7. Job 40. 11. Isa. 2. 11,
12. Ezekiel. 17. 24 1 Pet. 5. 5, 6. God would have none to be High and Exalted
before his time. It does not become a Potsherd of the Earth, a small, weak and
finite Being. Whatever Honor and Advancement he shall meet withal, he is to
expect from his Master only. But if he will now try himself in his own way, he
will fall into Shame and Disappointment. Let him be never so Proud in Heart,
continually raising up Imaginations. Let him puff and swell never so much,
there is an end of all. His Breath goes forth, he returns to his Earth: in
that very day his Thoughts Perish, Psalm. 146. 4. It sinks into a clod of Clay,
All those great fancies as to his Esteem and Advantages in the World, do
utterly vanish and come to nothing as soon as his Spirit is gone out, and flies
into that place where no regard is had to what is highly valued here. The
utmost of Pride is contained in this Life, and the things had therein, which we
see with our Eyes do certainly perish and stand the owners in no stead; We are
further told by God (who sent us here for t^yal, who knows all things and how
it shall be hereafter) that this way leads to Contempt and Falling; when what
is spoken of as past according to the Prophetic Style, which is as true as if
already fulfilled; He has put down the Mighty from their Seats, and exalted
them of low Degree, Luke 1. 52. Those who are Great in this World, shall be
little in the World to come; and the little great; which will be so as to
Wicked and Ungodly persons, and those of mean Condition who continue in all
Obedience. Even those of high Degree who live in good Conscience and Duty, yet
the more Acts of Humility and Condescension they use, it will be much better
for them. Wherefore Humble your selves O ye Mighty, for this is the way to
preserve what you have, and attain greater Advancement. A mean person cannot
bow down, he cannot stoop beneath what he is already, his way of Exaltation is
by continuing where he is, having Thoughts only suitable, and not above his
Condition. You are by God placed higher that you may voluntarily come down,
still keep the difference you have in the World, do as the rest of your
Brethren, and hereafter be put into a Seat among the Blessed, when all shall be
Perfect; Disdain and Envy shall cease.

It is manifest worldly Pride cannot do any good, nor that which creeps into
Religion also. I mean of those who would save their Souls in a gentile way, who
are for the modish manner of Worship and Devotion, performing it in a stiff
careless and indifferent way; who put a difference in Congregations,
freq^enting those where people of Quality do resort, and for having Pastors
accordingly; who love the uppermost Seats in the Synagogue. You would be Great
and Honored still, then consider seriously whether indeed this is the way to
be so? Did our Fathers please God after this manner? Is there any intimation in
his Word that it is acceptable in his sight? Is it not an Abomination as the
effect of Pride, Prove. 16. 5. Who say to the Poor, stand by your selves, come
not near us, for we are more Rich and Honorable then you, If such Thoughts are
in the breast of any, God knows them, and puts these things in his Book of
Remembrance, and they shall be brought forth one day, when he shall make a
right difference among his People. You had better take this Counsel, which you
will not disapprove of in a day of Humiliation, Sickness, Death Bed, or as soon
as ever you are stepped forth into the other World, but only to be observed in
your life time: As our Lord dwelt among us in the Habit of a poor ordinary
Person, yet had his Grave with the Rich; so you, who have your Habitation and
Living with them, may follow him in the Generation, and serve him in the same
manner as poor people do. To whom he says the Gospel is Preached. Come over to
the Plainness and Simplicity thereof; follow the Fashion only in lawful things,
but let it have nothing to do with Religion, for God does not so well like the
Course of this World, that being either opposite unto, or would corrupt the
things pertaining to him. If you take heed to all this, you will be no loser in
the end, but greater then those who are resolved to hold fast in their wonted
way, whatever may be said to the contrary. It is Vain to offer any thing to
persons that are under the Dominion of ^ride, for this makes them despise
Exhortation and ^nstruction, to set themselves above, to cast off and not mind
it. This is one cunning Stratagem of the Devil, for thus he prevails with them
not to receive the Truth that they might be saved. He represents such as mean
persons and busy Bodies in other Men's matters, whom God has raised up as
Instruments to convey it unto them; Their despising is against him, for we do
not speak out of our own Humor, Fancy or any prejudice, but from his Word
only. We know and are assured that it is true, and every tittle shall be
fulfilled. And then it must be reasonable to put all in mind to take heed and
order their Actions accordingly. When it is suggested in a common matter, such
a thing cannot possibly profit, but is likely to do more harm then good, there
is no Frown or secret Indignation, but Thanks for the Admonition. Why should it
not be so likewise in Spiritual things? Because there is a subtle Adversary who
would have such things done and consented unto, and stirs up a close Antipathy
and Hatred against them who would dissuade from False and Deceitful appearances.

You would fain be Great. Who hinders? but let it be only in that way God has
showed. Be contented for a little while, and wait what he will do for you. We
b^leech you to forego those things which are only shadows of Greatness, which
evidently decline, and vanish and hinder from obtaining the ^bstance thereof,
which you are most earnestly desired to make sure of above all things. He that
is least in the King^omo^ Heaven, is greater then he who has the Pomp and
^lory of this World; the one does as much exceed the other in Degree and
Continuance, as the Sun does the light of a Spark, which ascends up a little
height, expires and is nothing; so whatever is Spe^ious and Beautiful here, if
for some Years, it is not so much in comparison to the Glories of Heaven and
Eternity. What a fool must he be, who does lose the greater for the less? Is he
not mistaken and deceived, who wh^lst he seeks to be Exalted becomes low? who
is desirous to be Great, but is ^ound little? Shall we call up the careless
Nobility and Gentry of former days, who lived and died in their Imaginations?
let these Gods ascend out of the Earth, even all those of several Generations
and Countries heretofore. Hell has e^larg^aher self, and opened her M^u^h
without measure, and their Glory, and their Multitude, and th^^ Pom^, and he
that Rejoices shall desc^nd into it, Isa. 5. 14. Their Souls even now are
sensible what their Earthly Grandeur amounts unto, just nothing at all; but
when the day of God's Judgment and their own Re^^rrection is come, they shall
further know what it is they lose and are to suffer for the same. This stands
for a warning to all those who are now Living and shall be Born, not to fill up
the Measure of their Fathers, but so to use their Greatness as not to abuse it,
for it passes away, an such is the event thereof if not rightly managed. What
an horrible Abuse and Prevarication it is, That when they should ^e mo^e
Thank^^l and Obedient to him who placed them in a higher S^ation, thence to
lift up themselves as to contemn God and S^n against him? What is lent for a
trial of Humility and moderate Deportment, they presently turn into Pride and
insolent Carriage to others.

The nature of Man is extreme prone to Pride and hardly restrained, no other
way but according to what is written. Then he op^neth the Ears of Men, and
seals their Instruction, That he may with draw Man from his purpose, and hide
Pride from Man, Job 33. 16, 17. Let them attend to what may be said of the
nature of things and their Establishment, of his own ^rame and constitution,
his own Vileness, Weakness and Mortality, how he is Dust and Ashes, walking up
and down like a Shadow, a little dependant Being, and much more there is to
humble and keep him off from this Sin. The prevalency thereof arises from those
enlarged Faculties wherewith Man is endued, as also that Preparation and
Tendency God has put into him for greater things. Now this is turned the wrong
way, and thence proceeds all the Transgression and Irregularity. Those powers
of Soul were designed to serve the Lord with all the Heart, but turning aside,
they are taken up with vain things which cannot profit, 1 Samuel 12 20, 21. If
Man were to be once made, and so still to abide; If there was no further
Advancement and Exaltation for him; If he were not capable of Increase, and to
be yet more Excellent; What mean those aspirings after it, that he is still
reach^^^^ yet higher? This being equally in good and bad, which also prompts to
things lawful and commendable as following ones Humor and vain Applause, to
keeping of the Commandments all one as breaking them; which seems to show this
is not so much the voice of Depraved, as Imperfect Nature. Even before Sin came
into the World, these desires were; so much was not revealed for wi^e Reasons,
yet our Fore-father was to have been Translated as Enoch if he had pleased God,
and to have a better Body then formed out of the Earth, that to be changed into
more Glorious. His Soul was to have been more enlarged, and converse with
higher things then those of this Earth. God would have led him up from one
Degree to another; But the fault was his Impatiency, and he would not tarry the
Lords leisure. He did hearken and yield unto the first proposal and appearance
of being greater, when himself might have had an assurance of being so, if he
had been contented to have waited for some time. Nothing is more reasonable
then for a Creature to expect of his Creator, That as he was first pleased to
make him low until he should be raised and rendered more Excellent, so according
to his good Pleasure he would fill the Mouth which he has made capable and
commanded to be opened wide, Psalm. 81. 10. That he would satisfy See and
Observe, Psalm. 145 16. 19
the desires he has put in. The Lord will perfect that which concerns me,
Psalm. 138. 8. And we are to wait his good time. We see how our Fore-father
fell, how others at this day Transgress after the same manner, so we may look
on and be afraid, using the utmost caution that we do not follow after them.

Man would be Happy and Great his own way, and that presently; God has ordered
another, which is to be begun here and fully manifested hereafter. The question
is whose Will shall take place; If Man follows his own, he shall find nothing
suitable to his Faculties, but be carried along with Falsehood and Deceit, till
he falls into Destruction and Misery. But in Gods way, and according to his
appointment, there let him stretch out as far as he can, and he will meet with
things proportionable with Reality and Truth according to his Promise and
Covenant of our Sojourning here, which ends in the greatest Safety and most
complete Happiness. Humble your selves therefore under the Mighty Hand of God,
that he may Exalt you in due time, 1 Pet. 5. 6.

Those accomplishments of the inward Man are most worthy to be sought after and
highly to be valued, for they have real Worth and Excellency, they give Peace
and Blessed Expectation to the Soul, and when the Body goes to the Earth,
remain together till they are perfected in eternal Happiness Indeed he that is
discerning cannot have a thing but he knows he has it, and also the worth
thereof. As he sees others value themselves upon the account of such and such
things, comparing his with theirs, he is subject to do the like. Thence comes
spiritual Pride to be the greatest of all Pride, as those Graces and Gifts are
more excellent then any thing whatsoever. But that all Glory may be unto God,
for stirring up Thankfulness unto him, and quelling Selfconceit, and also to
take somewhat off from the Temptation to Hypocrisy; it may be requisite to lay
open this Proposition with the Reasons thereof, viz. If a Man be Religious, he
deserves not the least Praise nor Reputation from others; for it is matter of
Duty as he is a Servant; If he is only according to the common Standard of the
World, that is from a mercenary selfish principle out of respect to the promise
of Eternal Life, and fear of the threatenings of Eternal Death, and that
prudential security to saving of the Soul as to the uncertainty thereof. Now
there is no more Commendation in all this then an Hireling that works for his
Pay, or another doing to prevent an Evil that would be^all him, or to secure
ones self in a matter doubtful. But for what is more and comes to the practice
of things which are Honest, Lovely, of good Report, Virtue, Praise, Phil. 4. 8.
For the several Acts of Universal Obedience, pure Faith and Love, Freewill
Offerings, doing Good, working with Grace; all this is Answered from Romans 2.
29. Whose Praise is not of Men, but of God. It Is not Man that does this, but
the Grace of God in him, Acts 18. 5.
by strong impulses or quickenings, which he must give way unto, or he is
uneasy. And to keep his own Peace, being acted he does act. For who makes thee
to differ from another? And what have thou that thou did not receive? 1 Cor.
4. 7. God makes him both to will and to do of his own good Pleasure, he is a
mere Creature, an Instrument only, and also God has made him thus. So he alone
is to be glorified in the Gifts, he gives unto Men. They are to stir up and
comply therewith, for which they receive a Reward. Glory to God in the highest,
and on Earth Peace, good Will toward Men, Luke 2. 13. Those whom he sends
forth should not be disturbed, they desire only the common thing of good Will
and Kind Reception, but no thanks at all, for their Master will sufficiently
reward them. No Flesh must Glory in his Presence, or take the least share of
that Honor which is due unto God only. And what some of forward but not
thoroughly considering minds Acts 12. 23.
may give, they are to return immediately into the Exchequer of Praises of the
Great King. We have Examples of this in Christ and his Apostles. See how he is
described, Zech. 9. 9. And Psalm. 111. 3. Isa. 42. 21.
who are commissioned under him, though their * Employment is more worthy then
that of Kings and the wisest Statesmen, yet they are to possess and discharge
it with lowliness of mind.

Let nothing be done out of moroseness or frowardness to derogate from that
Civility and Respect due unto Men. Yet in this we do exceed (as every thing
proves a Temptation) by Flattery Job 32. 21. 22.
and Pride; but also as we are fellow Creatures we do too much Idolize one
another in giving that Honor, that we cannot give greater of the same sort,
even to our Lord and Master. Submitting your selves one to another in the fear
of God, Ephesians. 5. 21. Love as Brethren, be pitiful, be Courteous, 1 Pet. 3. 8.
Which may as well be preserved without that strain of Complement, or those
Expressions which are not proper for such low and ^rail Creatures as we are.
This may be put off as a needless Scruple and Fear; but if it were complied
withal, it would bring greater good at the last, then all the conveniences of
Dissimulation, Flattery or Ignorance amount unto at present.

Those workings of the Soul which aspire upwards, may be turned into good, and
help to order the Conversation aright toward God and toward Man. As the Lord
is greater and above all, so let Men show themselves in Subjection unto him in
all things, and then they may be as great Spi^ited as ever they will: Mind not
high things, Romans 12. 16. Such that are so only in Opinion, but they are low in
Reality and Truth; for it is all but the highest part of the Dust of the World,
Prove. 8. 26. The most glittering things here are ^carce discernable, if you go
up yonder Mountain What are they then to the high and lofty place, the
In-habitation of Eternity? Let us lift up our Heart with our Hands to God in
the Heavens, Lam. 3. 41. Set your Affections on things above, Col. 3. 2. There
exceed if you can. That Christ may dwell in your Hearts by Faith, that ye being
rooted and grounded in Love. May be able to comprehend with all Saints, what is
the Breadth and Length, and Depth and Height, and to know the Love of Christ
which passes Knowledge, that ye might be filled with all the fullness of God,
Ephesians. 3. 17, 18, 19. Here the Soul may stretch every way, till it burst forth
into Immensity and Glory.

CHAP. XVIII. OF AFFLICTIONS In General.
A Digression concerning Words; of Sorrow, Melancholy, Sickness, ^ain, Poverty,
and other Adversities

HAving in the foregoing Chapters spoken of the Evil and Good which are set
before Mankind, how the one is to be chosen, and ^he other avoided; it remains
to insist somewhat on those Evils which are not so much in their power
absolutely to escape, but if any help can be found out either to Comfort under,
or that even these may turn into Good. It is the manner of Gods wonderful and
gracious dealing toward the Children of Men, to lead them from Vanity to a
Substantial, then a glorious Being; to bring them from Imperfection to
Perfection; from Misery, ^^^, making that tend Romans 8. 28.
unto, and at last be changed into a greater Happiness. This is the favor he
has unto his own People; but for those who are Strangers and Unconverted he
uses such means to reduce them. When the nature of Man is so impatient of
Affliction, that he is presently for Ease and Deliverance, of whom should he
seek but of the Lord most Mighty, who for o^r Sin is justly displeased. And
what is more Reasonable then to forsake that, which is the cause of so much
Vexation? Read and consider well, Deuteronomy. 4. 29, 30, 31. Never any one that
turned from every evil way, and manifested this to be sincere by Obedience for
the future, but found good hereby. Indeed Punishment does sometimes begin on
hardened impenitent Sinners, which will be sollowed with what is worse
hereafter; but even they had some Chastisements before which were designed for
their Amendment and Repentance. What befalls the Sons of Men, is ordered by wise
Providence that they may come to Grace here, and Glory hereafter. Is Prosperity
delightful? yet reflect thoroughly, it is unsatisfactory and tiresome, however
we can go on with it; But then is it not desirable to continue thus? which puts
the Man upon laboring for that complete Happiness against the time he shall be
taken from this. Is Adversity grievous? Compare it to Hell, and what is
suffered here is little; all present Afflictions will have an end, and yet they
^it heavy, How insupportable then must those be which are Eternal? this
sufficiently warns to ^lee from the Wrath to come. Consider Men in their
different Ranks and Circumstances in the World, It is ordered by God that his
Promises and Threatenings should have effect upon them. If they Obey and Serve
him, they shall spend their days in Prosperity, and their years in Pleasure,
Job 36. 11. He generally gives that first, the flourishing and light someness
of Youth, when they are capable of knowing him; So when they grow up further if
they continue in his Obedience, he turns the Mirth of that into a more solid
Joy and Peace. He manifests his goodness because he makes this the first
Experiment, and does not Afflict willingly unless Mercy and Justice do require
it. But he gives more Grace, wherefore he says, God resists the Proud, but
gives Grace to the Humble. James 4. 6. If they are Humble still, he will yet
increase that, for he would give exceeding gifts unto Men, if they would not be
lifted up; but when they are, he hinders or takes a way the qualifications
wherein they boast, or some way defeats them. So here as long as their Heart is
right and steadfast in his Covenant, he continues their Tranquillity; but if
they turn aside, some Adversity is laid on them. These two are the same unto
the Body and Estate, as Love and Fear to the Soul and inward Man; the first is
more Generous and Noble, the other proves commonly more attractive. Fear is the
beginning of Wisdom, but Love is the Accomplishment and Excellency thereof. So
it may be applied to Adversity and Prosperity. He is not a right Christian who
does every thing out of fear, nor yet to whom Affliction is the principal
Impulsive; for there are in both an unwillingness, and no full sincere
Intention to please God. And what seems strange, Those who are all for their
own Safety and Deliverance, having that alone in their Eye, yet do not
sufficient to obtain it; for the Promises and Comfort of God are to those who
love him, as these do not through Ignorance of his ways. They stand at the door
of his Sanctuary, but do not come in; They are arrived at the entrance of
Religion, but stop there, when they should come into the inner Courts of the
Lords House. from Deuteronomy. 4. 29, 30, 31. It appears that God accepts of such a
beginning if it goes on and has its perfect work as there described; but this
sort is commonly feigned according to what is written, Psalm. 78. 34, 35, 36,
37. They run unto God as to a Shelter in a Storm, from which they go again when
that is over. He knows the very secrets of the Heart, and will not be imposed
upon by Hypocrisy and Baseness. But they should have considered, that as he is
then (even in their opinion) to be sought unto for Stay and Relief, so he is
worthy to be trusted unto at all times, and then fully resolved to have taken
him for the God of their Help, from that day for evermore; this had been well
pleasing in his sight.

Lord! What Aversness is in our Nature to come unto thee? And yet whither
should we go, but unto thee? We are not sufficient of our selves, thou art the
Author of all Good, and a sure Refuge against Evil: Yet we are at a stand and
unwilling to come when thou call. Thou have made us weak and frail, that we
should seek Help of one that is Mighty, and trust in thee. Thou sendest the
Stormy Wind and Tempest which do near beat us down that we may know, The
Eternal God is our Refuge, and underneath are the Everlasting Arms, Deuteronomy. 33.
27. Thou have put a vanity and insufficiency into things, that all which is to
be had in this World cannot establish a sure Trust, whereon Man may certainly
depend. Our fellow Creatures will not, but in the greatest exigencies they
cannot help. The best things here are unable, others are deceitful, all of them
put together cannot give Aid; they may stupifie for a little time, but cannot
preserve the Breath from going forth. What must we lie, and sink under these
Evils? surely we have been told, and him we should think of first, There is one
above who both will, and also can deliver to the utmost all that come and seek
after him. I will lift up mine Eyes to the Hills from whence comes my Help: My
Help comes from the Lord, which made Heaven and Earth, Psalm. 121. 1, 2. And
therefore can dispose every least thing to our Advantage, or take away the Evil
that oppresses us, and rescue from the Jaws of the Grave: and at last, in him
though we die we shall live again.

In what a wretched condition is that Man in the day of Distress and Death? who
has held fast to the World till it can give no longer Relief; when the Arm of
Flesh is withered and its poor helps fail. They have turned their Back unto me,
and not their Face, but in the time of their Trouble they will say, Arise and
save us. But where are thy Gods that thou have made thee? let them arise if
they can save thee in the time of thy Trouble, Jer, 2. 27, 28. Where are thy
Riches, Pleasure and Company that thou have relied on, let them preserve thee.
Consider this ye that forget God in your Health and Prosperity. He hates your
putting away the thoughts of him at that time; when you stand off, it is then
he spoils your Mirth. It Is nothing but your own Sins and Transgressions which
occasion that Enmity and slavish Fear of him, which would also cease when the
cause is taken away. In the evil day you might be safe under his Feathers; In
the time of Wealth there is nothing affrightful or disagreeable to those who
would live in Sense of, and thankfulness under him, for this would make
Enjoyments yet more excellent. O how great is thy goodness which thou have laid
up for them that fear th^e, which thou have wrought for them that Trust in thee
before the Sons of Men, Psalm. 31. 19. How many ways has ou^ Gracious God found
out, when all we like lo^t Sheep have gone astray, to bring us back aga^n? Even
those which seem (^o the carnal and inconsiderate) more harsh and severe
Dispensations of Providence are to this blessed end: In Mercy thou do Afflict
them, out of pure Love and Compassion to their Souls.

It is a sad Prospect to see the Tents of Cushan in Affliction, Hab. 3. 7. to
behold the Dwellings of the Sons of Men in so much Sorrow, Grief, Pain and
Sickness, as if the Curse of Jo^b was entailed on all Families throughout the
whole Earth. And there is not an House but there is one that has an ^ssue, or
that is a Leape^, or that leans upon a St^ff, or that falls on a Sword, or
that lacks Bread, 2 Samuel 3. 29. or has some other ^vil of equal kind. Surely
there is a good God above all his Creatures, and how then can these things be?
If at any time hard thoughts do arise, it is our Ignorance, and want of a
through Consideration out of his Word. Besides what is before mentioned, We do
not lay to Heart our own Provocation, that Deluge of Sin and Ungodliness which
has covered the face of all Nations; (but his Grace and Revelation would put a
stop unto it, if effectually used and put forth) Some Evils are sent for
Punishment to frighten and dissuade people from the like things. Then the spot
and ^allings of his own People are to be chastened here, and their Graces
exercised, see Deuteronomy. 8. 15, 16. Z^ch. 13. 9. And further Satan is suffered
(some Reasons whereof we know, others are secret, but we judge of the equity of
them by what are manifested) to walk up and down in an invisible manner, being
permitted to Afflict the Body and Estate, all one as to tempt the Soul. And
then from John 9. 3. 1. Sam. 2. 6, 7. it may be gathered, that God to show his
Glory, Power and Sovereignty man do what he will with his own. As Lord of Life,
he takes away one and leaves another in his own order, but not to us
discernable; because no respect is had to Age, the good or ill of the person
that one lives longer then another. He sends Sickness to this Man when another
is well, to some it proves Mortal, and not to others. Some have more and others
less of the Distribution of the good things of the Earth, without the better or
worse deserving of the Parties. Things now seem uneven, but in the Sanctuary,
and out of the Lords Book all may be understood. He is Good and Merciful still.
He is our Maker and our Father, from whence we are to be considered as
Creatures, and then in a nearer Relation of Sons and Daughters, 2 Cor. 6. 18. 2
Cor. 7. 1. to which last the great future Promises do relate.

Righteous art thou O Lord, when I plead with thee, Jer. 12. 1. Clouds and
Darkness are round about him: Righteousness and Judgment are the Habitation of
his Throne, Psalm. 97. 2. Though we cannot see through all, yet we have
sufficient revealed to be most fully assured, that he is just and equal. Here
in the place of Faith and Trial, many things come to pass of which though we
may in general be satisfied of the Goodness and Justice of God in ordering and
suffering them so to be, yet we cannot give so particular account how it is so
in a strict sense and superlative degree, as most certainly it is. This is to
be imputed to our blindness and want of understanding, which shall be done away
when he comes to judge the Earth. Judgment will I lay to the Line, and
Righteousness to the Plummet, Isa. 28. 7. All things shall be exactly stated at
last; He is even now Righteous in all his ways, and will give a clear account
how he is so. The things of this World are now loved and feared, but then it
will appear, that there is so little in them, that they are not worthy to be
spoken of or had in Remembrance. However God will not forget any Labor or Pain
his Servants endured for him. They shall be as a Dream when one awaketh, and
who is much concerned for the Pleasantness or Dreadfulness thereof, after it is
over? Call to mind the days that are past, recollect both the Good and Evil of
them, or what was done at such a place when you are removed from thence; much
more will it be so when you are translated from Time to Eternity, from Earth to
Heaven. It is so mere a nothing, that if the Creature might be bold to speak
with his Maker, it will not be insisted on or required from Gods Hands, but
what he will be pleased to do of his own Promise and Bounty; for one would
think Justice it self is not obliged to make amends for small Matters, when the
harm is over, and the very same as if it had never been at all. This single
Consideration if thoroughly weighed, would ease our mind in all Afflictions: The
Transitoriness of them, as also they are vain and little; for however we Groan
and Murmur, yet they are such as can be endured. They are not so great, as we
weak and frail by Nature. We further bring a delicacy and tenderness on our
selves, which makes us yet more unable to bear them. Whereas if we would comply
universally with his design, God would ordain Strength out of our Weakness; He
would give us that Grace and Knowledge, if we were meet to be partakers thereof
and make use of them, that would carry us through all trouble whatsoever: for
he suffers none to fall on us but what is common to Men. And how know we but he
to manifest his own Glory, does lay the more heavy things on him that so weak a
thing may endure them, and intend its greater Happiness by a proportionable
Reward? For I reckon that the Sufferings of this present time, are not worthy
to be compared with the Glory which shall be revealed in us, Romans 8. 18. If we
did understand and consider of all things, instead of being cast down and
disquieted, we might Rejoice in Tribulation. We make such a stir about Trouble,
but there is not so much in it: We may rest with the most full assurance that
God is good, and for all those Adversities he sends on us, he is all along
accomplishing the Happiness of his Creatures, which should stir up and continue
our Love and Obedience unto him.

He would have that foretold which he will certainly do; that Isa. 42. 9. Luke
2. 25.
they should be comforted in the mean time, who shall be delivered; that they
should be joyful with Hope and Expectation, where with they shall be Happy at
last. This has been the Method of Gods working of old, we have heard it with
our Ears, and it is very acceptable unto us. How beautiful upon the Mountains
are the Feet of him that brings good Tidings, that publishe^h Peace, that
brings good-Tidings of Good, that says unto Sion, Thy God Reigns. Isa. 52.
7. How welcome is every one that has good news of prosperous Accidents and
worldly Conveniences? How many Messages of this nature have been delivered
from time to time to private Persons and Nations, which were thankfully and
kindly received. What are they all come unto now? their Memorial is perished
with them. They were shadows only of Good, which just passed by and are gone;
this is the utmost of all Temporal Happiness, and of this World. But what comes
from our God is Great and Enduring; which lately was beginning, now carrying
on, till it be consummated to Eternal Ages. Great is our Lord, and highly to be
praised for the least manifestation he ever made thereof, and so is by his
chosen People. Unto you therefore which bel^eve he is precious, 1 Pet. 2. Psalm.
89. 15.
7. You both understand and have assured Hope to be Partakers. These prize it
more, then others do great Reversions and Expectancies they so much talk of,
and please themselves with.

Who is among you that seareth the Lord, that obeycth the Voice of his Servant,
that walks in Darkness and has no Light? Let him trust in the Name of the
Lord, and stay upon his God, Isa 50. 10. Who gives a glimmering, and sends
Light into the Soul, a comfortable Thought, or sends him who can speak a Word
in Season. Comfort ye, Comfort ye my People, says your God, Isa. 40. 1. They
are to Preach the Gospel, Heal the Sick, administer Help and Remedy against all
the Maladies of Mankind. An hard Task and not to be performed, who considers
not from whom he comes, and whose means he makes use of: Even God and his
Word, which are sufficient for all this; and if they have not the due power and
effect, it is not from the weakness of them, for that is stronger then Men, and
he that breaks can bind up, but from the incapacity of the Subject. Who are not
turned to the Lord with their whole Heart, they have no right to the Promises,
and therefore receive no true Comfort; but where a People formerly Disobedient
are turned unto the Wisdom of the Just, and made ready for the Lord, His Word
does good upon them who walk Uprightly. Blessed be God, there is Experience of
this, though not so much as were to be desired; for it is but a little Flock
and small Remn^nt of true Israelites Compared with the whole of Mankind. Those
who have the form of Godliness, will cry out with the wicked World upon Fancy
and Imagination; but if it is a sensible Comfort against inward Evil, then the
effect is had, and should not be slighted, for it is such as the Trouble was,
and does it away. The matter is easily conceivable, unless they absolutely
disbelieve or cannot understand; for if an Heir of a good Estate can
contentedly rub through some Inconveniences in the mean while upon prospect of
that, Why may not another do the same in hope of Heaven? If one is supported by
a Father, Friend, Husband, God reveals himself to be such to every one that
fears him, and does likewise uphold. When the Sorrow is for things pertaining
to him, cannot he Comfort or Deliver? When from the World, cannot he furnish
with higher Considerations? Does he who is in pursuit of a great Advantage mind
the loss of a Farthing? God who gives Breath and Food, does also give Relief to
the Soul. As the Body goes on contentedly from day to day by the strength of
Meat and Raiment, Cannot also she Immortal part of us be a little quieted from
time to time in its Hunger and Thirst after Happiness, till it is perfected in
the due time and place? The Scriptures speak much of Comfort, Joy and Peace in
the inward Man, which they know and perceive who make that the rule of their
Actions, and have it fulfilled in them. Let others do the same, and they will
be likewise Partakers of the Joy and Consolation.

The unbelieving and natural Man Laughs at all this; Will words; which are but
wind, blow away Pain and Grief? It sticks faster then so. The Physician gives
visible Remedies to heaI Diseases, the Lawyer shows a way to get out of
encumbrances of Estate, the Bountiful gives Money to relieve the Poor and
Distressed: And indeed for worldly Vexations and Trouble, Wise Sayings may do
something; But for the Man whose Trade is only in words, who takes care of the
Soul which we see not, and of another World which we know not, What will this
Babbler say? he moves his Lips, but he does nothing.

It will not be much besides the present purpose to describe how Of Words
much force and Efficacy is in Words, and then to show that they will
effectually assuage Grief. Words are Thoughts expressed, which arise from, and
are the workings of the mind. Set them aside, you must renounce the very Soul
and Reason, and confequently Unman him. What do Words signify? So you may ask
of Wisdom, Understanding, and all those noble Faculties within, which are
discovered by them. Take away these, Man is a lump of Clay, just enlivened, but
withal vile and weak: A dumb and breathing Statue without use or excellency.
More need not be said to lay open the Absurdity and Monstrousness of this; All
will grant there is need of some Speech or Language, and there is more in it
then a Voice only, for it is significative of Things as what is commonly seen,
heard or talked of. Things are visible and invisible, past present and future.
Now Words convey and make all these known, making invisible to be as it were
visible to us past, and future present by the description it gives of them.
Herein appears the excellency and reality of Words, that they represent those
things which do not appear, as if they did appear. Who shall ascend into
Heaven? that is to bring down Christ from above: Or who shall descend into the
deep? that is to bring up Christ again from the Dead. The Word is nigh thee,
even in thy Mouth and in thy Heart, that is the Word of Faith which we Preach,
Romans 10. 6, 7, 8. That speaks of God himself, of whom are all things; That
declares unto us the astonishing Works of Creation, The Motion of the Stars,
and the Springs of the Deep. Which comprehend in one Sentence the Compass of
the World and all that is therein. This we see done with our Eyes in Ink and
Paper, we hear it with our Ears in a light and aerie sound, Of what we are
further convinced without by the Eye of Sense. But there is one step higher
which leads to further Knowledge, and applies it to our selves, showing how we
are concerned; The Word of Faith, Which is that Revelation God has made to
Mankind in Scripture. The Truth whereof relies upon Divine Testimony, Miracles,
Signs, Infallible Proofs. The certainty whereof may be somewhat seen from the
very Nature and Connection of things. Here are WORDS indeed, they are called
GREAT WORDS, Dan. 7. 11. and may be seen in the foregoing verses. And not only
there, but throughout the whole Scripture. Lo, these are parts of his VVays,
but how little a Portion is heard of him? Job 26. 14. This is only of what he
does to the Inhabitants of the Earth, and that is but as a Point to the whole
World. This is part of Gods Will noted in a Book, that it may be for the use of
those several Generation which shall pass through here: Which is of no great
bulk, but take ^ll the Libraries of the World, all that was ever Written and
Printed, and besides what they have from hence, they do not contain so great
and excellent words as this: The Wisdom of God does as much excel Man's as his
Works does theirs; which I^a. 55. 9.
he could have manifelled in a style accordingly, but he condelcended to our
infirmities that we ^^^ht receive and know what concerns us. They are not
Words only, for they are both true and significative; as such they should
affect us as the things themselves, for they go before and give notice of it.
In things of common life Men are equally concerned at the Message as the thing
it self, and provide accordingly; now the first is but a Word, so it would be
the same as to the Promises and Threatenings of God if they were believed. The
Word Preached did not profit them, not being mixed with Faith in them that
heard it, Heb. 4. 2. The Will of God is as we learn from John 1. 6, 7. That all
Men through him might believe. So we read Acts 28. 24, that at the first time
of Hearing, Some believed the things that were spoken, and some believed not.
But would they have attended again and again for successive times, hearkened to
what might be urged further, then more might have believed. Did ever any Man
feriously understand and thoroughly weigh all the Arguments that might be
brought for Faith, and yet remain an Unbeliever? It is possible through
Prejudice, Ignorance, hardness of Heart; but not to a sincere and willing mind,
that has no other end but to be satisfied, whether indeed these things are so?
The greater part will not admit of a full hearing, least they should believe
and be saved, and so they are of their own fault Unbelievers. That place in
Isa. 6. 9, 10. is after God has used former Methods, as appears by his
Expostulation in the foregoing Chapter, What could I have done more for my
Vineyard that I have not done in it? Isa. 5. 4. People may be at length
unaffected and hardened under the Word, but it was at first through their own
provocation and wilsulness: By not minding thereof when it would have saved
them, they come to have no Sense thereof afterward. But in it self it is apt
to produce Faith. And when it is received therewith it does make as much, yea,
more impression then worldly matters, as it is of greater concernment. Those
Words whereby we shall be saved, Acts 11. 14. are as gladly attended unto, as
the proposals of temporal Convenience and Pleasure. The Terrors of the Lord do
as effectually persuade Men, as they are beaten off from such a thing by its
Evil and Danger. When the Heart does Love and Dread God, it will M^lt at
hearing of the Law and Tremble at his Word. Hereby the Kingdom of Heaven is
opened unto all B^lievers, for when they hear thereof it is as if they saw it
with their Eyes. In the midst of Life they can look into the Chambers of Death,
have a Prospect of the Horrors of Dooms Day, and the Misery of Damned Spirits,
which ^ais^ sut^ble Affections; and this is done by Words. And the voice of
Words, which voice they that heard entreated that the Word should not be
spoken unto them any more, for they could not endure that which was commanded,
Heb. 2 19, 20. The Gospel was not brought in after such a terrible manner; yet
it being not in Word only but also in Power, and in the Holy Ghost, and in much
assurance, 1 These. 1. 5. There being the greatest certainty that all will be
fulfilled, though it be in a still voice, yet it causes as much and a more
^asting concern as those had at Mount Sinah. Which declares all that God and
Christ has done for us since the World began, and what is now a doing, Christ
sitting at the right Hand of God, and making Intercession for us, and how we
are to behave our selves in the mean while, and what shall be to Everlasting.
As now what is quickly spoken of is long in transaction, for the Words of a
Minute will comprize all the days of our Life here; so what is, or may be said
of the succeeding one, which is very much, there will be a suitable space for
fulfilling, even all Eternity. As Spiritual and Invisible things are discoursed
of, the hearer is stripped and out of the Body, not minding whither he has any
Flesh about him: As there comes a Salutation, the Babe leaps in the Womb, the
Soul lifts up her self at hearing of such things, and is kept in from the World
to come as an unborn Infant from this; knowing that her spiritual Nature was
designed for spiritual things, all one as the Eye to see, and the out ward
Senses for things sensible. It is her proper business to mind them, and finds a
like Gratification therein, as the outward Romans 8. 5.
Man does in his Employment and the good success thereof. Let not the scornful
Infidel come into our Assemblies, thence Laugh or Imagine how the one sends
forth Wind, the others gape and suck it in, think these to be the greatest
Fools, because The Preacher has something for what he says, but they give and
have nothing, They Sow and Reap the Wind; yet still they are the greatest
Debtors, and also wise in what they do. If we have sown unto you Spiritual
things, is it a great matter if we shall reap your Carnal things? 1 Cor. 9. 11.
Neither do thou smile, O ungodly Man, for even that Reason and Inference thou
pretendest to have for thus doing is a Spiritual thing. As are all thy
Principles of Evil, those black Suggestions which arise from beneath, the
Imaginations of thy dark mind are not seen: Why can not thou likewise
suppose, that they are of a Spiritual nature and real, which are from above,
God and his Grace, which is written and manifested within us? Do not go away in
a slight cursory Apprehension, but judge thoroughly, and even th^^ may come
to perceive of the things, which we cannot represent to another, but only by
the help of Words. They do as much transcend the natural Man's apprehension as
Rational discourses the lgnorant, and common Talk does exceed the noise of
brute Beasts.

All the Affairs of this World, The Government of Kingdoms, Transactions of
Parliament, Proceedings at common Law, Administration of Physic are founded
upon certain Propositions; There are Rules and Skill as to inferior Trades,
which are known by Thought and Observation; and so all the other Actions of
Mankind, both good and bad, are the result of foregoing Thoughts, which either
are or might be made known by Words; and therefore, Whv should this be an
Objection to Religion, which is to nothing besides? But here is an abuse and
mistake, the like whereof cannot be found in any other instance. A plain
Evidence, there is an Enemy which does strangely befool Mankind as to this one
thing. I mean that Deceit of resting in Words only, as mere Devotion, Reading
or Hearing the Scriptures and Sermons, or talking Godly without complying with
what is prayed for, and being doers of the Word. One would think what M^ses
does so often repeat was Impertinent, H^arken O Israel unto the Statutes for to
do them, Deuteronomy. 4. 1. This and the like phrase is repeated over and over in
Deaterone ny, and in innumerable places throug^out the Scripture. One might
know as much without being particularly told thereof. Yet the Wisdom of God
foreseeing this Deceit does so often caution against it. Nothing is more
common in these days then the work done, going to Church and there is an end.
But what is written in Gods Book, and done in his Worship, every least Syllable
and part thereof is significative. And who does not think or do thereafter that
Man's Religion is Vain, and he is to have his Portion with Hypocrites and
unbelievers. Here is also a Lesson for those who instruct others, Who say and
do not, Mat. 23. 3. Thou which Teach another, Teach thou not thy self?
Rom 2. 21. Do thou not conclude thy self, because thou speak against them
which do such things, and do the same? Herein appears the Justice of God that
all those who fall under it shall even Condemn themselves, and being convicted
in their own Conscience, shall subscribe to that as just and equal. But what
Wicked Men do in their own private Thoughts, these do with the Mouth outwardly.
This proclaims our Judge Righteous, because the Offenders affi^m Punishment due
for such things, but themselves Wi^ked and Foolish that still do the same. It
is a Mavelous thing that Reasonable and Wise Men should be deceived after
this manner. Whence does it proceed? ^u^from the subtlety of the Devil, and
that degree of Unbelief which would make it all pass for Words only, even in
those who profess to Believe and Teach the same. There should be agreement
between Thought, Words and Actions; for if the second do vary, it is a Falsehood
and Lie; if the third, it is Dissimulation and Hypocrisy. Cleanse the
Fountain, see that thy Thoughts be right and good, then let thv Words and
Actions be accordingly. Let these be put forth and go together for saving thy
self and those that hear thee. Let them take from thy Mouth to turn into good
Thoughts and Actions for themselves, and tell unto others.

It may be seen by this time, that the Man whose Trade is of Words, is as
honorable and necessary as any. And though he does speak of another World,
that is not Vain, for it is the least part of the World where we Inhabit. It is
not another World, but another part of the World as a Room of an House. This is
seen with our Eyes, and much more to be understood by Reason and Perspectives.
There is something Above and something Beneath, whither the Spirit does go when
the Body is laid in the Grave, and that to arise again. This consideration is
unpleasant, and therefore Men are shy and afraid of those who put in mind
hereof. Whereas we are likewise Men subject to the same things. And why should
they refuse to think of that beforehand which will certainly be? when this
forethought would render them safe if it were thoroughly given way unto.
Mankind need not be in Perplexity, Fear or Stupid Inconsideration; for there
are laid down assured Principles how they may be Heb. 11. 7.
Happy, which are impossible to fail, for then we must be nothing at all. So
none need be enraged against those as Tormenters of the Earth, who are
Instruments of Peace and Safety. Only let us be Submissive and Obedient unto
that Mighty One above, and then no Evil can possibly happen unto us. Fear, and
the Pit, and the Snare are upon thee, O Inhabitant of the Earth, Isa. 24. 17.
But there is a way showed how thou may escape and be freed from them all. If
thou were left to thy self, or would go on unmindful, thou would fall unto
them.

What does preserve from the great Danger and Evil, this does likewise
administer Relief to the lesser Griefs of the People. This is my Comfort in
Affliction, for thy Word has quickened me, Psalm. 119. 50. All Affliction
(except what strikes upon sense, as Pain and Sickness) is the impression of
such sad and resenting Thoughts; now what produces of a different kind, as when
Good Words and Comfortable Words, Zech. 1. 13. are received in, they make
glad as the other did sorrowful, There is an alteration of the Soul, or the one
are set against the other, and so the Vexation is less. We often read that God
Comforts, Isa. 49. 43. and 51^ 12. 2 Cor. 7. 6. He has left a standing means
in his Word, which is the same with himself. His holy Spirit, who is the
Comforter, may cause that to be better understood, and set it home to the Heart
of Man. A lively Faith, a well grounded Hope, a close and true Application of
the Scriptures will give ease to any manner of Adversity. In the multitude of
my thoughts within me, thy Comforts delight my Soul, Psalm. 94. 19. A Man's own
fancies plague him, but what he gathers from thence do refresh him. Let him not
run hastily, but consider upon every verse, and when he has found the Word of
Consolation, let him stay and fix thereon. This is better then all worldly
Com^orts, for they stupifie, they are broken off and interrupted, just divert a
little for the time, but signify nothing at all after they are over. They are
not always, and then is greater anguish; but however they must all fail at
last. But what comes from the Fountain of Life, is a stream continually
running; it gives constant Peace and Quietness to the Soul, and ascends up into
the Paradise of our God where is no Consolation, for there is no need thereof.
Again, Worldly Aid at the very time cannot give true and firm Relief, nor take
off from a great Adversity. But the Lord is a strong Hold in the day of
Trouble, he knows them that trust in him, Nahum 1. 7. We know not who are
Hypocrites, who partial Christains; but who are Sincere and Obedient without
reserve, who understand and can apply the Word of God, they have that Patience
and Resignation, that Complacency and joyful Hope, which the Wicked and
Dissemblers cannot pretend unto. There is a sensible difference between good
and bad as to the enduring of Affliction; One does bear up and is truly
Courageous under it, when they are faint or stupid. Truth is not to be learnt
from Examples, for we cannot see into, and know all their circumstances. Whilst
we reflect upon particular instances, we often doubt of Scripture, (for Truth
is the same in Proposition and Experience) whereas we should in the first place
look to what is written, and be assured all that is true. It is not for us, but
God to judge of every Man's work, he will manifest the Counsels of the Heart,
and then his Word will be found true by what, and how it is with them. Thy Word
is Truth, John. 17. 17. bringing Comfort and Happiness unto Men, but they turn
aside not complying with the terms thereof, neither are they such as that
requires them to be.

The design of the whole Book of God is to build us up in our most holy Faith,
which comprehends the Word of Exhortation, for this follows from the other; and
to teach truly the way of Salvation, this is Instruction; and the rest is
Consolation, to carry us through the Wilderness that he might humble thee, and
that he might prove thee, to do thee good at thy latter end, Deuteronomy. 8. 16. So
Happiness is the end of all. What more can be desired by Man? Wherefore should
he set himself against that, which would do all this? It is because he is not
made thoroughly sensible of thus much. Search and try till you find the worth
thereof. It is a hidden Manna which no Man knows, saving he that receives
it, Rev. 2. 17. Hide it in thy Heart, do not only read and get it without Book,
but have the sense thereof within thee, and thou may come to affirm
experimentally with David, The Law of thy Mouth is better unto me then
Thousands of Gold and Silver, Psalm. 119. 72. It will conduce more to thine
Happiness then all worldly Conveniences, for they perish when here are the
Words of Eternal Life; they do not satisfy the Soul as these; they cannot keep
off Pains and Diseases and Griefs, whereas the Grace and Wisdom arising hence
prevents them many times, and shows the way to the favor of God, who
comfort those that are cast down, and delivers Israel out of all his
Troubles, putting such an end to them, that it was better to have had, then to
have been without them. In the worst of Evils they have greater cause for Joy
then Sorrow. Blessed is the Man that trusts in the Lord, and whose Hope the
Lord is: for he shall be as a Tree planted by the Waters, and that spreads
out her Roots by the Rivers, and shall not see when Heat comes, but her Leaf
shall be green, and shall not be careful in the Year of Drought, neither shall
cease from yielding Fruit, Jer. 17 7, 8.

The Sayings of Philosophers and Wise Men may a little assuage some kind of
Trouble, but are insufficient to support under a great and long Adversity;
Whereas the Scriptures afford Hope and Comfort to the greatest that befall Men.
They may alleviate for Inadvertency and Folly, and prevent it in some measure;
the Word does the same, and much more by providing against the Evils of corrupt
Nature which are the cause of all Sorrow; It does also show a way for what is
past and unavoidable, and admonishes to Sin no more, least worst things befall
us. The Dictates of Morality and Humane reasoning may do somewhat as to
self-Vexation, lesser injuries and reproaches from others, inconsiderable
losses and such like; but for the greater Miseries can find no help as the
frailty of Man's Nature, dangerous Diseases, fears of Death, doubtfulness of the
succeeding State, how to secure future Happiness and avoid Misery. Here the
ancient Sages are Dumb, and they cannot tell what to say. They are in
Perplexity and Amazement themselves, how then should they consult for others?
They were lifted up with a conceit of the Benefit they did unto Mankind, when
their Consolatory discourses could avail only as to those light things which
might be laughed away, or Courageously born; Or the wicked Men of our days find
remedy against by Pots and Company; for if things were so as they said, this
last was a sure Relief. They might indeed regulate the disorders of Fancy and
Opinion; But for what did really make Men miserable by shaking the Powers of
the Soul, what did torment and endanger the Body is by Philosophers left
remediless. They would blunder out something, which was ridiculous conjecture
or uncertainty. As, What is suffered here, would have an end, which the meerest
Idiot knew as well as they. None is Happy before Death, A sad Consolation to
those who knew not what should be after that; and when they did surmize it
would be an utter end, how absurb must their Arguing be? As if Man was made
only for Misery, and his utmost Happiness was to be freed from that and be no
more for ever. What is more miserable in Life, then to be willing to die? To
have an impatient desire after ease and Happiness, but to find none till become
without Sense or Capacity. Some of them did go further as to talk of
Immortality and a future State, of this with much doubting; but then they did
raise the Fears of Mankind, of what sort it would be, whether Happiness or
Misery. They would speak most of Glory, Liberty and the Elisian Fields. This
was insisted on as a Mighty word of Consolation for all the Evils here; But
then the mistake and delusion was (which considering Men did spy out and
therefore received to assurance) even what they were forced to grant when they
came to discuss it particularly, that there were two kinds of Futurity, Reward
and Punishment, and they knew not exactly what Men were to do to obtain the
one, what to leave undone to avoid the other. Their Ignorance as to this kept
the World in suspense, did raise their Horror and Dread, but not allay it;
What they would have suggested as a Dellverance from Trouble, they could give
no certainty but worse might abu^e for us in the succeeding Condition. They
might impose upon the vulgar with their plausible Speeches and Eloquence, but
Men that could examine Consequences did not give so much heed to them.

Neither is this any Argument against Christian Religion, because it happens so
now: Common People and Women do gladly hear thereof, when Politicians and those
who would pass for Wise Men among us, do not so much mind it; for this
Diversity is to be observed. They of old did slight vain Philosophy, but it was
after they had searched its Principles, and found them only conjectural and
fallacious; whereas the Men of our times contemn our Faith and Practice without
Examination, for let them admit this thoroughly, and then speak lightly thereof
if they can. This is the Policy of Satan whereby his Kingdom stands, he would
not let them try what he beats them from, for if they should, they would not
continue with him. This is the difference of Truth and Falsehood, the one
appears more true by the Touch Stone, the other false. The only Argument
against Truth is to put it off, the way to resist is to be at a distance, and
come not near it. Thus Paganism spread and continued of old. Thus Christianity
was endeavored to be stifled, and its further increase hindered. Here is the
reason that of old Men did walk in their own ways, and even of those that do
soat this present time. They were willing to be Happy then, and unwilling to be
Miserable, and so are now; when they were in Affliction or Trouble, they were
willing to be eased and delivered, so they are now. The Truth was not so
clearly manifested to the greater part of the World. The times of this
Ignorance God winked at, Acts 17. 30. He made Men of such Faculties and Powers
to see what they could bring forth, and now he has given more assistance by
further Revelation, if any thing may be done yet more. God makes Men now as he
did from the Beginning, with the same Reason, Inclinations, Desires, Fears and
Aversations: we who stand in these latter days on the Earth, wherein iniquity
does abound with more Weakness and Sorrow, have also more helps against them
from Scripture, which is given by Inspiration from God, and therefore must be
better and more certain then of Man's Invention and Wisdom.

That has been disproved and sound Vain, when there is help to be had of God.
It is letter to ^ust in the Lord then to p^^^^ fidence in Man, Psalm. 118. 8.
Some have sought Happiness in this thing, and some in that, so for Relief in
Adversity; But we ^ill remember the Name of the Lord our God. They are brought
down and fallen, but we are ris^n and standupright, Psalm. 20. 7, 8. This is
true in seeking after Happiness and Prevention of Misery by other Men or our
own Wisdom and ways; they all are disappointed, for it is to be had in God
only. The Men of this World look after good in Flesh, and so they would keep
off Evil; but when that is stricken and begins to fade, when it cannot relish
by reason of Pain, and the anguish of Spirit does so break forth that this is
not able any longer to pacify, then they resort to the Wisdom of Man's words,
but that will not profit nor deliver them; So they must lie down under their
Calamities, expecting worse things, or come unto God and his Word. What an
Argument is this to overcome the averseness and obstinacy of Man's nature? There
is Invitation for the greatest Sinners. Come unto me all ye that Labor and are
heavy laden, and I will give you rest; Take my Yoke upon you, Mat. 11. 29. Let
them keep Gods Commandments, and so they may have that Hope of eternal Life,
which God that cannot lie promised before the World began, ^ it. 1. 2. This
gives satisfaction concerning that great doubt of Futurity; There is a way
showed by patient continuance in well doing (which any one may that will comply
with, and put forth the Principles of Good in him) to partake of the blessed
Immortality. Romans 4. 20.
If it were not to derogate from Faith by which God is Glorified, I could lay
down how our Religion relies upon the greatest certainty that possibly can be,
for the Happiness and Safety of Mankind. So where Philosophy was at a loss,
this helps and gives firm establishment to the Man as it shows unto him how his
Condition shall be after Death, according as he orders his Conversa^ion now. It
may be said, he need not trouble himself with things afar of, yet they may be
nearer then he is aware, even to Morrow; The time after he is gone out of the
World, is manifestly Ionger then whilst he is in, and will as certainly be; so
he is equally obliged to be concerned about it.

It is a sad case when one must be forced to borrow Comfort from the other
World, for then commonly none is to be had in this, whereof we are most assured
because we are herein, but the other is to come and of doubtful Expectation,
Show us some Relief here. Such are the suggestions of Unbelief, which yet may
be answered by Sense and by Reason; for our Fyes behold other parts of the
World then what we are in now, ^^e Spirit from within testifies that we are not
here in our pr^per place, Experience assures we must depart hence in a very
little time, The natural Understanding leads up to the Knowledge of God who
made and governs all things. We can well suppose that he who gave a Being, and
so many Conveniences for one part of us, can also provide for the other: As he
is the Father of Mcrcies, so the God of all Consolation; we taste and see them,
so we may perceive this also. The nourishment of the Body according to his
appointed means springs from the Earth whence it was taken, so likewise does
the true Comfort of the Soul, according to its Original come from above, the
Father, the Word and the Spirit. There is nothing below suitable to this
Spiritual and Restless part of us. lf we had Comfort only in the things of this
World, we were of all Creatures must Miserable, for they Psalm. 145. 16, 19.
have what sati^fies from what is before them, but not we being designed to
Thirst and Labor after greater things.

A Voice was heard in Rama, Lamentation and bitter Weeping, Rachel Weeping for
her Children, refused to be Comforted for her Children, because they were not,
Jer. 31. 15. So it is all the World over, people are irrecoverably deprived of
persons and things. Nothing can countervail the loss of them, but hope of
having and meeting them again, for which we are beholden unto a Resurrection
and another State. It is manifest they are not had here again, and we are
tormented with earnest longings after them, and have real thoughts of seeing
them yet again. which were never put in our nature in Vain. Thus Man dies not
as a Beast dies; for there are no such affections from the Dam or others of
the Herd, as we have concerning Relations, Friends and Acquaintance. Says the
Messiah, our Lord, These things have I spoken unto you that in me ye might have
peace, in the World ye shall have Tribulation, but be of good cheer, I have
overcome the World, John 16. 33. If the Heavens were not sometimes opened, and
a little dew did descend from above; If we had not sometimes little sprinklings
of the Divine Favor; If we had not recourse to that Book where the words are
pleasant as an Honeycomb, Sweet to the Soul, and Health to the Bones, Prove.
16. 24. We should have a weary and tiresome Journey through this place, for
here is no rest and nothing proper for us. How prophetically do Men speak of
Fnturity before it was plainly revealed? I Genesis 49. 18.
have waited sor thy Salvation, O Lord, says dying Jacob. The Words seem to
come in without Connection on the former, as Light immediately sprung into the
Soul, a full assurance then of what he had faintly hoped and forethought of
his few and evil days, and now it was beginning to be accomplished. I had
fainted unless I had believed to see the Goodness of the Lord in the Land of
the Living, Psalm. 27. 13. This is not, for all here are dead or dying, so we
are as soon as we begin to draw Breath. Even the Inhabitants of the earthly
Canaan do not boast of the Happiness which a^ises from the Ground, of their
Health and Plenty; but of the Goodness and loving Kindness of the Lord, of
their Trust in him. Much more should those under the Gospel, Who are kept by
the power of God through Faith unto Salvation, ready to be revealed in the last
time, 1 Pet. 4. 5. Let not your Hearts be troubled, Believe in God, Believe in
me, John 14. 1. The Sense of him above, under whose good Providence we live all
our days, those many Mansions in his House, verse 2. So there is room for us if
we use his Grace to become meet, these are greater Comforts then the World can
give, which are not to be despised nor cast off as a res^rve, for compare them
a little with yours ye worldly Minded and Unbelievers. The reason why you set
them at naught, is from Want and Ignorance. But woe unto you that are Rich, sor
yet have received your Consolation. VVo unto you that are Full for ye shall
Hunger; VVo unto you that Laugh now, for ye shall Mourn and Weep, Luke 6. 24,
25. Being puffed up with Sensnality, and your Souls become as it were of the
same nature with the Body, they begin to relish the same Enjoyments also, and
to approve of them. You now care for nothing more, but you shall be taken from
these things. You who rejectthe good things of Gods Kingdom now offered unto
you, shall then lament the refusal of them. Will you lightly esteem of that
which does ever remain, when those things are done away which you highly value
now? Only be Wise in time, consider of that before hand which you must at
length be sensible of whither you will or not. T^y and be acquainte and your
selves will affirm (not withstanding all Pleasures, Enjoyment, Company and
Recreations; the two first make Brutish not Happy, the others make unmindful
for a little while, but do not prevent Misery) yet in the midst of Health, Life
and Vigor, much more in the time of Tribulation, There is no such true
Happiness and sincere Comfort, as what arises from God, and the things of
another World.

Evil does beset and fall upon us in the three^old capacity of Mind, Body and
Estate; which does Afflict as it disturbs and is contrary Of Sorrow.
to the regular Order of each. Indeed they (especially the two first) are
connected, that if the one suffers the other does also. The Souls that God has
made may be compared to so many Rivers, which as they all come from him, so are
they to run through the Earth, and to disembody themselves again into that
infinite Ocean of Being and Happiness. Now there is one Labors to divert the
Stream, to make it run another way, or stop its course. The first is sinful
Pleasures, the second is Negligence and Sloth. The Soul has some
Foreknowledge which way she is to go, and an Inclination toward the right,
and thence whatsoever does hinder and seek to turn aside does also disturb. If
she would keep to this first Principle, carefully observing the Original
tendencies of her Nature, and suspect every thing that does in the least thwart
that, all the Devils in Hell could never deceive her, for she might know the
Connection of Sin and Sorrow. Indignation and Wrath, Tribulation and Anguish
upon every Soul of Man that does Evil, Romans 2. 8, 9. This contradicts the Pure
and Spiritual part of us, which raises those several kinds of Sorrow. So the
cure for it is by taking heed against Sin which is the Troubler of the Man, By
Repentance as to the past, and watchfulness for the future. Sorrow does arise
from other Afflicting Obj^cts of Body and Estate, and is the resentment of
them; but confine it to the Soul, and it is occasioned by Sin only, as that is
divided in Evil, Falsehood and Folly; all which are contrary to that Good Truth
and Wisdom wherewith she is ^ndued, and is to improve th^se Talents to the
glory of our Master, who will give a Reward according as every one is found
Meet and Faithful. There is a Vexation all along, which would be sensible if
not smothered, when we do not Trade to his Use; So on the other hand there is
Joy and Complacency when we do. Great Peace have they which love thy Law, and
nothing shall offend them, Psalm. 1. ^9 165. And the Ra^so^ed of the Lord shall
return and come to Sion with Songs, and everlasting Joy shall be upon their
Heads: They shall obtain Joy and Gladness, and Sorrow and Sighing shall flee
away, Isa. 35. 10.

That propension and natural tendency which is in Man's nature Of Melancholy.
to know God, and to come into the way of his Commandments, the workings of
Grace and regrets of Conscience, that Dissatissaction and Restlesness of mind
for not doing what he ought, and all those several things which incline to
Repentance and Obedience, do pass in the World for pure Melancholy. It is an
Aspersion cast upon sincere Religion where it has an influence upon the Life
and Actions, where is universal carefulness against Sin; and who will not
comply with the mere outward Divertisment of Evil, Lying and Foolish Talking,
he shall be Obnoxious to the Character of a dull and m^serable Soul. All
Thoughts of God and the things pertaining to him are by the Ignorant and
Ungodly thus esteemed; and further are those, Having a Form of Godliness, but
d^nying the Power thereof, 2 Timothy 3. 5. Whatever is more then their size, they
would impute to the blackness of Blood, an heavy phlegmatic Constitution, or
such like. This is one of the Devises of Satan to keep people off from Reli^ion
in general, then from the Truth and Since^ity thereof, by raising such a Report
which is commonly received; and whilst he suggests not to give way to
Melancholy, he turns Men aside from the way of Peace, Life and Bless^dness. All
Religion is irksome and tedious to those who are una^quainted therewith, and so
it is with them who practice it a little, but not thoroughly.

The Scripture is fulfilled as it speaks of that Enmity against God, Romans 5.
10. Romans 8. 7. that Root of bitterness, Heb. 12. 15. Acts 8. 23. that Avers^ess
and Alienation, Col. 1. 20, 21. that Hatred and Opposition of Good, the
Stubborn and Perverse Spirit, the Trouble and Restlesness, those Fears and sad
Expectations in the Wicked, which are the cause of all this. They may come to
the Ordinances and outward Profession, and yet remain the same still, not
transformed by the renewing of the mind. The Word is found true as ^^ ^peaks of
the reason of these things, and why may it ^ot be believ^d as it mentions the
Love of God, being r^^^^iled to him deligh^ing in God and that which is Good,
that Joy, Peace and Gladness of Heart; those loving and familiar Appellations
of Father, ^riend, H^^band, the expressions of Kindness to us, and our
Thankfulness and Praise. The Lord Reigns, let the Earth R^j^^ce, Psalm 97. 1.
Truly God is Goud to ^srael, even to such as are of a clean Heart, Psalm. 73. 1.
Are all these written in Vain, or for our Comfort? Do others by sad Experience
confirm the Truth of what is aforementioned, and have none the happy feeling
thereof? Surely there are some whom the Scripture calls Bl^ss^d, who have the
favor of God and are careful to preserve it in all Duty and Obedience. It may
be observed there are two manner of ways in the World; Some in all their
Actions have Conscience toward God, others not. The Scriptures declare the
effect of both by Peace and Trouble, one part is sensible of the disorder
within, And why may not others feel, know and testify of the good Promises?
For themselves might also if they would do the same things. It were easy to
make things clear, if that Prejudice was taken away of judging by Examples and
humane Sayings more then from divine Testimony and Truth. Hypocrites and many
who seem to be Religious (but the Apostle by failure in one Christian Duty
pronounces their Religion to be Vain, Jam. 1. 26.) do most oppose what is the
Doctrine of Scripture. They accuse their Brethren of Melancholy who abound in
the Work of the Lord, who spend their time in Meditation of his Law. They call
Contempt of the World Stupidity, the avoiding of sinful Compliances and
appearances of Evil a sour morose Temper, not fit to live amongst Men; The not
running too much after sensual Pleasures, is sencelesly styled an heavy and
sluggish Disposition, which is not refined enough to receive them. And what is
done by the Grace and Fear of God, are the effects of mere Melancholy. Every
avoiding of Sin and good Action to which a Misconstruction can be applied, is
by them censured. It is not so much minded what the profane Sinner says, but
what comes from them who make ^ fair show in the Flesh, yea, the Teachers of
the Law, this is entertained by Inquisitive and Considering Men. It is
dangerous for Numb. 13. 32.
any to bring an evil Report upon the good Land, but worse for those who
pretend to have searched it; for though not in express words, yet by manifest
Conclusion they do the same, as, We must serve God, and that so much which is
pleasant, but what is more is Melancholy, for so are those Calumniated who go
further, and find more Benefit then themselves. It is ^urmised such a thing is
Harsh and impracticable, so he is thought an hard Master who requires, and that
his Commandments are grievous, which is abominably False. Where the Love of God
is fixed, that makes all things easy and delightful done in Reference to him.
They have Peace and Satisfaction all their days, a well grounded Hope, and are
secured against the terrors of Death. They do every thing of a cheerful mind,
and not grudgingly.

But where the work is only done, and people are glad it is over; Whose Holy
and Spiritual things are left as soon as out of the Closet or Congregation, and
care for no other Hearing or Conversation thereof: Who run on in their manner
of serving God, and certainly conclude themselves Right because they have the
Course and Generality of the World on their side, though they have been
mistaken all along in matters of pure and sincere Religion: Who do not
universally prove what they do, and if they did, could find no Rejoicing in it;
^ndeed their way may become familiar and customary to them, for vain Hopes and
Formality if not examined may produce some Gladness and Exultancy; And then
they reject what is more for Melancholy: These will admire so many words should
be made about what they conceive and do in short. They may look upon what is
here and afore-offered as a parcel of Melancholy Notions and contradictory to
the Argument of Happiness, which they fancy as only apt to breed Disturbance
and sadness of Mind. But i^ the whole Work of Religion might be made so short,
Why did God make so large and full a Revelation in Scripture, which is to be
searched and contains infinite matter? Why did he afford such a long John 5.
39. Psalm. 14. 2.
time to Man upon Earth, to understand and seek God, if it might have been done
so quickly? His doings are all Wisdom, and no more then what is Necessary.
Religion is not a Business of such sudden dispatch as some would falsely imagine
and make it. The general pr^j^dice against Truth is, that it makes M^lancholy;
But he that will not be thus Melancholy, shall be Miserable for ever. We learn
from 2 These. 2. 10, 13. They are to receive the Love of the Truth who would be
saved; from hence spring their Principles of acting aright, and they must know
before hand to avoid what is Evil and Destructive. The Knowledge of Truth
brings unto God who has established all things, under whose Shadow we may be
secure from all Evil and Danger.

Indeed there may be mistaken ways of pleasing him, which have no Footstep in
his Word; on a furious unwarranted Zeal, which exposing to Trouble and
Inconvenience without his Acceptance, may run out of Breath in a wrong Road,
and so spend it self in weariness and doubt of mind. There may be a^ overmuch
Righteous^^ss in not Commanded things, but in keeping close to the lines of
known Duty, in observance of the Precepts is application and hope of the
Promises, there is Approbation of Conscience, Blessed are those Servants who
are so doing. It is called a Work of Faith and Labor of Love, (...) These.
(...) 3. but still they contentedly do it, looking for the Reward and Rest, as
they have a little in the mean while to carry them through here; yea, this is
an Antidote against Melancholy, for they would be so otherwise: the restless
and busy Faculties of Man must be doing somewhat, though less troubled when in
any acting, yet are uneasy if not on their proper Business, as Religion is of
the mind and outward Calling of the Body; and this in subservier^y to the
other. A strange wresting of things, to call that M^lancholy Isa, 5. 20.
which only prevents and keeps it off; a Disturbance which belongs to our
Peace; to be driven away and avoided, which is the chief Good to be sought
after and cherished.

None are more Melancholy then who seem to decline it, for their utmost
Happiness lies in Stupefaction and the studied Arts of unmindfulness; but take
away these and they sink into Dumpishness, or are tortured in mind. They having
either a dead and troubled Heart, do not know what Peace is, and must find out
some cure for that which would bring them to Repentance or Desperation.
O'foolish Sinners, who has bewitched you? Why will you not suffer Gods design
to be answered in you? for he would have you turn from your Sins and Vanities;
the guilt whereof if permitted to stir, causes Sorrow; if stifled, heaviness of
Mind: All this is a sad Earnest of worse things to come, if not prevented this
only way. You must either comply or smother; but how unreasonable is ^he last?
for if you could put away instead of putting afar off the evil Day, it will
come at the appointed time do what you can, you only shut out the Sense
thereof: If in driving away Melancholy, you could utterly beat off Death; If
you could hinder your Souls from being stripped naked and sent into the other
World where are no Company, Pleasure or Recreations to harden; If you could
escape the day of Judgment and the dreadful Event thereof; then it were some
advantage to chase away Serio^s^ess, but as things now stand, it is the
greate^^ Folly and ^an^er. Be persuaded to endure it here for a little time.
Dare to be somewhat dull for a day or two; and suffer the l^ksom^^^ss of what
you have done in Iniquity, 2 Cor. 7. 8, 9, 10.
and begin the Work of Righteousness. If people could be prevailed upon to be
M^l^ncholy a little (and they must, or suffer Eternally what is worse) they
would be Christians in Deed and in Truth, for this is the great hindrance with
a^, High and Low; Wise and Ignorant: Religion makes dull, and therefore they
keep off. Here again is to be repeated the former Observation. Things at first
make a show of the contrary; Whatever brings Happiness and real Good to
Mankind, has a slight appearance of Misery and Evil. The Wisdom from above
does bring Peace, Satis^actron, Delight and Assurance; but the Enemy who lets
from all that is Good would Suggest, it raises Trouble, Disquiet, Fear and such
like. Many think of what is aforementioned, as dull things, because they do not
make much outward noise and merriment. But they do not understand the true
Happiness of a Man. Peace, etc. What can be more desired? Would they be
Children always in Laughter or Crying? now up in excessive Mirth, and down
again in Dejectedness and Anguish? The first at the very instant does not
satisfy, and there is weariness in it; the other does really Afflict. It is
desirable to be between both in a sober composed State, to be as other
Creatures pleased with themselves. And though there is a knowledge of
Imperfection and Vanity, yet to go on contentedly to a better State, and
comfort himself in the mean time with hopes thereof. He is just as a Man should
be, for the Mouth was not made always to be contracted: Who is end^ed with real
Wisdom, cannot take pleasure in Fools Mirth or an idle Jest. Who are passed
over the festivities of Childhood and Youth, cannot still show themselves
transported with Vanities: Who have seen and fully observed the same
heretofore, are not to be admired if not lifted up with little Novelties: Whose
Conversation is in Heaven, and their Affections on things above, shall they be
blamed if knowing the difference, and they do not show forth the like rejoicing
at the common Accidents and little things here below? Who do not resort to
Drink and Company to cheer up their Spirits, or still the Disorder within, for
they are in a right frame already. The Sea within is smooth and like a molten
Looking* Glass, where they can reflect and be satisfied with their inward
likeness.

It is Impertinent, if not Sinful to dissuade them from Holy things who delight
therein: As long as they can go on in such a course all their days, let them do
as much as Gods Grace shall direct rhem. Another knows not what Comfort they
find therein, how they have their Body in subjection, and to what a measure of
Love and Spirituality they are arrived; So they may do those Acts without
tiring, which others cannot now that are not yet so far attained, but may
attain. The Scripture makes frequent mention of those who do not enough for
Heaven, but nothing against them who do too much, for there is no danger of
exceeding. That particularly lays down all things necessary and relating to
Man's Salvation, and also speaks of his temporal Happiness in Subordination to
that, yet there is not one word mentioned concerning Religious Melancholy or
Mopishness. Without question, there were some in the days of the inspired
Writers, whose Conversation was obnoxious to that Character as now. What the
World calls Melancholy in Scripture Phrase is Sorrow, and to that somewhat is
said by way of Comfort; but it was to be in God, not to take people off, nor to
have recourse to those Arts as Sinners do. The best way of solving Fears,
Scruples and Disquiet, is to give a people a right understanding of them; but
let none resort to the Pleasures of Sin and idle Company, which increase, but
not cure them. We read of the Temptations and Devices of Satan, Spiritual
Desertions, Ignorance, intervening Sins and Infirmities which cause Vexation
and Trouble: but nothing of illness of Blood or Bodily Constitution, there is
no intimation of this in Holy Writ: But it is the Opinion of late Physicians
which has been received so far by Divines, that to improve this notion of
Melancholy a little further, and the other of Enthusiasm would be the ready and
effectual way to cause the Holy One of Israel to cease from before us, Isa. 30.
11. For let all regrets of Conscience pass for Melancholy, and the workings of
Gods Spirit for Enthusiasum or ^a^cy, inward Religion is in danger to be
destroyed, which is the most sensible Evidence of the Truth and certainty
thereof. That can never fail, but the Knowledge thereof may be lost; as several
times already it has near been, but will not be so again because of the
Promises of God, which are near at hand, even at the very door to be
accomplished.

Is there then nothing in bodily Constitution? Not so much as is pretended, and
that again may be altered. The corruptible Body presses down the Soul which is
common to all; and that difference of temper in particular persons, which yet
is not so much as commonly talked of, serves for an Exercise and Trial of the
greater Virtue: That the Soul may yet ascend and lift up it self. And then the
Power of Gods Grace and their complying with it can, and does actually change
the natures of Men. That natural tendency and Seriousness was therefore put in
them to move toward their right end; And also finding no true Happiness here,
they are prompted to look out for one to come. It is so ordered by the good God
that all Mankind might be saved and come to the Knowledge of the Truth, some
more this way, some another, according to their Inclinations of Soul, Body and
Condition of Life. One has the Advantage in this thing, another in that; but
some Degree of what is understood by the Word Melancholy is communicated to
all. Fro^lick and Mirth are more incidental to Youth, But there it is a
striving against nature; for if not supported by outward Helps and Objects, it
does fall down into Seriousness, so it is of riper Age. The great mistake is,
we observe many things without the reason of them. All things tend to their
Center; and what is in Man moves toward his proper end, which is doing the
things for which God has made him. As the Fish on dry Land beats it self to
Death because not in his own Element; As the Tur^le mourns away for want of her
Companion; there is an uneasiness even from very Childhood if not in some
Action: So if Man were kept away from God, debarred from Company and always to
be idle, he would pine away in Sorrow, which works Death before the time,
because there is such a strong Inclination in his nature to the first
principally, Ezekiel. 24. 23.
and the others in subordination to him. Although Wicked and Ungodly Men do
pursue the two lesser ends, yef forsaking the great Principal upon which the
others should depend, they are tormented for want of true Happiness all their
Life long, so that by reason of the weariness even they are willing to die. The
Righteous desire a more full Enjoyment of him, whom they have known only by
Faith and seen darkly. Their Soul is athirst for God. When shall I come to
appear before God? they are more induced to long after it, because of the Vain
and imperfect state they are in here; they do indee desire Immortality, and
shall have it. The Wicked being conscious whom they have despised and
forgotten, they wish to Sleep for ever, for they had rather so continue then
awake and rise up to Punishment. What a sad thing it is to be deceived, and
willingly ignorant of their proper End? To be restless all the way, and
disappointed at last? To live in a perpetual Violence and Contradiction to
themselves, to turn aside the Soul from its natural bent. To keep her, though
in Pain and Displeasure, from her Center and Rest; and at length when she would
have ascended upwards, to sink into the Bottom as a Stone. To have notrue
Comfort and Satisfaction in the Light of the Living, nor whil^t the days of
Darkness draw on. Now Consider this ye that forge^ God; Whose Souls are yet in
the Body: Take away the weights of Sin that do clog and press down. Remember
the days past before habitual Sin and evil Habits came on, to what did the
Motions within aspire and prompt unto? Before the Spirit was made unclean, did
it not soar up toward the Father of Spirits? When it was not corrupted with
Malice and Stubboinness, Had you not a good mind toward God? when your Desires
were Pure and Sincere, After whom were they most sutably inclined? To him
above, and nothing here. Then you were whispered by Satan, or told by his
Instruments, to go that way was to be Melancholy, and to avoid that you did
follow Sin and Vanity. Is not this really Sorrow? But it may be through the
Deceitfulness of Sin thou can not tell how to get out, but thou must. Be
advised first to forbear the outward Acts, VVash and make Clean, put away your
former Evil Doings, the Clouds will go off, and the Sun may again appear in its
full Might. Then resume thy former Thoughts, and do accordingly. This kind of
Melancholy leads up to the Most High, from whom comes every Good thing.
Observe all the Commandments, but there is no need of laying any greater Burden
on thy self by performances which are not required. The Service God has
instituted is reasonable, which may be done with a ready and willing mind.

Be diligent in thy Calling, for this is the Will of God, and agreeable to
Peace as an Employment of those powers of Body and Mind. Keep good Company, for
there is a strong inclination in our Nature toward this. And though now we are
often separated from one another by our several Business and Action, yet these
shall cease when the times of refreshing shall come, when there shall be no
need of Action because the end is obtained. We are not now to be always in
Company, for we have something else to do, and also they do not continually
divert through the remainders of Sin and Ignorance; though so much the more
according as we are purged from these, and have less Avocation. All Melancholy
and Disquiet which is the same thing, does arise from not answering the natural
ends, and therefore the way to avoid it, is to know our own Frame, and to
carefully comply with the just tendencies thereof.

All irregularity and disorder in the Flesh is Sickness or Pain. Of ness. Sick.
And the Lord God formed Man out of the Dust of the Ground, Genesis 2. 7. Then the
Ground was not Accursed, nor the Creature brought into the bondage of
Corruption; so it is conceived he was made Immortal, but after his
Transgression Thorns and Thistles sprang up, the Seed of Diseases and Mortality
was received in with the Juice of the forbidden Fruit. Sickness came Genesis 2. 19.
into the World upon Man and upon Beast, and every living Creature, for they
were formed out of the Ground before the Fall. They partake of the Punishment
of Original Sin, but not so Jer. 12. 4.
much of Actual and Intermedial Sins; for it may be observed, that they do not
languish under pain or Ilness from within (unless by Man's Tampering and
Cruelty) until what brings on their Death. Whence we learn that to avoid
Sickness or Pain, To Hereditary Guilt let us add as little more as we can; Let
us comply with Gods Law, which he has revealed for the Benefit of miserable
and falen Man. Be Temperate in all things, use Labor and Exercise according to
the measure God has ordained. it is no unbecoming thing to go to the Herd and
consider their ways, for Health is a present and sensible good. We are alike
according to the Body with them: The different shape does not alter much, as
appears by their several Kinds. How is their well Being and sound Constitution
preserved? Nature goes on with them according to its Course. They eat what is
wholesome and suitable, without superadded Sauces and Mixture. Think upon their
Rest and Sleep, which they leave off before the rising of the Sun. See them in
their goings forth and comings in, what degrees of Motion they use, and they
are better for doing so much as designed unto. The Horse and Ox performing due
Service do better run out their appointed time, nor perish sooner unless over
wrought by Tyranny or Covetousness. A good Man is Merciful unto his Beast: Much
more should those that are Rich have the like in consideration for Servants and
the Poorer part of Mankind. Not suffering them to Labor beyond their Strength,
for that exhausts and consumes the vital Spirits, as again others do Destroy
themselves before their time by Sloth and Idleness. Moderation is excellent,
and carries through all things of the World.

When the Faculties of mind are pure and free in a sound Body, they can better
exert themselves. It is a great Blessing srom God, so it is to be sought for
and preserved by his established means. What Man is he that desires Life, and
loves many days that he may see Good? keep thy Tongue from Evil, and thy Lips
from speaking Guile. Depart from Evil and do Good, seek Peace and pursue it.
The Eyes of the Lord are upon the Righteous, and his Ears are open unto their
Cry, Psalm. 34. 12, 13, 14, 15. This is the way to prevent loss of Liberty, or
Life from the offended Magistrate, Violence and Mischief from a Quarrelling
Neighbor, so he is safe as to Man; And then from within himself, Nothing is so
good a remedy to keep the Body in its due Temperament, as avoiding Sin and
doing commanded Duty. Gods Providence here stands engaged for outward Accidents
and Casualties. Sickness or Pain does happen one of these three ways, and so we
are taught as to each of them. Ye shall serve the Lord your God, and he shall
Bless thy Bread and thy Water: And I will take away Sickness from the midst of
thee, Exodus 23. 25. He has put a standing Wholesomeness and Nourishment in
those Creatures appointed for our Food; and if any Poison or Hurt should be in
them, (as that is seldom in common things, but rather in new Inventions of
Luxury) he can by a Thought or some other manner divert from receiving thereof,
or afterward cause that it shall not hurt them. Nature, which is made the
great Temptation to Unbelief, does plainly manifest his Eternal Power and
Godhead, for he first erected such a standing Course of things, and even now
Governs it; He overrules the whole, and disposes each part thereof. So he is
not to be thrust out, but should be sought unto as well as the Physicians and
outward Help. He in the first place, 2 Chronicles. 16. 11, 12.
and they in Subordination unto him. The dull and unthankful World will cry out
upon such a Prescription or Plaster, and therefore he shall have the thanks
who was the Instrument of bringing it unto them. Whereas they might remember
who made the Body; Who was it that gave Skill and Understanding to the
Physician? He can also turn his Counsel into Foolishness. It was God who first
made and gave that Virtue in Physic and Salve to Heal, for otherwise a piece
of Wood might do the same. He has endued things with their several Efficacies
and Uses. I taught Ephraim also to go, taking them by their Arms: But they knew
not that I Healed them, Hos. 11. 3. He gives, preserves and continues our
Health. But yet what is corruptible and weak, will wax old and decay. Health
consists in such an exact disposition of Humors, which is easily disturbed by
Violence from without, Defect or Excess from within. The Goodness and Wisdom
above does ordain Strength out of Weakness, and continuance from tottering
things; otherwise it were to be admired that we are not Sick always instead of
being so sometimes. A Sparrow does not fall to the ground without the Will of
our heavenly Father: Nor any Chastisment light upon the Sons and Daughters of
Men, without his Permission or Order. He suffers such an one to fall under the
harm of a second Cause, or adverse Accident. If we would search and examine to
the utmost, then confess and give Glory unto God, we might many times find our
Disease to be the natural effect of some Sin or Provocation: We became at first
subject unto Sickness by Sin only; So if we reflect upon Genesis 2. 17.
all our foregoing Actions and Circumstances, There is some evil which
insensibly alters and breaks the sound Constitution, or brings it on Speedily
and Violently. The next thing is to be humbled for the same, to accept the
Punishment of our Iniquity, Lev. 26. 43. I will bear the Indignation of the
Lord, for I have Sinned against him, Mic. 7. 9. We must sincerely resolve, if
God should spare us this time, to watch more carefully against the same for the
future, now to be unfeignedly sorry for it, and to cry mightily unto God. The
King of Israel is a Merciful King, he will be Appeased and Reconciled.

Behold Happy is the Man whom God Corrects: Therefore despise not thou the
Cbastening of the Almighty, Job 5. 17. Then he fully perceives that false show
of Happiness, with which Fools and Blind are deluded all along: Which they
might know in the mean while if they would consider it thoroughly, as they do
ever and anon slightly. Outward things cannot give so much aid as they vainly
promise. They are all passed away as a Dream, and cannot help in the greatest
time of need. My Flesh and my Heart fails, but God is the strength of my
Heart and my Portion for ever, Psalm. 73. 26. If the Conscience is accused by
sin, let the Sick Man cast it forth by Confession and Prayer; and the Sea will
cease from raging: The mind will become more quiet. Whether the Body dies or
lives he is safe, when he has done all things to obtain the Mercy and
acceptance of Almighty God.

It is a sad Story of those who in time of Dangerous Sickness have made great
shows of Reformation and Amendment, and after Recovery have returned again unto
Folly. And they have not cried unto me with their Heart, when they howled upon
their Beds, Hos. 7. 14. Which word imports no true in ward Sorrow, but an
outward noise upon apprehension of Danger, which goes off with it. However God
cannot be imposed upon, he knows the Thoughts long before, searches the Heart
and tries the Reins, discovers the bottom and inward reserves, according to
which he will judge. So it is not what they pretend, but what they will really
be. Those who have been for a superficial and slight Repentance, which they did
hope might avail if they should Die, but if they Recover then to return to
their former evil ways, I say these should have done well to have considered,
What moved them to any Repentance at all; the same should engage them to
continue and perfect it. For admit you should certainly live, it is but a
Reprieve only: You will be Sick again, or what is worse cut off suddenly. And
then things will appear exactly at the same manner again, yea, worse for the
former Hypocrisy and Dissembling. As also for that more Sin and Guilt is
increased. How many years may be added unto your Life is not known, but it will
be a sad thing to have lived Ionger, to have committed more Iniquity, and so
Die hardened, Impenitent or feigned at last. At first recovery is uncertain,
for many have lulled themselves with hope thereof, till Death has been upon
them. Many things might be urged to dissuade people from doing Foolishly and
Presumptuously. Their own Eternal Happiness or Misery lies at stake, It is not
a matter to trifle or deal deceitful with. Be prevailed upon as you tender the
good of Soul and Body, to have your Repentance true and sincere. By the Trouble
or Pain of them, think of the Worm which shall never die, and the Fire which
shall not be quenched, and which are to be escaped from only this way. Believe
in God and Jesus Christ, that all things contained in the old and new Testament
are certainly true. Faith and Repentance are necessary for all Men both in time
of Health and Sickness; which whosoever has according to Truth is sure, for these
entitle unto the Promises of him with whom we have to do.

Health does consist in a regular Disposition and due Motion of each part of
the Body: None can see into himself, or tell the exact manner how as to every
particular. I was made in secret, and curiously Wrought in the lowest parts of
the Earth. Thine Eyes did see my Substance yet being imperfect, and in thy Book
were all my Members written, which in continuance were Fashioned when as yet
there was none of them, Psalm. 139 15, 16. None of us can look into the Womb, or
whilst in Life can see how all the Members and Parts within do work and move,
yet after the Body is dead we may perceive somewhat by Dissections, which is
guess and uncertain; for if a number of Men should come into the Shop of an
excellent Artist, seeing his Tools and Instruments only, One may think this,
another that, and so may be divided, but can never find out the exact manner of
his Art. He that sees a dead Carkase unless he were put in mind by himself
carrying about one of the same likeness, would be at a stand to answer the
Question, Was this lump ever in Life? He could never by his own Wit and
Invention find out the way how it was. He would also admire how each part both
within and without did move and actuate. So wonderful and fearful are Gods
Works, which puzzle the Understanding of Man. Whether it were to keep of
Boasting or other causes, yet God does hold our Souls in Life by hidden and
invisible Bands, that whatever others pretend unto, they cannot perfectly find
out and see them. The Lord Kills and makes Alive: He brings down to the
Grave, and brings up, 1 Samuel 2. 6. He has kept this in his own Power. All
the ways he has set out for Nature to go according unto, are not yet known.
Indeed many of them have been searched after, and some found: but not all, for
then those Diseases would be Cured which were not first Mortal and
Irrecoverable. The prevention of, and recovery out of Sickness does depend upon
the Knowledge of the Truth and right way, which being hidden to discern more
thereof, is by Probability and Discourse, for hereby Psalm. 85. 11. 2 Timothy 3. 7.
we come to the knowledge of what is concealed, as by looking with the outward
Eye, to search out what is lost above Ground. Truth is the very Nature of
things without as they are fixed and connected together, and that inferring
from one thing to another is the means to find it out. Now because Consequences
are diverse, True and Fallacious, Obscure and Plain; to rightly discern between
them and also to apprehend, to go from things more known, unto those that are
less, this is the Office and Employment of Reason. But before, and after all,
God gives Wisdom unto the Wise, and Knowledge to them that know Understanding.
He reveals the deep and secret things, Dan. 2. 21. 22. He may at length
discover those Rules and Orders concerning the Body of Man, how at first it is
made for such a continuance, by what ways it moves, what keeps on its course,
and what stops, that Help and Remedy may be had to each, So that more may run
out the days of their appointed time. Who knows but it may be fulfilled all the
World over, what is written? Thus says The Lord of Hosts, There shall yet old
Men and old Women dwell in the Streets of Jerusalem, and every Man with his
Staff in his Hand for very Age, Zech. 8. 4.

Is any Sick among you? let him call for the Elders of the Church and Pray over
him, Jam. 5. 14. The God in whose Hand all our Breath is, direct every one for
the best, and let him be careful to look up to seek for Preservation and
Relief, if the Lord may raise him up.

Pain differs not much from Sickness, being also an Indisposition in the Flesh,
but commonly in one single part, and is the Of Pain.
more or less Dangerous according to the Member affected. It is irksome and
grievous for the present, but must be endured till Deliverance is had. The
thoughts of past soundness and freedom from Pain do enhaunce the present; but
yet this Balm may soften, for the Pain is transitory. The days and hours past
are the same as if expired in Pleasure, the present slips back likewise, so the
less is behind, and all that will have an end just the same as if it had never
been at all. This is seldom Mortal, but if it should, then care is to be had of
a well grounded Hope, which sends up to that place, Where shall not be any more
Pain, for the former things are passed away, Rev. 21. 4. To obtain that is our
business all our Life long before Sickness and Pain come on, which is a sure
Refuge and Rejoicing in the evil day. The Spirit is quiet and undisturbed,
though the Flesh does suffer. Even here God has ordained remedies and means,
so they are to be used for Recovery and Deliverance.

Those which are called Afflictions of Estate, Many of them of Afflictions of
Estate.
are so far without that they would not torment at all if we had no thoughts of
them. If we do not hear, or forget, or are unmindful, they do not disturb; but
letting them into the Soul with worse Circumstances and Aggravations, here is
the Sting of outward Adversities. We admit the sense thereof to have a deep and
continued impression in our minds, but what may be administered for Comfort we
cast a slight glance toward that, concluding it unable to help and so will
have none of it, or make a small trial and leave off presently, and will not
suffer it to have the alike stay and influence over us as the other has. Thus
are we partial to our own loss, and wilfully deprive our selves of Contentment.
This proceeds from the cunning Wiles of the Enemy, who continually lets our
Happiness, and here serves an end by raising up the spirit of Murmuring, and
subtly leads into Temptation and Sin, taking advantage of our froward and
foolish Nature, Prove. 19. 3.
which is presently upon the fret, and there is a way showed to get out, but we
have no Heart unto it; When the Evil is upon us, God holds forth a Remedy by
Grace and Knowledge; so we alone are to be blamed if we do not accept thereof.
Sometimes we imagine it is an Evil, when it is none, which vanishes as soon as
we suffer our understanding to be convinced to the contrary. If we will not
give way to that, it is just we should lie down and smart for our Stubbornness
and Folly. Here the Philosophers may come in and help us by their Aphorism. It Is
opinion that vexes, Change or take that away, and the Plague is stayed. The
Wise Men of the World may do somewhat as to the imaginary Afflictions which
arise from hence. But yet they could not give solid and perfect Comfort to real
Grievances, because they were not acquainted with the very Nature and
Establishment of things.

An instance shall be in Poverty, Which if not comprehensive Of Poverty.
of all, is the worst of outward Evils. This is so in imagination or reality.
If the first, then indeed Wise Sayings might remove it where the Man would
attend unto them as that is seldom, for Covetonsness and Pride on which fancied
Poverty is grounded, are obstinate and will not be fully persuaded. But where
it was so according to Truth, those of old were at a loss how to obtain Remedy
for it, for Money is one of those hard things which require both Power and
Skill to get it. Wisdom alone might show the way, but cannot wrest it by
Violence or fair Entreaty: So people were forced to sit down and Comfort
themselves as well as they could, when they were necessitated to endure
Inconvenience and Pain all their days, and afterward know not what shall
become of them. They were in an hard Condition to come forth once into the
World to suffer Labor and Sorrow, Hunger and Thirst, Cold and Nakedness, and
have no way showed or assurance given, how or when they should be Comforted for
the time wherein they had these evil things. But divine Revelation sets all
this right, which relies upon the same Word and Power, and therefore it is as
impossible to fail, as that the World should fall down into Rubbish. That
acquaints how things stand pertaining to us Men. It gives a lively
Representation of the Vanity and Transitoriness of all here; they soon pass
away and are forgotten. Our own Reason and Experience confirm the truth hereof.
Call to mind the days or years lately past, and reflect how they seem as to
labor or sporting, to delicious, common, or course Food^ Whether we ruffled in
Silks, or home spun Cloth. Is it not all near the same? But we are required to
look forward, for we are told of more then these little things. Would we go
forth into the place of departed Souls, (as now we may in thought before we
shall be there indeed) they would put in mind of other kind of Things: What
some are Happy in expectation of, and others Miserable in disappointment; the
one would exhort to do as they did more earnestly and Diligently. The others
would warn and testify least we also pass through here with ^o little regard
of what we ought most to seek after. Not to be so much busied about the Good or
Evil of a Mortal Body as to neglect, but only in Subordination to secure the
Happiness of an Immortal part. Labor not to be rich in the World, for we can
carry nothing away, but to be rich in Faith and good Works; for that con^^gns
over unto Salvation, and these follow us. Be not troubled if in Want here, for
that also is ended; but have withal poverty of Spirit, (no Murmuring or
Aspiring Thought) and then Yours is the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 5. 3. which is
Everlasting, and will have no end. Why should People be cumbred and make such a
stir about the things of this Life, for the Rejoicing and Vexation as to their
Abundance and Want expire with the moment before us. Every revolution of the
Sun, The night comes and shuts up all; Those who did Cry or Laugh, are in deep
Silence; the Laborious and Idle persons are at Rest; the fine Clothes are laid
aside, and so is the vile Raiment; the Mouth is still with Sleep that fed upon
Dainties or common Fare. As one day and ^ight is to the time of our Sojourning
here, so is the whole as to Eternity and future Life. The things we have
already done would not profit unless we did Build further and finish them; so
it will be of all Labor done as to the things here, which will have an end,
and signify nothing. If reasonable Creatures would distinguish between the
means and the end, Not mistaking that for the end which is the means only. If
they would discern the appiness of the whole Man (which is beginning, and going
on toward Consummation) before the Conveniences of the lesser part which
peri^h with it, then they would not be so mightily concerned about present and
outward things.

Let them know what is Necessity and Convenience, and pare away the insatiable
desires of Lust, Pride and Superfluity. Thatdifference of Condition or Place
(if Office and Employment do not make it) is most commonly a word of Pride.
They are not thence to take occasion to enlarge their desires, and murmr if
not satisfied. God has obliged himself by Covenant to give to us what we have
warrant to Pray for, viz. our daily Bread. ^o support our Life here, but he is
no where bound to gratify the Lusts of any, to give that which is a Sin in
them to desire. Whatever may be the Mutterings of a Proud and sensual Heart, it
is to no more purpose to answer them, then it would be to let them have their
requests; sor when desire is beyond Gods Law it is e^dless, crying with the
Horse-Leech, Give, Give. But to them who w^^^ ^e obedient, the Language of
Grace says in this Wise, H^ving Food and Rai^^ent let us therewith be content,
1 Timothy 6. 8. Which may be justified from Nature and from Reason; for that is
content with a little, and affects no delicacies. It is for plain and wholesome
Food, a suitable Covering, an House to shelter from Weather and Cold. An Emblem
whereof may be seen in the Feeding and Skin of Beasts; those which are more
immediately for the use of Man, have a Stable or Fold, others are provided with
Holes and Dens. Reason will judge of the Equity of this: It is just and right
that what does want should have supply, and if it has convenient, What would
the Man have more? The Stomach is filled, The Body is preserved against Shame,
Cold and outward Violence, and has things allotted according to its need. But
it is course, Why is not the Flesh gross and filthy also? every thing applied
is more fine then what receives it. Is the Raiment mean? it is a Vile Body that
is to be arrayed therewith. The excellency of Man does not consist in these
things. Let Servants have what is fit for them, and no more, least they grow
Proud and Lazy. But Jesur^^ waxed Fat and Kicked, Deuteronomy. 32. 15. If this
inferior part be pam^^red too much it will grow Wanton and Luxuriant, despise
the Laws of its Master, and be more unfit for his use. The Soul receives no
Gratification by bodily Enjoyments, abundance of Meat and Drink hinder the Work
she has to do toward the getting of Happiness. God knows (and he intended by
provision at first what we learn by experience) how much of outward Comforts is
convenient for us. He prepared the Earth with the number of Inhabitants to
bring sorth Fruits and sufficient Increase for the nourishment of them: But
Luxury and Pride has found out new Inventions. There is enough given for all,
but Gluttony and Drunkenness do Vainly and Sinfully waste what others have need
of. By this may be seen what Poverty is, It is a real Want, When they have not
what is sufficient or wholesome to satisfy Hunger, nor suitable Raiment to hide
Nakedness and keep out Cold, this alone is Poverty: The condition of such is
deplorable, and should be remedied. For ye have the Poor with you always, and
whenever you will, you may do them Good, Mark 14. 7. They are suffered so to
be for our Trial; their Case is to be helped partly by themselves, and partly
by others.

But in the mean while a great deal of Discontent might cease. There are many
now in the World, such as Jude speaks of in his time, Murmurers, Complainers,
walking after their own Lusts; and their Mo^th speaks great Swelling Words,
Having Men's persons in Admiration because of Advantage, Jude 16. Who have
sufficient for Life, but repine because they have not enough to follow
Pleasure, to minister unto Boasting and Proud things, and do court the Rich to
get by them, and advance their own Estate. Here in a Christian Country all
profess to Believe the Gospel, yet the same strive to be as great as they can.
There is little or no condescending to Men of low Estate, but they mind High
things Romans 12. 16.
They strive to the utmost of their Rank and Condition, to seem above or the
outside of what they are. Yea, Christians (to the dishonor of their
Profession) seek earnestly after these things, and esteem of others
accordingly. Since the Grace of God has appeared to the World, More Regard and
Valuation is given to them, and Contempt where wanting, then when it was under
Philosophy and the Conduct of Man's Wisdom, for that said many things in check
of this unreasonable Custom. And our Lord (who though he was Rich, yet for our
sak^s became Poor) has enforced it with stronger Arguments, as Heaven is above
Earth, Eternity longer then Time. But Men now a days do not really believe or
not seriously attend to them, for otherwise they would have the due effect. He
did not therefore make Promises to the Poor, or speak against the Rich because
he was himself in a low condition, for he might as well have been Born of a
Queen and in a Sumptuous Palace, as of a mean Virgin in Bethlehem the least of
the Princes of Judah. The Counsels, Decrees and Prophesies of old might have
been so fixed. But the Son of God despises the Pomp and Glory of the World; he
slighteth them both in Word and Practice. Gods Thoughts are contrary to Man's
Thoughts, for he speaks in Favor and Comfort of the Poor whom the World
abhors and despises: On the other hand terribly and to humble those who now
are so much flattered and Psalm. 18. 27.
had in admiration, the significancy whereof themselves shall feel who do not
mind nor take due warning. The Scripture runs thus when it mentions that
difference of State and Condition. And whosoever intends to have good, must
follow the steps of the Captain of our Salvation, taking him both sor a Lord
and Example to do and to speak, yea, and to think as he did, That we may have
boldness in the day of Judgment, because as he is, so are we in this World, 1
John 4. 17. And then will not be given so great Respect and Adoration to Riches
only, no fawning upon those who abound therewith. For they have not so learned
Christ, Ephesians. 4. 20. It comes near to a Contradiction, that the Grace of our
Jam. 2.
Lord Jesus Christ should be had with respect of Persons, for that equals and
makes us Brethren in Christ; It was given to contemn Vanity, and is of a
different nature from Gold or precious Raiment, and therefore in no wise to be
more magnified by reason of those worldly Advantages the Person is in. The
Faith and good Works of those in ordinary State are not taken notice of, but
who have Riches and Honor of this World, what they do toward Religion is
applauded even by those who should Know, Teach and Practice otherwise. Though
these do contrary to the Apostolical Canon, 1 Timothy 5. 21. Yet, God and the Lord
Jesus, and the Elect Angels will not prefer one before another, they will do
nothing by Partiality, but distribute to every Man according to his work.

It is thus also in a lower step. We find it by Observation and Experience if
we never saw it Written; The Poor Man's Wisdom is despised, and his Words are
not heard, Eccles. 9. 16. The Apology here is, Because it is supposed that they
who have Worldly Advantages have also better opportunity and means to get
Wisdom, and those cannot attain it, who have them not. Great Men are not always
Wise, Job 32. 9. and further Wisdom does not depend so much upon outward means,
as those Endowments and Faculties God has first implanted in the mind. There
is much upon the Improvement of them, yet this is not necessarily had or
hindered by worldly A^^^d (...) or Want; for the first is often made an
occasion ^^ Sensuality, Negligence and Idleness. None judges of a Tree by its
b^ing planted in a right soil, or dunged about, or the likelihood to bear, but
by what Fruit it does actually bring forth. God may, and does raise up some
without common Advantages, whom he enlightens by his Grace and Spirit. He shows
his own Glory and Power this way, and chiefly in them who had not much of
outward abundance. The Prophets and Apostles, those Worthies of old both in
Divine and Humane Learning, were rejected and despised by that corrupt and
foolish Estimation of judging the Man without the Man, neither according to
Body nor Soul, but Land or Money which he has no right unto from his own
Nature, but national Laws and Constitutions has set out unto him. Besides,
Wisdom and Truth is without the Man, and not to be j^dged of by him: The
Blessing is sent unto the World through such water-Pipes, which of themselves
are dry and mere Engines to convey. Who is so sottish to refuse the good,
because of the meanness of the Instrument that brings it? A Man can receive
nothing except it be given him from Heaven, John 3. 27. God is jealous of his
own Glory, and sends forth his Treasure by despicable outward means that the
Excellency thereof should not be in us, and all praise should be returned unto
him. None does refuse his daily Sustenance, although it comes forth of the dirt
of the Earth; the Proud person does not esteem Silk the worse, because it is
the Excrements of a Worm: Yea, all Temporal things if we look down to the Pit
whence they are dug, are mean and filthy, which does not prejudice as to
them. Every good Gift; and every perfect Gift is from above, and comes down
from the Father of Lights James 1. 17. They no have Defilements; We are
naturally unclean, but this comes on purpose to cleanse us. Sanctify them
through thy Truth, thy Word is Truth, John 17. 17. It receives no advantage but
diminishment from the things of this World.

One would think we were all under the Dominion of Mammon, he is so much in
Men's Thoughts: It is a shame that Reasonable Creatures should esteem of one
another according to a little Pelf or outward Gaiety, but much more that
Christians (who if they were so indeed, their Profession would as much advance
them above the common Size of People, as they are above Brutes if they
preserved their Dignity) should yet be carried away with the error and absurd
Partiality of the World. A sign how little they are governed by Faith and
Reason, but they are led on by Sense and Custom. Which would do us most good,
will be seen when the Lord of all shall demand how we have done according Mat.
25. 14, 19.
to the Laws and Power he gave unto us.

Were those false opinions of things taken away, as it would be a great help to
our Duty, so to present Peace and Contentment: For the generality of Mankind
being Slaves to the opinion of others, do more according to what they think
then themselves. Such a thing could be let alone, but the Fashion and Majority
is for it, and they must do as the rest. Again, they could be without it, but
Reputation and Esteem of others make it necessary. Who go not according to
Conscience toward God, yet do upon the very same Principles toward Men, for
would they do the same to please and get Honor from him (who is more then all
the many Inhabitants of the World) as they do from one another, they were in
the right. Which seems to show that what God requires is not only easy, and
may be performed, but there is a propension in the Heart of Man to do even the
same, for he does it in common Acts, though he does not stretch up this
Principle to the high and right end. Would he do so in Obedience unto God, as
to recommend himself unto others; take and go according to his Estimation of
things, (For who knows them better then he that made and established them?)
rather then according to the common Vogue of others, which is mere Opinion and
Fancy of the multitude, not to be justified from Truth nor Reason, then he
would be certainly Happy. Let not thy Actions be according to others Sayings,
but be ruled by the Direction of Gods Word, for this in most things is contrary
to what is commonly received among us.

We are distinct and several Beings, there is a mutual need to keep up Society;
yet that was intended for our ^enefit and not Destruction; ^t is to ge^
Necessaries and Conveniences for the Body, to Admonish and ^nstruct one
another; this is only to help but to make nothing, to assist and show the wa^
but not to add or implant Power: Still one Man is divided from another. God and
himself only is to work out his own Happiness, and it is not in the power of all
the World besides; so again if he fall away into Misery, they cannot absolutely
prevent. He alone is sensible of the Good, and none but himself shall groan ^or
the Evil. In this is the Saying true, God for us a^^, an^ (...) one for
himself. What the Israelites told David, Thou (...) Thousand of us, is really
so as to the meanest Pe^^^^: ^e is more to himself then Ten Thousand times Ten
Thousand, which prompts especially to what the Prophet advi^es. (...) ye every
Man his Soul from the fierce Anger of the Lord, Jer. 51. 45. and in all other
things relating to his Happine^s. Our Sav^our was made of the Seed of David
according to the Flesh, Romans 1. 3. Paul does also Style some his Brethren
according to the Flesh: but there is no relation between Souls otherwise then
from the common ^^ock, no more then between rays of the Sun. They shall be all
Taught of God, as Children of the same Parent: Only to talk together of the
things pertaining to him, and to put one another in mind how they shall most
please him. The stronger and elder should help the weak according to his
different Grace. But still as their Being, so their End; as their Works, so
their Reward; and also of Si^ and Punishment, Every person s^all bear his own
Burden. The way to Happiness is to live according to what is written in the
Holy Book, not what is thought in the foolish and corrupt minds of Men; as they
are such when in Opposition to that.

This is not so much besides the present Subject as may be first apprehended;
for this would help to the prevention of Murmuring and getting of Contentment.
The greater part of Mankind are in a middle state, having neither Poverty nor
Riches, but Food convenient for them, And yet are not satisfied: Which proceeds
from Covetousness, Sensuality, Pride, of which it has been discoursed
severally. By observing the ^nsol^nt and Contemptuous Carriage of others above
them, to avoid that they are discontented with what they have, and seek greater
things. They are guided by the opinion of others, which hinders from finding
rest, for it is in another power to disquiet them. Contempt does strangely
exasperate, and though a sure remedy is to despise Contempt, yet through the
dominion or remainders of Pride, this is more easily said then done, which yet
Grace and Truth are able to subdue and mort^fie. This would be of much
Advantage, ^or it is the greatest Sting of the lower Condition wherefore Men
are so ashamed of it, and are tempted to get higher by right or wrong: For in a
mean Estate, Our Soul is exceedingly filled with ^he scorning of th^se that are
at ease, and with the Contempt of the Proud, Psalm. 123. 4.

Let not thy Heart envy Sinners, but be thou in the fear of God all the day
long, Prove. 23. 17. Do not Sin to advance thy present Condition: Look not so
much upon others but mind thine own things; to compare with those above thee,
will occ^sion fretting and greedy d^sires. Consider thy equals, and thou art
satisfied: Cast thine Eye upon those inferior, and thou art thankful; Many
have not so much, Who Labor long and Eat little, Who endure great hardship to
live, but it is not so with thee: And they seem less discontented. They give
praise to God, and have good will to their Benefactors for every small Mercy
and Kindness. Art thou apt to Murmr and be Unthankful, who have more? Those
poor Wretches shall rise and Condemn thee, for they were contented with less
things. Art thou better then they? Pride will dictate so, why, if they had the
same Advantage for Education they would have been the same also, but even now
God is more pleased with them, because they are better satisfied with little
then thou with more. He that made them, made thee; who placed them in the
lowest degree, might have done so with thee also. Will you Sin more, because he
has dealt more Graciously? Does the Wild Ass bray when he has Grass, or
loweth the Ox over his Fodder, Job 6. 5. you have s^fficient for your natural
needs, Labor therewith and be contented.

It is time to come and visit those who are poor indeed, that they may see the
way how their Condition is to be remedied. It is a sore Evil depressing the
mind, and making the Body seem yet more Vile and Sordid. Yet now our Flesh is
as the Flesh of our Brethren, our Children as their Children, Neh. 5. 5. There
is no need of describing their Miseries, for they are too much known and felt
already. Evil is no further to be manifested then is necessarv for Provision
against it, as a Wound is to be Launced in order to a Cure. It is alleged,
That Custom, Their low Thoughts and Desires make this Condition easily born,
which we otherwise used think insupportable. But a continued Evil which one is
forced to submit unto all his days, is so much the more Grievous. Indeed it is
Wisdom to have moderate desires stretched no further then the true worth and
value of the thing. There are Objects answering to each Faculty in Man, he is
made of perishingFlesh and an immortal spirit, the one for Earthly things, the
other for Heavenly; So he has different desires according to them, One covets
after the things here, and is contented, The other those above which at present
he is only seeking and in expectation of, for they are to be revealed
hereafter. Now the error may be two ways: if the Man lets out both after
present and visible things, then he is but half satisfied; On the contrary, it
is when they are both stifled and confined within this World, when they are
pressed down to the Earth, and aim no further. We have Instances of both
mistakes in the Rich Voluptuary, and the Poor and Foolish person; the first
runs out after Happiness till he is tired and disappointed; the other cannot do
that through Want but he rubs through as contentedly as he can with what is
before him, not thinking above, but is Ignorant and unmindful as to any thing
more, and so concludes all is well enough; for the first he is not to be
blamed, but the latter sinks into Destruction and Misery.

Consider ye Poor, you have so much Knowledge as to be willing to be Happy,
then you must learn to know the Way of the Lord, and the Judgment of your God,
for there are no other means of Jer. 5. 4.
being so, and the neglect is Dangerous. If you will not regard this, your
Condition is not likely to be mended in this World; and it will be Ten Thousand
degrees worse in that which is to come. Here you have Comfort and Assurance
that all your present Sufferings will have an end; but then another Life does
begin, and if you should be Miserable in that also, there will be no redress
for Thousand Thousands of Years. There is no way to avoid that, but to get God
for your Friend whilst you are here, which is done by Knowledge of him and
Obedience to his Commands in Scripture; unless you do this you will be
Miserable now, and Miserable to all Eternity. God brought you into this World
when you never thought of it, and he will raise you up again, both Soul and
Body in another State, though you now fancy and wish otherwise.

Remember to serve the Lord your God, for his gracious Promises are more to
your Condition. When he had left the Earth to the Sons of Men, some by
Covetousness, Oppression, Violence, and Deceit did scramble and take more, so
others came to be in Want and evil Entreated. But God shows himself displeased
therewith, and declares in his Word that he would take their part. For the
Oppression of the Poor, for the Sighing of the Needy, now will I arise, (says
the Lord) I will set him in Safety from him that puffs at him, Psalm. 12. 5. I
know that the Lord will maintain the Cause of the Afflicted, and the Right of
the Poor, Psalm. 140. 12. A Father of the Fatherless, a Judge of the Widows is
God in his holy Habitation: Thy Congregation has dwelt therein, thou O God
have of thy Goodness prepared for the Poor, Psalm. 68. 5, 10. What follows next
from the Divinely Inspired Penman? (who was a King, and did not turn Advocate
for them out of necessity) Something at first which seems to have no Connection
on the former, when there does lie an hidden meaning; The Lord gave the Word,
great was the Company of those that Published it, verse 11. In this he more
especially provides for them, for the way is showed how they are to be relieved
both by themselves and others. He manifests his power and Sovereignty that he
has commanded it to be done. As Lord over free Creatures, he would have it
done by them freely. He makes known his pleasure, and has left to them whither
they will comply with it; Now is the time of Trial. But he will confirm all the
Truth he has spoken by his Prophets, Son and Apostles. He will Reward and
Punish according to what is written, Rev. 20. 12. which is as true, as if
already past and fulfilled.

There are Directions for the Poor, which if they follow, they may either come
out of their Poverty, or have it sanctified unto them. They are to obey God in
all those Commandments he has given; and then they must use the means,
particularly diligent Labor and Honesty. They are also to avoid those Sins of
Idleness, Pride, Drunkenness, Prodigality and unnecessary Expense which bring
on Poverty. God has established things by way of second Causes and outward
Means, which are to be used. When these are showed and put in our power, he
that will not comply with them, it is his own fault if he is Poor, and he
suffers justly under the Inconveniences thereof. Indeed they are so
Afflicting, that unless Men are sottish Fools, and idle Drones, they will do
any thing to be relieved. Methinks I see the yearning Bowels of Thousands
throughout this Nation, who are in Doubt and Distress, they fain would have a
Livelihood, they look out any way, but see none. What Cares and Fears are about
this one thing? We are apt through Ignorance and Unbelief to seek for Help in
Affliction every way rather then the right; and what we should first, we do
last of all when driven by the failure of all other means. Many do not first
seek the Kingdom of God and his Righteness, Nor consider who made and brought
them up hitherto, Who has fed them all their life long. This they do not
discern nor are thankful for it, God is not in all their Thoughts. And when
they come to pinch and be in strait, then they use all ways right or wrong. And
conclude falsely, that if they cannot have a maintenance by both manner of
means, much less if they observed only those which are lawful and good. Whereas
by venturing upon evil and unjust things, they forfeit their right to the
Promises, Isa. 33. 15, 16. Mat. 6. 33. And also through their Knavery and
Idleness, it comes to pass that others will not trust or not deal with them.
These judging only by common Accidents and the things before them, how it goes
with others in the World who do Wickedly and yet Thrive; and therefore they are
encouraged to try, and if it does not fall out so with them, they Murmr at
their hard Condition. Not much unlike those of whom the Prophet speaks, It
shall come to pass when they shall be Hungry they shall sret themselves, and
curse their King, and their God, and look upwards, Isa. 8. 21. Be enraged at
him whose Laws establish Property, for giving so much to one and so little to
themselves. And think hard of the Lord who Governs the World for suffering
things so to be. But for all the Mutterings of the Ungodly, They that know thy
Name will put their Trust in thee, for thou Lord have not for saken them that
seek thee, Psalm. 9. 10. If they would go to him in the first place, pray for
his Direction, use his appointed means, and do nothing more then is right; they
would not be reduced to so great straits as many are. There may be Surmises and
Frightnings of Poverty, which are Temptations of the Enemy to Sin and Distrust,
which are suffered for proving us; but he that resolves for all to go on in
known duty, avoiding Sin and Knavery, shall be provided for. As it is just and
reasonable that a Man should Eat the Labor of his Hands, so it is likewise
assented by all, that he who does Eat should Work for it; and they do not
grudge the former to have the latter. This Principle is fixed in the minds of
Men by God who made them, and ordained all things for their use to be had by
Labor. None pities him who neglects it, although he Wants. Even those who have
to live without (if they do not make it up by other ways of doing good)
derogate from this great Law and Institution. The Lazy Gentleman and Idle
Beggar do vary from it; the one to his greater future account, and the other to
his present Misery. But who considers of things, and has right apprehensions,
not corrupted with Pride or Sloth, is glad and thankful that things are so
disposed of, and willingly reaches forth when they may be so had.

Thus it is ordered as to outward s^pplies, the Poor are showed and exhorted
what to do; but God to show his abundant care of their Welfare, has also given
to others a Charge over them. As Deuteronomy. 15 7, 8, 9, 10. the Reason and
Injunction of all is added, verse 11. For the Poor shall never cease out of the
Land: Therefore I Command thee, saying, Thou shall open thine Hand wide unto
thy Brother, and to thy Poor and to thy Needy in thy Land. Here is only a
Command given, and no Compulsion, Objects are left for the trial thereof. The
Phrase is directed just contrary to the close-fisted World, Open thine Hand
wide, but Man shuts it fast, and will not be easily moved otherwise. If the
Grace and Authority of Almighty God will not do now, as he spoke the World into
Being, so he will at length send forth his Word, and it shall be actually
recompensed for all manner of Disobedience, For the Needy shall not be always
forgotten, the expectation of the Poor shall not perish for ever. God will make
it up to them at present by inward Comfort and Contentment, and by considering
their Condition hereafter, when the^ shall see what others suffer for now
shutting up their Bowels of Compassion against them. He provided for them also
after the same manner as the Earth to maintain us; For he said let the Earth
bring forth, and it was so, Genesis 1. 11. The Earth though dull heard the Word of
the Lord. To Man he likewise Commands to minister to his poor Brethren
expecting of him to be freely obeyed; because he can, therefore he refuses,
some do, and some do not; and even the first in too scanty a measure, not
according to the proportion God has given them. The generality do not at all
out of Conscience toward him, it may be something in compliance with national
Laws and Customs of the World, but not out of respect had to the great King and
only Lord thereof. There may be seen a Providential ordering, that Humane
Constitutions tend only so far as to provide against the Universally Corrupt
and Disobedient state of Mankind, but still the Exercise and Trial may be had
for free Obedience. So here the Law of the Realm has made a slender Provision
for the Poor, and nevertheless room is left for the Alms of good and willing
people. God does oblige from his own Dominion, Property and Greatness, and also
by Arguments taken from themselves. Mark how pathetically the Holy Ghost
speaks, When thou see the Naked that thou Cover him, and that thou hide not
thy self from thine own Flesh, Isa. 58. 7. Importing that thou being the same
altogether should give what they self woulst desire if in the same need. And
if thou draw out thy Soul to the Hangry, and satisfy the Afflicted Soul, verse
10. Measure by thy self when thou art thus, let thy Soul be in his Souls stead,
nay, to Paraphrase does lose the excellency of Expression, being such as no
Humane Orators, nothing but the immediate Inspiration of the Spirit of God can
compose and set forth. The Wise Men of old said little or nothing as to
Almsgiving unless by way of Generosity and vain glorious Beneficence. They
thought it did derogate from Prudence to give away his own and see no good come
of it. Every one did hold that so fast that it was not in the power of Man's
Wisdom by Argument and Persuasion to get it from them. So far it is true, for
the Tongues of Men and Angels that can move people to every thing besides, yet
it is not sufficient that they might part with beloved Mammon, though for
support of their Poor Neighbor. Nothing but the Revelation of God can do as to
this; for that where believed, must persuade Men. These have the like reason to
do it as others through Unbelief to refrain, for they are not willing to part
with a certainty for an uncertainty, the Money they have in their Hands, but if
given away, it is none of their own, and they are not assured of finding any
good thereof. But who have Faith will not call that uncertain, which God has
promised. Sell that ye have, and give Alms, provide your selves Bags which wax
not old, a Treasure in the Heavens that fails not, Luke 12. 33. Seeing you
are Mortal and must be taken away from your Riches and Possessions, Is it not a
better and a more Wise way so to dispose, that they may stand the owners in
some stead? for it is certain and evident that to keep after the manner of
worldly Men, would avail nothing at all. Whatever is spent in Pride or
Pleasure, in Prodigality or Vain things, is consumed at the instant, there is
an end, and no more; but what is given, that remains a Sacrifice well Pleasing
unto God. He that gives to the Poor lends to the Lord, and that which he
gives will he pay him again, Prove. 19. 17. For as much as ye have done it unto
the least of my Brethren, ye have done it unto me, Mat. 25. 40. He which sows
sparingly shall reap also sparingly, and he that Sows bountifully shall reap
also bountifully, 2 Cor 9 6. There is no need of citing more Texts, but for
people to be put in mind and stirred up to comply therewith. What hinders? If
ye believe in God, ye must believe what he has here spoken by his Son and
Servants. And this does not depend upon an evil Heart of Unbelief or Fancy to
the contrary, but known to God are all his Decrees according to which he will
deal with all Mankind at last. Either Stupidity or want of Faith does not alter
the Case. And since these things are so, The rich of this World have the same
Exhortation to be ready to Distribute, willing to Communicate, as now for doing
as they do either by sordidly keeping, or expending it in the Fashion and
Sensuality; for they may judge which is likely to turn to most Good and Benefit
to themselves at long run. They may as well send forth Benevolence to reap
thereof in the Kingdom of Heaven, as now the Husband Man sows Seed in order
to Harvest, though for the present it seems lost and buried in the ground.

Do not shift it off from your selves to Clergymen, who have Church
Perferments, and live by Religion, and therefore are to give more freely.
Admitting that, yet in this you argue against your selves, are Enemies to your
own Glory and Recompense. There is much talk they should do this or that, but
there is no difference in the Commandments of God to one more then the other.
All are equally pressed to the observance of them, there is nothing more
strictly enjoined nor greater Duty laid on the Priest then the People, saving
what relates to the distinguishing Office; and Alms giving is not particularly
mentioned under that. All are the Creatures and Servants of the same God, and
ow the like Subjection unto him. What if it should be said? You likewise live
by Religion, for He unto whom it all relates, holds your Souls in Life; he
placed you under such Parents from whom your Inheritance descended, or gave you
power to get Wealth; but besides, you ow your keeping of abundance to this
only; for here is founded Meum and Tuum, the distinction of Right and Wrong,
Take away the sense of this, all Confusion would come in; Those in Distress and
deep Poverty might use Rapine and Fraud, and they could be no losers if the
utmost was to be sent out of this Troublesome and Miserable World; But the
Wrath of God which is revealed here against all Ungodliness and Unrighteousness
of Men, which is to be Executed in another place, keeps things in order. It is
your Interest to be Religious toward God as well as Loyal to the King, for he
establishes Kingdoms and property. He made Man upright, and when those
Principles of evil came in afterward, did send forth his Mercy and Truth
without which our Souls would be among Lions. The Proud and Scornful Men should
have a care how they speak Contemptibly of his Institution. What the Apostle
says, 1 Cor. 9. 13, 14. may silence them; and the same God has ordained that,
who maintains all the Order and Diversity which is in the World.

Whatsoever is more then the Necessity and Conveniences of each Family
belongs to the Poor and is their due. It appears from Ephesians. 4. 28. that those
in ordinary Employments are to dispose of what is more then satisfies
themselves, so there is the same reason that those higher should likewise
proportionably, just keep up the distinction, but otherwise come as near
equality as may be; for those under us would willingly have some Comforts of
Life as our selves. They are likewise Brethren of the same common stock, the
very some in Bo^y and Soul, partakers of the same Grace, and Heirs of the same
Hope. Neither is there so great stress to be laid on this Duty, for it is
justice and not Merit, called Righteousness, Psalm 37. 25. Psalm. 112. 9. Dan. 4.
27. a giving that which is due and equal. Nor should they be Proud that do
something toward it, but thank God who enabled them; for it is Duty.
Themselves should acknowledge Gods goodness that they are in such a Condition
as to give Alms and not receive them: Those rather are to be commended (if any
praise is due for what is Chedience) who are partakers, in cheerfully bearing
their Condition. Indeed unless the Scripture did speak expressly of a future
Reward, as it does to this more particularly then any other Duty, (whether
foreseeing Men's backwardness and to give greater encouragement, or to satisfy
this doubt) One that did examine the reason of things would scarce think
thereof, because they have the more already in hand to do it, and a Steward
that has Money given him to lay out so much for his Masters use, the rest for
his own, expects no more. But God to show his extraordinary Goodness, and to
make us more ready to supply the want of his poor Creatures, has already
committed wherewithal by giving a more plentiful use, and also a promise of
someth ng more to come. Some Primitive Writers have spoken too Hyperbolically
concerning Alms, Others turn them to merit of forgiveness of Sin. But herein
they do exceed, for so much is not to be depended thereon. Alms do not make
Atonement for Sin. Though some may be found who would give as largely as he in
Micah for the Sin of his Soul, yet it will not do unless it be repented of and
forsaken. It is not come to that for the Rich to have a License to Sin, or the
Poor to miss of Forgiveness for want of Money. Neither is it such an
extraordinary good Work above all others, for things are to be stated aright:
It being a Temporal kindness to the worse part, for all which they go away and
die, and it is not much minded: so it is not to be compared to the good done to
Souls, for this ever remains. The other is more then what is said, To keep Life
only to longer Misery, for that is a poor Relief. The Christian Charity does,
or should go further, even to have not only bare Necessities but Refreshments
of Life also, for we could not be so contented, and they are likewise desirous
of more, The great Law, Love thy Neighbor as thy self dictates thus much.

Thus we see how it stands with our Brethren, how God has provided for them
in his Grace and Revelation, he does his part, but we do not ours. As the
Apostle argues, Jam. 2. 15, 16. It is the same a little higher. We pray to God
for them, that he would Relieve those Afflicted in Mind, Body and Estate; and
perhaps think hardly because they are not; when he has set out the means and
left it in our power; for if we would do as he has said and commanded in
Scripture, all those several Afflictions would be actually Relieved. They would
be Comforted and supported in the mean time, till God gives an happy Issue and
Deliverance out of them, which he will certainly do if we prepare and become
worthy getting the Qualification he there shows.

This might be known by his Goodness and Truth already, let any one fulfill the
terms of the Covenant of sincere and universal Conclusion of the Chapter.
Obedience, Turn from every evil way; for the want of that is the only
hindrance to Loving of God with all the Soul, and all the Mind. One Sin is the
Root that bears Gall and Wormwood, and hinders all these good effects. But
whosoever keeps himself from that, let him seek after Knowledge, for to that he is
Commanded: Then come and see how it is Written. When the Law of God is in his
inward parts, when The Kingdom of God both in Word and Power is within him,
there is a Remedy for all manner of Adversities by comfortable Thoughts to the
Soul. What things may be known without, there is no need of particular mention
in Scripture. When that Reason God has given prompts to outward means, this
shows the lawfulness of them; for Ease and Deliverance may be sought for the
Body, as Comfort and Freedom to the Soul. And further it is excellently
consulted as to the Afflictions of Estate. O ye Sons and Daughters of Sorrow,
be fully assured that God is Good still. All the Paths of the Lord are Mercy
and Truth unto such as keep his Covenant and Testimonies, Psalm. 25. 10. Think
of Almighty God by his Works and his Word, and from the good and usefulness of
things pertaining to us. Let us know our selves, remembering we are but Men and
imperfect Creatures. Call to mind how Evil came into the World through Sin,
though it is not taken away, yet Help is ordained against it. It is Written and
found true of the Benefits of the second Adam, unto whom all the Scripture has
Relation. Surely he has born our Griefs and carried our Sorrows, Isa. 53. 4.
It is but reasonable we should have some sense of them also; That as he had
Compassion on the Afflicted, Heb. 2. 10.
so we should perceive how great things he endured for us, to raise our Love,
Thankfulness and Obedience unto God through him. Take, my Brethren, the
Prophets who have spoken in the Name of the Lord, for an Example of suffering
Affliction and of Patience. Behold we count them Happy which endure. Ye have
heard of the Patience of Job, and have seen the end of the Lord, that the Lord
is very Pitiful and of tender Mercy, James 5. 10, 11.

CHAP. XIX.
AN EXHORTATION TO OBEDIENCE and FEAR of God; The CONCLUSION of the Whole.

NOw therefore stand still, that I may Reason with you before the Lord of all
the Righteous Acts of the Lord, 1 Samuel 12. 7. It is as certain that God is, as
any thing is, for he made all things. Consider how great he must be whose Works
are so, how Glorious, Good and Excellent he is, as those Manifestations do set
forth. And then think further, how we the Inhabitants of the Earth (who walk up
and down as so many Grasshoppers) should behave our selves toward him If we
were not his Offspring and Workmanship, we might justly think he would have
nothing to do with us, but that shows the contrary; nay, moreover our Rebellion
proves the Relation. What might be known by Obedience, is also showed by
Transgression. But how unreasonable does this last appear? for reflect upon God
and our selves; What are we to despise, or be stubborn against him? He is great
and we little; Other things do his Will, and why should not we comply
therewith? Would the vain Swearer walk out, and as he beholds the Heaven or
Earth he treads, which was first Created and now sustained by an Almighty
power; And is it fit he should be spoken lightly of? His Glorious and Fearfu^
Name be used upon every frivolous and idle account, when he has so expressly
Commanded to the contrary. So it may be said of every Sin; May not the God who
formed us, preserves us, giving whatever we enjoy, give also Laws and
Directions to his Creature for him to be governed by? To keep the Commandments
of the Lord and his Statutes, which I Command thee this day for thy Good, Deuteronomy.
10. 13. Thy Testimonies that thou have Commanded are Righteous and very
Faithful, Psalm. 119. 138. As for God, his Way is Perfect: the Word of the Lord
is tried, Psalm. 18. 30.

Look impartially upon his whole Revelation in Scripture, survey every
particular Precept, and Judge, Whether it is not equal Psalm. 119. 128.
for God to enjoin, and for Man to comply therewith. As for Worship, Praise and
Prayer, none denies them: There is the general Consent that such are to be
rendered. We are zealous and prone, But here Satan the Enemy has two Wiles, the
one in some Ungodly people who are frightened with a little Dullness and
I^ksomeness at first, but even they unless very Ignorant and Stupid cannot
satisfy themselves without some Worship: That Aukwardness would go off, if
they would accustom themselves to Duty. Another Subtlety, The Adversary has
found concerning the manner thereof, for the Substance is agreed by the far
greater part of Mankind. But here they are fierce and hot, so angry and
displeased at contrary Opinions, So stiff for their own, an Evidence of what is
in our nature to have to do with Religion. Here again creeps in another Device
of the old Serpent by which he takes advantage, for he would confine the whole
of Religion to this which is but a part: and also raises a Dust about outward
Circumstances which are not essential to Worship, for seeing that God is to be
Worshipped in Spirit and in Truth, but has prescribed no exact Pattern thereof
in Scripture, away might be found out for Union, Love and Peace; Neither in the
mean while should we be angry with our Brother that does not go according to
the same precise manner, for as the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 12. 4, 5, 6. Why may
it not be likewise supposed? If there be now some Diversity of Worship, yet as
long as it is the same God to whom it all relates; if each way is Spiritual and
True, free from Idolatry, Jewish and Heathen Superstition, God is Glorified
every way, for all fall down and Worship him, and God is in them of a Truth. He
does actually manifest his Favor, Grace and Acceptance to those of the
several Persuasions among us.

Yea, all the Idolatries in the World do some what discover that natural
Inclination in Man to Worship God, for all Falsehood and Fiction does suppose
somewhat true and real. But it has been the Stratagem of the Devil (who is
permitted to resist) either to take away, or where he cannot do that, to
corrupt: To move Men to forget God, or deceive them in their Duty toward him.
As reasonable Creatures, They can thus conceive, That if they should lose the
sense of him, or harden themselves against his Fear, yet still be remains.
The Lord sits King for ever, Psalm. 29. 10. He is always above. Thou
compassest my Path, and my lying down, and art aquainted with all my ways,
Psalm. 139. 3. Though we do not think of him. The Scripture in sundry places
threatens severely against forgetfulness of him, for it casts off his Kingdom
which is over the Hearts of Men. Besides it is unnatural to forget God that
formed us. Every thing we see are his Works, which do remind; His Word, His
Servants, Every Affliction or Evil, and a Thousand things do stir up our
Remembrance of him, which before was stifled with other things The sense of him
is paturally imprinted in our minds, and appears forth when Stupefactions and
Hindrances are taken away. Corrupt Man is willing to lose it, for it Occasions
aw and dread, which he does not like. But God would have it retained, and
therefore forbids Excess, Sensuality, and all things which clog and suppress
it. He does requires us to walk Humbly with our God, Mic. 6. 8. He has
established Love to be mixed with Fear, both make up Reverence and Good will;
So we may be in the Fear of God all the day long without Torment, yea, with
Satisfaction and Complacency.

Another Reason of our willingness to forget is because a continual Remembrance
implies Subjection, and we are inclinable to that which was our Forefathers
Fall. But why should we not think our selves (as we are indeed) Creatures? We
are only in subjection to the Most High, We are not put under Principalities
and Powers. The more excellent created Beings do not exercise Dominion over us,
We are subject to none but God and Superiors on Earth of our own likeness, by
his appointment in some few and outward things. Subjection sounds harsh to the
Ignorant, but it is in order to Advancement, for we shall be made higher though
by this way only. And we must fully Learn and Practice it, for it is to be
retained in Heaven. That lifting up above themselves was the unhinging of those
once Glorious Spirits. Whilst they would be like the Most High and Independent,
the Foundation was taken away whereon they should subsist, They kept not their
first Estate, but left their own Habitation, Jud 5. Whatever these now whilper
to us, Whatever Pride may dictate, yet Subjection is the Language of our true
nature; for this prompts thereto. By what we readily do to our Superiors on
Earth, finding fault when others do not, That zeal for and observance of the
Commandments of Men, does import it is likewise just and reasonable to Obey
those of God. The Words of Jonadab the Son of Rechab, the Laws of ones
Country, yea, those lesser institutions pertaining to Religion are observed:
The Scholars of Pythagoras keep his Rules, a Son honors his Father, a
Servant does what his Master bids him, that willingness to please, the general
Approbation of old Prescriptions, the Reverence for the way of our Fathers,
nay, following the Fashion and Custom; If all these were lifted up from Earth
unto Heaven, they teach Obedience and Subjection unto God. The fault is, we
give it to every thing besides him to whom it is originally due. Why may we not
do what God Commands, as well as what others say? That out of a willing Mind
and perfect Freedom, then what we do in contradiction to our own Understanding,
in compliance with others, and absolute Slavery.

A pretense is of more variety and self-Command, whereas if we strictly
consider there is not so very great in Men's Actions. God has given them
liberty to Good and Evil, but yet has determined the bounds of them. If they
will keep his Percepts they walk at liberty and have as several kinds of Action
as they can possibly have in following the dictates of Evil; for indeed the
Thoughts and Imaginations of the wicked are Evil continually, yea, and
infinetly, yet they are restrained to a short time and some few infirm Acts.
Though the Circumstances and Aggravations may be more, yet they are not very
many neither. Hitherto shall thou come, but no further, and here shall'thy
Proud Waves be stayed, Job 38. 11. An Arguments of Gods Dominion even over the
most Rebellious, with their utmost striving they cannot exalt themselves
further. Neither is there so much Range for them, they may and do weary
themselves, but then it is by going round or over the same ground again. There
is more variety and a continual Advancement higher in following the things that
good are, but in evil they run backwards and forwards, or whirl up and down
till they sink into the bottomless Pit. Seeing there is a limited course of
Action set, how much better had they submit and go according to Gods direction
in Scripture, then follow their own or other Men's Humor, or the Temptations of
Satan, for these are Rules and Confinements. Man is a finite Being, and he had
better follow the guidance of the Lord, for he gives him Liberty enough,
keeping him from error and those things which would hurt. I will Instruct and
Teach thee in the way in which thou shall go, Psalm. 32. 8. Otherwise he is as
the Horse and Mule following after Beastly and unnatural things, Whose Mouth
must be held in with Bit and Bridle; so curbed that though he would act more,
yet he cannot. This is the great Controvercy between God and the World
concerning Liberty and Government over their own Actions. There is a definite
number of them; His Word and Commandment do extend unto, and show forth
explicitly or implicity all that are Good; the Evil are in the Thoughts and
Imaginations of Men. Known unto God are all of them, but herein he will display
his Glory and Power, his Goodness and justice, that if People will not do
according to what he says, nor yield Subjection unto him for their Good; they
do to something else, they are Servants of Sin and Evil. God has command over
Evil that it cannot the least hurt or impair his Glory, and how far that may
reach, it is only by his sufferance, but the power of Men's acting is yet
shorter. So whatever be their Hatred, Enmity or Opposition against him, still
he has power over them. They act according to a limited Form, though they
think otherwise; and if they are not willingly subject unto him near, yet they
are further of by force, but they know not, nor consider it. His Kingdom, Power
and Dominion is over all, and there can be nothing Disobedient unto him. If
Satan is let loose, he was tied up first and can be again, however at the very
time he cannot go further then divine Permission. Though perhaps he perceives
it not, there is a Hook in his Jaws, and he may be turned back by the way he
came. All things in the World are subject unto God; also our selves are, and
must be whether we will or not, with this difference; if we willingly subject
our selves unto him, God accepts thereof and will give a Reward; but if we Sin,
we are still subject to our present and future Misery. All people will grant
subjection unto God in the general as most due and reasonable; but that is not
sufficient unless our Thoughts, Words and Actions are at all times Obedient and
Conformable to his revealed Will.

All are sensible of the necessity of Religion, but the greater part take up
with wrong Apprehensions, and every thing besides the right: They would think
to please God any other way, then by keeping his Commandments. It is to be
admired that Mankind (who are endued with such rational and wise Principles as
to inferior Objects which they use accordingly, for they are wise enough in
their Generation) yet should be so mistaken and sottish, as they have been
toward the Higher end. Our shape, besides inward powers, do manifest that we
were designed to look up to Heaven, as well as run too and fro upon the Earth.
Our Nature has a strong tendency to the Author thereof, a Thirst after that
Invisible God who made us and all things. Yet Man fell away soon after he was
Created, and became Blind, Strange and Miserably deceived. The substance of
Religion was not lost, but spoiled and wholly turned into Falsehood and Error.
If we run over the History thereof from Adam unto Noah, and from Noah unto
Abraham and the Patriarhes; the Fear and true Worship of Psalm. 105. 12.
God was but in a few single Families when the whole Earth besides was Ungodly
and Idolatrous. Afterward it gathered into the Jewish Nation, (which also was
very Corrupt) but that was a small piece of Land to the other Habitable World.
The Nations round about did laugh at them; They had Learning and Wisdom, and
some dwelt in every Nation under Heaven, yet there is little notice or mention
made of them in other Writers. In the Treatises of Idolatry and Superstition
whilst knowing Men could confute the Folly and Falsehood of that, they could
disprove that, but yet not light upon the true Wisdom. Many things might be
shown from the Succession of time to discover that Sulness, Averseness,
Ignorance and Pride in the Heart of Man toward God; for many would not confess
whom they must know, some would not mind at all, others Groped for the Wall
like the Blind, Isa. 59. 10. Others through their own self-Conceit and
Knowledge which perverted them, would not stand beholden to Gods Grace and
Revelation, but try to seek it out themselves. The Reasons hereof may be
conceived, Man's Corruption who became weak and unable, Satan's Temptation who
did befool him, and also the excellency and wonderfulness of right Religion. It
is exceeding Holy and Spiritual, so that Man could never attain unto the
Knowledge thereof but by Gods help. And he would not seek first after that, and
therefore deservedly received the error of his ways. The Light shines in
Darkness, and the Darkness comprehends it not, John 1. 5. It is afraid and
shrinks thereat. We can look on this side, or that side, but not against the
Sun shining in its brightness. It is on high, we must soar often and make many
essays before we can ascend up, when there are so many things to press down.

But the principal Reason of the slow progress of Religion is that the
Scriptures might be fulfilled. It is a great Work whereby Acts 3. 17. 18.
God is to be Glorified as to the Earth and all the Inhabitants thereof. The
Kingdom of God is like to a grain of Mustard Seed, which a Man took and Sowed
in his Field. Which indeed is the leaft of all Seeds: but when it is grown it
is the greatest among Herbs, and becomes a Tree, so that the Birds of the Air
come and Lodge in the Branches thereof, Mat. 13. 31, 32. Gods doings are not of
a sudden. Shall the Earth be made to bring forth in one day? Isa. 66. 8. The
Fruits are growing up at full and perish by flow degrees within the
Circumference of the Year; So it is with Beasts and Man, they increase and
decrease by little degrees, which are not perceived in the middle time, though
it is afterward. The Earth shall wax old like a Garment, and they that dwell
therein shall die in like manner; but my Salvation shall be for ever, and my
Righteonesness shall not be abolished, Isa. 51. 6. This is the Tree of near Six
Thousand Years growth, that was Planted in the Earth, and came up by little
according as the tenor of divine Revelation came into the World: And though
that is finished more then Sixteen Hundred Years since, yet it has been, and
is yet again to be Col. 1. 23. Heb. 10. 13, 16.
Preached to the whole World: And it is expected what Fruit it will yet bring
forth. Whether it will at length be universally received, as it has been
heretofore rejected. It will spread yet further, Isa. 60. Psalm. 80.
and be more eminent in the Lives of Men. The hidden Wisdom of God will come
forth, and he will unfold the mystery of the Kingdom. For he will finish the
Work and cut it short in Righteousness, because a short Work will the Lord make
upon the Earth, Romans 9. 28. For I would Brethren, that ye should not be
Ignorant of this Mystery, (lest ye should be wise in your own conceits) that
blindness in part is happened unto Israel until the fullness of the Gentiles be
come in. And so all Israel shall be saved, as it is written, There shall come
out of Sion the Deliverer, and shall turn away Ungodliness from Jacob, Romans 11.
25, 26. He is already come who gave the Word and showed the Way, who made
invitation for all; yet by what he has done for us, and the continuance of the
Spirit which is to abide for ever, and Searches all things, yea, the deep
things of God, 1 Cor. 2. 10. More heavenly Truths may be yet known which are
brought forth out of the Treasure of his Word, that People may more know, and
be added unto him. As certain as the Earth is sufficient to maintain all its
Inhabitants Psalm. 67.
by the Tillage, Industry and Improvement of Man, and God blesses them in
their Endeavors, for they do it accordingly; So in his Kingdom of Grace the
means are sufficient that every Soul Isa. 61. 11.
may come unto Glory, if they were as carefully used, faithfully put forth by
humble Prayer and Diligence, by laboring with the Faculties of the Mind, as it
is done the other way by members of the Body, the like Food may be had to
nourish all people up to Eternal Life. If they hold fast to the Form of sound
Words in Scripture, and urge it with that Authority and Reasoning which flows
from it, things will be yet better then now they are. The Word which is thought
foolishness, is wiser then Men; and the weakness of God is stronger then Men.
If it is not stronger then they, Why are they afraid to encounter with it? Why
do they turn their Backs and flee from it? What means that neglect and wilful
Ignorance? They must be unmindful, or otherwise they cannot go on in sinning.
They cannot otherwise avoid going to the Pleasant Land, then because they will
not hear a true report thereof, and the encouragements to it. Not all the
Ungodly and Wicked of the World can withstand those Arguments in Scripture
against them. That this is not a vain and forward Assertion, it may be somewhat
judged from these four ensuing.

1. From Consideration of Wisdom and Folly.

2. The intrinsic Goodness of the things commanded, and the Evil of what is
forbidden.

3. The Promise of Eternal Life.

4. The Threatening of Eternal Death.

The first prepares the way, for the Man is capable of receiving Good, and
subject unto Evil: He has a natural desire to one, and abhorrence of the
other: So He is prompted to look about and order his Actions accordingly. He is
told how things stand; Wisdom moves him to search and examine, it being a more
important Question for him to know, then his Title to his Estate on which way
to get a Livelihood; because these things are greater, Ionger and will as
certainly be upon him, as the little, short and fading Conveniences are now,
for he must aic. And then do appear forth the things contained in Scripture,
all one as the things we now see, handle and converse withal. Inconsideration
is the utmost Folly and Danger, for we know that temporal Evils are the more
grievous when they fall on us through our want, of Care and Foresight, much
more must it be to Eternal, for they are without end and remedy. The Word is
laid before Mankind, They must either hear or forbear; if the first, they are
Ezekiel. 2. 5. 7.
Wise, and will come to Faith and Knowledge, if they forbear, they are the most
so^tish Fools that can be, for they certainly plunge themselves into all those
Evils, whereas the other way they might have avoided them. The best dictates of
Wisdom make the Man enquire about these things because they so nearly concern
him, his own self, His own Eternal Happiness or Misery, and finding it so, he
must prepare accordingly. Then he comes to consider what he is to do, and avoid
that he may be Happy and safe as to this most necessary thing, which leads to
the second point.

2. This has great influence over Men's Actions, because it is present. They
are all done out of consideration of Happiness or Misery; to have the one, and
eschew, the other, is the desire of Good and Bad, Righteous and Wicked Each Man
acts upon such a number of Thoughts within himself concerning the one or the
other. The Question is concerning Good and Evil, Duty or Sin which tends most
unto Happiniss, and to avoid Misery; which has been debated all along
particularly in the more considerable instances. It is certain, on the one hand
there is a real Good in whatever God commands; it is agreeable unto and
preserves our nature, has an increase and expectation of better things to
come. On the other s^e, What is forbidden is only a vain appearance of
Happiness, It hurts and comes near to Destroy, It raises Doubt and Misery all
the Life long, and Dread of worse things hereafter. They do vanish in the Act,
and manifestly come to nothing: The pleasures of Sin can never make a Man
Happy, because they are unsatisfactory at the very time: they are for a season
which is short, and all one as if it had never been. There is no hope of any
thing more, but fearful Expectaion. Here is the great searching of Heart, for
Man has a goodwill toward God, but a jealousy as to this one thing. He has a
Zeal and Inclination for his Worship, for that by use may become familiar unto
him, and hinders of nothing. And therefore shows himself willing to every part
thereof; So for Godliness there is no such Dispute, he is quickly brought over
to that. If he has sufficient to live handsomely in the World, he assents unto
as reasonable and fit to be practiced all the rules of Righteousness; this is
of good report and accepted in the World, unless some mistrusts of a Livelihood
and coming to Want, of which has been heretofore spoken. However this is
granted by all to Chap. 14.
conduce toward the welfare of the Community and single Persons. But the great
Suspicion and Contest is about the denial of worldly Lusts, and living soberly
in this World: Here is imagined an hindrance of Happiness. This has been
likewise endeavored to he cleared, and the nature of things stated, that Man
might be satisfied as to this. Were he alike persuaded that these do not
obstruct his Happiness, no more then acts of Pretty and Justice, he would
equally approve and follow them. N^y, they promote it as has been showed. The
equity of Gods ways may be seen toward us, for they are justified of all those
who walk therein, and those who do not, excuse themselves. Wickedness is
condemned of her self; even those who practice one kind condemn another whereof
they are not so Guilty. The Worshipper of God, who lives in Inju^^ice and Sin,
will speak against the Ungodly; the Covetous and Unrighteous will exclaim
against the Intemperate and Unclean Person; as again he will to the Hypocrite
and Knave. Even Sinners know, but they are enslaved to wicked Desires and Lust,
that it would be better to live without them. Man does earnestly desire
Happiness, and seek after it in every thing besides the right, in every place
but where it is only to be found. Let any one make a Proposal of Good, he
hearkens and thankfully accepts thereof. But if put in mind of Religion, then
there is such a clutter and stir about that, he knows eno^gh already. The
Prophet speaks to our time, and exactly to the present purpose; For Prec^pt
must be upon Precept, Precept upon Precept Line upon Line, Line upon Line, here
a little and there a little This is the R^st, wherewith ye may cause the weary
to Rest, and this is the Refreshing, yet they would not hear, ^sa. 28. 10, 12.
It is not a vain thing you are persuaded unto, It is your Wisdom, It is your
Happiness, It is your Life, there is no need to exhort to that. If some
invisible Enemy did not beat off, and it is your own fault to give way to him,
for you may resist him if you will, it is impossible you should keep so at a
distance, or refrain from what carries such Evidence and Demonstration of Good.
If the same did not tempt and push on, (and you might abstain if you would) you
could never be so eager after the Wages of Sin and Death, to the committing of
those things wherein is no Benefit, the most that can be said for it is a
slight Convenience, which instantly Psalm. 119. 119.
passes away and satisfeith not, it is but dross.

Those who now stand in defense of the Gospel are at some disadvantage by
reason of long custom in Sin and Iniquity, Men Jer 41. 17, 18, 19.
are for doing what their Fathers have done before them, But that again is
taken away, because there is so much the more experience to witness unto the
truth of what we speak. It is the property of Wisdom to know that before hand
which Fools know sensibly upon themselves. There has been some Thousand Years
experience of the Misery and Deceitfulness of Sin, and innumerable Examples
upon a Deathbed sincerely wishing that they had lived otherwise, These give
sufficient warning to those few who now live, who will go away in like manner,
and also to succeeding Ages. That Iniquity should still abound, is one of the
depths of Satan. But we have encouragement by the Promises of God, that the
World will be better Reformed before the absolute end thereof. O Lord my
Strength, and my Fortress, and my Refuge in the day of Affliction; The Gentiles
shall come unto thee from the ends of the Earth, and shall say, surely our
Fathers have inherited Lies, Vanity, and things wherein there is no profit,
Jer. 16. 19. Part of which has been already fulfilled as to the abolishment of
Idolatry and false Worship; and also that great Corruption of the Roman Church
(whereby Christianity is now Blasph^med throughout the whole World) will be yet
taken away. The other part has in some measure, and will be yet found true
more universally by the actions and Romans 2. 23 Deuteronomy. 32. 21. Tit. 3. 3.
manners of Men, for God is dishonored by them, and they find no good therein:
They shall confess and perceive that their Ancestors were mistaken as to the
great Concernment of all, Obedience to God and their own Happiness. If they
would search and try by the utmost Reason and Discourse, look back upon the
Generations before, Is that an Argument they should be Miserable and Foolish,
because those of old time were so? What is all their Sin and Noise come unt^?
like a Dream of a night Vision, out of which they will awake to a sad account.
It is commonly said, We should be Wiser, which we cannot unless we are better,
and give more diligent observance unto Gods Commandments, for they are good and
true both by Speculation and Practice, As cursed are those that err from them.
All Sin is so grievous and deceitful, that the less one knows thereof, so much
the better. What the least sincere and durable Happiness did it ever bring
forth unto Men? What Evil and Misery was there ever, which this was not the
occasion of? The Word of God gives assurance of Happiness when that is a
pretense only, the first keeps off Misery and Hurt, which this subtly brings
on. That gives demonstration of Good in the end, this has consequent nothing
at all, which it falsely makes a show of, or what is worse certain and
remediless Misery, which it cunningly conceals. The Captain of our Salvation is
able through his Word to overcome the evil One; his Grace is stronger then the
others Temptation as to the present time; but further is that which gives a
complete Victory, Let us call in the Powers of the World to come.

The Law made nothing perfect, but the bringing in of a better Hope did, by
which we draw near to God. That could not accomplish the effectual Reformation
of Men by temporal Promises and Threatenings; for the first did happen a like to
all, and then if had, they colud not make a Man truly Happy, for the greatest
Prosperity and sensual Enjoyments would sooner weary, then satisfy the
Partakers. And the like were the Threatenings, for they did involve all without
difference. The Sword or Death was no such frightning to those who were tired
of this Life through long Ease and Plenty: Nor was it to more considering
persons to have their Carkase^ u^buried, for they should not in the least feel
that. The Israilities did see those mighty works and wonders God wrought for
them in Egypt, the red Sea and the Wilderness. He revealed himself in a visible
manner on Mount Sinai, and afterward by Vrim and Thummim, The Fire from Heaven
which consumed the Sacrifice, the appearance of Glory over the Mercy Seat, And
then he manifested himself by Visions and Prophets. So they had a most sensible
Evidence of Gods Dominion and Government over them, which should keep in
subjection. So their Disobedience was inexcusable, and deserving of Punishment
according to the Majesty and Greatness of him against whom they offended. The
Law was our Schoolmaster to bring us to Christ; It did lead on by Rudiments
from Carnal and Temporal things, to Spiritual and Eternal; from Wordly
prosperity and the conveniences of one part, they might arise unto the true
Happiness of the whole Man. Under the Gospel the Promises are such as to make
him perfectly and universally Happy, and the Threatenings alike Miserable.

It is evident, there is Light and Darkness; there is also somewhat beyond
these moveable Regions, where is Eternity. And this being the place of Trial
between both here is a little scanthing of Good and Evil, what does delight and
what does torment: This we taste and feel. How we are concerned further, we may
know by our Hopes and Fears. We are day by day in our single persons removed
hence, and there is a desire to have a Being above, and Horror of falling
below. We have all things in part and in an imperfect manner; which give
assurance there shall be the whole, and that added which is perfect. What may
be known of Gods future Promises and Threatenings is manifested in us, for God
has showed it unto us from his Word, Works and our Nature which is capable of
and has a tendency to one, which is liable unto and abhors the other. For the
first we are contented with all our Hearts, Hoping (as indeed it is true) that
we may be translated from Imperfection to Perfection, from Vileness to Glory,
form Misery unto Happiness. We are glad and thankful that it is so, but then
there must be a rendering meet and the qualification of Obedience and Holiness.
The greatness of the Reward does abundantly stir up, for such an exceeding Good
cannot be refused by any Man. None is so full and blessed already, but he may
receive in of Heavenly good things. God has given us larger Faculties, and
made Earthly things short and empty, so they do not satisfy at the very time;
however all these Isa. 28. 20.
things perish, and against the Man is taken away from them, seeing he shall
remain elsewhere, he must likewise desire an Happiness which shall be with him
then, as now he does what is before him. That catching at every little good,
the so greedily running after what vanishes almost as soon as had, does show
that he desires also real good things which are exceeding Great and Eternal.
Seeing Man must live for ever, he cannot do other wise then desire to be Happy
for ever; No more then whilst here for a short time he ceases desiring to pass
through here as Comfortably and pleasant as he may. If we could take away the
desires of Life and Happiness, then we might find him that has no mind to go
to Heaven. As the Hungry craves after Food, the Covetous Riches, the Ambitious
Honor, and every one Rest and Satisfaction, and will use the common means in
their own power toward the having of them: So there is a desire ingrafted into
Man after those things God has promised. And it is but reasonable he should do
so much toward obtaining them, for otherwise he will come short of them. They
are set forth by the very same things in a greater degree then what is so
earnestly followed after here. Many will not seek after the things above
through Negligence and Sloth, but every one will sincerely desire them
hereafter when they shall be fully sensible of what they were so careless and
indifferent. God saw how prone our Nature was to this, and has ordered
something else to shake it off. Had any one need be pushed forward to go and
receive a Kingdom? Should there be so much entreaty used to save him from
Danger and Misery? When he knows thereof, the Man will run fast enough of
himself without using many Words.

Arise then, and escape for thy Life. Thy Breath is in thy Nostrils, which
alone keeps the Wicked Man from falling into Eternal and remediless Misery. The
reason why people are so fearless and unconcerned as to this, is because they
see it not; but if they did, they would be at their Wits end, and think they
could never get far enough from so terrible a thing. If they believe this to be
real and true, it is impossible they should resist the Force and Cogency
thereof: For all Men are very Solicitous and wonderfully Careful to keep off a
little Evil, whether national or private. Yea, the Wicked and Ungodly are
afraid of a little Melancholy, Irksomeness, Dullness, want of a little Pleasure
and the least thing that would do hurt. They must likewise abhor and dread
everlasting Misery, and there is the same reason they should endeavor to avoid
it. And though it be future, that will come: Many Years hence will as certainly
be as the present Moment, unless all things are absolutely destroyed, when they
have already continued for some Thousands of Years: And they will be no
otherwise dissolved then to make way for an Eternal and Irreversible State,
when things shall be more substantial and enduring. But themselves endeavor to
keep of future Evils as to preserve Health and prevent Sickness, they provide
against Want and Poverty or falling into Disgrace. They take care how things
shall be with their Children and Posterity after their own decease. So that
compare one thing with another, the greatness of the concern, the utmost
certainty that it will be one day present; for what is more sure then Death the
inlet thereto? Many things might be here urged that must persuade Men.

And therefore they have two ways to fence themselves by Unbelief or
Unmindfulness. But both are pitiful and foolish shifts, for though we are not
apt to believe ill things against our selves, and we have Temptation to think
(because we would have it so) that these are only in terrorem; Yet there is no
security in this. Our reason tells us, things are fixed, and not according to
our fancy: If some disbelieve, that shall not make the Decrees of God of none
effect; If we go about to prove this does not make them for they were before,
but only to make more known what we have from Scripture, to warn Sinners the
more that they do not come into this place. It was the Saying of old at the
delivery of their Message, The Prophets shall become Wind, Jer. 5. 13. Which
makes a whistling and noise for the time, but hurts no Body. But those found
after by woeful Experience. The Lord has done that which he had devised, he
has fulfilled his Word in the days of old, he has thrown down and has not
pitied, Lam. 2. 17. O, if they had gave heed and turned from their evil ways;
but then it is too late. It shall be exactly so as to what is now said of
Resurrection of the Dead, Eternal Judgment, and the after State. The event is
to prove all things; but whosoever suspends his Faith until then, his Condition
will be without remedy. There are several Examples both in sacred and common
History of those who have fell into great Danger and sudden Death, of which
they were foretold, but they would not believe or not mind it: In such a case
Wisdom dictates to what is safest; as there may be Danger, so it is better to
undergo that little Trouble to prevent then to run the Genesis 19. 14. Exodus 9.
20, 21. Jer. 40. 15, 16.
hazard thereof. lt is not so much their Destiny, as their Folly which draws
them to the end, for the means of avoiding was in their power, and they might
have used them. It was kindness in him that gave the notice, and some do take
it and escape the like Evil; so it is as to the Threatenings of the Gospel: They
being future and in another World, cannot be certainly and indubitably known
unto us; for a future and distant Affirmative may be proved by his Testimony
who sees all places and knows the things to come: Here we have the Word of
God that these things are so; but yet the Serpents Question, Genesis 3. 1. will
raise a doubt. Our Lord, who came to redeem us from that place, speaks thereof.
There are also some reports of persons arising from the Dead, and giving
witness to the same things, But he is greater then all, and their Testimony is
not so much to be relied on. None did ever return from the Dead and say they
were forged or false, from the silence of those Saints that arose at our
Saviors Resurrection, or Lazarus who had been four days dead, nothing can be
concluded; for possibly they were hindered from speaking, or might speak
something which is not Recorded, that our Faith should not stand in the Word of
Men, but the Power of God, by which they were then raised: Or if they knew
nothing, this is no more to be wondered at, then he who Slumbers some few
Minutes should know of the following day; Or if the Souls do not absolutely
Sleep, yet they may be like those that Dream when they are first put into
Futurity, knowing nothing but confusedly. There may be a slight Remembrance,
but we cannot tell what to make of it. But what should they testify, whereof
we are not as much assured of already? The Decrees are yet to come and to be
fulfilled, of Resurrection, Eternal Judgment, Perfect consummation of Bliss and
Misery. That there is a place for separated Spirits we may understand as well
as they, for this is the least part of the World where we live, and they must
exist somewhere all one as we in this state of Conjunction and Mortality now do.

God will not show it further then as he has done already by Moses and the
Prophets, Christ and the Apostles who have spoke out plainly what they did in
general and signification. And I will punish the World for them Evil, Isa. 13.
11. Which is manifest he did not always in this place, and therefore would do
it in another. I have set before you Life and Death, Deuteronomy. 30. 19. When as to
the present it did happen alike to Righteous and Wicked, and therefore must be
understood of Eternal Life and Death. Accordingly the Jews ^id gather from such
kind of Expressions a future Happiness or Misery. The Evangelical Prophet comes
a little Joh. 5. 39. Mat. 22. 31, 32.
further, to use his own Phrase, With stammering Lips and another Tongue will
he speak to this People, Isa. 28. 11. He speaks more clearly of Heaven and
Hell, Isa. 66. 22. and Chap. 33. 14. then the others, but not so quite out
neither, as those under John 16. 25.
the new Testament. Such has been, and is the way of God's discovering himself
by degrees to the World. For the Kingdom is the Lords, and he is the Governor
among the Nations, Psalm. 22. 28. It is for the Glory of the Great God, and the
good of his Creatures, being Established upon proportionable Rewards and
Punishments.

We are all Servants under him, though some are appointed to make known his
Will to others, but themselves also are to obey it. And they are now to do the
first only from what is revealed. So they speak what they have not received,
who declare any thing more It does not become Servants to anticipate
extraordinary Acts of their Masters Grace and Bounty, for those according to
the Flesh would sooner retract their conceived Favors, when another shall put
in mind and give notice of what they would have voluntary from themselves and
unexpected of others. And therefore for my part, I dare not speak out what God
knows are my desires and innermost thoughts, in submission to his Will, and
consistent with his Glory and other Attributes: But as a Fellow Creature do
entreat Men, that they would not commit those things against which God has
manifested his severe Displeasure. O that we may all behave our selves in the
mean while, though we cannot deserve the least Mercy, yet to be in some measure
worthy to escape those things which we have been f^re^old of; and then we must
not Sin yet more against him. All the World may be assured, it was never yet
seen in any Nation, Country or Language, Ezekiel. 6. 10.
for the Laws thereof to be Elusory or Vain, but due Punishment does overtake
those who are Stubborn, Despisers and continued Offenders. There are abundance
of Expressions of Gods Mercy in Scripture, but they are commonly joined with
his Truth, or something else to keep of people from presuming too much upon it,
as Psalm. 57. 3, 10. and 62. 12. and 86. 5. and 100. 5. And that Gracious
Manifestation Exodus 34. 5, 6. Where it is repeated many times that Mercy
rejoices over Judgment, yet there comes in a limitation, That will by no means
clear the Guilty. The Threatening is as firm and abiding as any part of his
Word, and they are of Judgment when our Lord says, Heaven and Earth shall pass
away, but my Words shall not pass away, Mat. 24. 35. The Promise is confirmed
by two immut able things wherein it was impossible for God to lie, Heb. 6. 8.
So of some he has sworn that they Isa. 54, 10.
shall not enter into his Rest, Heb 3. 18. Both parts are ratified as much as
can be. Known to God are his Decrees, and how he will be pleased to distribute
to every one; But the safest way is for us to have Apprehension of them
according to Truth, that we may be more careful to partake of his Favor and
avoid his Wrath. Beware of those Doctrines which beget Presumption and
Unconcernedness; for the things are true as God has Established, if all the
Learned in the World did argue or determine which way they would. It is better
to do those things required, and avoid what is forbidden and so escape, then to
follow after what ends in Death to be unmindful or to dispute against it, for
now several things happen which we did either not think, or say would not come.
Though some would release or mitigate, yet they do not deny future Punishments,
but if they were only as the more favorable conception of them allows, yet the
Pain and Loss is much beyond the Pleasure or Convenience of a short sinful
Life; for what is that to countervail the Romanists Purgatory? or the opinion
of a Thousand Years Torment, and then a fi^al Dissolution? The seeming good
though present can never be a sufficient exchange for such an evil and
deprivation of Happiness, much less when the Torment is both Intolerable and
Eternal. The Commands of God are enforced with the greatest Arguments that can
be And yet how few do regard them? How is the World grown to be so Wicked and
Ungodly? And of those who come unto God, how few do conform unto his whole
Will, Love and Serve him with all their Hearts? One would admire, unless he did
consider the causes of so great. Apostasy, viz. Man's Corruption, Unbelief,
Ignorance, Deceits, Satan's Temptations, there are many o^tward Objects to
divert him, Carnal and Temporal things do make him forget those that are
Spiritual and Eternal, which have a light and transient impression upon us, and
such like* But all these hindrances may be taken away by the Grace and
Revelalation of God. It is so ordered that Man must strive and give Diligence
if ever he would be Happy; there is enough left to prove him, and to exercise
his Care and Watchfulness.

Upon the whole, There is a wise Establishment of things: There The general
Conclusion.
is a just Disposal, for assistance is given and the means are put in our
power. The Members that have been yielded unto Sin and Iniquity, may be made
Members of Righteousness unto Holiness; the Faculties and Powers were first
designed, and now may be restored unto good as they have been employed in evil.
It is a gracious Dispensation in that God encourages to those things which are
for our Good and Happiness. It is true, for we are only taken from deceit and
falsehood, from show and appearance which ends in what is worse then nothing,
and are called forth to what is true and assured, and real as any thing is: All
that we now see is but the Figure of the true, even that Heaven and Earth which
are to suceed: Hearken and come near Oye Sons of Men! do but Learn, Know and
Practice the things pertaining to Gods Kingdom, for they are Just, Wise and
Conceivable also, I want words to express their excellency.

I have written the Great things of thy Law, but they were accounted as a
strange thing, Hos. 8. 12. The like Imputation may be here cast upon what is
brought out of the same Book of Scripture: Many odd passages, uncouth, They
know not what to make of them. But let me tell any one that thinks so, where
the Strangeness of all lies. Even in Man's Transgression; either the not
observance of what is Commanded, or doing those things which are contrary to
the Laws of God and Truth. When there was occasion to speak of those things,
uncommon expressions might fall. The nature of things is the same, but
differently apprehended, for some do live according to the Principles of Good
and others do not, some use the means to have their first Blindness and
Ignorance taken away, and others do not: But where is universal Obedience and
alike Knowledge, what is Truth and suitable to one, is likewise to another.
Where it is half and imperfect, Prove. 8. 9.
let him reflect upon that Duty or Sin which himself observes or avoids, and
see how that is explained; by that he may measure whereof himself is Conscious
and Guilty. Had all continued alike Obedient as the Man after Gods own Heart,
they would give the same Praise and Commendation of his Law as is done, Psalm.
119. but according to their several Sins Men think severally as they will. It Is
Lust and Iniquity That we might turn from our Iniquities, and understand thy
Truth. Deu. 9. 13.
that corrupt the Judgment, or at least the outward Faculty, from whence they
think, speak and do to vindicate themselves before their Acquaintance,
otherwise then they should: But there is even in the Disobedient (unless
mightily defaced and suppressed) the Spirit of the mind by which they can judge
that the Law is holy, and the Commandment boly, just and good, and they consent
unto the Law that is is good, Romans 7. 12, 16. By that let them likewise examine
what is here said to be interred from it. Luke 2. 35. Mark 4. 22. 2 Cor. 4. 2.


God knows, I have not intended to up^raid or accuse Mankind, but was obliged
to manifest the Truth Impartially and Universally, as every one may judge in
his own Conscience. There has been nothing said but what is practicable. My
self also am a Man compassed about with the same Sins and Infirmities, and do
readily subicribe to what is written, In many things we offend all, Jam. 3. 2.
Neither have I spared mine own Sin, but in several places stand Convicted and
Condemned out of the words I have set down, hoping to recover by Gods Mercy and
my own Repentance; But what I desire for my self, so for others, to have the
less Sin, for thereby is more Peace and Comfort according to the measure of
Innocence and doing good there is a greater Reward. What real good does come of
any Disobedience? surely none, God is Dishonored, and Man is not Benefited; it
serves the design of an invisible Malicious Enemy, and therefore we should all
abstain srom Evil as much as we can.

It is the open Accusation or secret Thought of the World to affix severally on
them who come on this Message, This Man seeks not the welfare of this People,
but the hurt, Jer. 38. 4. If one had devised new Pleasure sor the sensual
minded, or had abundance to bestow Largesses on poor people, or gives them
Entertainment for a few days with Mirth and Pastime; He that conquers Kingdoms
and enlarges Territories, such are reputed great Instruments of Men's Happiness,
though the utmost hereof is but as the hasty Fruit before the Summer; which
when he that looks upon it, sees it, while it is yet in his band he eats
it up, Isa. 28. 4. which signifies nothing after it is had, and is but a faint
^ore-runner of the true Happiness; But they are only the unacceptable persons
to the World, who speak of this, which shall just begin here on Earth, but
never end and be consummated in Heaven. There cannot be too much Good Will
returned to them who save from every least Injury, from Fire, Enemies,
Sickness, Poverty, all which tend only to Temporal Death, but they are hated
who would keep off from Eternal Death, from the Devil and his Legions, who
would d^sswade from vain things that cannot profit, and are the Baits he makes
use of to beguil Souls unto himself: Even here beloved ^^st and Interest have
been touched upon and showed that they cannot make a Man Happy. so that if the
Temptation may not be taken away, yet is less tempting.

Why abundance have done thus much already; so many Books and Sermons ^o this
purpose, what need of more^ But there should be yet further Admonition, for
people are not as yet come over unto God. Whilst others have hovered up and
down in generals I have ventured by Gods help to pitch; When others again have
spent many words in Instruction of what was known before, or notional
unnecessary things, here has attendance been principally given to the word of
Exhortation. When some have used Moral Persuasions, or the less Cogent
Arguments, here have been brought forth those pressed with the full force and
power that I kn^w of; for cursed is that Deceiver who knows them, and does
not use them. And further, several things have been spoken out which were
concealed from the people. If I had came with mine own Inventions and Fancies,
or the power of Man's Wisdom and Eloquence, there would be less ground of Hope;
but the Truths have been pressed in the Name of God from his Revelation. I
thought my self accountable for that measure of Grace he has been pleased to
send through me. And therefore let it be considered, that it is nothing to me,
let all Men do what they will, they have still their Liberty of Action; but
they are to answer before God how they will show themselves toward his Word
and Truth. If that is not found sufficient to reclaim Sinners Isa. 55. 10, 11.
John 12. 48.
and Transgressors, it is because they will not believe nor consider thereof,
however it will arise and Condemn them: What is here Published, will have its
due effect on all that are Stubborn or Despisers.

Let not any one think this new found out, for it is the old Scripture-Way,
illustrating that more particularly what is affirmed in diverse places, That I
may see the good of thy Chosen, that I may Rejoice in the gladness of thy
Nation, Psalm. 106. 5. Happy art thou O Israel, Deuteronomy. 33. 29. Happy is that
people whose God is the Lord, Psalm. 144. 15. He tha^ keeps the Law, Happy is
he, Prove. 29. 18. The end of all Preaching is to prove and show that more
perfectly what is contained therein, and so to manage it according to the
design of the whole, that all the World may O^ey God and be wise unto
Salvation. His Word does not stand in need of Apology, but the Abuse and
Corruption in handling thereof has b^^^ so universal, that he who would keep
free from it, is necessitated to Justify himself least he be thought a setter
forth of strange Doctrines.

To bring all toward Conclusion, Man would be Happy even whilst he Lives and
does so that from the Decree of God, and the nature of the thing it is
impossible he should be Happy; And again, he declines those things which are
absolutely necess^ry to be so. All his Actions turn upon this Point; If he
would rectify the mistake, and suffer himself to be rightly informed herein,
he can never miss of (what all desire) the only end, the true Happiness. If he
is put in mind of any thing which may assist or direct him, Not unto us, O
Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name give Glory, for thy Mercy and for thy
Truths sake, Psalm. 115. 1.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 4 line 2 for varietation r variation. l 40 r Mark 14. p 26 17 r not we
our selves. P 37 l 35 r to recommend. P 47 l 34 f forwardness r frowardness.
P50 l 19 (...) speaking r sn^aking P 70 l 37 f fear r bear. P 71 l 21 r equal
worth. P 75 l20 r John 16. 13. P 79 l 1 omit the word first. p 86 l 5 r their
own p^ril. P 180 l 13 r does not. P. 190 l 16 r adapting. p 229 l 9. r trust
God. p 261 l 6 r lively and. P 309 l 8 r enjoyment. P 358 l 22 f employments r
enjoyments. P 417 l 16 r ^rocuring. p 467 l 29 r to have been Penned. p 152 l
27 r before Men can.


