A DISCOURSE CONCERNING THE DEVOTIONS OF THE Church of Rome, Especially, as
compared with those of the CHURCH of ENGLAND, In which it is shown, That
whatever the Romanists pretend, there is not so true Devotion among them, nor
such rational Provision for it, nor Encouragement to it, as in the Church
established by Law among us.

LONDON, Printed for Benj. Took at the Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1685.

ERRATA.
P. 13. l. 18. r. Monkery. p. 16. l. 29. r. Assistance. p. 25. l. 20. r. Seal
for Seat. p. 37. l. 25. r. Rev. 19.10. p. 40. l. 10. r. destroy for remove. p.
45. l. 31. r. punished for promised. p. 46. l. ult. r. depending. p. 47. l. 30,
31. r. Decisions for Devisions. p. 48. l. 29. r. severe for secure. p. 50. l.
31. r., for: p. 51. l. 21. r. loath for loath. p. 63. l. 22. r. especial for
especially. p. 64. l. 27. r. (and for (or. p. 65. l. ult. r. Camere for
Camaerae.

A DISCOURSE Concerning the DEVOTIONS OF THE Church of Rome, etc.
IT is certainly one of the greatest Commendations that can be given of any
Church, or Body of Christians, that a man can with Truth affirm of it, that the
Doctrines which they profess, the Rules and Orders under which they live, that
the Frame and Constitution of the Church tends directly to make men more
pious and devout, more penitent and mortified, more heavenly minded, and every
way of better Lives than the way and profession of other Christians: For to
work men up to this holy Frame and Disposition was one of the main designs of
the Gospel of Christ, which intends to govern men's Actions, and reform their
Temper, as well as to inform their Understandings, and direct their Belief. And
in this particular it differs much from all the Ethics of the learned Heathen.
For whereas they designed especially to exalt the Passions, and to raise up the
Mind above it self, by commending the high and pompous Virtues, thereby to stir
men up to great Designs, and to appear bold and braving in the affairs of this
Life; the Gospel is most frequent in commendation of the humble lowly and
mortifying Virtues, which would reduce the Mind to it self, and keep Men within
due Bounds, and teach them how to behave themselves toward God, and to live in
a due regard to another Life.

Now there is scarcely any thing which the Church of Rome does more often urge
for her self, or with greater Confidence pretend to excel the Church of England
in, than by endeavoring to persuade, that the Frame of their Church is more
fitted for the exciting of Devotion and a good Life than ours is. And so they
will boast of their Severe, Rules and Orders, the Austerities of their Fasts
and Penances, the strict and mortifyed Lives, the constancy and incessancy of
Devotions used among them; and would thence infer, that that must needs be
the best Religion, or way of serving God in which these Practices are enjoined
and observed, That the Tree must needs be good by such excellent Fruits; and
that if all other Arguments fail, yet they say they have this to show for
themselves, that in their Communion there is at least somewhat more like that
great Self-denial and Mortification so often made necessary under the Gospel,
than is to be found in the Reformed Churches, or particularly in the Church of
England. Now laying aside all Disputes concerning Points of Doctrine, in
controversy between them and us, in which it has been abundantly shown, that
they err in matters of Faith; and that in what they differ from us, they differ
also from the Scripture, and the true Church of Christ in all the best Ages;
I Will confine my self to examine their Pretense to Devotion, where I doubt not
but it will sufficiently appear, that they are as much deficient also in
Regularity of Practice; that there is not that true Foundation laid for such
Devotion as God accepts, nor that strict Provision made for it, nor that real
Practice of it which they would make us believe; but that even the best which
they pretend to, is such as does by no means befit a truly Christian Spirit,

I Will discourse in this Method: 1. I Will instance in the several Expressions of
Devotion, the Motives to it, or Assistances of it, which the Church of Rome
pretends to, and on which she is used to magnify her self. 2. I will allege
the just Exceptions which we have against such their Pretenses. 3. And then
show that they are so far from encouraging true Devotion, that many things both
in their Doctrine and Discipline directly tend to the Destruction of it. 4.
I Will show what excellent Provision is made in the Church of England, for the
due exercise of all the parts of Devotion, and what Stress is laid on it, and
on a good Life among us.


First, Though Devotion is properly and chiefly in the mind, a due sense of God
and Religion, yet it is not sufficient if it stop there: For there are certain
outward Acts which are either in themselves natural and proper Expressions, or
else are strictly required of us by God, as Duties of Religion, and Evidences
of the devout temper of our Minds; and these are called Acts of Devotion. And
all the Commendation that can be given of any Church, on Account of Devotion,
must be either, that there is a true Foundation laid for it in men's Minds, or
constant Provision made for the due Exercise of it, all necessary Encouragement
given to it, and a suitably, strict and regular Practice of it observable among
them. And there are several things which are not at all insisted on by us,
which they of the Church of Rome boast of, as serving to some or all of these
purposes, which I shall represent as fairly as I can, that we may see what
there is in that Church that does answer such great pretenses.

For it is observed that they of the Church of Rome oftentimes instead of
dispute, endeavor to work on our People, and too often prevail, by appealing
to matters of Practice, visible to every ones Eye; an Argument to which men
need not use their Reason, but their Sense; and this will, (say they)
sufficiently convince any of the excellency of our way. For here are several
things used as Instances and Expressions of Devotion, very acceptable to God,
and suitable to a good Christian Temper, which are either not at all used in
the Church of England, or at least not in that Degree and Measure, and yet all
those that are used in the Church of England, say they, are used among us: For
we not only enjoin, and practice constant use of Prayers public and private,
together with Reading and Preaching of the Word, Sacraments, and what ever is
used in the Church of England; but we have besides several things which are as
well proper Expressions of Devotion, as Helps and Assistances which are not
used among the Protestants: The Principal things which they urge are such as
these:

1. They blame the Reformation in general, as well as the Church of England,
for the want of Monasteries and such other Religious Houses, which are so
numerous in the Popish Countries, where Holy Men and Women being shut up, and
having bid adieu to the World, live as in Heaven in constant Exercise of
praising of God Night and Day, and of praying to him for the Church and State,
and particular Christians, as well as themselves; and who are not only so
beneficial to the World, by the constancy of their Prayers, but also by their
Example putting others in mind of Religion, and of doing likewise; and by the
severity of their lives, as to Diet, Garb, and other Circumstances, live in a
constant Practice of that self-denial which is commanded in Scripture, and was
so practiced by Holy Men almost from the beginning of Christianity; and are as
it were constant Preachers of Holiness and Mortification, who though they do
indeed stay here in the World below, yet converse not in it, but are in some
Sense out of it, and live above it.

2. They sometimes also boast of the extraordinary Charity, and Liberality to
all good and Holy Uses pressed and practiced among them, which is but sparingly
used, say they, among the Protestants; Especially their excessive Expense and
Cost in building and endowing Monasteries, erecting Churches, Chapels and
Crosses, their so pompous adorning the Places dedicated to the Worship of God,
besides their Charitable Assistance, and relief which they afford to the Bodies
of the Living, and the Souls of the Dead; and no Man can deny but Charity is a
certain Evidence, as well as a great branch and duty of true Religion and
Devotion:

3. Sometimes they glory in the great number of Saints commemorated in their
Church, and dying in the Communion of it, and urge them as a forcible Example
to others, and a mighty incentive to Devotion; they think also it redounds much
to the Honor, and Commendation of their Church to have had such glorious
Members of it, and twit us as they think severely, when they ask us what Saints
we have of our Church, and wonder especially that we should observe so few
Festivals and Holidays; whereas the very many days set apart in their Church in
memory of their several Saints, they think not only afford proper Occasions,
for all Acts of Religion; but are a sign of their being less addicted to this
World, when so great a part of their time is spent in the Service of God, and
that Piety and Devotion are a considerable part of their Business and
Employment.

4. They urge also the multitude of Pictures and Images of several Famous Men
and Women, who have in an eminent manner served and pleased God, and been
instrumental in converting the World, as very proper Assistances of a Man's
Devotion; instructing some, they being the Books of the Unlearned, and sensibly
affecting and alluring all to the Imitation of the Persons whom they represent.

5. Sometimes they commend their Church for the Fastings, and other Acts of
Severity and Mortification, used not only by the Monks and Regulars, but by all
sorts of Men, according to the Rules of their Church, on set days of the Week
or Seasons of the Year; as well as such Austerities as are enjoined by their
Confessors, by way of Penance; their going barefoot and bare-headed in
Processions, their whipping and lashing themselves, their drawing great Chains
and Weights after them, as great and proper Instances of Self-denial and
Devotion.

6. They place also a great Deal of Religion in Philgrimages, which the more
Devout sort take, and spend their Estates, and sometimes their Lives in, to
Jerusalem, Rome, Loretto, Mount-ferrat, to St. Thomas, at Canterbury St.
Winefrid's Well, or some such other places where some extraordinary Person has
lived, or some strange Relic is left, or where they reckon God has on some
Occasion or other wonderfully manifested himself; and they reckon that the very
visiting or kissing these, are either an argument of truly Devout Minds, or
that which will make them so. And their Manuals or Books which their Priests
give into the Peoples Hands, do not fail by all the art imaginable, to
endeavor to screw up Men's Devotion, even to rapture and ecstasy in
Commendation of these Practices and Orders, even as if they would have us
believe that there is no true Religion and Devotion without these, and that
where there are these things practiced, it is a certain Sign that the mind is
affected as it ought, and Piety flourishes in the highest Degree.

And besides these Matters of Practice, there are also several Doctrines, and
Opinions peculiar to themselves, whichthey reckon do naturally tend to the
Advancement of true Devotion. As,

7. Their Doctrine concerning the Intercession of Saints for us, and the
Advantage of Invocation or Prayer to them, and that we of the Church of England
want one of the greatest Encouragements to Prayer and Devotion that can be, who
neither own nor make use of these Helps, and therefore that we cannot have such
hope of Success and Blessing as they have.

8. Their Doctrine concerning the Merit of Good Works and Supererogation, is of
the same Nature, in their esteem: For the more Worth you suppose in any Action,
the greater Encouragement is there to the Performance of it, and therefore
surely it must be a most irresistible motive to Devotion, to persuade men that
the worth and value of it is such, as that you may by it purchase Heaven not
only for your selves, but for others also.

9. Their belief of Purgatory, and of the validity of Prayers for the Dead,
does naturally tend to excite men to Devotion, say they; for here is a greater
Scope and Occasion for our Prayers, we may hope to be instrumental to more
good, more Persons to be relieved and helped by our Prayers, than are supposed
in the Devotions of the Church of England.

10. And especially their Doctrine and Practice of Confession, Penance and
Absolution, they look on as so necessary to Devotion, that it is a wonder with
them that there should be any show of it, where these are not received and
practiced: For a particular Confession of all Sins to a Priest being so
strictly required, they say is the readiest way to bring men to a Sense of and
shame for their Sins; and Penance being also imposed presently on them, will
surely make Men to be more afraid of sinning again when they see it must cost
them so dear, and that they may not despair or despond, by Reason of the
Multitude or Weight of their former Sins, but may be encouraged to strive more
earnestly against Sin for the future, the Priest gives them Absolution of what
is passed, at the same time encouraging their hope, as well as exciting their
fear, and endeavoring by the same Method both to allure, to force and to shame
Men into Amendment.

Lastly they insist much also on the Validity of their Ordinations, the Truth
and Succession Unity and Authority, of their Church, and the Obedience that is
paid to the Rules and Orders of it, as mighty Helps and Assistances, and
Encouragements to Devotion; when they are so sure of the Sacraments being duly
administered, and all other Acts of Authority rightly performed, when the Laws
of the Church, for the Punishment of Offenders are duly executed, and when the
Church has Power to oblige all to an Uniform and Regular Practice.

All these things, say they, do either encourage and excite men to Devotion, or
assist or direct them in the exercise of it, give more room or afford better
Occasions for it, or else show more fully the Necessity of such and such parts
of it then what is received and practiced in the Church of England; and
therefore the Church of England that wants these wants also much of the
Occasion, Matter, Opportunities and Arguments for Devotion: so that laying
aside all disputes concerning Articles of Faith, they doubt not but it will be
readily granted, that at least, they are a more devout People; whatever their
Belief is, their Practice is more agreeable to that Self-denial and
Mortification commanded in Scripture; that God is more constantly and
reverently served among them than he is among us; that they take more Pains,
are at more Cost and Trouble in the Worship of God, which they think is an
Instance of a good religious mind, and will be most secure of God's Acceptance.

These are, I think indeed, the most that they do urge for themselves in this
point, and there is something of appearance of Truth in all this. Most of these
Instances are such as may perhaps be very taking at first sight with some
people, they having a show of Regularity, Strictness and Severity, or else of
being proper Helps and Assistances of Devotion: For Men are wont to admire any
thing that looks odd or big, especially if others have but the Confidence
highly to praise and extol it. But if we examine them, we shall find them to
fall infinitely short of such specious Pretenses; some of them to be unlawful,
and those that are good in themselves, to be some way or other spoiled in the
use of them; always they err in some material part or Circumstance; and taken
all together, they have nothing in them which evidence any true devout Temper,
either designed to be wrought by the Church, or actually working in the People:
Much less do they bespeak greater Devotion than is required and practiced in
our Church.

For it has been well observed by the judicious Sir Edwin Sandys, that the
Church of Rome has so contrived its Rules and Orders, as rather to comply
with, and fit every Temper and Inclination good or bad, than to work any real
good effect on any. And therefore as it has several things which openly agree
with, and please the profane and debauched; so it must be granted, that it has
somewhat also to suit with and gratify the melancholy Temper, where the
devoutly disposed may find somewhat an agreeable Retreat: And therefore one
would be apt to suspect that the most strict and severe of their Orders, were
kept up rather out of a politic end, to please and quiet the People, than
really to advance true Piety to God and Devotion. But however it is plain, that
taking the whole Frame of that Church together, it does not design to promote
serious and true Devotion; but only to make a Noise, and to appear so to do.
For when I see the same Church, though sometimes seeming to countenance the
utmost Severity as necessary, yet at other times to give all Liberty, and let
the Reins loose to all kind of Debauchery, I have just reason to fear they are
not in earnest for Religion: For all such irregular Heats, are a fign of bad
Principles, or a distempered Constitution. Just as if I should see the same
person sometimes desperately dissolute and debauched, and at other times
intolerably strict and severe, and this interchangeably and often, I shall much
question his strictness, whether it be sincere: If his Sense of Piety were
real, it would be more lasting and uniform; and therefore without Breach of
Charity, I think I may look on him in his greatest Severity, rather to act a
part on a Stage, and to serve a present Turn and Occasion, than to be really in
his mind what such Strictness would represent him. And therefore whatever true
Devotion is in any of that Communion, ought to be ascribed to somewhat else,
than to the Constitution of that Church: For even those things which they are
used to boast most of, which I have mentioned already, we shall easily find to
have little that is truly commendable, much that is greatly faulty in them; and
if their best things are no better, what are their worst? If the Subject of
their Glory is shameful, what will become of the rest?

2. And therefore I Will now show what we have justly to except against their
forementioned pretenses to Devotion.

1. As for Monkery in general, which they boast so much of, calling it Status
Perfectionis and religiosus, as if besides the State of Men in Holy Orders,
that were a State of Perfection, and nothing else worthy the Name of Religious.
We confess, that scarcely as to any thing concerning the Externals of Religion,
does the Church of England distinguish it self from the Romish Church so much,
as that there is not any Provision made, or so much as a Supposition of such
Monasteries, or religious Houses, or public places of Retirement for devout
People, as they are called, being again ever settled among us. For though we are
not so rash as utterly to abhor and throw away every thing that at any time had
been abused to Superstition, yet we are very well contented that Monasteries
should never be rebuilt among us. For we do not look on the Life of Monks as
any great help to Devotion, or an instance of true Religion prevailing where
they are found; much less that they are necessary in the Christian Church.

For it is evident that the first and purest Ages of the Church did not know
any thing of them: Almost three Centuries passed without any mention of them in
Ecclesiastical History. Antony and Paul in the Dioclesian Persecution, being
taken notice of as the first of that Way. We read indeed of some that did lead
a more than ordinary severe Course, and denied themselves much of the (perhaps)
lawful Pleasures of this Life, in respect to Religion and the other Life; but
these were not Monks, or the modern Asceticks; though it has been the way of the
Church of Rome in more instances than this to impose some new thing on the
World upon the Reputation of some good and reverend Old Name: For the Lives of
the ancient Asceticks, or mortified Men, differed much from the present Monks
of the Church of Rome. We find not that they engaged themselves in a solemn
Vow, distinct from, or above that of their Baptism. For whatever their general
Course of Life was, they would take the Liberty to break their Rule sometimes
in order to extraordinary Charity, or when an occasion offered it self of doing
more good; as is recorded particularly concerning Spiridion a Bishop in Cyprus.
Nor do we find that they always continued in the same State of Life; but took
such a severe course on themselves at some particular times, and on some
special occasions, (as the Nazarites of old did) to humble, and bring their
Bodies under, and as St. Paul advises the married; but not to continue always
so, lest Satan should tempt them; and they reckoned it in an higher degree
praiseworthy for every Act of Mortification to be voluntary, than that they
should once for all force themselves to it: And therefore still retained a
Power to themselves, and did vary from this Method-sometimes, and on occaosin
would indulge themselves a greater, though still a lawful Liberty. They took not
on them the Vow of Poverty, nor placed Perfection in Beggary, but reckoned
every Creature of God to be good; and even the outward good things of this Life
to be the Gift and Grace of God, if they be well employed, according to 1 Pet.
4.10. and remembered that Saying of our Blessed Savior, Acts 20, 35. It is more
blessed to give than to receive. Nor did they vow what the Church of Rome now
calls Chastity, but reckoned themselves as chaste in Wedlock; and as for
Obedience, the third part of the Monks Vow, they thought it sufficient to obey
the Commands of God, and knew not of any other Obedience due from them, but
only to their Governors in Church and State, whose lawful Commands they
reckoned themselves obliged to, in order to the more regular Administration of
Affairs, and the more peaceable Government of the World; much less had they any
distinct Rules to be set up in Competition with the Laws of God, and urged as
necessary to Salvation, making even the Commandments of God of none effect, as
many of the Monks Rules apparently do, as might be easily made to appear. Such
religious Men as these, there were in the first Ages, who practiced a stricter
Devotion than others, that God's Name might be the more hallowed by them, the
more it was profaned by the rest of the World, and who were more than ordinary
instant and constant in Prayers for a Blessing on the Church and State, of
which they were Members; and by the Strictness and Severity of their Lives,
made some amends for the Negligence and Viciousness of the Age in which they
lived.

And many such as these, we doubt not, are now among us, who yet utterly
dislike the Popish Mankery. And if by the Monastic Life all this were done,
and nothing else designed, it were justly to be commended: For let Men deny
themselves as much as they will, and use their Christian Liberty to the
Restraint of themselves by a voluntary Self denial and Mortification, to keep
their Bodies under, and thereby get a better Temper of Mind. But all this will
not suffice in the Church of Rome: For it is not enough for a man to live so
strict and holy a Life, unless he enter into a Vow particularly to this
purpose. Nay, though a man do take on him all these Vows of Chastity, Poverty
and Obedience; and though they be made to his Bishop or Confessor, who one would
think were the properest persons in the Case, yet still it is not sufficient;
he cannot be said to be in this religious State, unless he vow Obedience to
another kind of Spiritual Jurisdiction. So that it is neither the living so
strictly, nor vowing to live strictly, as the most severe Monks; but it is
their being of a particular Order, and living under such and such Rule, that is
so meritorious; so that by Monkery indeed, Monkery is encouraged, and some
politic and Secular Designs answered; but the Advancement of Piety and
Devotion is not principally designed or intended. But to discourse more
distinctly of it;

In a Monastic Life these three things are especially remarkable,

First, The secluded, and perhaps Eremetical way of living which they lead.

Secondly, The Constancy and Regularity of Devotions practiced there.

Thirdly, The Severity of their Rules, and Austerity of their Lives.

But I must needs say, that there is little of true Devotion, that I can
discover in any of these:

First, Their being shut up from the World, or living in Deserts, is no very
proper Instance of their Devotion, or agreeable to the Design of Christianity.

For a man should converse in the World, else he cannot so well understand it,
what is amiss, or wanting in it, nor how even to apply and place the Emphasis
of his Prayers.

A man that lives in a Wilderness, or shut up always in a Monastery, it is
possible that he may keep himself free from the Defilements of the World; but
yet it must be looked on as much more noble and commendable to converse in the
World, and yet to avoid the Pollution of it.

And though by such a secluded Life he may escape one kind of Temptation, yet
still he will be at least as liable to the two others, that arise from the
Devil, or his own Flesh and Temper as ever. And if he avoid some Sins, yet
still he will be more subject to others, Sowerness, Moroseness, Melancholy,
Censoriousness, spiritual Pride, and other Sins of as high a Nature as those,
which by being shut up from the World he pretends to avoid. And yet such as
these are generally legible and observable in the very Looks, Conversation and
Carriage of Monks and Hermits.

Indeed Retiredness sometimes is an excellent help to the Mind, by giving it
time to recollect it self, and to reflect on its former Miscarriages, and the
better to prepare it self for its future Encounters in the World. But a man may
exceed in the Measures and Degrees of this, as well as of other Convenicies and
lawful Enjoyments; and so it may become a Snare and an Evil to him: For the
mind will naturally be as much tired with Solitude as with Bufiness: Besides,
that the Devil is always most busy when men are idle, and Diversion and
Recreation is as necessary to most Tempers, as Health and Cheerfulness are; and
fits a man even for the Duties of Religion. For the keeping the Mind in a
constant Bent, though of Devotion, will in a short time weaken its Spring and
dull its Edge; and the Acts of Devotion in such a mind, will, it is to be
feared, be rather a formal piece of Drudgery than a reasonable Service. And
though we should grant, that by being confined to a Monastery, a man might
better escape the Defilements of any kind of Sin; yet it must be granted, that
he cannot be in so much capacity of doing good in the World as if he conversed
freely with it: And Sozomon quotes it as a most remarkable Saying of some of
the first Monks, Soc. l. 1. c. 12.
That he that abstains from Evil, but does no Good, ought to be esteemed a very
bad Man; and so the Commands of Scripture enjoin us to take Care to do Good, as
well as to abstain from Evil, else we shall be reckoned among the unprofitable
Servants. We are sure that public Service ought to be preferred before
private, the Glory of God, and the Good of Men being more advanced by it; and
therefore, though that man that lives in a Wilderness, and serves God there
when he is forced to it by Persecution, may hope for a Blessing, though he be
alone, and neither worshippeth God in Public, nor gives a good Example to the
World; yet he that runs into a Wilderness to be wondered at and admired, and
neglects the ordinary and most useful way of serving God, there is too much
reason to fear he has his Reward. At least how far soever it may please God to
pardon his blind Zeal, and want of Discretion, yet certainly this Example of
his ought not to be recommended to all, as a Rule for them to walk by. The
first Monks we grant, were very good and pious Men, and were compelled to
forsake their Houses, and live in Solitude; but it is very unreasonable to make
their manner of Life a Pattern to be followed in the quiet and peaceable Ages
of the Church. For this would be to show our selves insensible of the goodness
of God to us, in giving us the Liberty of serving him freely and openly, and
that we dare profess our Religion without fear of losing our Lives. And for the
same reason we should still choose to celebrate the Sacrament in an upper Room,
because our Blessed Savior, and his Holy Apostles did so; and should have our
religious Assemblies in Crypts and Vaults under Ground, because the first
Christians, in times of Difficulty and Persecution, often durst use no other.

And as the Solitude of a Monastic Life is no proper Asfistnce or Expression
of true Devotion, was not known in the first Ages of the Church, and afterward
was not taken up of Choice, but by Necessity: So also in the last place, I
observe, that the Gospel of Christ, and the Rules of Living, which are given us
by himself, and his Holy Apostles, never enjoin or suppose any such thing. We
are always supposed to live in Company and Society; and accorpingly the
Precepts of our Savior and the Apostles are adapted to the common Cases of
Men, and the Concerns of such as converse freely in the World. And therefore I
must needs say, that it has been very wisely ordered, that there should be new
and distinct Rules made for those that delight in this solitary and Monastic
way of Life: For they are such a kind of men as the Gospel of Christ has no
proper Rules for.

Secondly, And I am afraid that there is as little true Devotion in their so
frequent and constant Prayers enjoined and practiced in their Monasteries,
though this be confessedly what is most commendable in their way of Life, and
is the only way by which they themselves can pretend to do any Good in the
World. (If I except those, which are but very few, that workwith their Hands.)

Praise and Prayer is therefore acceptable with God, as it is in the volunrary
Expression of our Souls, a Free Will Offering and Sacrifice which we offer to
God, in consideration of his infinite Excellencies and Perfections in himself,
his former undeserved Goodness to us, and our Liableness to him. Now the
constant Prayers used in their Monasteries, in more particulars than one, come
short of that true Devotion due from Men to their Maker: For first, they are as
much as can be forced on a rational Being, and on that account must needs lose
much of their Worth and Acceptableness. The Monks are obliged by the Rules of
their several Orders to say such and such Prayers, and just at such and such
times, whatever Devotion or Intention of Mind they have; and they are severely
punished if they fail of them. Exactly at Midnight, at two or three a Clock in
the Morning, so very often, and at so very unseasonable times, that many have
confessed this strictness of their Devotions, to be of all the greatest Burden
of their Lives; And yet this they must do in Imitation of some holy Man of Old,
who is recorded to have prayed at these Hours; whereas these Men's Devotions is
not warm enough to keep them awake when they are at Prayer. And therefore these
Prayers not being the free Emanations of their own mind, methinks the praise of
them is not so much due to the Monks themselves, as to the head and founder of
their Order, who obliged them to such Rules.

And their Devotion is little more praiseworthy than that of the Jews at
Avignon, and several other Places, who are once in a Week forced to go to
Church and hear a Sermou, (as these Monks are) at least to sit there whilst a
Sermon is preached, and return home as good Christians as they went thither.

But then they are not only thus strictly obliged to such Hours of Prayer, for
that were somewhat tolerable, they might possibly be intent on their Prayers,
notwithstanding. But they are at the same time taught, that they need only say
the Words with their Mouths; it is not absolutely necessary that their mind
should go along with them, and this together with the other must needs spoil
all true Devotion. The frequency and unseasonableness of their Prayers, will
make it very difficult for them to attend as they ought, and their Doctrine
concerning the No-necessity of attention at Prayers, will certainly make them
to yield to these difficulties, and so there may be abundance of Words said,
but no Devotion performed.

Besides all this, they have a way of being eased of this trouble of the
Prayers, for according to their Casuists, it is allowable for a man to get or
hire another to say his Prayers for him. At least he may be dispensed with by
his Superior, and this Dispensation is good, whether there be a just Reason or
Occasion for it or no, according to an excellent Maxim of theirs, Non ad Valo
rem, sed ad Justitiam requiritur Causa.

And if after all this, Men still will be more than they need strict in their
Prayers, according to the Rules of their Orders, they almost constantly offend
in the End, and Design of their Devotions. For they do them not so much to
benefit the World, or work themselves up to a better temper of Mind; But to
perform a task imposed on them, and which they have vowed to perform, or
especially to merit by their works. For they do not so much as pretend that
this strictness in Devotion is absolutely Necessary for their Salvation, (for
else why do they not enjoin it to all, seeing all have the same need of
Salvation?) and therefore the sole end of all this strictness and constancy in
Prayers, is only to get Heaven for others. Which Opinion, besides that it will
mightily discourage Men of an ordinary Charity, from being very intent on what
they do, when they are sensible they Labor only for another; It countenanceth
also a false and dangerous Doctrine concerning the Merit of good Works, and
incourageth all vicious practices in other Men, who will hope to be saved, tho
not by their own Prayers, yet by the Prayers of these holy Monks said for them.

So that on many accounts, there is little of true Devotion to be found in that
constant course of Prayers, said so regularly by the Monks and Hermits; Not to
mention several other particulars, concerning the Frame and Language of their
Prayers, the Object or Persons worshipped or prayed to, the Persons prayed for,
and the like, which I may have Occasion to mention afterward, which being put
together, do abundantly show the impropriety, and the worthlessness of such
Devotions.

Thirdly, And as to the Austerities of the Lives of their Monks and Nuns, the
Punishments which they inflict on themselves, as they profess for the sake of
Religion, by coarse and uneasy Garments, scanty Food and Fare, long and
tedious Watchings, frequent and cruel Whippings, and Lashings, and other such
Course and Harsh Treatments, which they use toward their own Bodies. I confess
I pity them, but can discern little or no true Christian Devotion in them.

For all Severity to our Bodies is not Devotion, or any part of that
Self-denial which the Gospel requires; nor is this of theirs, though they
pretend it to be for the sake of Religion; but their insisting so strictly on
it, and valuing themselves so much on it, is of very bad Consequence to
Religion.

All Punishment which men inflict on themselves is not Religion, nor
commendable, nor is the patient bearing of it always a Sign of a true Christian
Temper. Christ has no where told us, that he that can fast longest, or endure
most Lashes is the best Man; but he that governs himself and his Life best.
We have strange Instances of this Insensibleness of Pain in many of the worst
Principles and most profligate Consciences: The Devil has his Martyrs as well
as God; and if the voluntarily inflicting Punishment on themselves be a Sign of
Devotion, the Priests of Baal, 1 Kings 18. must have been a very devout
Generation of Men. Therefore it is not any religious Commendation of a Man,
that he can stoutly whip, or lash himself, or bear it from another without
flinching: Such a man might have made a good Gladiator, but seems not so well
qualified for a Christian.

Nor is all Punishment which Men inflict on themselves, and say they do it for
the sake of God and Religion, always a Sign of true Devotion: For in other
Cases, it is not Men's Saying that they design well, which will make their
Actions acceptable with God; but it is their doing what he has commanded, and
for the ends which he designed and intended, with which he is well pleased. And
it too often happens, that men do Actions having a show of Sanctity, and of
great Self-denial, which yet are received by God only, with a who has required
this at your hands?

Self-denial indeed is commanded in Scripture, and is necessary also to many
and excellent Purposes, to subdue a man's Passions and Affections, and to bring
him to a right understanding of himself; to put a man in mind of leaving the
pleasant things of this World, sensibly to affect him with the Condition of
those that are in Misery and always want them, and to inure him to bear
patiently the adverse things, or whatever it shall please God to lay upon him.
It is necessary that a man should have a mind always ready and prepared to lose
all for Christ; and therefore he ought often to deny himself somewhat for the
Sake of Christ, that he may give full proof to himself, that his mind is
affected as it ought to be: And by voluntary Acts of this Nature he preserves a
Power over himself, and is much the more fitted for all the Accidents of Life,
and for the Exercise of Devotion.

But let a man have a care that he keep within due Bounds: He may exceed and
transgress both in the Measure, and in the End and Design of such
Mortification. He exceeds in the Measure of it, when he inflicts such Severity
on himself as shall render him unfit for the Service of God, and useless in his
Place. God delights not in the Punishment of his Creatures, but desires their
Good here as far as it is consistent with their greater Good hereafter. And
though he requires Self-denial of us, it is only in such a measure as is for
our Good, in order to the bettering of our Temper, and to cut off the Occasions
of Sin in us. And therefore it is a great fault in any man on this pretense to
render his Life so uneasy to himself, as that he shall not be able to serve
God contentedly, cheerfully, and without Distraction: As a Man may be to blame
also for his Charity, when without a just Occasion he throws, or gives away
all; For if this Course were allowed or followed, the worst People, and they
that know least how to use an Estate well, would be the richest and Owners of
all, and the only persons in Authority and Power.

And he transgresses also in the End and Design of such Severity, when he
pretends to merit by it, and hopes to buy Heaven (which is the Gift of God)
with a few Lashes, or a little Money.

And I have too much reason to undervalue and dislike the Severity of the Monks
on both these Accounts. They often tie themselves up to such Degrees of
Strictness as are above the Measures of a man, and consequently not to the
purpose of Religion and Devotion. And they always design to purchase Heaven for
themselves or other, by the Merits of such Sufferings: At the same time
undervaluing the Sufferings of Christ, and over-valuing their own; and yet
making them of less worth in God's Esteem than else they would be, by their own
setting so high a price upon them.

And besides all this, their insisting so strictly on these pieces of
Austerity, and placing such Religion and Persection in them, is of very ill
Consequence to other purposes.

It makes men to acquiesce in the means as the end, to content themselves with
having performed their Fasts, their Number of Prayers and Lashes, without ever
aiming at any Reformation and Change of Temper and Practices; than which
nothing can be more absurd in it self, or more contrary to the Design of
Christianity.

It makes men also to esteem this or that kind of Meat and Drink, Condition or
Course of Life, to be unlawful or sinful, which really is not; which does much
harm, even to Religion: For it disparageth God's Creation and brings an evil
Report upon the Land. It necessarily makes Men querulous and censorious; and is
the very thing which our Savior took such pains to correct, and did so often
rebuke the Pharisees of his Time for.

And this extraordinary pretense to Severity, brings the Persons of such Men
into Esteem, whatever their Principles, Opinions and Practices otherwise are,
and so injures Religion. For so Ecclesiastical History tells us, That those
Heretics that have most hurt the Church, were such kind of pretended mortified
Men, as Montanus, Pelugins, etc. So that what do these more than others? Do not
even the Publicans so?

And therefore however praiseworthy the Monastic Life may have been formerly,
and what ever good may have been done, by some of that Order: Yet this is no
Plea for the Monks at this time. For the Ancients were very Instrumental in
converting many to Christianity; but these only live on the spoil of Christians
already made so. And considering the present posture of Affairs in the World,
this Monkish way of living is very improper, and the abuses that are made of it
in the Church of Rome, are plainly intolerable. Where Men are taught to place
Religion in a certain Way and Trade of Life, rather than in a truly Christian
Conversation. It strikes at the very Foundation of our Religion, for Men to be
made to believe, that the living or dying in the Habit of this or that severe
Order of Monks, will have an Influence on the Soul, and give it a better Title
to Heaven. And yet it is too notorious that these things are considently taught
and believed among them.

In short, let Men deny themselves as much as they will, for the sake of God
and of Religion, to humble themselves for their Sins, and to keep their Bodies
and Passions under. Let them use their Christian Liberty to the restraint of
themselves, by a voluntary self-denial, as far as they find it necessary or
expedient; But for this to be brought into a trade, is the most preposterous
thing in the World. Especially, let them have a Care of censuring and judging
others, who tread not exactly in their Steps, or of over-valuing themselves, on
account of this severe and strict course of Life. For it is evident that for
the most part it is not Religion brings them thither, or any extraordinary love
of Devotion; but their Parents send them thither as a pretty cheap way of
providing for their younger Children, that so they may be able the more
honorably to dispose of the rest agreeably to the Grandeur of the Family.
Therefore if they will commend the Institution of Monasteries, as a good and
frugal way of breeding up of Youth, or of providing for a spare Child or two,
let them do what they will. But it is not to be suffered, that when they serve
especially, or only to such Politic ends; yet that they should be boasted of
as the best, or only Christian and Religious way of Life, as if the Persons in
them were the only Religious, and all others were secular, and in some Measure
Profane.

Besides it is very unreasonable for Persons to be shut up in Monasteries, so
as they are, when they are young, and before they can have fully considered
what Temptations they may have, or how they shall be able to bear and withstand
them; and yet if they have but once, though of a sudden, through their own
Melancholy, or the Insinuation of others, take the vow on themselves, there is
ordinarily no revoking or drawing back for ever.

It is very cruel also for Persons to be put there, without any Consideration
of their several Tempers, and Circumstances. For instead of benefiting the
Public, which they pretend, it robs the World of many an one that would
have been useful to it in an Active Life and Station. And some by their Tempers
do not need such Mortification, as the melancholy and dejected. Others cannot
bear the Strictness and Confinement, the weak and sickly. And now to force this
same course of Life on all, or such a number of Men, indifferently, is like the
Cruelty of that Tyrant that would make all men of the same length: And the best
that can be said in the case, is, that the Persons who thus confine and shut up
their Children and Relations, are like to the Persecutors, who in the like
manner shut up St. Cyprian, which certainly was Cruelty in them, tho by so
doing, they gave him a greater Opportunity for private Devotion. So that in
truth I look on the Monasteries, as they are now ordered, to be rather a kind
of Prisons, and places of Punishment, than convenient places of Retirement in
order to the freer and more undisturbed Exercise of Religion and Devotion. And
if I am not mistaken, the Church of Rome her self, whatever she pretends,
really thinks so of them: For the worst Punishment that she inflicts on a
Priest for one of the worst of Offenses, viz. for his violating the Seat of
Confession, is, that he shall be condemned to be shut up in a Monastery; and I
dare say, that he and I agree in thinking that to be a severe Punishment,
rather than an Help to Devotion.

Secondly, And if the Multitude of Monasteries in the Church of Rome is no
certain Sign of Devotion flourishing among them, they have little reason to
boast of their works of Charity: For it is most plain, that the biggest part of
their Charity is turned this way, to the building and endowing Monasteries, and
to the Encouragement of the Monastic way of living.

But besides this, though I am very loath to find fault with any pretense to
Charity, yet I have too much reason on many accounts to think very meanly of
all that which is practiced in the Church of Rome: For whatever has been given
to that Church under the Name of Charity, and is now enjoyed by it, has for
the most part been ill gotten, and is as ill employed.

And here I will not treat of the temporal Power of the Pope himself, and of
the several Principalities which he stands possessed of in Italy and France;
for they cannot be ranged under the Head of Charity, according to my acception
of the Word; though it might be easily made to appear, that they have generally
been gotten by unjust and unlawful, or at best by harsh and cruel Means, and
such as one would not expect from the Succesfor of St. Peter. But I concern my
self with smaller and more private Benefactions and Gifts, though these are so
considerable, that generally a third part, often half the Lands of a Country
are the Propriety of the Church, Now all this is gotten chiefly from men that
are dying, who can keep their Riches no longer, and therefore who do not so
much give this from themselves as from their Heirs; and is especially, as it
were, to buy Heaven; and a man must have a most despicable esteem of Heaven,
who will not give all the good things of this Life, when he can no longer use
or enjoy them, for the Purchase of it: And what is given from so bad a
Principle, is commonly applied to as bad a purpose. It is a common Observation,
that in all the Popish Countries the Poor are the most miserable in the World;
and their Secular Priests too are generally in a sad Condition, notwithstanding
the infinite Riches of that Church: And so the Regulars only have any
considerable advantage by them; and they also, as it were, club together to set
up one great Man as Cardinal, or Head of their Order, in mighty Pomp and State;
and heap Riches and Preferments on him till he can hardly bear them. So that
one can scarcely suppose so great Riches as that Church is in common endowed
with, to be gotten into fewer Hands, or do less Good than it does amongst them.
Let them not therefore boast of their Charity, whilst amidst so great Plenty,
they suffer the Poor to want so extremely; and yet to make a Show build a fine
Hospital in two or three of their chief Towns: For perhaps no where in the
World do the Rich more exalt themselves, and tyrannize over the Poor, no where
is there a greater inequality of Conditions; no where is there so much given to
the Church and Charity, and no where is the Estate of the Church engrossed into
so few Hands, to maintain Grandeur, rather than to be a Relief to Poverty. For
the Cardinals above Seventy in number are maintained out of the
Church-Revenues, and yet are by their Creation equal to Kings, and superior to
Princes. Now if this be Charity to have a prodigious Revenue for the
Maintenance of the Church and Poor, and yet to employ this to the Luxury of a
few, and to let the rest perish, I will acknowledge the Church of Rome to be
the most charitable Church in the World. And if it be said that a great deal
indeed has been given to good and truly charitable uses, but is now perhaps
misemployed: I answer, it is possible it may be so, yet still I have some
reason to question it; For their Doctrines of Merit, and of buying Souls out of
Purgatory, etc. are enough to spoil their works of Charity, and make them to be
rather esteemed a Bargain of Sale than a free Gift. And yet their Donations run
commonly in this Form, I give this to such a Monastery for the good of my Soul,
or of the Souls of other persons deceased, or for the Honor of such a Saint;
but seldom for the good of the Poor, the Maintenance and Support of true Piety
and Religion; or for the Glory and Honor of God: And yet in my Opinion such as
these are the only ends for which a Gift ought to be esteemed charitable, or
will be accepted by God as such.

But now on the other side, though the Church of England own not either
Purgatory, or any other of their Pick-pocket Doctrines, yet Charity urged by us
from truly Christian Principles, has had more force, and done more good than
all their Tricks and Devices put together: For so Dr. Willet has in part
shown, and it might be more fully demonstrated, that in these last 120, or 130
Years, since the settling of the Reformation among us, there has been more and
greater Churches, Schools and Hospitals built and endowed, better Provision
made for the Poor; more and better care taken, not only for the Maintenance,
but especially for the Instruction of the ignorant and meaner sort of People;
In short, all parts of Charity more fully exercised, than can be shown in any
the like number of Years since Christianity came into this Country. Indeed the
general Strain of our Peoples Charity runs to the doing of more good, and is
more properly expressed than theirs is. The Papists build Monasteries, in which
Provision is made for a few people to live in Idleness and Luxury under
pretense of Devotion and Retirement: Ours relieve the Sick and Needy (tho not
Regulars) and think it better Charity to preserve a poor Family from starving
(of which so many thousands die in Popish Countries) than to maintain an idle
Monk or Nun, or to make a Present to the Lady at Loretto, or offer Candles and
Tapers to the Image, or Saint of the Town in which we live. We, by so bestowing
our Charity, both honor God, and do good to Men. They do neither, but do
Homage to a Saint that neither knows them, nor receives any Good by the Honor
which they give them.

It is indeed confessed, that our Churches are not so adorned as they ought
sometimes: But that is no Fault of our Church, but of the Iniquity of the
Times, and of those Dissentions which they raise among us; but generally they
are decently grave, and as well sitted to assist a devout mind without
Distraction as can be. We love to have our Churches neat and handsome, to show
we do not grudge whatever may be required to make them in some measure a fit
place for Divine Worship; but we see not any necessity of having them so
splendidly rich and fine; we think it would rather divert men's minds from the
Business of the Place, than assist them in the Duties of it.

In short, in no part of Charity can they pretend to exceed us, considering our
Circumstances, unless it be in that of Prayer for the Dead, when they hire so
many Masses to be said for them; but we think not this so much Charity to the
person deceased, as to the Priest; for he doubtless receives most Benefit from
it.

Thirdly, And whatever they pretend, the great number of Saints canonized and
commemorated among them, is neither a Sign of their good State and Condition of
their Church, nor is their keeping so many Holydays in remembrance of them any
instance of true Devotion.

As for many of the Saints which they commemorate we own as well as they, and
can pretend as good a right in them as they can, because we own, and will
submit to whatever can be urged from them; such are the Blessed Virgin, the
Apostles and Evangelists; and after them also the Bishops, Martyrs and
Confessors in the Primitive Church: But we confess that we have not the same
esteem of many whom they commemorate as Saints, and utterly disallow of their
Canonizing or Sainting of them: For many of them (I believe) never had any
Being, but in the Fancy of these Saint-makers, who yet are commemorated, and
prayed to as well as any others. Such are St. Longinus, under which name they
have made a Man of the Spear which pierced our Savior's Blessed Body. St.
Almachius, on Jan. 1. which only comes from the Corruption of Almanac; St.
Amphibalus, who was only St. Alban's Cloak; St. Vrsula, and her 11000 Virgins,
of whom no Footsteps can be found in true History. Many of them, I fear, it
had been better that they had never been, as being notoriously vicious and
scandalous in their Lives. And others, though more innocent, yet if we believe
what is written in their Lives, were so prodigiously ridiculous, that a wise
and religious man would be ashamed of such Company. To hear Men in an Ecstasy
of Devotion to talk Nonsense, or to preach to Birds and Beasts, to run naked,
to wander voluntarily in Deserts, etc. is more likely with sober men, to bring
their Persons and Actions into Contempt and Scorn, than to affect them with any
quick Sense of Religion; at best it will excite Men only to that extatical and
enthusiastical kind of Devotion, which was in vogue among the Heathens, whose
Priests were besides themselves, when they spoke in the Name of their Gods; and
their most celebrated Exercises of Religion were such kind of irrational
Actions; but there is nothing of this at all countenanced under Christianity:
For the Gospel would make us wise as well as devout; and it is not required
that we put off the Man, but the Old Man and its Vices when we become
Christians.

And though we are sensible of many among us that have been very exemplary for
Virtue and Piety, and have no reason to doubt of their Salvation; but have as
full Assurance of it, at least, as they have of their Saints; yet we are very
shy of canonizing or sainting of them, because we know not Men's Hearts, nor
dare we to presume to dispose so absolutely of Heaven as the Pope does. We
thank God for those that have lived and died well among us, and exhort our
people to imitate all the Good which showed it self in them; but we know not to
what purpose Canonization is. If it be only to recommend their Virtues to
Example, the Canonization of them will signify no more than the bare History
of their good Lives faithfully recorded would do; but if it be in order to
praying to them we utterly condemn it. And it is too plain, that this is the
end of their being canonized: For from that time solemn Prayer and Invocation
is allowed and offered up to them. And this I believe has been an occasion of
their falling from the Truth of Christian Doctrine as well as Practice: For
they taking such a man to be a Saint, think themselves obliged to follow and
vindicate whatever he either did or said, as holy and true, not considering
that the best of mere Men have been guilty of Mistakes and Imperfections; and
then much more may we suspect the Judgment and Understanding, the Virtue and
Piety of many of those that fill up the bigger part of the Romish Calendar.

And for the same reason we think there is not much Religion or Devotion
expressed in the keeping up the Memory of such Saints, by so many Holydays
observed among them.

If they commend their Holydays for the opportunities afforded in them of
serving God in public, we have such Conveniences in many places every day.

If they commend them as days set apart to Rest and Idleness, we are not
altogether of their mind; for we think we have as many as our Poor can well
spare; and are sure that they have more Holydays than their Poor can afford to
observe. So that their Holydays are no Advantage to any. The Rich need them
not; because if they have Abilities, they may be idle and luxurious every day:
But they are a great Evil and Burden to the Poor, when they are forced to lose
so many days from their Work, by which they should maintain themselves and
their Families. And though the Popes, by reason of this Cry of the Poor, have
been prevailed with to cut off many of those days of Idleness, yet still in
most places the Number of them is intolerable.

Fourthly, As for Images, I should have thought it more proper to range them
among the Hindrances of Devotion, did I not see the Men of Rome to plead
earnestly for them, as Helps and Assistances, and to blame us for not using
them, and paying no respect to them.

I confess my self not acute enough to discern how they can any ways advance
Devotion: For their paying such Honor and Respect to them as they do own and
acknowledge, must needs be a great Distraction, it diverting the Mind, and
making Men spend their religious Reverence on that which is exposed to their
View: but their paying such Worship to them as they do pay, but are ashamed to
own, is flatly destructive to all true Devotion.

They indeed plead the Ignorance of the People for the necessity of Images, and
call them the Books of the Unlearned: But they must first suppose their People
insufferably ignorant to need such Helps as these are. And to give the Priests
their due, if any Ignorance would suffice to justify such a Practice, they
take care to heep their People in Ignorance sufficient: And then if they are so
ignorant that they cannot worship God without an Image, the Church cannot be
secure, but these so silly People may worship the Image for God or Christ; or
at least as having some extraordinary Virtue in it, and so make an Idol of it,
especially when they see the Eyes and Hands of the Image to move, and see
Miracles wrought by the Touch of it, as is frequently pretended and believed to
be done: So that either there is no need of Images, or great danger in the use
of them.

I confess, I am not of Mr. Baxter's Mind, who thinks that they may be properly
or safely used to excite Devotion; at least I must confess my self of a
different temper from him. Methinks I represent God in greater Majesty to my
self, when I consider him in his Works of Creation and Providence, than to see
him pictured, as in the Clouds, though with Thunder in his Hand. And my Savior
appears more lovely to my mind and thoughts when I consider him as coming into
the World and dying for us, than when I see him pictured and carved on a
Crucifix. For it is more useful to see him with the Eye of Faith than of Sense,
and it is not the Proportion of his Body represented to my Eyes, but the
Dignity of his Nature, the Love that he bore me, and the Passions of his Soul
for me, that I admire most, and which no Pencil can draw.

Besides, a Picture or Image tells me nothing but what I knew before; and it is
by what I knew before that I can make sense or any devout use of this Picture;
for else I might take it for another profane and idle Story. And I would fain
know whether the reading considerately the 26, and 27th. Chapters of S. Matthew
will not affect any pious Heart much more than the seeing and contemplating a
Picture. Certainly if this will affect the Sense and bodily Passions, the other
will more work on our Reason, and that will be to better purpose. Nay, the
seeing of any Picture often will naturally make it familiar, and not at all
affecting to us.

5. And if the severity of the Monks to their Bodies is not any great Sign of
Devotion, much less can the Austerities used by the common People turn to any
great Commendation of the Church. It is true, they are forced to keep Fasts,
but it would make a Man laugh to read how their Casuists have defined
concerning the modus, the Measure and End of Fasting. Escobar has resolved it,
That no Drink breaks a Fast, be it Wine or Chocolat; and because it is not
wholesome to drink without eating, you may eat two Ounces of Bread: For that is
but a quarter of a Meal; and if a man should chance to break his Vow of Fasting
thus, he is not bound to fast another day for it, unless on a new Obligation:
And if all this be too hard, you may be dispensed with for your whole Life, and
that whether there be any just cause for it or no. Nay, Servants, tho they eat
never so gluttonously of the Scraps, they break no Fast. Indeed there need be
no Rules set down concerning the Poor Peoples observing Fasting Days: They are
kept low enough without them: And as for the Rich, their Fasting is
Mock-fasting, to fast to Luxury, with Wine, and Fish, and Sweetmeats. Is not
this great Self-denial? If any therefore are still truly mortified, when they
can thus help it, I must rather commend their own Piety, and devout Temper,
than the Rules and Orders of their Church, which give so much Liberty, that a
man must have a very cross-grained Appetite, or be in the highest degree
sensual, not to be willing to comply with it. We find then no Fault with
Fasting being enjoined, and at set Seasons: For we our selves commend and
practice it; but let it not be to play tricks, but for true and real
Mortification, and for the proper Ends of Mortification, to humble the Body to
the Soul, and to bring the Mind to a better Temper; and to these ends is
Fasting commanded by our Church; but not as if we looked on this or that kind
of Meat to be unholy, or designed to purchase Heaven by our Abstinence, as the
Church of Rome does.

6. And as for their Pilgrimages, and Worship of Relics, they must needs have
less pretense to Religion: For their Fasts, and other Austerities somewhat
resemble true Christian Duties; but these have no Show that way. If Pilgrimage
be enjoined for Penance, then there is no Thanks due to the Person performing
it.

If it be voluntary, there is no true Devotion in it: For the Worth of it must
consist in some of these Reasons, viz. either, First, That God is more present,
or Secondly, more propitious in one public place of Worship than another: both
which are contrary either to the Nature of God, or his Declaration in
Scripture, when he says, In every place a pure Offering shall be offered to
him, Mal. 1.11. And Where ever two or three are gathered togein Christ's Name,
he is in the midst of them: Matt. 18.20. And the teaching otherwise is in some
measure to revive Judaism, which allowed God, as to some cases, to be served
acceptably only in one place; or Thirdly, That the Saint is more present or
propitious here than any where else: But we are speaking of Devotion to God,
not to the Saint; or Fourthly, That it is their punishing themselves that is so
acceptable; but that has been sufficiently discarded already: Or, Fifthly,
That going so far, and taking such pains is a Sign of their Love: But a man may
show his Love to God, and to his Saint too by more proper Instances, and do
more good by it, which God, to be sure, will better accept, and the Saint, if
he be a Saint, will like as well. And therefore the making such account of
Pilgrimages, seems rather to favor the Mohammedan, than the Christian Religion:
For the going on Pilgrimage to Mecca, is one of the five indispensable points
of the Mohammedan Superstition.

And as For the Veneration of Relics, all the World knows, what a Cheat is
put on Men, in vending any old rotten Bone, or piece of Cloth, etc. for a
Relic of this or that Saint: So that according to a moderate Computation, I
suppose scarcely one in a hundred is true: And some have pleaded they need not
be true. Now whatever Devotion is performed to, or on occasion of these
Relics, can be commendable only in regard of the Mind and devout Temper of
the Person; which I think might as acceptably show it self in any other proper
time and place: And there is required a long Series of Consequences before the
Sight of St. Joseph's Axe, or any such other of their Relics, can be
pretended to raise a man's Devotion. But it being the chief Trade at Rome to
sell feigned pieces of Antiquity, and other such worthless Trinkets at a high
rate, I the less wonder, that they have such an Esteem for Relics; for it is
for their profit to keep up the Value of them, they being the principal
Commodities of the place.

7. And the Belief which they have of the Saints hearing them, and their
Practice of praying to them, is no proper Encouragement or Instance of true
Devotion: For all Devotion is properly toward God; and therefore the making
Addresses to any other cannot possibly have any direct Tendency to exalt our
Devotion to him, but is really a great hindrance: For it takes men's Minds off
from God, and sets them on his Creature: And the same time that is spent in
Prayer to them, surely is better spent in praying to God, who is more present
with us, hears us better, and loves us more. And Men's going to Saints when God
is present, naturally tends to provoke God's Jealousy: For he declares himself
jealous as to his Worship particularly, to set them up in Competition with God,
and to create in Men an Opinion, that they are more easily entreated, and
readier to do us a Kindness than he is. And therefore though Men may fear God
more, yet they will rather love the Saint; and Love is the truest Motive to
such Devotion, as will be best accepted with God. And yet in this plainly
consists all that Court which they make to the Virgin Mary, that she would
pacify the Anger of God the Father, or of the Son toward Men; they are
represented severe, and almost cruel, to render her more amiable to the people
in her interceding for them: So they frequently in their printed allowed Books
of Devotion, call her Fountain of Mercy, and Pity, and other Names of the like
Importance. Now all the assurance they have of her being so tender and
compassionate, is only because she is a Woman; but they are assured of God's
Mercy, both from his Nature and his Word: They have no Assurance that she, or
any other Saint hears them; nor can they show how the Saint can be rationally
supposed to know every thing that we do or say; but they are well assured that
God hears them: For he is styled The God that hears Prayer; which Prerogative
of his, by every Prayer to a Saint, they may at least suspect that they
entrench on. They are not assured that the Saint can help them; but they may be
fully satisfied of his Help, who is Almighty. They have no Encouragement from
Scripture for praying to Saints: For though the Angels rejoice at the
Repentance of a Sinner, it does not follow that therefore every concern of Men
is known, or Prayer heard by them; much less that we may pray to them for the
Gift of Repentance, or any other Grace. And Prayer being so considerable a part
of Divine Worship, we need not doubt but the Angels and Saints would refuse it:
For so St. John was rebuked for offering to worship the Angel, though supposed
immediately and visibly with him, Worship God, Rev. 19.20.

So that if they prayed to Saints and Angels only to mediate and intercede for
them to God, it is more than they have any Warrant or Allowance for. Christ
being always represented as the Mediator between God and man; and the setting
up his Servants in his Office, is as far as is possible a deposing of him. Nor
is it in this case, as it is in Courts on Earth (which is their common Excuse)
where a Favorite is made use of to represent our Cause and our Request to the
King: For this is done because our Kings do not know our Persons, nor
understand our Case, nor can they be present in all places, and hear all Causes
themselves: So that it is often necessary that Princes should employ and trust
other than their own Eyes and Ears. Many things they think below them to
enquire particularly into; and sometimes they will do that at the Request of a
Favorite, which they would not do for the sake of a Person that is not
particularly known to them. But there is no Room nor Occasion for this in the
Court of Heaven: For God is not only intimately known, but is immediately
present to all his Creatures; as he has declared himself no Respecter of
Persons, but to love all, and therefore there is no need of any Intercessor for
us, except the Lord Jesus; he affects not empty Pomp and State; but his
Providence extends to every particular Concern of the meanest of all his
Creatures; and though he may give some undeserved Favors, as longer Lives, and
further Opportunities of Amendment, etc. for the sake of others Prayers, yet no
Man is so far his Favorite, as to be able to persuade him to reverse his own
Laws, and to save a wicked Person that continues in his Wickedness. On all
which Accounts there is no Occasion of praying to the Saints so much as to
intercede for us, as the Church of Rome pretends. But to pray to them to bless
us, and give us this or that Temporal or Spiritual Good, as they of the Church
of Rome practice, and to suppose them to have Power to help us in this or that
particular Difficulty and Distemper is plainly intolerable: For this is in a
great measure to revive Heathenism, by which Men worshipped this or that God
for this or that particular Case. They must grant the Saint to have, though not
an Original, yet a most certain and derivative Power, according to which he
will not fail to assist them that worship him; and in all such Prayer, methinks
they even terminate their Worship on the Saint: For if I pray to a Saint to
help me in this or that Difficulty, with a full assurance that this Saint has
sufficient Power to help me, though I should grant that this Saint received
this Power from God, yet my Prayers terminate on the Saint. Indeed the Saint is
obliged to God for that Power; but I seem to own my self only obliged to the
Saint, for his applying this his general Power to my particular Case: Just as I
am obliged to a man for giving me an Estate, though he is beholden to the
Government and Laws, that either he enjoyed that Estate himself, or was
empowered to give it to another.

Besides that they often pray to Saints for such things, which, if they be only
Creatures, they can have no power to give, or to be even so much as the
Instruments of conveying to us; and yet it is notorious, they pray sometimes to
the Saints for Grace, for Pardon of Sins, and strength against them. So in
Bonaventure's Pfalter, translated into Italian, Salmi di S. Bonav. in Lode
della Virgin, per Giovan. Battista Pinello. In Genoa, Anno 1606.
and published for the use of the people, tho the Translator and Publisher
says, that he had purged it from the Blasphemies which were in the former
Editions; yet we find such passages as these to the Virgin Mary, Psalm. 7. Come
to her all ye that are heavy laden, and she shall give Rest and Refreshment to
your Souls. Psalm. 40. Cleanse my Heart. Psalm. 41. Thou art the beginning and
the end of my Salvation. Psalm. 44. By thy Holiness my sins are purged, and by
thy Integrity, Incorruptibility is given to me. Psalm. 104. Eternal Salvation is
in thy Hand, O Lady, and he that worthily honoueth thee shall obtain it; and
many more Sayings of this nature, or worse, if possible. Now can any man say,
that such Prayers as these are fit to be offered up to a Creature, or that they
are Instances of the Devotion of a Christian, when they are so offered? I am
sure that we charge the Heathen with giving Divine Worship to Men, though we
can hardly find any Expressions or Prayers to their Gods, which are so high,
and argue their terminating their Worship on them so fully as these, and other
such, which are commonly used by those of the Church of Rome to Saints, and
especially to the Virgin Mary.

8. And whatever they pretend, the constant Trade which they make of
Confessions and Penances, and their Doctrine concerning them, is so far from
encouraging Devotion, that it is enough to remove all true Devotion out of the
World, if the Providence of God did not miraculously interpose.

For though they be very constant in their Confessions of all their Sins to a
Priest, yet the frequency of it in themselves and others, makes them not so
much as ashamed of themselves; and though they may be more afraid of angring
their Priests, yet they have no reason to abhor themselves, or their Sins in
the Sight of God any more for it.

And when they have thus confessed, their Confessor may enjoin what Penance he
pleases, or else may leave it to the Penitent's own Choice, as Escobar from
Suarez. affirms; and men are not used to be very cruel to their own Bodies, or
lay a very severe Penance on themselves, when a lighter will serve: Or else the
Confessor may say thus, I impose on thee for Penance whatever good thing thou
have done, or shall do this Day, or this Week, or whatever Evil thou have, or
shall suffer. And Cardinal Tolet is of the same mind too. Now will not this
make a man mightily afraid of sinning any more, when his ordinary course of
Conversation, and the unavoidable Casualties of Life shall be turned into a
sufficient Penance, Satisfaction, and Punishment for his Sin? And if the
Confessor enjoin no Penance at all, indeed he is to blame, says Escobar; but
still it is a Sacrament for all that, because a satisfactory penance is not an
essential part of the Sacrament, but an Integral.

But if after all this the Confessor will impose a Penance, the Penitent may
perform what he will of it: For, says Tolet, if he does not perform his
Penance, his Absolution stands good, only when he comes to Confession next, he
must confess that he did not perform his penance, and so his Nonperformance of
penance will pass away in the Crowd of his other Sins, and there is an end of
it. And if this please them not, there is an easier way still, if need be: For
you may get another man to do your penance for you. Is not this a fine easy
way to Heaven, when the fasting and starving of the Poor may be made to serve
for a satisfaction for the Sins and Debauchery of the Rich? Indeed Escobar from
Suarez, says, There ought to be a just Cause for one's performing penance for
another: But here the other Distinction will help them, non ad valorem, sed ad
justitiam requiritur causa, the penance is valid, though there be no just
Cause. And whether there be a Cause or no, it is not doubted, says Escobar, but
one may perform the penance for another, if the Confessor will give leave: And
it is to be hoped there are some good natured Confessors to be found: But good
Cardinal Tolet Instruct. Sacerd. Lib. 3. c. 11.
Tolet is more free and generous than Escobar himself in this point: For he
tells the Confessor, That he must impose a lighter Penance, if he sees the
Penitent will not perform a harder, without ever telling the Penitent, that
this lighter will not serve his turn, or without ever putting him in mind of
his Danger, or of the necessity of a harder penance; and wholly commits it to
the prudence of one Priest to diminish the penance which another had imposed,
without so much as once telling him, that perhaps this penance will not
suffice. So that in plain terms, by Consequence, he resolves it all into the
power of the Priest; and neither Confessor nor Penitent are any further
accountable that I perceive, if too slight a penance be enjoined, the Sin is
pardoned notwithstanding. And lastly, he goes on, and shows, that though the
Penitent be enjoined to perform his penance in his own person, yet he may
transfer this to another, without his Confessor's leave; and yet he shall
obtain the satisfactory part of penance, though not the meritorious, that is,
he shall be excused from suffering evil; but shall not merit much at God's
Hands by such penance. And indeed I think he is very unreasonable if he expect
more: And besides all this, the design of all penance being only to satisfy
the Debt of Temporal punishment due to their Sins, there are several easy ways
provided by their Church for the discharge of it, besides the severe penance,
as e. g. several short Prayers, to the saying of which some scores of thousands
of years pardon are annexed, toties quoties; there are large Indulgences
granted at Jubilees, and at several other good Times; and may at any time be
had for a good Sum of Money; And if a man take no Care of himself all his Life,
yet if he can purchase Prayers to be said for him after his death, it will
serve as well. And though the Penance be never so easy, and be performed as
triflingly, yet the Absolution, by which they suppose the Absolution, by which
they suppose the Debt of eternal punishment is discharged, must be as complete
and full as possible: For so the aforementioned Cardinal, with a great deal of
Concern, takes Care that the Absolution be not pronounced conditionally, as e.
g. on condition that you amend your Life, or perform your penance, etc. but it
must be pronounced absolutely, without any if or and, thus, I absolve thee, etc.

Now would not any one think, that the Church of Rome, by this Method of
Confessions and Penances so taught and practiced among them, rather designs to
find out the Temper and Inclinations of people, and to dive into the Councils
of great Men, or to answer some other such politic End, than to advance piety
toward God, or Amendment of Life in the Penitent? I am sure they can have no
hearty respect for Devotion, when they are taught to look on their Prayers to
God, as a severe Penance; and yet which they may be released from by winning a
Game at Cards, as is too commonly known.

9. And their Doctrine concerning the Merit of good Works and Supererogation,
as it is false, so we cannot look on it as any Encouragement to Devotion; for
God will not be served with a Lie.

I confess, if what is required of Men in their Confession and Penances be
enough to save their Souls, they may very easily do more than is required: For
they cannot do less, if they do any thing, though indeed one would wonder, that
any that consider the Nature of the Gospel, or the Words of our Savior, should
ever pretend to supererogate.

But supposing their Doctrine to be true in these points, they cannot be
thought to advance Devotion, but rather hinder it: For seeing it is some what
natural for a Man to love his own Ease, every one will be apt to argue with
himself, that so many have merited already, that there is no need of what he
can do. Nay, it is Folly for him to attempt it: For what need he endeavor to
add to a Stock of Merit, which is already infinite, as some have thought?

And indeed it had need be infinite, else it is to be feared, it is almost, if
not quite spent, especially considering the vast Expense of these Merits in
frequent Jubilees, and other Indulgences, the Multitude of Sinners, and the
little extraordinary Virtue and Piety found among them at this day, to add to
their Store: So that methinks it may justly be questioned whether they are not
bankrupt before now, their Disbursement so much exceeding their Receipts; and
the Credit of their Bank seems to depend wholly on their Old stock of Merit
which the Ancients laid up for them; and yet they grant that this was rather
casual, than out of Design or good Nature: For the Saints designed only to make
sure of doing enough for themselves; and it seems that less served their turns
than they thought of, and the rest was laid by for the use of such rich Sinners
as the Church would sell it to. So that all this Stock of Merit, which the
Church of Rome has so great occasion for, and of which there is made so
prodigious an Expense, is at the best but a Chance and spare-heap, which they
cannot tell how they came by (for every Bishop has the same Title to such
Treasure-trove that the Bishop of Rome has,) nay, they have reason to fear
there was never any such Treasure: (For I doubt not but the Saints in Heaven
will thankfully own, that they have received more from God than they deserved,
or could challenge:) to be sure, they knew not how much there was ever laid up,
nor whether the Stock be spent; and yet they spend as freely now, as if they
had been only laying up till this time, and that the Treasure were now first
opened.

Many other such Absurdities and unanswerable Difficulties there are in their
Doctrine of Merit, and in their practice of applying these Merits to the use of
others. And is it not a dismal thing, that the Priests of the Church of Rome
should teach men to trust in, and as to Salvation, depend assuredly on these,
of which they themselves have no manner of Assurance nor Ground to hope. Is not
this to play with Men's Souls and Eternal Salvation? And especially can this be
urged as an Encouragement of Devotion, when, if it were as true as it is false,
it tends directly to make Men vicious, and to neglect Devotion: For so a Man
will think if there be such a Stock in the Church, why should not he have a
Share of it as well as another? And if one can merit for another, why should
not he depend on others, as well as, they on his Merits? And seeing Merits may
be bought as the Roman Casuists have adjudged, he may think it very reasonable
that other's Merits should be given him in exchange for his Money. So the
Result of all is this, according to this Doctrine, and the supposed
Church-stock, only one thing is needful, and that is Money; and this will fully
make up all lack of Piety and Devotion.

10. And the belief of Purgatory, and of the validity of Prayers for the dead,
is no proper Encouragement of true Devotion: For true Devotion is such as we
perform to God, agreeably to his Will, when we know what we do, and for what
ends, and have a promise or hope of Success; but when a man prays to God to
deliver a Soul out of Purgatory, he must suppose as true several things, which
are either false, or at least very uncertain; so that he can never pray in
Faith, or without great perplexity and distraction of mind; for he knows not
whether there be any such place or state as Purgatory: For Scripture says
nothing of it, nor the Fathers of the three or four first Centuries. He knows
not whether the Soul that he prays for be in Purgatory (if there should be such
a place) for it may be in Heaven or in Hell, for ought he can tell. And if the
Soul be in Purgatory, he knows not whether it be Useful or Lawful to pray for
it; for God has given us neither Command, nor Encouragement, nor Liberty so to
do, Nay, there are several particulars which they themselves cannot agree on
concerning Purgatory, viz. What Sins are promised there? How the Soul without
its Body can be tormented there with a material Fire? Who are Gods Instruments
in punishing the Souls there? For the Devils are not; and how the Pope by his
Indulgences can apply the Satisfactions of Christ and of the Saints so as to
deliver any Soul out of Purgatory? And if there be such a place, the Pope
himself by his Example does enough to dishearten all Men from endeavoring to
deliver the Souls of their Friends from thence: For it is not doubted but he
can deliver all out of Purgatory, he having the Command of the Treasure of the
Church. And it must needs be a wonderful Discouragement to a Devout Mind, that
among so many hundred Popes, there should not be one found so Charitable as to
release so many thousands of poor Souls that lie under intolerable pains, and
so must lie till the last day, or till the debt of their temporal punishment be
paid. If the Pope can do so much with so little Charge or Trouble to himself,
and yet will not do it, surely I have less Reason to do any thing.

Nor does it follow, that because it is a part of acceptable Devotion, for one
Man to pray for another, whilst living here on Earth; that therefore it is as
pleasing to God, for us to pray for Souls departed: For our Prayers for others
on Earth, are either for Temporal Blessings, or for the means of Grace. We
pretend not to desire God to reverse his own Laws, and save such a Man, let him
be as bad as he will; but to make him Holy first, and then to make him Happy:
And to Pray any otherwise for another Man, naturally tends to represent it as
feasible to reconcile a wicked Life with the hopes of Heaven; but when a Man is
dead he can Work no more, nor make any use of the means of Grace, and therefore
there is no room for this Prayer to God for him, he is not capable of
Repentance, and Glory, and Amendment, and of being made fit for Heaven.

Lastly, If they boast of the validity of the Orders of their Bishops and
Priests, as an Encouragement to Devotion, the validity of the Sacraments
dependnig so much on the Legality of the Ministry; We answer that we have a
Clergy as properly and truly of Christ's sending as any Church in the World;
against whose Ordination and Mission nothing can be objected: We deriving the
Succession of our Bishops, not only from their own Austin, but from the British
Bishops before his time, which is the only Regular way of Mission, that we know
of, except that of an extrarodinary Commission from Heaven as St. Paul had. And
I would not that there were that to be objected against us, that is justly
objected against them, as to the Succession of their Popes even since the
Reformation began. For the Election of Sixtus V. was most notoriously
Simoniacal, and yet one that comes by Simony into the Popedom, is by their own
Canon Law, by the Bull or Constitution of Julius II. approved in the Council of
Lateran, An. 1513. to be looked on as a Magician, Heathen, Publican, Septimi
Decretal, Lib. 1. Tit. 3.
and Arch-Heretick, and his Election can never be made valid by any after Act,
and yet several of the Popes since, were either made Cardinals by this Sixtus
V. or received that Dignity from those that received it from him; which is the
very Case of this present Pope Innocent Eleventh.

As for their Unity, it is plain that they have more divisions among
themselves, then they can charge us with. For they have not only such as openly
dissent and separate from them, but great and violent dissentions among their
own Members, and such as live in the Communion of their Church, one against
another, and each party pleads the Doctrine of the Church, and Decisions of its
Councils. And yet the Pope himself, notwithstanding his Infallibility and
Authority, either cannot or dare not determine which is in the Right, or which
Opinion is True.

So that whatever Power and Authority their Church has, it has no good effect
to such ends and purposes, to which Church Power is designed to serve, the
encouragement of Holiness and Virtue, and the discountenancing of Vice, the
Preservation of the Doctrine in Purity, and of the Members at peace one with
another. It is true they are more able to see the Laws of their Church Duly
executed; but it is to their disparagement to have so much Power, and yet to do
so little good with it. As for us, we had rather deserve more then we have,
then that it should be said that we have more power then we deserve. And
whatever Power our Church wants, and whatever loss Religion suffers by this
means, we justly Charge the Church of Rome with the guilt of it, who have made
all Princes jealous, and afraid of all Church Power, by their invading their
temporal Rights under pretense of a Spiritual Jurisdiction.

In short, though somewhat may be said for the worst thing, and a very bad
Cause may have a great deal pleaded in its Vindication, as we have seen in all
the foregoing Helps and Instances of Devotion, which the Church of Rome boasts
of; yet if we consider them, they all in some respect or other come short of
what they pretend to; several of them being very improper, many plainly
Nonsensical and Ridiculous; they proceed from bad Principles, are done in an
undue Manner and Measure, or to serve some bad end or design, or some such
other way offend; even the most secure Practices, which most resemble true
Self-denial, are countenanced or enjoined rather to make a show, or to gratify
some Tempers, then to advance Devotion; for excesses and overactings are often
Infirmities, and the effects of Weakness; steddiness being the most certain
sign of Strength, as the shaking Palsy is a Disease and Sign of Weakness, as
well as the Dead one.

3. I now come to consider such things in the Doctrine and Discipline of the
Church of Rome, as tend directly to promote Debauchery of Manners, and
Carelessness in Devotion.

I Will insist only on these few, among very many.

First, The unlimited Power which they ascribe to the Church, or to the Pope as
Head or Monarch of it: For the People are taught that he can make null Duties
that were made necessary by God, and make necessary what was not so before. The
Consequence of which Doctrine is plainly this, that a Man may safely disobey
and neglect the serving of God, if he pay but his due respects to the Pope. And
yet their Casuists have defined that the Pope can dispense with Sins, or give
leave to do things forbidden by the law of God, as well as pardon them when
committed, as in the Dispensations with unlawful Marriages. And on the other
side he can excuse them from doing what they are by their Duty to God bound to
do, as in his Dispensations with Vows though made never so solemnly to God
himself. That is, he can bind where God has left us loose, and he can loose
where God has bound us. Nay, a Superior can give a Dispensation even when he
doubts whether it be lawful or no; because in a doubtful case the milder side
is to be taken. And if the Reason cease for which the Dispensation was given,
yet the Dispensation does not cease: Nay, a Dispensation may be granted where
there is no Reason or Cause for it; and yet the Dispensation is valid
notwithstanding. And not the Pope only, but every Bishop and Priest has his
Share of this Power, only there are some reserved and more profitable Cases,
which his Holiness only can dispense in. And though I cannot tell what they
think, yet I am sure their Casuists are very shy of saying, that there is any
Case in which there may not be a Dispensation granted for the doing of it, or a
Pardon for it when it is done.

And all Indulgencies are directly designed to hinder Devotion, for they are
given to free Men from the Necessity of Mortification, frequent Alms and
Prayers, etc. which else would have been enjoined as Penance; and yet we know
that these are the chiefest parts of Devotion.

And as their general Doctrine concerning the validity of Pardons and
Indulgencies is very destructive of all true Piety and Religion: So,

Secondly, Their constant Practice of giving Absolution before Penance, is in a
more especial manner influential to that purpose. For the People are taught to
believe, that by the Priests saying, I absolve thee, etc. the Sin is actually
pardoned by God: And though indeed their Guides of Confessors advise that
Absolution should not be given till Penance be imposed and accepted; yet when
the Confessor thinks that the Penitent will accept of the Penance, he may
absolve him first: That is, the Person may be absolved before he accept the
Penance, or even promise to perform it; but it is their constant Method to
absolve him before Penance be actually performed.

Now if their Absolution be of force, the Person is free from his Sin, and sure
enough of Heaven, whether he perform any Penance or no: Which Practice gives
all imaginable Encouragement and License to Sin; the fear of Penance being the
only restraint from Sin which they pretend to; but if the Sin be fully pardoned
before Penance be accepted or performed: I see not why a man should trouble
himself much for the performance of his Penance; he sees plainly that it is
only an Appendix that is used to be annexed to Absolution, but is neither
necessary in it self nor for Absolution; the Sin is pardoned already, and at
the worst there is only some temporal Punishment to be satisfied for, which he
may get rid of several other ways.

Nay indeed the true and ancient Notion of Penance is utterly destroyed, by its
being imposed and performed after Absolution. For Penance according to the
Primitive use of it, was a severe course of Life prescribed to a Person that
had grieviously offended, as a proper Method for him, at the same time to
testify his own sorrow for his Sin, and abhorrence of it, and to create in him
an Aversation to the Like for the time to come; and also to satisfy the Church
of all this, that so he might be admitted to Absolution and the Communion: And
therefore their Penances were always public, and indeed it is by public
Penance only that all these so good ends can possibly be answered: But now in
the Church of Rome, the Offender is pardoned without any thing of this, he is
not put to any grief for his Sin before he be absolved. It is left wholly to
his own Honesty and Generosity whether he will perform any Penance for his Sin.
N^y indeed so loath are they to appear severe against Sin, or Cruel to the
Sinner; that when in the Council of Trent some would have revived this
DIscipline, by enacting public Penance, they were violently opposed and
overruled; tho St. Gregory a Pope of Rome had held it to be of Divine Right:
and their Casuists since teach that a Confessor cannot, or ought not to enjoin
a public Penance: So that by this means a Man is not so much as to be put to
the blush for his Sins; for no such Penance must be imposed by which the Sin
may be known, and he is sure that the Confessor to save a Kingdom dare not
reveal or discover it.

Thirdly, Their Doctrine concerning the Nature of several Sins, is such as must
needs rather encourage Men to continue in Sin, than deliver us from it; and
will spoil all true Devotion to God, and that due regard that we ought to have
to his Commandments.

They tell us there is a vast number of Sins in their own Nature Venial,
Escobar Tract. 2. Exam. 1. cap. 4.
which are so very inconsiderable that an infinite number of them altogether
will not deprive a man of the Grace and Favor of God, or make up one Mortal
Sin, and for the Pardon of which there is no need or occasion for the Mercy of
God: And yet they have no certain Rules to discover whether a Sin be Mortal or
Venial, so that men are in wonderful danger of being cheated in a matter of so
great Moment as their Eternal Salvation.

They tell us also, Escobar Tract. 2. Exam. 1. cap. 2.
that an Habitual Sin, is only a Stain left by former voluntary Sins, and a
Deprivation of habitual Goodness; but has nothing else that is evil in it.
From which Doctrine it necessarily follows that a man is guilty only of those
Sins which created this Habit, and that there is not an habitual Repentance, or
Course of Life required to get pardon for habitual Sins; but a few or perhaps
one single Act of Contrition will serve. So that the more a Man sins the
better he may, and it is a piece of true Prudence to get an Habit of all Sin
betimes; for a Man is accountable only for those Sins which preceded the Habit;
all the Sins which follow it will pass under the name of Inadvertencies, and as
such can be esteemed only as a kind of Venial Sins.

And they not only allow the Church Power to command what does not belong to
her in many Cafes; but give such Authority to her Commands, as to make the
Disobedience to them the greatest of all Sins, and make way for the breaking of
the Laws of God, that they may keep those of the Church. So Marriage has been
adjudged a greater Sin in a Priest than Fornication, because the Priests are
obliged to Celibacy by the Laws of the Church, and their own Vow; as if they
were not by the Laws of God, and their Vow of Baptism more obliged to abstain
from Fornication; and accordingly for Marriage, a Priest is excommunicated or
deposed; but for Fornication, he is only obliged to confess it secretly among
his other Sins; and the Guilt and Irregularity of it is done away by
Absolution. Indeed they bring almost all Sins under the Head of Discipline, not
only by pretending to give Pardon and Dispensations for most Sins that can be
committed; but also when they compare Sins, they are always most earnest
against such as transgress the Commands of the Church. So v.g. when Escobar
asks the Question, What if I communicate unworthily at Easter? He answers, That
by so doing, I fulfill the Command of the Church, which is what I am immediately
bound to: And passes over the Duty of Self-examination and Preparation so
strictly enjoined by St. Paul, as not worthy to be considered: And so in
innumerable other Cases; by which means indeed they create a great Veneration
for the Church, or for that which they call the Church; but thereby make the
Commands of God of none effect.

Fourthly, Their very Doctrine concerning their Prayers and Devotions, and
their Practice consequent on it, is such as is altogether inconsistent with the
Nature of true Devotion: For, according to the Church of Rome, the outward Act
will suffice in many Cases, though nothing of the Mind go along with it;
particularly as to Prayers Escobar from Coninch and Durandus affirms, that
neither an actual, nor vertual Attention is required when a man prays; and
they give an excellent Reason for what they say, viz. Because the Church has
no Power in hidden Cases, but only in the Case of Auricular Confession: As if
in Prayer only the power of the Church, and Obedience to its Commands were to
be regarded: And he confirms his Assertion with this other most cogent
Comparison, That an outward Act of Devotion, or Prayer only with the Mouth, is
a true Act of Prayer, tho without the Intention, as an outward Act of Adoration
of an Idol, though without the Intention, is a true Act of Idolatry. So that
for a man to mind what he does when he is at Prayers, or to be earnest in his
Desires of that which he prays for, though it may possibly be a Commendation,
and Accomplishment, yet it is not necessary either to the pleasing of God, or
satisfying of his Duty according to the Church of Rome. Nay, it is a praise for
a man to draw nigh with the Mouth, and honor him with the Lips, though the
Heart be far from God, notwithstanding that our Savior, after the Prophet
Isaiah blamed the Jews for so doing. Indeed such a kind of superficial
Christians will this Doctrine make, that a Pharisee would have been an
excellent Man, if he had lived in these days.

And pursuant to this Doctrine of the No necessity of Attention at Prayers,
they take care that the people shall not be able to attend to what is done; and
therefore provide that the public Prayers and the Scripture it self shall be
only in a Language unknown to the people, and are so desperately found of this
Device of keeping the people ignorant of what is prayed for, that their
Casuists have defined, that a Man may say his Office privately in other
Languages besides the Latin, as in Hebrew, or Greek, but not in the Vulgar
Language; at the same time keeping the people in Ignorance, and discouraging
them in their Devotions, and exercising their Authority over them in the most
dangerous manner that can be.

6. Their ascribing spiritual Effects to several things which are purely of
their own Invention, is much to the Discouragement of true Devotion toward
God. And yet they have very many things of this Nature: As Holy Water, by the
being sprinkled with which, they believe the Devil shall have less power over
them: Agnus Dei's, Swords and Medals which they wear to preserve them from
Dangers; which being consecrated according to the Rules of their Church, have
through the Devotion of the Persons, and the power of the Church, a wonderful
good effect, though indeed God never promised any such thing.

To this Head I may refer also, their Rosary, which is nothing else but an odd
Combination of Pater-noster's and Ave Mary's. Several short Prayers to the
saying of which thousands of years of pardon of Sins are annexed: Their carrying
the Image of St. Genovefa in Procession at Paris, and other Images in other
Places to obtain Rain, etc. and innumerable other such like Practices, on which
Men are taught to rely, and to expect great good by, though they have neither
any natural force or efficacy that way; nor any assurance from God that such
effects shall follow. Nay even the Sacraments themselves according to the
Doctrine of the Church of Rome are only such a kind of Charms; for they are
supposed to work effectually on the Person, without any Devotion or Virtuous
Disposition being required of him in order to it.

Now whatever effect they promise above what the natural efficacy of the thing
is apt and able to produce, they must have express Authority from God, or else
they sadly delude and cheat those poor Souls that depend upon them. And at the
best they are supposed only a shorter cut to Heaven, an easier way of pleasing
God and getting his Blessing, and are invented only to ease a Man of the
fatigue and trouble of the common and ordinary rode of serving him by a
constancy and regularity of Devotions.

Seventhly, Their Manuals and Books of Devotion which they give their People to
read, instead of the Scripture which they forbid to be used, though they may
design them as Helps, yet I must range them among the Hindrances of Devotion.

For the best of them are so full of Tautologies and vain Repetitions, that
they must needs come under the Censure of our blessed Savior, Matt. 6. though
they use his own holy Name. For so in the Jesus Psalter, at the end of the
Manual of Prayers and Litanies Printed at Paris in English, An. 1682. in a
Litany of fifteen Petitions, the Name Jesu is repeated over above 130 times.
And in the same Book, in the Litany of the blessed Virgin, they pray to her by
40 several Names, being only so many distinct praises of her. And the like is
observable in all their Books of Devotion which I ever saw. Now their saying
the same thing so often over, is not contrived to help and assist Attention, or
prevent Distraction, or as a Repetition of what is more then ordinarily
important, or for any other good and prudent Reason, but out of pure Vanity and
Ostentation, or as it were even to flatter our blessed Savior or the Saint
which they pray to.

But most of the Books and Legends which they put into the hands of their
People to excite their Devotion, and by which the People take an estimate of
the Christian Religion, are such wretched plain Forgeries, and so pitifully
contrived Fables, as can never be believed by Men of Sense, and if they could
be believed, are proper indeed to make Men Mad and Enthusiastical, but not to
advance true Devotion; and he that reads only such Books is qualified indeed to
tell Stories and to believe Lies, but no serious truth will stick to him or be
valued by him. So that such Books as these are so far from doing good, that
they do much harm to Religion; for they Imprint a wrong Notion of Religion on
Men's Minds; would make a Man believe that God is like a Child pleased with
Trifles, that Religion and the Method of our Salvation is only a Charm and
Trick, which the Priests have gotten the receipt of; but that there is nothing
in Christianity fit to make a man wife and manly in his Worship of God, or in
the management of himself and practice of Devotion. Nay the Stories which are
told in the Lives of their Saints, and believed by the Common People, are
enough even to deprave the natural Sentiments of Mankind concerning God and
Religion, so that perhaps it were much better to leave Men to the natural
effluxes of their own minds, than to pretend to assist them with such Helps as
these. That a little Water or a consecrated Bell should scare the Devil, or St.
Francis's rope charm and bind him, would make a Man have little fear of such an
Enemy, or a prodigious Veneration for such a Saint; but how it should render a
Man more piously affected toward God, more relying on his Providence, or more
Religiously Careful over himself, I see not: And these Stories though so
apparently false, yet being affirmed with such Confidence, strike at the very
Foundation of our Religion; For it is apt to make Men believe that Christianity
it self was at first propagated among a sad dull stupid and credulous
Generation of Men; (when as really it first appeared in an Age as
sharp-sighted, as any Age before or since, which is much for its Vindication.)
It would tempt a Man to despise a Religion in which such Men are Saints, and
such Practices commended; And will set Christianity but on the same level with
modern Judaism and Mahometanism; For the Jews have just as much to say for
their Cabbala, and the Turks for their incredible Fables; for they are reported
on the same Credit, are just so credible in themselves, and just as edifying of
the People that attend to them: The Miracles which they relate being often Just
so useful, as that pretended to be wrought in the Temple of Apollo; when a Man
coming out of the Temple, it was observed that his body did not cast any
shadow; by which thing however strange in it self, the Man was not much the
better, nor the World wiser.

But many of their Books of Devotion are worse than ridiculous; for there are
frequently such passages and prayers as I cannot tell how to vindicate from
Blasphemy and Idolatry. Saint Bonaventure's Psalter both in Latin, and Italian
I mentioned before, in which there are I believe a thousand such Prayers to
her, or Expressions concerning her, which I confess I could not with a safe
Conscience say of any Creature. And Albertus Magnus the Master of St Thomas
Aquinas has not only 12 Books of the Praises of the Virgin Mary, but also a
distinct Book called Biblia Mariana; in which he applies several places of
Scripture to the Virgin Mary; as if she were prefigured in several passages of
the Old Testament as well as her Son: So Genesis 1.1. that she was that Heaven
that God made. Genesis 1.3. She was the Light which God there made; and so on
through almost the whole Scripture: And however Cautious they are in the Books
which they Print in English for the use of their Converts here: yet in them we
find often such sayings to or of the Virgin Mary as I cannot reconcile with
Christianity; for so in the Manual quoted before, in the Prayers for Women with
Child they sing thus to her, Hail to the Queen who Reigns above,
Mother of Clemency and Love, etc.
Elsewhere they pray thus to her, page 196. Oblessed Mother assist my Weakness
in all my Dangers and Necessities, in all Temptations to Sin, and in the hour
of my Death, that through thy Protection I may be safe in the Lord. Where the
Lord indeed is mentioned, out of Complement, and for Fashions sake, but they
had first begged of the Lady as much as they wanted or could desire: and page
80. they call her Spouse of the Holy Ghost, Promise of the Prophets,
Expectation of the Patriarchs, Queen of the Angels, Teacher of the Apostles,
Strengthner of Martyrs, Faithful Comforter of the Living and Dead. Now if they
Print such things in English, what do they Print in Spanish? If they do such
things in a Green Tree, what shall be done in the dry? And I fear that even
their nicest Casuists give too much Countenance to this so gross Practice: For
they have determined that Honor's above Civil, cuitus Hyperduliae are due to
the Virgin Mary, that is in plain English, Divine Honors must be paid to her.
For it must be a very Metaphysical Head, that can in this Sense apprehend a
kind of Honor above Civil, and yet not Divine; it must be somewhat like his,
that would pretend to find a mean between Creator and Creature, between Finite
and Infinite.

Lastly, this is most notorious, that they enjoin acts to be used, and propose
Objects of Worship which they themselves cannot deny but there is danger of
offending in them, and even of falling into that Idolatry; and yet take little
or no care of giving caution concerning them; and if the grossest abuse should
happen, there is scarcely any possibility of redress.

Indeed wherever they speak of Veneration due to Relics and Images, of
worshipping of Saints, and especially the Virgin Mary, they always seem as if
they cared not how much Honor were paid to them; only they must make as if
they put some Restriction on it, for the sake of the reformed who would exclaim
against them: And therefore their Command for the worshipping of them is
general and absolute; but the Limitations are so nice and forced, that one may
easily see that they very unwillingly deny any Worship to be paid to them. For
so the wary Council of Trent speaking of Images, says, They are to be kept, and
due Honor and Veneration paid to them: And though by and by they seem as if
they would limit this Honor, yet presently they put in such words as make that
pretended Limitation to signify nothing: For they tell you, That whatever
Honor you pay to the Image, goes to the person represented, (v. g. to our
Savior) it seems the Honor is paid to him whether we intend so or no: And
hence you may easily gather what Honor is due to the Image of our Savior, and
how little fear there is of paying too much Honor to it: For I suppose we are
all agreed there is no fear of paying too much Honor to our Blessed Savior;
and whatever Honor is paid to his Image, is paid to him, if we can believe
these Gentlemen. And agreeably hereunto, it is very rare to hear of any person
censured or blamed for paying too much Honor to Images, though surely it is as
possible for men to be Idolaters now as in the former Ages; and I suppose that
neither the common people, nor all the Priests are Men of such extraordinary
Understanding and Learning, as to be altogether free from the like Temptation.
Nay, the Caution which is given seems only to concern, Imagines falsi dogmatis,
and Rudibus periculosi Erroris Occasionem praebentes; but there is not one word
concerning the abuse which may be made of the Image of Christ, or of a true
Saint: There is no Provision made that Men be warned not to perform too much
Devotion in their Minds to a good Image.

And by what this Council says the Priest understands well enough what it
intends; and therefore scarcely ever dare preach against the excess and abuse
of Images, Relics, etc. tho they cannot but see it actually committed every
day.

And now if there should happen to be any Idolatrous Worship paid to an Image;
tho the Bishop has power indeed to set the Image up, yet he has not power to
pull it down, or to correct any abuse concerning it; without the leave of the
Archbishop and other Bishops of the Province, and even of the Pope himself. So
unwilling do they seem that any Provision should be made for redressing abuses
in so great and common a Case as the excess in Worship of Images must needs be,
v. Council. Trid. Sess. 25.

Lastly, as we have seen how deficient and very faulty the Church of Rome is in
her pretenses to Devotion, we will now consider what Provision is made for the
due Exercise of Devotion among our selves; that we may thank God for our being
settled in the Communion of the Church of England, and may learn to be
conscientiously strict and regular in our own, as well as to despise the Romish
Devotions. And in order hereunto, I reckon that these four things are
especially to be regarded.

First, That among us none but the true Object of Devotion is proposed to be
worshipped. God the Father Son and Holy Ghost, none of the most blessed Angels,
or Saints in Heaven being ever invoked, or adored by us. For we look on them
only as our Brethren, and Members of the same Church with us, triumphing indeed
whilst we are here below still in our Warfare. We thank God for them, and keep
Feasts in the Memory of them, at the same time praising God for his Goodness
and Grace bestowed on them, and shining forth in them, and also stirring up our
selves by such Commemorations to follow their good Example, and this we think
is as much as is due from us to our fellow Creatures, and believe that neither
God allows, nor do they expect more from us.

Secondly, Only proper Expressions of Devotion are commanded or allowed by our
Church. For the matter of them they are such as God himself has required to be
served by, are significant of that disposition of Mind which we know God
accepts, and have an aptness to the producing of that temper in us which God
intends to work us up to by them: We use all the Instances of Devotion which
they of the Church of Rome use, if they be either necessary or fit; though
indeed often to other and better purpose. We pray constantly, but only for the
living; for we look on the Dead as past the means of Grace, and consequently
past the benefit of our Prayers. We praise God for his Excellencies in himself,
and thank him for his Goodness to others as well as to our selves: We practice
Confession of Sins to God in public, and in private, and advise it to be made
also to the Ministers of Gods Word, when it is necessary for Ghostly Counsel
and Advice, for the satisfying of their Consciences, and the removal of
Scruple, and Doubtfulness: but we cannot say it is necessary to be made to Men
in order to the Pardon of God: We reckon it rather as a privilege or advantage
than a Duty? And if Men will not make use of this privilege, as often as there
is Occasion unless we tell a lie to advance the credit of it, we cannot help
that: We enjoin Fastings and disallow not of Penances, but advise People to
take an holy revenge on themselves when they have sinned; but not as the
Papists do to satisfy for their Sins, or merit at Gods hand, but to show the
sincerity of their Repentance, and to strengthen their Resolutions of
amendment; for it is our amendment, and not our punishment which God is pleased
with. And we take care that all these things be performed in a due measure,
proportionably to the strength of the Person, and the Nature and Design of the
Duty; but are afraid of straining them too high, lest men should be altogether
deterred from them, or acquiesce only in the outward Action, or render our
selves and our Cause ridiculous by an imprudent management. We have the
Sacraments duly administered, as our Savior commanded them; we reckon our
Baptism with Water perfect without Oil or Spittle: We grutch not the Cup to the
Laity, nor celebrate solitary Communions, nor admire whispering to God in the
Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ; but as we have received from Christ,
so we teach and administer, without Addition or Diminution of any thing
essential or material. In short, in the holy Offices themselves, and the
behavior which our Church requires they be celebrated with, there is always a
great propriety observable, agreeable to the Command of God in Scripture, and
the Practice of the Apostles and first Ages of the Church, proper to the
several parts of divine Worship, expressive of our Sense, consonant to Reason,
and the use of the World, especially respect being always had to the exciting
of Piety and Devotion in the minds and carriage of our People.

Thirdly, All useful Helps, Motives and Occasions are here plentifully afforded
and pressed on Men. For we not only have all our Service in a Language which
the meanest People understand, but have it so contrived by frequent Responses,
that every Person bears a part in that Worship which he is so much concerned
in, and does not only hear the Priest speak to God Almighty, but prays for
himself, and is required to join his assent to every short Prayer by a distinct
Amen. With us the same Service and Rules of Life are enjoined to all, all Men
having the same Concern in another Life however different their Circumstances
and Cocerns are in this Life. We have constant Prayers in every Parish weekly
at least, in many daily, with the blessed Sacrament of the Body and Blood of
Christ frequently administered, nay every Sunday, not only in Cathedrals, but in
several Colleges and private Parish Churches. And we appeal to all Men whether
there be any where more practical Sermons, fitted to the Cases of Men, without
Vanity and Superstition, than among us; Whether good and free Learning be any
where more encouraged, or where better care is taken for the due Instruction of
the People: The Scriptures being in every one's hands, with us, and other
excellent Books made according to the Doctrine of the Holy Scriptures, instead
of Legends and Lives of Saints, St. Bonaventure's Psalter, and other such Books
which are really Libels against Christianity, and yet are the principal Books
which the Priests of the Church of Rome commend to their People: For as for the
Bible, if any one of them has happened to read in it, who is not licensed to
that purpose, he must own it as a Sin to his Priest at his next Confession.

And as there are such blessed Opportunities afforded so constantly, and such
Prudent Provision made for all Cases Ordinary and Extraordinary, so I thank
God, we can say that our People are generally very diligent in the use of these
Means; (or would be more so, were it not for the Divisions which they of the
Church of Rome especially raise among us.) For they may easily perceive that we
urge no more on them than their own good, and the commands of God require of
them; though our Church knows her Power very well, yet she makes use of it only
to enforce the Laws of God, to explain, illustrate and apply them to particular
Cases, but never to set up her own Commands in Opposition to them, as the
Church of Rome does; and therefore though we teach our People to dread an
Excommunication, it being summum futuri Judicii Praejudicium, as Tertullian
calls it, a foretast or forestalling of the last Judgment; and not for a World
to lie under it, though it were inflicted only for Contempt; yet we warn them
in the first place to avoid the Cause and Occasion of Excommunication, and
therefore not to value what Censures of the Church of Rome we are under, they
being so very unjust and Groundless.

Fourthly, and lastly, as only the true Object of Devotion is here worshipped,
only proper Expressions allowed, all useful Helps afforded; so also the
greatest stress is laid on the Practice of it, agreeable to the true Nature,
End and Design of it. The Principal ends of Devotion are to pay a Homage to God
our great Creator and Benefactor, to get his Blessing, and to work our selves
up to a better temper of Mind: And to this end we are in our Service
Importunate without Vanity or Impertinency, long without Tediousness, or Idle
Repetitions; (Only we use the Lord's Prayer often, that no part of our Service
may be without that perfect form, and also in Consideration of the great
Comprehensiveness of it, and of the Distraction of Men's Minds which seldom can
attend to the full Sense of it all at one time.) And we teach our People that
every Man must work for himself, for he that prays only by a Proxy, it is very
just that he should be rewarded only by a Proxy too; we put our People in mind
that an unfeigned Repentance is absolutely Necessary, and not a Verbal one
only: That it is out of our power, and of any Man's in the World to turn
Attrition into Contrition. We pretend not to dispense with any for not obeying
the Command of God. We have no Taxa Camaerae by which the Papists are shown how
all Sins are fined in their Church; for in that Book Men see at what Charge
they may kill a Father, or commit Incest with their Sisters: But we assure all,
that the Wages of Sin is Death, Death Eternal, if indulged and not most
earnestly repented of. And we tell all that Devotion is necessary for all,
though the Church of Rome has ways of gratifying every Inclination, so as they
that will not lead a strict Life, need not, and yet may have hopes of
Salvation: We own their Policy in this Contrivance, but do not so much admire
their Religious regard to the Salvation of Men's Souls.

And to conclude, though we thus forcibly press all Christian Duties on all
Men; yet at the same time we warn them not to pretend to Merit Heaven at God's
Hand; but after they have done their best, to confess they are unprofitable
Servants. Wersay of our Charity or whatever else we do in Obedience to God,
that of his own we give to him, and we are bound to thank him both for the Will
and the Ability to give. The most that we pretend to, is only to make a small
Acknowledgment by way of Sacrifice for what we have received; we beg of God to
accept it as a Testimony of a grateful Mind, and we know that his Goodness is
so great, that he will abundantly reward an honest and sincere Servant, though
he has done no more than was his Duty: And we hope that what we offer though
mingled with many Imperfections, he will be pleased to accept for the sake of
Christ as if it were perfect.

These are the Grounds that we go on in our Devotions, and whatever we do for
the Honor of God; and thus designing and thus acting and persisting, we need
not doubt but the good Providence of God which watches over his whole Church,
will in an especial manner watch over this which is so pure a Member of it;
that he will accept of the Devotions which are offered to him in it, and hear
the Prayers that are made unto him for it, and defend it against all its
Enemies on every side; which God of his Infinite Mercy grant for the sake of
Jesus Christ our Lord.

FINIS.

