DEATH AND THE GRAVE No Bar to Believers Happiness.

OR, A SERMON preached at the Funeral OF THE Lady HONOR VYNER, In the Parish
Church of Mary Wolnoth in Lombardstreet, July 10. 1656.

By WILLIAM SPURSTOW, D. D. and Minister of Gods Word at Hackney.

If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most
miserable, 1 Cor. 15. 19. I will ransom them from the power of the grave, I
will redeem them from death: O death I will be thy plague; O grave, I will be
thy destruction, Hosea 13. 14. Omnia sub sole vanitas; ergo supra solemn
veritas. Paulin. in Opusc.

LONDON, Printed for J. Rothwell, at the Fountain in Goldsmiths-row in
Cheapside. 1656.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL Sir THOMAS VYNER, Knight. And Alderman of the City of
LONDON.
SIR,
SInce that you are pleased not to be dissatisfied with the long stay of this
Sermon, it matters not to give an account to others, to whose hands it may
happily come, what the causes are that have made it to stick so long in the
birth. And yet I am willing they should understand thus much: First, that it is
a sad work, and that I never preached or printed more unchearfully: Sorrow is a
passion that moves slowly, it makes the words slow as well as few, and the pace
to be creeping, and snailelike: there is nothing in it that runs, but tears.
Secondly, that it is an imperfect work, and unfit for that end to which it
seems to be designed; and therefore I gladly would that it might have been
still hid like Saul behind the stuff, and not have appeared in public view.
For I know it will be looked upon as a kind of record that bears upon it the
name of the Lady HONOR VYNER, whose name should always be written by me,
aureis potius literis, quam vili hoc liquore, in Letters of Gold rather then
with this vile and cheap Ink, so many were my obligations to her for the
constant and real favors that she was pleased to heap upon me, which must
still live, and be acknowliged by me: But the best at present that I can make
of this way is, that black is suitable to mourning, and that broken notes,
sentences, and inconsistencies (with which I fear this little piece abounds)
are in sorrow pardonable, if not commendable. And this is all that I shall now
say on my own behalf.

To you Sir, who are still a sad mourner under this band and stroke of God, I
hope this Sermon may afford such prevailing considerations as may cause you not
to sorrow as others that have no hopes, in regard that she is not dead but
sleeps, is not lost but found, not taken from the company of the living, but of
the lamenting. Though therefore your eyes may drop as a limbeck, yet let them
not run as spouts; though sighs may come from you, yet take heed of repinings.
It is God that has done it, and who shall say unto him, What do thou? I know
you do strive against dejections, (and I bless God) that hitherto you have
born your cross as becomes a Christian; continue, I beseech you still in the
exercise of Faith and Patience, that so when you are tried, you may receive the
Crown of life that the Lord has promised to those that love him, James 1. 12.
And that you may thus do, and be thus crowned, shall be the prayer of him, who
thankefully acknowledges all your love, and rests

SIR, Your most affectionate friend and servant in the Lord WILLIAM SPURSTOWE.

DEATH and the GRAVE no Bar to a BELIEVERS Happiness.
PSALM. 17. 15. I shall be satisfied, when I awake with thy likeness.
It is storied by the famous Tully concerning Syracuse, that there is no day
throughout the whole year so stormy, and tempestuous, in which the inhabitants
have not some glimpse and sight of the Sun: The like observation may be truly
made on all those Psalms of David, in which his complaints are most multiplied,
his fears, and pressures most insisted on, that there is not any of them so
totally overcast with the black darkness of despair; but that we may easily
discern them to be here and there interveined and streaked with some
comfortable expressions of his faith and hope in God. If in the beginning of a
Psalm we find him restless in his motions, like Noah's Dove upon the
overspreading waters; yet in the close we shall see him like the same Dove
returning with an Olive branch in its mouth, and fixing upon the Ark. If we
find him in another Psalm staggering in the midst of his distresses through
the prevalency of carnal fears; we may also in it behold him recovering
himself again, by fetching arguments from faith, whose topics are of an higher
elevation then to be shaken by the timorous suggestions that arise from the
flesh. If at another time we behold him like to a boat on drift, that is tossed
and beaten by the inconstant winds, and fierce waves, yet we shall still find
all his rollings and agitations to be such as carry him toward the standing
shore, where he rides at last both in peace and safety. And of all this the
present Psalm is both a full and lively instance.

For in it holy David's afflictions are neither few nor small: His innocence
that is wounded by malicious slanders, His life that is in jeopardy by deadly
enemies that compass him about, His present condition that is imbittered unto
him by the pressing wants of a barren Wilderness, while his foes live
deliciously in Saul's Court. And yet under the weight and combination of so many
sore evils, David carries himself as one that is neither hopeless nor
forsaken: yea, lays his estate in the balance against theirs, and in this low
ebb of his vies with them for happiness; and at last shutting up the Psalm
with a triumphant Epiphonema, concludes himself to be by far the better man.
As for me, I shall behold thy face in righteousness, I shall be satisfied when
I awake with thy likeness. They it is true enjoy the face of their King, whose
favor is as a cloud of latter rain promising a fruitful harvest of many
blessings, But I (says he) shall behold the face of God in right^ousnesse;
whose loving: kindness is better then life, clothed with all its Royalties:
they have their bellies filled with hidden treasure, having more then a common
hand of bounty opened unto them; but I have more gladness put into my heart,
more then in the time that their Corn and Wine encre^sed. They have their
portion in hand, as being men of this world; but I have mine laid up in the
other: I shall be satisfied when I awake with thy likeness.

In the words we have his and every believers eternal happiness in the other
life, set forth in three particulars as a most effectual Antidote against
present troubles and temptations that arise from the malice of wicked men
againstt them.

First, the time of his absolute and complete happiness. Cum evigilavero, when
I awake. Some Interpreters conceive, that by this waking the Prophet intends no
more then to express the lively sense and confidence that he has of the
return of Gods favor unto him, under this dark night of trouble and sorrow
which is now upon him: and though he now be like those that are asleep, who for
that time want those pleasures and delights which others enjoy; yet he shall
awake again to behold the light of Gods face shining upon him like a bright
Sun with manifold emanations of love and bounty. But others both of the
Ancient and Modern carry the Metaphor far higher, applying it to the
resurrection, and the state of blessedness after death, which to me seems to be
both a full and genuine interpretation; in regard that David comfort
himself in his present wants with the hopes of an after happiness, totally
differenced from that which those whom he styles the men of the World, and such
as have their portion in this life are made partakers of.

The second is the measure and redundancy of his happiness: I shall be
satisfied. The Sun is not so full of light, nor the Sea of water, as he shall
be at his awaking of endless bliss and perfection. Our desires in this life are
(as the Lawyers say, of ones will while he lives) wholly ambulatory, and admit
of as many alterations, as such testaments do of additions and expunctions;
being neither filled nor fixed with the fruition of any satisfactory good: But
in the the other life our desires are terminated in the fullness of our
enjoyments, and as faith is swallowed up in vision, so are our desires in
complacency: we affect nothing that we have not, and we have nothing that we do
not affect.

The third is the object of his happiness, together with the manner of his
enjoying it: I shall be satisfied with thy likeness. The object is the
likeness of God, that is, his glory and perfection, with which he sits clothed
on his Throne of Majesty. The manner of enjoying it, is by beholding of it; not
by way of resultancy, and mediante speculo, by the conveyance and help of a
glass; but by an immediate, clear, and permanent vision, in which he shall be
filled with the knowledge and sight of God, so far as the capacity of a
creature can reach unto: but as it is impossible to bring the vast body of the
Sun into the narrow compass of the eye that beholds it; so is it much more
impossible to comprehend the being of an infinite God within the limits of a
finite understanding, when elevated and widened to its highest pitch.

Having opened the words in the several branches, which naturally they shoot
forth into: I shall begin with the first particular, the time of David's and
every believers complete happiness: [ When I awake] And from it gather two
Observations.

The first, (which I shall but briefly touch) is, That death to the godly is no
more then a sleep. The grave in which they rest is as their bed; the darkness
of it as the night; and their resurrection from it, as the joyful morning. The
Heathens have called death by the name of sleep as well as the Scripture. Homer
says, that sleep and death have one mother, and are begotten of the night: And
the Cynick falling into a sleep, a little before his death, pleasantly said,
Frater me mox traditurus est fratri suo; one brother is now delivering me into
the hands of another: but yet they never styled it so upon the same ground
which the Scripture does, neither ever could, being wholly ignorant of Christ,
by whom death is wonderfully changed from an enemy to a friend, from a curse to
a blessing, and is put into the Inventory of the Saints privileges which
accrue unto them by Christ, 1 Cor. 3. 22. It comes now to them rather by sin,
then for sin, because it is not in ordine a peccato ad supplicium, sed ad
salutem: it comes not as a middle thing between sin and damnation, but between
sin and salvation. And therefore may now fitly be resembled to a sleep in these
respects.

First, sleep is a ligation, not an ablation of the external senses; it
obstructs their function and exercise, but it does not destroy the faculty: So
death interrupts and suspends the action of life, but it does not extinguish
the root and principle of a believers life, so as to make it to admit of no
return. The Philosopher thought indeed the dissolution of the body to be
argument full enough to evince the impossibility of its resurrection, and
therefore derided the doctrine of it when Paul preached it, Act. 17. 18. But
Job tells us, that though his reins be consumed within him, that yet with his
eyes he should behold God, Job 19. 27. and the Prophet says, that Christ's dead
shall arise and sing, Jsay 26. 19. The silence of the grave is but a kind of
Pythagorian (...) or restraint only for a time; sight, hearing, speech shall
all return again. For though death has made a separation between soul and
body, yet neither soul nor body are by it separated from Christ: but as in
Christ the Union Hypostatical; so in his members the Union mystical is
inviolable: and therefore they are said to sleep in Jesus, 1 These: 4. 14. to die
not out of the Lord but in the Lord, Rev. 14. 13. yea into the Lord, Romans 14.
8. so as by death to be more closely joined to him: being then united to him
that lives for evermore, their very dust must needs be a living part of him.

Secondly, in regard both of the time and manner of sleep and death. Some as
children are put sooner to bed; others again sit up longer before they go to
sleep: some have their life like a Winter day short and cloudy, and with them
it is quickly night; some have it lengthned out like to a Summer day, and with
them it is late before the evening of their life shuts in. Some as children
when undressed by their Parents, begin to struggle and express a backwardness;
others again as thoroughly wearied with their stirring, call to be had to bed:
And so some Christians shrink at the approaches of death, and are loath to be
unclothed; others again as burdened with their earthly tabernacle, groan to
have mortality to be swallowed up of life. Hezekiah when the Prophet bids him
set his house in order, for he must die and not live, turned his face to the
wall and wept sore, 2 King. 20. 3. But Paul he desires to be dissolved and to
be with Christ, which is best of all, Philip. 1. 21.

Thirdly, death is a sleep in regard of the likeness of our being awakened both
from the one and from the other. It is observed by the Naturalists that no
noise more suddenly awaketh a man from his sleep, then an Humane voice; yea
though it be that (...) that heavy and deep slumber which precedeth death it
self, as the Aphorism notes it in Hippocrates. The way by which our Savior
raised Lazarus, John 11. 45. and Peter raised Tabitha, was by a voice, Acts 9.
40. And the way by which all the congregation of the dead shall be awakened
from the grave, shall be, not by the immediate voice of God, but by the voice
of the Son of man. The hour comes (says our Savior) in which all that are
in the grave shall hear his voice and come forth, John 5. 28. It is his voice
that shall cause the Sea to give up its dead, and shall make the bones of his
Saints that are scattered over the face of the whole earth to come together.

But it is not my purpose to weary the Metaphor in a full and close pursuit of
it, or to draw an exact parallel between sleep and death: It being a point that
I least aimed at in this present exercise. The application that I shall make is
briefly double.

First, if death be but a sleep to believers, then it should cause us to
moderate our sorrow on the behalf of our dearest friends and relations that are
fallen asleep in the Lord: as also to correct that excess of fear in regard of
our selves, who are apt to be dismayed at the harbingers of the King of
terrors, age, pain, and sickness, and to sink under the sad thoughts of an
imminent dissolution. Who is troubled when he understands his sick friend is
laid down to rest? and who is afraid to put off his clothes at night, when he
goes to bed? Sleep is not an hurtful, but a necessary kind of privation and
intermission: It is the sick man's Physician, the travelers and laboring man's
restorative, the only Parenthesis of the afflicted man's sorrows; and from hence
it is that Aristotle in his Ethics says, that for well nigh half their time
the miserable and the happy do little differ. And are not all these together
with far more high advantages found to meet in the believers sleep of death? is
there not then a perfect release from all the miseries of this life? is there
not by it a cure wrought of all the maladies both of the soul and of the body,
so that the one shall no more relapse into its former sins, nor the other into
its old diseases and cares? the eye shall not weep for sorrow, nor the brow
sweat with labor, the head shall not ache with the multitude of anxious
thoughts, nor the fancy be molested with the dreams and visions of the night:
when we awake from it we shall say it was the best and quietest sleep that ever
we slept, and the best physic that ever we took for the putting of a final
period to all our distempers. Let not therefore believers dread the thoughts of
death as others do, nor shreek out when they epsy this snake creeping into
their bosoms; for hurt them it cannot having lost its sting; but benefit them
it shall, being made by Christ an egress from all misery, and an ingress into
all happiness.

The second application is, to acquaint us how necessary it is to exercise
faith and holiness while we live, that death may be a comfortable sleep to us
when we die. No man can die in the Lord that lives not to the Lord; nor shall
awake from death to happiness, that does not first awake from sin to holiness.
It is a vain presumption to conceive that a man that lives and dies in his
sins, can ever have the same joyful resurrection with them that have made it
their constant work to die to their sin. Northern and Southern rivers though
they run from contrary points meet in the same Sea; but they whose ways and
Principles are contrary unto theirs that profess holiness, shall never be found
with them in the same Heaven. If we look for according to Gods promise, new
heavens and a new earth wherein dwells righteousness, 2 Pet. 3. 13. we must
have righteousness dwelling in us here, or else we shall never dwell in them
hereafter. O then that they would lay this to heart who dread the separation of
the soul from the body; but yet are not at all afraid of the separation and
disunion both of the body and soul from God, that so they may timely busy
themselves in those ways and duties, which may make the first death that
cannot possibly be avoided by them, to be comfortable to them; and may also
wholly prevent their dying of the second death, which leaves all those that fall
under the stroke of it eternally hopeless.

And thus I have done with the first Observation, touching it well nigh with as
light an hand as Jonathan did the honeycomb, into which he only dipped the end
of his rod; but by that small taste his eyes were enlightened; and so I hope may
ours also by that little which has been spoken of it. There remains yet a
second observation, which grows as ripe fruit upon the same branch and is next
to be gathered, and that is this.

of the Spirit, with which they are often lifted up toward Heaven; but the
ultimate fullness of it, they enjoy not until the whole man come to be possessed
of Heaven. We are now the sons of God, but it does not yet app^ar what we shall
be, 1 John 2. 2. Our present condition at best falls as far short of our
future, as a faint ray does of the Sun when it shines in its full strength. The
learned Verulams observation of Prophecies falls in much with the manner of our
celestial happiness, who says, that they have gradus and scalas complementi,
certain gradual fulfillings, in each of which they grow more clear and
distinct: And so has it sundry progressive steps, and ascentions, in each of
which we are truly partakers of it after a growing and increasing way, as I
shall show in five steps.

First, believers have life and eternal blessedness, in pretio, in the price
that is laid down for it. Ephesians. 1. 14. It is called a purchased possession, an
inheritance that does not descend to us by birth; but is given to us by grace.
He who has a natural right unto it, as being the heir of all things, Heb. 1.
2. has given unto us a right of purchase: Our title is founded in Christ's
blood which makes it truly ours; he having by it obtained a power to give
eternal life to whomsoever he pleases.

Secondly, believers have it in promisso, in the promise, which is a
declaration and conveyance of what Christ has purchased to be to their behoof,
and the oath of God which is added to it, is as the seal upon the label of the
deed, that gives a further ratification unto it; that so by two immutable
things in which it was impossible for God to lie, they might have strong
consolation, Heb. 6. 18. And who is it that by the eye of faith views and reads
those evidences, in which a crown of life, Revel. 2. 10. a Kingdom that cannot
be moved, Heb. 12. 28. an inheritance that fades not away, 1 Pet. 1. 4. are
all ascertained to him, does not rejoice more under the hopes of glory, then
the greatest of Princes ever can in the fruition of all their worldly
greatness.

Thirdly, they are partakers of Heaven it self, in prodromo, in their
forerunner, the Lord Christ. He at his ascension took seisin and livery of it
in their name, John 14. 2. I go to prepare a place for you. An expression (as
some conceive) borrowed from travelers, amongst whom some one is by agreement
sent before to take up lodgings for the rest of his company. And as he takes,
so also does he keep possession in their names, preserving still their right
unto it, until they come to be possessed of it themselves. And hence it is,
that the Apostle says of believers, that they are raised up together, and made
to sit together in heavenly places in Christ, Ephesians. 2. 6.

Fourthly, they have the happiness of Heaven, in primitiis, in the
first fruits, and pledges of it, every grace of the Spirit is scintilla futurae
lucis, a spark of their future glory; every comfort of it is gutta font is
vitae, a drop of the well of life; and are as certain evidences of an ensuing
fullness; as the day star is of an approaching morning. The tastes and
prelibations of happiness, which believers have in this life by the mouth of
faith, the sight of Heven which they have by the eye of faith, that sometimes
stands, on tiptoe, and peeps into the things that are within the veil, do
differ only in degree and not in kind from the full sruition and vision of God
which they have in the other life, when their souls and body, are reunited to
each other, and both con^oyned unto Christ their everliving head and Lord.

Fifthly and laftly, believers have life and eternal blessedness, in mess,
in the rich and full harvest of it; when all the promises both of grace and
glory are wholly accomplished, when all the expectations of faith and hope are
swallowed up in endless admiration, when all the desires of the soul, which
are more restless then the Sun in their motions, are eternally fixed upon
one simple and infinite good, which contains in it the perfection of all
delectible objects. Quid ^o avarius cui Deus non sufficit in quo sunt omnia?
What can be more insatiable then that man, whom God does not suffice in whom
all things are? can any thirst after a larger possession then immensity? a
surer state then immortality? a longer term of years then perpetuity?

But if you ask me why God defers the consummation of his childrens happiness
unto the resurrection, and makes it to be like a Jacobs ladder, that has
sundry steps and ascensions: amongst many grounds that may be assigned, be
pleased to take these.

First, God does it that he may hide his counsels and purposes concerning his
children from the eyes and knowledge of carnal and proud men, to whom the
external meanness of Christ and his followers becomes a stumbling block, and a
just occasion to make them perish in their sins. And he does it also that he
may hide his people from their rage and fury, who are as impatient at the least
appearances of their welfare, as Bulls are at the fight of Scarlet. They envy
them their morsels of bread, much more their Manna; their rags, much more their
robes. The evil husbandmen in the Gospel as soon as they beheld the heir, deal
worse with him then with their Lords servants, Luke 20. 14. And did but the
wicked of the world but fully know whose the inheritance of Heaven were, they
would fall upon them as the Jews upon Steven, and stone them to death.

Secondly, God does it that he may show forth the greatness of his power.
Alchymists boast much of their skill, that they can turn baser mettalls into
more noble, Lead into Silver, Copper into gold, but the ground upon which they
build their presumption is, that these baser metals are in their nature in the
way to be better; and so they do but perfect that which is imperfect and would
by course of nature have become perfect though they had never labored it; But
they never assayed to turn dross into Silver, or dirt into Gold. And yet the
power which God puts forth is far greater, when he raises his children from
the grave to Heaven, and makes them that were Netherlanders, dwelling in the
dust, to be citizens of the new Jerusalem which is above, the companions of
Angels, and coheirs with Christ. Who but an infinite power can make a vile
corruptible body to put on incorruption? or can change a natural body into a
spiritual body, so as that it shall not need the assistance of meats and
drinks, but live as the Angels do? or can make a body sown in dishonor to
rise in honor, being beautified with the glorious endowments of clarity,
agility, and impassibility?

Thirdly, God defers the full happiness of believers till their resurrection,
that they may have occasion to show forth and exercise all kind of graces that
bring glory and honor to himself. If the crown were set upon their heads,
while they were as infants in the cradle, where would their patience in
enduring trials and in waiting on the pleasure of God be made visible to the
world? If they were all forthwith taken up from earth to heaven, where would be
the exercise of their hope, and earnest longing after the appearing of Christ
in glory? If there were no such changes as death and dissolution intervening,
where would be the glory of the Christians faith who now believe that which the
line of reason cannot fathom. Is there any desert so hopeless as death and
the grave, desertion of life and being, when milk forsakes the breasts, marrow
the bones, blood the veins, spirit the arteries; and the soul the body? And
yet after such desolations faith expects a restoration: I know (says Job)
that my Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand upon the Earth at the latter
day: and though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I
see God, Job 19. 25, 26. Believers know the power of God can easily break
asunder the bands of death, and therefore yield to it as prisoners of hope.

Fourthly, God does it, that there may be a conformity between Christ's and the
believers entrance into glory. He was first abased, and then exalted; He
suffered, and then was crowned; he descended into the grave, and then ascended
into Heaven. O fools and slow of heart to believe all that the Prophets have
spoken; ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and to enter into his
glory? says our Savior to his doubting Disciples, Luke 24. 25, 26. Surely, if
He went from the Cross to his Throne, it is not meet that we should balk the
one, and take the other: If he were stripped naked, before he was clothed with
Majesty and honor, we may not refuse to undergo the same condition with him;
especially he having sanctified to us abasements, afflictions, death and the
grave, by undergoing them for us.

Fifthly, God does it, that he may declare himself just in his threatenings, as
well as gracious in his promises. It was his Law that if any man did offend, he
should die the death; and therefore though he has taken away the curse from
off the soul, yet he has not taken away the stroke of it from the body; though
he have in mercy freed his chosen ones from Hell, yet he has not exempted them
from the grave. Let not therefore any so presume on his goodness, as to slight
his justice, or conceive that the promises of the Gospel have vacated the
threatenings of the Law: but let them remember, that he is known by executing of
judgment, Psalm. 9. 16. as well as by showing mercy, Exodus 34. 7.

In the application of this truth I shall be very brief, and touch only upon
two inferences, without insisting upon either, that so I may not by the lapse
of time be wholly frustrated in speaking to other particulars, that are yet like
rich hangings folded up and not presented to our view.

First, it may acquaint us how needful a grace patience is to believers, whose
felicity is in expectation, not in possession, whose life is a seeds-time, and
not an harvest, that so they may not droop at the delay of the promise. It is
one choice piece of the spiritual armor with which the Apostle would have the
Ephesians feet to be shod, to secure them both against the roughness, and the
length of their way, Ephesians. 6. 15. It is that he prays for in the behalf of
the Thessalonians, that God would direct their hearts into the patient waiting
for Christ, 2 These. 3. 5. It is the commendation os the Saints given by the
Angel, Revel. 14. 12. that they bare patiently the furious assaults of
Antichrist without fainting, expecting by faith his ruin and their own
exaltation. Let us therefore arm our selves with the same mind, both in
running our race, and bearing our burdens without murmuring or dejection,
believing that in the best season God will make our happiness to grow as the
light, until it be consummated in its ultimate perfection and stability.

The second inference is, that though the complete happiness of believers be
future, that yet it is no ground to any to slacken their present diligence of
standing perfect and complete in all the will of God, Col. 4. 12. or to
procrastinate their service till they draw nearer the borders of the other
World, because they conceive the reward to stand at a great distance: for when
they have done whatever we can imagine to lie within the latitude of a
creatures ability, yet their work will never arise to any equality with their
wages. For could we suppose a man's obedience from his birth to run in a
parallel line with the purity of the whole law, and that he should abide in
that estate as many years as the world has stood minuits; yet when the total
sum of all his duties and services is cast up, it would fall as far short of
the reward with which God crowns the services of his children, as the smallest
fraction does of the greatest number, or the least filing of gold of the riches
of the whole Indies. How sedulous and careful therefore should believers be, to
let slip no season, nor to foreslow any occasion of honoring God in the
exercise of all holiness, whose time is but short, whose works are but
imperfect; and yet are rewarded with full and endless bliss.

I leave now the first particular the time of David's happiness [ when I awake]
and come to the second, the measure and redundancy of it, which follows next as
well in order of the words, as of the parts: When I wake I shall be satisfied.
This one word satiabor, points out the wide difference that is between Earth
and Heaven; the one is the place of desires, and they speak indigency, the
other of having, and that speaks fullness. Whom have I in Heaven but thee O
Lord? And there is none upon Earth that I desire besides thee, Psalm. 73. 25. On
Earth we may have contentment, which consists in curbing our appetite, and
bringing our mind to our estate, but in Heaven we have satisfaction, and that
is, when our estate is fully according to our mind and desires. Then all the
thirsty appetites of the soul, and of the whole man are filled and satisfied
with enjoyments suitable to the several faculties: The understanding that is
filled to its utmost capacity with truth, the will that is satisfied with
goodness, and the senses with pleasure. When therefore believers change Earth
for Heaven they do not lose their happiness but perfect it: as Fish when they
fall out of the narrow and small brooks into the wide and deep Sea do not leave
their Element, but are more in it then before.

To open more distinctly the fullness and perfection of the blessedness of
Heaven, I shall set it forth two ways. First, Comparatively. Secondly,
Positively.

First, let us compare it to the best things here below, such as men's hearts,
and endeavors are most carried forth unto, and we shall quickly find how light
they will be in the balance, and how heavy the other. Gold, pearls, precious
stones do but serve to set forth the pavements of the streets, the Walls and
Gates of the new Jerusalem, Revel. 31. But alas! they are too mean things to
shadow forth the riches, glory and dignity of the Inhabitants? What is the
beauty of the High Priest garments wherewith he entered into the Holy of holies,
to those robes of righteousness with which the Saints are clothed? What is
Solomon's throne with its steps and ascents, to the throne upon which they sit?
What are his servants and attendants, which astonish the Queen of Sheba, to
those Angels that are their ministering spirits? they are but as rags, as a
dunghill, as motes in the Sunbeam to the beam it self.

Secondly, compare it with the sorest sufferings and afflictions that any have,
or may sustain while they are in the body, and they will all be as so many
foiles to set off the pefection of the happiness of Heavens Who have met with
harder measure from the World by persecutions, by torments, by slaughters, then
Christians? and who have sustained them with such courage and resolution as
they have done? giving greater thanks to their enemies, when they have been
condemned, then when absolved. Paul under the hope of glory, joys in
tribulation, Romans 5. 3. The believing Hebrews knowing that they have in Heaven
an enduring substance, take joyfully the spoiling of their goods, Heb. 10. 34.
Others that they might obtain a better resurrection, have not accepted of
deliverance from the sword, flames and other tortures when it has been offered
unto them, Heb. 11, 35. It is storied of Adrianus that Martyr, that seeing many
Christians put to so cruel and bitter deaths, he asked others of them what it
was that they suffered such grievous things for; and their Answer was, Speramus
illa bona quae oculus non vidit, auris non audivit, in cor hominis non
ascenderunt: We hope for those things which eye has not seen, ear has not
heard, nor ever entered into the heart of man to conceive. Whereupon he was so
moved, that he forthwith desired to be enrolled in the catalogue of Martyrs,
and so suffered his Wife exciting him thereunto. Needs therefore must the
happiness of Heaven be full and perfect, when for it, men are willing to
forgo the sweetest things, and to undergo the hardest; and yet reckon all not
worthy of the Glory that shall be revealed in them, Romans 8. 18.

Thirdly, the fullness of the felicity of Heaven may appear, if we compare it
with the joys and comforts of the Holy Spirit. Such they are, as that the
Scripture styles them strong consolations, Heb. 6. 17. full joys, John 15. 11.
Joy unspeakable and full of Glory, 1 Pet. 1. 8. abounding consolations, 2 Cor.
1. 5. And yet all the joy and peace that believers are partakers of in this
life is but as a drop to the Ocean, as a single cluster to the whole Vintage,
as the Thyme or Honey upon the thigh of a Be to the whole Hive fully fraught
with it, or as the break and peep of day to the bright no^n-tide. But yet these
tastes of the Water, Wine, and Honey of this celestial Canaan with which the
Holy Spirit makes glad the hearts of believers are both far more desirable and
satisfactory then the overflowing streams of all earthly felicities: And there
are none who have once tasted of them, but say as the Samaritan woman did, Lord
give me that Water that I thirst not, neither come hither to draw, John 4. 15.
So also the first and early dawnings of the heavenly light fill the soul with
more serenity, and ravish it with more pure joy, then the brightest Sunshine
of all worldly splendour can ever do. I have read of a devout Person who but
dreaming of Heaven, the signatures and impressions it made upon his fancy were
so strong, as that when he awaked he knew not his Cell, could not distinguish
the night from the day, nor difference by his taste Oil from Wine, still he
was calling for his vision and saying, Read mihi campos floridos, columnam
anream, comitem Hieronymum, assistentes Angelos. Give me my fresh and fragrant
fields again, my Golden pillar of light, Jerome my companion, Angels my
assistants. If Heaven in a dream produce such extacies, as drown and overwhelm
the exercise of the senses to inferior objects; what transes and complacencies
must the fruition of it work in those, who have their whole rational appetite
filled, and their body beautified with its endless glory?

Secondly, as we have seen the transcendent fullness of Heavens happiness
comparatively; so now let us view it a little positively, and that both in its
causes and in its properties.

First, the efficient cause of all the fullness and glory of Heaven is God. It
is his royal mansion built by himself, and for himself, Heb. 11. 10. No Artist
had either head or hand in the creating of this stately fabric; for who could
make it suitable to his greatness but himself, who only understands his own
excellency. The Tabernacle, the Temple in which his typical presence only was,
were both by his appointment to have art and cost bestowed upon them, that so
they might the better draw respect and reverence to his name who was worshipped
in them: how much more will God beautify and deck his Throne of Majesty on
which he sits, and on which he will manifest himself in all perfection unto the
whole Assembly of the first born, whose names are written in Heaven, that he
may forever be adored, and admired by them.

Secondly, if we look upon Heaven in the meritorious cause of it, as it is a
purchased inheritance; so it will appear also to be full of glory. When we hear
what a vast sum has been given for a Lordship, for a Jewel or Diamond by them
that have become propreiators of them, we usually conclude, that they are of
more then common worth, or else men would not have expended so much treasure
for them: How much better may we argue, the worth and excellency of Heaven, for
which the Lord Christ laid down his blood as a price to gain us thereby a right
and a title unto it. Surely he who is the wisdom of God knew the value and
worth of it to be such as none but himself could ever have been able to
compass, or else he would not have given his precious blood for that, for which
men or Angels had been sufficient to have bought with their stock.

Thirdly, the riches and glory of Heaven is seen in this, that Christ is the
exemplary cause, and pattern to whom believers are to be conformed. He shall
change our vile body (says the Apostle) that it may be fashioned like to his
glorious body, Phil. 3. 21. In his abasement he became like us bearing upon him
our infirmities; but in our exaltation we shall be made like unto him: We shall
not only behold his glory; but we shall be partakers of it. And can they want
any thing who sit upon the same throne, who feed at the same table, who are
clothed with the robe of his righteousness, who are dignified with the titles
of being heirs with him, brethren to him, and members of him who is the head
that f^lleth All in all, Ephesians. 1. 23.

Fourthly, the full blessedness of Heaven may be demonstrated from the matter
or object of it; which being fully perfect must needs make the partakers of it
fully blessed. Felicity consists in an aggregation of all good, if any thing be
wanting, it cannot be absolute and entire: And can we find any perfect
coacervation of all the scattered objects of good, but in God, who as he is in
all things, so all things are in him after a more excellent manner then ever
they were, or can be in themselves: they never were without imperfection, and
since the fall not without impurity; but in him they are perfect without
defect, and pure without polution. When therefore God in Heaven, and not any
confluence of created good is the object and matter of believers happiness,
must it not needs be full? Can he that inherits all things, Revel. 21. 7. want
any thing? or can he who has a full and constant communication of God himself
not inherit all things?

Fifthly, the final cause: For Gods making Heaven proves the happiness of it
to be perfect. Gods end in all his works is his glory; for he that is the
fountain of his own being, must necessarily be the end of his own actions: but
yet the manifestations of his own glory, are not in all his works alike, the
more or less he communicates himself to them, the more or less are they
glorious. Now there are no where such perfect communications of God as in
Heaven. That is the place designed by God, where all the riches of mercy and of
glory that eye has not seen, ear has not heard, nor the heart of man
conceived, shall be all revealed in their full luster and beauty: there
pardoning grace in the full discharge of all debts that could never have been
paid, shall be for ever admired; there sanctifying grace which is now imperfect
shall be completed: there we shall know, as we are known, and love as we are
loved; loving God not as we do here with a love of desire, but with a love of
friendship, being for ever united to him, and made fully happy and blessed by
him.

Secondly, the full and satisfactory happiness of Heaven will appear in the
inseparable properties and adjuncts of it; but through want of time I can only
point at them in a brief gloss upon those words of the Apostle, 1 Pet. 1. 4. An
inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, and that fades not away.

First, it is felicity which is incorruptible. There is nothing on earth which
serves either for necessity, or for delight, for food or for ornament, but it
has in it a latent soed of mortality which in time prevails against it, and
corrupts the being and substance of it. Bread that is the staff of life, that
in a few days moulds. And Manna that for its excellency is Angels meat, if
kept but a little that stinks: Gold that serves for riches that rusts, and
clothes that are for ornament wear into rags. But in Heaven there is nothing
but what is free from corruption. The food which the Saints live on is the tree
of life, Revel. 22. 2. the crown which they wear is a crown of life, Revel. 2.
10. The riches which they possess, are durable riches, Prove. 8. 18.

Secondly, It is undefiled. As it is free from corruption within; so is it also
from soil or any abasement from without. Sorrows cares, fears, take away the
luster of all earthly felicity, and make it become like a crystal glass blown
upon by some impure breath that retains little or nothing of its native
brightness: But in Heaven all our enjoyments are pure, without the least stain
or spot of any evils that may cast a dimness upon their beauty, there is no
fear of losing what we have, nor vexing care in keeping what we have; no sorrow
in grieving for any thing that we want: What ever we there possess is made
delightful to us by an holy security, and a perfect complacency.

Thirdly, It is felicity that fades not away. There is a double fading to
which the most desirable things on earth are subject: the one is, when the
things themselves recede from that beauty and verdure with which they sometimes
flourished: the other is, when they fade in our esteem and affection, so as to
become less amiable to us, and less desired by us. But to neither of these is
the happiness of Heaven ^^able, as it abides in the same luster and
brightness, which had in the first moment that we entered into it, so have we
also the same height of ravishing joys and delights after Millions of years
fruition of it.

The uses of this point might be various; but I may not draw them out into
number or length, I shall therefore confine my self to a brief nomination of
two.

First, If the happiness of Heaven be full and satisfactory, it should then
take off the edge both of our desires and endeavors in the eager persuit of
things that are below. Illi sapiant terrena, qui promissa coelestia non habent.
Let them savor earthly things (says Jerome to Celantia) who have no interest
in Heavenly promises: And yet it is both strange, and sad to see how earthly
the conversations of many are who profess to have Heavenly expectations,
running after the empty pleasures, and perishing delights of the World with as
much vehemence and strife as the small Fish do after a fly, or rotten Worm that
swims upon the top of the Water who shall first catch it. But alas! how do such
men belie their hopes and give occasion to the World to say, that what ever
they profess of Heaven carries more of a design in it then a real truth, and
that they drop and let fall such notions, as Atalanta did her golden balls, to
stop and impede the course of others that themselves may gain and graspe the
more? Let me beseech you therefore who have taken upon you the name of
Christians, to raise up your minds and souls toward Heaven, where your
Treasure, your Crown, your Savior, and your God all are, that thereby you may
vindicate Religion from that reproach which it lies under, and your selves of
that sin of earthly-mindednesse, which like a root of bitterness has spread
it self, to the defiling of many; so that I may truly say, that from the days
of John the Baptist until now the Kingdom of Heaven never suffered less
violence, nor the World more.

Secondly, how great is their folly who exchange a full and satisfactory
happiness for empty and transient pleasures? and how sad will their end be,
when dying in their sins, evil and misery shall come upon them in its
perfection? What is it that heightens the blessed condition of those that are
in Heaven, but this, that their happiness is pure without mixture, and lasting
without end? And is not this the aggravation of the sinners estate in Hell,
that it is sheere wrath without the least allay of mercy, with which they are
filled; and that it is abiding wrath, without the least hope of end, with which
they are tormented? There is not so much as a drop of water to a lake of fire,
not a moment of ease to an eternity of pain. All their short pleasures are
turned into sufferings that are eternity to the bottom; their mirth is changed
into endless sighings, their tabrets and shaumes into everlasting beatings,
and hammerings upon the anvils of their breasts, their shoutings into howlings,
and their clapping of hands into a perpetual gnashing of teeth. O that I might
therefore by a timely expostulation with sinners prevent that desolation that
else will certainly befall them! Why do you lay out your money for that which
is not bread? Why do you refuse the free tender of that mercy, which hereafter
at any rate you would gladly purchase? Is then a little ease worth a World? and
are now the comforts of God worth less then a few base lusts? Would you then
subscribe to the hardest conditions of duty and set vice that God could
propound, and say Yes Lord to every question? and will you now make a denial
to every woing? O consider this all ye that forget God, left he tear you in
pieces, and there be none to deliver you, Psalm 50. 22. O remember that your
life is not so long to day as it was yesterday, and that though the Sun times
measure did once stand still, yet time it self ever passed forward, and did
neither stand with the Suns standing, nor return with the Suns returning.

The last branch that should now be spoken unto, is the matter and manner of
this happiness which is both full and satisfactory: the matter of it is GODS
face or likeness, which is commonly termed by the School, faelicitas
objectiva, objective happiness: the manner of enjoying it, is by beholding the
face of God, which is by them also called faelicitas formalis, formal
happiness. Man's objective happiness lies wholly out of himself, and out of
every creature, and the more he fixes his happiness upon the object without
himself the more happy and excellent he is; for as the eye is perfected by
light without, so is the soul by God. But yet secondly, not God abstracted and
simply considered, is man's happiness; but God enjoyed and looked upon as God,
with whom he has perfect union and communion, is that which makes up man's
formal happiness. And this is that vision and fruition of God which David
faith when he awakes he shall be satisfied with. But I must of necessity wave
what I intended to speak of this point, having already exceeded (I fear) the
time, that should confine and terminate this Exercise.

It is I know expected, that I should speak somewhat concerning this worthy
Lady, the Lady Honor Viner, whose sad funerals we now celebrate; but it has
never been my custom on such occasions to add a long Panegyric to a Sermon,
the end of this meeting being rather to instruct and counsel the living, then
to commend the dead. Yet do I not with others think it wholly unlawful to give a
due testimony to the dead, in mentioning such things of their life and
conversation, as may be useful patterns to the living for their imitation. If
we look into the Ancients, we shall find them mingling the praises of their
friends with their sorrowful mournings over them. Thus Ambrose commends Saturus
his worth as well as deplores his loss, the same does Nazianzen for Gorgonia
his sister, Austin for Nebridius his friend, and Bernard for Gervasius. The
great miscarriage that has brought this way both under suspicion and censure,
has been the golden commendations that some have bestowed upon worthless
persons, as if they did make it their professed art to garnish Tombs and
Sepulchers, But though Tombs may receive an addition of beauty from colors
laid upon them, yet pearls do not, they shine best not by a borrowed but by
their native luster: And such an one is she of whom I am now speaking whose own
real endowments and qualifications will more commend her, then adscititious
and studied praises. I shall therefore give you a plain and genuine character
of what she was, which in brief is this.

She was one in whom many virtues did meet, which made her truly amiable. As a
wife she was a rich blessing to him to whom God had for many years given her;
She was both as Ezekiels wife, the desire of his eyes; and as Solomon's virtuous
woman, the repose of his heart, and did fully deserve that praise which is
given by him Prove. 31. 11. that the heart of her husband does safely trust in
her: so that he shall have no need of spoil. She so managed domestical
affairs, as that by her prudence his care was eased, and all meet supplies
fully furnished. As a mother she had most tender affections, which yet were
governed with wisdom and discretion; and unto others whose relation stood at a
further distance, she was (as I know themselves will always readily
acknowledge) a mother in love rather then a mother in law: such an one whom few
will be found to equal, much less to exceed. As a friend, she was affable,
and courteous, without haughtiness or pride, and real without guile. But as
the watering of the Diamond though it give a luster to it, does yet add little
or nothing to its value: so all moral perfections, though they set off and
beautify a Christian, yet not they, but true piety does give unto him a real
worth. What therefore she was in this, as well as in the other, you shall see
both by her way and practice.

In works of mercy she had an open hand, and a tender heart, but yet her
charity run with a still and silent stream: great and deep rivers that pay a
large tribute to the Sea, empty themselves oftimes into it in a more still
manner then the petty and shallow brooks; and so did she diffuse her bounty
with far less noise then many that give little and boast much. What she did in
this kind was not to get her self a name, but to do the poor good.

Of private duties she was a constant observer, making Religion the work of her
Closet, as well as of the Church. Grande est Christianum esse non videri: It is
a great thing (says Jerome) to be a Christian, not to seem one; and there is no
character that does better evidence the reality of profession in any, then a
conscientious performance of unseen and secret duties, especially in these
times in which Religion shoots forth into leaves rather then into fruit.

And as for her esteem both of the public Ordinances and the Dispensers of
them, the two contrary affections of sorrow and joy which of late had visible
stirrings in her, shall be the present testimony. She was to my knowledge much
affected with the sad breach that God had made upon this place, by taking from
it an able and faithful Pastor by the stroke of death; and was also not a
little sensible of the mercy of God in providing again so happily for it. And
for her affection to the Word, I shall now let pass her constant attendance on
it on the Lords day, and shall briefly add a passage that since my preaching
came to my knowledge from him that can best tell, and that is this: She
expressed herself to be very glad that he was purposed to case himself of
such burdens as had hitherto lain upon him in his calling, and to draw his
business into a narrower compass: For now (says she) I hope you and I shall
hear more Sermons, and frequent more Lectures then before. A speech it is,
which if some that have time and leisure would seriously think of, their life
would prove more useful, and their death more comfortable. But not many weeks
after she had thus spoken, and pleased herself with the hopes of enjoying such
happy opportunities, it pleased God to put a sudden period to her life, which
yet was no other then what that infirmity with which she conflicted had once
threatened, some of her friends feared, and her self expected; who sometimes
(...) leave them on the sudden. Such indeed was the blow, as that it took from
her the opportunities that others have in lingering sicknesses of expressing
themselves; but though they be wanting, yet Gods hand on her speaks to us, and
bids to keep our Lamps burning, and our garments girt about us, because we know
not at what hour our Lord will come.

FINIS.

