Imprimatur,

Guil. Needham, R. R. in Christo P. ac D. D. Wilhelmo Archiep. Cant. a Sacr.
Domest.
Ex Aed. Lamb. Febr. 21. 1688.
A SERMON Preached in the Cathedral and Metropolitical Church OF St. Peter in
York, January 30th 1688/9. AND Published at the request of the Auditors.

By WILLIAM STAINFORTH, Residentiary Canon of York.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's-head in St. Paul's
Churchyard, and Francis Hildyard, Bookseller in York, 1689.

II. CHRON. 35. 24. -- And all Judah and Jerusalem mourned for Josiah.
MOURNING supposes Grief, as being the proper effect and natural indication of
it; for though Grief is a secret and hidden passion, and inwardly seated in the
Mind, yet, as all other passions, when they are suffered to swell and grow up
to any considerable degree of strength, it affects our Bodies in such a
sensible manner, as renders it apparent and manifest to all, who look upon us:
For the Soul and the Body are so closely united together, and have such a
dependency and influence on each other, that their interests are inseparable,
and they mutually partake in each others impressions; so that whatever affects
the Mind in a troublesome manner, and sits heavy upon it, the Body falls under
the weight, and shares in the pressure and uneasiness of the burden; for the
grief of the mind contracts and oppresses the Heart, it checks the motion of
the Blood, retards and slackens its Circulations; it damps and clogs the vital
Spirits, relaxeth the Nerves, and enfeebleth the Animal faculties, and
prejudices and weakens them in their necessary operations. And from hence
proceed those sad Looks and dejected Countenances, those deep Sighs and heavy
Groans, those loud Complaints and effusion of Tears, which are properly called
Mourning, and which are so discernible in all persons, who are oppressed and
afflicted with any considerable degree of Grief and Trouble of mind.

So that Mourning signifying all the outward signs and sensible expressions of
Grief, it must suppose Grief, if it is not counter feit and dissembled, as the
inward and necessary cause of it.

And as Mourning supposes Grief, so Grief in some measure or other is the
natural and common portion of all mankind. Our state and condition in this
world does necessarily subject us unto it, and we can no more resist the
impressions than we can prevent the cause Job 5. 7.
of it. Job tells us, That man is born to trouble as the sparks sly upwards. By
which he means, that our Nature does as necessarily expose us to sufferings and
grief, as the nature of sparks does determine their motion upwards. We came
into the world with Tears in our Eyes, and we no sooner breath out we cry; and
those Infant-Tears and Ories are Ominous and Prophetic of our future
succeeding condition, and sadly presage, that our continuance in the world will
be like our entrance into it, and that we shall never want, in some respect or
other, cause of Grief and matter of Complaint. And indeed whoever considers the
frailty of our Nature, and the passiveness of our Tempers, the instability of
humane Affairs, and the uncertainty of all earthly Comforts, will find the
evidence of this great Truth too bright and convincing to suffer a
contradiction. But alas! I need not discourse on the Reason and Philosophy of
it to gain your assent to it, every man's personal experience is a sufficient
argument for this purpose, and there is no necessity of appealing to any thing
but that for a demonstrative proof and full conviction of it: For what man is
there upon Earth, who has not his infelicities as well as his sins, his
misfortunes as well as his guilts to wound and afflict his Soul? What man is
there whose Sun is always so bright and shining as never to be over-cast and
clouded? whose days are always so calm and serene as never to be ruffled and
discomposed with any rude storms and boisterous tempests? Alas! what mam is
there but frequently suffers in his private and personal interests, as he
stands considered by himself, and without relation to the public Community, of
which he is a member? Thus how often do we suffer in our Health, in our
Reputations, in our Estates, in our Friends and Relations? How often are we
crossed in our desires, and disappointed in our hopes, and frustrated in our
designs, and deprived of our choicest, and most valuable earthly Comforts? But
when an affliction becomes National and is as public and extensive as the
whole Kingdom, then every man must be a sufferer on that account, and partake
of the common Calamity, because every man makes a part of the Nation, on which
it is laid. And have not Kingdoms and public Societies of men, considered as
such, Afflictions and Distresses as well as private Persons? Are not those
equally with these obnoxious to Calamities, and liable to Losses? And is not
the death of good King such a public loss, such a common Calamity? And can
such a loss, such a Calamity happen, and not be regarded and considered? Or can
it be considered and reflected on, and not be resented with a quick and
passionate Grief, with a Grief as universal as the Loss, and with a Mourning
loudly indicative, and emphatically expressive of that Grief? This is
impossible to humane Nature, except where it is so far hardened by Folly, or
corrupted by Vice, as to become insensible of its most tender and concerning
Interests: For it is as natural to grieve for any Good which we lose, as it is
to rejoice in the use and possession of it, and our Joy and our Grief are in
both cases proportionable to the nature and importance of it. And as no earthly
Good is of greater advantage to us than a good King, because nothing is of such
public and universal influence to the whole Nation, so the Loss of such a King
cannot but be lamented and bewailed by all thinking and considering People,
with all the signs and expressions of an hearty Grief and affectionate Sorrow.
And so the whole Jewish Nation did, when good Josiah dyed, for my Text tells
us, That all Judah and Jerusalem mourned for Josiah.

In the discoursing on these words, I will,

1. Consider the general Reason which induces a People or Nation in common to
grieve and mourn for the death of a good King.

2. Consider how much the Jewish Nation were concerned in this general Reason
to grieve and mourn for the death of Josiah.

3. Consider what particular and additional Reason they had, besides the
general one, to grieve and mourn for his death.

4. Consider our own case in relation to the sad occasion of this day's
Assembly, and show you, that though the Jews had great and extraordinary reason
to mourn for Josiah, yet these Nations had not only as much but more reason,
nay, still have more reason to mourn and lament the death of our late Dread
Sovereign King CHARLES I. of ever Blessed Memory.

1. I will consider the general Reason which induces a People or Nation in
common to grieve and mourn for the death of a good King. Now all Grief
supposes the Loss of something which we esteemed and valued, and which some
way or other contributed to our delight or our advantage: For Grief is a
trouble and perturbation of Mind, which is raised and effected in us through
the sense and experience of such a loss; and therefore when we grieve and mourn
for the death of any Person, our Grief speaks the interest we had in his Life,
and the sufferings we feel by his Death. And as the very Make and Principles of
humane Nature, by a strong and powerful Bias, incline us to love and esteem
those who oblige us by their favors and kindnesses, who are useful and
beneficial to us, who are the happy instruments of the ease and comfort of our
lives; so the same Nature as strongly disposes us for Grief, when Death takes
such a dear Friend from us, and will not allow us to consider the loss which we
sustain by his departure, without a real and hearty concernment, without a
sensible and afflictive Sorrow.

And as our Natures urge and necessitate us to grieve on such a sad occasion,
so Religion allows it; for the Design of Religion is not to extinguish our
affections, but to rectify them; not to root out our passions, but to reclaim
and reduce them, to bring them into good order, to put them under the
discipline and conduct of right Reason, and to keep them within those bounds
and limits which were originally set and prescribed unto them. Religion allows
us to love the good things of this world, in proportion to their worth and
value, their convenience and usefulness, and in subordination to our love of
God and of the things above: And it allows us to grieve for the loss of what we
love, so long as our Grief exceeds not the causes of it, nor rises beyond the
merits of the things whose loss affect us with it; so long as it does not grow
up into Fret, and Vexation, and Impatience, nor sallies out into Murmurings and
Repinings, but keeps a just decorum, and due consistency, with our dutiful
submissions and humble resignations to the Will of Almighty God. Thus our
Blessed Savior himself, who had no passions but what were natural and
innocent, grieved John. 11. 35.
for the death of Lazarus, and expressed that Grief by shedding Tears, which
the Jews interpreted as an argument of the Love and Affection which we had for
him. And thus may we love our Friends and Relatives, and mourn for the death of
those we love, without any guilt or danger, without any disparagement to our
Reason, or any offense to God, if we do but take care to avoid the criminal and
intemperate Excesses of either.

And if our Nature constrains, and our Religion allows us to grieve for the
death of a private Friend, whose kindnesses perhaps went no farther than our
selves, or at most were extended but to a few besides, how much more then for
the death of a good King, whose Benefactions were as diffusive as his
Authority, and, like the benign influences of the Sun, ran through all the
parts of the Nation, visited all the corners of the Kingdom, and gave life, and
vigor, and spirit, to the whole Community: for a good King is the most public
and comprehensive Blessing imaginable, because such a King derives and secures
unto his People all the Blessings and Comforts which can proceed from a wife
and gentle, a just and merciful administration of Government: For it is
inconsistent with the notion and nature of a good King to govern arbitrarily,
as that signifies governing by mere Will, Humor, and Passion, for that is the
proper temper and character of a Tyrant, who abuses his just Authority to evil
purposes, and instead of protecting his Subjects, oppresses them; and instead
of ruling them prudently with all his Power, turns his Power into an instrument
of his rage and folly, and exercises it upon his People, not for their
preservation but destruction, and so makes his Government a Curse instead of a
Blessing.

No; a good King is acted by other principles, and proceeds by other measures,
and takes his aims and directions from other ends. He considers the ends for
which Government was instituted, and his Authority given him; and because both
were designed for the Peace, and Order, and Prosperity, of the whole Community,
therefore he never exercises his Authority but with respect to these public
ends, and in subserviency to them. As he has a tender and paternal care for his
People, so in all the expresses of his sovereign Power he consults and intends
their common interest and welfare; and instead of governing them with the
ungrateful roughness and severity of an imperious Lord, he rules them with the
endearing affections and compassions of an indulgent Father. And upon this
account good Kings are in Holy Scripture compared to the most useful and
beneficial Things and have Titles and Appellatives of Honor given them, which
are borrowed from those excellent Things. Thus they are called, The Healers of
Isai. 3. 7.
a Land, because by their wise and prudent administration of Government they
apply proper remedies to the diseases and distempers of it, and cure the wounds
and breaches which have been made in it: The Bars of it, because Lam. 2. 9.
by their watchfulness, and providence, and necessary preparations, they secure
it from being invaded and rifled by foreign force and violence: The Shields of
it, because by their Psalm. 47. 9.
power and strength they defend it from mischief, and protect it from violence:
The Foundations Psalm. 11. 3.
of it, because by their prudent care and conduct, and discreet management of
public affairs, they support the peace and prosperity of it, and preserve it
from sinking into confusion and falling into disorder by intestine Seditions
and Commotions. They are styled Sheepherds and Fathers, which import not only
their power and dominion over their People, but also their watchful care and
tender affections for them: Nay, as if every thing upon Earth were too scanty
and little to make up a just Comparison, and to set forth the mighty usefulness
and excellency of their Persons, they are styled Gods, which would have been
accounted a piece of Court-blasphemy, if we had not had the Authority of Holy
Scripture to warrant the use of it. And indeed a good King may in some sort be
justly reckoned an earthly God, because he represents the heavenly One, not
only in his Majesty and Power, but also in his Love and Goodness, and in those
invaluable blessings and benefits which he procures for and conveys to his
People: And therefore no wonder that such a King is dear to his Subjects and
gains such an interest in their affections, and extends his Empire to their
very Souls, which no earthly force can reach, no humane power can subdue, and
makes him reign over their minds as well as their bodies, and establishes his
Throne in their hearts, which is a more sure and lasting establishment than his
Sword can give him.

And then it is as little wonder, That when such a King dies, the whole Nation
is struck with Grief, and invaded with Sorrow, and bewails the said Accident
with all the mournful Expressions imaginable; for the Love which they had for
his Person, and the benefits which they enjoyed under his Government, and the
frightfull apprehensions which they may entertain on such a dreadful change,
are so many powerful causes to produce an universal Grief in their Minds, and
to crowd their Eyes with Tears, and to fill their Mouths with doleful
Complaints and Lamentations; for all such changes are dangerous, and full of
hazard; and though they do not always prove fatal and mischievous to the
Government, yet there is always reason to suspect that they may; for where
there is no cause to hope that things can grow better, there is always cause to
fear that they may grow worse: And therefore whenever a good King dies, Fear
and Love combine and unite, to afflict all his Subjects with a pungent and
hearty Grief, and People of all Nations and all Religions have felt and
experienced this troublesome Passion on such a moving and affecting Occasion,
and have owned and published it by solemn and ceremonious Mournings; and so in
particular, All Judah and Jerusalem mourned for Josiah: which brings me to the

II. Which is to consider how much the Jewish Nation were concerned in this
general Reason, to grieve and mourn for the death of Josiah.

The general Reason which induces any People to mourn for the death of a good
King is (as I have shown you) the consideration of those various Blessings and
manifold Benefits which they reaped and enjoyed under the Exercise of his
Sovereign Power and Administration of his Government: For these Blessings are
so near and concerning, and do so sensibly touch us, that we cannot consider
the death of the happy instrument of them without being affected with a real
and hearty Grief for the Loss of him. Now that Josiah was such a King, and such
an Instrument, will appear, if we consider that He was endu'd with all those
natural, spiritual, and moral Excellencies and Perfections which are necessary
to make up and complete the just character of a good King, and to render him
the greatest Blessing to his People. For,

1. Josiah was a King of an excellent Understanding and Wisdom, which in
others is the fruit of long experience and much observation; the acquist of
study and industry seemed to be innate to him, and born with him: For he gave
early proofs of a Wisdom so extraordinary, as no less distinguished him from
his Subjects, and set him above them, than the Dignity of his regal Office and
the Eminency of his supreme Power. For as he began to reign when he was but
eight years old, so within eight years after he entered upon his Government; the
Wisdom, which was so peculiar to himself, brake out in a most conspicuous
manner, and the first Essays of it appeared in that which is both the
indication and beginning of true Wisdom; for the Scripture tells us, That in
the eighth year of his reign, while 2 Chronicles. 34. 3.
he was yet young, he began to seek after the God of David his father:
Afterward he proceeded to consider the Actions of his Predecessors, and
according to the dictates of his own Wisdom, and the counsels of the Elders,
(which, as Josephus observes, he always took along with him,) he rectified
their errors and mistakes with as much exactness and circumspection as if he
had been an old man, and promoted and imitated what he found established by
them with good advice, and settled upon just and weighty reasons.

2. He was a King of extraordinary Piety: For his Soul was filled with a just
and powerful sense of God, which discovered it self in suitable Acts of
Holiness and correspondent Practices of Religion and Goodness throughout his
whole Conversation. He had a mighty and active Zeal for the Glory of God, and
could not endure that his Honor should be given to another, or that he should
have any Corrivals and Competitours in his Worship; for he purged the Land from
Idolatry by demolishing the Altars of Baal, and destroying the Groves, which
were the places of their Idolatrous Worship, and breaking their carved Images,
which were the Objects of it, and putting to death their Priests, who were the
Instruments and Ministers of it, and reducing the misled People to a just
sense of their duty and service which they owed to the only true God, the God
of Israel. He repaired the decays and ruins of the Temple of the Lord at
Jerusalem with extraordinary diligence and dispatch, and adorned it not only
with material Ornaments, but with the spiritual Beauty of Holiness, by
restoring the public Worship of the true God to its ancient Glory and Purity.

Nor can we doubt, but that the whole course of his Life was uniform, and in
all the parts of it consistent with his ardent and flaming Zeal for God's
Worship; That it was entirely governed by the same holy Principles, and
directed by the same holy Rules, and was in all respects a bright and
illustrious Example of sincere Piety and true Religion; especially if we
consider the glorious character which the Holy Ghost gives us of him in the
Scriptures, for there we are told, That he did that 2 Kings 22. 2.
which was right in the fight of the Lord, and walked in all the ways of David
his father, and turned not aside to the right hand or the left.

3. He was a King of strict and impartial Justice; for he governed his People
by just and equal measures, such measures as were the legal standards of Right
and Wrong, and were essential and fundamental to that National Constitution:
For though God instituted the Jewish Monarchy, and set Kings over them, and
vested their Kings with a Supremacy of Power, yet he did not leave the Exercise
of this Power to the boundless and mischievous Liberty of their own Wills, but
prescribed them certain Rules, which they were inviolably to observe, both in
the Decision of Controversies concerning Civil Right and Property, and in the
management and determination of Criminal Causes. And these Rules are known by
the Name of the Judicial Law of the Jews, in contradistinction both to the
Moral Law, which respected things of eternal and universal Obligation, and to
the Ceremonial Law, which related to the positive and instituted Worship of
God. And the Jewish Kings had no Authority to dispense with or abrogate this
judicial Law, either in whole, or in part, but were bound by the Command of God
to conform themselves unto it as the standing and unalterable rule of their
Government: And therefore when the King came to his Throne, and entered upon
his Government, He was commanded to write a Copy Deuteronomy. 17. 18, 19, 20.
of the Law with his own hand, and to read in it all his days, that he might
learn to fear the Lord his God, and to keep all the words of this Law, and
these Statutes to do them.

Now Josiah, out of a just regard to the Authority of God, and a tender respect
to the Welfare of his People, contains himself in the exercise of his Sovereign
Power within those bounds which God had set him, and administers his Government
according to those Laws which God appointed to be the constant 2 Kings 23. 25.
and fixed rules of it; for so we are told, that like unto him was there no
King before him, that turned unto the Lord with all his heart, and with all his
soul, and with all his might, according to all the Law of Moses, neither after
him arose there any like him.

Where by all the Law of Moses must be meant the judicial as well as the moral
and ceremonial Laws, and consequently this noble Character of Josiah must imply
his exact and punctual Observance of that in matters civil and political, as
well as his strict Conformity to the other in things of a moral and ceremonial
nature.

And what greater Blessing could a Nation enjoy, or wish for, than such a King,
who was so admirably qualified and fitted for Government, and who in his
Government kept punctually to the legal constitution of it, and inviolably
observed all the public Rules which either related to the Worship of God, and
the duties of Religion, or to the civil Rights and Properties of the People?
And therefore the Death of such a King could not be reckoned any otherwise than
a public Loss, nor could the Notice of it be received by any thinking person
without such a passionate and affective Grief, as was suitable to the nature
and moment of the Consequences which depended on it. And accordingly when good
Josiah dyed, the whole Nation was ready to dye with Grief too, ready to faint
and sink under the sense of their Loss, and the weight of their Affliction; for
as their Loss was extraordinary, so their Grief was so excessive, and so much
beyond the ordinary rate of Mourners, that it became proverbial, and the
Prophet Zachary could not find a more proper instance of Grief to represent the
greatness of that Mourning which the Children of the Bride-chamber would
express, when Christ their Bridegroom should be taken from them, than this,
wherewith the Death of Josiah was lamented; for thus he describes it, It shall
be like the mourning of Hadadrimmon in the Valley of Megiddo. And indeed all
Judah and Jerusalem had extraordinary reason to mourn at that extraordinary
rate for Josiah, not only because he dyed, but because he dyed in that
surprising and astonishing manner. Which brings me to consider,

III. What peculiar and additional Reason they had, besides the general one, to
grieve and mourn for the Death of Josiah. If good Josiah had dyed according to
the ordinary course of Nature, and gone to his Sepulcher, and been gathered to
his Fathers, as a shock of corn fully ripened, and in its proper Season, as
Eliphaz elegantly compares it; though his Job 5. 26.
death, even under such circumstances, had been a loss, and an infelicity, yet
the consideration that he had lived so long, and as long as the forces of
humane Nature could hold out, might have been a just abatement of their grief,
and disposed them to have born the Calamity with less Trouble, and more temper
of Mind. But alas! the case was quite otherwise; for he not only dyed in the
prime of his Age, in his full strength and vigor, but he dyed too by the hands
of Violence; for he was slain in the day of Battle, as he was endeavoring to
oppose the King of Egypt, and to stop his march toward the river Euphrates:
For an unlucky Egyptian drew his mischievous Bow, and shot a fatal Arrow, which
gave him his mortal wound, and soon put an end to his Life, and to all the joys
and delights of his people; for they could not bear the death, the untimely and
violent Death, of such an excellent King, without being extremely concerned at
it, and almost overwhelmed with a deluge of grief and sorrow for it. And indeed
the manner of his death was a just occasion for so great a grief, because it
was so plain an indication of God's displeasure against them, and so clear a
Prognostic of Calamities and Miseries which would follow upon it. For though
Kings must dye like other men, and though there seems nothing extraordinary in
the untimely and violent death of a good King, when we consider only, that
they are made up of the same frail perishing materials with our selves, and,
with the rest of mortal men, are equally susceptive of the fatal impressions of
a destructive Violence; yet when we consider farther, that the Providence of
God does in an especial manner superintend and watch over good men, and in a
more particular manner over good Kings, then we cannot reflect on the untimely
and violent death of a Wise, Holy, and Just King, without being convinced that
Heaven is highly offended, and has a dreadful controversy with the Nation,
and has removed this great instrument of its Blessing out of the way, that so
its wrath may break in with greater liberty, and fall down upon it with all the
dispatch and execution imaginable. And the Jews had a more than ordinary reason
to make such a judgment on the untimely and violent death of their good King
Josiah, and to interpret God's permission of it, as the effect of his sore
wrath, and heavy displeasure, which he now seemed resolved to pour down upon
them in such National Calamities and Miseries as should bear proportion to
their own and their Ancestors provocations. For they had been assured by
Huldah, the Prophetess, that the Idolatries and Impieties of their Forefathers
had kindled and blown up the wrath of God against them to such a degree, that
it should not be quenched, but should flame out upon them in Judgments as
signal as their Crimes, and as extraordinary as their Offenses which deserved
it: But notwithstanding, for the sake of Josiah, whose heart was tender, and
who 2. King. 22.
humbled himself before the Lord, God would defer the Execution of his wrath,
and not bring it upon them in his days. And therefore, as the Jews were
warranted by this Prophecy to esteem the life of their King as the surest
preservative of their own, and to look upon his Person as an happy Skrene,
which interposed between them and the dismal terrors of God's justice, and
kept off his destroying hand from seizing and laying hold on their guilty
Nation, so they had reason to conclude from the manner of his death, that God
was quite wearied out with their provocations, That his Patience and
Long-suffering were utterly exhausted, and that he was now sending down upon
them all those tremendous judgments, which their Prophets had so clearly
foretold, and their sins so loudly called for. And all men must own this to
have been a reasonable inference, gathered from the manner of his death, which
carried in it such evident marks of God's fierce Anger and Displeasure against
them. And must not their grief then have been as reasonable as the inference?
For if they had any sense of their public loss, and of the fatal Consequences
which attended it, how was it possible for them to have stood unconcerned, or
to have grieved less than they did, under so awakening and astonishing a
Providence? No wonder then, that when Josiah dyed an universal Grief ran
through his Kingdom, and all his Subjects expressed their grief in such
extraordinary Mourning, as became as remarkable for its Greatness as the sad
Loss that occasioned it. But though the Jews had great and extraordinary reason
to mourn for Josiah, yet I will,

IV. Show you, That these Nations had not only as much, but more reason; nay,
still have more reason to mourn and lament the Death of our late dread
Sovereign King CHARLES the First, of ever blessed Memory. And,

1. What was there great and eminent, of public Use, and universal Benefit, in
the Person, Life, and Government of King Josiah, which may not with equal Truth
and Justice in all those respects be ascribed to the Royal Martyr of this day?
For,

1. As for his Understanding, it was of a Royal size, and Princely dimensions,
and of such a vast Capacity and Comprehension, as showed him sitted for Empire
and Government, as he was born to it. There are none can doubt of this, who
have with any care and impartiality perused the Book which he composed and
wrote in the state of his Sufferings; a Book which is a Lively Image of his
Royal Mind, a Perfect Transcript of his Great Soul; a Book which contains in it
not only such Exuberancy, such Compass, such Variety of delightful Fancy, nor
only such Majesty of Style, such Elegance of Phrase, such Propriety of
Language, but also such Strength of Thought, such Depth of Judgment, such Reach
of Apprehension, as uncontrollably proclaims him to have been a great Man in
the modern sense of the Phrase, as that signifies a Man of great Understanding.

2. As for his Life; What was that but a visible draught of practical
Christianity, a bright and illustrious example of universal Holiness? for, How
did all Christian Graces and Virtues adorn his Royal Conversation? How did the
Power and Spirit of true Christianity appear and manifest it self throughout
the whole Course and Tenor of his Actions, notwithstanding all the softening
Charms, and fascinating Temptations of a Court, with which he was surrounded?
Nor was he only an eminent Example of those Graces and Virtues which are
proper to a flourishing and prosperous Condition, but also of those which
belong to a passive and suffering State. His Chastity and Temperance, his Mercy
and Justice, His Humility and Charity, were not more remarkable in him in the
time of his Prosperity, than his Meekness and Contentedness, his Patience and
Submission to the Will of God in the days of his Affliction: So that if that
pernicious Maxim had been true, That Dominion is founded in Grace, and
Saintship gives Title to the power of Government, He would have had as clear
and unquestionable a right to his own Crown and Scepter on account of his
Christian Graces and Virtues, as he had on the account of his natural and legal
Inheritance.

3. As for his Government, it was mild and gentle, just and legal, agreeable to
the public Laws and fundamental Constitutions of this Nation. As he was always
inclinable to pardon injuries, so he was always careful to do none; For who
was ever oppressed by his Power or injured by his Authority? Whose liberties
did he invade, or whose rights did he usurp? Whose Ox or, whose Ass did he
take? Or who ever could truly complain of any wrong which he did them?

Indeed there were one or two Passages in his administration which make a loud
Outcry in the Nation, and were improved to the most malicious and destructive
purposes against him. But whatever Causes or Counsels misled him into those
Errors and Mistakes, it is plain that they did not proceed from any design
which he had of overturning the legal Establishment, and setting up an
arbitrary Power in the room of it, as his malicious and implacable Enemies
falsely accused him: For never any Prince could be more liberal in his
Concessions, and indulgent in his Grants, than he was, to allay the jealousies,
and remove the fears of his People. For to assure them that he desired no more
power than the Laws allowed him, he was content to enjoy less; and parted with
some of his own legal Rights to convince his Subjects that he had no intention
to usurp upon theirs, and divest himself of such essential and fundamental
Prerogatives of his Crown as did in some measure Unking him, that so he might
let them see how far he was from any thoughts of governing as a Tyrant.

Now how happy might these Nations have been under the indulgent Government of
such a Prince, if they had but understood their own happiness, and would but
have been contented to have enjoyed it, as their duty, and their interest
obliged them? But as it is not in the power of the wisest and best of Kings to
make their Subjects happy against their own wills, so if Subjects will be
querulous and murmuring under Peace and Plenty, if they will be unaccountably
fearful and unreasonably jealous, and fancy Hobgoblins and Bugbears ready to
seize and devour, when there appears nothing but their Guardian-angel to defend
and protect them: If they will be seditious and turbulent under the best of
Governments, and the best of Kings, their Follies are both their Sins and their
Punishments, and as they stand accountable to God and Man for their Guilts, so
they may thank themselves for the mischievous Consequences of them. But though
our contemptuous thoughts of a Blessing, and ungrateful behavior under it,
may keep us from reaping the happy and comfortable effect of it; yet they
cannot change the Nature, nor lessen the Worth of it; but the Enjoyment of it
will be a Happiness, and the Deprivation of it a Loss, notwithstanding our
mistaken opinions, and scornful neglect, or despightfull treatment of it. And
therefore though many rejoiced at the death of our Royal Martyr, and others
were stupidly unconcerned at it, yet all wise and good Men considered it as it
really was, a Public Loss, and resented it as a general Calamity, and were
affected with a pungent Grief, and expressed a passionate Sorrow for it: And
they had extraordinary reason for so doing, as will farther appear if,

2. We consider the Manner of his Death; for his Death was neither in the
common course of Nature, nor according to the ordinary periods of it, but it
was violent and untimely; for he fell by the hands of cruel and bloudy-minded
Men, and was ravished from us, when in all appearance he might have lived to a
far longer date, to have been the blessed instrument of much Glory and much
Happiness to these Kingdoms: For by the healthfulness of his Constitution, and
the soundness of his Vitals, he seemed to have been designed for a long Life,
and in all probability his Moderation, and Temperance, and Sobriety, which he
practiced on all occasions, might have lengthned his days very nigh these of
ours, if not to them. But he was too great a Blessing for such an ungrateful
and sinful People to enjoy any longer; and therefore God suffers him to fall
into the bloody hands of his implacable Enemies, and to be cut off by them;
that so the Nation might be involved in those Confusions, and groan under those
Miseries, which the provoking guilts and impieties of it so abundantly
deserved. And all Men had great reason to apprehend beforehand those dismal
Evils which soon followed his Death, when they considered the Manner and
Circumstances of it: For that God should suffer so Holy a King to be so
inhumanely treated, and so barbarously murdered, could proceed from nothing
but his hot-burning Wrath against the Nation, and his immovable purpose to
pour down his heavy Judgments upon it. And the Event sadly demonstrated the
reasonableness of such pre-apprehensions; for when he suffered, our Religion
and our Laws suffered with him, and the Government both in Church and State
expired and dyed in the very same moment with him: For then our Holy Religion
was banished from our Churches, and the Ministers of it driven into Corners, or
forced into Prisons, and the Abomination of desolation stood in our Holy
Places: Then Hypocrisy pulled off its Mask, and Atheism appeared barefaced,
and Profaneness grew impudent, and Sacrilege laid its devouring hands on all
holy Things: then innumerable Swarms of new and unheard of Sects sprang and
grew up among us, and walked abroad in their uncouth Forms and monstrous
Shapes: Then Popery prevailed, and increased, and seduced many weak and
unstable Souls, and gained more Proselytes in those dark times of trouble and
confusion, (as some have made the computation,) than in all the peaceful Reign
of King CHARLES the second. So that Cardinal Richilieu seems to have had some
grounds for that Maxim of his, viz. Till the Monarchy of England was changed
into a Commonwealth, there was little reason to hope for the return of Popery:
Then our Laws were either laid aside, or turned against themselves, expounded
and interpreted to their own ruin, and the destruction of those who adhered to
them, and so were executed in no other sense, than in that in which their Royal
Fountain and Guardian was executed, that is, by being destroyed. Thus you see
how the manner of our King's death was an Index of God's fierce displeasure,
and a Prologue to Tragical Miseries, which immediately succeeded it, and what
great reason the Nation had upon that account to grieve and mourn for him.

But this is not all, but there is something more of a fadder Consideration
still behind, and which extremely differenceth our Case from that of the Jews
concerning the death of that good King Josiah, and shows that these Nations not
only had but still have more reason to grieve and mourn for the violent and
untimely death of that blessed Martyr, and glorious Saint, King CHARLES the
First, of ever Blessed Memory; and this will appear if,

3. We consider the Instruments by which this bloody and untimely death was
effected and brought to pass: For it was not an Assyrian or an Egyptian, not a
Stranger or Foreigner, which slew him, but his own native Subjects, who by all
the Laws of God and Man, by all the Ties of Oaths, and Engagements of Promises,
by all the Obligations of Gratitude and Interest, were bound to preserve and
protect his Royal Person against all attempts of Violence whatsoever. And if
the Jews mourned so heavily for Josiah, who dyed by the chance of War, and by
the hands of an Alien from the Commonwealth of Israel, how much more ought we
to mourn for our Gracious Sovereign, who was put to death as a Criminal and
Malefactor in his own Kingdom, and in the great and famous Metropolis of that
Kingdom, and before the Gates of his own Royal Palace in that Metropolis, and
by the hands of his own natural Subjects? This was a prodigious Wickedness, a
Complicated Villainy, an Unprecedented Excess of Unrelenting and Impudent
Barbarity: It was Murder and Treason too, and both of them heightened to the
utmost degree of Aggravation, by being dressed up in the forms and methods of
public Justice. And if all Murder is a crying Sin, which importunes the
Justice, and wearies the Ears of the Almighty, until it be avenged, how
clamarous must the blood of innocent Majesty be? and how great must those
Judgments be which must silence its loud Cries, and atone the Wrath which is
due for it? And can this Nation then sit down under the sense and remembrance
of this sad and deplorable Evil, without being touched and affected with it,
without being humbled and grieved for it, without accompanying their Grief and
Humiliations with a sincere and hearty repentance for the Guilt of this day's
Wickedness, as well as of all other their Offenses? For the Guilt of this
Murder was as National as the Loss which was sustained by it, and all the
People of this Kingdom were accessory to it, either as the Instruments, or the
occasions of it; some by their actual putting him to death, and imbruing their
wicked hands, in his Innocent blood; some by their unnatural Rebellion and
Treasonable Fighting against him; some by their cowardly Neutrality, and
treacherous Unconcernedness; and all by their personal Sins and Vices, which
inflamed the Wrath of God, and contributed to the general Provocation.

And let us not vainly imagine that we are no way concerned for this great
Evil, no way obliged to be grieved and humbled for it, because it was committed
Forty years ago, when most of us were not born, and most of of us, who were
then born, not capable of knowing good from evil; for it being a National Sin,
a National Judgment is due for it: And because this World is the proper Season
for inflicting such Judgments, we have reason to dread, that God will bring
upon us the Judgment which is due for this Sin (if he has not already brought
it) with all the Circumstances of Terror, and Severity of Execution, except we
endeavor to avert it with sincere Humiliations and unfeigned Repentances.

Remember that it was not till Forty years after the death of our Blessed
Savior, that God visited the Jewish Nation; for the guilt of shedding his
Innocent blood, and it is very probable that very few of those, who either
petitioned for his Crucifixion, or apprehended and Murdered him, were living
at that time: And yet when God, after so long forbearance, visited that Nation
for that Sin, neither Age, nor Sex, nor Rank or Quality were spared, but all
were involved in the same common Fate, and felt the severe effects of the
Public Calamity.

Its true indeed, God provided an opportunity for the Christians to escape, and
to fly beyond the reach of the public Judgment; but that we may not presume on
impunity, from the Example of their deliverance, we must know, that they were
Christians not only in Name and Profession, but in Life and Practice, and
their Graces and Virtues, were as singular and extraordinary as their
Preservation: And therefore consider it is now just Forty years since the
horrid Fact was committed, which we either do, or should commemorate this day
with Fasting and Humiliation, and Penitential Sorrows. And consider farther,
that the public Affairs of this unsettled Kingdom, seem now to be brought to a
Crisis, and to move on the point of Life and Death, of Happiness and Misery.
How things will go, and what will be the issue and event of them, God only
knows; but I am sure there is no such certain and effectual way to make them go
well, and succeed to our preservation and happiness, as to humble our selves
under the hand of God, to lament and bewail all our Sins, both Personal and
National, Private and Public; and particularly the Sin of this day, which was
such a scandal to the Protestant Religion, such an Infamy to the English
Nation, and such an offense to Almighty God: And therefore with contrite
Hearts, and devout Minds, let us pray to God, that he would deliver us from
Bloud-guiltiness, and particularly from the guilt of that Royal Blood which we
now bewail and mourn for, that so it may not be charged upon us or our
Posterity. And to our devout Prayers, let us add Works of Mercy and Charity,
which are Sacrifices well-pleasing to God; and throughout the whole course of
our Lives, let us keep innocence, and do that which is right, and upon all
occasions be followers of that which is good; and then we may hope that God,
for the sake of Christ, will pardon and forgive us all our offenses, receive us
into his favor and protection, own us for his People in this World, and
receive us into his Glory in that to come; which God grant for Christ Jesus's
sake; To whom, with the Father and Holy Spirit, be ascribed all Might, Majesty,
Dominion, Praise, and Thanksgiving, now and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

