The Happiness of Good Men after Death.

A SERMON AT THE FUNERAL OF Mr. Robert Castle, Late of Deptford in Kent.
Preached in the Parish Church of Deptford, August the 19th. School.

Published at the Request of the Relations and Executors of the Deceased:

By GEORGE STANHOPE, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty.

LONDON: Printed for R. Sare at Grays-Inn-gate in Holborn, 1699.

Rev. xiv. V. 13. I heard a Voice from Heaven saying unto me, Write; Blessed
are the Dead which dye in the Lord from henceforth. Yea, says the Spirit, that
they may rest from their Labors, and their Works do follow them.


THat the Importance of these words is very great, we need no other Argument to
convince us, than the solemn manner in which they are delivered to the Apostle.
Such is the express Command, that they should be carefully preserved by
writing, I heard a Voice from He^ven saying unto me, Write; Blessed are the
dead which dye in the Lord from henceforth. To which is added yet farther the
Testimony of the Holy Ghost, confirming the Truth of what that Voice had
dictated, and declaring particularly, wherein the Blessedness of such persons
consists, Yea, says the Spirit, that they may rest from their Labors, and
their Works do follow them. These forms are such Preparations, as always speak
the matter ushered in by them to be of mighty Consequence; And are intended to
awaken our Minds more powerfully, and to recommend it to our best and most
attentive Consideration.

The immediate Occasion and Design of the Passage now before us, was plainly to
fortify the Christians against some very violent Persecutions, which St. John
had a certain foresight given him of, and describes accordingly by very
terrible Circumstances. Infomuch, that he pronounces it here a very great
Happiness, to be taken out of the World, before those Calamitous and Trying
times should come, which might endanger the shaking the most resolute Faith and
Patience, even of the best Men. Or (as some other Interpreters think) he
describes the Blessedness of those faithful Professors of Christianity, whom
the Grace of God should enable to persevere unto the end, and to suffer
Martyrdom for the Doctrines of his Gospel. Those persons being sometimes said,
with a peculiar Emphasis, to dye in the Lord, who suffer in his Cause, and lay
down their Lives for his sake.

But there is no necessity, nor indeed any sufficient Reason, for confining
this Expression to those times of Primitive Perfecution only, or to the Martyrs
who suffered in them. For, as every sincere good Man, who heartily embraces the
Faith of Christ, and whose Conversation is such as becomes that Faith, is said
in Scripture to 2 Cor. v. 15.
live unto the Lord; so every one who continues in that Belief and Obedience to
the End of his Days, is very truly and properly said, when God takes him out of
the World, to 1 These. iv. 14.
sleep in Jesus, and to dye in the Lord.

And thus, it is manifest, not our Own only, but the Christian Church in
general, has constantly understood the Text, by making it in many ancient
Liturgies a part of the Burial Service: And so declaring the Blessedness here
to belong to every deceased Person, who lives and dies a worthy Member of her
Communion.

Having therefore so good Authority to bear me out, I shall make no difficulty
to treat of my Text, in this larger and more popular Sense; and so to apply it
to the occasion of our present meeting, that we may gather from hence those
useful and comfortable Reflections, which may minister to us a Reasonable Hope
of our Departed Brother's Happiness, and a joyful Expectation of our Own.

In order hereunto, I shall, so far as the time will give me leave, do these
three things. I. First, I shall endeavor to represent to you the Happy State
of Good Men after Death, as the Words have here described it to us. II.
Secondly, I shall, from this Doctrine so established, draw some few Inferences,
which may be of use to us, both for the Conduct of our Lives in general, and
more particularly seasonable upon these Melancholy Occasions. III. And then in
the Third and last Place, I shall apply the Substance of my two former heads
yet more closely, to the Circumstances of the Person, whose mortal part now
lies before us.


1. First, I shall endeavor to represent to you the happy State of Good Men
after Death, as the Words have here described it to us. And I may well say I
shall endeavor only, that which it is not possible for me worthily to effect.
For Who indeed can represent it justly? What Tongue of Men or Angels can find
expressions strong and significant enough? What Images are so bright, so
glorious? What finite Understandings of a Capacity so large, that they should
contain adequate Ideas of that Bliss, to which nothing we are acquainted with
in this Life is equal, nothing like, nothing in any degree comparable? That
Bliss, which would lose a great part of its Perfection, if Sense and feeble
Reason could fully comprehend it; and whose peculiar Excellence (we are told)
it is, that 1 Cor. ii. 9.
Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, neither has it entered into the Heart of Man
to conceive, the things which God has prepared for them that love him. The
utmost therefore which you must expect in this case is only to have it drawn in
little; In such proportions as frail Men are capable of; by Resemblances taken
from things familiar to us; by setting it in opposition to the Miseries we are
at present exposed to; and by such Other Considerations, as are of Value and
Weight with us, in the Affairs and Transactions of humane Life. This is the
Method, which the Holy Spirit has made use of here: And the Arguments, by
which he raises our esteem of that Blessedness pronounced from Heaven upon the
Dead which dye in the Lord, seem to be these Three.

1. First. The Troubles such Men are delivered from. They rest from their
Labors.

2. Secondly. The good Acceptance and great Reward, which they shall after
Death receive, for what they have done well during the present Life. Their
Works do follow them.

3. Thirdly. The Time when they enter upon this Happiness, intimated in that
Term fixed here, Blessed are the Dead which dye in the Lord from henceforth.

1. First. They who dye in the Lord are Blessed in regard of the Troubles they
are delivered from, They rest from their Labors. I will not, I need not, upon
this occasion undertake to show, how sore and manifold these Labors are. For
This is an Argument that comes home to the Sense and Experience of every one of
us. All that hear me are able to go before me in the Reflection, how thick we
are beset with Troubles and Afflictions on every Side, in our Bodies and our
Souls, in our public and our private Capacities. The Vanities of Youth, and
the Infirmities of Age: The Difficulties of Supporting these Bodies, and the
perpetual Wants and Weaknesses to which they are Subject; The lingering and the
acute Distempers, the sensible decays, and the more sensible Pains, that waste
and tear and torment them. The Miseries of an unhappy Temper, and Overflowings
of a black heavy blood, which intercept all light and comfort, and condemn the
Soul to the dark dismal prison of a melancholy Constitution; The Violence of
Passions from within, and the vast Variety of Accidents from without, which are
continually provoking us to Grief, or Anger, or some other disorderly excesses:
These are personal and of a piece with us.

The Losses in our Estates, the surprising Disappointments in our Expectations
and Designs; The hurry of Business, the Strife and Contention our Affairs
engage us in; The Travel of the Poor, and the Cares of the Rich; The Anguish of
our Afflicted, and the Uncertainty of our most Prosperous Condition; The
Treachery of pretending Friends, and the Spite of professed Enemies; The
Snares of Conversation, the Vanity and extreme danger even of those Diversions
and Pleasures, by which we labor to lighten this load of Life, and gain some
Intervals of Ease at least, by forgetting for a little while our Cares and
Calamities: These, and a thousand Difficulties more, are inseparable
encumbrances of Mortality, to every one, considered Singly, and apart from his
Relations and Engagements in Society.

But as those Capacities increase, our Sorrows and Labors increase with them.
The Care of Families, and kind Concern for those whom Nature has made a Part
of our selves; The Fears and anxious Thoughts for their Safety, the
Fellowfeeling of their Sufferings; The restless Endeavors to help them in
their Distresses, and the cutting regret we endure, when we would assist them
but cannot, or when they will not suffer us to do them the Good we could; And
(to name no more, that Calamity which all of you at this time are very deeply
affected with) the having those Friends taken from us, whom Nature, or
Kindness, or their own Worth, have rendered very dear and necessary. The
tearing, as it were, our very hearts asunder, by cutting off that tenderest
part of them, whom God and Affection had incorporated and made one with us;
These are Trials, which we have so quick and piercing a Sense of, that it is
much less difficult to lament and complain as they deserve, than to temper our
Resentments, and keep them within the Bounds of Duty, and Decency, and
Christian Moderation.

It were easy to give you a yet more moving Spectacle, by opening the Prospect
a little wider; and urging the Uneasiness we feel from the Distresses of the
Needy, the Injuries of the Oppressed, the Cries of Helpless Widows and Orphans;
the Corruptions, or the Calamitous Circumstances of the State, or the Church,
whereof we are Members; All which affect us more sensibly, in proportion as we
are better-natured Men, that is, better Christians. But That, which is to such
the most afflicting Consideration of all is, that these things do not only
create a present Uneasiness, but may likewise, if not very carefully managed,
lay the foundation of Eternal Misery. That they are the Temptations and
Instruments of Sin, such as the Frailty of humane Nature is but too apt, alas!
to be overborn by; Such as are often successful even against the most Watchful
and Resolute; And therefore, of all other Labors in this fight of Afflictions,
the Wise and Good Man esteems those the heaviest, which hazard the Salvation of
his Soul; And no Consideration renders a Deliverance from the Sufferings of
Life, half so desirable, as that mentioned by St. Romans vi. 7.
Paul; that He that is dead is freed from Sin.

These are all of them such Labors, as the Condition we now live in naturally
exposes every Man to; And the very Severest of them such, as the Providence of
God has not thought fit to exempt the holiest and best beloved of his Servants
from. They, like their Captain, are made perfect through Hardships and
Sufferings. These are their Spiritual Warfare, the Exercises of their Virtue,
the Proofs of their Patience and Fidelity, and constant Love to Him. And God is
not much concerned to be very exact in the measures of Good and Evil in this
Life, because this Life is not the Season of final Retribution: But he has
appointed another, wherein he knows how to make Good Men ample amends for all
they do and suffer for him here. The Benefits we are to expect at present, are
the Wisdom and Kindness of his Providence to turn every Affliction to our good,
the powerful Assistances of his Grace to support us under our Conflicts, and
the merciful Execution of that Decree, which, after we have toiled and suffered
a while, may translate us to a State of Rest and Peace; may render that Death,
which to mere Nature is so ghastly and formidable, a Blessing and Privilege, for
such in truth it is in the Eye of Faith, and to those who dye in the Lord.

For ought not this to be a very Supporting Consideration, in the midst of
difficulties and troubles, that, though these hemm us round, and thrust sore at
us now, yet there is a day coming in which we shall make our escape from them
all? That God will hide us in the Grave, and set us on that Shore, where we
shall, full of Security, look back upon this tempestuous World, and have no
part of the Storms that tossed us here, but only the Remembrance of them, left. A
Remembrance so much more joyful, as the Miseries we call to mind were formerly
more grievous: But especially, Is it not a mighty Comfort, to think we shall
shortly put off this load of Infirmities; that we shall be perfectly at quiet
from all the disturbance which the lustings of the Flesh against the Spirit,
and the irreconcilable War in our Members create us every day and hour; that
God will not only cover our Head in the Battle, but take us out of the Field,
into a sure retreat, where the Enemy of Souls cannot hurt us, nor Temptation
assault us, nor corrupt Nature betray us, nor pain, or affliction, or danger
overtake us? Surely Job v. 7.
Man that is born to trouble, as the sparks fly upwards, has reason to be
pleased with such a Refuge as This; Surely That ought to be no small
Recommendation of the future State of Good Christians, which the Voice from
Heaven gives in the xxith of this Book at the 4th verse, that God shall wipe
away all tears from their Eyes, and there shall be no more death, neither
sorrow, nor crying; neither shall there be any more pain: for the former things
are passed away. So valuable a Blessing it is, merely to rest from their
Labors; so proper this Argument to reconcile us to Death, that it removes us
into a place of Ease and Safety. But if this make Death tolerable, there is
something behind, which makes it even desirable. The prospect of a Deliverance
may sustain us under our troubles, but it is enough to prevail with us, not
only to bear, but even to bless our Troubles, when we reflect, that though our
Sufferings are left behind, yet the Virtue and Effect of them are not. For that
is the Second Reason,

II. Wherefore the Dead are blessed, who dye in the Lord, that they do not only
rest from their Labors, but their Works follow them. The Toil and Drudgery is
at an End, and all that could be grievous to them is put off with that Body,
which exposed them to Corruption and Suffering; But those Labors are not
forgotten, Their Diligence and Conscientious Care, The Meekness and Resignation
wherewith they were endured, sticks by the Labourer still; And, as to all the
desirable and advantageous purposes, will be sure to keep him company for ever
in the other World. For by this Expression of their Works following them, is
meant that Good Acceptance and great Reward, which the Saints shall be sure to
find after Death, for what they have done well during this present Life.

We must not from This, or from any Other Expressions like it in Scripture,
infer such Merit and Sufficiency in the best works of the best Men, as can
convey to them a Right to demand this happiness, as in Rigor and Equity their
due. For All have come short of the Glory of God, Romans iii. 23. Psalm. cxliii. 2.
and no Flesh can be justified in his Sight, should Judgment, and not Mercy, be
the Standard of his Proceedings. But hereby is meant, that according to the
Terms of the Gospel Covenant, which, for the Sake and Sufferings of Christ,
promises Pardon for Sins rerepented of, Compassion for Infirmities not
indulged, and a Recompense for those Good Actions which the Grace of God has
wrought in, and by, and with us, Every sincere Christian shall not fail to be
abundantly considered, for, and in proportion to, what he has performed and
endured, as became him, in the days of his Flesh. I say, abundantly considered;
More or less, as the Trials and Instances of each Man's Virtue have been more
or less; but yet in such manner and measure, as far exceeds the Value of his
best Works, and the Degree of his sharpest Afflictions. For St. Paul has
assured us, Romans viii 18.
That the Sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared with
the Glory that shall be revealed in us, and that 2 Cor. iv. 16.
these light Afflictions which are but for a moment, work out for us a more
exceeding and eternal weight of Glory. In short, God will deal with such Men,
according to the Riches of his own infinite Mercy, and make them actually happy
then, far above what they now are able so much as to conceive.

For how indeed can it be supposed, that We, in this imperfect State of things,
should have any distinct Notions of that future, and vastly different State,
when this dross of Earth and sensual Appetites, shall be purified; when the
Faculties of our Mind shall be enlarged; freed from Prejudice and Error, 1
Cor. xiii. 12.
and not see as now, darkly and through a Glass, but know even as also we are
known. When we raise our Souls as high as possibly we can, yet even then our
thoughts are cloudy and confused. We speak as Children, we think as Children,
we understand as Children; but when we come to the fullness of the Stature of
perfect Men in Christ Jesus, these childish things shall be put away, and we
shall have quite other apprehensions of the matter. Then shall we see, and
know, and feel, that all those lofty descriptions of Heavenly Joys in
Scripture, which now so hardly gain our belief, are much beneath the Dignity of
that Happiness they would represent and recommend to us; And that those Images
were made use of, not because they were worthy and proportionable, but because
they were the fittest and best resemblances of that Bliss which We were capable
of. And therefore even in these noblest flights, there is all along a
condescension to our weaknesses; A veil of Figures and sensible Similitudes
drawn before that Glory, which is too strong and bright for our naked Eye, too
big for even Thoughts and Wishes, much more for Words, to reach and come up to.

O! the incomprehensible Excellence of that knowledge, which shall see God as
he is, and liken the Soul to the Excellence it sees! O the Delights of that
Wonder and Praise and perpetual Thanksgiving, with which glorified Saints extol
the amazing Wisdom, and Justice, and Goodness of God! The mighty Satisfaction
of being let in to the hidden Treasures of his Mercy, the exact harmony of his
Providence, the Mysteries of his Nature, and his Dealings with Mankind, which
now pretending Mortals wrangle and raise such a Dust about! O the perfect
purity and tranquillity of a Life free from Lust and Passion, from doubtful and
painful Struggles, and ever choosing, ever delighting in, that which is good! O
the Charms of that entire Love, and Peace, and joint Consent, in honoring and
serving God, and rejoicing in each other's Happiness; void of that Envy, and
Grudging, that Jealousy and Discord, that Ill Nature, or Selfishness, those
Personal Injuries, or differences in Interests and Opinions, which will not
suffer us to enjoy a perfect Unity in this World! O Gracious God, how plentiful
is thy Goodness, which thou have laid up for Them that fear thee! They pay thee
a short imperfect Obedience, and what is this, that the King of Heaven should
recompense it with so great a Reward! They are unprofitable Servants, and yet
thou make them Sit down at thy Table in thy Kingdom! Their Sins and Frailties
are Many, and Those are remembered no more; their Good Deeds in comparison but
very few, and yet not one of These is forgotten! Their present Labors and
Sufferings have their Intervals and Comforts, and are but light and short at
worst; light in consideration of that future weight of Glory; short and even as
nothing to that Eternity of Bliss, that pure uninterrupted Bliss, which they
work out for them. Nor do thou, Blessed Jesus, put off these Laborers with
distant Prospects and uneasy Expectations: For no sooner does that Night come
on in which they can work no longer, but they are called to present payment.
The Combat once ended, and the Race run, the Conqueror is crowned without
delay. Which brings me to the third Circumstance, whereby this Spirit here
represents to us the Blessedness of Good Men departed; and that is

III. The Time when they enter upon their Happiness, intimated in that Term
fixed in those words, Blessed are the Dead which dye in the Lord from
henceforth. I am not ignorant, what differing Interpretations are put upon this
word in the Original, but neither the Time, nor the present Temper of your
Minds, will bear so cold a thing as Criticizing now. And therefore it shall
suffice to say, that both the Sense in which I have all along taken the words,
and the Church in using them at the Burial of every Christian, do warrant us to
conclude, that this Rest from Labor, and the Reward of Good Works, begin at
the instant of Men's dying in the Lord. And if the passage before us do not
sufficiently prove this, yet there are Others which may even oblige us to
understand it so. The Laborers in the Vineyard, as soon as ever the Even was
come, Matthew. xx. 8.
and the Duty of the Day over, are called to receive their Wages. Lazarus
immediately upon his Death, is said Luke xvi 22, 25.
to be carried by Angels into Abraham's bosom, and comforted for the Evil
things he received in his Lifetime. St. 2 Timothy iv. 6, 7, 8.
Paul, upon mentioning his departure at hand, and reflecting upon the good
fight he had fought, declares, that from thenceforth there was laid up for him
a Crown of Righteousness. Perhaps indeed this Crown is not yet so bright, nor
Lazarus his happiness so exquisite, as it will be at the last great day of
account. But still that Crown was determined and fixed from the day of this
Apostle's departure, though he is to be more solemnly invested with it, at the
day when the Righteous Judge shall appear. And Lazarus was at least in a
Condition of Comfort, Such as made him good amends for the Poverty and Diseases
he had undergone in his Body. So that these Passages, as well as that of the
Laborers in the Vineyard, sufficiently confute that fond imagination which
some have entertained, of the Soul sleeping in a State of Insensibility till
the general Resurrection; They also overthrow that profitable Delusion of the
Romish Purgatory, and render Prayers for the Dead superfluous and useless. For
how can they be comforted who have no Sense? What occasion have they for our
Prayers, who are already blessed? or how can they be said to rest from their
Labors, who pass from hence into a Condition of Torments, more exquisite by
far than this Life can possibly endure? and yet such the Popish Purgatory is
represented. So just ground have we to conclude, that there is no Interval
between the End of Good Men's Labor, and the Beginning of their Rest; So
substantial a Reason is it of their Happiness, that their Works do not only
follow them at a distance, but keep them company, go with them hand in hand,
and render the Dead blessed, from the very moment of their Dying in the Lord.

II. I have now done with my first general Head, and after so largely insisting
upon it, shall think it necessary to say less upon my Second, which consists of
such Inferences, as are proper to be drawn from the foregoing Particulars. And
they (among many Others) may be These that follow.

1. As First. We shall do well seriously to consider what vast encouragement
these words contain to a Godly Life. For it must always be remembered, that the
Glorious Privileges we have hitherto been treating of do not belong to all
indifferently, but only to such as Dye in the Lord. That is, (as was declared
in the beginning of this Discourse) To Them that embrace the Faith of Jesus,
that live up to the Principles of the Gospel, and persevere in doing so to the
End of their Days. As for Those, who either refuse and oppose this Belief, or
who hold it in unrighteousness, their Case is the very Reverse of what we have
been describing. They are so far from finding Rest after their Labors, that
all the Evils they sustain in this world, are light and gentle, and less than
nothing, in comparison of the intolerable, the unconceivable, the infinitely
heavier Miseries, reserved for them in another. Their Works follow them too,
but it is to upbraid them with their Guilt and Impenitence, to wound them with
sad and fruitless Remorse, to testify against them in the Great Day of Account,
and to condemn them to everlasting Flames. Let me then most earnestly conjure,
let me prevail with, All that hear me, to Secure a Title to this Blessedness,
by breaking off their Iniquities from this very moment. And this will best be
done by possessing their minds with just and worthy Notions of these Comforts
in my Text; by considering what vast amends will be made them for all the
hardships of Virtue here; and how wretched an Exchange those Men will make at
last, who indulge the pleasures of Sin for a season, at the prodigious Expense,
the certain and irrecoverable Loss, of their Souls and Eternal Happiness
hereafter. The Severest Doctrines of the Gospel have more than enough to
enforce their practice upon us, if we would but consider them impartially, and
proceed upon the same Measures, which humane Prudence puts us upon in the
Affairs of this World. And What are the Affairs of this world, when put into
the balance against our Spiritual Concerns? What are the troubled and
imperfect Joys of Sense, which a thousand cares and fears, pains and disasters
innumerable disturb, in comparison of that sweet and sure Repose above, which
nothing can annoy? What are the Honors, the Wealth, the Pomp we so eagerly
pursue here, if set against the Glories of Saints, and the inestimable
Treasures of our heavenly Father's Kingdom? Trust me, Such gains are no where
to be had, so cheaply to be bought, so certain to be obtained, so durable in
the Enjoyment. No gains indeed are durable but these; Nothing turns to True
account, but Piety and Virtue. And This is profitable for all things, so
exceeding profitable, that we could not have hoped, we could not have imagined
it; and if any other than God the Giver had told us of this, we could not have been so easy as to believe, so presumptuous as to expect it.

2. Secondly. The Considerations, which went before, are very proper to arm our
minds against the Fear of Death. A passion, where it prevails to any great
degree, of all Others the most Tyrannical and tormenting. It must be so:
Because Scaring us perpetually with hideous Apprehensions of a Danger, which,
we are fully satisfied beforehand, it is not possible with all our Industry to
shun. And this domineering Evil is what nothing but Christianity ever was, or
could be, a match for. But when we consider how many things there are, which
may justly abate our fondness for This Life, and that they who dye in the Lord
are effectually delivered from all these: When we look upon Death as a
necessary Passage to Happiness; and reflect, that the instant we cease to be
miserable here, we take possession of a never failing Bliss in another State;
This puts quite another face upon the matter, from what it carries to the
Wicked, or to the Natural, Man. 1 Cor. xv. 56.
The Sting of Death is Sin, says the Apostle, that is, the Only thing which can
in reason render Dying terrible, is the being called to an account for our evil
deeds. But the Gospel frees us from the Bondage of this Fear too. It shows us a
Victorious Redeemer, One, who has made Satisfaction for the Sins of Mankind,
and by so doing has triumphed over Death; nay, has perfectly changed the
nature of the thing, and made it a Blessing to them that dye in Him. And This
is what we may all do, by the assistance of his Grace, which is wanting to
none, who seek and use it diligently. So that, upon the whole matter, this Fear
is an Affliction, in our power to correct and moderate at least. We may conquer
it as Christians, though we cannot wholly remove it, as Men; For the better we
are provided for the Approach of Death, the less troublesome all Apprehensions
of it will be to us. And a firm prospect of our future Blessedness would bring
us, so far as is consistent with our Duty, even to thirst and pant, and long
for that very Dissolution, which now we start and tremble at, and take such
infinite pains to run away from.

3. Thirdly. From hence we may fetch the most, in truth the only, powerful
Argument, to support us under any Injuries or Afflictions, that befall us in
this present World. To think, that These things cannot last long, is some, but
far from a sufficient, Consolation. But to be assured, that they will turn to
our Advantage, an incomparably greater Advantage, such as bears no proportion
at all to the utmost we can ever endure, this is a substantial Stay to our
Spirits. To reflect, that He who afflicts us in the mean while, does it for our
good, and out of fatherly tenderness; that what we complain of is the Exercise
of our Virtue, and every Fresh trial a higher Step to Perfection; that not One
Sigh or groan vanishes into Air, but reaches the Ears of the Almighty; not One
Tear falls to the ground, but all are put into his Bottle, (as David expresses
it Psalm. lvi. 8.
;) not One Injury or Affront we ever forgave, but it has contributed to the
forgiveness of our infinitely more heinous Offenses against God; Not One pang,
or Sickness we have gone through, patiently and with a Christian Resignation,
but it will be paid us back with Interest in perfect Joy: These are the
invincible weapons of a Good Man, such as harden, and render him proof, against
all the Assaults of Ill Men, and what we call ill-fortune. And he who is
careful to have this Armor girt close about him, will find his Courage keep up
with his Faith, and be able to withstand in the Evil day, and having done all
to Stand.

Fourthly and Lastly. What has been now said may and ought to prevent, or at
least to check those Sallies of excessive Grief, which we are too often
disposed to give a loose to, when it pleases God to remove Good Men, and
especially our Friends and Relations, out of the World. For do the Men, who
indulge such Passions, consider at all what they say or do, when they profess
this Concern for such Persons? For Them? Why are we sorry for Them? Is it such
an insupportable Calamity to us, that they whom we loved most dearly, have
after many painful struggles broke loose at last from Misfortunes and Diseases,
from Hazards and Dangers, from Sorrow and Sin? Do we use to weep and lament,
when our best Friends escape many a terrible Storm, and come Safe into Port;
especially too, if the Returns of their Voyage have been prosperous beyond all
Imagination? Yet this (my Brethren) is directly the Case of our Friends who are
dead in the Lord. And can we suppose that the being sorry for Their Happiness
is an Argument of Our Love? This is most absurd. And it is plain our refusing
to be comforted in such cases, proceeds from want of considering how happy They
really are; or else it is not Kindness for Them but for our Selves. And yet if
it be for our selves; Do we not think it a necessary proof of affection, to be
pleased with the very great Advantage of a particular Friend, though We suffer
some little uneasiness or Inconvenience by it? And shall we not be content,
that a Useful Neighbor, a Darling Child, or a tender Husband, should be
blessed above what we can frame any Idea of to our Selves, though we must not
enjoy his Company here any longer? But a good Man you will say, can least of all
be spared; True. When we speak and think as Men; But if we argue as Christians;
It is as true, that such a one we may best bear to part with. Because the
better the Man is, the more assured hope we have of his obtaining that better
Life; which is the most Effectual Argument to Soften these Trials of our
Resignation to us.

And therefore I cannot but think it very well becomes me to exhort You the
Relations of this deceased, that you would dry up your Tears; And, from the
dark Side of this afflicting Providence to your selves, turn your thoughts
rather to the bright prospect of his happy Change. For such I make no doubt we
shall think it, if to my two former Heads, be added that very Little, which I
have still to speak upon my Third and Last, wherein I promised to apply my Self
to the Circumstances of this Person, upon whose account we are now met, and
whose Remains of Mortality lie here before us.

III. When I say I will add but little, you will not so understand me, as if
the Subject would not bear a great deal. But Much is not necessary, when I
speak to Them, who have had the happiness of a longer Acquaintance than my
Self; and therefore All I have to do, is only to refresh you. Memories, with
some of those remarkably good qualities and actions, which I have received from
persons of undoubted Authority, and such as your selves will bear testimony to
upon the mention of them. And here I shall follow the method of my Text.

1st. then. It could not be but a Person of his Engagements in the world must
have a share of Labors and Troubles, Losses and Disappointments; All which
were entertained with great Moderation, and just Reflections upon that
Providence of God, which disposes of Us and Ours as he sees fit. But besides
these Trials, it pleased God, in his later years, to afflict him with Sore
Pains and frequent Distempers. All which he bore with such Evenness of Mind,
that even the Rackings of the Gout and Stone could not often provoke him to
Any, and never to such as were Unbecoming, Complaints. God exercised that
patience, we may hope, to increase the Reward of it, and to render it
exemplary, among those who observed and conversed with it. And that Meekness
and Submission, which continued to his very last hours, notwithstanding the
most acute pangs, of one of the most insupportable Diseases mankind are subject
to, give us just ground of Confidence, that he is now at rest from his Labors,
and that it is good for him to have been so afflicted, since Troubles thus
sustained never fail to turn to the Sufferers unspeakable Advantage.

2. But it was not in the Passive kind alone, that he discharged himself so
well, his Virtue was Active too. Many of his good Works there are, which should
not, and Some, which scarcely can be, forgotten. Such were his Honesty and
Strict Justice in his Dealings. His Moderation and Prudence, The Peaceableness
of his Temper, and Readiness to compose Differences, His Integrity and Candor,
his Modesty and Humility, which recommended him to the Conversation, and the
good Opinion of all that had opportunities of knowing him. He was remarkably
careful to discharge the duty of those several Capacities God placed him in. An
Affectionate Husband, a kind Relation, a faithful and generous Friend. And
though he left no Issue of his own, yet did not that destroy but diffuse rather
the Relation of a Father, for he was such in some sort to several, whom Nature
had setat a greater distance from him. His Piety and great Regard to Religion
was testified by attending diligently upon the public Worship of God, as often
as his Indispositions would permit. And his Love of the Beauty and Decency of
the House and Service of his Great Master cannot dye, so long as the Deptford
Church rebuilt, 1697
Place where we are now assembled, Stands. For This is a lasting Monument of
that Generosity and Godly Zeal, which moved in the foremost rank of those many
noble Contributors, to so necessary, so becoming, so pious a Work. And his
Charity to the Living Temples of the Holy Ghost, as it was freely extended upon
fit occasions in his Lifetime, so is it continued in a very large and useful
Provision for the Benefit of the Poor after his Death. I forbear several of the
Works of this kind, which, together with these now mentioned, no doubt do
follow him, and are already, (we trust) begun to be repaid, in the Comforts and
Joys of a Blessed Immortality.

The only thing left for us to do is carefully to copy after such good
Examples, that when we shall be called upon, (as shortly we shall) we may with
holy Trust and steady Submission to God's Will, commit our selves into the
hands of our most merciful Creator, and Redeemer. And such a Trust and cheerful
Resignation, I, who, by the particular Approbation of his Reverend and very
worthy Pastor, attended him in his last hours, did with great Satisfaction
observe in Him in the very Agonies of Death. For even then his Mind was much
composed, and except the tender Impressions which the Tears of his dearest
Relations made upon his Spirits, all seemed easy and full of Content to him. So
much power had the Hopes of a better World to Sustain him in his last
conflicts. But now those conflicts are happily over, and the truest Honor and
Affection we can pay to his Memory, is to bless God for that perfect Peace, and
sweet Tranquillity which we believe he has exchanged this dangerous and
troublesome life for; and so to imitate his commendable Actions, and resemble
his meek Christian temper and good dispositions, that We may in God's due time
meet again, at our Joyful and blessed Resurrection; Even then, when all Those
who have dyed in the Lord shall shine as the Brightness of the Firmament, when
these vile Bodies of ours shall be fashioned after Christ's glorious Body, to
live, and reign with Him for ever and ever. So amply shall even these Bodies be
recompensed for their present Sufferings and Decay; So sweet shall be their
Rest: To so excellent purposes shall every good Man's works follow him. Which
that Ours may do, let us pray and endeavor with all our might, that we may
live and dye in Him, who lived and dyed and rose again for us, the Blessed
Jesus the Son of God: To whom with the Father and Holy Spirit, Three Persons
and One God, be all Honor and Glory, now and for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.
Books Written by George Stanhope, D.D.
EPictetus's Morals, with Simplicius's Comment in English. A Sermon of Death
and Judgment. Preached at Whitehall on the Death of the Queen. A Sermon at the
Commencement at Cambridge, July 6. 1697. A Sermon at the Funeral of Dr.
Towerson. A Sermon at the Feast of the Sons of the Clergy, Dec. 7. 1697. Thomas
a Kempis's Christian Pattern; With Meditations and Prayers for Sick Persons, 8o.

