A TREATISE OF GOD's GOVERNMENT, And of the JUSTICE Of His present
Dispensations In this WORLD.

By the Pious, Learned, and most Eloquent SALVIAN, A PRIEST of Marseille, who
lived in the Vth CENTVRY.

Translated from the Latin by R. T. Presbyter of the Church of England.

With a Preface by the Reverend Mr. Wagstaffe.

Si pejeret Francus, quid novi faciet, qui perjurium ipsum Sermonis genus putat
esse, non Criminis.

Salvian de. Gubernat. Lib. 4. LONDON: Printed for S. Keble at the Turk's Head,
over against Fetter-Lane in Fleet Street. 1700.

Though the Reverend Author of the Judicious Preface to this Translation, has
admirably demonstrated the Usefulness and Excellency of this Treatise; yet it
may not be improper (for the English Reader's Satisfaction) to Note here the
just Reflections, which two Famous Critics have made upon the Renowned Salvian.

Genadius says, That he was very well skilled in Divine and Humane Sciences;
That he wrote several Treatises in a clean, polite, and Elaborate Style, which
Genadius had read, when he wrote thus of him, which was in the Year 495.

Du Pin says, It is not necessary to commend the Beauty and Elegancy of
Salvian's Style; it is sufficiently known to all that have but a little
smattering in Learning. It would be hard to find in all Antiquity, a more Neat,
Beautiful, Smooth, and Pleasant Discourse; He is not so diffusive as
Lactantius, but is more Diverting, and full of Instructions; He proves what he
asserts by Texts of Scripture, which he alleges much to his Purpose, and which
come up very well to the Subject in hand. His way of handling of this Subject
of God's Government of the World, convinces Us, that his main End was, to Cry
down, and declaim against the Manners and Immoralities of his Age, which he
does with all possible Strength and Elegancy; describing the common
Irregularities, and the Terrible Corrupt Manners of the People, and the
Astonishing Uncleanness of the Theaters and Play Houses. Ellis Du Pin, Bib.
Eccles. Cent. 5.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
THere are two Things that will recommend the Translation of an Author to the
World, and justify the Usefulness of a Man's Pains in making him more
public, and capable of being read and understood by many more, than possibly
could be in his own Native Language. And those are, the Seasonableness of the
Doctrine he treats of, and the Excellent and Useful manner of handling that
Doctrine; And both these we have in this Admirable Author, who is now made to
speak English, and dedicated to the Use and Advantage of the Natives of our own
Country. And therefore, that the Reader may reap that Benefit by it, which was
designed him, and peruse the following Translation with that Care, Temper, and
Application of Mind, as Subjects of that weight ought to be, I shall, by way of
Introduction, endeavor to raise his Thoughts and Faculties, that they may bear
some measure of Proportion to the Greatness of the Subject. Here he must not
expect (what is the present Shame and Burden of the Press) to meet with any
light and frothy Discourses, or empty, vain, and useless Speculations; but a
Fundamental Pilar of Religion, supported by grave, solid, and irrefragable
Arguments; And if the Reader has nothing to please, but a wild Fancy and
roving Appetite, if nothing can gratify him but lewd Jests, and unsavory
Ribaldry, he will be here mightily out of his Way; but if he knows how to
relish clear and Convincing Reasons; if he can be affected with the Noble
Truths of Religion: In short, if he bring his Judgment and Conscience along
with him, the Translator will never lose his Pains, nor the Reader his Profit.
For,

I. The Subject Matter of the following Book is always Seasonable, fit for all
Times, and all Persons. That God governs the World, superintends all the
Affairs of it; That they are not ordered and managed by blind Chance, fatal
Nececessity, or the Will of Man, but by an All-wise and Omnipotent Governor,
who sits at the Helm, guides and directs the whole Universe, and all the Parts
and Branches of it; In a word, that God is Judge himself, Judge here, as well
as hereafter, and exercises a Sovereign and Judicial Power in the whole
Administration of this World. This, I say, is a Doctrine not calculated for
Times and Seasons, for an Age, or peculiar People, but is adapted to the whole
World, necessary for all Times, Persons, Nations and Languages. It Is the
Foundation of all Men's Prayers. The first Reason of all that Worship and
Homage, which has every where been paid to the most High God, for no Man
would, no Man reasonably could pray to that Being, who, he thought, did not
hear, or neglect, or not concern himself with what was done upon Earth. And our
Praises and Celebrations would be as vain as our Petitions, if the God, whom we
celebrated, did not in particular regard the Actions and Behavior of Men. But
if God hears and minds our Prayers and Praises; for the same Reason he hears
and minds our Curses and Blasphemies too. If he* judges of the Sincerity of our
Hearts, upon the same Account, he judges also of their Hypocrisy; and our
Iniquities are as open before God, as our Devotions. And the Consequence is,
That the whole World lies under the immediate Inspection and Judgment of God.
And this is the first Step in the Doctrine of Providence, that God inspects and
judges the whole World in General, and every individual Man in particular. But
the Subject Matter of our Prayers extends yet further, which for the most part,
concerns the Things of this Life; as petitioning for Secular Blessings,
deprecating Mischiefs and Inconveniences, which plainly suppose the Belief of
God's Government of the World, and that the Things we respectively ask of Him
are purely at His disposal. To petition God for our Daily Bread, plainly
implies, that he as daily gives it; and to beg to be rescued from Temptations,
delivered from Evils, as plainly denotes, that the Things* that may tempt, or
injure us, are in God's hands, and may be permitted or restrained, as He sees
Good. And the Conclusion from these Premises is this, That this Doctrine is
seasonable and necessary for all Men that pray, that is always, at all times,
and upon all Occasions: For hereby we are taught, that all Second Causes are
Instruments in God's hands to fulfill his Will, and in all manner of
Dispensations to look beyond them, and to fix our Thoughts and Meditations on
the Supreme Arbiter and Governor of the World. To be Thankful in Prosperity,
Patient and Humble in Adversity: To take what we enjoy for Mercies, what we
suffer for Chastisements and Corrections, dispensed to Us from our Heavenly
Father. Upon this Foundation we are warranted to beg of God, Protection from
Injuries, Deliverance from Afflictions, Supply for our Necessities, Success in
our honest Undertakings; And upon this Ground we can trust in, and rely upon
God, though all the World forsake us, and freely* unbosom our selves to Him, when
Men will not hear us: So that this Doctrine is the Stay and Support of the
whole* World, and affords Delight to the Happy, Comfort to the Miserable,
Refuge and Shelter to the Oppressed, Security to the Traveller, Safeguard to
them that rest, Contentment under Disappointments, Increase to the Merchant and
Industrious, and Protection to All. Fetters and Prisons, Thrones and Dominions,
all Degrees and Qualities, are equally and alike concerned in it. And
whatsoever our Condition be in this World; whatever Posture the Things are in
that are without, or within us; whatever are the States of Public Societies,
or private Men; whether we have or want any thing, whether we hope or fear,
whether we rejoice or are sorrowful; in all these Respects, and in every other
Incident of Life, we are directly and immediately concerned with the Divine
Providence, and may find from thence Matter for Supplication, Arguments, for
Dependence, and Reasons for Adoration and Worship. That Doctrine therefore must
needs be seasonable, which is equally suited to all Cases and* Circumstances;
To all Ranks and Degrees; to all States and Conditions, to all Casualties and
Contingencies of Life; And all the different Seasons, which Eccles. Chap. 3.
Solomon Assigns to the different Uses and Purposes of Life, in this Respect
have no manner of Difference; There is a season to plant, and a season to pluck
up (Literally and Allusively) but both are Seasons for directing our Thoughts
for Contemplation of the Divine Providence. There is a time to kill, and a time
to heal, a time to get, and a time to lose, a time of War, and a time of Peace.
But these and all other, are Times for meditating on, and applying this
Doctrine, either to beg God's Blessing and Protection, or to render Him Thanks
and Praise for having bestowed it; Or to humble our selves under His Almighty
Hand, or to give Him the Glory of His power and Goodness for preserving our
Persons, Estates, or Innocence. In fine, how various soever the Affairs of the
World are, how unstable the Possessions, how Surprising and Astonishing the
Events! This Doctrine is ready at hand, to pacify our Minds, and to present us
with infinite and unspeakable Advantages, if it be not our own Fault; and we
deprive our selves of them through Atheism, Incredulity, a Neglect of God and our
selves. Nevertheless, though this Doctrine be very proper, and necessary for all
Times and Persons, it must be confessed, That it may at some times be yet more
Seasonable, and more fit to be inculcated, explained, and asserted; and those,
seem to me, to be these that follow,

1. When this Great Doctrine of Providence is corrupted and perverted, and by
unwarrantable Inferences and Deductions, is made subservient to Ends and
Purposes; I mean, to other Ends and Purposes, than those of Religion and
Virtue. For instance, when we are told, that Success and Events create a Divine
Right to Property and Dominion, that Possession and Providence, is a Title
superior to all legal Claims and Pretenses; That this is the Meaning of some
Men's Providence, is too Notorious to be denied, and therefore need not be
proved; and it would take up too much of the Reader's time, and with all be
unsuitable to the Nature and End of this Preface, to have it debated. All that
I shall at present remark, is, That it is perfectly new, and as far as I know,
this Doctrine was started within some of our Memories, and lay for some time
scorned and exploded, till revived of late; All Antiquity, and all Ages of the
Church are perfect Strangers to it, except our own. The Fathers of old, and
Holy Men in all Ages, have been copious on the Subject; but the Mystery of
providential Rights and Titles is a Mystery of Iniquity, reserved for our
Times, and fit to be discovered, when the same Doctrines can both be despised
and laughed at, and also owned and asserted by the same Persons. However in
such a Case, it seems highly requisite, that Men be set straight in their
Notion, that this Doctrine be placed in its true light; for as this, or any
other Doctrine of Religion, if it be* misunderstood, or misapplied, draws after
it an innumerable Company of practical Mischiefs and Inconveniences: So if it
be rightly stated, and duly observed, it produces in abundance the fruits of
Holiness and true Piety. And for this I shall refer the Reader to the Book it
self, where he will find this useful Doctrine plainly asserted, and
convincingly proved without being endangered, or tempted to set up God's
Providence in contradiction to His Laws.

2. When this Doctrine is denied either in direct terms, or by necessary
Consequence; This I take to be the most irrational and senseless Opinion in the
whole World, and even more absurd than Atheism it self; for the Denial of
Providence proceeds upon the Supposition of the Being of a God, and to believe
a God, and at the same time to deny his Providence, carries with it a thousand*
Contradictions; for I desire to know, what Idea or Conception such Men can have
of God, what kind of Being they can frame to themselves, or what Representation
they can make of Him exclusive of the Divine Providence; Let them give us His
Attributes and Characters, and tell us plainly, what they mean by God, and then
they must either renounce their Opinion, or frame such a God to themselves, as
all Men will be ashamed of; For certainly, the Notion of God implies all
possible Perfection, and a sluggish, unactive, impotent, inconsiderate,
negligent God, is an imperfect God, and they ascribe greater Imperfections to
the Most High God, than can honestly be attributed to a wise and good Man But
if the Notion of God implies the most perfect Being, such a Being, who is
infinitely Wise, Powerful, Just and Good. These Attributes plainly prove the
Divine Providence: For if God be infinitely Wise, he certainly knows all that
is done in the World, the deepest Designs, the closest Contrivances. If
infinitely Powerful, certainly, he is able to defeat them, to overruled them,
and to turn them to such Ends as he pleases; If infinitely Just and Good, he
certainly will do it, when it is fit for him so to do: So that the very Notion
of God implies Providence, and proves it a priori. God's Providence is the
Result of His Nature, and flows from it: And it is impossible to have any
Conception of God, but at the same time to include Providence, and God's
Sovereign Power in the World: However, seeing we are got into an Age, where
every thing is disputed; seeing our English* World is pestered with a Sort of
Men, who are resolved to call themselves Masters of Sense and Reason, though of
far more Arrogance than Comprehension, it seems reasonable and just to our
Countrymen, that the Antidote should be proportioned to the Poison; and here I
must again refer the Reader to the Book: And if he comes prepared to receive
either Truth or Reason, let him read it with Judgment and Discretion, and then
let him be an Epicurean, or Anti-providentialist, if he can.

3. When there is a general Corruption in Men's Manners. This (in Scripture
Language) is called living without God in the World; and it certainly is so, so
far as Mortals can live without God, when God is neglected, His Laws violated,
and Men live as if they had no other Concern with the Governor of the World,
but to despise and affront Him. When Uncleanness, Incest, Sodomy, Perjury,
Violence, Oppression, Unnaturalness reign, I would say in every Corner; but
that supposes some degree of Shame and Modesty; some Awe of Men at least, if
none of God; but when Vice grows bold and rampant, is above Reproof, and scorns
it; when it has it is Advocates and Pleaders, is turned into Principles and
Arguments; This is the highest Aggravation of the highest Crimes. It Is
superfluous to speak of Pride, Luxury, Fraud, Extortion, Calumny,
Uncharitableness, which may pass for Virtues, in comparison of some Impieties.
And to what purpose should I mention Heresy and Schism, for these suppose some
Religion, which in some Ages of the World is not easy to be found. Now how
far, and in what instances these Characters suit with the present English
Nation, is not for me to determine; and therefore, without coming to
Particulars, certain I am, that in a loose and Vicious Age, all the Restraints
of Religion are not too much to stop that Deluge of Impiety which is
overwhelming the World, and would to God they were all sufficient. This single
Doctrine before us, has a mighty Efficacy to this purpose, and if it were
planted in our Hearts, and riveted by frequent and serious Meditation; This
alone would be sufficient to curb the Insolence and Licenciousness of Sin, to
humble the proudest Sinner, and bring him to utter Shame and Confusion of Face.
For let Men be minded, let them believe it, let them always think of it; That
God sees, and is present with their Thoughts and Contrivances, as well as with
their actual Commission of Wickedness; That he will judge 'em for them, here,
and hereafter; That so many steps of Villainy are so many degrees nearer to
Vengeance, That thereby we are preparing our selves for the Plagues of this,
and the other World. And if after this, we can still obstinately pursue
Iniquity; if we can defy God to his very face, and act all manner of Outrages
and Abominations in His Presence, our Iniquities ripen apace, and the measure
of them seems very near filling up; and how much soever we may despise or
neglect this Doctrine, we are in the ready way to feel it to our Cost, and to
become visible Objects of it, and Examples to others.

4. When Men pretend to believe the Divine Providence, and at the same time
live in a constant and perpetual Contradiction to such Belief: All Sin indeed
does so; but that which I chiefly aim at, is, when Men shall take ungodly and
unwarrantable Methods to save themselves, or to accomplish their Ends. This is
a Practice apparently inconsistent with the Belief of God's Providence. If any
man steps out of God's way to preserve himself; or to bring about his Designs,
whatever he pretends, he does not in truth believe God's Providence, nor dare
he trust Him; if in a visible prospect of Danger, or Inconvenience to our
Persons or Interests, we shall basely abandon our Consciences, and break in
upon the Laws of Righteousness, for to get a little Security, or to prevent a
threatening Storm; If we can take unsanctified Courses to be Rich, Great,
Honorable, or Safe; if we can trifle with Religion for Temporal Ends, and make
Hypocrisy a Guard and Sanctuary: In fine, if we can do Evil, to prevent
suffering it, and make bold with God to keep our selves easy, quiet, or
flourishing in this World, instead of believing, we distrust God's Providence,
and forfeit His Protection; we abandon our best Security, and take our Cause
into our own hands; we forsake providence, and are resolved to shift for our
selves. Now in such Cases as these, (and God only knows how many such Cases,
there are among Us) the only way to recall Us to a steady and uniform
Dependence upon God, and to make us act regularly in Conformity to it, is to
gain a firm and steadfast Belief of this Great Doctrine. I say, a firm and
steadfast Belief of it in our Hearts; For while it is only a Notion in our Heads,
it is like a Problem, or School Question, and serves for Talk and Dispute, but
not to live by; But it is then only Serviceable to the Ends of Religion, when it
becomes a Principle of Life governs the whole Man, directs our Practices, and
whatsoever we do, is one way or other guided and determined by it. And the most
proper way (next to the Grace of God, and frequent Prayer to Him) for the
obtaining this, is to apply our selves honestly and carefully to the reading
such Discourses, as may rationally convince Us of the Truth of it. For though I
conceive that no man, who will give himself Liberty to be serious, and to
consider, and whose Understanding is not clouded with vile Lusts and
Affections, can possibly doubt of it; yet seeing we are too apt to forget and
neglect, even what we know; seeing we want a Monitor and Remembrancer in the
plainest things in the World. One would think no man need to be told, that he
shall die; that he carries his Breath in his Nostrils, and is making haste to
the Dust; and yet not withstanding the sensible Decays which we feel in our
selves; notwithstanding the innumerable Experiments we daily see before our
Eyes, how few are there who believe it; so believe it, as to make it a
Principle of Practice, and behave themselves as becomes mortal and perishing
Beings. The Doctrine of Providence is as evident as our Mortality, and yet the
manifold Insincerity of our Practices; the Fraud and Hypocrisy of our
Dealings, the shameless Shifts and Artifices we hide our selves under, the
impious and carnal Intriegues and Politics that are so visible among Men, are
but too sad and deplorable Instances, how much we need to be reminded and
convinced, That God governs the World; for which Use and Purpose, the following
Book is a most fit and proper Instrument, and Admirably suited for Conviction
and persuasion; to satissie the honest Enquirer, to stop the Mouths of
Gainsayers, to confound the Obstinate and Incorrigible, and to quicken and
awaken the Sloathful, negligent, and inconsiderate, which brings me to the
second thing, viz.

II. Our Author's Excellent and Useful manner of handling this Subject. This I
confess, is a Copious Argument, and abundance may be said of it: But I must
confess with all, that it is a Subject fit for far abler Hands than mine, and
it requires a Strength and Capacity equal to our Author, to give it its just
Character. I am very sensible, that the best I can say, will diminish the
Value, and baulk the Reader's Expectation, rather than advance it. And
therefore it will be more just both to the Author and the Reader, as well as
more modest in it self, to let this Great point alone. Let the Reader peruse
it, and then let him judge for himself; And, if he will but read it with Temper
and Application, with an honest Heart, and a due preparation, without
partiality and prejudice, I am well assured, he will bless God, and own his
good Providence, that ever it came into his Hands.

Tho. Wagstaffe.

SALVIAN's PREFACE To the Holy Bishop, SALONIUS.
SALVIAN to the holy Bishop Salonius, wishes health in our Lord Jesus Christ.
All those Men, who have thought, that the exercising their Wits in Writing some
Learned Work, might tend to the Improvement of Humane Life, have taken the
greatest Care, whether their Subject were useful and innocent, or unprofitable
and wicked, to Adorn the Matter treated of with Choice of Expressions, and to
add Luster to the Cause, they handled by the Beauty of their Style. And
therefore, in both sorts of Learning, most of those Writers, who have treated
of worldly Affairs, have applied themselves Chiefly to that Part, not much
regarding the Truth or Worth of the Subject, if so be they expressed themselves
upon it, either in smooth and taking Verse, or in clean and perspicuous Prose.
For generally in their Writings, they plead their own Causes, and being more
solicitous of their own Applause, than of others advantages, they have not so
much labored to be sound and instructive, as to be esteemed Eloquent and
Learned. And therefore their Writings are either swelled with Follies, or are
Scandalous for Lying; are bedawb'd with beastly Words, or else defiled with
beastlier Things; so that the Chief Thing they aimed at, being the Reputation
of being thought Ingenious, when they spent so much time on such unworthy
Subjects; they seemed to me, instead of having advanced the Credit of their
Parts, much rather to have debased them. But I, who am a much greater lover of
Things than Words, pursue Things profitable, rather than Things plausible;
neither do I desire to be commended for such empty Gewgaws of the Times, but
for the usefulness and solidity of my Matter; I am not for using tinsell'd
Words in my poor Writings, but Physic and Remedies; not designed to tickle the
Ears of sawntring, idle People, but to heal the sick and wounded Conscience;
which, by God's Blessing, may both ways be of very great Advantage. If this
Antidote of mine shall cure the ill Opinion some have taken up of our Great
God, it will be of no small Advantage that I have profited so many: But if it
falls out otherwise, I shall not think I have lost my Labor, having at least
attempted to do them good. For where good Designs and kind Endeavors do not
meet with the intended Success, in that Case the Will will be rewarded for the
Deed. And so I will begin.

THE CONTENTS.
BOOK I.
OF God's Governing the World. Page 1 The Prosperity of the Bad, and the
Adversity of the Good, in this World: And how the Good cannot be but Blessed.
p. 4 The Contempt of Riches, and the Profit of Infirmity. p. 8. How Cain slew
his Brother. p. 15. The World drowned. p. 18. The Destruction of Sodom and
Gomorrha. p. 21. The Rebellions of Pharaoh, and the Works of Moses. p. 24.
BOOK II.
Of Gods Governing the World. p. 37. How God's Ears are always open to the
Righteous. p. 30. How Great things David suffered. p. 44. An Example of
Repentance, and the Advantages obtained thereby. p. 47.
BOOK III.
The State of the Good much harder than the Bad. p. 53. Of the just Judgments
and Councils of God. p. 53. What Faith is. p. 56. How few or none are faithful
toward God. p. 58. What Murder is. p. 59. What it is to imitate Christ. p.
60. Law Suits to be avoided, and how God is to be Obeyed in all things. p. 64.
The Errors of the Rich. p. 75
BOOK IV.
Of Holiness, etc. p. 81. Of Theft, and of Servant's Faults, etc. p. 87. How
God is the Giver of all things, etc. p. 101 Of the Law accusing us for living
wickedly, etc. p. 110
BOOK V.
Of the Law and its Commands. p. 127. Of Heretics and Tradition. p. 129. Of
Ignorance which excuses. p. 131. Of Envy. p. 134. Of the Rarity of the Good.
p. 137. Of the Errors of the Romans. p. 138. Of Oppression. p. 140 Of the Mercy
of God. p. 149
BOOK VI.
How one Man's Crime hurts many. p. 157 Of Barbarous Sights. p. p. 161 Of the
Impurity of the Theaters. p. 163 When we may be merry, and how far it is
lawful. p. 169 Of Sin, etc. p. 174 Of the Devil's Enchantments. p. 180 How God
sometimes chastises us with Hardships; and sometimes with Ease. p. 192
BOOK VII.
Of God's Chastisements. p. 198 Of God's Goodness, etc. p. 201 Of what God
requires of us. p. 203 Of the Vices of the Aquitanes. p. 204 Of the Vices of
the Africans. p. 220 Of the Splendor of Carthage. p. 225 Of the Sin of one
Man, etc. p. 232 Of the Vices of a bad Governor. p. 227
BOOK VIII.
How we our selves are the Authors of our own Misery and Calamity. p. 245 How
it is a kind of Sacrilege to hate the Worshippers of God. p. 250
Some BOOKS Printed for S. Keble, at the Turk's Head, over against Fetter-Lane
in Fleet Street.
MOnasticon Anglicanum, or the History of the Ancient Abby's, and other
Monasteries, Hospitals, Cathedral and Collegiate Churches in England and Wales;
Published in Latin by Sir William Dugdale, Knight, and now Epitomized in
English, Page by Page in Folio.

Epicteti Enchiridion, or the most Excellent Morals of Epictetus, made English
in a Poetical Paraphrase; By Ellis Walker, M. A.

An Explication of the Terms, Orders and Usefulness of the Liturgy: by way of
Question and Answer, Recommended to be Learned after the Church Catechism.

A Table to all the Epistles and Gospels in the Book of Common Prayer; so that
you may find any* Texts of Scripture, being contained in them. This Table may
be put in your Common Prayer Book.

The Degrees of Marriage, that which is ordered to be had in all Churches in
England.

Three POEMS on St. Paul's Cathedral, viz. The Ruins of the Re-building and the
Choir.

A short View of the Profaneness and Immorality of the English Stage, etc. By
Jeremy Collier, M. A. and his First and Second Defense.

SALVIAN of GOD's Government, etc.
BOOK I.
Of God's Governing the World: The Prosperity of the Bad, and the Adversity of
the Good, in this World: And how the Good cannot be but Blessed. The Contempt
of Riches, and the Profit of Infirmity: How Cain slew his Brother; The
Destruction of Sodom and Gomorrha; The Rebellions of Pharaoh, and the works of
Moses.

I. GOD Almighty is esteemed by many Of God's Governing the World.
to neglect and disregard Humane Affairs, that He neither protects the
Righteous nor punishes the Wicked, and that That is the Reason why, generally
speaking, the Good are commonly miserable in this World, and the Bad happy:
Seeing we have to do with Christians, the Word of God alone ought to be
sufficient to refute this; but because many have something in them of
Heathenish Incredulity, it may be they* may be also pleased with the
Authorities of the greatest and wisest Heathens. I shall therefore show, that
even they who had not the true Religion, and so could not know God as they
ought to do, because utterly ignorant of that Law by which he is known, yet
never dreamed of any such Negligence or Carelessness as this. Thus the Great
Pythagoras, whom Philosopy her self almost owned for her Master, discoursing of
the Nature and Beneficence Tully de nature. Deorum. Book I.
of the Deity, says thus: That he is a Soul dilated and diffused through every
part of the Universe, from which every living Creature receives its Being. How
then can God be said to neglect the World, when by this He shows so great
Regard to it, that he disposes Himself in every part and parcel of it? Plato
and all his Followers declare God to be the Ruler of all Things. The Stoics
place him like a Pilot at the Helm of his Government. And how could they well
form a more orthodox and religious Thought of the Love and Care of God Almighty
than by thus comparing Him to a Pilot? For their Meaning is, that as when a
Ship is under Sail, the Director of it has always his Hand upon the Rudder; so
God's Care of the World is continual and without intermission: and as the One
is entirely employed in all the Faculties of his Soul and Body in ordering his
Tackle to the Winds, avoiding the Rocks, and observing of the Stars, so our
good God is always graciously beholding, and by His Providence governing, and
most tenderly and compassionately loving the whole Order of Beings. Hence also
is that most Divine Saying of Virgil's to this purpose, and which shows him to
have been a very Great Philosopher as well as Poet.

-- God is diffused through all Virgil. Georg. 4.

The various Parts of the Terragueous Ball.
So is that of Tully* Nor can that God, (says he) understood who is known by
us, be understood any other way, Tully's Tusc^l. Questions. BOOK ^.
than as a free Mind void of, and separated from all manner of Humane
Composition, knowing and disposing all Things. And in another place. There is
nothing more Excellent than God, and therefore the World must of Necessity be
governed by Him. It Is plain then that God is not under or subjected to any
other* Being or Nature, and therefore that He governs whole Nature himself;
unless we should be so very wise as to think, that He, who, we say governs all
things, should at one and the same time both govern and neglect them too.
Seeing then that even all those who are without the true Religion have been
forceably, and of necessity compelled to own, that all Things are thoroughly
seen, ordered, and governed by God: How comes it to pass that some now a days
do think Him to be negligent and regardless, who by His quicksightedness sees
all things, disposes of them by His Might, governs them by His Omnipotence, and
preserves them by his Goodness? I have shown what the Chiefest Authors for
Philosophy and Eloquence have thought of the Majesty and Government of the
Great God; and I particularly took care to choose the most accomplished Masters
in both those admirable Arts, that I might the more easily make appear, that
all the rest had the same Sense of the Matter, or at least, that they dissented
without any manner of Authority. And really, I cannot find any of a different
Judgment, bating a few whimsical Epicureans, or Epicurizers, who as they have
linked Voluptuousness with Virtue, so they have joined God with Sloth and
Carelessness, that they might show the World the effect of their Sentiments, by
following the Epicurean Vices as well as their Opinions.

II. I do not think my self obliged in this The Prosperity of the Bad, and the
Adversity of the Good, in this World: and how the Good cannot but he blessed.
place to produce any Divine Testimony to prove so plain a Truth, chiefly
because the holy Scriptures do so abundantly, and with such Evidence contradict
all the Reasonings of the Wicked, that, as in the sequel, I am answering their
further Calumnies, I shall have an opportunity of more fully confuting what has
been said before. They urge then that all Things are neglected by God, because
He neither punishes the Bad nor protects the Good; and therefore the Condition
of the better Sort is much the worse in this World: for the Good are poor, but
the Bad are rich; the Good weak, the Bad strong; the Good mourning, the Wicked
rejoicing; the Righteous miserable and despised, the Wicked prosperous and
advanced. I desire to know in the first place of those who either grieve at, or
blame such a Dispensation, whether they sorrow for the Saints, that is, for
true, and faithful Christians, or for Hypocrites and Impostors? If for the
Hypocrite, it is an idle Sorrow that grieves that a bad Man is not happy: For
they who are already wicked, would only be made worse by Success, and become
rampant in their Villainy. And therefore, for that very Reason they should be
more miserable, that they may be less wicked; since they vouch the Name of
their Religion for their dishonest Gains, and make use of the Pretense of
Sanctity only for their unrighteous and sordid Bargains; if their Miseries were
compared with their Iniquities, they are less miserable than they deserve;
because let them be in the greatest Misfortunes imaginable, yet their
Wickedness will be still greater than their Misfortunes And therefore we ought
not by any means to be troubled that such as these are not prosperous and
happy: And much less should we be afflicted for the Saints; for though they may
seem to ignorant People to be miserable, yet it is not possible for them to be
otherwise than happy. It Is an idle thing for any one to judge other people
miserable either in Sickness or Poverty, or in any other State in which they
take themselves to be happy. For no one is miserable in another Man's Opinion
but his own. And therefore they cannot be miserable by the mistaken Judgment of
another Man, who are truly happy in their own Consciences. For I am of opinion,
that none are more happy than those who act according to their own Wishes and
Desires. So then if the Good are in mean Condition, it is what they would be:
Are they poor, they take delight in their Poverty: Are they without Ambition,
it is because they despise it: Have they no Titles of Honor, it is because they
refuse them: Do they mourn, they joy in Mourning; Are they weak, they 2 Cor.
12. v. 10
rejoice in Weakness. For when (says the Apostle) I am weak, then am I strong.
And he had good Reason to think so to whom God himself speaks after this
manner, My grace is V. 9.
sufficient for thee, for my strength is made perfect in weakness. We must
therefore take care not to be grieved at any Affliction from such Weakness,
since we see that it is the Original of Strength; For, be it what it will, they
who are truly Good are to be esteemed happy; and in the greatest Distress none
are more happy than those who are in such Circumstances as they would be. There
are some indeed who pursue Baseness and Obscenity, and in their own Opinion
think themselves happy, because they obtain what they desire; but in reality
they are not so; because it was their Duty to detest those things they desired.
But the truly Religious are far happier than all of them, because they both
enjoy what they desire, and cannot possibly be possessed of better things than
those they do enjoy. So that Labor, Fasting, Poverty, Beggary, and Sickness
are not troublesome to all that bear them, but only to those who bear them
unwillingly; and whether they seem heavy or light, it proceeds from the opinion
of him who bears them. For as there is nothing so easy but is troublesome to
him who does it unwillingly, so there is nothing so heavy which will not seem
light to him who undertakes it cheerfully: unless it may be we think it was a
Burden to those ancient Hero's the Sea Eachard's Roman History, part. 1. p. 97.
etc.
Fabij, The same. p. 174, 175, etc.
Fabritij, and p 105, 106, etc.
Cincinati, that they were poor when they themselves would not be rich, but
placed their whole Study and Endeavors to advance the public Interest, and by
their own voluntary Poverty to enrich the Commonwealth. Can we think they
underwent that frugal and hard Way of living with Grief and Whining? When they
fed on the most ordinary Country Diet before that fire at which they had
dressed it, and took not even that until the Evening? Do we think they were
troubled that Loads of Gold did not oppress their rich and craving Consciences,
when they had restrained even the use of Silver by a Law? Or that they thought
their Appetites and Desires abridg'd, because they had not Heaps of golden
Treasures, when they judged a Corn. Ruffinus Eachard's Roman History, part Is It.
p. 179.
Grandee unworthy of the public Trust, because he had to the value of ten
Pounds in Silver. They did not doubtless then despise a mean Attire, when they
clothed themselves with a short and coarse Garment; when they were taken from
the Plow to the Magistracy; and when appearing in all their Splendour, would
wipe the Sweat and Dirt from off their Faces with the richest of their Robes.
'Twas such poor Magistrates as these that made a rich Commonwealth; but now a
rich Government makes the Public poor: though it is certainly the greatest
Stupidity and Frenzy, to think that private Estates can hold, when the Public
is Beggarly and Starving. Such were the Brave ancient Romans, and so they
contemned Riches, although they knew not the true God, even as those now despise
them who follow our Lord. But I need not insist so much on those who in order
to the enlarging of their Dominions despised their own private Interest for the
sake of the Public, who, although their private Fortunes were small, yet had
large Shares in the public Treasure: Since Crates Bias. Diogenes etc.
several of the Philosophers of Greece, without any manner of respect to the
Public, have renounced all Title to almost all their Estates, merely out of a
desire of Fame. And not only so, but have advanced their Precepts so far, as to
contemn all sense of All the Stoics in general.
Pain and Death it self, affirming that a wise Man is happy in the midst of
Fetters and Torments, and that the Power of Virtue is so great, that it is not
possible for a good Man to be otherwise than happy. If therefore these Men are
not esteemed by many now to have been miserable, who yet reaped no other
Advantage by their Sufferings, but only the present Reputation of them: By how
much more are Religious and Holy Men not to be accounted so, who have both the
Joy and Comfort of their present Faith, and shall hereafter be rewarded with
future Bliss.

III. One of these Gentlemen whom I am The Contempt of Riches, and the profit
of Infirmity.
now confuting, once asked a certain holy good Man who embraced the Truth, that
is, that God governed the World, and that it was absolutely necessary for the
good of Mankind that he should sit at the Helm; Pray if it be so (says he) will
you tell me how you came to be sick and weakly? His meaning was this, viz. If
you think that God orders and disposes all things in this present Life, how
comes such a Man whom I know, to be a very Villain, to be Lusty and Strong, and
you, whom I verily believe to be good and virtuous, to be sickly and infirm?
Who can for bear admiring the deep reach of this Man, who thinks the Piety and
Virtues of the Righteous worthy of such mighty Rewards, that they ought in this
present Life to be recompensed with healthful and robust Constitutions! However
I reply, not only on the behalf of this One, but of all good Men in general;
and to the Question, how good Men come to be weak and infirm, I answer briefly;
because righteous Persons labor to keep their Bodies under, lest if they were
vigorous and robust, it should be difficult for them to be so good as they are.
For I guess that all Mankind become strong and lusty by eating and drinking
plentifully: And on the other hand, they grow weakly by Abstinence, Temperance,
and Fastings. And therefore what wonder is it if those Men are weak and infirm,
who refuse to make use of the Means by which others become healthful and
strong. However they have good reason for such Conduct, since St. Paul says of
himself, I keep under 1 Cor. 9. V. 27.
my body, and bring, it into subjection: lest that by any means, when I have
preached to others, I my self should be a Castaway. If this Great Apostle thus
desired to pull down his Body, it can be no great Wisdom to nurse it up. If he
dreaded a robust Constitution, there is no good Christian that would reasonably
covet it: And therefore this may pass for a sufficient Reason, why some devout
Christians are both infirm, and desire to be so; but that is no Argument to
think that good Men are neglected by God, when for that very Reason, we trust
they are more beloved by him. We read of the Apostle Timothy, that he was of a
very weak Constitution, but shall we thence conclude that he was neglected by
our Lord, or that by reason of his Infirmity he was less acceptable to Christ,
when the Reason of his being so was an Endeavor to please him? And when St.
Paul saw him very much weakened by frequent Sicknesses, he suffered him to 1 Timothy 5. V. 23.
make use of only a very small quantity of Wine, that is, he would have him
take care of his Health, but not to pamper the Flesh so far as thereby to make
it unruly. But for what end did he thus? Without doubt for the Reason he Galat.
5. V. 17.
himself gives; because the flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the spirit
against the flesh; and these are contrary the one to the other, so that ye do
not the things that ye would. A certain Author on this place said not
indiscreetly, if we cannot do our Duty as we desire by reason of the Rebellion
and unruliness of the Body, it must be humbled and pulled down, that the Duty
may be done: For, says he, The infirmity Salvian Epist. 5.
of the flesh puts such an Edge on the Vigor of the Mind, that when it is
indisposed, all the Powers of the Body are transferred into the Faculties of
the Soul, the inward Parts do not broil with base Lusts; no secret. Incentives
inflame the distempered Mind; the wandering Senses do not ramble and play the
Wanton with a thousand tempting Objects; but the Soul alone, as Sovereign
Mistress in a distempered Body, is merry and joyful, and triumphs over the
Flesh, as if her Enemy were overcome. This then which I have set down, is the
Cause of good Men's Infirmities, and, I believe by this time you are of my
Opinion too.

IV. But it may be you will say there are greater How Cain slew his Brother.
Things than these, viz. That they suffer grievous and cruel Hardships; that
they are cast into Prisons; that they are put to Torture, and that they are
slain. All that is true. But in this what do we more than both the Prophets,
who were carried into Captivity; and the Apostles also who endured Torments?
And yet notwithstanding we do certainly believe that God Almighty took
extraordinary Care of them, even then, when they suffered those Hardships for
his Service. But perhaps for this very Reason you will pretend to prove, that God
does not regard the Things of this World now, but reserves them entirely to his
future Judgment; because, for the most part, good Men suffer all the ill
Things, and the Bad inflict them. I must confess the Assertion seems not to
savor altogether of Infidelity, because it does so plainly own God's future
Judgment: But we maintain that Mankind are so to be judged by Christ, as that
at the same time we believe that God does now dispose and order all things as
he thinks most fit and convenient; and we affirm that he will sit as Judge in
the future Judgment, but so that at the same time we teach, that he does always
exercise Judgment in this World. For since God does always govern, he does
always judge: because Government it self is the exercise of a Judicial Power.
How many ways would you have this proved? Whether by Reason, Examples or
Testimony? If by Reason; who is there so void of common Sense, or so great a
Stranger to the Truth we are discoursing of, that does not see and acknowledge,
that the most beautiful Frame of the World, and the inestimable Magnificence of
superior and inferior Things are all governed by the same glorious Being which
created them; that he that formed the Elements is still their Moderator, who,
as at first he made all Things by his Authority and Power, so he still rules
them by his Providence and Wisdom? Especially when in transacting all our own
Affairs, nothing can be managed without Prudence, and that every thing has it is
Safety and Success from Wisdom and Forecast, as the Body has it is Life from the
Soul. So that in this World not only Empires and Provinces, Civil and Military
Affairs, but even the smallest Offices and private Families, nay the very
Beasts and the most minute and contemptible of our Domestic Creatures, are not
to be managed without Conduct, and a prudent and orderly Disposition. And
without doubt it is the Will of God that thus it should be, that all Mankind
might rule the several Parts alloted them after the Pattern set them by him,
who so wisely steers the whole. But, say you, things were thus ordered and
disposed in the beginning of the Creation; But when God had made the Universe,
and perfected all things therein, he abandoned all further Care of earthly
Matters, and renounced it. I warrant you to avoid the Drudgery, he removed it
far enough from him, or was asraid of being tired with it, or being taken up
with other Matters, he left part of the Creation to it self, being unable to
look after the whole.

V. You say then that God has left all Care The Destruction of Sodom and
Gomorrha.
of mortal Matters. If so, pray tell me to what purpose serves Religion? What
reason have we to worship Christ, or what hope of gaining his Favor? For if
God does not at all regard Mankind in this World, to what end do we daily lift
up our hands to Heaven, why do we by frequent Prayers implore God's mercy, why
do we run to the Churches, and why prostrate our selves before the Altars?

The very Reason of all Prayer is destroyed, if we have not hope of obtaining
what we ask. And therefore you see the Vanity and Folly of such an Assertion,
which, if it should be admitted, does utterly destroy all the Foundations of
Religion. But it may be you will fly to this Excuse, and say, that we worship God
now out of Fear of his future Judgment: and that we labor to pay him all the
present Service we can, that we may obtain Mercy and Forgiveness in the World
to come. What means St. Paul the Apostle then by his commanding and ordering
that Supplications, Pray 1 Timothy 2. V. 1.
ers, Intercessions, and giving of Thanks should be constantly every day
offered to our God in the Church? And for what Reason did he order thus? But
for that which he tells us, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable Life in all
V. 2.
godliness and honesty.

Here we see he commands us to offer Supplications and Prayers for Things of
this present Life: and he would never have given such a Command, if he were not
confident that we should obtain them. How therefore does any one think that
God's ears are open to Prayers offered for the Good things of the other Life,
but are closed and shut up to those of this Life? Or how come we in our Prayers
in the Church to beg of God present Security, if we think we are not heard at
all? There are therefore no Prayers to be offered for our present Safety and
Prosperity, but rather that the Modesty of the Petition may procure Audience
for him that prays, it may be convenient to address himself thus: Lord, we ask
not for Prosperity in this Life, nor for the good things of this present time,
we know thy ears are shut up and baritaded to such Prayers, so as thou can
not hear them; all that we desire is, that thou would be favorable to us
after death in the World to come. Suppose now such a Prayer as this were
pertinent and useful, yet how would it consist with Reason and good Sense? For
if God has sequestered himself from all manner of regard of the Affairs of this
World, and shut his ears against all Petitioners whatever, certainly he who
does not hear us when we pray for present good things, does not hear us when we
crave those that are future; unless we imagine that according to the difference
of the Petition, Christ does either afford or refuse his ears, that is, that
when we desire the good Things of this Life he shuts them, and opens them when
we beg the future. But no more on this head: because all these Pretenses are so
very srivolous and foolish, that we had need take care that we do not affront
the Divinity, whilst we are endeavoring to rescue and preserve his Honor. The
Reverence and Regard we owe the Divine Majesty is so awful and tremendous, that
we ought not only to detest whatever is spoken against his Religion, but also
to take all the Care that may be, that what we our selves offer in it is defense
be done with the greatest Caution and Circumspection imaginable. Well then, if
it be folly and wickedness to think that the Divine Goodness despises all Care
of Humane Affairs, for that reason, it is plain, that he does not disregard
them; if he does not disregard them, then he directs them: If he directs and
orders them, for that very Reason it is manifest, that he judges them, for it is
not possible to suppose a Government, where the Governor is not invested with
a Power of Judging.

VI. But after all, these Proofs from Reason The Rebellions of Pharaoli, and
the works of Moses.
may seem to some to be of little moment, unless we likewise confirm it by
Examples. Let us take a view then of God's Government of the World from the
beginning, and thence we will show, that he has ever so governed all things,
that we may inform you that he has at the same time likewise passed Judgment on
them. For what says the Scripture? And Gen V. 7.
the Lord God formed man of the dust of the ground, and breathed into his
nostrils the breath of life: And after He placed him in the garden V. 16.
of Eden. Then He gave him a Law, Precepts to instruct him, and Discipline to
direct him. And what was the consequence of all this? Man transgressed God's
Commandment, has Sentence Genesis 3.
passed upon him, loses Paradise, and is punished for his Transgression* Who is
so blind as not to see God acting both as Governor, and Judge in this whole
Affair? For when he placed Adam in Paradise, he was innocent, when he expelled
him, guilty: In the placing of him he exercised Government, in his expulsion,
Judgment; when he put him in the place of Pleasure, he disposed of him by his
Power; but when for his Guilt he expelled him, he judged him. This was the Case
of the first Man, that is, the Father; let us see how it fared with the Second,
that is, the Son. In process of time it came to pass, says the holy Genesis 4.
Scripture, That Cain brought of the fruit of the ^ 3, 4, 5.
ground, an offering unto the Lord. And Abel he also brought of the firstlings
of his slock, and of the fat thereof; and the Lord had respect unto Abel and
his offering; but unto Cain and his offering he had no respect. Before I speak
of the more manifest Judgment of God in this Matter, I must take notice, that
in what I have now repeated, there seems to me a sort of passing of Sentence.
For in this particular, that God accepted the Sacrifice of the one, and
rejected that of the other, he did most evidently declare the Righteousness of
the one, and the Iniquity of the other. But this is the least of the Case. When
therefore Cain, in order to accomplish his designed Villainy, had drawn his
Brother abroad, he committed the Fact in the most lonely place, in this equally
impious and foolish, that could imagine he might perform the detestable cursed
Deed, if he avoided humane Eyes, and yet durst murder his Brother in the face
of the Almighty: which makes me believe that he was of the opinion that many
are now a days, that God does not at all regard things here below, and so does
not see the Naughtiness of cruel and ungodly Men: and one cannot doubt it by his
Management, when after the horrid Deed, being called upon by God, he denied
that he knew any thing at all of his Brother's Murder; he thought God Almighty
knew so little of the Matter, that he might conceal the unnatural Fact with a
Lie. But he found the contrary to his cost. For he, who when he committed the
Murder, thought God did not see, was made sensible that he did see when he was
condemned for it. I desire therefore to be satisfied in this place, by those
who deny that Humane Affairs are either regarded, governed, or adjudg'd by God;
whether what I have at present urged, proves the contrary or no? It seems to
me, that he who is present at a Sacrifice, is not absent from it, and that he
shows the Exercise of Government, who after such Sacrifice, inflicts a
Punishment upon Cain: that he shows Care and Regard, who demands an account of
the Slain at the hands of the Murderer: and that he exercises Judgment who
passes a righteous Sentence on the wretched Aggressor. From all which, it is
very natural to make this Observation, that we should not by any maans think it
strange that good Men now a days suffer Hardships, since at that time Heaven
permitted the first Saint on Earth to be Barbarously murdered. But for what
reason it was permitted, the shortness of a humane understanding will never be
able to reach, neither is it my Business at present to enquire: It is
sufficient to my purpose, that I prove that such Occurrences as these come not
to pass, without the knowledge or notice of God Almighty, but that they are
permitted so to be in his Providence and Wisdom. Neither can we by any means
esteem that thing to be unjust in which we cannot deny the Sentence of Heaven
to have passed: because whatsoever is the will of God must of necessity be the
perfection of Justice. It is not for us to Censure God's doings as unjust;
Man's Understanding was never designed to comprehend the Compass of Divine
Justice. But to return whence we digress'd.

VII. We see then, by what has been said, The World's drowned.
that in the Instances I have given, that nothing of them came to pass through
the Disregard of the Almighty, but that the Divine Providence ordered and
appointed some of them, by His long-suffering permitted others, and passed a
just Sentence on the rest. However, it may be, there are some still may think
that it is not sufficient for me to have proved my Assertion by a few single
Instances; let us see therefore, whether I cannot prove the same thing through
all the Race of Mankind. When therefore the Number and Iniquities of Mankind
were equally increased: God seeing (says the Sacred Scripture) that the
Wickedness of man was great in the Earth, and that every imagination of the
Genesis 6.
Thoughts of his Heart was only evil continually: it repented the Lord that he
had made Man on V. 5, 6, 7.
the Earth, and it grieved him at His heart. And the Lord said, I will destroy
man whom I have created from off the face of the Earth. Let us consider here
how much the extraordinary Care and strict Justice of the Lord is shown in all
these Particulars. And first, he says, God seeing: Secondly, it grieved him at
his heart; Thirdly, I will destroy (says he) man whom I have created. By the
Expression in this place of God's seeing all this, is shown his great Care: By
the other of grief, his terrible Wrath: By that of punishing, the severity of
his Justice. It therefore repented God (says the Scripture) that he had made
man on the earth: Not that the Almighty is liable to such Motions, or subjected
to any manner of Passion, but the sacred Writings, that they may the more
plainly convey the Meaning of the Things Recorded, delivering them to us in our
own way, after the manner of Men, by the Expression of God's repentance, do
demonstrate to us the Greatness of His Anger. Now God's Wrath is the Punishment
of the Offender. But what followed after this? When God locked upon the earth,
(it goes on) and behold V. 12* ^^.
it was corrupt, he said unto Noah, the end of all flesh is come before me, for
the earth is filled with violence through them, and behold* I will V. 30.
destroy them with the earth: It follows, The Genesis 7. v. 11.
Fountains of the great deep were broken up, and the^ windows of Heaven were
opened, and the rain was upon the earth forty days and forty nights. And a
little after, And all flesh died V. 21.
that moved upon the earth. And again; And Noah only remained alive, and they
that were with him in the Ark. Here now I would fain V. 23.
know from them, who would have it that God is altogether regardless of Things
here below, whether or no at that time they think God did either regard or
judge Things on the Earth? For I am of Opinion, that he did not only barely
judge them, but passed, as it were, a double Sentence upon them: Because, when
on the one hand, he preserved the Righteous, he showed himself merciful and
their Rewarder; and on the orher hand by his punishing of the Ungodly, he
showed the strictness of his Justice. But perhaps these things, because
transacted, as it were in another Age before the Flood, may not have so great
Weight among some of the weaker Sort, as they ought to have: as though there were
some other God at that time, or else, that He afterward grew sullen, and would
not take the same Trouble that he had done before. I could by Divine
Assistance, prove what I have said through all Ages since the Flood, but the
Greatness of the Number will not admit it; and besides, some few of the most
considerable Instances may suffice: For since it is beyond all doubt, That the
God of the first Men and of their Posterity, is the very same, that must be
expected in the Government of the Posterity, which we find by Instances to be
true in that of our Forefathers*

VIII. When therefore after the Universal The destruction of Sodom and Gomorrha.
Deluge, God had blessed Mankind, and the Fruits of that Blessing appeared in
their extraordinary Increase: The Lord called to Abraham out of Heaven, and
commanded him to Genesis 12.
leave his own Country, and go and find out another. Here he is called, he
obeys, he arrives at it, is placed in it, from Poverty becomes Rich, from a
perfect Stranger becomes Powerful, from a contemptible Vagabond to be Great and
Honorable. But lest these things, which were given him, might seem to be
purely the Effects of God's Bounty, and not any Encouragement of his Obedience;
he who was thus prosperous and successful, afterward underwent the Trial of
Adversity. For he afterward lived in Trouble, Hazards, and Dread of his Life;
was tormented with Traveling from place to place, fatigued in Banishment,
every where affronted; deprived of his Wife: God ordered his Son to be
Sacrificed the Father obeys, and offers him, as far as was possible in the
Sincerity of his Intention. He Is again banished, again in fear of his Life,
envied by the Philistines, robbed by Abimelech; These were mighty Misfortunes,
and yet his Comforts were as Great: For though his Afflictions were many, yet the
Lord delivered him out of all. In all these Transactions it is easy to observe,
that God was an Overseer, an Inviter, a Guide; was Solicitous, a Promiser, a
Protector, a Rewarder, a Prover, a Patron, a Revenger, and a Judge. He was an
Overseer, when out of many he chose him alone whom he saw to be better than the
rest: An inviter, when he called him from his own Country: A guide, when he
brought him into an unknown Place: He was solicitous when he visited him under
the Tree: A promiser, when he assured him of Things to come: A protector, when
he protected him among a strange People: A rewarder, when he enriched him. A
Patron and advancer, when he advanced him above all: A revenger, when he
revenged him of his Adversaries: And a Judge because in the Act of his
Vengeance, he judged them. To this Story of Abraham, God immediately subjoyns,
and says, The Cry of Sodom and Gomorrha is great, and their Sin is Genesis 18.
very grievous. The Cry, says he, of Sodom v. 20, 21.
and Gomorrha is very Great. The way of speaking that Sins do cry, is
remarkable: For doubtless the Cry of Sinners must be great, since it ascends
from Earth to Heaven. But why should he use such an Expression, as that the
Sins of Men do cry? Because God says, that his ears are wounded with the Cries
of Sins, to hasten the Punishment of the Sinner: And a huge and mighty Cry it
must be, when the long-suffering of God is so overcome by the Cry of Sins, that
he is forced to inflict Punishment on the Sinner. The Lord does therefore here
show how unwillingly he inflicts Punishment on the greatest Trangressors, when
he says, that the Cry of Sodom is come up to him, as much as if he had said, my
Mercy does mightily incline me to spare them, but the Cry of their Sins does
even force me to punish them. But when he had said thus, what was the
Consequence? Why, Angels are sent to; Genesis 19.
Sodom, they go, they enter the Place, are kindly* received by the good People,
are abused and injured by the Bad. The Wicked are struck with Blindness, and
the Righteous saved. Lot with his righteous Inclinations is taken out of the
City, the City, with its unrighteous Inhabitants is burnt to Ashes. I desire to
be informed in this place, whether God, according to his righteous Judgment
destroyed the Place, or; whether he did it without Judgment? Whoever, says God,
punished the Sodomites without passing Sentence, makes him to be* unjust: But
if he did pass Sentence in the Destruction of the Wicked, then he judged them;
and truly he judged them at present, as though it were at the future Judgment:
For it is most certain, that Hellfire burns for the Punishment of the Wicked
hereafter, and Sodom, with it is neighbourning Cities, were destroyed by fire
from Heaven. So that by this present one, God seems to declare the Dreadful
future Judgment, when upon a most unrighteous People he sent a sort of Hell
from Heaven. Even as 2 Pet. 2. v. 6.
the Apostle also says: And turning the Cities of Sodom and Gomorrha into
ashes, condemned them with an overthrow, making them an Example unto those that
after should live ungodly: And yet, even what was done there had more of God's
Mercy in it, than of his Severity. For 'twas a piece of very great Mercy that
he deferred the Punishment of them so long, as it was of Justice that he did
some time punish them. And therefore by his sending Angels to Sodom, he would
show us with what unwillingness it is that he punishes Sinners: So, as that,
when we read what the Angels suffered from the Sodomites, and consider the
excessive Greatness of their Villainies, the Deformity of their Crimes, and the
Nastiness of their Lusts, God does by that show his unwillingness to destroy
them, if they themselves had not extorted their own Destruction from him. The
Rebellions of Pharaoh, and the Works of Moses.


IX I could produce innumerable other Examples, but that I fear I shall seem to
write an History, whilst I am endeavoring fully to prove the Thing I have
undertaken. Moses in the Desert feeds a Flock, sees the Bush burning, hears God
out of the Bush, receives Commands Exodus 3.
from him, is exalted with Power, is sent to Pharaoh, goes to him, speaks with
him, is rejected, and yet gains his Point; Egypt is sinitten, Pharaoh is
scourged for his Disobedience, and that by more ways than one, that the greater
Criminal might be wracked with variety of Punishment. And what then? Why after
all he rebels ten times, and is as often scourged. What say you to that? Why, I
think you may perceive in this whole Affair, that God does both take care of,
and judge Affairs here below. As for Instance in Egypt, where there appears
not only one single One, but variety of God's Judgments: For as often as he
smote those who rebelled against him in Egypt, so often he judged them. But
what followed after? Israel is sent out, celebrates the Passover, spoils the
Egyptians, departs with Riches: Pharaoh repents, draws together his Army,
overtakes the departed, Encamps, is parted by the Cloud, the Sea is dried up,
Israel passes through, is delivered by the kind sufferance of the friendly
Waves, Pharaoh pursues, the Sea rowls upon him, and he is overwhelmed in the
Waters. I think in this whole Affair, there does appear the manifest Judgment
of God; and not only his Judgment, but also his Long-suffering and Forbearance,
For it is an Argument of great forbearance, that the wicked Egyptians were
often smitten, as it is of Judgment, that the Perverse and Impenitent were at
length destroyed. Well, after this Series of Things and Actions, Israel being
Conqueror without a Battle, enters the Wilderness, travels without a Journey,
sojourns without a Road, God his Leader, the Host of Heaven his
Fellow Soldiers, and heavenly Bodies his Guides, following the moving Pillar,
cloudy by Day, and fiery by Night, changing its Color and Complexion, as
fitted best the change of either Season, that it might set off the brightness
of the Day by it is shady Obscurity, and enlighten the darkness of the Night by
it is shining Splendor. To these add Fountains, made on a sudden, add Medicated
Waters either newly given, or else transmuted, remaining the same in Kind, though
changed in qualities: the tops of Mountains opened, with Rivers bursting from
them, and Sandy Deserts watered with new unusual Streams, thousands of Fowls
brought to the Travelers Camps, Heaven by the tenderest Love indulging, not
only their Necessities, but even their Wantonness, the Stars afford them daily
Food for forty Years, the Heavens still dewing down the luscious Meat, did pour
it forth, not only for Subsistence, but for Pleasure too. Besides, the Men felt
not in any Limb the alterations or decays natural to Humane Bodies: Their Nails
never grew, they lost no Teeth, their Hair still of one length, their Feet nere
fretted, their Garments always whole, their Shoes nere torn, their Honor was
so great in all respects, that even their poorest Clothing shared in the
advancement. To this add God himself descending, purely to instruct them, and
the Son of God appearing visible to the eyes of Mortals, the mighty Numbers of
the common Sort admitted to be familiar with their God, and honored with his
Friendship. To these add Thunders, Lightnings, the dreadful Sounds of heavenly
Trumpets, the fearful Crackling of the troubled Air, Heavens Axes growning with
the sacred Sounds, Fires, Darkness, Clouds all full of God, the Lord conversing
face to face, the Law resounding from the mouth of God, Letters cut by God's
finger, pages hewn from the Quarry, arccky Volumn, a People learning, and Great
God their Teacher, and even one School for Heaven and Earth, made up of Men and
Angels. For thus says the Scripture, that when Moses had related the Words of
the People unto the Lord, the Lord said unto him, Lo I come unto Exodus 19. v. 9.
thee in a thick Cloud, that the people may hear when I speak with thee. And a
little after, v. 16.
There were Thundrings and Lightnings, and a thick Cloud upon the Mount. And
again: And the Lord came down upon Mount Sinai, on the top of the Mount. And
afterward, He did talk Exodus 33.
with Moses, the whole Congregation beholding that the Pillar of the Cloud
stood at the door of v. 9, 10.
the Tabernacle, and they themselves stood and worshipped at the door of their
Tabernacles. God v. 11.
talked with Moses face to face, as a Man speaks to his friend. Things being
thus in fact, pray, does God seem to take care of Man or no, when he heaps so
many Benefits upon him, and does such mighty Things for him; when he admits so
contemptible a Creature to converse with him, and to be, even in some sense, a
sort of Companion to him; when he opens those hands for him that are crowded
with immortal Treasures, nourishing him with the cup of pleasure, and feeding
him with the bread of Heaven? I would fain know how he could better have
expressed the Care of his Government, what greater Tenderness could he possibly
show them, than by Respecting them so much in this Life, as to allow them a
sort of Anticipation of the Blessedness hereafter?

X. But perhaps it will be answered here, that it is true, that a long time ago,
God was thus careful of Mankind, but now a days he does not at all trouble
himself with it. Pray how come we to be of that Opinion? Because, it may be, we
are not every day fed with Manna, as they were then, when we are provided with
plentiful Crops of Corn: Because the Quails do not fly in our Faces to be
caught, when we are supplied with all sorts of Birds, Beasts and Cattle:
Because we drink not Water flowing from hardest Rocks, when we have Cellars
Stored with choicest Wines. Beside, I am confident, that even we our selves,
who think they were so much the Care of God, and that we are neglected by Him,
should he, instead of what we now enjoy, give us those Things they had, would
certainly refuse the Offer. We would never part with what we have at present,
to be possessed of what they had; not that we have better Things now than that
People then enjoyed; but because they who were thus daily fed by the hand of
God and Heaven, preferred their former Gluttony to their present Provisions,
grew sullen and afflicted with the base Remembrance of fleshly Diet, and lewdly
hanker'd after Leeks and Onions: not that their former Food was any whit the
better; but because they were just in the same Condition that we are now: They
abhorred what e're was present, and lusted for what was not: We commend the
Things of that Age more than of our own: not that we had rather have them, if
'twere put to our Choice, but it is a Vice common to Mankind, our Desires are
always roving after what we have not. As one says well, Other Men's Goods
please us, and ^. Syrus.
ours please other Men. Beside, it is almost universally true of us All, that
there is not one of us but is guilty of Ingratitude toward God, and it is a kind
of Original Sin which taints us all, we are still lessening God's love and
goodness, lest we should own our selves too much his Debtors. But enough of
this, it is time to return where I left off; although, I doubt not but I have
sufficiently proved my Proposition, yet I shall add somewhat more, because I
judge it is safer to use more Proofs than what are barely needful, than to
destroy a Cause perhaps, by being short in using too few.

XI. The Israelites, having been some time delivered from the Yoke of Pharaoh,
revolted at Mount Sinai, and are forthwith corrected by the Lord for their
Folly. For so it is written. And the Lord plagued the people, because Exodus 32.
they made the Calfe which Aaron made. v. 35.
How could God Almighty execute a more evident Judgment on the Offenders than
that Punishment should immediately follow the Transgression? But why since all
the Congregation were guilty, was not Sentence passed alike on all? Because the
God of mercy drew his Sword of Judgment against some, that others might amend
by their Example; and that he might show at once to all, his Justice in
destroying, and Mercy in preserving: 'Twas Justice that chastis'd them, and
'twas Mercy that spared them: although both in a different manner; for Mercy here
had greater share than Justice: Because the Lord being always most
compassionate, is ever more inclind to Mercy than to Vengeance, and although at
that time in punishing part of the Jewish Host, the Divine Justice made use of
Judgment and Severity, yet at that very time his Mercy saved by far the greater
part: and that out of mere Compassion to their mighty Numbers, lest the
Punishment should have destroyed all whom the Guilt had infected. However we
read that God's Justice is inexorable toward some Persons and Families, as in
the Case when the People rested on the Sabaoth-day, he who presumed Numb. 15.
to gather Sticks was ordered to be slain: v. 36.
For although the Act it self was innocent, yet the Day on which he did it, made
it Criminal: So in the Case of two contending Parties, one who blasphemed was
put to death; For thus it is written, Behold the Son of an Israelitish Levit. 24.
Woman, whose Father was an Egyptian, v. 10.
went out among the Children of Israel: And this Son of the Israelitish Woman,
and a Man v. 11
of Israel strove together in the Camp: And the Israelitish Woman's Son
blasphemed the Name of the Lord, and cursed, and they brought him unto Moses:
And a little after, And they put him in ward, that the mind of the Lord might
be showed v. 12.
them, and the Lord spoke unto Moses. saying; Bring forth him that has cursed
without the v. 13.
Camp, and let all that heard him lay their hands v. 14.
upon his Head, and let all the Congregation stone him. Is not here a plain and
manifest Judgment of God, and a Sentence in a heavenly Trial, passed according
to the form of Humane Examinations? For first the Offender is seized; in the
next place, he is brought before the Judgment Seat, then he is accused, then
sent into Prison, and last of all, punished by a Sentence from above. And not
only punished, but condemned in a Trial by Witnesses, that it might appear that
'twas Justice that convicted him, and not mere Power: that the Example might
contribute to the Amendment of all, that no one in aftertimes should dare to
do those things that all the People had punished in one. This is the Method and
the Justice with which God does both now act, and with which he ever has acted:
that the punishments inflicted on single, Persons may tend to the Amendment of
all. So it was in the case of Nadab and Abihu, both of the Priesthood, Numb 26.
v. 61.
when they were consumed with Fire: in whose destruction God had a mind to
manifest, not only his common Judgment, but a 1 Chronicles. 24. v. 1, 2.
very present, sudden, and unexpected one. For thus says the Scripture; That
when fire came out from before the Lord, and consumed Levit. 9. v. 24.
upon the Altar the Burnt-offering. -- Nadab and Abihu, the Sons of Aaron took
either of them his Censer, and put fire therein, and offered Levit. 10.
strange fire before the Lord, which he commanded v. 1.
them not: And there went out fire from the Lord, and devoured them: and they
died before the Lord. v. 2.
By this God would show, that his hand is always stretched over us, and that
the Sword of Vengeance hangs over our heads, since we see that he punished the
Sin of these Men in the very Act: The Fact of these Sinners was scarce
committed, before the Penalty revenged the Sin: but that is not the only
remarkable Thing in this Affair, since there are many others. For in these Men
it was not so much a wicked Heart, as a too rash and unadvised Easiness that
was punished? which is a Declaration from God himself, of what punishment those
are worthy, who dare Sin in open Contempt of the Divine Majesty, when these Men
are thus smitten who offended merely for want of Consideration: And how heinous
a Guilt they would contract, who should act expressly against God's Commands,
when these were so severely scourged, who wanted nothing but a Command for
their Actions. Further, by this, God provides for our Amendment, setting before
us so wholesome an Example, by which all of the Laiety may undestand how
greatly they ought to dread the Wrath of God; since neither the Merits of the
Father* could deliver, nor the Privilege of the sacred Ministry free, even the
Sons of the High Priest from immediate Punishment. But why do I speak of the
Inconsiderateness of these Men, which in a manner affected God himself, and
tended to the lessening his Honor? Miriam Numb. 12. v. ^.
speaks against Moses, and is punished; and not only barely so, but in a
Judicial way: For in the first place, she is summoned to appear in Judgment:
Then she is convicted, and in the last place punished. In the Reproof given
her, there was the force of a Sentence; in her Leprosy she was put in the
State of a real Offender; and this Censure did not only humble Miriam, but
Aaron also; For though it was not meet that the High Priest should be deformed by
Leprosy, yet nevertheless the Chastisement of the Lord was upon him; and not
only so, for Aaron, as Partaker in the Crime, is chastis'd, in that very
Punishment which Miriam suffered: for the punishment is laid upon Miriam, that
Aaron may be confounded with the Guilt. But that we may further understand how
inexorable God is in his Judgment in some cases, we shall see that he will not
hearken to the Intercession, even of the offended Party. Thus we read that the
Lord said unto Aaron and Miriam; Wherefore Numb. 12. v.*
were ye not afraid to speak against my servant Moses? And the anger of the
Lord was v. 9.
kindled against them, and he departed. -- And behold Miriam became Leprous
white as Snow. v. 10.
And Moses cried unto the Lord, saying, Heal v. 13.
her now, O God, I beseech thee. And the Lord said unto Moses, if her Father
had but spit in v. 14.
her face, should she not be ashamed seven days? Let her be shut out from the
Camp seven days, and after that let her be received in again. What I have said
on this head and part of my Discourse is sufficient: for it would be endless to
enlarge upon all, when the very naming them would be sufficiently tedious,
without staying to make Discourses upon them. However, I shall add somewhat
more.

XII. The Israelites repent that they left Egypt, they are smitten for it;
they murmur at the great Fatigue of their Journey, they are afflicted for it:
They long for Flesh, and are scourged for it. Being weary of feeding every day
on Manna, they desire to glut themselves with Dainties, their craving Appetites
are gratified to the full; but whilst their Bellies are crammed, they are
tormented: For while (says the Scripture) the meat was yet in their mouths, the
heavy Wrath of God came upon Psalm. 78. v. 30* 31.
them, and slew the fattest of them, and smote down the chosen Men of Israel.
Og rebels against* Deuteronomy. 3. v. 3. Numb. 26. v. 9, 10.
Moses, and is destroyed: Core reproaches him* and is overwhelmed: Dathan and
Abiram murmur, and are swallowed up. For the Earth opened and swallowed up
Dathan, and covered the Congregation Psalm. 106 v. 17.
of Abiram. Two hundred and fifty Principal Men likewise, as the Scripture
testifies, who were by name called to Council* Numb. 16. v. 2.
made an Insurrection against Moses: And at the time of their withstanding
Moses* and Aaron, they said, it is sufficient for us that al^ the Congregation
are holy every one of them* Wherefore then lift you up your selves above the
Congregation of the Lord? And what followed? v. 3.
Why, fire came out from the Lord, and v. 35.
consumed the two hundred and fifty Men that offered Incense. But after all
these mighty Things* they received no Advantage from Heavens care* they were
often under the Rod, but still without Amendment: For, as we at this time are
every day scourged, yet are nere the better* so they under all their
Chastisements continued still the same. For what says the Scripture? The day
following, the whole Congregation murmured v. 41.
against Moses and Aaron, saying; Ye have killed the People of the Lord. And
what then* Fourteen thousand and seven hundred Men were destroyed in a trice by
Fire from Heaven. But how comes it since all the People had transgressed that
they di not all likewise share in the Punishment, especially considering that
in the Rebellion of Cor^h, beforementioned, not a Soul escaped? How comes it to
pass that in that case God would destroy the whole Body of the Offenders, but
in this only some part of them? Because God is plentiful both in Mercy and
Justice, and of his Essential goodness forgives many times, as well as
exercises Severity in Vindication of his Justice. And therefore in that Case
his Justice took place, that by punishing all the Offenders, it might tend to
the Reformation of all that saw or heard it: But in this he exercises Mercy,
lest a whole People should be destroyed. And yet when he had used them with so
much Compassion, and saw the often*repeated Scourging of a part only of the
offending Multitude had so little Success, at the last he utterly destroyed
them all: The Consideration of which should both make us tremble, and spur us
on to Amendment, lest we, who neglect to reform our selves from their Example,
come to the same miserable End that they did. For what became of them is plain
beyond all doubt; for seeing that the Chief Design of bringing the Children of
Israel out of the Land of Egypt, was purely that they might possess the Land
of Promise, only two holy and good Men, of all that vast Body entered into it.
For thus says the Scripture; The Lord spoke unto Moses Numb 14. v. 26, 27.
and Aaron, saying, how long shall I bear with this evil Congregation which
murmur against me. As truly as I live, says the Lord, as you have V. 28.
spoken in mine ears, so will I do unto you; your Carcasses shall fall in this
wilderness. And afterward, But your little ones which you v. 31.
said should be a Prey, them will I bring in, and they shall know the Land
which ye have despised. But as for you, your Carcasses they shall fall in this
wilderness. And what followed? They v. 32.
all died and were cut off before the Lord. What is there now in all these
Instances where God is not? Would you see him a Governor? Behold, he rectifies
Things present, and orders what shall be for the time to come. Would you see
him a severe Judge? Lo he punishes the guilty: Would you behold him just and
merciful? Lo he spares the Innocent. Would you see him Universal Judge? Behold
he is Judgment it self. For as a Judge he reproves us, and as a Judge he rules
us: As a Judge he passes Sentence, as a Judge he destroys the guilty, and as a
Judge he rewards the Innocent.

SALVIAN of GOD's Government, etc. BOOK II.
Of God's Governing the World; How God's Ears are always open to the Righteous;
How Great things David suffered. An Example of Repentance, and the Advantages
obtained thereby.

THE Examples I have before produced, Of God's governing the World.
are sufficient to prove that our God is ever a most solicitous Regarder, a
most merciful Governor, and a most just Judge. Notwithstanding which, some of
the weaker Sort may yet think; if things are now ordered by God as they were
heretofore in those days; How comes it about, that bad Men prevail, and that
the Good are in distress; in those days the Wicked felt the weight of God's
Wrath, and the Righteous his loving Kindness; but now the Righteous in some
sort seem to experience his Wrath, and the Wicked his Favor? I shall give an
Answer to all this presently: But now, since in the foregoing Book I engaged to
prove these three Things, to wit, The Presence of God, His Government and
Judgment, by these three Topics of Reason, Examples, and Testomony; and having
already gone through the two first, it remains that I manifest the same by
Testimony: although in strictness the Examples I have produced already ought to
pass for Testimony, for that is rightly called Testimony, whereby the Truth of
things is proved. But which of the abovementioned Three shall I begin to prove
first by this Testimony, whether God's Presence, His Governing, or His Judging?
His Presence, I think, whether he govern or judge; for without doubt, he ought
to be present before he can exercise either the one or the other. The holy
Scripture in it is sacred Pages speaks thus: The eyes of the Lord are in Prove.
15. v. 3.
every place, beholding the evil and the good. Here you have him present, here
you have him beholding and watching in every place by his Care and Providence:
For therefore is it said, that he considers both the Good and the Bad, to show
that nothing can be neglected by him, who so narrowly views every thing. But
for a further Understanding of the Matter, hear what the same holy Spirit
testifies in another part of Scripture. The eye of the Lord is upon them that
fear him. -- To deliver Psalm. 33. V. 17. 18.
their Soul from death, and to feed them in the time of Dearth. Here is a
reason given why God is said to behold good Men, namely, that he may preserve
and protect them. For it is from the Propitious eye of Heaven that Mankind ought
to date their preservation. So the same holy Spirit in another place: The Psalm
34. V. 15.
eyes of the Lord are over the righteous, and his ears are open unto their
Prayers. See here with how much goodness the holy Scripture represents God
dealing with his People. For in that it says, The eyes of the Lord are over the
righteous, it shows the Affection of the gracious Beholder: in that his ears
are open unto their Prayers, is demonstrated the Liberality and Bounty of the
Hearer.

In the Expression that God's ears are always How God's ears are always open to
the Righteous.
ready to receive the Prayers of the Righteous is meant, not only bare Hearing,
but a kind of Condescension likewise.

But how are God's ears always open to the Prayers of the Righteous? How, but
because God always hears, and always grants their Petitions as soon as asked:
Our Lord's ears are always ready to hear the Prayers of his Saints, always
attentive: And, Oh how trebly blessed and happy should we be, were we as ready
to obey and do the Will of God, as we read here, that God is ready and willing
to hear us! But you will say, it may be, that what we read of God's beholding the
Just, does not help my Cause at all: Because that cannot be called a general
Beholding, which is restrained by a particular Favor to the Just only. It is
but a little before where the Text is produced, which says; The eyes of the
Lord behold the evil and the good: However, if a further Proof be desired, mind
what follows, for thus it subjoyns, The countenance of the Lord is against
Psalm. 34. v. 16.
them that do evil, to root out the remembrance of them from the earth. Here
certainly is no room left for Complaint, that God does not also behold the
Unjust: but notwithstanding this general View he takes of both, yet he beholds
them with a vast difference as to their Merits; he beholds the Good, that he
may preserve them, but the Bad, that he may destroy them; among whom you, who
have the Courage to deny that God beholds Mankind, must expect your share; For
know that you are not only seen by the Almighty, but acknowledge that your
destruction is inevitable: For since the Countenance of the Lord is upon them
that do evil, to root out the remembrance of them from the Earth, it is of
necessity that you, who wickedly deny the Countenance of God to behold any
thing, should perceive the Wrath of the Beholder in your Destruction. And this
shall suffice for the first thing, which is of God's Presence in, and his
beholding of, Humane Affairs.

II. Let us see now whether he who beholds them, governs them; certainly so,
for the main Reason of His Beholding is in order to His Governing; for he does
not regard and mind them, only in order to neglect them, when we understand
that he does not neglect by the very Act of his minding them; especially, since
holy Writ witnesses, as above, that God beholds the Wicked in order to their
Destruction, and the Good for their Preservation. And in this very Thing the
Dispensation of God's Government is manifested; for the Justice of Government
does entirely consist in this, to deal with every* Man according to the measure
of his Deserts. But let us view a plainer Testimony in this Matter. The holy
Ghost says to God the Father in the Psalm, Hear, O thou sh^pherd of (or thou
who governest) Psalm: 80. v. 1.
Israel. The word Israel signifies seeing God, whom yet all faithful Christians
may behold in their Heart and by Faith: and although God be the Ruler of all Men,
yet those are said more peculiarly to be governed by him, who do more
peculiarly deserve the Benefit of the Divine ear. So that you, whoever you are,
if so be you are a Christian, must of necessity believe your self to be
governed by God. But if you do not believe, with other Christians, that you are
governed by God; you must of necessity know that you are separated from all
other Christians. But if you desire to be informed, as we have hinted above,
what is the State of all Mankind in general, and not of the Christians in
particular, the Holy Scripture will solve your Doubt, which affirms, that all
things are continually and without intermission, ordered and governed by God.
For he loves Council and Discipline. Nor is there any other God whose Care is
Wisd. 12. v. 15, 18.
Universal. For so much then as thou art righteous thy self, thou orderest all
things righteously; -- and orderest us with great favor. Here you see God
always disposing Affairs, and always governing; and besides, there is not only
in this place a Declaration of his Governning, but also an Exaltation of Humane
Nature: For in the words, Thou orderest us, is the Force of God's Power, but in
those with great favor is the height of Humane Honor. So in the Prophet; Do
not I fill Heaven and earth, says the Lord? And He himself declares Jer. 23.
V. 24.
why he fills all things: Because I am with you, (says he) and will save you.
God Jer. 42. v. 11.
does not only barely declare his Power, and his filling all things, but shows
the Efficacy and Benefit of such his filling. For the Divine filling brings
this Advantage with it, that it saves every thing which it fills. And therefore
the holy Apostle St. Paul, in the Acts of Acts 17. v. 28.
the Apostles says: In him we live and move and have our Being. Certainly he is
more than a bare Disposer of Life, in whom is the Principal of Motion of the
Creature that lives. For he does not say that we are moved by him, but in him,
thereby informing us, that the Substance of us All is engraffed in the Divine
Perfections: Because we plainly live in him from whom we receive even our very
Existence. So our Savior himself in the Gospel: Lo I am with you always Matthew.
28. v. 20.
even unto the end of the world. He did not only say that he was with us, but
that he was with us always. And do you, ungrateful Man, venture to say, that he
who is always with us, does neither regard nor care for us? What, does he stay
with us for no other end but to despise and neglect us? How are these Things
consistent, that he should afford us his Presence out of Love, and yet hate us
by his Neglect? For he says, Lo I am with you always even unto the end of the
world. We put a very pretty Meaning on the loving kindness of God, by
slandering him for neglecting us, when at the same time he openly declares that
he does never leave us. He would by this show us, that he would never depart
from us in Affection and Protection, because his Presence should be always with
us: And we convert this Divine Charity into Contempt of us, and change these
Marks of Love into Arguments of Hatred. For this His saying, that he would be
always with us, we make a Testimony of Hatred rather than of Love. For if the
Lord had said he should be absent, there would be less Reason to accuse him of
disregard in Absence. It shows a much greater Slight and Contempt, if he should
always neglect us, who always remained with us; it is great aggravation of
Hatred to us, if he should stay with us only for this End, always to let us
have his Presence, and yet never to love us. Far be it from us to have such
Thoughts of the most Loving and merciful God, that he should be always near us,
only that by such nearness, he might slight and neglect us the more; and far be
it from us to speak it. I am persuaded there is scarce such a Varlet to be
found among all Mankind, that desires to be near another Man, purely because he
does not love him; and that would covet to enjoy his Company, merely that he
might have the better opportunity to hate and despise him. Let therefore Humane
Nature either inform or convince us: For if we do not desire to be with any
Man, unless such as we have Respect for; and because we have such respect, we
endeavor that our Company may be as grateful and advantageous to him we do so
love: How come we then to take away that from God, which you must allow to a
wicked Man, and to depress him beneath, even the very worst of Men: that he
should tell us, that he would be always with us, that he might use us with the
greater Scorn and Contempt? But enough of this.

III. It remains that, since I have proved by How great things David suffered.
Testimonies of holy Writ, that all things are ordered and governed by God, I
should show in like manner, that many things in this world have been adjudged
by him. When holy David was abused and affronted by Nabal the Carmelite, he
forbore to resent the Injury, and had his Cause immediately avenged by God.
When therefore his Adversary was dead, and smitten by the hand of Heaven, he
spoke after this manner, Blessed be the Lord 1 Samuel 25. v. 39.
that has pleaded the Cause of my Reproach from the hand of Nabal. When his
Son became his Persecutor, and turned him out of his Kingdom, the Lord as
Judge, in a short time, avenged his Cause; and not only barely avenged it, but
in a much higher degree than he, in whose Vindication it was, would have had
it; that God might show that the Injustice done to the Injured and Oppressed,
is more grievous to Himself than to those that bear it. For he who punishes
beyond the Desire of the Injured Party, shows plainly, that such overplus of
Correction is in his own Quarrel. His undutiful Son therefore, being snapp'd up
by the growing Gallows, holy Writ relates the Account then given of this
Punishment that fell upon him from above, Thus: Tidings, my Lord the King: for
the 2 Samuel 18. v. 31.
Lord has avenged (or judged for) thee this day of all them that rose up
against thee.

IV. Here you see, not only from the nature of Things and Examples, as I showed
before; but also from the very Name and Term of Judgment, how the Scriptures
prove by holy Witnesses, that God does Judge even in this present World. But
you think, it may be, this was a singular Instance, a particular Favor granted
to so Great and Good a Man, that God by his Judgments should deliver him from
his Adversaries. The whole day would not be sufficient for me to ^^eak of the
Sentences and Judgments passed by God in this present World. However, that you
may plainly discern, that he does not pass his Censures and Judgment so much
for the sake of Persons, as the Justice of their Causes; pray mark how the same
God, as Judge, who so constantly gave Sentence for David, has often in other
Cases given it against him: and this not in the Concern of Numbers of People,
or which perhaps might seem to incline God Almighty, that of holy and good Men,
but in the Cause of a single Person, and he an Alien too, and where in all
probability he would not have born so hard on so great a Man, if his Cause had
not condemned him. Having killed Vriah the Hittite, a Gentile, and a Foreigner,
the Word of the Lord comes to David; Thou have killed Vriah the Hittite with
the Sword, and have taken his Wife to be 2 Samuel 12. v. 9.
thy Wife, and have slain him with the Sword of the Children of Ammon. Now
therefore the Sword shall not depart from thine House. -- v. 10.
Behold I will raise up evil against thee out of v. 11.
thine own House, and I will take thy Wives before thine eyes, and give them
unto thy Neighbor, and he shall lie with thy Wives in the sight of the Sun, in
that thou did it secretly, but I will do this thing before all Israel, and
before the Sun. What say you to this, you that are so far from believing that
God does exercise Judgment in this World, that you don't think he minds it at
all? Don't you see that God's eyes were present at this private and single Sin
of David's? So that you who, I suppose, comfort and solace your self in your
Wickedness with the hopes that God does not at all weigh any of our Actions, do
by this find, that Christ plainly sees you, and is ready to pour down Vengeance
on your Head: for 'twas not possible for David, a holy Man, to conceal one
single Sin, committed with all the privacy imaginable, nor by the Merit of all
the good Works he had ever done, to free himself from present Punishment. For
what says the Lord to him, I will take thy Wives before thine eyes, and the
Sword shall not depart from thine House. Here you see how quick a Sentence is
passed on so Great a Man for one single Fault; his Condemnation immediately
followed his Crime, a Condemnation with a Punishment not to be deferred, but
immediately affecting the guilty Person, leaving none of the Guilt to be
answered for hereafter. And thefore he did not say, because thou have done this
Thing, thou shall feel God's future Judgment, and shall be tormented in
Hellfire hereafter: but thou shall be punished in this World, and shall
immediately feel the Sword of God's Wrath hanging over thy head. And what
Example of repentance.
was the Effect of this? Why, the Criminal acknowledges his Fault, is humbled,
suffers Compunction, Confesses, Mourns, and Repents, throws by his Royal Gemms,
puts off his Massy Embroidered Robes, uses no Purple, lays by his Diadem,
changes his Habit and his Heart, casts off the Crown with all its Gay
Attendance, becomes a formal Penitent, and flies for Refuge to a mean Attire,
is wasted with Fasting, and dried up with Thirst, is drained with Weeping, and
shut up in Secret. And yet so Renowned a Prince as this, greater in Piety than
in Power, extraordinary deserving in all his former Conduct, when he prays and
sues with so much Court, yet cannot be forgiven. However he gained that mighty
The advantage of repentance.
Great Advantage from his Repentance, that he was not adjudged to Eternal
Punishment, although he could not escape in this World. For after all, thus says
the Prophet to him: Because 2 Samuel 12. v. 14.
by this deed thou have given great occasion to the Enemies of the Lord to
Blaspheme, the Child also that is born unto thee shall surely die. Beside the
severe Penalty inflicted, in taking away the Child, God seems so to have
ordered it, that the fond Father should have the tenderest Sense of the
Judgment, that the Father himself who grieved, and feared the Loss, should be
the very Cause of the beloved Infant's Death, and even the Crime that brought
him into the World, the Occasion of throwing him out of it.

V. This therefore was the first step of the Divine Judgment; the first, but
not the only One, for there followed a whole Series of Troubles and
Afflictions, and a continued Chain of Misfortunes never after departed from his
Family. Tamar is ravished by Amnon: 2 Samuel 13.
Amnon is murdered by Absalom: A Grand wicedness was committed by one Brother,
but yet a greater by the other in Revenge of it: And David the Father a
Sufferer in both their Crimes; two of his Sons transgress, and he loses three
Children by the Offense, Tamar loses her Virginity, and in Amnon's Murder, the
loss of Absalom is bemoaned. And it is not easy to guess which of his two Sons
Loss, the indulgent Father took most to heart; whether his who fell by his
Brother's hand in this World, or his who perished eternally by his own in the
other. And now according to the Word of God, after this there follows a whole
heap of extraordinary Misfortunes; the Father is for a long time beset by his
Son, is abdicated and driven out of his Kingdom, and to save his Life, sneaks
off like a Fugitive. The Son would puzzle half Mankind to tell whether he were
more lewd or cruel; For when he failed to kill his Father by base Patricide, he
throws Dirt upon him by Incest, and by such sort of Incest, which beside the
Sin; was industriously designed to express and exalt the Villainy; for that very
Wickedness; which is most abominable, tho committed with the greatest Secrecy,
this Persecutor of his Father acted openly: that not only his absent Father
might be dishonored by the prodigious Sin, but also the eyes of the whole City
be defiled with his public Incest. If to this we add the manner of his Flight,
how hard it was when so Great a King, of so Great Fame, greater than all his
neighbor Kings, and above the World, fled from his own Children and Subjects
with scarce a Servant to attend him, become now, in comparison of what he was
lately, a Beggar and deserted; flying in Fear, in Disgrace, in Sorrow, going
(as the Scripture says) with his Head covered and barefoot: 2 Samuel 15. v. 30.
Beside these, driving from himself the Thoughts of what he was formerly,
living now, as it were, after himself, become so low (which is grievous to a
Prince) as to be liable to the Affronts of his own Servants, or (which is still
more grievous) to need their Pity; so that Siba now might bring him Victuals,
nor Simei fear to curse him publicly; 2 Samuel 16. v. 1, and 7.
being by God's Judgment so much altered from himself, that one single Enemy
might openly insult over him, whom all the neighboring World before, trembled
at.

VI. Where are they now that deny that God regards Humane Affairs? Behold how
often the Scriptures have informed us in the person of this one Man, not only
that God does regard them, but that he does adjudge them likewise. And to what
end does it inculcate all these things, but that we might know and understand
that God's Justice and Judgment in this World will ever be the same they have
been? And we therefore read that holy and good Men were formerly chastis'd by
God's Judgment, that we might know that we our selves are to be judged by God
as Judge, even in this World: For as God is everlasting, so is his Justice: As
the Lord's Omnipotence will never fail, so neither will his Judgment ever
change: as God is of right eternal, so his Justice has no end. And therefore
all those who are remarkable for their Piety in the holy Scripture, when they
were in any imminent Danger, or cruel Persecution, always call for God's
present Judgment: So says the Psalm. 43. v. 1.
just Man in the Psalm: Give Sentence with me, O God, and defend my Cause
against the ungodly People: which, lest it might be applied to God's future
Judgment, he adds, Deliver me from the deceitful and wicked Man. He certainly
desires God's present Judgment, who prays to be delivered from the hands of his
Persecutors: and being conscious of the goodness of his Cause, he does not so
much pray for the help and assistance of God, as his Judgment; because the best
assistance that can be given to a good Cause is, when it is rightly judged. So
in another place very plainly, Plead thou Psalm. 35.
my Cause, O Lord, with them that strive with v. 1.
me, and fight thou against them that fight against me; Lay hand upon the
shield and buckler, and v. 2.
stand up to help me. You see likewise in this place, there is no provocation
to any future Severity or Trial, but to the Justice of the present Judgment.
For this is all he says, Lay hand upon the Shield, and seize the Sword, the
Shield for Protection, and the Sword for Revenge. Not that God in the exercise
of his Judgment stands in need of any such Furniture, but because in this World
the names of such frightful Things are the Instruments of frightful Judgments,
he speaks to a Humane Understanding in the Language of Humane things: because
he prayed to be judged and avenged of his Adversaries, he expressed the
Greatness of the Divine Vengeance by Instruments of earthly Cruelty. Lastly,
this same Prophet does elsewhere declare the difference there is between God's
present and his future Judgment. For he mentions the exercise of a Psalm. 9. v.
4.
present Judgment in these words: Thou sit upon the Throne who judge
righteously: And of the Psalm. 96. v 13.
future and eternal Judgment, he says, He shall judge the World righteously.
And again, He shall judge the People in Truth. Here he uses the very Words of
the present and future time or tense, to distinguish the time of each Judgment.
That he might show the present Judgment he puts, Thou judge or thou do
judge; and that he might distinguish the Future from the Present, he adds, He
shall or he will judge. And thus I have sufficiently proved God's Providence,
his Government, and Judgment, by Reason, Examples, and Testimony: Especially
since the following Discourses tend all to the same Purpose. Now if it shall
please the Great God, whose Cause I am pleading, to grant me Strength to go
through with it: I shall attempt to produce what the Adversaries use to object
against it, and at the same time Confute them.

SALVIAN of GOD's Government, etc. BOOK III.
The State of the Good much harder than the Bad. Of the just Judgments and
Councils of God, which are unknown. Of what Faith is. How few or none are
faithful toward God. What Murder is. Of what it is to imitate Christ. Of Law
Suits to be avoided: And how God is to be Obeyed in all things. How few or none
Obey Him, as they ought to do. The Errors of the Rich. The Name of Holiness
without Good Manners profits nothing.

1. THUS far all is well, the Foundations of the Work are laid, which I have
begun with a Pious Design, and undertaken purely out of the Love and Duty I owe
the Great God; and therefore they* are not laid in mouldring Mortar, nor raised
with fading, Stone, but strong as Heavens Expense, and firm as God's own Art
and Skill can make them; such as He himself speaks of in the Gospel, which,
neither boisterous Winds can shake, Matthew. 7. v. 25.
nor Deluges overturn, nor washing Rains throw down. For since the Hand, as it
were, of the Sacred Volumes, has ordered the Work, and the Cement of the holy
Scriptures has joined it, it is of necessity that, through the Assistance of our
Lord JESUS CHRIST, this should be as lasting as the firm Materials which
compose the Building: And therefore it gains this Strength from its Originals,
and can never be pulled down so long as they are safe. For as in earthly
Buildings none can throw down the Walls, unless he moves the Stones and Mortar,
so none can stir the Building I have raised, unless he first destroys that of
which it is made and perfected: which being not to be weakened by any means
whatever, I may very well presume upon the Stability of the Building, since
it is Bottom is laid on immortal Supporters.

The Question then is, since Things are thus, The State of the Good much harder
than tke Bad.
if all things in this World are ordered by the Care, Government, and Judgment
of God, How comes the Condition of Vandals, Huns Franks, Goths, etc. who then
overran the Roman Empire.
Barbarians and Aliens to be much better than ours? And why among our selves is
the State of the Good much harder than that of the Bad? Why are the Righteous
cast down, and the Wicked lusty and strong? Why does all the World submit to
wicked Men, and chiefly wicked Powers? I could with Reason and Consistency
answer, that I know not the Secrets of God, and am altogether a stranger to his
Counsels: Of the just judgments and Councils of God, which are unknown.
The Words of Scripture are sufficient Proof to me of this Reason. God himself
says, as I have proved in the foregoing Books, that he does both Behold,
Govern, and Judge all things. If you would know what you are to hold to, you
have the holy Scriptures: it is the Perfection of Reason to stick* to what you
read there. But I desire you would not ask me for what Reason God does the
Things we are speaking of. I am but a mere Man, I do not understand the Secrets
of God Almighty, I dare not pry into them, and therefore dread to attempt it;
because I take it to be no less than a Sacrilegious Rashness to endeavor to
know more of those Matters than you are permitted to do. It ought to satisfy
you that God has declared, that all things are disposed and ordered by himself.
Why do you ask me why one is Great, another Mean, why one is Miserable, another
Happy, one Strong, another Weak? What the Cause is, why God orders Things thus,
I do not understand, but it is instead of a thousand Reasons to me, that I can
show that all this is ordered by God himself. For as God is infinitely above
all Humane Reason, so it is to me more than all the Reasons in the World, that
I know that God does it. So that in this Matter there is no need of producing
any thing new; for when we say that God is the Author, it is as sufficient as a
Million of Reasons. Neither should we in these Cases, which depend on God's
Will, take the Liberty of Saying, that this is Just, and that is unjust,
because whatsoever you see, and are convinced of to be done by God, you ought
of necessity to confess to be the highest Justice. Now all this might be
quickly and with strength of Reason said concerning God's Government and
Judgment. For it is not at all necessary that I should offer to prove that by
Arguments, which is more than proved, since God has been pleased to declare
that it is so. And therefore, when we read, that God has said, that he does
always behold the Earth, for that very Reason we prove that he does behold it,
since He himself has told us, that he does so. So when we read, that he rules
all things that he has made, we are from thence certain that he does rule them,
because he testifies that he does so. Thus, when we read that he dispenses all
things by a present Judgment, it is manifest and plain to us, that he does
exercise such Judgment, because we have his Affirmation for it. All other, to
wit, Humane Assertions stand in need of Reasons and Witnesses to support them:
But God's Word is its own witness; For whatsoever is spoken by perfect Truth it
self, must of necessity be a most perfect Testimony of Truth. However,
notwithstanding all this, since God has been pleased by the holy Scriptures, to
give us a Knowledge, as it were, of the Secrets of his own Mind, for the
Oracles of sacred Scripture are in some Sense the Mind of God, I shall not
conceal whatsoever God has thought fit should be either known or declared by
his Servants: only one thing I desire to know before I begin, whether I am to
argue with Christians, or with Pagans: If it be with Christians, I do not at
all doubt but I shall prove my Point; but if with Pagans, I scorn to offer at
it, not that I want sufficient Arguments, but that I have no hopes they will be
ever the better for what I say. For pains and labor are thrown away upon an
obstinate Hearer that will never be convinced. However, since I believe there
is no one who goes under the Name of a Christian, who would not willingly be
thought one, I will deal with him as with a Christian: And although any one
should be tainted with impious and paganish Infidelity, it is enough for me, if
what I offer, be approved of by the Christian.

II. Your Objection then is, how come we Christians who believe in God to be
more miserable than other Men? I could give a sufficient Answer to your
Question, from the Words the Apostle uses to the Churches: That 1 These. 3. v. 3.
no man should be moved by affliction, for your selves know that we are
appointed thereunto. And therefore seeing the Apostle tells, that we are called
by God that we should endure Afflictions, Misery and Distress; what wonder is
it, that we suffer all manner of Evil, since it is the greatest part of our
Warfare to do so? But there are very few who will relish this Doctrine, but
rather think, that as the Christians are more religious than other Sects, so
they ought to receive at the hand of God, as a Reward of their Faith, that they
should be more Powerful than other Men: For the present let us aquiesce in this
Opinion and Judgment: Of what Faith is.
And let us consider what it is to believe in God Faithfully. For we who would
have the Reward of our Faith in this World to be so very Ample, ought at least
to bestow some Thoughts what Sort of Believing or Faith this ought to be. What
then is Faith or the Act of Believing? I take it to be that a Man faithfully
believe in Christ, that is, that he be faithful to God, and sincerely keep his
Commandments. For as the Servants and Stewards of Great Men, who are entrusted
with all their Master's Goods and Stores, can never be esteemed faithful if
they squander what was committed to their Care; so are Christian* Men
unfaithful if they spoil the Goods assigned them by their God. But you ask me,
it may be, what those* Goods are that God has put in a Christian's Trust? What
can they be but all those things by which we gain our Belief; that is, those
very Things by which we are Christians? As first the Law, then the Prophets,
thirdly the Gospels, fourthly the Apostolical Thus the Doctrine of Baptism, and
Laying on of Hands are joined.
Writings, and lastly the Gift of Regeneration, the Grace of holy Baptism, and
the Confirmation; so called by the Fathers from the Anointing at that time used
in it.
Unction of sacred Chrism: For as formerly among the Jews, God's own People,
when, after the Judges, the Government became Regal, God used to advance some
particular Heb. 6. v. 2.
chosen Persons to the Throne by the Ceremony of Anointing; so all Christians,
when, after the After Confirmation.
Ecclesiastical Anointing, they have performed all God's Commandments, should
be advanced to the Kingdom of Heaven, there to receive the Reward of all their
Labors. Seeing then these are the Things by which our Faith is manifested, let
us see who it is that so keeps these sacred Treasures of his Faith, that he may
be called truly faithful; For, as I said before, he who does not keep what is
committed to his Trust, is unfaithful. How few or none are faithful toward God.
And truly, I do not enquire whether he perform all things commanded in the Old
and New Testaments; I will pass by the Punishments of the Old Law, all the
Threatenings of the Prophets; and, which yet cannot be altogether passed by, the
severer Discipline Part of the Apostles Books, and the Gospel Doctrines of
Perfection: I only desire to know who it is obeys, even a very few of God's
Commandments; neither do I mean those which many deny so far, as even to detest
them: For such is the Respect and Honor we now a*days pay to God, that what
parts of Devotion we think not fit to practice our selves, we hate to see in
others. For who can now endure to hear that Saying of our Savior, which bids
us* take no thought for the Morrow? Who takes Matthew. 6. v. 34.
notice of that which bids us be content with only one Coat? Who regards the
Advice of going Matthew. 10.
barefoot, or indeed, who is there cares to hear it? And therefore I pass by
all these. For the Faith in which we have all our Confidence fails in this,
that we esteem those Precepts needless and superfluous, which God has ordered
as Necessary to Salvation. Our Savior says, Love your Enemies, do good to them
Matthew. 5. v. 44. Luke 6. v. 27.
that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use you, and persecute
you. Where is there any one does all this, nay who is there who will vouchsafe,
not to pray, but even to say so much for his Enemies as God commands us here?
If any one go so far as to force himself to do it; it is only Lip-labor, the
Mind knows nothing of it: the Words, it may be, are pronounced, the Passions
still remain; and if the Enemy be named against the Grain at Prayer, the Party
only speaks but never prays. 'Twill be tedious to mention all, however, I will
add somewhat more, that we may see that we do not only not obey all God's
Precepts, but that we perform very few or none of them. And therefore the
Apostle cries, If any man think himself to be something Galat. 6. v. 3.
when he is nothing, he deceives himself. For this we make an addition to all
our Crimes, that we take our selves to be Righteous and very Saints, though we
offend in every thing, and so we go on heaping Iniquity upon Iniquity, What
Murder is. 1 John. 3. v. 15.
upon this Presumption of our Righteousness. The Apostle says, Whosoever hates
his Brother is a Murderer. From hence we may conclude there are many Murderers,
who take themselves to be very Innocent, because we find here that Murder may
be committed as well in the Hater's Heart as by his Hand: which made our
Savior enforce that Commandment with a greater Penalty, when he said,
Whosoever is angry with his Brother Matthew. 5. v. 22.
without a Cause, shall be in danger of the Judgment. Anger is the Mother of
Hatred, and therefore our Savior in this place excludes Anger, lest it should
produce Hatred. If therefore not only Hatred, but even Anger makes us in Danger
of the Judgment, we plainly perceive that, as no one is altogether free from
Anger and Passion, so no one is altogether free from Guilt. But our Lord
prosecutes, as it were, the very Fibers of this Precept, and cuts each Bough
and Branch of it. Says he, Whosoever shall say, thou Fool, shall be in danger
of Hellfire: whosoever shall say unto his Brother, Racha, shall be in danger of
the Council. There are many who do not know what sort of Abuse is contained
under the Word Racha, who yet are very sensible of the Affront they receive
when they are called Fools: And therefore in this Case, Men making use of their
Knowledge rather than their Ignorance, had rather that their Guilt for the
Abuse they do know, should be expiated by Hellfire, than by the Council of Man,
for that they do not know.

III. Seeing then that Matters are thus, and What it is to imitate Christ.
that what is commanded by God is not only not done by us, but rather the quite
contrary, When shall we perform those greater Duties? For our Savior says,
Whosoever he be of you Luke 14. v. 33.
that forsakes not all that he has, he cannot be my Disciple. And he who does
not bear his Cross 1 John 2. v. 6.
and follow me, is not worthy of me. And that he who professes himself to be a
Christian, ought himself also to walk even as Christ walked. All which, it is
certain, that neither they who follow the Pomps and Pleasures of this World,
nor they who have disclaimed all Title to them do fulfill as they ought. For
even they who seem to renounce all Riches, do not renounce them so far as
wholly to have abandoned them. And they who are thought to bear the Cross, do
so bear it, that under pretense of that they gain much more Honor; than they
do of Inconvenience by the suffering for it. And yet all of these, although they
did in reality perform somewhat of this, yet doubtless none of them could carry
it so high by that way of Living, that they could go as upright as our Savior
went. For the Apostle says, He that says he abides in Christ, ought himself
also to walk even as he walked.

IV. But perhaps some will be apt to think that the Apostle's Commands are
severe. Truly they might well be reckoned such, if they demanded greater
Strictness of Duty than they performed themselves. But if it does appear that
they commanded others much less than they did themselves, they will show
themselves to have been not only not hard Masters, but to be esteemed as most
indulgent Parents, who, out of real Zeal to Religion, laid those very Burdens
on their own Shoulders, which, out of Tenderness to their Children they took
off from their Backs. For thus says one of them to a Congregation of
Christians; My little Galat. 4. v. 19.
Children of whom I travail in Birth again, until Christ be formed in you. And
again, Be ye 1 Cor. 11. v. 1.
followers of me, even as I also am of Christ. He only lays this upon us, that
we should be Followers of him, who had imposed it upon himself to be a Follower
of Christ. And that he did really follow Christ, no one can doubt: Christ for
our sakes subjected himself to the World, and he himself for Christ's: Christ
for our sakes underwent Weariness and Pains, he did the same for Christ's:
Christ suffered Scorn and Reproof for us, and he for Christ. Christ bore his
Passion and his Death for us, he did the same for Christ. And therefore, being
conscious of his own good Actions and Deserts, he had Reason to say, I have
fought 2 Timothy 4. v. 7, 8.
a good fight, I have finished my course; I have kept the Faith; henceforth
there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness. Seeing then he followed
Christ thus, let us see who it is that follows our Apostle. For thus in the
first place he writes of himself: That he never gave Offense 2 Cor. 6. v. 3, 4,
5.
to any, but in all things approved himself as the Minister of God in much
Patience, in Afflictions, in Necessities, in Stripes, in Imprisonments, in
Tumults. And in another place, comparing himself to some others, he says;
Whereinsoever 2 Cor. 11. v. 21.
any is bold, I speak foolishly, I am bold also; -- I speak as a Fool I am
more; in Labors more abundant, in Prisons more frequent, v. 23. 24, 25.
in Stripes above measure, in Deaths often: Of the Jews five times received, I
forty stripes save one; thrice was I beaten with Rods, once was I stoned,
thrice I suffered shipwreck. Although, it may be, we make little account of all
the rest of the Apostles Excellencies here set down, I doubt not but in that
One, in which he says, he thrice suffered Shipwreck, we shall be found to be
before him; for we have not suffered Shipwreck only thrice, but almost every
Act of our Life is a kind of Shipwreck: for so much as we all live so wickedly,
that there is scarce a Christian, who does not seem always to be shipwrack'd.

V. But some one may urge here, that the Times are quite altered, it is not
expected now that we should undergo for Christ's sake what the Apostles then
suffered. That Is very true: For the Governors are not now Pagan, nor
persecuting Tyrants; the Blood of the Saints is not now powered forth, nor is
our Faith tried by Torture. Our God is content that our Ease and Quiet should
tend to his Service, that we should make our selves acceptable now by the
Purity and Innocence of our Actions, and by the unspotted holiness of our
Lives. Our Faith and Devotion are so much the more indebted to him, by how much
he has given us greater Blessings, and requires less Service. And therefore
since Princes are now become Christian, and there is no such thing as
Persecution, and that Religion is not disturbed, we, who are not compelled by
more severe Trials, ought at least to please God by all manner of lesser
Duties. And it is odds, but that he, who readily discharges these lesser Duties,
would cheerfully perform the greater, when called upon.

VI. We will therefore at present, pass over the Sufferings of St. Paul, and
all the other Severities which we find in Ecclesiastical Story, almost all the
Christians of those Times endured, who ascended to Heavens Gates by the
Staircase of their own Torments, and made Scaling Ladders of their Racks and
Scaffolds. Let us see if in those Services of Religion, which being less and
more common, all we Christians may at all times, in the greatest Security
perform, we do endeavor to answer our Lord's Commands. Christ commands us Of
Law* Suits to be avoided: and how God is to be obeyed in all things.
that we should not be litigious, but who obeys him? Nay, he does* not only
command it, but he presses it so far, that he orders us to quit our Pretensions
to whatsoever is the Subject of the Contest, that so we may be freed from the
Suit. If any man (says he) will sue thee at the Law, and take away thy Coat,
let him have Matthew. 5. v. 40.
thy Cloak also. I desire to know, were there are any such to be found, who
will comply thus with an oppressing Adversary, or rather, who they are who
would not, were it in their Power, oppress their Adversary themselves? So far
are we from quitting our other Garments with our Coats, that, if by any means
we could tell how, we would take away our Adversary's Coat and Cloak also. For
we obey the Commands of our Lord so very religiously, that it is not enough for
us, not to part with the least part of our Garments to our Adversaries, unless
to the utmost of our Power, if we have opportunity, we tear All from him. To
this our Lord has joined another like and parallel Command: Whosoever shall
smite thee v. 39.
on the right Cheek, turn to him the Other also. How few or none Obey as they
ought to do
How many do we think that do with Decency afford an Ear to this Command, or if
they seem to do it; that do in heart believe it? Or how many rather, if they
receive one Stroke, but will return an Hundred? So far are we from turning our
Cheek to him that smites us, that then we think we get the better, not when we
have mastered our adversary by his beating us, but by our mawling him.
Whatsoever Matthew. 7. v. 12.
ye would (says our Savior) that men should do unto you, do ye even so to
them. We are so well acquainted with one part of this Sentence, that we never
pass it over; but the other we take as little Notice of, as if we knew nothing
of it: For we know very well how we would have other Men deal by us, but are as
ignorant as may be of our Duty to other Men. And I would to God we were really
ignorant, for then our Guilt would be much the less, according to that
Scripture; He that knew not his Master's will shall be beaten with few Stripes;
but he that Luke 1^. v. 47. v. 48.
knew and did it not, shall be beaten with many stripes. However, this is a
great Aggravation of the Offense, that we should pick and choose one part of a
Sentence of Scripture that makes for our Advantage, and neglect the other part
in contempt of the Almighty. St. Paul does likewise by his Preaching, enforce
this Command of God; Let no man seek his 1 Cor. 10. v. 24.
own, but every man another's Wealth. And again, Look not every man on his own
Things, Philip. 2. v. 4.
but every man also on the Things of others. You see here how sincerely he
executed this Command of Christ; for whereas our Savior commands us to be as
solicitous for other Men's Welfare as our own, he advises us to take more Care
of other's Conveniences than our own, like the good Servant of a good Lord, and
the excellent follower of so admirable a Master, who treading in the very
footsteps of his Lord, has, in some sort, made those Footsteps of his Master
more plain and open. Which of the Two now do we Christians perform, what Christ
commands, or what his Apostle? Truly, I think neither. For so far are we from
doing any thing to forward the Convenience of other Men with some Loss to our
selves; that all of us bend all our Thoughts how to advantage our selves as
much as may be at the Expense of other Men.

VII. But, it may be, it will be said in this place, that I have picked out
some of the most difficult of God's Commands, which no body fulfils; and, as
they think, which it is not possible that any body should, and that I have
omitted others which they could observe, and which are easy to be observed by
every body. Pray let this be considered in the first place, that it is not
fitting for any Servant whatever of his own Head, to pick and choose out of his
Master's Orders, what he likes, and what he dislikes, and then insolently to
take what pleases him, and to refuse what he does not like: Especially when the
Masters of this World don't think it a thing fit to be born with, that any
Servants of theirs should obey part of their Commands, and slight the rest; and
according to their Humors, shall do, forsooth, what they think fitting to be
done, and shall spurn the rest. For if Servants obey their Masters only so far
as pleases themselves, there is no Duty paid to the Master by such Obedience:
For when a Servant only performs that part of his Master's Commands which he
has a mind to, he does not fulfill his Master's Pleasure but his own. If
therefore we who are poor, silly, weak, contemptible Mortals, cannot bear to be
thus slighted by our own Servants, whom only the Condition of Service makes
inferior to us, since they are made of the same Mould with our selves: how
unjustly do we despise the Great God of Heaven, who being but mere Men, think
it not fit to be despised by Creatures of our own Condition! Unless, it may be,
we are Men of that depth of Thought and Design, that, though we think it not
convenient to take Affronts at our Servant's hands, yet we should be very
willing to have the Almighty subject to all the Abuses that may be; and those
very Things which we think not fit to be tolerated by our selves, we judge very
fitting that God should bear from us. But to return; If there be any by this
time, who think I have been speaking all this while of the harder Commandments
of God, and have said nothing of the more easy ones, their Complaint is an
idle one. To what purpose is it to talk of a Preference in Duties, where all
are equally to be observed? For, as I said before, as it is not at all fitting
for the Servants of the meanest Mortal to choose out of their Master's Orders*
what they would have done, and what left undone; so we who are the Servants of
our Lord, ought to think it absolutely unlawful to take only those Commands at
our own good liking, which please us, and to tread under feet with Pride and
Insolence what we do not relish.

VIII. However, let us submit to those, who, it may be, will not have us
therefore mention the greater of our Lord's Commands, because they fancy they
fulfill the lesser: not that it is sufficient to Salvation to observe the
Smaller and neglect the Greater, according to that of the Apostle; Whosoever
shall keep the James 2. v. 10.
whole Law, and yet offend in one Point he is guilty of all: And although it
appears by this, that it is not sufficient for us to perform the lesser
Commands of God, yet I agree to call them lesser Commands, that I may show that
the greatest part of Christians do not observe, even those which are the least
part of their Duty. Our Savior commands that Christian Men should Matthew. 5. v.
34.
not Swear: But you shall find more of those who forswear themselves, than of
those who do not swear at all. He commands like wise* that no body should
Curfe, and yet our common Talk is made up of Curses. The first Dart we throw
in* Passion are Curses, and what we are too weak to execute, we give our
Passions leave to Wish: And thus in every discomposure of our Minds, we use
these Imprecations instead of Arms. So that every one plainly shows, that were
it in his Power, he would do all the Mischief which he* wishes to his
Adversary. And because all of us who do not obey the Divine Commands, easily
get a Habit of this wicked way of Speaking, we are therefore apt to think that
it will as easily take place with God who gave us those Commands: But the
Scripture says: Revilers and Evil-speakers shall not inherit the Kingdom of
Heaven: And hence Ephesians. 5. v 5. 1 Cor. 6. v. 10.
we may perceive how heinous and destructive this sort of Evil-speaking is,
seeing, although we do many other good Actions, yet this alone will shut us out
of Heaven. Christ commands us to forbear all Malice, and yet we envy not only
Strangers but our very Neighbors: It Is not our Enemies alone we hate
maliciously, but our very Friends; so much is this Evil riveted in all our
Natures: our Hunger may be satisfied, but this detracting Humor never can: We
are always cloyed with Meat, but never with Detraction. But, it may be, this is
a Peccadillo not worth God's Notice: However the holy Scripture says, The
Backbiter shall be rooted out: A heavy Romans 1. v. 30.
and dreadful Sentence, and yet it causes no Amendment; for so long as one Man
still persists to tear another, it is so great Pleasure to him, that he does
even sacrifice himself; and a just Return it is of such a Mischief, that it
persecutes its Author only, for in comparison it hurts him not at all at whom
it is levelled, but racks and tears the Heart of him who vends it. But perhaps
they will think I dote in urging things thus, and I, for my part, can be content
to be accounted a Doatard; but did our Blessed Lord himself dote, when he gave
Commandment by his Apostle, That all Ephesians. 4. v. 31.
Clamor and Evil-speaking be put away with all Malice. Both these lodge with
us perpetually, and yet I think we have more of Malice than of Clamor. For
Clamor is not always in our Mouths, but Malice always in our Hearts; and for
that Reason, I believe, that when the Power of Clamouring has left us, yet
Malice will remain. Our Lord has likewise commanded Phil. 2. v. 14.
us to be without Murmuring and Complaining; But when were Mankind ever without
them? If it be parching Heat, we complain of Drought; if a rainy Season, then
of Drowning: If the Year chance not to be over fruitful, then we accuse its
Barrenness, if it be plentiful, then the Cheapness of Things disgusts us: We
desire to get Abundance, and when we have it, then we blame it. What can be
more wicked and reproachful than such Dealing? To fall out with God's Mercy,
because he sends us what we prayed for. God has commanded his Servants to
avoid all manner of Offense, even that of the Eyes: Matthew. 5. *28.
And therefore he says, Whosoever looks on a Woman to lust after her, has
committed Adultery with her in his Heart. By this we may plainly understand how
chaste our Savior would have us be, who has denied us the Liberty of a loose
wandering Look: For* knowing that the Lights of the Eyes are a sort of Windows
to our Hearts, and that all wicked Desires enter us through the Eyes as through the
natural passage; he would altogether extinguish them whilst without us, lest
when they are entered, they should take firm Root in our Hearts, having first
budded at the Eye: And therefore our Lord warns us, that the Lascivious Looks
of lewd Men are not free from the Guilt of Adultery; so that they who would
sincerely guard themselves from that Sin, should put a watch upon their Looks.
Our Savior would likewise have all his Followers to have unspotted Holiness,
and therefore commands them to avoid the least thing that has but a Tendency to
Sin: That a Christian's Life should be as clean as the clearest part of the
brightest Eye; and as the Eye without Injury to the Sight, cannot endure the
smallest Dust within it, so a Christian's Life should not have the most
dimunitive Spot of Uncleanness in it. And that is the Meaning of this following
Saying of our Lords: If thine eye Matthew. 5. v. 29. Mark ^. v. 47.
offend thee, pluck it out, and if thine hand offend thee, cut it off: It is
better for thee that one of thy Members should perish, than that thy whole Body
should be cast into Hell. If then, according to God's Word, Offenses will draw
us into Hell, we had better part with our Eyes and Hands than carry both
thither; not that any one ought to deprive himself of his Limbs, but there are
some Domestic Offices and Services, which have so near a Relation to us, and
are become so necessary, that we use them sometimes as our Eyes, sometimes as
our Hands, and therefore we should do well to deny our selves the Satisfaction
of such present Assistants, lest hereafter we be tormente^d with Eternal Fire:
For when the Dispute is between a Man's Convenience and his Life, I think a
Christian had much better spare a present Convenience than hazard Life
everlasting.

IX. Seeing then our Lord has required Obedience in all these Particulars which
I have named: Where are they to be found, who have performed them all, or even
the smallest Part? Where are they who either love their Enemies, or do good to
their Persecutors, or that overcome Evil with Good; who turn their Cheek to him
that smites them, or that yield up their Goods without Dispute to them that
take them? Who is there that avoids all base Detraction, who injures no one by
base Words, who rather hold their Tongues, than break forth into bitter
Railings? Who is there minds these lesser Duties, not to mention now the
Greater spoken of before? Since then Matters are thus, and that we obey none of
our Lord's Commands, what Reason have we to complain of God, when he ought
rather to complain of us? Why should we repine that God does not hear us, when
we our selves refuse to hear Him, and whisper abroad that God does not at all
look upon the World, when we refuse to look up to Heaven? Why should it trouble
us that our Lord despises our Prayers, when we take care to despise his
Precepts? Suppose we were upon the Level with our Lord: What room could there
be for Complaint* if he deals by us as we use Him? Which yet I could prove to
be quite otherwise, and that God deals more tenderly by us, than we do
dutifully by Him. But to go on with the Parallel I began: And as our Lord says,
I have called to you and you have not heard me, Prove. 1. Mich. 3. Psalm. ^7.
and you shall cry to me and I will not hear you. What can be more just and
equitable? We don't hear, and therefore are not heard: We do not regard him,
and therefore are not regarded by Him. I desire to know where that mortal
Master is, who would be content to manage Matters at this rate with his
Servants, that in Return for Contempt received from his own Vassals, he should
only have the Pleasure of slighting them again? But we do not only affront and
contemn our God as Servants do their worldly Masters, whose greatest Slight is
not to do what they are ordered: For we not only do not what we are ordered,
but with all our Might and Main the clean contrary. Thus God commands us to
love one another; but we tear and hawl each other to pieces. God commands all
to distribute their own Goods to those that want them, and All invade the
Properties of other Men. God commands that every Christian should have chaste
Eyes; but how few are there who do not wallow in the Filth of Fornication! But
to what purpose should I produce more? What I am now going to say is sad and
lamentable: The Church of God it self, which at all times should be the
Appeaser and Peacemaker, is now become the Grand Provoker and Exasperator of
God; For, bating a very few who have escaped the Contagion, what is every
Congregation of Christians but a Common-shore of Vices? For who will you find
in the Church that is not either a Drunkard, or a Glutton, Adulterer or
Fornicator, Extortioner or Rioter, a Thief or Murderer? And what is worse than
all this, there is no end of them. For I appeal to the Conscience of every
Christian; of all the Villainies and Wickednesses I have named, where is the
Man that is not guilty of some, or rather of all of them? It Is easier to find
one thro'-pac'd in all, than one who has nothing of them. But some perhaps may
think the Censure here too hard, because I say, who has nothing; And therefore
I had much rather say, you may sooner find them guilty of all these Crimes,
than not of all; easier of the greater Sins, than of the less: That is, you will
easier find such who would commit the greater Crimes together with the less,
than such as would act the lesser ones without the greater. Our Congregations
are fallen into such a Degeneracy and Baseness of Manners, that among Christian
People now, it is a piece of Religion and Sanctity to be less wicked than their
Neighbors. So that some have less Respect for the Churches, or rather Temples
and Altars of the most High God, than they have for the House of some Petty
Corporation-Magistrate. For though all Persons don't presume to crowd
promiscuously into the Gates of Princes, nor even of the Chief Governors or
Officers, unless invited or cited by them as Judges, or to solicit Business,
or else whose Station and Post does permit it; so that if any enter insolently,
he is either beaten or driven back, is laughed at and exposed, or has some other
Mark of Disrespect put upon him: yet into the Temples, or rather the Altars and
Sacred Places of our God, the most Sordid and Flagitious, rush on Heaps,
without Respect or Reverence; not that they ought not to haste thither to pray
to God; but he that enters with the Design to endeavor to Appease Almighty
God, ought to be careful not to exasperate him at going out: For they are quite
two Things, to ask Forgiveness, and to provoke to Wrath. But is it not
monstrous and prodigious, that Men should every hour commit the Things, the
doing of which they every hour lament? They who enter the Church to Bemoan
their former Sins depart, what do I say, depart; nay even in the midst of all
their Prayers and Supplications, contrive to act the same! The Mouth says one
thing and the Heart another; and whilst in Word they Moan their past
Transgressions, their Thoughts are ruminating upon new; so that their Prayer
does rather increase their Guilt than prevail for Pardon; so that the
Scripture* Curse is verified in them, that their Psalm. 109. v. 6.
own Words condemn them, and that their Prayers are turned into Sin. Lastly, if
any one would know what these Men think of in the Church, let him observe what
follows. As soon as e're the Public Service ends, every one hastens to follow
his old Trade; some to Steal, some to be Drunk; some to Whoreing, and some to
the High-pad* so that it is plain they thought on* These the time they spent in
Church, in order to their after Execution.

X. But some may think that all this Wickedness, The Errors of the Rich.
this whole Catalogue of base enormous Crimes I have mentioned, are only deeds
of Slaves and Men of desperate Fortunes, but nothing that bears the Face of a
Gentleman can ever be so wicked? Pray what is the Merchant's Life but Perjury
and Cheat? The Courtiers but Iniquity? The Lawyers Calumny, and the Soldiers
Plunder? But perhaps you think these Things are tolerable in such Men as these:
their Actions, you will say, are suitable to their Profession, so that it is no
Wonder to see them act according to what they profess. As if God Almighty were
willing that Men should either act or profess Wickedness; or that the Divine
Majesty were not at all offended, when ordinary Persons commit the greatest
Sin; especially considering, that upon a Poll they are far the greater Part of
all Mankind: and certainly where there is the greatest Multitude of Sinners,
there Heaven is most offended. But perhaps, you will say, all the Nobility are
free from such Wickedness. That cannot be; for Nobility all over the World is
nothing else but one Great Man above a great many mean Ones. However, let us
see whether they are Faultless or no: And in the first place, let us consider
what the Scripture says of Men of this Rank. The Apostle reasoning with some of
God's People, says thus: Hearken, my Beloved* J^mes 2.
Brethren, has not God chosen the Poor of v 5.
this World rich in Faith, and Heirs of the Kingdom, which he has promised to
them that v. 6.
love him? But ye have despised the Poor; do v. 7.
not rich men oppress you, do not they blaspheme that Worthy Name, by the which
ye are called? This is a heavy Testimony of the Apostles: unless it may be,
Noblemen may think themselves not concerned in it, because the Rich are only
named in it. However either the rich Men here named are the same as Noblemen,
or if there be any very Rich who are not Noble, it is as good as if they were
ennobled; for such is the Baseness of this Age, that no body is esteemed so
Noble as they who are very rich. But whether the Apostle speaks of either or
both, may be easily compounded; for it matters not which part is here chiefly
meant, since what is said agrees very well to either. For where is there so
much as one Nobleman or Rich man, who abhors these Crimes? And yet in this I
may be mistaken: for there are many abhor them, but few* avoid them: They abhor
in others what they embrace themselves, being after a Wonderful manner, both
Accusers and Advocates of the same Crimes. In public they detest what they act
in* secret: and so by such Practice, while they think they condemn others, they
rather involve themselves in their own Sentence. But let us leave those who are
most guilty: and see if we can find that Rich or Noble person who is really
innocent, or withholds his Hands from all manner of Wickedness; though I think I
have added those words all manner of very impertinently: I wish there be any
who abstain from the greatest; because it may be Great Persons take it as a
part of their Privilege, that they may commit the lesser Crimes, and therefore
I shall say nothing of the lesser Sins. But let us see if any of them are free
from those two Capital ones of Murder and Whoredom: Which of them does not reek
in Humane Blood, and wallow in filthy Lewdness? One of these is enough to merit
everlasting Pain, and yet there is scarce a Man of Power but has committed both.

XI. But some one of this Number, it may The Name of Holiness without good
Manners, profitteth nothing.
be, thinks with himself: I don't do any such things as these now. I commend
you for not doing them, but it may be you have formerly done them; and to leave
off doing them is not altogether equivalent to the never having done them. But
suppose it be so, where is the Advantage by it, that one Man leaves off to sin,
and Many continue in it? One Man's Repentance will not heal the Crimes of Many
others; nor is it sufficient to appease God's Wrath, that one forsakes his
Sins, since All in general have offended Him: Especially, when he who is
converted, that he may escape Eternal Death, will receive great Advantage by
such Conversion, if he do escape it; but yet it never can come to pass that he
should free others from the Pains of Damnation: because it would be the most
intolerable Pride, and a Crime of a Monstrous Complexion, if any one should
take himself to be so Good, as to think that wicked Men through him might be
saved. God speaking of a wicked Land and People, says thus; Though these three
Men Ezekiel. 14. v. 18.
were in it, Noah, Daniel, and Job; they shall deliver neither Sons nor
Daughters, but they only shall be delivered themselves. I suppose* no body has
Impudence enough to compare himself to such* Great Men as these: And although a
Man at present endeavors to please God, yet it is a kind of the greatest
Injustice, if he presumes upon his own Righteousness, and by this is taken away
all hopes of that false Opinion by which we believe that a Multitude of wicked
Men may be defended from all present Evils by the Prayers of a few good ones.
For seeing that no one can pretend to equal those I have named above, what hope
can any have, that Men that are foreignners, many in Number, and very Wicked,
should be delivered by the Prayers of a very few good Ones: when those holy
Men, so familiar with God Himself, could not obtain this of our Lord, that in
their Children they might save their own Flesh and Blood: and Justly: For,
although all Children in General may seem to be Parts and Members of their
Parents, yet these are not to be esteemed Parts of them, who have severed
themselves from them by contrary Affections, and in such the Benefit of Nature
and Relation is lost by the Degeneracy of their Manners. And by the same Reason
it is, that we, who call our selves Christians, lose all the Benefit of so
Great a Name by the Naughtiness of our Conversations. It does not all advantage
us to have a holy Name without good Manners; for a Life disagreeable to the
Profession, destroys the Honor of the Illustrious Title, by the Baseness of
unseemly Actions. Since then there are scarce any Party of Christians, any
Corner of the Churches to be found, that do not abound with all Sorts of
Wickedness, and the Contagion of deadly Sins, what Reason have we to flatter
our selves for being known by the Name of Christians? Seeing by being called by
that most Sacred Name, we enhance our Guilt, because our Lives disgrace the
Title. And so under the Name of Religion, we offend God the more, being under
all the Ties and Obligations of it.

SALVIAN of GOD's Government, etc. BOOK IV.
The Name of Holiness without Good Works profitteth nothing. Of Theft, wherein
it is excusable; and of Servant's Faults: Of the World's living in Wickedness:
How God by our Sins is daily provoked. How God is the Giver of all things; and
his Love toward us, who merit nothing but Death. Of the Law, accusing us for
living Wickedly. Of the Errors of the Barbarians. How Christ's Name is abused.
Of how Great a Sin it is, in Causing others to Blaspheme, by our loose Living,
and by despising Things we know must be done.

1. WE have therefore departed from that The Name of Holiness without good
works profits nothing.
Prerogative of the Christian Name which I spoke of before, that because we
were more Religious than all other People, we should, for that Reason, expect
to be more Powerful. For seeing, as I have often said, That the Faith of a
Christian consists in this, that he sincerely observe the Commandments of
Christ: It is manifest, beyond all Contradiction, that he who is insincere in
that Particular has not Faith; and that he who contemns Christ's Commandments,
does not believe in Christ: and so the Whole of the Matter turns on this, that
he who does not the Duties of the Christian Religion, cannot be thought to be a
Christian. For the bare Name without Action and Duty, signifies nothing. For as
a certain Author says: What is Sovereignty Salvian in his 2 Book to the
Catholic Church.
without the height of Merit, but a Title of Honor without a Man? Or what is
Dignity in an unworthy Person, but Pearl on a Dunghill? And therefore, that I
may use the same Expressions, What is a holy Name without Merit, but Pearl on a
Dunghill. This the holy Scripture it self testifies, saying; As a Jewel of
Gold in a Swines Snout, so is a Prove. 11. v. 22.
fair Woman that is without Discretion. The Name of a Christian is to us as a
Golden Ornament: but if we abuse it, we shall look no better than the Swine
with his golden Jewel.

But whoever has a mind to be further satisfied, that Words are of little
Moment without Things, let him reflect what Numbers of People have lost even
their Names, when they failed in their Merits. The twelve Tribes of the Jews,
when they were anciently chosen by God Himself, had two holy Names given them,
for they were called, The People of God, and Israel. For thus we read, Hear,
Psalm. 50. v. 7.
O my People, and I will speak: Israel, and I will testify against thee. So
that the Jews were formerly both these, but now neither. For neither can they
be called the People of God, who have long since left the Service of God: Nor
Israel, or See p. 6. of the 2d Book. Isaiah 1. v. 3.
seeing God, who denied the Son of God; As it is written, Israel has not known
me, my People has not considered. For the same Reason God speaks to the
Prophet, concerning the People of the Jews in another place, saying; Call his
name Lo-ruhamah, or Hosea 1. v. 6. v. 9.
not beloved. And again to the Jews themselves: You are not my People, neither
am I your God. And why he said thus of them, he shows plainly in another place,
where he says; Jerem. 2. v. 13. Jerem. 8. v. 9.
They have forsaken me the Fountain of living waters. And again* Lo, they have
rejected the Word of the Lord, and what Wisdom is there in them. And this I
fear was not more aptly said of them at that Time, than it may be of us now,
because we do not obey the Words of the Lord; and we, who do not obey them,
have not the least Share of Wisdom in us, unless perhaps we take it to be
Wisdom to despise God; and the highest piece of Prudence to contemn the
Commandments of Christ.

And really, we give sufficient Occasion for any one to think thus of us: For
we all pursue Sin with such an Universal Consent, as though upon mature Advice,
we had entered into a Confederacy of Sinning. But since it is so, what Reason
have we to delude our selves with so false an Opinion, as to think, that
because forsooth, we are called Christians, that good Name will be helpful to
us in the commission of our bad Deeds! When the Holy Ghost tells us, that Faith
it self without works, will not profit a Christian; and certainly it is much
more to have Faith, than a bare Name; for the Name is only the distinction of
the Man, but Faith is the fruit of the Mind: And yet the Apostle testifies,
that even this Fruit of Faith, unless accompanied by Good-works, will prove
unfruitful, where he says, Faith without good works is dead. And again. For
Jam. 2. v. 17. v. 26.
as the Body without the Spirit is dead, so Faith without Works is dead also.
He adds further in this place some more severe Things, to confound the
Pretensions of those who flattered themselves on the Presumption of their
Christian Faith.

II. But perhaps, some one may say, Thou have Faith, and I have Works: Show me
thy Faith without thy Works, and I will show thee v. 18.
my Faith by my Works. By which he shows, that good Actions are, as it were,
the Witnesses of a Christian's Faith, because, unless a Christian do such good
Works, he can never make his Faith manifest: and so not being able to prove
otherwise that he has it, he is altogether to be esteemed, as though he had it
not.

For that he esteemed it as good as None, he shows by what he subjoins;
speaking to a Christian: Thou believe that there is One God, Jam. ^. v. 19.
thou do well: The Devils also believe and tremble. Let us consider well
here, what the Apostle's Meaning is in this place: Let us not take Pett at any
Testimony of Scripture, but rather aquiesce in it, not offer to contradict it,
but rather profit by it: Thou do believe, (says this Scripture to the
Christian) that there is One God, thou do well: The Devils also believe and
tremble. Was the Apostle here under a Mistake, when he compares the Faith of a
Christian Man to that of a Devil? Not at all, but designing to explain what he
had said before, that without good Works, a Christian ought to arrogate nothing
to himself on Pretense of his Faith; he therefore adds, The Devils believe
there is a God; and that as those Devils, although they do so believe, yet still
continue in their Perverseness, so some Christians had just such Faith as this
of the Devils, would frankly own the Belief of a God, but still persist in
their evil Doings. And then, to the Shame and Condemnation of wicked Sinners,
he subjoyns, that the Devils did believe, not only the Name of God, but did
fear and tremble: As much as if he had said, Why do you, O Man, whoever you
are, flatter your self in your Belief, which without the Fear and Obedience of
God signifies nothing? The very Devils themselves have more than this. For you
have only one Thing, they have Two; you have a Belief, but have not Fear; they
have both Belief and Fear. Why do you wonder then if we are punished, or think
it strange we are chastis'd, if given into our Enemies hands, if we are less
Powerful than other Men? For all our Miseries, Infirmities, Overthrows,
Captivities, and even our basest Slavery are Manifestations of a bad Servant,
and of a good Lord. How I pray you, are they Testimonies of a bad Servant?
Because I only suffer a small part of what I deserve. And how are they of a
good Lord? Because by that he shows what it is we deserve, although in Mercy he
does not inflict it on us: for he had rather correct us with the most mild and
gentle Chastisements, than that we should perish; should our Punishment be
adequate to our Crimes, Death it self would be our Doom: But He being
infinitely more Merciful than Severe, had rather by a gentle Censure reform us,
than by the Stroke of a just Condemnation destroy us. I am very well satisfied
that it is not at all pleasing to us to be thus punished: But can it seem
strange to us that God should punish us for our Sins, when we every day beat
our Servants for their Faults? We are partial and unjust Judges: We would not
have such a contemptible Creature as Man chastis'd by God, when yet we chastise
Man, a Creature, in the same Rank with our selves. But I do not admire to see
us so unreasonable in this Matter; since our very Nature and Iniquities are
altogether those of Slaves: We would commit Faults, but would not be beaten for
them. We have every one of us the Temper of our meanest Slaves, we would all
Sin without Punishment. I appeal to all, whether I am mistaken or no. For I do
aver that there is not one to be found, let his Crime be never so Great, who
will freely own that he ought to suffer for it. And hence we may observe how
unrighteously and wickedly we are most Severe upon others, when we are
indulgent to our selves, rigorous to them, but tender to our own Skins. For the
self same Fault we chastise others, but absolve our selves. This is both
intolerable Insolence and Presumption! We will not acknowledge any Guilt in our
selves, and yet we have the Courage to exercise Authority upon others for the
same thing. Can any thing possibly be more unjust and perverse than we are in
this Thing? We esteem that Wickedness to be very tolerable in our selves, which
we punish in others without Mercy. And therefore the Apostle has very good
Reason to speak to us after this manner: Therefore thou art inexcusable, O Romans
2. v. 1.
Man, whosoever thou art that judge: for wherein thou judge another, thou
condemnest thy self, for thou that judge do the same thing.

III. But me thinks, I hear some of the rich Of These wherein it is excusable
and of Servants Faults.
ones saying, we are not guilty of the same Faults as our Slaves: for some of
them are Thieves, and overrun their Masters; some of them mind nothing but
their Guts and Bellies. It Is very true that these are the common Faults of
Servants; but yet their Masters have more and much greater than these; though I
cannot say so of all Masters; for some are to be excepted, although they are but
very few: whom I forbear to name at present, lest I may be thought not so much
to commend them by such naming, as to expose the others, whom I shall be forced
to omit. In the first place then, if Servants are Thieves, it may be they are
compelled to it out of mere Necessity: who although they receive their usual
Wages, yet it may be, the customary Stipend may not be sufficient, and though it
complete their Wages, yet it may not fill their Bellies; and so for that Reason
their Want may make it less Culpable, for he seems to commit a kind of
excusable Thest, who is forced against his Will to the Fact. And the holy
Scripture seems in some fort, almost to excuse the Fault of such poor
distressed Creatures, when it says; Men, do not despise a Thief, if he steal to
satisfy his Prove. 6. v. 30.
Soul when he is hungry. So says Solomon: he steals to satisfy his Soul; and
therefore they should not be too Severely blamed by us, whom the sacred
Scripture seems thus to excuse. What I have said here of Servant's Thievery,
may be likewise* said of their Running away, and I think, with much more
Reason; for not only Want and Poverty, but too severe Beating compels them to
it. They are in continual Dread of their Bayly's, Supervisors, and
Taskmasters; so that among such a Gang, they seem to be rather any Bodies
Servants than their Master's: Every one Beats them, every one Mawls them. And I
need say no more, than that many Servants fly to their own Masters, for Fear of
their Fellow Servants. So that their Running-away is not so much to be imputed
to themselves, as to those that force them. Poor unfortunate Creatures, they
are under the greatest Violence; they desire to stay and serve, and yet are
compelled to run away: They would not by any means depart from the Service of
their Masters, and yet the Cruelty of their Fellow Servants will not suffer
them quietly to undergo it. They are charged likewise to be guilty of Lying:
when yet it is the Barbarity of the present Punishment that makes them do it;
for they Lie purely to avoid the Lash, and what Wonder is it that a frighted
Servant should tell a Lie to save a Scourging? They are further Accused of
Gluttony and Gormondising. This is no Rarity; For he that has felt the Force of
Hunger often, is more Eager to stuff himself. But granting that he does not want
sufficient Food, it is certain that he Fasts from Dainties; and therefore he may
be Pardoned, if he Eagerly desires to Taste what always is kept from him. But
now you Great and Rich Person, who abound with All manner of Plenty, and who
for that Reason ought to Honor God by your good Works, because you so Largely
taste of His Favors without ceasing, let us see if your Actions are entirely
perfect, or even so much as Innocent. And where are those Great Men, as I said
before, bating a very few, that are not Tainted with all manner of Crimes? When
I thus except a Few, I wish I could except a Greater Number; for the Innocence
of very Many might tend to the Preservation of All. I would not be understood
to speak in this place of any other than of such a One, who knows that what I
say is within himself. For if what I am now mentioning be not within his own
Conscience, the Whole of what I urge does him no Hurt at all; but if he be
conscious to himself of what I say, let him reckon it to come from his own
Conscience, and not from my Tongue. And in the first place, that I may speak of
Servant's Faults; If thy Servant be a Runaway, thou Rich and Great Man art a
Runaway likewise. For all they Run away from the Lord, who relinquish the Law
of the Lord. What then is it that you with all your Riches, blame in your
Servant? Why, he runs away from his Lord and Master, and you from yours. But
in this you are much more Faulty than he, because it is ten to one but that he
deserts a bad Master, but you always a good One. In the next place, you blame
the Voraciousness of your Servant. That which his Poverty will very rarely
admit him to be guilty of, your Plenty makes your daily Practice. You see
therefore that you, and only you are the Party, more especially lashed by the
Apostle's Judgment, because in what you judge another, you condemn your self:
for you do the same Things which you Censure in others, not only the same, but
Greater and Much more wicked; you fail not to punish Intemperance in him though
acted very rarely, when you your self are daily Crammed, even to the very
Throat. Theft, in your Opinion, is a Crime likewise peculiar in Servants. But
you, with all your Goods, are guilty of Theft likewise, for all they who do
things that are unlawful, do by that involve themselves in the Guilt of Theft.

IV. But what need I treat of these Matters Of the World living in wickedness.
with such Nicety, and as at a distance, when not only the private Pilferings,
but even the Notorious open Robberies of the wealthier sort are Manifest to all
the World? Where is there one that lives near a Rich Man, who is not actually
a Beggar, or in as bad a Condition? For by the Encroachments and Oppressions of
the Men of Power, the weaker and meaner Sort lose all that is theirs, and even
their Persons too together with their Goods: So that the sacred Scripture does
deservedly speak of both these sorts of Men, when it says, As the wild Ass* is
the Lions Prey in the Eccles. 13. v. 19.
Wilderness: so the Rich eat up the Poor. It Is not only the poorer Sort that
are subjected to this sort of Tyranny, but almost All Mankind in general. For
what is the Advancement of a Grandee now, but the porscribing of a City, or
what is the Lieutenancy of others, whom I forbear to name, but Pillaging and
Plunder? For nothing brings so certain a Destruction on the poorer Sort as
Power. And Preferment is now purchased by some few, but to be paid by the
destroying of All; Than which nothing can be more unworthy or unjust. The poor
Subject pays the Price of the Preferment which he never purchased: and though the
Bargain's made without him, yet he shall know the Payment: The World's turned
Topsyturvy for the Advancement of a Few; One Man's Grandeur is the Bane of the
whole World. The 1 Boetica, 2 Lusitania, 3 Taraconensis.
Spains can witness this, which have little else left them now but their Name;
All the Parts of Africa know in what Condition they have been: And the Togata,
Comata, Braccata.
Gaul's are sensible how they have been Plundered, though not alike by all, and
therefore they have some small Strength left yet, in some few Corners, by
reason that the Integrity and Honor of some few Governors, has sometimes
replenished those Provinces, which the Rapine of many others had wasted.

V. But I have digress'd too far our of pure Grief and Concern: To return
therefore to what I was saying before: What Vice is there familiar to their
Servants, in which the Great Ones are not equally concerned? Unless perhaps
they make this Difference, to punish that as a Fault in the Servant, which they
themselves commit, as Just and Lawful: Besides, a Servant is not admitted to
Aspire so high, as to exercise those Oppressions and Encroachments I have
before charged on the Wealthier Sort: Although in that I may be mistaken; For
some, who from Servants have become Great, have done the same or greater Feats.
But this ought not to be any Imputation upon Servants in General, that some
from their Condition have been so far Advanced. Murders are likewise very rare
among the Servants, out of the Dread and Fear of Death: but you hear of them
every day among the richer Sort, in confidence and hope of Pardon. Unless, it
may be, I am thought to deal partially, to reckon this for a Fault which the
Rich Men do: because, when they kill some of their ordinary Servants, they
think it is but Justice to do so, and not at all a Crime. But this is not all,
they make use of the same Liberty in all their Lewdness and Uncleanness. For I
would fain see that Rich Man who observes the sacred Ties of Wedlock, whom the
Frenzy of Lust does not hurl headlong, whose House and Family are not a sort
of Stews, and who does not gratify his mad Desires upon whatsoever Person the
Fevor of his wicked Lusts directs him: according to what the holy Writ says of
such Sparks as these. They were as fed Horses Jerem. 5. v. 8.
in the Morning, every one Neighing after his Neighbor's Wife. For does not he
prove this to be directly said of himself, who endeavors filthily to enjoy
whatsoever his Eyes lust after? Perhaps I shall be thought to deal very hardly
to mention any thing of their Concubines, because that, in comparison of the
forementioned Wickedness, is a sort of Chastity, it looks like being contented
with few of the Sex, and to restrain their Lusts to a certain Number of Wives;
Judge the Expression of Wives: because many are arrived to that height of
Impudence, as to Esteem their Maidservants as their Wives; and I could wish,
that as they are thought to be in a manner Wives, so that they were the only
Ones. For it is much more foul and abominable, that some who have lighted upon
Honorable Matches, do a second time take Wives out of the Rank of Servants,
thereby disgracing the Honor of sacred Wedlock, by the Meaness of so
degenerate an Alliance, not at all Blushing to become the Husbands of their own
Servants, debasing the State of their Noble Marriage in the dirty Beds of their
own Slaves: Such Men I wish with all my Heart, in the Condition and State of
those their Spouses, since they have showed themselves so very fond of their
Company.

VI. I doubt not but very many of those who are really Great and Noble, or
those who would be thought so, do receive with Scorn and Contempt that, in the
handling the Subject I am now about, I have said that some Servants are far
less Wicked than their Masters. But since I have not spoken this of All, but
only of such are Really so, I ought not to incur the Anger of any one, unless
he know himself to be Indeed such as I have Reflected upon, lest for that very
Reason, he be thought to be One of that Gang. Whoever among the Nobility do
really detest such Enormities, should much rather be displeased with those, who
by their Vile and Naughty Actions, disgrace the Titles that they bear: For though
such are a Burden and Scaldal to all Christians in General, yet the Stanch and
Filth of their Actions, reflects most immediately upon that Order of which they
are a Part. Well then, it is granted I have said, that some Noblemen are much
more wicked than their Servants, I did say it, and it might seem odd enough, if
I did not prove it as well as say it. Now to give an Instance of one of the
Greatest wickednesses, of which you shall scarce ever find any one Servant to
have been guilty. For can any one Servant be named that ever kept a Swarm of
Whores, or that is stained with the Scandal of having many Wives; or, like a
Dog or Boar, thinks he may have as many Mistresses as his Lust can Satisfy? I
know the Answer to this is easy, That Servants cannot do these things; and
that they would certainly do them, if it were in their Power. I believe it.
However, I cannot admit that as already done, which as yet I never saw done.
For let their Minds be never so depraved, and their Inclinations never so
wicked, yet no one ought to be punished for a Crime he never committed. That
Servants are Base and Naught, is very certain. But then those who are Noble and
Better-bred, are much more to be blamed, if being in a more Honorable Station,
their Manners are much worse. So that the Issue of this whole Affair will of
necessity come to this, not that Servants should be altogether quit from the
Guilt of their Naughtiness, but that many of the Great and Rich Men, in
comparison of Servants, are much more to be blamed. For who can sufficiently
set forth, as it ought to be, that vile Robbery, that when the Roman Empire was
as good as dead, or at least breathing its last Gasp, that in that part in
which it yet seemed to live, it should expire; being strangled with Cords of
Taxes, as much as by the hands of the Invaders, and yet in this Condition you
shall find very many of the Poor, who bear the Taxes of the Rich? That is, you
shall find very many Rich Men whose Taxes murder the Poor: But what do I talk
of finding very many, I fear I might have said with greater Truth, you may find
them all such. For there are so very few free from this Evil, if there are any,
that on that side where I say you may find Many, I might as well at once have
included All. For what has the Ease some time since given, to some Cities
produced, but only to set all the Rich Men free, and to increase the Burden of
the Poor, that the old Duties might be taken off from their Backs, and New ones
put upon the others; that the removal and taking off of some small Services
should enrich the one, only to torment the other with the addition of ten times
greater: that they might grow rich by lessening a Charge that was but a Feather
to them, only to press the other to Death with multiplying the Load already too
heavy to be born: So that the Remedy with the greatest Injustice relieves the
Rich, and as unjustly murders the Poor, a most unrighteous Reward to the One,
and as unrighteous a Ruin to the Other? Whence we may observe, that nothing
can be more wicked than such rich Men, who destroy the Poor by pretending to
assist them, and nothing more unfortunate than such mean Persons, who are
Ruined by that which was designed as a Cure for all.

VII. But what kind of dealing is this, and what sort of Sanctity must we style
it, that if any of the Nobility offer to be converted to God, he presently
loses the Advantage of his Honor? Or what sort of Respect has Christ in that
Chistian Country, where the very embracing his Religion makes the Party
ignoble? For as soon as any one begins to amend and grow better, he is despised
and contemned as one grown much worse; so that, for that Reason, all are in a
manner, forced to be wicked, that they may not grow cheap. And therefore it is
not without Reason that the Apostle says, The whole World lies in Wickedness:
1 John 5. v. 19
And very truly; for with good grounds may the whole be said to lie in
Wickedness, where is there no room for the Good. For the Whole is so full of
all manner of Ungodliness, that either they are all wicked who are in it, or
those few good that are remaining, are Harassed and Persecuted by the rest. So
that, as I said, if any one of Note applies himself to Religion, he presently
loses his Character. For when any one changes his Habit, he at the same time
changes his Title; if before he was Valued, he is now Despisable; if he was
before very Splendid, he is now as Mean; if he was before all over Honor, he
is now all over Contempt. And yet some Worldlings and People of little Faith,
think it strange that they feel the Anger of an offended God, when they thus
persecute God Himself in the Persons of his Saints! All things are perverted
and turned Topsy-turvy. If any one is righteous, he is despised as though he were
wicked; if any one is wicked, he is respected as though he were righteous. It Is
no wonder therefore if we daily suffer worse things, since we our selves grow
worse each day than other. For Mankind daily commit new Sins, and never leave
the old ones. A new Crop of Vices arises as a daily Addition to the remaining
old Stock.

VIII. What room therefore is there for How God by our Sins is daily provoked.
Complaint? Whatever Hardships and Inconveniences we suffer, they are much less
than we deserve! What reason have we to say that God deals hardly by us?
Certainly we deal much more hardly with God. For we exasperate Him by our
Impurities, and compel him to punish us against his Will. And although the
Essence and Majesty of God be of that Nature, that it is not to be disturbed by
the Passion of Anger, yet we by our Iniquities do so mightily provoke him, that
we even force Him to be angry. We do, as I may say, offer violence to His
Goodness, and rudely lay hands on His Mercy. And when His lovingkindness is
such that it would for ever spare us, the Sins we commit oblige Him to plague
us with Misfortunes. And as they who beset the most fenced Cities, or who
endeavor to destroy or take the strongest Forts, do without doubt ply them
with all sorts of Arms and Engines; so we in storming the Divine Mercy, make
use of all the greatest Villainies and Crimes as our offensive Arms; and esteem
Almighty God as injurious to us, when we our selves are most injurious to Him.
For every Fault of every Christian is an Affront offered to the Divine Majesty:
For when we do those things which God forbids, we tread his Commandments under
our Feet; and therefore it is very wickedly done of us to accuse God of dealing
Severely by us in our Calamities: we should only blame our selves: For when we
commit those Faults which are the occasion of our Distresses, it is we our
selves that are the Authors of our Misfortunes. Why then do we cry out of the
Sharpness of our Punishment? Every one of us is his own Tormentor, so that that
of the Prophet is said to all of us: Isai. 50. v. 11.
Behold all ye that kindle a fire, that compass your selves about with Sparks,
walk in the light of your fire, and in the sparks that ye have kindled. For all
Mankind run headlong into eternal Torment in the way here described by the
Scripture; first of all they kindle a fire, then they add more fuel and force
to it, and afterward enter into the flame the^ have provided. When therefore
does a Man first of all kindle Everlasting Fire for himself? Why when he does
first of all begin to sin: But when does he add Force to the Fire? When he
heaps one Sin upon the head of another. And when does he enter into Everlasting
Fire? When by an overplus and superfluity of daily Sinning, he has fulfilled
the remediless Sum Total of his Iniquities; as our blessed Savior said to the
Great Men of the Jews, Fill* ye up Matt. 23* v. 32, 33.
then the measure of your Fathers, ye Serpents, ye Generation of Vipers. They
were not far from the Complement of their Sins, to whom our Lord thus spoke,
that they should fulfill their Iniquities; and doubtless for that Reason,
because they were not worthy of Salvation, they might complete their
wickedness, in order to their Destruction. So in the old Law when it makes
mention, that the Iniquities of the Amorites were fulfilled, it tells us, that
the Angels spoke thus to Lot: Whosoever thou have in this City, bring them out
of Cer. 19. v. 12. 13.
this place, for we will destroy this place, because the Cry of them is waxen
great before the face of the Lord, and the Lord has sent us to destroy it.
That most profligate People had for a long time lighted the Fire by which they
perished; and therefore when they had fulfilled their Iniquities, they roasted
in the Flames of their own Crimes: for they had so very highly offended God,
that they endured that Hell in this world, which is to be felt in the other.

IX. But some one may say, there are none who deserve to be destroyed as they
were, because there are none guilty of the Impurities they were. Perhaps that
may be true. But what shall we make of that which our Savior says, that all
they who despise his Gospel are much worse than them? For thus he says to the
People of Capernaum: If the mighty works Luke 10. v. 12, 13.
had been done in Sodom, which have been done in thee, it might have remained
unto this day: But I say unto you, that it shall be more tolerable in the day
of Judgment for Sodom than for thee. He says here, that the Sodomites are less
Culpable, than those who neglect the Gospel, and therefore this is a most plain
Reason why we, who do neglect it in many Instances, ought to dread something
worse; especially considering that we will not now be satisfied with the usual
and familiar Vices. The customary ways of Sinning are not sufficient for many
now: They are not contented with Brawlings, Calumnies, Rapine, Drunkenness,
Rioting, Cheating, Perjury, Adulteries, Murders, no nor all of them together,
although most barbarously Inhumane, yet in Fact most injuriously inflicted on
many, unless in the height of their Fury, they lay their Blasphemous hands even
on God himself. For as the Scripture says of the ungodly: Psalm. 73. v. 9. v. 11.
They set their mouth against the Heavens; and their tongue walks through the
Earth: And they say, how does God know, and is there knowledge in the most
High? And in another place. Psalm. 94. v. 7.
The Lord shall not see, neither shall the God of Jacob regard it. And to such
as these we may very aptly apply that of the Royal Prophet; Psalm. 53. v. 1.
The Fool has said in his heart there is no God. For they who affirm that God
sees nothing, had as good at the same time take away his Subsistence; and when
they say he has no Sight, they had as good say he has no Being. For although no
very wicked Action can be consonant to right Reason, because Reason and Sinning
are inconsistent, yet in my Opinion there is no wickedness so very wild and
unreasonable as this. For what can savor more of Frenzy, than that a Man
should acknowledge God to be the Creator of all Things, and yet to deny that he
governs them; that he is the Former and Maker of all Things, and yet that he
neglects his own Handywork? As though the Chief End and Design of making them was
purely ^ How God is the giver of all things and his love toward us; who merit
nothing but death.
to disregard them. Now on the contrary, I assert that he had so Great Care of
all his Creatures, that I will prove, that he exercised it even before the
Creation. The very Thing it self shows it plainly. For he had never made any
thing, unless he had some Thoughts of it beforehand; for we do not see any part
of Mankind so very dull to undertake or go through with any thing that he may
never mind it when he has done it. For he who cultivates his Field, does it for
that End, that he may preserve it in that order. He who plants a Vineyard, does
it with Design to keep up the Plantation. He who begins to raise a Flock, does
it with Design to take care of their Increase. So he who builds a House, or
lays the Foundation of one, although at that time he has not a Dwelling ready for
him, yet he undergo's the Charge and Pains of Building, in hopes and prospect
of his future Habitation. But why do I mention this in Man, since even the
smallest Insects direct their Actions with the Instinct of what is to come!
Thus the Ants in their subterranean Cells, lay up what various Fruits they can,
and gather all their Stock in order to preserve their Lives. So Bees, when they
lay the Foundation for their Honey-Combs, or gather that which comes from the
Flowers; to what end do they desire the Thyme; but with desire and hope of
Honey, or fly from Flower to flower, but out of love to their future young
Ones? Has God then, who has implanted in the least of Creatures such
Affections for their own works, deprived only himself of the love of his
Creatures, especially since all the Passion we have for good things descends to
us from his good Love alone? For he is the Fountain and Original of All things;
it is in him, as the Scripture says, we live and move Acts 17. v. 28.
and have our Being; it is for him we receive all that Affection with which we
love every thing that is ours. For all the World and all Mankind are the Goods
of their Creator: and therefore from that Affection with which he has made us
love our Goods and Relations, he would have us understand how much it is that
he loves his Goods and Relations. For as, as we read, The invisible things of
him are clearly Romans 1. v. 20.
seen, being understood by the things that are made; so he would have us
understand his Love toward us by that which he has implanted in us for every
thing that is ours. And Ephesians. 3. v. 15.
as, as it is written, he would that the whole Family in Heaven and Earth
should be named from him; so it is His Pleasure that the Tenderness of a Father
in Him should be acknowledged by us. But what do I say of a Father? Yea rather
much more than that of a Father. For that Saying of our Savior in the Gospel
proves it so. For God so loved the World, that John 3. v. 16.
he gave his only begotten Son for the Life of the World. And the Apostle
says, God that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, Romans 8.
v. 32.
how shall he not with him freely give us all things.

X. This then is what I have said before, that God loves us more than any
Father does his Child. For it is a plain sign that he loves us beyond the Love
of Children, because for our sakes he spared not his own Son. And what is much
more, a righteous Son, an only begotten Son, and that Son God. Nay, and that
which heightens it, 'twas for us, wicked, ungodly, most unrighteous us. Who can
sufficiently value this Love of God toward us, since God's Justice is so Great,
that it is not capable of admitting the least shadow of Injustice? For
according to Humane Reason that Man would do a very unjustifiable Act, who
should cause a very good Son to be destroyed for the sake of very bad Servants.
But in this the inestimable Love of God and his admirable Power is seen, that
the Greatness of his Justice cannot be comprehended by Man, but rather in our
weak Sight the greatest Justice seems almost a sort of Injustice. And therefore
the Apostle, that he might show us the Immensity of the Divine Mercy, says
thus: For when we were Romans 5. v. 6.
yet without strength, in due time Christ died for the ungodly: for scarcely
for a righteous man will one die. This one Sentence plainly shows us the great
loving kindness of God, for if it be hard to find one who will lay down his
Life for the best Cause, Christ has demonstrated the Mighty Work he did for us,
when he died for our Iniquities. But in what follows, he gives us a Reason why
our Lord did all this: God commends his love toward us, in that while v. 8.
we were yet Sinners, Christ died for us, much more then, being now justified
by his Blood we v. 9.
shall be saved from Wrath through him. He commends it in this that he died
for Sinners. For the unworthiness of the Party who receives it, adds a greater
Value to the Favor: and therefore he says; God commends his love toward us.
How does he commend it? Because he bestowed the Blessing on those who did not
deserve it. For if he had given it to holy and deserving Men, he would not have
seemed to have bestowed a Favor he was no way obliged to, but rather to have
discharged a Debt. What therefore do we give in Return for these so Great
Mercies, or rather what ought we in Duty to return? Why in the first place,
that which the holy Prophet restifies that he did owe, and was resolved to pay,
when he says: What shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits toward me,
I will Psalm. 116. v. 12. v. 13.
take the Cup of Salvation, and call upon the Name of the Lord. This then is
the first Return, that we should give Death for death, all of us be ready to
lay down our Lives for him, who so freely died for us, although our Deaths will
be of infinitely less Value than His: So that if we should suffer Death, we
shall not by any means discharge the Debt. However, if we cannot pay the Whole,
we shall seem in some sort to do it, if we take care to discharge it as far as
we can. This then, as I said, is the first Return. Now the second is, that if
we cannot pay the Debt by Death, we should pay it by Love. For so our Savior
himself, as the Apostle says, would recommend his Love* to All, that by the
Example of his Mighty Loving Kindness he might draw them to the exercise of
mutual Love and Charity. And as it is reported of those Loadstones.
Gemms and Rarities of Nature, which being placed near to Iron, be it never so
hard, will take it up with almost a kind of Affection; so he the purest and
greatest Gemm in the Celestial Kingdoms designed, that by his Descent from
Heaven, he might join himself nearer to us, though hard as any Steel, that so he
might move us to his Affections, as it were, by the hands of his own Love; so
that making Acknowledgment of his Gifts and Favors, we might understand what
it was fitting for us to do for so good a Master, when he had done such Mighty
things for so bad Servants; and so that Saying of the Apostle might be
fulfilled: That for his Romans 8. 36. 38.
sake we should be killed all the day long, and that neither Tribulation, nor
Distresses, neither Persecution, nor Famine, nor Nakedness, nor Sword should be
able to separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

XI. Seeing then, that we are indebted to our Lord in all these Particulars,
let us see how well we pay him, and what Returns we make. Why all those Virtues
which I have named above, every thing that is Base and Unworthy, every thing
that will affront God, such as wicked Actions, debauched Morals, Drunkenness,
Gluttony, Bloody-hands, filthy Lusts, greedy Desires, and every Wickedness that
may more easily be thought of than expressed. For it is a Shame, as the Apostle
says, Ephesians. 5. v. 12.
even to speak of those things, which are done of them in secret. But this is
not all: For these things have been done formerly as well as now. But it is sad
and lamentable, that we add new Sins to the old ones, and not only new, but
heathenish and monstrous ones, and such as were never heard of before in the
Churches of God, venting profane Speeches against God, and blasphemous
Slanders, as that God is regardless, supine, negligent, and not at all
governing the World, and consequently merciless and untrue to his Promises,
inhumane, hard, and cruel. For he who is regardless, negligent and careless,
how can he be thought to be other than cruel, hard and inhumane! This is
Blindness and Impudence, the highest Sacrilege and Rashness! We are not
contented to wallow in our numberless Transgressions, and to be guilty of all
in the presence of God, but we must turn Accusers and Prosecutors of the Deity.
And what hope, for Gods sake, can there be, when the Prisoner sets up for a
Prosecutor of his Judge?

XII. But, say these Men, if God does regard Humane Affairs, if he takes care,
respects or governs them, why are we more weak and miserable than all other
People? Why does he suffer us to be crushed by Barbarians and Foreigners? Why
do we bear our Enemies Yoke? To answer in short, as I have said before, he does
therefore permit us to suffer all these Hardships, because it is but what we
deserve. For let us take a view of that Naughtiness, Baseness, and Villainy of
the Romans, which I have mentioned before, and then we may judge whether we who
live in so great Impurities can expect to be better protected. Since then many
make use of this Argument, that because we are miserable and low, that
therefore God does not regard Things here below, what is it that we deserve?
For if in the midst of so many Vices, if in the Commission of so much
Wickedness, he should suffer us to be strong, flourishing and happy, it might
give occasion to think that God did not at all regard the Iniquities of the
Romans, who suffered such vicious and profligate People to be happy. But since
he is pleased that such wicked and ungodly Sinners should be poor and
miserable, it is the plainest Demonstration, that God does both behold and
judge us, because we suffer those very things which we deserve. I am satisfied
that we do not think we deserve such Usage; and this is a main thing which
enhances our Guilt, because we do not acknowledge that they are our Deserts.
For an impudent Pretense of Innocence is that which sticks closest upon
hardened Sinners: and among a Multitude who are guilty of the same Misdemeanor,
there is none more Criminal than he who takes himself to be guiltless. And
therefore we have only this one addition to make to our Baseness, that we
esteem our selves to be blameless. But granting all this (says one of these
Transgressors, and he one of the worst of them) certainly it cannot be denied,
but that we are better than these Barbarians, and thence it appears that God
does not mind Humane Affairs, because although we are much the better Men, yet we
are in Bondage and Subjection to those who are worse. Well then, we will see
presently, whether we are better than these Foreigners or no: There is no
manner of doubt but that we ought to be much better: And that is one good
Reason why we are worse, because it is our Duty to be better. For where the
Condition and Station is more Honorable the Sin receives a greater
Aggravation. Where the person of the Offender is more Honorable, the Fault
arises in proportion. Thus Theft is a very great Wickedness, let it be
committed by whom it will; but certainly it is more heinous in one of the first
Rank, than in a contemptible Beggar. Fornication is forbidden every man, but
yet it would look much worse in a Clergyman than in an inferior Person. And so
we who are called Christians and Catholics, if we admit the like Sins as these
Foreigners do, it would be much worse in us. For the Sin is much more heinous
under the Profession of that holy Title. Where the privilege is the greater,
there the Sin is the grosser. For the very Religion which we profess condemns
our Practice. The Lewdness of one who has professed Chastity is more culpable,
than of one who has not. So it is more Scandalous for him to be drunk who
pretends to a great degree of Sobriety. There is nothing more contemptible than
a lewd and vicious Philosopher, for beside the Deformity of the Vices
themselves, he will be particularly remarked upon for his Character. And so we,
who, all over the World, profess the Christian Philosophy, must of necessity be
thought and reputed to be the worst of Men, because we have the Title of so
Glorious a Profession, and yet continue sinning under the Ties and Obligations
of so holy a Religion.

XIII. I am sensible that to very many it Of the Law accusing us for living
wickedly.
will seem intolerable, that I have said, we are worse than the Barbarians. And
what then, let it seem as intolerable as it will, it does not help our Cause
one Jott. Nay, it is rather an Aggravation to it, if we are really worse, and
yet take our selves to be better. For, (as the Apostle says) if a man think
himself to be Gal. 6. v. 3.
something, when he is nothing, he deceives himself: but let every man prove
his own work. We should therefore rely upon our Deeds, not our Opinion of
Things, our Reason, not Fancy, the Truth of Things, and not our own Wills*
Since then some think it so hard that we should be accounted either worse, or
at least not much better than Barbarians, let us see, either how we are better,
or than what Barbarians we are so. Now among all the different Nations of
Barbarians, there are two Sorts, and they are, either Heretics were the Goths
and Vandals, who were Arians vid. Book. 5. p. 7.
Heretics, or The Pagans that infested the Empire were the Franks, Saxons,
Moors, Scythians, Alans, Huns, see p. 37. of this Book.
Pagans* As to both Sorts, I do assert, as far as concerns the Divine Law, that
we are without Comparison better; but then as to Life and Conversation, it
grieves me at the Heart to think, that we are worse. But yet, as I have said
before, I do not say this of the whole Body of the Romans in General. For in
the first place, I except all the Religious, and in the next some Secular
Persons, as good as the Religious; or if that seem too much, some who by the
Honesty of their Actions come very near the Religious; but all the rest, or as
good as All, are more guilty than the Barbarians: For to be more guilty, is to
be really worse. And therefore, since some Men look upon it as irrational and
absurd, that we should be accounted either worse, or not much better than the
Barbarians; or than what Barbarians, let us see, as I said, how it is. Now I do
still say that, bateing only those few of the Romans, whom I now mentioned, all
the rest, or as good as All, are more guilty and more faulty in their Lives,
than the Barbarians. When you read this, it may be you grow Passionate, and
beside, condemn what you read. I submit to your Censure. Condemn me if I lie;
condemn me if I do not prove it, and condemn me, if I do not show that the
Sacred Scriptures have said as much as I say now. We then judge our selves to
be much better than All the rest of the World, nor do I, who assert that the
Romans are in some Things worse, deny but that in some Things they are much
better. For our Lives, and our Sins, as I said, are worse; but then we have the
Advantage without comparison by our Catholic Law. But then we should consider,
it is no Thanks to us that our Law is good; but that our Lives are bad, is
wholly owing to our selves. And what does it profit us that the Law is good,
when neither our Lives nor Conversations are good? For the good Law is the Gift
of Christ, but a bad Life is from our own Faults. Nay we are by so much the
more blameworthy, if we are possessed of a good Law, and yet are bad regarders
of it; I should rather say, since we are wicked, we are no regarders of it; for
he that observes it ill, regards it not at all: Neither does he respect a holy
Thing, who does not respect it holily: and so by this means the very Law which
we so esteem becomes our Accuser.

XIV. Laying aside therefore the Privilege Of the Barbarian Errors.
of the Law, which either helps us nothing at all, or else does most justly
condemn us; let us compare the Lives, Inclinations, Manners and Vices of the
Barbarians with our own. They are unjust, so are we; they are covetous, so are
we; they are faithless, so are we; they are griping, so are we; they are lewd,
and so are we; in short, they are guilty of all sorts of Wickedness and
Debauchery, and so are we; But perhaps it will be answered to this: If the
Barbarians and we are alike vicious, Why are not we upon the level with them in
Power? For since the Wickedness and the Guilt is a like, we ought either to be
as Powerful as they are, or they should be in as mean a Condition as we are.
That is true; and by this it is manifest that they are the more wicked, who are
the more weak. How do you prove that? Because, as I have said above, I have
showed that God does all things in Justice and Judgment. For if, as the
Scripture says, The Prove. 15. v. 3. Romans 2. v. 2.
eyes of the Lord are in every place, beholding the evil and the good; and
according to the Apostle, The Judgment of God is according to truth against all
evil Persons: We our selves see, that since we do not leave off to do evil
things, by the just Judgment of God we feel the Punishment of such Evil Doings.
But, say you, the Barbarians do the same things we do, and yet they are not
near so miserable as we are There is therefore this difference, that although
they do the same things we do, yet at the same time we offend much more
heinously: For their Vices and ours may be alike, and yet in those same Vices
our Sin must of necessity be much more weighty. For since, as I said before
page 2^*
all Barbarians are either Pagans or Heretics, that I may speak first of the
Pagans, since their Error is the Antienter; the Sea the great Geographical and
Historical Dictionary in English for all these and their Titles.
Saxons are cruel, the (d) Franks treacherous, the (f) Gepids inhumane, the (f)
Huns lewd; in short, the Life of all Barbarians in general, is Vice it self.
But it does not follow from thence that their Vices and ours have the same
Guilt; Shall a Hun's Lewdness be looked upon as Criminal as ours, or the
Treachery of a Frank be as Blameable as in one of us? Shall the Drunkenness of
an (g) Alan be Censured as much as that of a Christian, or the Thievery of an
Alban be condemned as much as the Thievery of a Christian? If a Hun or a Gepid
cheat you, it is no Rarity, because he knows nothing of the Sin of Cheating. If
a Frank forswear, it is no new thing with him, who takes Perjury to be only a
different way of speaking, and not at all a Crime. And what wonder is it that
Barbarians should believe thus, who know neither God nor his Laws, when almost
the greater part of the Roman Empire have the same Thoughts, and know they sin
at the same time? For not to speak of any other Sort of Men, let us take a view
only of the Companies of Merchants and Traders, who now fill the greatest part
of every City, and see whether their Life be any thing else but continual
Plodding how to cheat, and downright threadbare Lying, or if they do not take
those words to be utterly lost which do not bring some Advantage to the
Speaker. Those men have so Extraordinary a Respect for the Honor of God which
forbids common Swearing, that they look upon every Man's Perjury to be of
singular Advantage to them. Can we think it strange then that Barbarians should
cheat, who know not the Sin of Cheating? For being utterly ignorant of God's
Commandments, they do nothing in Contempt of them; for he who knows not the
Law, can do nothing wittingly against it. This then is peculiarly our Guilt,
who read God's Laws, and yet always take care to transgress them; who boast
that we know God, and yet contemn his Precepts and Commands: And so by
despising Him whom we fancy and boast that we serve, that very Thing which
seems designed for the Worship of God, becomes an Abuse and Affront to His
Majesty.

XV. But, to say nothing of other Sins at Christ's Name abused.
present, where will you find any among the Laiety, bating some few, who have
not always the Name of Christ in their Mouths to Forswear themselves by? So
that this is become the most common Oath among the Nobility, as well as Common
People: By Christ I Will do it, By Christ I Will perform it: By Christ I Will say
nothing else, By Christ I Will do nothing else. In short, the Matter is come to
that Pass, that, as I said before of the Franks, the Name of Christ seems now
not to imply the Sacredness of an Oath, but only a sort of Cant in speaking.
For so little is this Name regarded by very many, that they never design less
to do a thing, than when they swear by Christ they are resolved to do it. And
when the Scripture says, Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord Exodus 20. v.
7. Deuteronomy. 5. v. 11.
thy God in vain, we are come to have that mighty Veneration for Christ, that
among all the Vanities and Follies of the Age, scarce any thing seems so
contemptible and vain as that sacred Name. For there are many who swear by
Christ that they will do, not only some trivial, idle Business, but the
greatest of Villainies: with such it is the common Form of Speaking: By Christ
I Will take away such a Thing, By Christ I Will slay him, By Christ I Will murder
him. And so far are they arrived, that if they have once sworn by the Name of
Christ, they take themselves bound most religiously to commit the Sin. I will
tell you what lately happened to my self. Not long since, being mightily
pressed by a certain poor Man, to speak to a rich Neighbor of his, to desire
him not to take away the poor Creature's Estate and Goods; that he would not
carry off the Salary and Income that Maintained him in that low Station: To
which he, whose Ravenous Desires gaped after the Man's Estate, and who had
already in his Mind devoured the Man and Goods, looking Sternly upon me, as one
that thought I was taking from him, what he had not yet taken from the other,
Answered, that he could not by any Means grant my Request, as positively as if
it had been some of the greatest Duties he was performing, and which could not
by any means be dispensed with: When I desired to know the Reason why the Thing
could not be done, he gave me the most Convincing and Urgent one, and which was
not by any means to be gainsaid: I have, says he, sworn by Christ to take all
from him; and pray do you consider whether it be in my Power now to leave
undone what I have sworn by that holy Name to do. At which I (for what more
could I say, when he had so just and holy a Pretense) walked off when I had
heard the Reason of so Religious a piece of Villainy.

XVI. I would now desire to know of all Of how great a Sin it is, In causing
others to Blaspheme by our loose living, and by despising things we know must
be done.
those who are as yet in their Wits, whether ever any one could possibly think
that the Impudence of Men's covetous Desires could go so high in affronting
their Maker, as to assert, that they do those things out of Reverence to
Christ's Name, which yet are the greatest Disrespects that could be done him?
This is unaccountable and prodigious Wickedness! To what Baseness will not
Men's wicked Inclinations draw them! They arm themselves for Pillaging and
Plunder by the Name of Christ, and make even God the Author of their Crimes;
and when Christ is the Prohibitor and Punisher of all Wickedness whatever, they
tell you they commit it purely for Christ's sake. And do we complain of the
Iniquities of our Enemies, and accuse Heathens and Barbarians of Perjury! With
how much less Fault do they forswear by their Doemons than we by our Lord! How
much less a Crime is it to play and trifle with the name of Jupiter than that
of Christ! In that case there is only a dead Man who is sworn by: But in the
other it is the living God who is forsworn by. In that there is not so much as a
mere Man, but here the Almighty God. In our case there is a Renunciation of the
greatest Oath, and therefore of necessity the greatest Guilt and Perjury. In
their's, since there is as good as no Oath, there can be no Perjury. For since
it is not a God by whom they swear, it cannot be Perjury when they chance to
break it. But whoever has a mind to know the Truth of this, let him hear the
holy Apostle St. Paul, delivering the same Doctrine that I do now: For thus
Romans 2.
he says: We know that whatsoever the Law says, it speaks to those who are
under the Law. And Romans 4. v. 15.
again; Where no Law is, there is no Transgression. In these two Sentences, he
has plainly ranked the two Parts of Mankind, those without the Law, and those
who live under it. Who are they therefore who are now under the Law? Who should
they be but the Christians; such as the Apostle was, who says of himself: I am
not without the Law of God, but am under Romans 7.
the Law of Christ. Who are therefore without the Law of Christ? Who but
Pagans, who know not the Law of Christ? And therefore it is of these he says,
Where no Law is, there is no Transgression. By which one single Passage he
shows, that only the Christians, when they sin, are the Transgressors of the
Law, but the Heathen who know nothing of the Law do sin without Transgression:
Because no one can be a Transgressor of that Thing which he does not know. We
therefore are the only Transgressors of the Divine Law; we who, as the
Scripture says, read the Law, but do it not, and so by that means our Knowledge
is nothing else but our Fault, since we have known the Law to no other End, but
to break it with greater Aggravation: Because what we have known by Reading, we
have contemned and despised by our Pride and Lusts. And therefore that of the
Apostle is most truly said to every Christian. Thou that Romans 2. v. 23.
make thy boast of the Law, through breaking the Law, dishonourest thou God?
For the Name p. 24.
of God is Blasphemed among the Gentiles through you. Hence may be seen what
Crime it is the Christian are guilty of, since they give occasion to the
Blaspheming the Name of God. And when we find in the Scriptures, that we should
do all things to the Glory of God, we on the contrary 1 Cor. 10. v. 31.
do every thing we can to disgrace him. And when our Savior every day calls to
us, That our light should so shine before Men, that they Matt. 5. v. 16.
may see our good works, and glorify our Father which is in Heaven: We on the
contrary live so, as that Men may see our evil Works, and so by that means,
blaspheme our Father which is in Heaven.

XVII. Since Matters are thus, we have great Reason, on my word, to sooth our
selves with the great Advantage we have of being called Christians, since we
act and live at such a rate, as that we are a Scandal to Christ, by the bearing
of his holy Name. But on the other side, what like this can be said of any of
the Heathen? Can it be said of the Huns; See what sort of People these are who
are called Christians? Can it be said of the Saxons or Franks; Behold the
Actions of those who style themselves the Worshippers of Christ? Is our most
holy Law blamed for the brutish Carriage of the Moors? Do the barbarous Rites
of the Scythians and Gepids, cause the Name of our Lord and Savior to be evil
spoken of and blasphemed? Can it be said of any of these; where is the
Catholic Law which they believe? Where are the Precepts of Piety and Chastity
which they learn? They read the Gospels, and yet are lewd: they hear the
Apostles, and yet are Drunkards; they follow Christ, and yet love Rapine, they
lead a wicked Life; and yet Brag of the Goodness of their Law. Can such Things
as these be said of any of those Nations, no, not by any means: It Is of Us, and
only us, of whom they are truly said. It Is in us that Christ is ubraided, it is
through us that the Christian Law is evil spoken of. It Is of us that what I
mentioned above, is said: Lo, what sort of People they are who worship Christ.
Their Pretense of Learning only good Things is Sham and Falsehood, as well as
their Brags of the Excellency and Holiness of their Law. For if they learned
what was good, they would be good themselves; for such is the Religion as are
the Professors of it. Undoubtedly they are such as they have been taught to be.
It is plain therefore that the Prophets they have, do teach uncleanness; that
the Apostles they read, have published wickedness, and the Gospels they are
principl'd in, do instruct them in such Actions. If Christ had taught them holy
Things, his Followers would certainly live holy Lives. One may guess what a One
he is, who is worshipped, by the Practice of those who worship him. How can the
Master ever have been good, whose Disciples we see, are so very bad? For from
him they are called Christians, it is him they hear, and him they read. Any one
may easily understand the Doctrine of Christ. Look and see the Christian's
Actions, and you will presently perceive what 'twas that Christ taught. But what
wicked and base Thoughts the Heathen always had of our Lord's Religion, may be
learned from the most Cruel Tortures of their barbarous Persecutors, who
believed that in the Christian Sacrifices there was nothing but Impurity and
abominable Wickedness. For they thought the very beginnings of our Religion
came from two of the greatest Villainies; from Murder, and then, which is worse
than Murder, from Incest; not from Murder and Incest only, but, which is still
more wicked, from the Incest it self and Murder; from the Incest of pious
Mothers, and the Murder of their innocent Babes, which they believed were not
only murdered by the Christians, but eaten also, and all this to pacify their
God; as though any thing could have more offended Him: An odd sort of Expiation
of ones Sin, by another as great or greater: To recommend a Sacrifice by those
Things which the Lord does most abhor; and as if it could be worth our while to
gain eternal Life, if possibly it could be compassed, by such monstrous
Wickedness.

XVIII. We may from hence perceive what sort of People the Heathen took the
Christians to be, who worshipped their God with such Sacrifices, or else what
sort of God it was they prayed to, who taught them such sort of Duties. But how
came they to have such Apprehensions of us? How should it be but from those who
bear the Name of Christians, but in Reality are not, who by their Sins and
Wickedness disgrace their Religion, who, as the Scripture says, Profess that
they know God, but Tit. 1. v. 16.
in works they deny him, being abominable and disobedient, and unto every good
work reprobate; by reason of whom, we read, the way of Truth 2 Pet. 2. v. 2.
is evil spoken of, and the most holy Name of our Lord God is violated by the
evil Tongues of sacrilegious Men? But how heinous and particular a Sin it is,
to cause the sacred Name of God to be blasphemed among the Gentiles, we learn
from the Example of See Book the Second.
holy David, who, when in consideration of his many righteous Actions, he was
thought worthy to escape eternal Punishment by only one Confession of his
Fault, yet could not obtain pardon of this Sin, though he sought it by the
Mediation of Repentance. For when Nathan the Prophet had said to him, after he
had acknowledged his Fault, The Lord has put away thy Sin, thou shall not die,
he adds immediately; 2 Samuel 12. v. 13. v. 14.
Howbeit, because by this Deed thou have given great Occasion to the Enemies of
the Lord to blaspheme, the Child also that is born unto thee shall surely die.
And what followed after? Why, his Crown cast off, and Jewels laid aside: his
Robes put by, and all his Royal Ornaments removed, instead of these he became
Solitary, Pensive, shut up, clothed in Sackcloath, all moist with Tears, and
covered over with Ashes; he begged the Life of the young Babe with such a Crowd
of Lamentations, and assaulted the God of Mercies with so great Prayers and
Addresses; but after all these Prayers and Supplications, it was not to be
granted, when yet, which is the most powerful Help in Prayer, he prayed in
Faith, that what he asked of God he should obtain. By which we may see that
there is scarce a Crime of deeper Dye, than to give occasion to the Gentiles to
blaspheme. For he who sins grievously without the Blasphemy of others, only
draws Damnation upon himself; But he who makes others to blaspheme, carries
them headlong with him to Destruction; and it is of necessity that he be guilty,
for so many as he drew with him into Sin. But this is not all. For whatsoever
sinner does so offend, as not to cause others to blaspheme by such Sin, he has
only upon himself the Guilt of his own Transgression, but the most holy Name of
God does not suffer by the Sacrilegious Tongues of Blasphemers. But he who by
his Sinning causes others to blaspheme, does necessarily make his Sin above the
standard of common Humane Crimes, because he offers the greatest Injury
imaginable to God himself by the encouraging such a Multitude of Blasphemers.

XIX. This then, as I said, is a Malignity peculiar to the Christians: because
God is blasphemed only by those who learn what is good, yet practice the quite
contrary, who, as the Scripture says, confess God in their Words, but Tit. 1.
v. 16.
deny him by their Deeds; who, as the same Apostle says, Rest in the Law, and
know his will, Romans 2. v. 17, 18. etc.
approve the things that are more excellent, who have the form of Knowledge,
and of the Truth in the Law, who preach that a man should not steal and yet
steal; who read that a man should not commit Adultery, and yet commit the Sin,
who make their boast of the Law, and yet by breaking of the Law do dishonor
God. And so by this the Christians become much worse, who ought to be much
better. For they do not give proofs of what they profess, but rather contradict
their Profession by their bad Morals. And wickedness committed under a good
Title is more Damnable, and a holy Name enhances the Guilt of the Sinner. So
our Savior in the Apocalypse speaks to the lukewarm Christian: Rev. 3. v. 15,
16.
I would thou were cold or hot; so then because thou art lukewarm, and neither
cold nor hot, I will spew thee out of my mouth. Our Lord commands every
Christian to be fervent in Romans 12. v. 11.
Spirit: for thus says the Scripture, That we may be servent in Spirit, serving
the Lord. It Is in this Fervor of Spirit that the Heat of Faith and Religion is
shown, he who has a great deal of this Heat, is reckoned to be fervent and
faithful: he who has nothing at all of it, is esteemed altogether cold and a
Heathen; but he who is neither, but between both, is the lukewarm Trimming
Christian, and hated of our Lord; and therefore to him it is said, I would thou
were cold or hot; so then, because thou art lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot,
I will spue thee out of my mouth: I wish thou had either the Heat and Faith
of good Christians, or the Cold and Ignorance of the Heathens. For either thy
warm Faith would bring thee to God; or thy Ignorance of the Law, would for the
present, at least, in some measure, excuse thee. But now since thou have
already acknowledged Christ, and do neglect him whom thou have owned, thou
who wast received, as 'twere within God's mouth by the Profession of the Faith,
shall now be spewed out for thy Lukewarmness. And this the blessed Apostle St.
Peter does evidently declare, speaking of the Vicious and Lukewarm, that is, of
the Christians who led ungodly Lives. It had been better for them not have
known the 2 Pet. 2.
way of righteousness, than after they have known v. 21.
it, to turn from the holy Commandment delivered unto them. But it is happened
unto them according v. 22.
to the true Proverb, The Dog is turned to his own Vomit again, and the Sow
that was washed, to her wallowing in the mire. Now that we v. 20.
may understand plainly that this is spoken of those, who, under the Title of
Christians, live in the Filth and Impurities of the World, hear what he says of
the same People, in tho same place. For if, says he, after they have escaped
the Pollutions of the World, through the knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, they are again entangled therein: the latter end is worse with them
than the beginning. The blessed Apostle St. Paul Says much after the Romans 2. v.
25.
same manner; Circumcision verily profits if thou keep the Law: but if thou
be a breaker of the Law, thy circumcision is made uncircumcision. That by
Circumcision in this place he means Christianity, he teaches us plainly, when
he Philip. 3. v. 3.
says: For we are the Circumcision who worship God in Spirit, and have no
confidence in the flesh. By this we see that he compares bad Christians to
Pagans, and not only compares them, but even leaves them behind them, where he
says: Romans 2. v. 26.
If the uncircumcision keep the righteousness of the Law, shall not his
uncircumcision be counted for Circumcision: And shall not uncircumcision which
is by nature, if it fulfill the Law, judge thee, who v. 27.
by the Letter and Circumcision, do transgress the Law? Hence we understand,
as I said before, that we who have God's Law and despise it, are much more
criminal, than they who neither have it, nor any knowledge of it. For no body
contemns that which they Romans 7. v. 7.
do not know: I had not known Lust, says the Apostle, except the Law had said,
Thou shall not covet. Neither can they ever transgress a Law they never had, as
the Scripture says, Romans 4. v. 15.
Where there is no Law there is no Transgression. And therefore if they do not
deviate from the Law which they have not, neither do they despise the Precepts
of such Law: Because, as I said, no body can despise that of which he has no
knowledge. It Is we then that are the Contemners and Transgressors of the Law,
and by so much are worse than these Pagans: Because they have not known God's
Commandments, but we have known them: They have them not, but we have them:
They do not practice things that they never heard of, but we tread under foot
what we read and hear. And therefore there is only Ignorance to be laid to
their Charge, but Sin and Transgression at our doors: For it is a much less
heinous Offense not to know the Law, than after the Knowledge of it to contemn
it.

SALVIAN of GOD's Government, etc. BOOK V.
Of the Law, and its Commands; and how good they are, if we use them aright.
The Description of the Heretics; and of Tradition. Of Ignorance which
excuses: Of Envy; Of the Rarity of the Good. Of the Errors of the Romans. Of
Oppression: Of the Mercy of God.

1. I Am very well satisfied that many of the Of the Law, and its Commands, and
how good they are, if we use them aright.
greatest Libertines, and of those who are not capable of receiving the Truth,
may object against all that I have said and urge, that if the Guilt of wicked
Christians be so Great, that by their neglecting those Commands of God, which
they do know, they sin more heinously than the Heathen People who know nothing
of them; that then the Ignorance of these is much more Advantageous to them,
than Knowledge would have been; and that the having come to the knowledge of
the Truth, makes much against the others. But the Answer to these Men is easy;
That it is not the Truth which is against them, but their own Vices, it is not
the Law that hurts them, but their own Morals. For let our Manners be good, and
the Law will be on our side. Let us leave off Sinning, and then we shall have
Profit from the Law. For we know, (says the Apostle) that the Law is good, if a
man 1 Timothy 1. v. 8.
use it lawfully. Use the Law then lawfully, and it will be of advantage to
you. For we know (says he) that the Law is good, if a man use it lawfully,
knowing this, that the Law is not made for a righteons man. And for that
Reason, do you begin to be righteous, and so you will be free from the Law; for
that Law can never come against those Morals which are already altogether
consonant to it. For we know (says he) that the Law is good, if a man use it
lawfully, knowing this, that the Law is not made for a righteous man, but for
the lawless and disobedient, for the ungodly and for sinners, for unholy and
profane, -- and if there be any other thing that is contrary to sound Doctrine.
So that you may see by this, O Man, that the Law is not so much against you, as
you are against the Law; it is not contrary to you when it commands you what is
good, but you are contrary to it when you live ill: for it provides for your
Welfare by ordering every thing that is righteous, and you contradict it by
doing every thing that is wicked; so that you act not only against the Law, but
even against your own self, for so far as you contradict it, you act against
your self; because in the Law is both your Salvation and your Life; so that,
when you leave off to follow God's Law, you desert and forsake your own
Salvation. Our complaint against the Divine Law is much such a one as a poor
impatient Sick Man uses to make of the best Physician, who, when by his own
Fault he has made his Distemper worse, lays the Blame on the Ignorance of the
Doctor. As if the best Prescriptions could cure any Infirmity, if the Sick
Party does not follow them, or that any Method laid down by a Physician can set
any one upright, unless the Sick Party resolves strictly to pursue it. What
good will a bitter Draught do the Stomach, if Syrups be presently powered upon
it? What good does the Silence of the bystanders do to a Man in a Phrensy,
when he destroys himself with his own Noise? How can that Antidote work which
is followed by a larger Dose of Poison? Now the Law is our Antidote, and our
Vices are the Poison: The Antidote of the Law cannot cure us, whom the Venom of
our Vices does destroy. But I have now and formerly spoke sufficiently of these
Matters; and if there shall be occasion, I shall, with God's Assistance, say
more to the same purpose hereafter.

II. In the mean time, since I have before The Description of the Heretics,
and of Tradition.
made mention of two Sorts or Sects of Barbarians, viz. Pagans and Heretics;
because, as I suppose, I have spoken sufficiently of the Pagans, I shall now,
as my Method requires, discourse likewise of the Heretics. For it may be
urged: That although the Divine Law does not require at the hands of Pagans, that
they should obey those Commandments which they never knew, yet it certainly
exacts Obedience from the Heretics, who do know them; for that they read the
same things which we read, and have the same holy Prophets, Apostles and
Evangelists; and that therefore the Law is not less neglected by them, than
it is by us, but rather indeed much more; because they have the Advantage of
reading the same Scriptures we do, and yet do much worse Things than our
People. Let us therefore take a view of Both. They read, say you, the same
Things that are read by us. How I pray you, can those things be said to be the
same, which have been formerly by wicked hands most lewdly corrupted, and
depend on worse Tradition? So that they are not the same, because those things
cannot be said to be altogether the same, which are faulty in any one of their
Parts. For they can have no safety in them, since they have lost their
Perfection, nor have they always continued in the same State, which are
deprived of the efficacy of the Sacraments. It Is We therefore alone that have
the sacred Scriptures perfect, uncorrupted, and entire, who either drink of
them at the very Fountain head, or by the assistance of a just Translation have
drawn them from their purest Originals. It Is only We that read them truly; and
I would to God, we fulfilled the Contents of them as truly as we read them
rightly. But I fear that we, who do not observe them well, do not read them
well neither: because there does less Guilt acrue by not reading holy things at
all, than by disobeying the good Things we do read. For other Nations either
have not the Law of God, or they have it tattered and corrupted; and so by that
means, as I said before, they have not at all what they have only so. And
although there may be some of these Barbarians, who may seem to have the holy
Scripture not so much abused and altered, yet they have it corrupted with the
Tradition of their ancient Founders, so that they have rather a Tradition than
the Scripture, because they do not adhere to what the Truth of the Text
directs, but to the wicked Gloss inserted by their naughty Tradition. For they
are altogether Barbarians, ignorant not only of the Of Ignorance which excuses.
Roman, but even of all Humane Learning, who know nothing in the World but what
they hear from their own Doctors, and what they hear, That they follow; so that
it is of necessity that they, who, being thus without all Learning and
Knowledge, do come to know the sacred Truths of the Divine Law, by Doctrine
rather than by Reading, should rather retain that Doctrine than the Law it
self. And so the Tradition of their Teachers and their accustomed Doctrine, is
to them instead of a Law; because they know nothing else but just what they are
taught. They are then Heretics, but not wilful ones. They are reckoned
Heretics with us, but not among themselves. For they fancy themselves so good
Catholics, that they bestow the civil Title of Heretics, even upon us. So
that we are the same to them that they are to us. We are certain that they are
injurious to the divine Generation, when they assert the Son to be less than
the Father: And they think we are as injurious to the Father, because we
believe both to be equal. We have the Truth with us, but they presume that they
have it among them. The true Honor of God is among us; but they fancy that
what they believe is more for the Honor of the Deity. They are unkind and
unneighbourly; and it is one of the greatest pieces of their Religion to be so.
They are ungodly; but yet they think it is true Piety to be so. It Is plain
therefore they are in Error; but yet they err with an honest Mind, not out of
Hatred, but of love to God, believing that they love and honor our Lord.
Although they have not the right Faith, yet they nevertheless believe this to be
the perfect Love of God. How they shall be hereafter punished for this Error
and mistaken Opinion, no body can tell but the Judge: And in the mean time, I
presume, God Almighty affords them his long-suffering, because he sees them,
although not right in their Creed, yet to be mistaken with a Desire of
entertaining the true Opinion; and especially since he knows that they do all
through Ignorance, but our People neglect those things which they believe; so
that they sin purely through the Fault of their Teachers, but our People by their
own; they are ignorant, ours very knowing; they do that which they take to be
the right, but our People that which they know to be wrong. And therefore by a
most just Judgment the longsuffering of God supports them, and severely
punishes us: Because Ignorance may in some sort be excused, but Contempt can
never merit a Pardon. For thus says the Scripture: The Servant who knows not
the will of his Lord, and does it not, shall be beaten with few stripes; Luke
12. v. 47, 48.
but he who knows his Will, and does it not, shall be beaten with many.

III. Let us not wonder then if we are asflicted many ways, because we sin not
for want of Knowledge, but out of Perverseness. For though we know what is good,
yet we do it not; though we understand the difference between Virtue and Vice,
yet we follow the latter; we read the Law, and yet trample upon the Contents of
it, and make our selves acquainted with its sacred Sanctions and Precepts, for
no other end, but to sin more heinously, after we are forbidden to do it. We
pretend to worship God, and yet are downright Vassals to the Devil. And
notwithstanding all this, we are for receiving all good Things from the hand of
God, when we are heaping one Wickedness upon the head of another. We would have
him to fulfill our Desires, when we will not perform his Will; And behave our
selves as though we were Superior to our Maker. We desire that God Almighty
always should obey our Wills, when all of us live in Contradiction to His. But
he is just and righteous, and we are wicked and unjust. For he punishes those
he thinks worthy of it, and bears with those who deserve Forbearance: and both
as Means to one and the same End; that Chastisement might put a stop to the
Lust of Sinning in the Catholics, and that his long-suffering might some time
bring the Heretics to the perfect knowledge of the Truth; especially since he
may think those not altogether unworthy of the Catholic Faith, whom he sees to
live much better Lives than the Catholics. Now all those I am thus discoursing
of are either Vandals or Goths: For I do not speak one word of the Roman
Heretics, who are almost innumerable, neither do I compare them either to
Romans or Barbarians, because the Errors in their Faith make them worse than
the Romans, and the Filthiness of their Lives more base than the Barbarians.
But this is so far from being a pleasing Thought, that it is a greater weight
than the Load which we have laid upon our selves, because those whom I am
forced to give this Scurvy Character of, are Romans. And this may let us see
what the whole Body of the Romans may deserve, when one part of them affront
God by wicked living, and the other both in Doctrine and Life. Nay and with
this further, that even these very Heresies of the Barbarians have formerly had
their rise from the Naughtiness of the The Goths became Arrians to please the
Emperor Valens.
Roman Government, so that it is altogether our Fault that these Barbarous
People ever had Heresies among them.

IV. But as to what relates to the Conversation Of Envy.
of the Goths and Vandals, what is there in which we can prefer our selves
before, or compare our selves to them? And in the first place, to begin with
Love and Charity (which our Lord teaches us, is one of the Chief Christian
Virtues, and which he recommends to us not only through all the Sacred
Scriptures, but even in His own Person, when he says; By John 13. v. 35.
this shall all men know that you are my Disciples, if ye have love to one
another.) Now almost all the Barbarians who are of one Country and Government,
generally love each other; but all the Romans generally take care to persecute
one another. For who is that Citizen, who does not envy his Fellow-Citizen? Who
is there that loves his Neighbor thoroughly? They all are absent in Affection,
though not in distant Places; although they are joined in Habitation, their Minds
are far assunder. And I would to God this were all, though one of the greatest
Plagues, and that 'twere only thus with Fellow-Citizens and Neighbors. That is
much worse, that even Kinsmen do not perform the Duties of their Kindred. Where
is that Relation that shows himself such to his Kindred? Who is there pays to
Love what he acknowledges to owe, even to the very Name? Who is that in Reality
which he is said to be? Who is so near allied in hearty Affection as in Blood,
in whom cursed Malice and Emulation do not burn, whose sole base Envy has not
seized, and whom another's Prosperity does not put upon the wrack? Who does not
reckon another Man's good Fortune his own Misery? Who is so satisfied with his
own Happiness, as to be content that another should be so as well as he? For
many now are possessed with a new and an unaccountable Plague; they have no
Enjoyment of their own Happiness, unless they are sure others are unhappy. How
very cruel, and extremely impious, how far from the Practice of the Barbarians,
and how very common among the Romans is it to Ruin each other by Fines and
Outlawries; but I mistake when I say each other; if 'twere so, 'twould be more
tolerable that one Party should suffer what he had inflicted upon another: But
this is the Mischief that many are proscribed by a few, who make a Prey of the
public Fines, and what bears the Title of a Debt to the Treasury, is put into
private Pockets; and this not only by the Great ones, but their Underlings; not
only the Judges, but by their meanest Dependents. For what either City, Town,
or Village is there, where there are not as many Tyrants as there are
Magistrates? Although it may be, they please themselves with the Name, because it
makes them look Big and Stately: For so it is with all Thieves, who pride and
glory when they are reported to be much more daring than they really are. What
place is there then, as I said, where the very Bowels of Widows and Orphans
are not devoured by the Governors of Cities, and with them those of almost all
holy Men? For they reckon of them as of Widows and Orphans; because out of
Respect to their Profession they will not defend themselves, or through their
Innocence and Humility they cannot. So that there is not one of these safe, nor
any others, except the Great ones, free from the Destruction of this Torrent of
Thievery, unless those who are in every respect as very Thieves as themselves:
Nay to such a pitch is the Roguery arrived, that unless a Man be very wicked,
he cannot be safe.

V. Well, however, since there are so many Of the rarity of the Good.
who destroy the Good, without doubt there are some who in the midst of the
Calamity do assist and protect them, who, as the Scripture says, Deliver the
Poor and Needy Psalm. 14. v. 2. 53. v. 2.
from the hand of the Oppressor. No. There is none that does good, no not one:
And he therefore says, no not one, because good Men are so very scarce, that
they seem all to be contracted into one. For who can assist the Distressed and
Afflicted, when even the Christian Priests do not withstand the Oppression of
wicked Men? For many of them either hold their Tongues altogether, or speak to
as little Effect as if they had held them; and this many of them do, not out of
Cowardice, but advisedly, as they think, and with Reason. They will not declare
the plain Truth, because the Ears of wicked Men cannot bear it; they do not
only refuse to hear it, but even hate and abominate it; they do not only not
fear and reverence it when they hear it, but despise it with the greatest
rebellious Pride and Obstinacy. So that they who can speak, keep silence,
whilst sometimes they spare the Wicked, and will not produce to them the Force
of open Truth, lest they should make them worse by a too earnest pressing of
the Truth upon them. And thus it comes that the Poor are Oppressed, Widows
mourn, Orphans are trod under foot, insomuch, that many of them, well born and
genteely bred, fly over to the Enemy, for Fear of Dying here under the public
Persecution, going to seek the Roman Humanity among the Barbarians, because
they cannot undergo barbarous The Errors of the Romans.
Inhumanity among the Romans. And although they differ from those they fly to,
both in their Rites, and Language; and, as I may so say, in the ungrateful
Scent of their Bodies and awkward Clothing, yet they had rather bear with a
different Habit among the Barbarians, than with raging Injustice among the
Romans. And therefore from all Parts they straggle either to the Goths, or the
Bacaudae, or to Outlaws or Outliers of Gaul.
some other of the Conquering Barbarians, and they do not repent their Journey.
For they had rather live free under a seeming Captivity, than be real Captives
under a seeming Liberty. So that the Name of Roman Citizens, formerly esteemed
not only very high, (d) but purchased at a great Price, is now voluntarily Acts
22. v. 28.
rejected and fled from, and is reckoned not only cheap and contemptible, but
abominable and a Burden. And what greater Evidence can there be of the
Injustice of the Romans, than that many Creditable and Noble Persons, and to
whom the Roman State ought to be an Honor and an Ornament, are yet compelled
by their Cruelty and Oppression to quit the Name of Romans? And hence it is,
that even those who do not go over to the Barbarians, are yet compelled to be
such, as is plain in a Great Part of the Spaniards, and no small one of the
Gauls, and in general in all those through the whole Roman Empire, whom the Roman
Injustice has now made not to be Romans.

VI. I shall speak now of the A sort of Outlaws Tories, Raperies, or Refugees
of Gaul.
Bacaudae, who being pillaged, distressed, and murdered by cruel and unjust
Judges, after they had lost the Privilege of the Roman Liberty, have now also
lost the Honor of the Name. What is only their Misfortune is thrown upon them
as their Crime, and we impute a Name on their Calamity, which we our selves
have been the occasion of: We call them Rebels, and lost Wretches, when we our
selves compelled them to the Crime. For how came the Bacaudae to be such, but
by our Injustice, and the Wickedness of their Judges, but by the Proscription
and Rapine of those who converted the public Tribute to their own private
Gains, and have made the Peoples Taxes only a Prey for themselves? Who like the
most Savage Beasts, have not so much governed those put under their Care, as
they have devoured them, not being satisfied with the Spoils of the Men, as
most Thieves are used to be, but have torn them piecemeal; and, as I may say,
have gorged themselves with their very Blood. And thus it came that the Men
being suffocated and murdered by the notorious open Robberies of their
Governors, began to be in a manner Barbarians, because they were not permitted
to be Romans. They were satisfied to be what they were not, because they were
not suffered to be what they had been; and were forced at least to defend their
Lives, because they saw plainly they had utterly lost their Liberty already.
And what are we doing now, but the very same thing that was done before, that
is, that they who already are not Bacaudae, shall be forced to be such. For as
far as Violence and Injury can go, they are compelled to be willing to be so;
but then their Weakness hinders them, that they are not such. So that they are
as Captives groaning under the Enemies Yoke. They endure the Hardship out of
Necessity, but not Choice; they with all their heart would be free, and yet
undergo the greatest Slavery.

VII. And thus it is that we deal with almost Of oppression.
all of the meaner Sort. For by one thing they are streighten'd to two the most
different. The greatest violence prompts them to a Desire of Aspiring to their
Liberty, but the same Violence does not suffer them to accomplish what it
forces them to desire. But it may be, these Men are blamed, because they do
desire it, when all they covet is, that they may not be forced to desire it:
For it is their greatest Misfortune that they do desire it; And they would be
much better dealt with, if they were not compelled to have such a Desire. But
how can these poor Creatures otherwise choose than desire Liberty, who undergo
the daily, nay hourly Ruin of public Taxes, who have the always Grievous and
never ceasing Proscription hanging over their Heads, who desert their Dwellings
lest they should be tortured in their own Houses, and run into Banishment to
avoid the Punishment? Public Enemies are more mild to these than the
Collectors: For so it is plain in Fact, they run over to the Enemy to avoid the
Violence of the Taxing. And even all this, though it be hard and inhumane, yet
would be less grievous and unpleasant, if all did bear it equally and alike.
It Is most shameful and tormenting that all do not bear the Burden of All; that
the Tribute due from the Rich, is laid on the poorer Sort, and the Weak bear
the Burdens of the Strong. Nor is there any other Reason that they cannot bear
them, only that the Burden of the miserable People is greater than their
Estate. They suffer two the most different and unlike Things, Envy and Poverty.
Envy is in the Great Payment, Poverty in the Estate. If you look at what they
pay, you would take them to be very Rich; but if you mind what they have, you
will find them miserably Poor. Who can sufficiently set forth this Mystery of
Iniquity? They bear the Payment of the Rich, and the Indigence of the Beggars.
But I have much more to say to this Matter. The Great ones sometimes make
Additi^nal Taxes, for which the poorer Sort are sure to pay. But, say you:
seeing their Estaes and Revenues are much the Greater, how comes it about that
they should be willing to increase their own Debt? You don't hear me say that
they do increase it. For it is for that Reason they do augment it, because it
is not augmented on themselves, and I will tell you how. There do often come
fresh Couriers and Expresses sent from the higher Powers, who are recommended
to a few Great Persons, to the Ruin of a great many others. For these, there
is presently ordered some new Presents, and so new Levies must be made. The
Great ones decree what the meaner Sort must pay, the Favor of the Rich orders,
what a whole Herd of Wretches must discharge. For they do not in any wise feel
the Weight of their own Decrees. But, you will say, those that come from the
Higher Powers must be Respected and Treated handsomely. I grant ye, but pray
then do you Great ones be the first to Gratify them, who are so ready to order
others to do it. Be you the first in bestowing your Money who are the first in
the Liberality of your Words: You who give of my Sustance, pray spare a little
out of your own: Although in Justice you, whoever you are, who solely expect the
Thanks, should solely bear the Expense. Well, we poor Knaves rest satisfied in
the good Will and Pleasure of you Rich ones. Let all of us pay what a few of
you command: Can any thing have more of Justice or Humanity in it? Your Orders
still load us with new Debts: Pray at least let the Debt be in Common between
us both. For can any thing be more unrighteous or unworthy, than that you alone
should be free from the Debt, who are the Parties who make us all Debtors? And
really the poor People are most miserable that pay all this I have been
speaking of, and neither know why nor wherefore they pay it. For who dare
examine why he pays, or who is suffered to find out what his Debt is? But then
it comes out when the Great ones fall out among themselves, when some of them
take snuff that some things have been decreed without their Advice and
Approbation. Then you may hear some of them say: What strange Doings are these!
Two or three order what will be the Ruin of many; a few Great ones decree what
must be raised upon a great many very poor ones. For every one of these Rich
ones so far gratifies his own Pride, that he would not have any thing pass in
his Absence, and not out of any Respect he has to Justice, to stop the passing
of any unrighteous Thing when he was present. For what they had found fault
with in others, they themselves, either to revenge the former Slight, or to
show their own Power, do afterward Establish. So that the poor unhappy meaner
People are placed, as it were, in the middle of the Sea, amidst the contending
Storms, are sometimes overwhelmed with the Waves of one side, and sometimes
with those of the other.

VIII. But I warrant you those who have been thus hard in this particular, are
more just and moderate in others, and make Amends for the Badness of one
Business by the fair Dealing in another. And as in the Imposition of fresh
Supplies they bear hard on the poorer Sort, so they support and assist them by
the fresh Remedies: and as the lesser People were most burdened with the new
Taxes, so they are most eased by the new Remedies. No, their injustice is alike
in both Cases. For as the meaner People are the first in the Burden, so they
are the last in the Relief from it. And if at any time, as it lately happened,
the Higher Powers have thought fit that the Taxes of some decayed Cities should
be lessened, the Great ones immediately part that Remedy that was given in
common to all, among themselves. No one then thinks of the Poor: Nor calls the
mean and needy to the partaking of the Favor. He who is always first in
bearing of the Burden, shall in the last place receive the Ease from. And what
shall I say more? The poorer Sort are not reckoned to be Scot and Lot Men,
unless when the Load of Tribute is put upon them, but when a Remedy is to be
shared, they are cast out of the Number. Do we think then that we do not
deserve the severity of the Divine Vengeance, when we are thus always
oppressing of the Poor! Or do we believe, seeing we are perpetually unjust,
that God will not as constantly exercise his Justice upon us? For where or
among what People, unless among the Romans only, will you find such wicked
Dealings as these? Whose injustice is so great as this of ours? The Franks know
nothing of this Villainy. The Huns are absolutely free from it. There is no such
thing among the Vandals; nothing of it among the Goths. For so far are the
Barbarians among the Goths from bearing any thing of this Nature, that the very
Romans who live among them feel nothing of it. So that it is the unanimous
Prayer of all those Romans, that they may never be forced again to come under
the Power of the Romans. There it is the Peoples constant and daily Wish, that
they may still lead the Life they now live among the Barbarians. And yet we
admire that the Goths are not routed by our Armies, when our own People choose
rather to live with them, than with us. So that our Countrymen will not only
not return from them to us, but desert us to go over to them. And really, it
seems a little strange to me, that all the Poor and meaner Sort, who are
assess'd to the Taxes, do not all go over, and there seems to be only one
Reason why they have not done it; Because they cannot carry over with them the
diminutive Remnants of their Fortunes, their poor Cots and Families. For since
many of them are forced to quit their little Fields and sorry Huts, to avoid
the Violence of the Exactions, how would they not leave what they are compelled
to, but if 'twere possible, would carry it off with them. However, since they
cannot accomplish this, which, it may be, they had rather, they strike up with
the only Method that is left them. They throw themselves into the Guardianship
and Protection of the Great ones: They surrender themselves into rich Men's
hands, and entirely put themselves under their Power and Jurisdiction. I should
not take this to be any great Burden or Misfortune, but should rather commend
this Power of the Great ones, to whom these poor People surrender themselves,
if they did not sell their Protections, and when they gave them such Shelter,
they did it out of Charity or good Nature, and not for sordid Lucre. But it is
very hard and cruel, that they only seem to Protect them, that they may Plunder
them; they defend them only on Condition, that they may make those who are
miserable already, to be much more so. For all who are under this seeming
Protection, make over almost All their whole Estates to their Guardians, before
they can procure the Favor; and so the Children lose their Inheritance, that
the Fathers may gain a Protection. The defense of the Parents is procured with
the Beggary of the whole Family. And these are the Grand Helps and Protections
of the Great ones. They give not a Cross to those who are under their
Patronage, but keep all to themselves. And thus the Parents for some small
while, have a little Advantage, that afterward the Whole may be taken from
their Children. So that the Great ones sell, and sell at the highest Rate they
can, every Favor that they do: And what I call selling, I wish they would sell
after the usual Method; for then, it may be, the Buyer might reserve somewhat
for himself. But this is a new and unheard of Way of Buying and Selling. The
Seller delivers nothing, and yet receives all. The Buyer receives nothing, and
yet utterly loses all. And since this is common almost in all Bargains, that
the Buyer is generally the Richer, and the Seller the Poorer, for that the
Buyer purchases with Design to increase his Estate, and the Seller parts with
his Goods in order to lessen it; this kind of Dealing is prodigious, the
Seller's Estate increases, when the Buyer has nothing left but sheer Beggary.
And how intolerable and monstrous, and so far from being endured by Mankind
that it is not fit to be heard by them, is this, that many of these pitifully
Poor, miserable Wretches, who are robbed of all that little they had, and
driven from their little Lands, even when they have thus lost their Estate, yet
still pay the Tax for the Estate thus taken from them; and though they have lost
the Possession of that, their Capitation does not leave them. They have not one
jot of Property, and yet they are overborn with Taxes! Who can sufficiently
set forth this Wickedness? The Oppressors brood upon their Estates, and these
poor Creatures pay the Tribute for them. After the Father's Decease, the Sons,
by reason of the Father's former Service, have not their Lands, and yet are
murdered with the Duties of them. And so by these Pranks, it comes to pass,
that they who were before stripped by private Oppression, do yield up the Ghost
by public Squeezing, and from whom Robbery had taken away their Estate,
pilling and polling has taken away their Life. And therefore many of those, who
either naturally are more considerate, or whom Necessity has forced so to be,
when they have either lost their Houses and Lands by Oppression, or have been
driven from them by the Tax-gatherers, and find they cannot hold them, they
seek out for the Lands of some Great Men, and so become Farmers to the Rich.
And as they who being affrighted with the Approach of an Enemy, are used to
betake themselves to their Strongholds, or they who have forfeited the
Protection of the Government, do in despair fly to some place of Refuge, even
so these Men, who can no longer enjoy the Seat and Honor of their Family,
betake themselves to the Drudgery of a pitiful Tenement, being reduced to the
necessiry of being strangers not only to their Estate, but even to their former
Stations and Conditions, Banished not only from their Fortunes, but even from
themselves, and loosing every thing together with themselves; they want both a
Property in their Goods, and have lost all Title to their Liberty and Freedom.

IX. And really, since Misfortune and Necessity have made it so, this mean
Condition might, however, be born with, if there were not still somewhat worse.
But it is bitter and grievous that there is yet a greater Mischief follows. For
they are received as Strangers, but their Dwellings prejudice them so far as to
make them Natives, and after the Pattern of Circe, that most powerful
Enchantress, who was said to change Men into Beasts, all of these who are
admitted within the Lands of Great Men, are pefectly Metamorphos'd, as by a
Draught of Circe's Bowl. For those whom they receive as Foreigners and Aliens,
they presently seize as their proper Goods; and those who are well known to be
Gentlemen, are converted into Slaves. And do we wonder then if the Barbartans
carry us away Captive, when we thus captivate our own Brethren? Never think it
strange that our Cities are sacked and destroyed. We have long taken a world of
Pains by the Oppression of very many, that so by captivating others, we our
selves should at length begin to be Captives too. For now we feel, though much
later than we desetve; we feel, I say, at length, what we have done; Psalm. 128.
v. 2.
and, as the holy Scripture says, We eat the labors of our hands; and by the
just Judgment of God, we pay the Debt we owe. We have Of the Mercy of God.
shown no Compassion to those who have been Banished from their own Country,
and lo, we our selves are now in that Condition? We have put Tricks upon
Strangers, and behold, we our selves are become Wanderers and are put upon. We
have over-reached Men of Condition by the Corruption of the Times, and lo, we
of late begin to live in a foreign Soil, and yet fear, even now, the like
Corruptions. And, O how Great is the Infidelity and Blindness of our naughty
Minds! We are now under the Sentence of a Judging God, and yet we do not
acknowledge our selves to have been adjudg'd. Nay some good Men admire that
other People, who yet have not suffered any such thing, are not amended by our
Examples, when as we our selves, who are now under God's hands, are not the
least reformed by his punishing of our Iniquities. O intolerable Pride! Very
many bear the Punishment of their Iniquities, and yet no body vouchsases to
understand the Cause of the Chastisement. But the Reason of this Pride is
plain; although we do indeed undergo some Hardships, yet we do not suffer what we
deserve. For the Mercy of God is so Great, that although he would have as suffer
for some of our Faults, yet he would not have us bear them all; though he
punishes the Wicked, he cannot do wickedness: and he had rather we should
acknowledge our Sins, than bear the Weight of them; that so, by those loving
and wholesome Stripes, he might show us what we deserve to bear, but yet will
not lay upon us our Deserts, according to that of the blessed Apostle, where he
says: Do thou not know that the goodness of God leads thee to Repentance?
But after thy Romans 2. v. 4, 5.
hardness, and impenitent heart treasurest up unto thy self wrath against the
day of wrath. We do really just thus, as the Apostle says. For God calls us to
Repentance, but we treasure up Wrath; God invites us to Pardon, but we daily
add Sin to Sin. We offer Violence to God for our Iniquities, we arm the Divine
vengeance against us. We force the Almighty against his Will to revenge the
Outragiousness of our Offenses. Nay we almost go so far as not to give him
leave to spare us. For since there cannot the least sign of Injustice ever
happen to, or appear in God, we act so, that if he does not execute Vengeance
on our Gigantick Villainies, he will almost seem to be unjust.

X. But some one or other was formerly a Sinner, perhaps now he is not; Is
there any end of Sinning, and do not Men sooner leave their Lives than their
Iniquities? For where is one, who does not die in his Offenses, and is buried
with, nay in his very Transgressions? So what That of the Prophet may be truly
applied to them: Their Graves are their Habitation Psalm. 48. 12. v. 20.
for ever: they are compared unto the foolish bruit Beasts, and are made like
unto them. And I wish they were like Beasts: for it had been better for them to
have gone out of the way by brutish Stupidity: Because it is worse, and
enhances the Crime, that they have offended God, not out of Ignorance, but
Contempt. And are they the Laity only that have done this? No, some also of the
Clergy. What, of the Seculars only? No, many also of the Religious, who under
the Cloak of Religion are enslaved to Secular Vices; who after all their former
Sins and Debaucheries, taking upon them the Title of Sanctity, and being the
same they ever were in their Conversation, have only by a new Profession
changed their Name, but not their Lives, and taking the Whole of God's Worship
to consist more in odd Clothes, than good Actions, have only put off their
former Garments, but not their Inclinations. So that those take themselves to
be Offenders with much less Censure, who, when they are said to do something
like Penance, as they do not leave their former Courses, so neither do they
change their Habit. For these Men do almost every thing so, that you would not
so much think they had formerly repented of their Sins, as that they afterward
repented of that very Repentance, nor that they had formerly repented so much,
that they had lived ill, as afterward, that they had ever promised to live
well. They know that I speak the Truth, and their own Consciences bear Witness
to what I say; and that as of many others, so particularly to those Religious
Hawkers and Courtiers of new Honors; and after they have taken the Name of
Penitents upon them, purchasers of very large and never-before-possess'd Power.
So that they would be not only Seculars, but much more; it is not enough for
them to be what they were before, unless they should afterward be somewhat more
than they had been. How then do not such repent of their former Repentance?
Even as they also repent, that ever they had a Thought of their Conversion to
God, who abstaining from their own Wives, do not keep their hands from the
wrongful taking away of other Men's Goods, and when making profession of the
Continence of their Bodies, they run Horn-mad with the Incontinence of their
Minds. This is an altogether new sort of Conversion. They do not do those
things they lawfully may, and yet commit those that are unlawful. They refrain
from Copulation, but do not refrain from Rapine. What Is the meaning of so
ridiculous a Persuasion? God has forbid Sinning, but not Wedding. Your Actions
do not quadrate with your Principles. You ought not to be the Patrons of Vice,
who pretend to be the followers of Virtue. You act most preposterously. This is
not a turning to God, but a turning away from him. Since, as the Report go's,
you have long since left the work of honest Matrimony, pray, likewise at length
leave off your Sinning: And that, as is fitting, all manner of Sinning: But yet
if you cannot refrain from all, because perhaps you take that to be a difficult
and impossible Task, yet I beseech you, hold your hand from prodigious and
monstrous Impieties. I grant you, whoever you are, that no Neighbors may hold
up, nor mean People live near you. I allow that you be a Persecutor of many
indigent People, and a Destroyer of the distressed; I allow that you be an
Afflicter of all, so they be foreigners: But I beg of you at length, to spare
your own Friends, and if not all your own, because, it may be, you judge that
to be grievous and burdensome, if you should spare them all; have Compassion,
at least, on those of your Acquaintance, who have preferred you, not only
before their Kindred and Neighbors, but before all the dearest and nearest
Relations in the World. But what should I mention Relations and Children? They
have loved you more than their Souls, and all their future hopes, for which
they are not to be commended; and he who has done so, does acknowledge his
Mistake. But what is it to you, who were the Occasion and Subject of the
Mistake? You are certainly the more indebted, because he offended no otherwise
but by loving you too much. He was blinded with the Affection he had for you,
and was marked and checked by every body for it. But you, however, are so much
the more obliged to him, because he suffered himself to be blamed by all
Mankind, purely out of Love to you.

XI. What is there now among the Barbarous Goths like this? Who injures those
that love them? Who persecutes those who respect them? Or whose Throat is cut
by the Sword of his Friend? You pursue those who love you, you cut off the
Hands of those who bring you Presents, and slay your dearest Friends that
respect you, and yet do not fear, do not tremble! What would you do if you did
not perceive God's present Judgment, even in this next Correction of you?
Beside you add and heap up new Wickednesses to your former Crimes. Consider,
and think what Punishment waits for you, who are committing Sins of the larger
Size, when the lesser have been severely chastised, even by evil Spirits. We
desire for the present you would be satisfied with the pillaging of your
Friends and Companions; let it content you to have tormented the Poor, and to
have robbed even the very Beggars; there is not a Soul near you, but has his
Fears; no body can be secure. The headlong Torrents from the rocky Alps, or the
Fire made wild by Winds, are much more tolerable. The sinking Seamen are not so
nimbly swallowed by Charybdis, nor devoured, as the Saying is, by Scylla's
Dogs. You forceably thrust out your Neighbors from their poor little
Possessions, and your Kindred from their Houses and Estates. What, as the
Scripture says, Would you be placed alone in the midst of the Earth? Isa. 5. v.
8.
But this is the thing you can never attain to. For although you seize upon all
you can, and run over all you can, yet you will always have a Neighbor. I
beseech you, have a little Regard for some others, whom you your self, whether
you will or no, do respect. Regard others, whom, whether you will or no, you
admire. They are above the rest in Honor, and equal to them in Worth and
Reputation; they are greater by their Power, but lesser by their Humility. You,
to whom I am now speaking, know well enough, of whom I speak; and you, the
same, of whom I am now Complaining, ought to acknowledge him, whom I am thus
deservedly Commending; And I wish there were many such who deserved such
Commendation; For the Excellencies of many might be the Saving of All. But
granting, that you have not a mind to be commended, why, I pray you, do you
desire to be condemned? Why is nothing so grateful to you as Injustice, why
nothing so pleasing as Avarice, and nothing so dear as Extortion? Why do you
prize nothing of equal Value with Naughtiness, nor think any thing so Excellent
as Rapine? Learn at least from a Heathen, what is the solid Good. You should,
says he, be defended by Love and good Will, and not by Arms. You are therefore
mistaken in your Notions, the Baseness of your blind and depraved Understanding
deceives you. If you would be blameless, Powerful, and truly Great, you should
surmount all others in virtuous Actions, not in Oppression and Injustice. I
have formerly read in some place or other: No one is a bad Man, but who at the
same time is a Fool; for if he were wise, he had much rather be good. Do you
then, if it be yet possible for you to return to your right Wits, leave off
your ill Doings, if ever you hope to attain true Wisdom. For if ever you desire
either to be really wise, or in your right mind, you must-entirely change and
put off your self. Remove your self then from your self, that you be not
rejected by Christ. Cast off your self, that you may be received by Christ.
Destroy even your self to prevent your perishing. For whosoever, says our
Savior, will lose Luke 9. v. 24.
his Life for my sake, the same shall find it. Fall in love then with this so
wholesome Perdition, that you may thereby obtain the true Salvation. For you
must never expect to be saved by God, unless you first of all condemn your self.

SALVIAN of GOD's Government, etc. BOOK VI.
How One Man's Crime hurts and wounds many: Of barbarous Sights which difile
the Minds of Beholders. Of the Impurity of the Theaters, when we may be merry;
and how far it is lawful. Of Sin, how offensive it is to God. Of the Devil's
Enchantments. How God sometimes chastises us with Hardships; and sometimes he
indulges us with Tranquillity and Ease.

I Have been discoursing a long time to How one Man's Crime hurts and wounds
many.
particular Persons; and may seem to have exceeded the Bounds of a regular
Disputation. For whosoever reads these Papers (if yet there be any one, who for
Christ's sake will read what I have writ out of Love to Christ) he does
undoubtedly perhaps think or say of me: Since the Cause that he handles is a
General one, what does it make to his purpose to have said so much of
particular Parties? Granting, that he of whom he spoke, is such a one as he
took him to be: Does one Man's Fault wound another's Innocence, or, which is
much more, valid, is the Cause of all hurt by the personal Crimes of one Man? I
could show by plain Examples that it does suffer by it. For Achan Joshua 7.
long since took privily away somewhat of the cursed Thing, and the Sin of this
one Man was punished upon all. David commanded that the People of Israel should
be numbered, 2 Samuel 2.
and the Lord severely chastis'd the Fault with the Slaughter of the whole
People. Rabshakeh Isa. 36.
spoke some things to the dishonor of God, and he slew a hundred eighty five
thousand Men, because the ma^apert Tongue of one profane Wretch had
blasphemed. And therefore it is with good Reason that the blessed Apostle St.
Paul orders the corrupt Person to be cast out of the Church, and gives a
Reason, when he says, Know ye not that a little leaven leaveneth the whole
Lump. And hence we plainly 1 Cor. 5. v. 6.
see, that one wicked Man has often been the Destruction of many others. And
thus my Reader may please to understand, that it was not to no purpose that I
had said so much above of one wicked Person, seeing we read that the divine
Vengeance has been very often kindled by the Offenses of one But I am not so
strait laced as to stick upon this: For it is not at all necessary to suppose
that any one Man in this Case injures all, when all injure each other alike. It
is not fit I should think that All are endager'd by One, when all, of their own
accord run singly into Danger. For all hurry to Destruction, or at least, to
speak in milder terms, almost all. And what good is it to the Christians that
the Number of the Bad was less, or at least the same with that of the Good?
This is a miserable Business, and to be extremely bemoaned and lamented! How
unlike are Christian People now even to themselves, that is, from what they
have been formerly! Then St. Peter, the Chief of the Apostles, with a word slew
Ananias and Saphyra Acts 5.
for telling of a Lie. And the blessed St. Paul threw out of the Church an
incestuous Person, least by his nearness, he might infect 1. Cor. 5.
many. But now we are satisfied to have an equal Number of both among us. But
what do I say, satisfied? We ought rather to triumph and leap for Joy, if we
could but once arrive to that Equality. Behold, to what a pass we are come, how
low we are dropped after that Purity of Christianity: Behold, we are reduced to
that, that we should judge the Church happy, if it had only so many good People
in it as it has bad ones. For how should we not esteem it happy, if we had but
one half innocent, since we now bemoan the sinfulness of almost All? So that
indeed, seeing Matters are thus, 'twas to little purpose that I said so much
before of one wicked Person; 'twas in vain that I lamented the Iniquities of a
single Party. For either all, or almost all are to be bemoaned and lamented.
For most are either such, or certainly, which is as culpable, desire to be
such, and labor as much as they can by their evil Actions not to be thought
behind them, and for that Reason, although they commit lesser Ills, because their
Abilities are less, yet they are not at all the less wicked, because they would
be as great as the others, if it were in their Power. So that they do what is
in their Power, and are as bad as the others in Desire, Will, and good Wishes;
and as far as their Fortunes will admit, endeavor to outdo them: For there is
the same Emulation, although in quite different things, between these Men, as
there is between good Men; for as the Good desire to overcome all others in the
Rectitude and Honesty of their Minds, so these covet to master all others in
the Irregularity and Wickedness of theirs. And as it is the Glory of all good
Men to become daily better and better, so it is the Pride of all bad ones to
become worse and worse; and as the best Men covet to ascend the highest Pitch
of all manner of Virtues, so the worst Men desire the Prize of being Victors in
all manner of Vices. But all this is to our Damage, to ours who are Christians,
who, as I have said before, take Wickedness for Wisdom, and of whom God speaks
in an especial manner; I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and will bring
to nothing the 1. Cor. 1. v. 19.
Understanding of the Prudent. And when the Apostle cries: If any man among you
seems 1. Cor ^. v. 18.
to be wise, let him become a fool that he may be wise: As much as to say, If
any one will be wise, let him be good, because no one is truly wise but who is
truly good; we on the contrary, by the depravation of our wicked Minds, and, as
God's Word says, by a reprobate Sense, Romans 1.
rejecting Goodness for Folly, and embracing Wickedness for Wisdom, believe our
selves to grow every day more wise by how much we become more wicked.

II. What hope is there then of amendment in us, who are not led to what is
evil by any mistaken Opinion, but who take a great deal of pains through the
Corruption of our depraved Wills, that we may always appear to be very bad? And
hence it is that I have all along complained that we are much worse than the
Barbarians: For the Ignorance of the Law excuses them, whilst the Knowledge of
it, condemns us. They through their Unskilfulness in the Truth, because they know
not those things that are good, embrace the Evil instead of the Good; We, though
we have the Knowledge of the Truth, and know very well what is good, Somewhat
here lost from the Original.


In the first place, there is almost nothing either sinful or heinous which is
not in the Of barbarous Sights which defile the Minds of Beholders.
public Shows; where it is the greatest Pleasure imaginable to have Men die
upon the Spot, or which is more grievous and cruel than Death, to have them
torn in pieces, and the Paunches of wild Beasts to be gorged with the Flesh of
them, to have Men eaten, to the great Pleasure of the Standers by, and the
Satisfaction of the Beholders, which is, to be devoured by the Eyes of Men, as
well as by the Teeth of Beasts. And to keep these up, the whole World is at
Expenee. There is all the Care and Pains that can be taken about them. The
privatest Places are applied to; Groves never passed before are viewed, the
thickest Woods are gone through, the cloudy Alps are climbed, and snowy Valleys
penetrated; and that Men's Bowels may be devoured by Beasts, the World and
Nature's Secrets, are all ransacked. But these things, say you, are not always
done. A very admirable excuse of the Folly, that they are not always done. As
if what is offensive to God ought to be done at any time, or that bad things
were therefore well done, because they were not always done. Rogues and Bandity
do not always murder, and yet they are Murderers notwithstanding, even when
they do not commit the Fact, because they are sometimes defiled with Murder.
And highway Men are not always upon the Pad, and yet they do not by that cease
to be highway Men, because, although they do not actually rob any one of his
Goods, yet their minds are still ruminating upon their Robberies. So all those,
who are delighted with these sort of Sights, even when they do not see them,
are not free from the Guilt of those Sights, because they would always see
them, if they could. But this is not all, there are greater Things than these.
For, are not young Fowls fed for the Consuls after the manner of the Gentile
Sacrilege, and Auguries taken from their flying, and almost all the other
Follies acted, which even the old Pagans themselves looked upon as ridiculous
and childish? And when they do all this, who give names to our Years, and from
whom the Years themselves take their Beginning, can we think that ever our
Years can succeed well, which take their Beginning from such things as these?
And I could wish, that as these things are done only for the Consuls, that they
defiled only those, for whom they are done. For it is lamentable and grievous,
that whilst these Things are done by public Consent, the Honor of a very few
becomes the Crime of all; and as there are two elected and admitted each Year,
it is almost so, that no one in the whole World can escape.

III. But let us suppose that there is enough Of the Impurity of the Theaters.
said of those things, which, as you excuse them, are not done daily. And let
us speak of the Uncleanness acted every day, of which Legions of Devils have
found out such Sorts, and such Numbers, that even the honestest and best
Tempers, although they may despise and trample upon some, yet they will scarce
ever be able to overcome all. For as two Armies about to engage, are said
either to cut Ditches, drive Stakes, or other sharp Instruments in the Passages
through which they expect their Enemies to pass, not with design that each
Enemy should fall into them all, but yet that no one should wholly escape them,
even so the Devils have laid so many Snares, Baits, and Enticements for Mankind
in this Life, that although a Man get quit of many of them, yet he is certainly
snapp'd one way or other. It would be tedious to speak of them all, as of the Sea Kennet's Roman Antiquities for all these.
Amphitheatres, Musick-rooms, Gaming-Houses, Shows, Wrestling, Tumblings,
Mimickries, and the other Monsters, which it grieves me to speak of, because I
am sorry ever to have known so much Wickedness; I shall only speak of the
Impurities of the The places where the Romans exhibited their Shows to the
People.
Cirques and Theaters. For the Things are such which are acted there, that a
Man cannot not only speak of, but even remember them without defileing himself.
As for other Crimes, they seem only to claim some particular Portion in us, as
base Thoughts the Mind, unchaste Looks the Eyes, and idle Talk the Ears; so that
when any one of these is faulty, the rest may be free from Offense. But in the
Theater there is not one of them guiltless, our Mind is polluted with Lusts,
our Ears by Hearing, and our Eyes by Seeing. All which are so very wicked, that
one cannot explain, or set them forth with common Modesty. For who with safety
to his Modesty, can tell their Representations of filthy Things, the Obscenity
of their Words and Voices, the unseemliness of their Motions, and the
uncleanness of their Gestures? The heinousness of which may hence be guessed,
because they will not bear the relating. Some even of the greatest Villainies
may be named and reproved, without touching the Honor of him who mentions
them, such as Murder, Theft, Adultery, Sacrilege, and others in like manner.
It Is only the Impurities of the Theaters, which cannot with Decency be so much
as accused. So that it happens pretty odly to him who would reprove the
Baseness of such Uncleanness; for certainly he is an honest Man, who would
offer to accuse them, but then if he will keep his Honesty entire, he can
neither speak to, nor accuse them. All other Wickednesses defile the Actors,
not the Seers, or the Hearers. So although you chance to hear one blaspheme, you
are not polluted with the Sacrilege, because your Heart dissents from it: And
so if you chance to be present at a Robbery, you are not stained by the Fact,
because you abhor it inwardly. They are only the Uncleanness of public
Sights, which make the Actors and Spectators culpable alike. For whilst those
who see them do approve, and see them willingly, they do All by such Sight and
Approbation, act them. So that that of the Apostle does truly, in a peculiar
manner, fall Romans 1. v. 32.
upon them, that they are worthy of death, not only they who do such things,
but also they who consent, and have pleasure in them that do them. And
therefore in the Representations of Fornication, all the whole Body of the
People are mental Fornicators; and they who, it may be, came clean to the Play,
return Adulterers from the Theater. But it is not only then, when they return,
that they are Fornicators, but even when they come. For, for that very Reason
that any one desires an obscene Thing, whilst he hastens to such Unncleanness,
he is unclean.

IV. Things being thus, lo what are the Actions of all the Romans, or at least
of almost all. And since they are such, we who do these fine things complain,
that we are neglected by Heaven, and say that we are deserted by our God, when
it is we our selves that leave him. For let us suppose that our Lord had a mind
to regard us, though we do not deserve it; let us see whether he could do it.
There are many thousands of Christians every day at the beastly public Shows.
Can God, think we, look upon such People as they are? Can he regard those, who
revel in the Cirque, and fornicate in the Theaters? Or have we a mind, and
think it very fitting, that when God beholds us in the Cirques and Theaters, he
should be a Spectator of the Sights together with us, and should look upon all
the Uncleanness of the place, as well as our selves? One of the two must
necessarily be done. For if he vouchsafes to behold us, it follows, that he
must likewise behold the things where we are; or if, which is most certain, he
turns away his eyes from them, he turns them likewise from us, who are present
at them. And though matters are thus, yet we do all this that I have mentioned,
and that without ceasing. What do we think, we have such a God as the old Pagan
Theaters and Cirques had? For they did all these things heretofore, because
they thought they were very pleasing to their Idols. But on what account can we
pretend to do these things, who certainly know that they are odious to our God?
Or at least, if we are sure that these Filthinesses are pleasing to God, I am
not against the continual acting of them. But then, if we find in our own
Consciences, that this is what God abhors, that he abominates them; that as
there is in them the repast of the Devil, so they are an Abuse to God; how do
we pretend we worship God in His Church, when we are continually serving the
Devil in these obscene Plays, and that wittingly, and knowingly, advisedly, and
on set purpose? And what hope and confidence then can we have in God, who
offend him, not by Accident or Imprudence, but like those ancient Giants, who,
we read, madly attempted Heaven, and endeavored to step into the Clouds. So we
by the Affronts, which all over the World we offer to God, do, as by universal
Consent offer Violence to Heaven. To Christ then (O prodigious Madness) to
Christ, we offer the Games of the Cirque and Mimickries, and then chiefly when
we have received some Favor from him, some Blessing is bestowed upon us, or
when he has given us Victory over our Enemies. And what is this but to offer
Injuries to ones greatest Benefactor, or scurrilously to abuse one who treats
us civilly, or to wound the very face of one who would salute us? For I desire
to know of the Rich and Great Men of this World of what fault they take that
Servant to be guilty, who devises Mischief against a kind and loving Master,
who offers Abuses to him who deserves well of him, and for the Liberty which he
has gained, returns only Injuries and Affronts? He will doubtless be thought
guilty of the greatest Crime, who returns Evil for Good, who ought not to have
returned so much as Evil for evil. But this is what all we, who are called
Christians, do. By our Impurities we provoke a most merciful God against us, by
our Uncleanness we offend him, who has tenderness for us, and by our Injuries
wound him, who obliges and courts us.

V. To Christ then (O prodigious Madness) to Christ we offer Cirque plays and
Mimickries; we render to Christ, for all the Benefits we have received from
him, the Filthiness of the Theaters; to Christ we offer the Sacrifices of these
most abominable Pastimes. Undoubtedly our Savior became incarnate for us, that
he might teach us this. Certainly he preached this either by himself, or his
Apostles. For this he underwent the Shame of his Humane Nativity, and took upon
him the debasing Principles of an earthly Birth. For this he lay in the Manger,
and had Angels ministering unto Him, whilst he lay there. For this he would be
wrapped in Swadling-Clouts, who ruled Heaven in Robes of Glory. For this he
hung upon the Cross, whom all the World, even hanging dreaded. Who, says the
Apostle, though 2 Cor. 8. v. 9.
he was rich, yet for our sakes, he became poor, that we through his Poverty
might be rich. And when, says he, he was in the Form of God, he Phil. 2. v. 6,
8.
humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross.
To be sure Christ instructed us in these Matters, when he underwent all these
things for our sakes. We make most admirable Returns to His Passion, who having
received Redemption by His Death, requite him with a most Scandalous Life. For
the Grace of God, says the blessed St. Paul, Titus 2. v. 11, 12, 13, 14.
has appeared to all Men, teaching us, that denying ungodliness and worldly
Lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present World,
looking for that blessed Hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God and
our Savior Jesus Christ, who gave Himself for us, that he might redeem us from
all Iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar People zealous of good works.
Where are they who do these things, for the which, the Apostle says, Christ
came into the World: Where are they that deny worldly Lusts; where are they who
live soberly, righteously and godly, where are they, who by their good Deeds
show, that they look for that blessed Hope; and by the Innocence of their Lives
demonstrate, that they for that Reason, expect the Kingdom of God, because they
are fit and qualified to deserve to receive it? Our Lord JESUS CHRIST came, he
says, to purify unto himself a peculiar People zealous of good works. Where is
that pure People, where is that acceptable People, where are the People of good
works, the People of true Holiness? Christ, says the holy Scripture, suffered
for us, leaving us an Example, 1 Pet. 2. v. 21.
that we should follow his steps. I warrant you we follow our Savior's Steps
in the Cirques, we follow the Steps of our Savior in the Theaters. Christ, no
doubt, left us such an Example, whom we read to have wept, but we never read
that he laughed: for Weeping is the Compunction of the Soul, Laughter the
Corruption of Discipline. And therefore he says: Woe unto you that laugh, for
ye shall Luke 6. v. 25. v. 21.
mourn and weep. And, Blessed are ye that weep, for ye shall laugh. But we are
not contented to laugh and rejoice, unless our Joy be mad and sinful; unless
our Mirth be mixed with Impurities and Mischief.

VI. Pray then, what kind of Error, what When we may be merry, and how far it
is lawful.
kind of Folly is this? What, cannot we have a constant Scene of Merriment and
Laughter, unless we make our Mirth and Joy become a Sin? What, do we take
innocent Jollity to be fruitless, nor cannot we be merry without being wicked?
What Mischief, or rather, what Madness is this? Be merry in God's Name, as
excessively as you please; laugh till you are weary, so that you do it
innocently. What Folly and Frenzy is it, that we do not value any Mirth or
Pleasantry, unless it carries in it some Affront to our Maker? Nay and the
greatest Affront that possibly can be. For in the public Shows, there is a
kind of Apostatizing from the Faith and its Pledges, and a mortal Prevarication
from the Divine Sacraments. For what is the first thing that Christians profess
in their Baptism to Salvation? What else, but that they vow to renounce the
Devil, his Pomps, Shows, and Works? And therefore these Pomps and Shows, even
according to our own Profession, are the works of the Devil. How then, O
Christian, do you follow these Spectacles after your Baptism, which you confess
to be the works of the Devil? You have once renounced the Devil and all his
Shows; so that you must necessarily know, that when you return to these Shows,
that you do wittingly and knowingly return to the Devil. For you have once
renounced them both, and have owned that one is both. If therefore you close
with one, you return to both. For you say, I renounce the Devil, his Pomps,
Shows and Works. And what after? You say, I believe in God the Father Almighty,
and in Jesus Christ his Son, So that the Devil is in the first place renounced,
that we may believe in God: For he who does not renounce the Devil does not
believe in God; and therefore, whoever returns to the Devil, deserts God: But
the Devil is in his Sights and Shows, and therefore, when we return to these
Shows, we quit our Christian Faith. And thus all the Articles of our Creed are
weakened; nothing that follows after, but what staggers and falters. For if the
Foundation does not hold, nothing that is consequent to it can stand. Tell me
then, you Christian, how you can pretend to adhere to the following Parts of
your Creed, when you have destroyed the Foundations of it? The Members without
the Head are nothing worth, and all the Articles depend upon their Principals,
which if they fail, all the rest fall of course. For if you take away the
Foundation, the rest remain not all, or if they do, it is to no Advantage,
because they are nothing worth without their Head. If then the Sin of
frequenting these Sights seem little to any one, let him consider all I have
said upon it; and he will see, that there is not pleasure in these Sights, but
Death. For what is it else to lose the Fountain of Life, but to incur Death?
For where the Foundation of the Creed is subverted, Life it self is entirely
destroyed.

VII. I cannot forbear therefore to return to what I have said often before:
What is there like this among the Barbarians, where are there any Cirque-Games
among them, where are their Theaters, where is the Abomination of all kind of
Impurities, that is, the Destruction of our Hopes and Salvation? And although
they, as Pagans, did make use of all these, yet their Error would be much less
culpable in the Sight of God; because, although there would be uncleanness in
the seeing of them, yet there would be no Breach of a Or Baptismal Vow.
sacred Obligation. But as to us, what can we answer for our selves? We hold
the Creed, and yet destroy it; we confess the Gift of Salvation, and at the
same time deny it. And where is our Christianity this while, who have received
the Sacrament of Salvation to no other purpose, but that we might transgress
afterward with greater Sin and Wickedness? We prefer Plays before the Churches
of God, we despise the Altars, and honor the Theaters; We love them all, we
respect them all: It Is only God Almighty who seems little to us, in comparison
of them all. For beside many other Things, which show it, this which I am going
to say, does sufficiently prove it. If at any time it chances, which it often
does, that on the same day, there is a Church-Festival, and public Plays, I
desire to ask of every Man's Conscience, which of the two Places has the
greater Congregation of Christians in it, the Seats of the public Play, or the
Court of God, and whether All rather follow the Temple or the Theater; and
whether they love the Words of the Gospel more, or those of the Players, the
words of Life, or the words of Death; the words of Christ, or the words of a
Mimical Actor? For on every day of these deadly Sports, if there happen to be
any Feasts of the Church, they who call themselves Christians, do not only not
come to Church, but if by chance, not having heard of any such thing, they have
come, as soon as ever they hear there are Plays, they presently leave the
Church. The Church of God is despised, that they may haste to the Playhouse:
The Church is emptied, the Cirque filled. We leave Christ on the Altar, that we
may feed our Eyes that run a Whoring after the unclean Sights, with the
Fornication of those filthy Pastimes. Somewhat wanting here, and confused in
the Author.


VIII. But it may be answered to this, that these things are not done in all
the Cities of the Romans. Right; And I can say further, that they are not now
acted there, where they have formerly been always acted. For there is no such
thing now in the City Mentz.
Moguntia, but because it is rased and destroyed. They are not acted at Colen.
Agrippina; but because it is full of Enemies. They are not acted at the Great
City of Triers.
Treveris; but because it has been four times demolished: And lastly, they are
not acted in very many Cities of Gaul and Spain. And therefore woe be to us,
and our Impurities; woe be to us and our Iniquities. What hope is there for
Christians in the Presence of God, since that these Wickednesses have not been
in the Roman Cities, since the time they fell under the Power of the
Barbarians? So that Vice and Impurity are a Sort of quality peculiar to the
Romans, and are as their very Soul and Nature; for there does Vice particularly
reign, wheresoever there are Romans. But this is perhaps a heavy and an unjust
Complaint. 'Twere a heavy one indeed, if 'twere false. But how do you say; how,
not false? When, what we have spoken of, is now done only in very few Roman
Cities, and there are a great many which are not at all spotted with such
Impurities, where, though indeed, the Places and Conveniences of their former
Error remain; yet they are not at all made use of to the same purposes as
formerly? Therefore both Matters are to be considered, that is, how it comes
that the Places and Playhouses remain, but the Sports and Pastimes have ceased
to be? As to the Places, they are as yet Nests of Filthiness, because all
Impurity has been there formerly acted. And for the Plays, they are not now
acted, because the Misery and Poverty of the Times is so Great, that they
cannot be. And therefore what was formerly done, was out of pure Vice, and that
it is not now as formerly, is mere Necessity. For the Poverty* and Lowness of
the Rom^s Treasury and Exchequer, cannot allow that extravagant Expenses should
be every where lavished upon such Trifles. But let them yet squander as much as
they can, and throw it even to the Dunghill, yet for their Hearts they cannot
waste so much as they have done; because there is not so much left for them.
For as to the Desire of our Lusts and impure Delight, we could wish with our
Souls, that we had more, that we might convert more of it to these filthy,
dirty Pleasures. And it is plain, how much we would squander, if we were rich
and wealthy, when we are even Beggars, and yet lavish so much. For so great is
the Corruption and Looseness of our present Manners, that although our Poverty has
not wherewithal to spend, yet the Viciousness of our Tempers would fain
squander more. We have little Reason therefore to flatter our selves in this
Case, by saying, that those things are not done in all Cities now, which have
been formerly done. For they are not therefore now done in all, because the
Cities where they have been formerly acted, are not now in being; and where
they have been long acted, they have so managed it, that they cannot be even
where they formerly were; as God himself by the Prophet spoke to the Sinners,
For the Lord remembered them: says he, and it came into his Jer. 24. v. 21, 22.
mind; so that the Lord could no longer bear, because of the evil of your
doings, and because of the abominations which you have committed: therefore is
your Land a desolation, and an astonishment, and a curse. And by these Doings
it is come to pass, that the greater part of the Roman World should be for a
Desolation, and an Astonishment, and a Curse.

IX. And I would to God these things had only been done formerly, and that the
vicious Romans, would some time leave off to do them. It may be, as the
Scripture says, God might have mercy upon our Sins, But we do not act as though
we desired he should have mercy upon us. For we continually add evil to evil,
and heap one Sin upon the head of another, and when the greatest part of us
have already perished; we do what we can that we may perish all. I desire to
know who sees another slain near him, and is not himself afraid? Who sees his
Neighbor's House on fire, and does not endeavor by all means he can that he
himslef be not consumed in the Flames? We have seen not only our Neighbors
burn, but have felt the Flames in the greatest part of our Bodies. But, O
strange! What Misfortune is this? We burn, we burn, and yet do not dread the
Flames that burns us. For that these things, as I said, are not acted every
where as formerly, is owing to our Misery, not out Couduct. And I can easily
prove it. For put us but in the Condition we formerly were, and you shall
presently find all things every where as they were. Nay further, although they
are not now in reality every where, as far as Men's Wishes can make them, they
are every where, because the Roman People would willingly have them every
where. For when a Man is kept back from doing an evil Thing, merely out of pure
Necessity, the very Desire of doing the Wickedness is condemned instead of the
Action. For, as I said, according to that Saying of our Matthew. 5. v. 28.
Lord, He who looks upon a Woman to lust after her, has committed Adultery
with her already in his Heart. We may understand that although we do not commit
filthy and base Actions out of Necessity, yet we are condemned for the having
had an hearty Desire to the commission of them. But what do I speak of a
Desire, almost all commit them, when they have opportunity. Nay when the
Inhabitants of any City whatever come to Ravenna or Rome, they make a part of
the Romans in the Cirque, and a part of the People of Ravenna in the Theater.
So that by this means, no man by absence or distance can think himself excused.
The filthiness of the Things makes them all one, who are joined to each other
in the Desire of those filthy Things. And yet we sooth our selves with the
Integrity of our Morals, and flatter our selves with the Rarity of
Uncleanness. But I affirm, that not only those infamous contagious Pastimes
which were formerly acted, are now in Being; but that they are acted with much
more Guilt than formerly. For then the Parts of the Roman World were entire and
flourished, the Public Riches crowded the Storehouses, the Citizens of every
City swam in Delights and Plenty; the Authority of Religion, amidst so great
Abundance of all Things, could scarce preserve a Discipline and Order.
Inventors of idle Pastimes were then maintained in many places, but then all
places were full and crowded: No body thought of the Cost and Charge of the
Public, because the Expense was never felt. The Public rather sought where to
consume what its own Storehouses could scarce contain. And so the heap of
Riches, which exceeded almost all Measure, overflowed upon those Trifles. But
now what can be said? Our former Plenty is departed. Times and Estates are
altered, and we are became miserably poor, and yet we do not cease to be
trifling. And when Poverty used to cure the greatest Prodigals and
Spend-thrifts; so that as soon as ever they leave off to be rich, they
forthwith forsake their Vices; it is only we that are a new sort of Spendthrifts
and Rakehells, whom Riches has forsaken, and yet our Wickedness remains. So
that we have not, like other Men, the Occasions of our Immoralities in
Temptations, but in our own hearts; and our own inward Man is the Cause of all
our Naughtiness; we are not to be amended by the taking away of our Estates,
since we sin out of pure Love and Affection to the evil Things themselves.

X. Although I have already spoken sufficiently Of Si^, how offensive it is to
God.
of the great Vices of the Romans, with which the barbarous Nations are not
defiled, yet I will add many that are wanting. But I give this Advertisement
before I begin, That no Fault whatever seem little to any one, by which the
Great God of Heaven is offended. For if it is not by any Means permitted to any
one to dishonor a Noble and Illustrious Person, and if any one does abuse sueh
a one, he is subject to a Trial for the same, and to be legally condemned for
the Affront; how much greater a Crime is it for any one to pretend to offer an
Affront to his Maker? For the Fault does always rise in proportion to the
Quality of the Party who bears the Abuse: Because it is necessary by how much
the greater the Person is who suffers the Injury, by so much the greater is his
Fault who offers it. And hence it is that we read in the Law, that Exodus 31.
Numb. 2. and 2.
even those who seem to have done only some small Matters against the Divine
Command, were yet most severely punished. That we might understand from thence,
that nothing relating to God ought to be esteemed light. For even that which
seemed to be little, as to the Fault, the Affront thereby offered to God made
very great. But what did Vzzah the 2 Samuel 6.
Levite commit against God's Commandment, in endeavoring to save the Ark of
God from falling? For there was nothing of that matter commanded in the Law.
Yet while he supported it, he was smitten dead, not, as it should seem that in
any particular he had done any thing out of an obstinate or undutiful Heart,
but by his over-officiousness, he became undutiful, because he presumed to do
that, which he had no Command for. A man of Israel Numb. 15. v. 35.
for gathering Sticks on the Sabbath day, was put to death, and this by the
Judgment and Command of God, the most tender and most merciful Judge, and who
certainly had rather spare than destroy, if the Reason for such Severity had
not been much stronger, than that for Mercy. For one unwary Person perished,
that many others might not afterward be lost for want of Caution. But what do
I speak of Particulars? The whole Nation of the Jews, Numb. 11.
when they passed through the Wilderness, because they desired to have Flesh,
which they had been used to, lost part of their People. And yet it was not
forbidden as yet to desire it; but, I suppose, God would by that gain advantage
for the observance of his Law, to curb their rebellious Desires, to the intent
that all the People might more easily acknowledge, how much they ought to avoid
the Things which God had forbidden in the holy Scriptures, when they found they
received so much Damage by doing what he had not as yet forbidden Exodus 1.
by any Express Law. The same People complained, that they underwent hard
Labor, and are punished for it by Plagues from Heaven; not that it is not
lawful for any one who is oppressed, to groan and complain; but this was a sort
of an ungrateful Groaning, which accused God, as the Author of their excessive
Labor. By which we ought to understand, how much those who enjoy the Blessing
of Prosperity ought to please God, when we may not so much as complain of those
things which seem ungrateful and uneasy to us.

XI. But perhaps it is asked what the Meaning Of the Devil's Enchantments.
of all this is? What else should it be but to show, that nothing ought to be
esteemed light, by which God is offended. For I speak of these public Plays,
the Mockery's of our Hope, and the Cheats of our Lives. For whilst we divert
our selves in the Theaters and Cirques, we perish, according to that Saying of
the Holy Scripture; It is a Sport to a Pool to do mischief. And so we in like
manner, Prove. 10. v. 23.
when we spoil our selves among those filthy and disgraceful Sights, commit
wickedness, and those not of the lesser Sort, but much more penal for this
Reason, because though they seem outwardly to be innocent, yet they are most
pestilent and pernicious. For since there are two the greatest of Evils, that
is, if a Man either destroy himself, or offend God, both these are done in the
Public Plays. For the eternal Salvation of Christian People is there destroyed
by their scandalous Uncleanness; and the Majesty of God profaned by their
sacrilegious Superstitions: For there is no doubt but they offend God, since
they are consecrated to Idols. For Minerva is worshipped and honored in their
places for Exercise. Venus in the Theaters; Neptune in the Cirques, Mars in the
Of the Amphitheatre.
Sands, Mercury in the Wrestling-places; and so according to the Quality of
their Patrons, is the Superstition of the Worship. Whatever uncleanness can
be thought of, are exercised in the Theaters, whatever Luxury can be named in
the wrestling places; all manner of excess in the Cirques, and all manner of
frenzy among the Crowds of Spectators. In one place there is Immodesty, in
another Lasciviousness, in another Madness, and the Devil in them all; nay all
the Devils of Hell are in every one of the Places of these Pastimes. For they
preside over the Places dedicated to their Worship, So that in these sort of
Shows and Sights, there are not only Enticements and Temptations, not only Vice
and Naughtiness; For it is a kind of Sacrilege for a Christian Man to be joined
to such Superstition, because he communicates with their Worship, with whose
Pastime he is delighted. Which although it be always heineus, yet it is then much
more intolerable, when beside our ordinary Course of Life, either our Adversity
or Prosperity makes this more Criminal. For in our Adversity God is the more to
be reconciled, and in our Prosperity to be less offended; when he is Wrath, he
ought to be pacified, and should not be offended when he is appeased; For
Adversity comes upon us by God's Wrath, and Prosperity by his Favor. But we do
all the quite contrary. You ask, it may be, how? Observe, and I Will tell you.
And in the first place, if God Almighty is at any time of his own free Mercy
entreated (for we never live so at any time, as that we deserve to be pleaded
for;) but if, as I said, being entreated by Himself, he gives us peaceful
Times, Increase and Plenty of all Things; Quietness, Riches, and Abundance,
even beyond our Wishes or Desires, we are only made worse by such a Series of
Prosperity, and corrupted with such Lewdness and Insolence in our Morals, that
we altogether forget both God and our selves. And when the Apostle says, That
the Advantage of such Peace granted us by God, consists in this, That we may
lead a quiet and peaceable Life, in all godliness and honesty. We use the Ease
granted us by (...) ^ v. 2.
God, only that we may live in Drunkenness and Luxury, in Mischief and Rapine,
and in all manner of* Villainy and Wickedness. As though the Benefit of such Peace
were only a Vacation for Naughtiness, and we only received Quietness at the
hand of God, that we might sin more licenciously and securely: We are therefore
unworthy of God's Blessings, since we make no better use of them, but turn that
very thing into an occasion of Vice, which he designed for an Inducement to
Virtue and good Works. So that, even Peace it self, makes against us by such
management of it, neither is it at all convenient for us ever to enjoy such a
thing, which only makes us worse. But who would believe this? We change the
very Nature of Things by our Iniquities; and what God out of His
loving kindness bestows upon us for Good, we convert into a Mischief to our
selves, by the Corruption and Viciousness of our Morals.

XII. But it may be, we who are Debauched by Prosperity, are amended by
Adversity; and those whom a long Peace had made immoderate, Troubles and
Distresses have made more regular. Are any of the Inhabitants of those Cities,
who were lewd in their Prosperity, become more chaste in their Adversity? Is
that Drunkenness, which grew upon them in Peace and Plenty utterly ceased since
the Ravaging of the Enemy? Italy is laid waste by so many Miseries. Have
therefore the Italians left off their Vices? The City of Most probably by
Vandals, in the Year of our Lord 454.
Rome is besieged and taken. Are the Romans for that Reason no longer Madmen
and Blasphemers? The barbarous Nations have broke in upon the Gauls; but are
not their Manners as corrupt, and their Wickedness as great as ever they were?
In the time of Honori^s.
The Vandals are passed over into Spain. The Condition of the Spaniards is
indeed changed; but not their Viciousness. And lastly, that no part of the
World might be free from Misery and Destruction, the Wars have begun to Sail
even upon the Waters; and after they had over-turn'd the Cities enclosed by the
Sea, and destroyed In the Year 440.
Sardinia and Sicily, that is, our public Storehouses, and drained the Blood
out of our Bodies, they seized upon even Africa it self, that is, the very Life
and Soul of the Commonwealth. Well but, when these Barbarous People had entered
the Country, undoubtedly they left off their Vices out of Fear at least; Or, as
the basest Slaves, who dread present Correction are wont, the very Fright
extorted some Modesty and Discipline from them O who can declare their
Naughtiness? When the Arms of the Barbarians were sounding round the Walls of
Cirta and In the Year 439.
Carthage, the Christians of Carthage, were running mad in the Cirques, and
rioting in the Theaters. Whilst the Throats of some were cut without doors,
others were playing the Whores and Rogues within. Part of the People without
doors were made Prisoners by the Enemies, and part within were made Prisoners
by their Lusts: and which of the two had the harder Fortune is uncertain. They
who are without, were only made Captives in their Bodies; but they who were
within were captivated in their Souls; And of two so great Evils, as I suppose,
it is much easier for a Christian to bear the Captivity of his Body, than that
of his Soul, according to that which our Savior says in the Gospel, That the
Loss Luke 9.
of Souls is much greater Damage than that of the Body's. Can we think that the
People were not captivated in their Souls, who could rejoice after that manner
in the Captivity of their Burden? Were not their Hearts and Senses captivated,
who amidst the Tortures of their Countrymen could be merry, who did not
perceive that they themselves were stabbed in the Murder of their Friends, and
that they died in the Death of their Neighbors? There was a Great Noise, as I
may so say, both within and without the Walls, of Battle, and of Pastimes; the
Cry of those that died, and those that revell'd, was confounded; and perhaps
the Groans of those who fell in the Battle, could not easily be discerned from
the Noise of those, who hollowed in the Cirque. And by doing all these things,
what else could such a base People mean, but that seeing, that God thought not
fit to destroy them at present, yet they would even demand their own
Destruction from him.

XIII. But why do I speak of Things so far off, and done in quite another Part
of the World, when to my own Knowledge in my own Country, and in the Cities of
Gaul, almost all the Great Men became much worse by their Calamities. For I my
self have seen several Inhahitants of Treveris, Men of Birth, and of Triers.
Preferments; but now pillaged and despoiled of all, who were yet less
shattered in their Fortunes, than they were in their Morals. For although in
their plundered and stripped Condition, they had some small Remnant of their
Substance, Yet they had not one Rag of Morality. So that they were greater Foes
to themselves than their foreign Enemies were, for although they were undone by
the Barbarians, yet they were much more undone by themselves. It is dismal to
relate what I have seen; worshipful old Gentlemen, decrepid Christians, just
when the City was falling into the Enemies hands, indulging themselves in
Gluttony and Wantonness. And what shall I blame Chiefly in this Matter? That
they were Worshipful, that they were old Men, that they were Christians, or
that they were in danger? For, who would ever think such a thing could be done,
in the greatest security by old Men, or in danger by young ones, or ever by
Cbristians? They lay at their Feasts, having forgot their Honor, forgot their
Years, forgot their Profession, and forgot their Reputation; the Chief of the
City stuffed with Meat, dissolved in Drunkenness; Bawling outragiously,
Revelling madly, quite out of their Senses; but considering that they are
almost always in that pickle, I should have said, being altogether in their
Senses. But matters being thus, that is more, which I am now going to say, that
the utter Destruction of the Cities put no end to these Debaucheries. For the
richest City of Gaul was four times taken: It Is easy to guess which I mean. One
would have thought the Triers.
first taking might have caused a Reformation in it, that the renewing of its
Faults might not have renewed its Destruction. But to be short, that which I
now say is, scarce to be credited. The very continuance of their Calamities
there, was the increasing of their Crimes. And, as old Stories tell of that
Monster of a Hydra.
Serpent, who increased by being wounded, so in this most Famous City of Gaul,
their Wickednesses increased by that very Punishment, which kept them back from
sinning: So that you would think the chastising of their Crimes were the
original of their Vices. And what should I say more? By the daily increase of
hourly growing Ills, they are come to that pass, that you may eafily find that
City without an Inhabitant, than almost any Inhabitant in it without a Crime.
This is the condition of that City. What is there done in Agrippina or Colen.
another not far off, but almost as Magnificent as the other? Is not there
likewise the same Ruin of Estates and Morals? For beside all the rest, when
all things were fallen to pieces by those two especial and general Evils,
Covetousness and Drunkenness, at last, by their greedy Desire of Wine, they
came to that pass, that the Chief of the City had not then risen from their
Banqueting, even when the Enemy had entered the Town. So that, I verily believe,
God had a mind to show them plainly the Reason of their Destruction, when they
were doing that very Thing at the Minute of their Ruin, which had been the
Occasion of their utter Perdition. I saw there many lamentable Sights, no
manner of difference between Boys and old Men: The same idle Jesting, the same
Levity. All things jumbled together, Luxury, Tippling, and Destruction. All did
every thing alike, they played, got drunk, and so were knocked on the Head. Old
men, and of Reputation played the Wantons in their Feasts, they had scarce
strength to live, and yet were stout and lusty at the Bottle; infirm in their
Walking, but robust in their Drinking: Tottering in their common gate, yet very
nimble at Dancing. In short; By what I have said, it is plain they are come to
this, that the Saying of the Son of Syrak; Holy writ is fulfilled in them:
Eccles. 19. v. 2.
Wine and Women make men fall away from God. For while they drink, play, whore,
and run mad, they begin to deny Christ; And we admire after all this, that such
People lose their Estates, who have so long before lost their Senses. Let no
one then think that it is only the City which is brought to ruin. For where
such things as I have mentioned are acted, there the Inhabitants have perished,
even long before they are destroyed.

XIV. I have even now spoke of the Grand Cities. How fared it with the other
Cities in other Parts of Gaul? Have not they perished by the like Crimes of
their Inhabitants? For their Iniquities pressed them so hard, that they never
feared the Danger. They were sensible beforehand of their Captivity, and yet
never dreaded it. The apprehension of danger was taken from them, lest they
should fence against it. So that when the Barbarians were even in Sight, the
People had not fear upon them, nor ever guarded the Cities. So great was the
Blindness of their Minds, or rather of their Sins, that when it is certain not
one of them was willing to die, yet not one of them did any thing to prevent
his own Destruction, They were altogether Carelessness and Laziness it self,
Negligence and Gluttony; Drunkenness and Drowziness had possessed them All,
according to what the Scripture says of such Men; that a deep sleep from the
Lord was fallen upon 1 Samuel 26. v. 12.
them. The deep sleep was laid upon them, that their Destruction might follow.
For when, as it is written, a Sinner having completed Genesis 15. v. 16.
his Iniquities, deserves to perish, all foresight is taken from him, lest by
the help of that, he should escape. But enough on this head. For, I suppose, I
have sufficiently proved what I undertook, viz. that even in the utmost Danger,
the Debaucheries of the Citizens never ceased, to the very Minute of the
Destruction of the Cities.

XV. It may be such things as these have been, but now they are not, or will
cease ever to be. And if any either City or Province is at this day either
visited with Plagues from Heaven, or laid waste by an Enemy, it is Humbled,
Converted and Amended, and it is not the Temper of all the Romans in general
sooner to Perish, than be reformed, and rather to leave off Being, than not be
in their Sins. That may easily be seen in the three Successive Destructions of
the greatest Triers.
City of Gaul: when all the City was but as one Grave, their Evils increasing
even after their Ruin. For those whom the Enemy had not destroyed in its
overthrow, Misery destroyed afterward. And that which had escaped Death in the
taking of it, could not afterward survive the distress. For some died lingering
Deaths of deep Wounds. Others after the fireing the Town, were tortured and
burned by the Enemy; Some died of Famine, others of Nakedness, some wasted
away, and others were Starved. So they all came to the same Stage of Death by
different ways of dying. And in short, Other Cities were Annoyed by the Ruin
of this One. For the Naked dead Bodies of both Sexes, lay scattered abroad
every where, I my self have seen, and endured it, defiling the Eyes of the
City, torn piecemeal, and devoured by Birds and Dogs. The infectious stanch of
the Dead, caused a Pestilence among the Living. Death was exhaled from Death:
So that they who were not present at the Ruin of the foresaid City, bore the
Misfortunes of its Destruction. And what I pray you followed after all this?
Why such a Madness, as is not easily to be thought of. Those few Great Ones,
who survived the Ruins, desired of the Hono^ius and Constantius.
Emperors, as the only Remedy of their rased City, that they might have
Cirque-Games there. O that I had in this Place Rhetoric equal to the Subject,
to pursue the Baseness of it sufficiently, that the Complaint might have as
great a sting in it, as the Cause has Sorrow! For who can say what is most to
be blamed in the Premises, whether Irreligion, Folly, Luxury or Madness? Since
they are all in them. For what can be more Irreligious than to desire any thing
to affront our Maker? Or more Foolish than not to consider what it is you
desire? Or what abandoned Luxury is it to desire Rioting and Revelling in a
time of Mourning? Or what greater Madness can there be than to be in Misery,
and not to be the least sensible of it. Although in this whole Matter, nothing is
less to be blamed than the Madness of it; for where the Sin is committed in
Frenzy, there the Will is in no Fault. Would you Men of Treveris, then fain
have Cirque-Games, and this after you have been Plundered, and Ruined, after
Blood and Slaughter, after Torments and Captivity, and so many Overthrows of
your Conquered City? What can be more sad than this Folly, and more lamentable
than this Madness? I confess, I thought you were sufficiently miserable, when
your City was destroyed; but now I see you are much more miserable, since you
desire these wicked Shows. I thought before truly, that you had only lost your
Goods and Estates, when you lost your Town; I could not imagine, that you had
lost your Senses and Understanding likewise. You desire Theaters then, and
Petition for a Cirque from the Princes. For what State, I beseech you; for what
People, for what City? For one that is burnt and destroyed, for a People that
are captivated and murdered, who are either lost, or in Mourning; of whom, if
any thing remains, it is nothing but Misery; who are either dejected with
Sorrow, exhausted with Tears, or fainting for the Loss of Friends, among whom
you can scarce tell who had the harder Fortune, those who were killed, or those
who survive. For the Miseries of those who remain, are so Great, that they
exceed the Infelicity of the Dead. You City of Treveris then, petition for
public Pastimes? Pray where will you play 'em? What, upon the Graves and
Ashes, upon the Blood and Bones of the Slain? For what part of the City is
there, that has not some of them? Where is not Blood shed, where are not Bodies
scattered, where are not the mangled Limbs of the Slain? There are every where
signs of a Vanquished City. the Horror of Captivity, and the Image of Death.
The miserable Relics of the People are lying on the Graves of their Dead; and
yet you ask for the Pastimes of the Cirques? The City is all Sooty with its
late Burning, and you would put on the Face of Mirth? Every thing in it is
sorrowful; but you are joyful. But beside all this, you provoke God by these
most Scandalous Fopperies, and stir up His Displeasure by these worst of
Superstitions. I do not truly wonder, I do not any longer admire, that so many
Evils have fallen upon you; for since you have not been amended by three
Ruins, I think, you very well deserved to feel the Sea p. 27.
Fourth.

XVI. I have drawn out this Matter the How God sometimes chastises us with
Hardships, and sometimes he indulges us with Tranquillity and Ease.
longer, that I might show, that all the Evils we endure, do not come upon us
by the Carelessness or Neglect of God; but that we bear* them by His Justice, by
His Judgment, by His most righteous Dispensation, and most justly Retribution;
and that there is not any one Part of the Roman Empire, or of any thing that
bears that Name, how severely soever they have been punished from above, that
have ever been Reformed by it. So that we do not by any means merit the
Enjoyment of Prosperity, because we are not made better by Adversity. And yet
as unworthy as we are, we sometimes receive Good Things: For our Good God, like
a most tender Father, although he suffers us sometimes to be humbled for our
Iniquities, yet he does not leave us long under the Affliction; and therefore
to show His Government, he does sometimes Chastise us with Hardships; and other
times again to show His Tenderness, he Indulges us with Tranquillity and Ease.
For as the best and most Skilful Physicians suit different Remedies to
different Distempers, and Cure some by Sweet Medicines, and others by Bitter;
recover some by Causticks and Burning, and others by gentle emollient
Applications; to some they use Cutting and Scarifying, and on others pour the
smoothest, softest Oil, and yet it is but the same Health that is procured by
all these Various Methods: Even so our God, when ever he uses Severity toward
us, Cures us, as it were, by Causticks and Scarifying, and when he refreshes us
again with Ease and Prosperity, he Comforts us, as it were, with Oil and
emollient Medicines. For His Design is to bring us to the same Health and
Welfare by the help of different Remedies. Good Words are used sometimes to
mend the worst of Servants, whom Correction will do no good upon; and
Kindnesses have made them submit to their Masters, when Stripes would never do
it. So Sugar-Plums and fair Words will bring those little, testy, peevish Brats
under Government, who would never submit to Threats and the Rod. By which we
may understand, that we are worse than the worst of Servants, and more foolish
than the filliest Children; since Punishment does not amend us, as it does bad
Servants, nor fair Words change us, as they do young Children.

XVII. And now I think I have sufficiently proved that no Part of the Roman
Empire were ever amended by the Punishments inflicted on them. It remains that
I show likewise, that they have not been reformed by God's Bounty and
Loving Kindness. But what are the Bounty and loveing-kindness of God? What
should they be, but our Peace and our Quiet, and a Prosperous Tranquillity, the
Foundations of all our other Joys and Satisfactions. But, since the Matter
requires it, I shall mention somewhat in particular. As often then, as we are in
Fear, in Straits, or Dangers; when either our Cities are besieged by the
Enemies, or our Provinces wasted by Plunder, or any Parts of the Commonwealth
are in Trouble and Distress, and we Pray to Heaven for Assistance; if by the
Divine Help and Pity, the Cities are saved, or the plundring ended, or the
Enemies routed, and all Fear by the Favor of Heaven removed, what is it that
we do after all this? I presume we endeavor to recompense to our Lord God the
Benefits we have received from him by Worship, Honor and Reverence. For that
follows of Course, it is but what is Common among all Mankind, that we should
return Thanks to those who have lent us Favors, and give again to those who
have formerly presented us. So then, it may be, we do; and dealing with our God
at least after the returns used among Men, when we receive Good Things from
Him, we return Good Things to Him. We haste immediately to the House of God,
prostrate our selves on the Ground, Pray to Him with Joy and Tears together, we
Adorn the Sacred Building with our Presents, and load the Altars with our
Offerings; and because purely by His Favor we our selves keep Holy Day, we put
the Church it self in the same cheerful Dress; or at least, which is as
pleasing to Him, we renounce our former Sins, we slay the Offerings of Good
Works, and for our new Joy, Offer the Sacrifices of our new Conversation; we
proclaim a Holy War against all manner of Uncleanness, we shun the Madness of
the Cirques, we Abominate the filthiness of the Theaters, we Vow a New Life to
our Lord; and for the obtaining of His perpetual Protection, we Sacrifice our
selves to God.

XVIII. Seeing then, that what I have said ought to be done for fresh Favors
received from God, let us see what is done. They have forth with to the Plays,
they fly to their Follies and Madnesses; all the people are dispersed in the
Theaters, and behave themselves like Madmen in the Cirques. He bestows good
things on us, in order to make us good. We on the contrary, as often as we
receive those Good Things, add to the Sum of our Wickednesses. He by His
loving kindness calls us to Virtue; we run headlong into Vice. He by His
Favors provokes us to Compunction; but we run headlong into Debauchery. He
calls us to Chastity, and we run headlong into Uncleanness. We answer the
Divine Bounty very finely. We do both acknowledge and Honor his Gifts very
delicately; who for as many Benefits as we receive from him, 'take care to
repay him with so many Injuries. It may be, this is not an Injury to God, or
there may be some greater; or is there need of many and Great Ones? But since
by an inveterate Contagion of all manner of Wickednesses, we cannot now be any
otherwise not Vicious, than by ceasing altogether to be; I desire to know, what
hope there is of any Goodness from us? They who sin out of ignorance are
reformed, when they know their Error. They who have no Religion, when they
Change their Profession, begin likewise to Change their Manners. Lastly, as I
have said, they who are vicious by overmuch Plenty, Ease, or leave off being
Rake-hells, when they have lost their Ease. We offend neither out of Ignorance,
nor for want of Religion, neither are we corrupted by Prosperity and Ease. But
all the quite contrary. We have known the true Religion, and are not excused by
Ignorance; have not the Peace and Riches of the former Times; All things that
have been, are either taken away or changed, nothing has increased with us, but
our Vices. There is nothing of the former Peace and Prosperity left us, unless
the Crimes of them, which have occasioned the loss even of that Prosperity. For
where are the former Riches and Honors of the Romans? The Romans were formerly
most strong, but now they have lost their Strength. The Ancient Romans were
dreaded, and now we stand in fear. Foreigners paid them Tribute, and now we pay
Taxes to Foreigners: Our Enemies sell us, even the very use of the Light. Our
Safety and Being is become a Merchandise. O Miserable Wretches, to what a pass
are we Come! And yet we give Thanks to and Address those very Foreigners, from
whom we purchase, even our selves at a Price. Can any thing be more Abject and
Miserable than we? And do we think we Live after this, when even our Life costs
us so much? Beside all this, we make our selves ridiculous, the vast Sums we
pay, we call free Gifts. We call that a Gift, which is a Price, and a Price of
the hardest and most Miserable Condition. For all Captives, when they are once
delivered, enjoy their Liberty: We are always delivered, and yet are never
free. These Foreigners deal by us just like those Masters who let out those
Slaves for certain Wages, for whom they have no Necessity themselves. Even so,
we, in like Manner are never free from the Duties we pay: But still pay them
the Acknowledgments of our Slavery, that so we may never leave off paying them.

SALVIAN of GOD's Government, etc. BOOK VII.
How incorrigible we are; and rather worse with God's Chastisements. Of God's
Goodness in desiring nothing, that is either heavy or burdensome for His
peculiar Favors Conferred upon us: Of what God requires of us. Of the Vices of
the Aquitanes. Of the Vices of the Africans. Of the Splendor and Dignity of
Carthage. Of the Sin of one Man, how it becomes the Bane of many. Of the Vices
of a bad Governor.

1. WHen in the Conclusion of the Book, How Incorrigible we are and rather
worse with Gods Chastisements.
which I have just now finished, I mentioned somewhat of the Weakness and
Misery of the Romans, I may be thought to have said, what makes against the
Subject I am handling. For I am sensible, that it may in this place be
objected, That from hence there is a manifest Proof, that God does not regard
Humane Affairs: Because, when the Romans were formerly Pagans, they both
conquered and ruled; but now they are become Christians, they are both
Conquered, and made Slaves of. What I have said long since, of almost all the
Pagans, might be a sufficient Confutation of this Objection; that is, that they
sin more heinously, who knowingly transgress the Law of God, than they who
transgress out of Ignorance. However, with God's Permission, when I come to
that Part of my Task, where something is to be said of the ancient Romans, I
shall with His Assistance plainly show, that God's Favor toward them then was
as just, as His Severity now toward us is righteous; and that it was as meet
that God should then, by His Assistance, exalt the Romans, as it is fitting,
that we now should be chastis'd; And I wish heartily we were any thing the
better for the Chastisement. But what is more grievous and lamentable, that
there is no Amendment follows it. Our Lord would cure us by His Punishments,
but the Cure does not follow the Remedies. What a mighty Misfortune is this?
The larger and lesser Cattle are cured by Incision; and the putrified Bowels of
Mules, Asses and Hogs, when they are burnt by cauterising, acknowledge the
Benefit of the Healing fire, and presently, as soon as the corrupted part is
either burnt or cut off, live Flesh succeeds in the room of that which* was
dead. We are both burnt and slashed, but are not healed, neither by Scarifying
nor Causticks: Nay, which is harder, are made worse by the very Cure. And
therefore that is deservedly fallen upon us, which uses to happen to all sorts
of Cattle, that are seized with incurable Diseases. For in all parts of the
World, because we are not amended by the Healing Remedies designed us, we are
brought to our End by Death and Destruction. For observe, that I may not repeat
what I have already said long before; what an odd Thing is that which I
mentioned just now, that we are at the same time, both Miserable and Debauched?
For granting, that these are the Vices of happy People (though no one Man can be
both wicked and happy; for where there is not throughpac'd Honesty, there is no
true Felicity) but yet, as I said before, granting, that these Vices are the
Effects of Peace, of Plenty, and Security. How, I beseech you, come they to be
there, where there is neither Peace nor Security? For in almost all the Roman
World, there is no Peace nor Security. Why are our Vices the only durable
Things? Who, I pray you, can bear to see Lasciviousness in a Man Eccles 25. v.
2.
in want? For Luxury in Poverty is much more Criminal; and for a Man in Misery
to play the Fool, must needs increase the Censure. All the Roman World is both
Miserable and Luxurious. Who, I desire to know, is poor, and yet spends his
Time in Trifles; who, when he expects Captivity, thinks of the Cirque, who is
under the apprehension of Death, and yet is merry? Yet we play under the very
Dread of Captivity, and having the Fear of Death upon us, burst into Laughter.
You would think all the Romans were satiated with the Herbs of A proverbial
saying, for a foolish laughing with sorrow in the end.
Sardinia, They die Laughing. And therefore, almost in all Parts of the World,
Tears follow our Laughter; and even at present, that Saying of our Lord is come
upon us: Woe unto you that laugh, for you shall Luke 9.
weep.

II. But it may be, since I have spoken so Of Gods Goodness in desiring nothing
that is either heavy or burdensome for his peculiar favour's conferred upon us.
long of the public Sports and Uncleanness, some one may be apt to think,
that we are worse than the Barbarians only in this, because they do no such
things, and it is only we that do them; but as to the wickedness of Carnal
Lusts, and the filth of Abominable Fornication, that we are not by any means so
Bad. Let us, if you please, compare the Romans in this Particular with the
other People. And really, I cannot tell whether they can be more rightly
compared to any than to those, whom God having placed, in the very heart of the
Commonwealth, has made Lords and Masters of the Roman Soil. But although nothing
can be argued of the Judgment of God; yet seeing he has taken away from us a
great Part of our Possessions, and given them to the Barbarians, let us
consider whether, what he has taken from us, and given to them, he can be
thought to have done by a just Judgment. Every one knows, that the Aquitanes,
and the The inhabitants of what is now called Gascoine and Guienne in France.
Novem-Populi, had the very Marrow of almost all Gaul, and the Breasts of all
its Plenty; and not only of Plenty, but of what is sometimes preferred before
it, of Delight, Pleasure, and (*) People of Languedock and Gascoine.
Beauty. The whole Country there was so intermixed with Vineyards, and curious
flowery Meads, checkered with various Tillage, planted with Orchards, or the
pleasantest Groves, watered with Fountains, or flowed between by Rivers, or
covered all over with Harvests plenty; so that the Possessors and Owners of
that Country seemed not so much to enjoy that Portion of the Soil, as the very
Resemblance of Paradise. And what after all this? Undoubtedly they ought to be
more dutiful toward God, whom he had thus in a peculiar manner enriched with
such an Abundance of His Favors. For what is more rational and fitting, than
that they whom God by His Blessings seemed particularly willing to oblige,
should likewise in an especial manner, endeavor to please him by Honor and
religious Service; especially considering, that God, requires nothing that is
heavy or burdensome from us. God does not call us to the Plow or the Spade; not
to Till the Earth, nor to Dig and Delve in the Vineyard; nor does he require so
much of us, as we do from our Servants: For what says he? Come unto me, all ye
that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give Matt. 11. v. 28, etc.
you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly in
heart: and ye shall find rest unto your Souls. For my yoke is Of what God
requires of us.
easy, and my burden is light. Our Lord therefore does not invite us to
Labor, but to Refreshment. For what does he require of us, what does he
command us to perform, but only, Faith, Chastity, Humility, Sobriety, Mercy,
Holiness; all which do not burden, but beautify us? And not only so, but they
do therefore adorn this present Life, that they may much more adorn that which
is to come. O the Goodness, Loving-kindess, and inestimable Mercy of God, who
gives us in this present Life the Blessing of Religion for that very End, that
he may hereafter reward the very Things that he gave us! Such certainly,
without all question, the Aquitanes ought to have been. And truly, as I said,
in a more especial manner, because they received more especial Favors from the
hand of God. But what after all these? What followed? What, but every thing the
quite contrary? For as they were the richest in all Gaul, so they were the most
Vicious. For there was no where greater Voluptuousness, no where lewder Lives,
nor no where more corrupt Discipline. This Return they made the Lord for His
heavenly Favors, that as much as He by His loving kindnesses, endeavored to
draw them to him, that he might have mercy upon them; so much on the other hand
by their detestable Actions, they labored to exasperate Him.

III. But it may be, this is false, and is rather Of the vices of the Aquitanes.
spoken invidiously, than truly? I shall not make use of any far-fetched Proof,
as Orators and others in their Causes are used to do, by producing to justify
it only some few, and those strangers, and not legal Witnesses. I will only ask
the Parties, who have done the Fact. I have told an untruth, if they deny it.
For they confess it, and which is worse, they own it so, as not to show the
least Sorrow in the Confession. For they have the same Mind now in the
Confessing it, as they had before in the Acting it. As then they were not
ashamed to commit the Wickedness, so neither now do they in the least repent,
that they had done those Wicked things. Excepting however, some very few Holy
and Eminent Men, who, as one of their Number says -- Redeemed their Crimes by
scattering their Coin -- Excepting, I say, those I speak of, whom in that
Universal Stanch and Filth of Vices, I believe only to have been guilty of the
lesser Crimes, since they deserved to be reformed by Heaven. For he does not in
every Respect offend his Lord, for whom Mercy is reserved. And in short, I am
of Opinion that he had always his Eye upon God in the midst of his Mistake, who
could obtain the Blessing from Him, that he might continue no longer in it. But
the rest, and Most, and Richest, were almost all the same; their Guts were
almost one bottomless Pit: And all their Lives one continued Brothel-house. But
what do I mention the Brothel-houses? I take the Bawdyhouse to be much less
faulty. For the Harlots who are there, never knew the Bond of Marriage; and so
they do not pollute what they never knew. They do indeed deserve to be punished
for the Sin of Unchastity, but yet they are not guilty of the sin of Adultery.
Beside, there are not many Brothels, and there are very few Queans, who have
damned themselves to that cursed way of Living. But among the Aquitanes, what
City was there in the Richest and Noblest part of it, which was not like a
perfect Stews? Where was there a Rich Man of Power, who did not live in the
filth of Lusts? Who did not plunge himself in the nasty stinking Jaques? Who
was true to his Bed? Nay, as far as lying with them goes, who has not reduced
his Wife into the Number of his Maidservants, and debased the Sacred
Obligation of holy Wedlock, so far, that no one in the Family seems Meaner in
the Husbands Eyes, than she who was Chief by the Honor of her Marriage?

IV. But perhaps some one or other thinks, that it was not so bad to the full,
as I represent it, for that the Mistresses of the Family had their Right there,
and that they possessed all the Respect and Power due to Mistresses. Many of
them truly, had their Governing Power entire, but scarce one of them their Bed
undefiled. And we are not now enquiring what is the Power of the Women, but of
the Baseness and Immorality of the Men. Although, neither can Psay that That
Mistress of the Family has her Power entire there; because, whoever she be,
that has not her Matrimonial Dues safe and unviolated, neither has she her
Power entire. For that Mistress of the House is at very little distance from
the meanest of her Servants, where the Master of the Family is the Husband of
the Maids. But who of the Wealthy Aquitans, was not this? Whom have not their
most impudent Maidservants rightly called either their Adulterer or their
Husband? For they were, Jerem. 5. v. 8.
as the Prophet says, As fed Horses, every one neigh'd after his Neighbors
Wife. And they of whom we thus read in the Scripture, as I believe, offended
with a much less Crime, and a much less Number and Repetition of them. But
these, like true fed Horses, did not neigh after a few, but after all their
little Slaves, that is, after their own Herds; and like those Animals, who are
called the Husbands of the Flock, Goats.
rambling in the frenzy of boiling Lust, they fly upon the first Female the
burning Fury of their Lewdness leads them to. Here seeing Matters are thus, I
would ask of any considering Person, what sort of Families does he think were
there, when they had such Masters? How great must the Corruption of (...)
Servants be, where that of the Master is so large? For when the Head is
Distempered, nothing in the Body is sound; nor does any one Limb perform its
Office, when the Principal is out of order. For in his Family the Master is, as
it were, the Head of the Body, and his Life is the Rule which all the others
live by. And this is the Mischief in this Affair, that all do more willingly
follow the worse Examples, and ill Instruction will sooner spoil those who are
Good, than good Advice Reform those who are Bad. But besides, seeing that the
Good and Honest Masters of Families, cannot make their Servants Good, what a
lamentable. Condition must those Families be in, where the Masters are the
Patterns of Lewdness? Although in this Case there was not only bad Example, but a
sort of Force and Necessity; because the Maidservants were forced to comply
with their most unchaste Lords against their Will, and the Lust of the Master
necessitated the Servant. By which we may see how great the filth and nastiness
of their Lusts were, that it was not possible for the Women, though they desired
it, to live Chaste under such lewd Masters.

V. But it may be, this is very difficult to be proved, and there are no
footsteps at all lest of the past Filthinesses and Villainies. Nay there are
even now many of them, although they have lost their Country, and in comparison
of their former Plenty, live Poorly, yet are even worse than they were before.
They are worse more ways than one, because although they do the same things they
formerly did, yet they are so much the worse in this, that they do not leave
off their sinning. For if their present Wickednesses are not greater in their
kind, yet they are more; and for that reason though they do not increase in the
newness of their Crimes, they sufficiently add to the Number. Add to this, that
they do these things in old Age, and now they are Poor: For both are an
aggravation of the Crime. Because it is less strange to see Young men and Rich
men Sin. But what Hope or Remedy is there for them, who are not reclaimed from
their habitual Impurities, neither by Misery and want, nor by the Conclusion of
their Lives. For suppose that an Idle presumption of long Life, or the hope of
repenting some time or other, does Comfort some; Is it not altogether
Monstrous, that any should be vicious, even at the time of Death? Things being
thus, Is there any thing more can be said? Yes, it is a further Addition, that
many do these Things at this day, in the midst of the Enemies, and being
Captives in daily Danger and Fear: and when by reason of their most impure
Lives, they were delivered up by God to the Barbarians, yet they do not leave
off those Impurities, even among those very Barbarians.

VI. But perhaps their Enemies, among whom they are, are such sort of Men, that
they are pleased with such kind of Doings, and would be mightily offended, if
they should see the Romans chaste, when they themselves are unchaste? Which if
it were so, yet other Men's Wickedness should not make us wicked, because it
concerns every Man much more to take care that he be good, than it can any
other Man, that he be bad; and to take more Pains to please God by Honesty,
than to humor Men by Impurity. And so admitting that any one did live among
unchaste Barbarians, he ought rather to follow Chastity, which makes for
himself, than unchastity to please his impure Enemies. But what addition is
there further to our Wickednesses? Why, we are unchaste among chaste
Barbarians: Nay further, the very Barbarians are offended with our Ledwnesses.
There is no Whore-Master Goth permitted among the Goths; it is the Romans only,
to the prejudice of their Name and Nation, who among them are suffered to be
lewd. What hope is there then for us, I would fain know before God? We love
Unchastity, the Goths abominate it; we shun Purity, they court it; Fornication
among them is Criminal and Dangerous; with us it is Creditable. And do we think
we are able to stand before God; do we think we can be safe, when every Sin of
Impurity, and every Filthiness of Unchastity is admitted by the Romans, and
punished by the Barbarians? I desire to know in this place of those, who take
us to be better than the Barbarians; let them name me the smallest Number of
Goths, who do any thing of this; or let them mention any of these Crimes, that
All the Romans, or almost All of them do not practice? And do we wonder then,
if the Lands either of the Aquitanes, or of all of Us, be given by God to the
Barbarians, when those places which the Romans had defiled by their
Uncleanness, the Barbarians now purify by their Chastity?

VII. But it may be, this is only among the Aquitanes? Let us pass then to
other Parts of the World, lest we should seem to have spoke only of the Gauls.
And have not the same, or, it may be, greater Vices, destroyed the Provinces of
Spain? Which, although the Divine Vengeance has indeed, delivered to some other
Barbarians; yet the Foes of Purity have suffered Punishments equal to their
wicked Deserts. But there is this over and above, to manifest the Condemnation
of Unchastity there, that they should be given into the hands of the Vandals,
that is, to chaste Barbarians. God by that Captivity of the Spaniards, had a
mind to show, by two several ways, both how much he hated the Lust of the
Flesh, and how much he loved Chastity; when he both put the Vandals over them,
purely on account of their Modesty, and put the Spaniards under them, purely on
account of their Immodesty. For what; were not there in all the World to be
found more stout Barbarians, to whom the Spaniards, might have been delivered?
Yes, many doubtless; nay, unless I am mistaken, all of them. But he therefore
delivered up all to the weakest Enemies, that he might show that it is not so
much Strength which prevails, as the Cause; nor that we were at that time
overthrown by the Valor of our Enemies, but were vanquished by the Uncleanness
of our Vices only. So that that Saying, which our Lord uses to the Jews, is
fully come upon us; According to Ezekiel. 39. v. 24
their Uncleanness, and according to their Transgressions, have I done unto
them, and hid my face from them. And in another place to the same Ezekiel. 26. v.
11.
People: The Lord shall bring upon thee a Nation from afar, and with the Hoofs,
says he, of their Horses, shall they tread down all thy Streets, and they shall
slay thy People with the Sword. All things therefore, which the Scripture has
spoken, are fulfilled in us, and the Punishment of All of us declares the Force
of the Oracles from above.

VIII. But yet, since almost all the Barbarous Nations have drunk the Roman
Blood, and all have torn our Bowels; how comes it, that our God has given the
greatest Riches of the Commonwealth, and the wealthiest People of all that bore
the Name of Romans, into the Power chiefly of those, we formerly reckoned the
most Cowardly of our Enemies? To what other End, but that we should
acknowledge, as I said before, that this was the Fruit of their Deserts, and
not the Effect of their Valor; and that this very Thing is fallen upon us, to
our Confusion and our Punishment, that we should be delivered to the most
Cowardly, and so might acknowledge the Stroke of the Divine hand in it, since
we are not conquered by the Valiantest of our Enemies, but by the most
Cowardly. For so we read, that if God would have it at any time observed, that
some Mighty Things are done by Himself, the Things are brought to pass, either
by a few, or by weak Persons, lest the work done by God's right hand, should be
ascribed to any Humane Judges 4. v. 21.
Power. So Sisera the Captain of the Host, whom the Army of Israel dreaded, was
vanquished by a Woman. The Hand of a Judges 9. v. ^3. Judith 13 v. 7, 8.
Woman likewise smote Abimelech, the Great Assaulter of Cities, and the
Harnessed Armies of the Assyrians, perished by the Assistance of a Widow-woman.
And to mention some others beside Women; would not the Lord have it so, that
Benhadad, the King of Assyria, whom 1 King. 20.
many thousands of People followed, and who had thirty and two Kings and their
Armies, that served him; would not he have him vanquished by a few Princes of
the Provinces, that it might be perceived, who was the Author of such a
Victory? So likewise Gideon is commanded with a few, to fight against the
Madianites, Judges 7.
who, as the Book of Judges relates the Story, had filled all places like
Locusts; not that he had not many in his Army, but he is forbidden to lead out
many to the Battle, lest by their Number, they might claim to themselves a
Share in the Victory. So that, when he had gathered together thirty Thousand
Armed Men, the Lord spoke thus unto ver. 2.
him; The People that are with thee are too many for me, to give the Madianites
into their hands. And what followed? Why, he left this Man, who was to engage
against very many thousands of strange People, only three hundred Men. And he
ordered his Army to be reduced to that slender Number, that the fewness of them
might not be able to usurp to themselves any thing of the Victory, bestowed on
them from above. But why the Lord was pleased to do thus, he declares most
plainly, when he says: Lest Isracl vaunt themselves against v. 2.
me, saying, mine own hand has saved me. Let all Wicked and Presumptuous Men,
I say, hear this, let all the Men of Power, and all Mankind in general hear
what God says, Lest Israel vaunt themselves against me, saying, mine own hand
has saved me.

IX. Let all, I say, hear this who blasphemously boast the contrary, let those
who put their trust in Man hear this. God says, that all they who presume they
can be delivered by their own Strength do speak against him. But where is there
one of the Romans, who does not speak so; who does not think so? Who is he of
our side, who does not almost always Blaspheme in this particular? That the
Commonwealth has now no Strength left, is what every Man knows, and neither by
that do we acknowledge to whose loving kindness we owe, that we are even yet
alive. For if at any time beyond our hopes and desert, God does bestow upon us
some little Prosperity, one ascribes it presently to Fortune, another to
Chance, one to the good Conduct of the Officers, another to prudent Council,
some to their Master, others to their Patron, but no body to God. And yet we
wonder if Heaven does not do something for us, when we diminish every thing we
receive from it. For what else do we, when we ascribe the good things we
receive thence either to casual Events, or to the Valor of the Leaders, or to
any other frivolous Matters? For by as good reason we ought to give Thanks to
the Earth, because we gather our yearly Fruits, and to the Vineyard for our
Vintage, and to the Sea that we catch Fish, to the Woods that we cut Timber
from them, to the Sheep for our Clothes, and to the other Cattle that we are
crammed with Flesh. For what reason is there that we are thankful to Him for
other Favors, when we Rob Him of the Thanks due for His greatest Benefits?
What Man is there of our own Condition, who is content that any one should own
the having received some small Kindness from him, and yet should stifle or
Diminish some greater Obligation? So we, although we do not give God Thanks in
any particular as we ought, yet it is very pitiful, if we are only thankful
barely for the necessaries of Life. Why do we forbear to Thank Him for His help
in our Distresses, that he gives us Deliverance in times of Danger, and for His
Preservation and Protection in the midst of so many Barbarous Nations? The
Goths do not do thus, this is not the way of the Vandals; although their
Instructors be but indifferent, yet in this particular they are much better
than we. I have reason to think some will be offended at what I say. But since
Truth is more to be regarded than any Man's Displeasure, I will say it and say
it again: The Goths do not do thus, this is not the Practice of the Vandals,
who when they are in any Danger beg help of God, and call their Successes the
Gift of Heaven. Our Misfortune in a late Encounter is a Proof of this. For when
the Goths were afraid, we presumed to put our Confidence in the Huns; but they
trusted in God, when they sued to us for Peace, we denied them; they sent our
Bishops, we rejected them; they Honored God in His Priests though of The Goths
became Arians in the time of the Emperor Valens.
another Communion, but we contemn Him even in our own. As the Actions of
either Party were, so was the Issue of the Matter. Victory was given them in
the greatest fear, and confusion to us amidst the greatest Haughtiness and
Stifness; So that the saying of our Lord was truly fulfilled both in us Luke
14. v. 11.
and them: For whosoever exalts himself shall be abased, and he that humbles
himself shall be Litorius in the Year 439 taken, as he was besieging Tolose,
the Capital City of the Goths in Gaul.
be exalted. For they were exalted for their Humility, and we were abased for
our Pride.

X. That Commander of Ours found the truth of this, who entered that City of
the Enemies as a Prisoner, which on the same day he presumed he should have
entered as a Conqueror. He sufficiently proved what the Wise Man said. A man's
heart devises Prove. 16. v. 9.
his Way, but the Lord directs his Steps. For because he thought his Way was
in his own Power, he neither had the direction of his Steps, neither did he
find the path of Safety. Psalm. 107. v. 40.
Contempt, as we read, is poured upon Princes, he wandered in the Wilderness
where there is no Way, and is brought to nothing as Water that runs apace.
Now in this Case beside the Misfortune of the thing, the Present Judgment of
God was manifested, that he himself should suffer, what of his own head he
thought he should Inflict on others. For because he believed that he could
Captivate the Enemy without the Assistance and help of Heaven, he himself was
made a Prisoner. He pretended to the highest pitch of Counsel and Wisdom, and
yet incurred the Disgrace of Foolhardiness. The Shackles he prepared for
others, he carried himself. and pray how could the Judgment of God appear more
evidently, than that he, who had the daringness of the Plunderer, should
himself become a Booty, who presuming upon Triumph, should himself become the
Subject of one; should be encompassed about, hall'd along; should be bound,
have his Arms tied behind him; should see those Hands Shackl'd, which he
thought were excellent at Fighting; should become a Spectacle to Children and
Women; should see the Barbarians playing Tricks with him; should bear the
Taunts and Scoffs of both Sexes; and that he, who had all the Arrogance and
Pride of a Man of Mettle, should undergo the Death of a Coward. And I wish this
were the short Remedy of his Misfortunes, and that his Torments were not more
lasting. For he, as to the Punishment they inflicted on him, being kept a long
time in Goal by the Barbarians, and wasting under a lingering Distemper, was
reduced to that Misery, That, which Men oftentimes take to be more grievous and
bitter than their Hardships, he was even pitied by his very Enemies. And how
came all this to pass? How? without doubt, but because, as I now said, they
were obedient to God, and we Rebels to Him; they believed Victory was in the
hand of God, and we took it to be in our own; nay in Those of the Huns.
impious and sacrilegious ones, which is worse and more wicked than our own.
The Theodoric King of the Goths.
King of our Enemies, as the thing it self has declared and proved, prostrate
in Sackcloath, powered out Prayers to the very day of the Battle; before the
Battle, he lay at Prayer, and rose from Prayer to the Battle. Before he began
the Fight, he had fought with Supplications, and therefore he marched in
Confidence to the Battle; because his Devotion had already merited the Victory.

XI. The Case was much the same as this In the Year 422.
in the Engagement with the Vandals, against whom, being fixed in Spain, when
our Army marched, and carried as much Considence and Presumption along them,
that they should certainly rout them, as they lately did in the Affair of the
Goths; they perished with the same Insolence and Pride, and with the very same
Destruction. And that saying of the Prophet came upon our Army: The Lord has
rejected Jerem. 2. v. 37.
thy Confidence, and thou shall not prosper in them. For we trusted in our
Wisdom and our might, in contradiction to God's Command, who says: Let not the
wise man glory in Jerem. 9. v. 23, 24.
his wisdom, neither let the mighty man glory in his might; but let him that
glories glory in this, that he understands and knows me, for I am the
Lord. We are therefore deservedly overcome: For they betook themselves to
better helps than we: For whilst we prided our selves in our own Armies, and
those of our Allies, our Enemies on the other side, had among them the Books of
the Holy Scriptures, The Fear and Consternation of the Vandals, had at that
time driven them for Help to them more especially, that they might oppose the
sacred Volume of the heavenly Oracles against their approaching Foes, and even
open the very mouth of God Almighty against us. Here now, I would know, whether
any one of our side ever did thus, or who would not be ridiculed, that should
but think of doing it? He would be scoffed at with a Witness; as almost every
thing that relates to Religion is by our People. And therefore, what Advantage
can it be to us to have a Religious Title, that we call our selves Catholics,
and boast of the Purity of our Faith; that we despise the Goths and Vandals,
and upbraid them with the Name of Heretics, when we our selves live as
wickedly as any Heretics can do? And therefore, that is most truly said to us,
which holy Writ spoke to the Jews, that trusted in the Law: How do ye say we
are Wise, and the Law of the Lord Jerem. 8. v. 8.
is with us? Trust ye not (says the Prophet) in lying words, saying, The Temple
of the Lord, Jerem. 7. v. 4, 5, 6, 7.
the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord are these; For if you thro'ly
amend your ways and your doings, if ye oppress not the stranger, the the
fatherless and the widow, and shed not Innocent Blood in this place, then will
I dwell with you in this Place for ever and ever. From whence it is plain, that
if we do not do these things, it is to little purpose to flatter our selves on
account of our being called Catholics. But I have said enough both now and
formerly of this Matter, and it may be, may say more hereafter: And there is no
need to discourse further, where God's Judgment still continues. For the thing
it self shows what God's Judgment is of Us, and of the Goths and Vandals. They
increase every day, and we decrease; they go forward, we are pulled back; they
flourish, and we are dried up. So that the Saying of holy Scripture, which
speaks of David 2 Samuel 3. v. 1.
and Gaul, is come upon us: David waxed stronger and stronger, and the House of
Gaul waxed weaker and weaker. For just, as the Prophet Psalm. 119. v. 137.
says, and righteous is the Lord, and true are his Judgments,

XII. We are therefore judged by God, even by a present Judgment; and to that
end, for our Destruction and Dishonor, a People are stirred up, going from one
place to another, rambling from one City to another, and laying waste all
before them. For first of all, from their own Country, they were powered in upon
The Country between the Mosel and the Rhine.
Germania Prima, which bears the Name of Barbarous, and was under the Power of
the Romans, after whose destruction, they pillaged first the Country of the The
Country between the Rhine, the Seine, and the Scheld.
Belgae, then seized the Wealth of the Luxurious Aquitanes, and afterward the
Body of all Gaul, not all at once, but by little and little; that while one
part of them were routed and slain, the other might amend from their Example.
But where is there any Amendment among us, or what part of the Roman World, be
its Distress never so great, that is reformed by it? For, as we read, They are
all gone out of the Ps. l. 53. v. 4.
way, they are all become unprofitable. And therefore the Prophet cries unto
the Lord, and says: Thou have stricken them, but they have not Jerem. 5. v. 3.
grieved; thou have consumed them, but they have refused to receive Correction:
They have made their Faces harder than a Rock, they have refused to return. How
truly this is applicable to us, even the Thing it self shows. Gaul is long
since laid waste; and is her Neighbor Spain amended by it? No such matter; for
they had not the least apprehension upon them, there was no Reformation at all;
they began to be singed in the Flames, which burnt the Gauls. But what, as I
said before, is most heinous and grievous in all this is, that when Fire, as I
may say, was set to the Limbs of sinful Men, yet the Vices of the Sinners were
not cured by it. And therefore God was compelled by our Wickednesses to spread
the Enemies as a Scourge, from place to place, and from one City to another;
and to send a Nation, fetched almost from the As far as part of Sweden.
uttermost Parts of the Earth, cross the Sea for the Punishment of the
ungracious Africans. For could not they after they were brought from their
Native Country have Settled in Gaul? Who did they fear should hinder them to
live there, when without any disturbance from us even to that time they laid
all waste before them? But supposing they were afraid to stay in Gaul. What was
there in Spain, where they had routed our Army in Battle? What were they afraid
to sit down and stay there, when they were Conquerours and Triumphing, and were
arrived to that pitch of Strength and Power, that after the experience of a
Battle that had been long preparing they found that* all the forces of the
Roman Commonwealth, assisted by their The Huns
Barbarian Allies, were not an equal match for them?

XIII. They might then have lived there Of the Vices of the Africans.
without any manner of fear. But that same hand of Heaven, which brought them
to punish the Iniquities of the Spaniards, forced them to pass over to waste
Africa. Nay themselves owned that it was not their own business they were
doing, but they were forceably compelled to it by a command from above. By
which we may perceive how great our Wickednesses are, when the Barbarians
against their Will are forced to waste and to torment us, according to that
which the King of Assyria the destroyer of the Land of Israel says, Am I now
come up without the Lord against this Isa. 36. v. 10.
Land to destroy it? The Lord said unto me, go up against this Land and
destroy it. And in another place the holy Scripture* says. Thus says Jer. 25.
v. 9 and 19.
the Lord of Hosts, the God of Israel, Behold I will send and take
Nebuchodonosor the King of Babylon my Servant, and he shall come and smite the
land of Aegyt. By which we may perceive that all places that are afflicted are
smitten by the Judgment of God; but yet, as I have often said, are overthrown
for their own Sins. So that all that happens to them is to be ascribed to their
own Transgressions, and not to God; for the action is justly ascribed to that
thing that required, that the Action should be done. For both the Murderer when
he is condemned by the Judge, is punished through his own villainy; and the Thief
or the Churchrobber, when he is burnt in the fire, is brought to that
Punishment for his own Crimes. So that the Vandals passing over into Africa, is
not to be ascribed to the Severity of Heaven, but to the viciousness of the
Africans. For they drew them there by their grievious and long impieties a
great while before they came at them, and therefore we should observe that it
was Gods loving kindness, that he deferred the Punishment which had been so
long due; and their own Sin and Wickedness, that a sinful People did sometime
receive what they had deserved. Unless, it may be, we think the People of
Africa did not deserve this, when none deserved more, as having among them a
Collection of all sorts and sizes of Wickednesses and Uncleanness. For other
People, although* they were in Bondage to some sorts of Vice and Naughtiness, yet
were not entangled in all; although they may be given to tippling, yet they are
free from Spite and Malice; though they burn with Lust, yet they do not tyrannize
in rapine; and lastly, though the incontinence of their bodies accuses some, yet
the simplicity of their manners, in other respects, at the same time commends
them: But among almost all the Africans, there is nothing of these which
belongs to both, that is, to the Good as well as the Bad, because the whole is
thro'ly Evil. So that the Integrity of their former Natures being excluded,
their Vices seem in some sort to have made them another kind of Natures.

XIV. For excepting a very few Servants of God, what was the whole Territory of
Africa, but one Family full of Vices? Like that Pot of which the Prophet
speaks? Woe to the bloody Ezekiel. 24. v. 6.
City, and the Pot in which there is rust, it shall not go out of it, because
blood shall not go out of it. He compared the City, we see, to a Pot, and their
Iniquity to Blood. That we might know that Iniquity of the People in a City is
like Blood boiling in a Pot. Not much unlike this is that other place of
Scripture; All Ezekiel* 22. v 18* 19.
the House of Israel is to me become mixed with Copper and Iron, Tin and Lead,
and in the midst there is Silver: Wherefore say thus: Thus says the Lord,
because you are all become one mass, I will blow upon and melt you in the fire
of mine anger. Here the holy writ mentions Metals of very different kinds. And
how can such different things be refined in the same Furnace? Why? because in
these different kinds of Metals, is meant a diversity of Men. And so even
Silver, that is, a Metal of a Nobler make is put into the same fire, because
the best Parts and noblest Nature by a degenerate life are condemned. Thus also
we read that the Lord spoke by the Prophet concerning the Prince of Tire. Son
of Man take up a lamentation upon the King of Tyrus, and say unto him; thou
sealest up the scum, full of Wisdom and perfect in Ezekiel. 28. v. 12.
Beauty, thou have been in Eden the Garden of God: Every precious stone was thy
covering, v. 13.
the Sardius, and the Topaz, and the Emerald. And again: With silver and gold
thou have v. 4. and 5.
filled thy Treasures; by the multitude of thy Trafick thou have filled thy
Warehouses. All which seem as if they were spoken of the Africans in
particular; For, where were there greater Treasures, where greater Trading,
where fuller Storehouses? With gold says he, thou have filled thy Treasures by
the multitude of thy Trafick. But I say farther, that Africa was formerly so
Rich, that the abundance of her Merchandising seemed, to me, to fill not only
her own Treasures, but those of the whole World. And what follows? Thy Heart,
says v. 17.
he, was lifted up because of thy Beauty, for the multitude of thy sins I have
cast thee to the ground. How does this agree to the Powerful State of Africa,
or how does she seem to be thrown upon the Ground? How? Why when she lost the
height of her ancient Power, she parted with almost a sort of Celestial
Dignity. And I will bring forth, says he, a fire from the midst of thee, it
shall devour thee. What can v. 19.
have more truth in it than this? For from the midst of their Iniquities, the
fire of Sin is gone forth, which has consumed all the Happiness of the former
times. And all, says he, who knew thee among the Nations shall v 19.
mourn over thee. Let us not think that this agrees to them, if the Destruction
of Africa is not the grief of all Mankind. Thou art made, says he, a perdition,
and shall not be any more for ever. It Is manifest enough that all things are
brought to Destruction there. What remains is, that the continuation of Eternal
Torments may not follow these punishments of their present Evil Deeds.

XV. But God out of His loving kindness and Mercy cannot suffer that to be.
Though as far as appertains to the Merit of our Crimes, the Matter is such, that
he may seem to suffer it. For what Villainies are there, which have not been
always committed there? I cannot speak of all, because they are both uncommon
and irregular, and are so great that they cannot be either known or spoke of. I
only now mention the beastliness of their Uncleanness, and which is worse, of
their Sacrileges. I pass by in any of them the greedy desire of having, as a
Vice common to all Mankind. I shall say nothing of the inhumanity of their
avarice, which is an Evil peculiar to almost all the Romans. I shall leave
their Drunkenness undisturbed, as being common to both Gentle and Simple, their
Pride and loftiness shall be buried in Silence. This is so reigning a Sin among
the great Men, that perhaps they may think they lose somewhat of their Right,
if any one should claim any parcel of it. And in the last place, I shall not
touch upon the Catalogue of their Frauds, Falsities and Perjuries. No Roman
City was ever without their Evils. Although the Wickednesses seem more especially
to belong to all the Africans. For as all Dirt and Filth runs into the Sink, or
Hold of an high built Ship, so, as from all Parts of the World, have Vices
flown into their Manners. For I know of no kind of Wickedness whatever, which
did not more than abound there; when yet, even the Pagan and unciviliz'd
People, although they have Vices peculiarly their own, yet all things among them,
are not worthy of detestation. The Goths are Perfidious, but yet they are
chaste. The Alans are unchaste, but then they are not so perfidious; The Franks
are Liars, but are Hospitable; The Saxons are Cruel and Barbarous, but are
remarkable for their Continence. So all Nations, as they have some peculiar
Vices, so they have some Virtues. But among almost all the Africans, I do not
know any thing that is not Evil. If inhumanity is blameworthy, they are
inhumane; if Drunkenness, they are Drunkards; if Falseness, they are most
False; if Deceit, they are most deceitful; if Covetousness, they are most
rapacious; if Perfidy, they are most perfidious. But their Uncleanness, and
their Blasphemy are not to be joined to all these: For in those Evils
beforementioned, they have surpassed the Vices of other Nations, but in these
they have outdone even their own.

XVI. And in the first place, to begin with their Uncleanness, who knows not
that whole Africa has always burnt with the obscene Fire of Lusts; that you
would not take it for a Land or Habitation of Men, but rather an Aetna of
unchaste Flames? For as Aetna rages with the intestine Heats of fermenting
Nature, so Africa always boils with the abominable Fire of Fornications. I do
not desire to be believed, merely for my asserting it. Take evidence from all
Mankind. Who does not know that all the People of Africa are generally
incontinent, unless, it may be, they are converted to God; that is, are changed
by Faith and Religion? But that is as great a Novelty and Rarity, as it would
be to see one, That John a Styles should not be John a Styles, and John of
Nokes should not be John of Nokes.
whose name was Gaius not to be Gaius; and one whose name was Sejus, not to be
Sejus. For it is as uncommon and unusual, not to have an African unchaste, as
that an African should not be an African: For the Sin of Incontinence is so
general among them, that whoever of them do ever leave off to be lewd, does not
seem to be an African. I shall not run through all places, nor examine every
City, lest I may seem studiously, to enquire after, and narrowly to search for
what I say. I shall Of the Splendor and Dignity of Carthage.
be content with one only, and that the Head and Metropolis of all the Cities
there: She that was always Rival to our Rome, formerly in Arms and Might, and
afterward in Beauty and Power: Carthage, I mean, both the greatest Adversary of
the City of Rome, and as another Rome in Africa: which alone is sufficient for
me, as an Evidence and Example, because it had within it all things, by which
the Discipline of any Commonwealth in the whole world is either governed or
managed. There are all the Necessaries of public Offices; there are Schools of
the liberal Arts, and Lectures of Philosophy, and all Instructions to be had in
Languages or Manners. There is a standing Army, and Officers to lead them.
There was the Dignity of a Proconsul, a constant Judge and Governor, called
indeed a Proconsul; but a Consul in his Power. And lastly, there were all sort
of Officers there, and places different in Degree and Name, and, as I may say,
a sort of Procurators of every Street and Alley, for the Governing all places
of the City and Divisions of the People. I am therefore satisfied with only
this One, as an Example and Evidence of the rest; that we may understand in
what State those Cities were, which had less Care taken of, and Government
among them; when we shall see in what a Condition this was, where the Chiefest
Magistrates always resided. But in this place, I almost repent me of my
Promise, that is, that I engaged above to pass by all the other Crimes of
Africa, and to speak only of their Blasphemies and Uncleanness. For methinks,
I see the City overspread with Vices, and the place reeking in all kind of
Iniquities, crowded with People; but more with all Uncleanness, full of Riches;
but fuller far of Vices; Men striving with each other for the Mastery in the
Naughtiness of their Villainies; some offering at the Prize in Rapine, and
others by their Lewdness. Some reeling with their Wine, and others gorged with
Gluttony; some with their Garlands on their Heads, and others daubed with
Unguents, and all lost in diverse sorts of Luxury and Corruptions, but yet
destroyed almost All by one Death of Errors; they are not all indeed fuddled
with tippling Wine, but yet are all quite drunken in their Sins. You would take
the People to be much disordered, to be out of their Senses, to be neither
sound in their Mind, nor in their going; but, like Bacchus's mad Votaries,
hastening in Crowds to Riot and Intemperance. But now of what sort is that, and
how grievous; different indeed in Kind, but not different in Iniquity, unless
perhaps, it be esteemed different in this, because it is greater. I mean the
Pillaging of Orphans, the Afflicting of Widows, and the Torments of the Poor,
who daily lamenting unto God, and begging an End of their Misfortunes; and,
which is worst of all, through the bitterness of their Distress, sometimes
craving of God to bring an Enemy, have at length obtained from Him, that they
should undergo the common Destruction from the Barbarians, which they alone
before only bore from the Romans.

XVII. Well, it shall be so, all these things shall be passed over, for they
are acted almost all over the Roman World; beside, I promised, that in this
place, I would speak somewhat of these Wickednesses. What then shall I say of
that Unchastity and Uncleanness which I now speak of; was not it alone
sufficient to destroy the Africans? For what part of the City was there, that
was not full of Filthiness, what Street or Lane within the Place, that was not
a Bawdy House? They dugg always, either as Traps of Lust, or spread them forth
as Nets; so that, even they, who had no manner of Inclination to them, yet
could scarce avoid them. You might in a manner see the Sets of Highway-Men
waiting for the Plunder of passing Travelers, who, by the closeness of their
frequent Snares, so hemm in all Paths, all narrow Lanes and Turnings, that
scarce any one with all his Caution, but would fall into some of the Traps,
although he had freed himself from many of them before. All the Citizens of that
place, as I may say, stunk with the dirt of Lust, mutually breathing on each
other the nasty Savor of Uncleanness. But these horrid things did cause no
dread in them, because they All were equally concerned. You Would think there were
one Commonshore of Lust and Fornication, a public Jaques made up from all the
Streets and Privies. And what hope could be there, where, except in the Church
of God, there was nothing but dirtiness to be seen. But why do I speak of the
Church of God? For that belongs solely to the Bishops and Clergy, whom I do not
enquire after, because I reserve all imaginable Respect to the Ministers of my
Lord; for they, I believe, only remained undefiled at the Altar; as we read,
that Lot Genesis 19.
at the Destruction of Sodom, was remaining alone in the Mountain. But as far
as concerns the People, who was there in that almost innumerable Number of them
that was chaste? Chaste do I say? Who was not a Fornicator, who was not an
Adulterer, and that without ceasing, without ending? And therefore I am forced
to cry again, What hope is there of such a People, where, when sometimes one
Adulterer has defiled the whole Congregation of Christians; there, if you seek
as diligently as you can among so many Thousands, you will scarce find one
chaste Person in the Church? Nay, I have wose to add. And I wish there were only
what I have said, and that the Lewdness of the Men had been content to have
been defiled with the use of their dirty Whores only. That is grievous and more
heinous, that those things of which the Apostle St. Paul complains with the
greatest Sorrow and Lamentation have been almost all among the Africans; viz.
That the men leaving the natural Romans 1. v. 27, 28.
use of the Woman, burned in their Lust one toward another, Men with Women
working that which is unseemly, and receiving in themselves, that Recompense of
their Error which was meet; And even as they did not like to retain God in
their Knowledge, God gave them over to a reprobate mind, to do those things
which are not convenient. Does the Apostle speak this of Barbarous and
uncivilised people? Not at all, but of us, that is, of us Romans in particular:
whom, when the Africans could not formerly overcome in Power and Empire, they
have done the only thing they could; they have overcome them in Uncleanness.
Whoever therefore thinks he has reason to be angry with me, let him be rather
angry with the Apostle, because that what I say, the People of Africa were, the
same the Apostle says of the Romans, who were their Masters.

XVIII. But, it may be, what I speak of was either done in secret, or at least
the Magistrates took care, that such Wickedness should not be published to
scandalize the Government, and defile the eyes of the City. Which, if it had
been done, although many had been guilty of the Fact, yet all would not be
polluted in Sight and Mind; for an Action wicked enough, if it be done privily,
does not use to deserve the Credit of a villainous Act. But it is above all the
execrable and monstrous Offenses to commit the highest Transgression, and yet
not to be ashamed of the Sin. I desire to know what can be more prodigious than
this? In a Christian City, in an Ecclesiastical City, which the Apostles had
formerly instructed in their Doctrines, which Martyrs have crowned with their
Passions; the Men in the use of their Bodies have owned themselves Women, and
that without any the least shadow of Shame, or any covering to their Modesty:
and in such manner, as if it were a small Matter, that the Authors only of the
Sin should be defiled with the Wickedness, by the public profession of the
Crime, it became the Guilt of the whole City. For all the City saw it, and
suffered it: The Judges saw it, and winked at it, the people saw it, and
applauded it; and so by the joint publishing of the Scandal and or Governors.
the Crime through the whole City, although they were not guilty of the Fact, yet
their consenting to it, made it the Crime of all. But it may be, there was some
time or other, an end put to the Corruption, and the People amended? Who can
believe or hear, that the Men changed not only their Use and Nature into Female
passiveness, but even their Countenance, Gate, Dress, and every thing that was
Manly, either in the Use or Dress. All things were so perverted and distorted,
that since nothing ought to put a Man more out of Countenance, than to have any
thing about him that looks effeminate; there, nothing seemed more disgraceful
to some Men, than when they seemed to have any thing manly about them.

XIX. But say you, this is only a shame to Of the Sin of one Man, how it
becomes the Bane of many.
some few, and what is not committed by many cannot hurt all. I have showed
already, how that oftentimes among the People of God, the Sin of one Man became
the Bane of many; Thus the People perished by Achan's Theft; Josh. 7.
so a Plague arose from Readiness Zeal; as a Mortality 1 Samuel 19.
from David's numbering of the People. For the Church of God is like an Eye.
For, as, 2 Samuel 23.
although but a little Dust falls into the Eye, yet it blinds the whole Sight; so
in the Body of the Church, although but a few Members do commit dirty Deeds, yet
it does almost darken the whole Light of the Churches Beauty. And therefore our
Savior himself calls the Principal Part of the Church the Eye, when Mat. 6. v.
22, 23.
he says: The light of the Body is the Eye: If therefore thy Eye be single, thy
whole Body shall be full of Light: But if thine Eye be evil, thy whole Body
shall be full of Darkness. And 1 Cor. 5. v. 6.
so the Apostle, Know ye not that a little Leaven leaveneth the whole Lump.
Although I do affirm, that there was not a little only of this Wickedness, but a
great deal of it; not because there were so many of those effeminate Men, as
because the Effeminacy of those few, had tainted the rest. For although they are
but few who are Actors in such scandalous Practices, there are many, who are
defiled with the filthiness of those Few. For as one Harlot makes many
Whore-masters, so the accursed Mixtures of a few effeminate Ones pollutes a
great Part of the People. And I cannot tell which of them are the worse in the
sight of God, since they are both condemned alike in 1 Cor. 10 v. 9*
the sacred Scriptures: For, says the Apostle, neither effeminate Persons, nor
abusers of themselves with Mankind shall inherit the Kingdom of God. This then
is greatly to be bemoaned and lamented, that such a Wickedness as this seemed
to be the Crime of the whole Commonwealth, and all the Honor of the Roman Name
was marked with the Infamy of this prodigious Villainy. For when the Men took
upon them the Women's Habit, and minced their Gate more than the Women, and
fastened to themselves certain Tokens of their monstrous Uncleanness, and
dressed their Heads as the Women used to do, and this publicly in a Roman
City, a most Renowned and Famous City; what was it but a Scandal to the Roman
Empire, that so execrable a Villainy should be publicly permitted, even in the
very heart of the Commonwealth? For that Great and Mighty Power which can
hinder the greatest Naughtiness, does, as it were, license that Thing to be
done, if knowingly it suffers it to be committed. For in whosoever's Power it
is to forbid a Sin, if he does not forbid the Commission of it, he commands it
to be done.

XX. Again, since Grief forces it, I desire to know of those who are angry,
among what Barbarians these Things are either ever* done, or permitted
publicly with Impunity? But that there may be no longer Doubt, or Search made
in this Matter, let us compare these who have overrun Africa, to the Africans
themselves. Let us see if any thing like this be committed by the Vandals. And
really a strange People, puffed up and swollen with Victory and Success,
dissolved in the Abundance of Riches and Delights; although they had been always
before most chaste and continent, might yet have been changed, by such a
torrent of Temptations, having entered a Land, that in the Scripture Phrase,
flowed with Milk and Honey, Exodus 13. ^ 5
Fruitful, most Plentiful, and almost drunken with all Delights and Pleasures;
in which it would not have been any wonder, if Foreigners had been luxurious,
where even Nature her self seemed to be so luxuriant. Who would not think now,
but that the Vandals entering these places, plunged themselves in the Filth of
all manner of Vices and Uncleanness; or to speak the least, that they did the
same things the Africans had always done, into whose places they succeeded? And
really, if they had done only the same things, they might be reputed chaste and
modest, since Success did not make them more vicious. For how many are there,
even of wise Men, whom Prosperity does not alter, and whom Vices does not
increase with their Estates? And hence it is manifest, that the Vandals would
have been most temperate, if they as Conquerours had been such, as those whom
they captivated and subdued. But what, was no one of them unmann'd among all
this Luxury? Does no such thing appear? It Is certain, that it was very common
with the Noble Romans to be so. But what shall I say more? Were none of them
polluted with the Incest of the Effeminate Romans there? It Is certain, that
this was long ago so esteemed by the Romans, that it was rather thought to be a
Virtue than a Vice; and they were looked upon to be the stoutest Men, who were
most robust Stallions. Whence it came, that for a Reward to a parcel of
Scoundrels, who followed the Army of Striplings, it was decreed as to a
meritorious Service, That since they were lusty Fellows, they should have the
Pleasure of using Men as Women. O horrid! And this by Romans; and further,
Romans not of this Age: But yet, lest we accuse the old Ones, Romans; but not
the ancient ones: But after they became dissolute and debauched, and utterly
unlike themselves and their Ancestors, and more like Greeks than Romans. So
that (as I have often said before) it no wonder that the Romans should sometime
suffer what they have long since deserved.

XXI. This Uncleanness then began among the Romans before the Gospel appeared,
and what is worse, has continued after the Gospel. Now who after this can
forbear to admire the Vandals* who entering this most wealthy City, where all
these wickednesses were every where committed, so possessed themselves of the
Delights of the debauched Inhabitants, as to despise their Debauchery and
Lewdness, to take to themselves the use of what was good, and to avoid the
uncleanness of the bad. So that this is a sufficient Commendation of them, though
I should say no more. For they abominated the filthiness of Men, nay more than
they abominated that of Women; they abhorred the Stews and Brothels, and
abhorred the lying or meddling with the common Strumpets. And can this seem
credible to any, that the Romans committed these things, and that the
Barbarians abhorred them? Or is it possible for any thing more to be said,
after what I have said already? Yes there is, and a great deal too. For that I
have said they avoided the Filthinesses themselves, it is but a small Matter.
For any one may detest Baseness, but not remove it. But that is truly Great and
of singular Merit, not only not to be polluted ones self, but also to make
Provision, that no one shall ever after be defiled. For he does in some sort
provide for the Welfare of Mankind, who does not only take care that he himself
be good; but endeavors what he can that others may leave off to be bad. This
which I say is Great, truly Great, and Extraordinary. Who could believe that
Vandals did these Things in Roman Cities? All uncleanness of the Flesh is
utterly removed from among them. But how is it removed? Not as Things used to
be removed by the Romans, who make a Law, that no one shall commit Adultery,
and they are the first Adulterers; and Enact that no one steal, when themselves
are the first Thieves. Of the Vices of a bad Governor.
Although I can scarce say, that they steal. For they are not little petty
Thieveries they commit, but Notorious open Robberies. For the Governor
punishes Cheating in the public Revenue, when he is the greatest Robber of the
Treasury; he punishes Rapine, when he himself is the greatest Oppressor; He
punishes a Cutthroat, when he is a Gladiator; He punishes the breakers of
Doors and Windows, Burglars.
when he overturns whole Towns; He punishes the Robbers and Breakers of Houses,
when he destroys and robs whole Provinces and Cities. And I wish they only did
this, who were in Power and Places, and whose Station gives them a kind of
Right to use these Robberies and Oppressions. But it is grievous and more
intolerable, that those who have been formerly in Places and Honors; but now
are private Men, should do this. The Station, it seems, they once had, gives
them so Great a Privilege, that they have always a Right of Robbing. So that
when they cease to have the Administration of their public Power, they still
reserve private Power to Plunder. So that the Power they had, when Governors,
was much more easy, than what they have as private Men. For in that, they are
often succeeded, in this never. Now pray what signify Laws; what Advantage is
there from any public Sanctions, when they who administer them, contemn them
most? The common and ordinary People are forced to obey them, the poorer Sort
are compelled to* be Subject to their Orders; and if they do not, are certainly
punished for it. For they have the same Reason done them in this Matter, as
they have in their Taxes. They only observe the public Laws, as only they pay
the Taxes. And so in the very Laws, and in the just public Ordinances, there
is the greatest Wickedness and Injustice, when the meaner People are forced to
observe that as sacred and inviolable, which the greater Folk disregard, and
tread upon their feet.

XXII. I have broke off the thread of my Discourse a little, being forced to it
by the unworthiness of the Things I was speaking of. But now I return to what I
was saying before. I have said then, that the Cities of Africa, were full of
monstrous Impurities, and especially she that was the Queen and Mistress of
them all; but that the Vandals were not polluted by any of them. These
Barbarians then, of whom I speak, who were to reform our Corruption and
Filthiness, were no such Men. For they utterly took away out of all Parts of
Africa, the Uncleanness of the Effeminate Men; they abhorred the Contagions
of the Common Whores; neither did they abhor or remove them only for a Time,
but they made them altogether cease to be. O good Lord, and merciful Savior,
how strange are the Effects of Discipline and Government, by which the Vices of
Nature may be changed, as they were altogether changed by them! But how were
they changed? For it is of Moment to tell, not only the Effects of Things, but
also the Causes of those Effects. For it is to little purpose to take away
Unchastity by Word or Order, unless you remove it indeed: And 'twill signify
very little to require Chastity by Words, unless you exact it heartily: which
they being very sensible of, did so take away the Unchastity, that they
preserved the unchaste Persons, not putting the miserable Harlots to death,
lest they should blemish the Cure of their Vices with the Blot of Cruelty; and
whilst they desired to take away their Sinning, they themselves should sin in
the cutting off their Offenses. But they so amended the Sinners, that what they
did was a real Medicine, but no Punishment. For they commanded and compelled
all the Harlots, to betake themselves to Marriage, and so converted Fornication
into Wedlock: thereby fulfilling that Saying and Command of the Apostle: That
every 1 Cor. 7. v. 2.
man should have his own Wife, and every Woman her own Huusband; so that as
Incontinence could not otherwise be bridled, without the use of such carnal
Mixtures; so the Bodily heat should receive it is lawful use, that Incontinence
might not have in it Sin. By which management, they did not only provide, that
those Women should have Husbands, who could not contain without them, but also,
that they who were not able to secure themselves, might be safe under the eye
of their Domestic Guardians; and so always submitting to their Husband's
Government, although the Habit of their former Uncleanness enticed them to
Naughtiness; yet the Observation and Care of a Husband might keep them from the
Sin. Beside this, to restrain Debauchery, they added severe Laws to establish
Chastity, and to punish Incontinence; that both the Affection of Marriage might
keep both Sexes clean at home, as the Dread of the Laws do the same abroad:
That so Chastity might be defended by a double Guard, having something at home
to be beloved, and somewhat abroad to be afraid of. But these Laws were not by
any means like those, which so take away one part of the Wickedness, that they
allow another part of the Uncleanness: Or, as those Roman Edicts that forbid
Whoremaster's going near other Men's Wives, but allow them the use of all
single Women; forbidding Adulteries, but erecting Brothels. I suppose they were
afraid that Men would be too chaste and clean, if they kept them from all sort
of Uncleanness. But so did not they of whom we are speaking, who prohibited
Fornication as Adultery; who would have Women be no Women, but to their own
Husbands, and the Men be no Men, but to their own Wives; who suffer Lust to
wander no farther than the lawful Bed, ordering their Laws after the Model of
the Divine Laws, believing, that nothing was lawful to be done in that Case,
but what God had thought lawful. And therefore they did not think, that any
thing was to be allowed to any man by them, unless what was permitted to all by
God Himself.

XXIII. I am sensible that what I have said, will seem intolerable to some Men.
But we are to be guided by the Reason of Things, and not by any one's Fancy or
Pleasure. Let that Man, whoever he be, that is displeased with what I say, tell
me, whether Socrates was not always esteemed the wisest of Men, and that too by
the Testimony of the Demon of Delphos, who, as he was the Chief of the
Philosophers, so he was of the Devils. Let us see then, what Laws Socrates
enacted relating to Chastity, and what they did of whom I am speaking. Let no
man, says Socrates, have a Wife to himself, for Marriages ought to be common to
all. For by this Means Cities will agree much better together, if all Men lie
with all Women without any difference; then all Women will allow the use of
their Bodies to all Men without Distinction; and so all Men will become the
Husbands of all Women, and all Women the Wives of all Men. Did we ever know any
body in a Frenzy, or Possessed, or stark Staring mad, that ever uttered any
thing like this? You grand Philosopher then say, that by this means all Men
will be the Husbands of all Women, and all Women the Wives of all Men, and the
little Ones thus begot, the Children of all. But I on the contrary say, that by
this Means, there is not any Man, who is the Husband of any Woman; neither is
any Woman the Wife of any Man, nor any of the Offspring the Child of any
Parent. For where all things lie in common and confused, there no body has a
Property in any thing. Neither was it enough for this Great Sage, as they call
him, to teach this Doctrine, unless he also practiced it; for he gave away his
own Wife to another Man; as did also the Roman Cato, that is, another Socrates
of Italy. Lo here, what are the extraordinary Patterns set us by the Wisdom of
Rome and Athens. They make all Husbands, as much as in them lies, to be Pimps
and Panders to their own Wives. But Socrates was Victor in this, for he wrote
Books upon the Subject, and recorded these shameful Things for Posterity. But
however, his Precepts were to be bragged of: For his Doctrine makes only one
public Stews of the whole World. He is said to be unjustly condemned by his
Judges. And true it is: For all Mankind with more Justice should have condemned
him, when he was setting forth such Principles as these, as undoubtedly they
did condemn him. For since in this particular all have rejected his Doctrine;
they have condemned him, not only by the Authority of a Sentence, but which is
much more, by their contrary Practice; and justly. For let his Constitution be
compared wit the Orders of those, whom God has made Masters of Africa. He
ordained, that no body should have a Wife to himself; they, that no body should
have any but his own; He would have every Woman Prostitute her self to all
Men; they, that no woman should know any other but her own Husband; He was for
a mixed and confused Generation, they, for a chaste and regular one; he would
have every House a Brothel, they, no such thing; he endeavored to erect Stews
in all Habitations, they, took them all down out of the Cities; he was for
prostituting all Virgins, and they made the lewd women chaste. I could wish
heartily that this had been only Socrates's Error; and that* many, nay almost
All the Romans, were not infected with it, who, although they do not by any means
imitate Socrates in other Particulars of his Life, yet in this they follow him
closely: For both many Men have each many Wives, and a great many Women have
each many Husbands. And are not all the Cities full of Stews, and even stink
with Brothel-houses? And why do I say all? It Is certain the greatest and and
richest are such. For it is a sort of Privilege and Honor in the great Cities,
that as much as they excel others in greatness, they should out* do them in
Uncleanness. I would fain know then, what hope the States of Rome can have,
when the Barbarians are more chaste and clean than the Romans? But I mince the
Matter; What hope I pray, of either Life or Pardon before God, can there be for
us, when we see such Chastity in the Barbarians, and yet we cease to be chaste?
Let us blush for shame, and be confounded, There are no unchaste Persons now
among the Goths, but the Romans, and among the Vandals, even the Romans are not
such. The desire of Chastity, and the severity of Discipline, have done such
Mighty things among them, as not only to make themselves chaste, but to do a
new thing, a Thing incredible, and never heard of before, they have made even
the Romans chaste. If I had strength, I would make such an Outcry, as the
whole World should hear me: Be ashamed at length, you Romans, be ashamed of
your way of living. You have no Cities without Stews, none altogether free from
Uncleanness, but those only, in which the Barbarians have begun to be. And do
we wonder then, if we are miserable, who are so very lewd? do we wonder that we
are conquered by the Enemy, who surpass us in Honesty? Do we wonder that they
possess our Goods, who abominate our wickednesses? It is not any natural
Strength in their Bodies that makes them overcome us, neither is it any natural
weakness in us, that causes us to be vanquished. Let no man persuade himself
otherwise; let no man think otherwise, it is our vicious Morals alone that have
enslaved us.

SALVIAN of GOD's Government, etc. BOOK VIII.
How we our selves are the Authors of our own Misery and Calamity. How it is a
kind of Sacrilege to hate the Worshippers of God.

1. I Suppose, nay I am certain, that the length How we our selves are the
Authors of our own Misery and Calamity.
of this Discourse is become tedious to very many; especially since it does so
freely lash the Vices of our Morals. For every body would willingly be
commended, but no body cares for Reproof: Nay, which is much worse, be the
Person never so wicked, never so desperate and lewd; yet he had rather be
untruly commended, than justly rebuked; be deceived with the Delusions of false
Commendations, than be preserved by wholesome Admonition. And what is to be
done in such a Case as this? Must we gratify this Humor of ungodly Men? Or if
they desire to be courted with such vain Praises; Is it fit for us to sooth
them with such Vanity and Delusion? Especially since they, who would be thus
cheated, ought not to be so used by good Men, as neither ought they to be
untruly commended, who desire to be set off with the false Colors of undue
Praise: For we should consider, not so much what every one of these Men desire
to hear, as what is most fitting for us to speak; especially since the Prophet
has said, Woe be to them that call sweet bitter, and Isaiah 5. v. 20.
bitter sweet. So that by all means, the Truth is to be stuck to, and what is
in the thing it self, the same should be in the Discourse upon it: Those things
that have sweetness in them, should be called sweet, and those which have
bitterness in them, bitter; especially now in so sacred a Concern, where our
Iniquities are by many ascribed to God; and so that they may seem guiltless,
they presume to throw the Blame upon God Himself. For when they say, that he is
negligent and regardless, and blaspheme him, as not administering humane Affairs
righteously, or not administering them at all; what do they do less than accuse
Him of Laziness, mispending His Time, and of Injustice? O the Folly and
Blindness of Mankind, O their Frenzy and Fool-hardiness! You then, O man, call
God negligent and regardless: If you offered such a Compliment to any thing of
a Gentleman, you would be guilty of Insolence and ill Manners: And if to a
Nobleman or a Man of Quality, you would undergo the Penalty of the Law for it.
These are Reproaches which are thrown on the most prodigal Spend-thrists, and
it is a Taunt only proper to lewd young Rakehells, who are said to be
Mispenders, negligent, and regardless of their Estates. O profane and
sacrilegious Impudence! We say that God Almighty is that, which we do not use,
even to Men, unless the most desperate and wicked. And yet these are not the
only things are said: For he is accused, as I said before, of Injustice. For if
we do not deserve the things we suffer, and ought not to bear our present
Miseries, we make God unjust, who commands us to bear evils we have not
deserved. But, say you, he does not so much order them, as permit them.
Granting that it is so: How far, I pray you, is he that permits it from him
that orders it? For he who knows that we bear such things, and can prevent our
bearing them, does without doubt, approve of our bearing what he suffers us to
endure, Whence we may perceive, that the permission of His Judgment is just,
and that it is by a Sentence from above that we suffer; for since all things
are under His Jurisdiction, and His will governs all things, whatever
Misfortunes or Punishments we every day suffer, it is a Censure from God's own
hand; which Censure we bring upon our selves by our Sins, and by our
Provocations inflame it. We light the fire of God's wrath, and stir up those
flames which may consume us. So that as often as we bear these Evils, that of the
Prophet may be justly applied to us: Walk in the flame of the fire which ye
have Isaiah. 50. v. ^^.
kindled. So that by this, according to holy Scripture, every Sinner does
prepare for himself what he suffers. There is nothing of our Calamities then to
be laid at God's door: We our selves are the Authors of our Calamities. For God
is loving and merciful, and who, as the Scripture says, Would have all men be
saved. It Is we therefore that do every thing against 1 Timothy 2. v. 4.
our selves. There is nothing, nothing so cruel to us as our selves. We, I say,
torment our selves, whether God will or no* But I may seem here to contradict
my self, since I said a little above, that we were punished by God for our
Sins; but now I say, that we are punished by our selves: Both are true: We are
punished indeed by God; but then we are the Cause of the Punishment. And seeing
we cause him to punish us, who can any longer doubt, but that we by our own
Crimes punish our selves. For whosoever gives a Cause why he should be
punished, he punishes himself according to that: Every one is bound with the
cords of his own Sins. If then perverse Men are bound with the Cords of their
own Sins, without doubt* every Offender binds himself, when he commits Sin.

II. But since I have spoken a great deal of the Uncleanness of the Africans, I
will here I suppose such another as the (...) (the Image that was said to fall
down from Jupiter) at Ephesus, mentioned Act 13 v. 35*
say a little of their Blasphemies. For Paganism was always openly professed by
many there. They had within their Country and Cities, an Intestine and deadly
Abomination, I mean that She Demon of the Africans, which they called (*)
Coelestis (or Heavenly) on which the ancient Heathens, I suppose, bestowed that
goodly Name, that since it had nothing of Divinity in it, it should at least be
related to it in the Name; and having no perfection from its own Power, it
should derive some Honor from the Appellation. Who was there that was not
initiated in the Rites of that Idol? who was not from his very Conception and
Birth, devoted to her Service? I do not speak of those, who, as they were
Pagans in their Lives, so they were in Title and Profession; who, as they were
profane in their Error, so they were in their Names. For Paganism is more
tolerable and less wicked in those, whose Profession it is: But that is more
pernicious and wicked, that many of those, who had publicly professed Christ,
yet in their Mind served the Idols. For who was there of those who were called
Christians, who did not worship that She-Idol, either after Christ, or which is
much worse, before Christ? Who enters the House of God, that is not full of the
Incense of the Sacrifices offered to these Devils; and with the stanch of the
Devils themselves, ascends God's Altars: so that it had not been near so great
a Crime not to come to the House of* God at all, as to come thus. For the
Christian, who does not come to Church, is only guilty of Negligence; but he
who comes in that manner, of Sacrilege. And it is a much less Offense not to
give God the Honor due to Him, than thus to injure and affront Him. And so,
for that Reason, they who have done these things, have not given any Honor to
God, but rather have taken it from him. For they have, in some sort, performed
the Service of the Church to the Idol already: For the performance of the Duty
at the second place, redounds to his Honor to whom the first and chief
Devotions are offered. See here, what was the Faith, what was the Religion,
what was the Christianity of the Africans, and especially of the Great ones!
They were called Christians, to the dishonor of Christ. When the Apostle cries
aloud: Ye cannot drink the Cup of the Lord and the cup of Devils: Ye cannot 1
Cor. 10. v* 21.
be partakers of the Lord's Table and of the Table of Devil's: It was not
enough for them, that with the Cup of the Lord they might drink the Cup of
Devils, unless they preferred it to the other: Neither was it sufficient for
them to compare the Table of Devils to the Table of our Lord, unless after the
performance of their infamous Superstitions, coming to the Church of God, by
the Instigation of the Devil himself, they breathed out their abominable
Incense upon the most holy Altars of our Lord.

III. But, say you, all did not do these things, How it is a kind of Sacrilege
to hate the worshipers of God.
but only the Great and Powerful ones. Granting it to be so: Yet seeing, that
the richest and greatest Families fail not to draw the Mobb after them; you see
that the whole City is defiled by the Sacrilegious Superstitions of a few Great
ones. I suppose no body doubts, but that all their Families were like the
Masters of them, if not worse, for so they are generally. And seeing, that even
virtuous Masters have often very bad Servants, we may easily guess, what all
those Families were, since the wickedness of the Masters make those servile
Creatures worse, who were already bad enough of themselves. Well, I allow that
what I have spoke of, belonged only to some Great and powerful ones. But what?
were those things any whit less that were common to All, both high and low?
Such as Hatred and detestation of all holy Men: For it is a kind of Sacrilege
to hate the Worshippers of God. For, as if any one beats our Servants, he does,
in some sort, beat us by injuring our Servants, and so, if a Man's Child is
Chastis'd by another Person, the Father's Affection is a little uneasy with
the Child's Stripes: Even so, when any Servant of God is abused by any one, God
Himself is affronted; as our Lord Himself said to his Apostles: He that
receives you receives Me, Matt. 1^. v. 40.
and he that despises you despises Me. For our most compssionate and loving
Lord shares both Honor and Abuses in common with His Servants, lest any one,
when he injures a Servant of God, should only think, that he injured the Man;
when without all question, there is an Affront to God, joined with the Injuries
done His Servants; God Himself with the most tender Affection testifying as
much to His Servants in this wise: For he that Zachar* 2. v. 8.
touches you, touches the apple of my eye. That he might express the
Tenderness of His Love, he mentioned the very tenderest Part of Man's Body;
that so we might perceive most plainly, that God is as much injured with the
least Contempt offered His Saints, as the Sight of a Man's Eye is hurt with the
smallest Stroke. The Africans then abused and hated the Servants of God, and in
them God Himself.

IV. But it is asked, it may be, how this Hatred of theirs can be proved. The
same way that the Jews Hatred of our Savior, may be proved, when they said to
Him; Thou art a Samaritan, and have a devil; when they derided John 8. v. 48.
Him, blasphemed Him, spit in His Face, and grated their Teeth at Him. So that
our Savior Himself, who endured all this, says in the Psalms; All they that
see me laugh me to Psalm. 22. v. 7.
Scorn; they shoot out the Lip and shake the Head. And in another place: They
tempted and derided me, and gnash'd their Teeth upon Jerem. 20. v. 7, 8.
me. Just thus is the Hatred of the Africans toward the Monks, that is, holy
Men of God, proved; For they derided them, slandered them, railed upon them,
and abhorred them, and did almost every thing against them, that the impious
Jews did formerly against our Savior, before they came to the shedding of His
most precious Blood. But, say you, they did not put these holy Men to Death, as
we read the Jews did formerly; Whether they slew them or no, I know not; I do
not say they did. But however, this is an admirable Excuse, that they only
wanted that of the heathen Persecutors in them, which is the utmost Thing
persecution it self can do. Let us suppose then, that these holy Men were not
slain there. But what shall we make on it, when we see that they are not far
from Slaying of them, who hate them so, as to be willing to slay them;
especially since our Lord says: Whosoever hates 1 John 3. v 15. Matt. 5. v. 22.
his Brother without a Cause, is a murderer. Although they did not persecute
these Servants of God without a Cause. For who can say, they persecuted such
Men without a Cause, who differed from them in all the Particulars of their
Lives* and Manners, in whom they saw nothing of their own Conversation, because
the others were wholly devoted to God. And such diversity of inclinations is
the greatest cause of Discords; for it very rarely happens, if ever, that any
one can fancy that in another which he dislikes in himself. And therefore they
did not hate them, as I said, without a Cause, in whom they saw every thing
opposite and contrary to themselves. For they lived altogether in Wickedness,
these Men in Innocence; they in Lust, these in Chastity; they in the Stews,
these in the monasteries; they almost always with the Devil, and these
continually with Christ. It was not then without cause that that as unhappy as
ungodly people could scarce see within the Cities of Africa, and especially
within the Walls of Carthage, any one clothed in a long Robe, of pale
complexion, and who having parted with his thick and curled Locks was clipped
even to the Skin, without taunting and detestation. For if at any time any
Servant of God, either from the monasteries of Egypt, or the holy Places of
Jerusalem, or from some of the Sacred and Venerable privacies of the Desert,
came to that City on the business of his Sacred Office, as soon as ever he
appeared to the People, he received Reproaches, Slanders, and Abuses. And not
only that, but he was Scourged with the most wicked Scoffs of unrighteous Men,
and the deriding Hisses of the mocking Multitude, as with whips and lashes. So
that if any one, who was a stranger to the matter, should have seen it, he
would not so much have thought that any Man was abused, and made a laughing
Stock of, as that some strange and unheard of Monster were expelled and driven
out of the Place.

V. Lo, here is the Faith of the People of Africa, but especially of those of
Carthage. The Apostles might formerly with much more Safety enter the Pagan
Cities, the rude and uncivilis'd Crowds of those ungodly Infidels did much less
abhor their first coming and appearance. The People of Athens, although extremely
addicted to Superstitions, heard with Patience Acts 17.
that holy Vessel of Election, St. Paul the Apostle, discoursing of the Majesty
and Worship of one Only God. The Lycaonians also admired them so much, that
when they saw the Divine Excellencies, that were in the Apostles, they took
them to be more than Men. Acts 14. v. 11.
But in Carthage, the Servants of God could scarce appear in either Streets or
Lanes, without Abuse and base Revilings. This they do not think to be any
Persecution, because they did not likewise kill them. Highway Men truly have
such a Saying among them, as that they have given such a Man his Life, because
they did not take it from him. But in that City this was no Favor of the
Inhabitants, but of the Laws. For the Laws of the XII Tables forbid that any
man lose his Life, who is not first Sentenced to it. By, which we may perceive
in what Extraordinary Esteem our Lord's Religion was there, where the Servants
of God escape, because they are secured by a Pagan Law, from being knocked on
the Head by their Fellow Christians. And yet we wonder that they now suffer
under the Barbarians, when these holy Men suffered under Barbarians in
suffering under them. Righteous therefore Psalm. 1* 9. v. 137.
is the Lord, and just are his Judgments. For as the Scripture says, What they
have sowed, Gal. 6. v. 7.
that they reap. So that the Lord seems to have spoke of the Wickedness of that
People in Particular, when he says: Render unto her according Jerem. 50. v. 14,
15.
to her deeds, as she has done, do unto her; for she is lifted up against the
Lord. We may wonder then, or take it ill, that they now endure some Evils: But
those they have before done against God, are much greater, if according to the
difference of the Persons, it be duly weighed, both what they suffer, and what
they have done.

FINIS.
Some BOOKS of DEVOTION: Printed for Samuel Keble at the Turks-head in
Fleetstreet.
MEditations upon Living Holily and Dying Happily, with suitable Prayers at the
End of each Chapter. Written in Latin by Daniel Senert^^^ Physician.

A Weeks Preparation toward the Worthy Receiving of the Lord's Supper, etc.

The Holy Days, or the Feasts and Fasts, as they are observed in the Church of
England (throughout the year) explained: And the Reason why they are yearly
celebrated; with Cuts before each day.

Preparations to a Holy Life: Or Devotions for Families and private Persons;
also Meditations, Prayers and Rules, for the more pious observing the holy time
of Lent. By the Author of the Weeks Preparation to the Holy Sacrament.

The Spiritual Combat, or the Christian Pilgrim, Translated from the French,
Revised and Recommended by Richard Lucas D. D.

Contemplations on the Love of God, etc. with a Devout Prayer suitable
thereunto.

The Church of England man's private Devations, bebeing a Collection of Prayers,
out of the Common Prayer Book, for Morning Noon and Night, and other special
Occasions: By the Author of the Weeks Preparation to the Sacrament.

Death made comfortable, or the way to die well: By John Kettlewel.

A Companion for the Penitent and Persecuted; consisting of Directions and
Devotions for persons troubled in Mind: By John Kettlewel.

Divine and Moral Discourses on diverse Subjects.

The Mourner comforted, or Epistles consolatory; writ by Hugo Grotius, Perused
and recommended to the World by John Scot, D. D.

A Contemplation of the Mercies of God, in several most Devout and sublime
Thanksgivings for the same: Published by the Reverend Dr. Hicks.

Rules for the more Devout behavior in the time of Divine Service in the
Church of England.


