A SERMON PREACHED IN St. PAUL's Cathedral, AT THE ANNUAL MEETING OF THE SONS
of the CLERGY, Tuesday, December vii. 1697.

By GEORGE STANHOPE, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty.

Published at the Request of the Stewards.

To which is annexed, A Faithful Account of the CHARITIES distributed by that
Corporation for Fourteen Years last past.

LONDON, Printed for H. Bonwick, at the Red-Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard; and
R. Sare, at Gray's-Inn Gate in Holborn. School.

TO THE Most Reverend Father in God, THOMAS, By Divine Providence Lord Arch
Bishop of Canterbury, (Primate and Metropolitan of all England, and) President
of the Corporation of the Sons of the Clergy.
May it please your Grace,
BY condescending favorably to accept this Discourse, when published, to
promote the great End for which it was at first composed: That of exciting
Piety and Charity, in a Society particularly happy in your Grace's presiding
over it. A Society blessed with a Succession of Reverend and Religious
Prelates; but never more signally so, than now, that Your Grace has been
pleased to take it into your peculiar Care. The Eminent Station You have most
deservedly attained in the Church, is our Honor and Privilege: And the Luster
of so bright an Example is both a Pattern to Us, and a powerful Inducement to
All who are disposed to do us Good. The Members of this Body will be
exceedingly to blame, if They shall neglect to imitate (so far as their
respective Capacities permit) the Virtues of their Head; and Others, in whom
Mine or better Arguments may move Compassion to the Distressed Relicts of the
Clergy, will now no longer be able to excuse themselves, by the too common
Pretense of having their Charity stifled or mis-employ'd.

The Account of our Distributions for several Years past, is purposely annexed
to this Sermon, that the World may be convinced, how unjustly this Objection is
at any time urged against Us; and Your Grace's known Vigilance, and prudent
Zeal in Matters of this Nature are an absolute Security against its being so
much as pretended, while You have the Inspection of Us.

For this Reason, My Lord, when I found my self obliged to commit this Sermon
to the World, I presumed to endeavor the making it yet more serviceable to my
Brethren, by begging the Recommendation of Your Grace's Patronage. Though not
for this Reason only, since it gives me at the same time an Occasion of
thankfully acknowledging Your Grace's Favor to my self: Which I shall always
study to preserve, and express a due Sense of, as well by my hearty Prayers,
that Your Grace may long continue a Public Blessing to this Church and Nation,
as by my constant Care to approve my self in all possible Instances of Duty and
Respect,

My Lord, Your Grace's most Obedient Son and Servant, George Stanhope.
Dec. 13. 1697.
A SERMON Preached before The Sons of the Clergy.
Titus, Chap. I. Ver. 6. -- Having faithful Children, not accused of Riot, or
unruly.


THE particular Occasion of this Epistle, and the Capacity of the Person to
whom it is directed, are clearly contained in the Verse before my Text. For
this cause (says St. Paul) left I thee in Crete, that thou should set in
order the things that are wanting, and ordain Elders in every City, as I
appointed thee. A Power (it seems) there was even then of giving necessary
Directions, of reforming Things amiss, of constituting proper Officers to teach
and preside in Spiritual Affairs: A Power, by St. Paul's own Appointment lodged
in one Single Person, at whose Hands the rest should receive their Authority,
and to whom, as their Superintendent, they were accountable for the Use of it.
The Difficulty this Apostle was concerned to provide against, relates not to
the true Seat, but to the fit Exercise of this Power; nor was the Point in
question, Who had the Right of Ordaining; but, What Persons Titus, who was
confessed to have it, ought to look upon as duly qualified for this holy
Function, and most important Trust.

Of how great consequence it is to Religion, that They who minister in Holy
things should be Men of unblemished Character, The Reason of the Thing, the
Power of Example, and the Consent of all Mankind, abundantly convince us. Those
Impious Enemies to God and Goodness, who have not yet arrived at the hardened
Impudence of flying in the very Face of both, by levelling directly at the
Doctrines themselves, have always thought their wicked Ends well served, if
they could wound them by that oblique Glance, of fastening any notorious Scandal
upon that Order of Men who teach and press these Doctrines upon others. And so
again, All zealous and prudent Assertors of Piety have found it highly
necessary, that this should come recommended to the World by the Practice of
Them who undertake to propagate and promote it. For Truth and Virtue never
shine so bright, never persuade so successfully, never attract so irresistibly,
as when illustrated, adorned, enforced, by the Beauties, the Charms, the even
Demonstrative Evidence of a Holy Conversation.

Hence, I presume, St. Paul, designing to give Rules of Behavior for
Christians in general, begins with those, whose Actions are of greatest
Influence; and forbids, that any should be a Preacher or Governor, who was not
likely to be also an Ornament and a Pattern to the Church: That such should by
their Conduct in a private Capacity, show what might be expected from them,
when exalted to a Public. And in regard this Exaltation was for the Benefit of
others, a Single and Personal Virtue was not esteemed sufficient. The Care and
Abilities of such a Person to instruct and oversee the House of God as a
Spiritual Father, would best be measured by the Condition of his own Family at
home. And therefore to some other Accomplishments more immediately regarding
himself, enjoined in the beginning of this Verse, this is added here, as no
less indispensable, that every one admitted to the Charge of a Bishop, have
Faithful Children, not accused of Riot, or unruly.

It cannot surely be expected, that I should spend any part of your Time, or my
own, in proving the Pertinence of a Discourse from these Words to the Occasion
of our present Meeting. For, Who that thinks at all, can suffer himself to
doubt, whether the same good Principles, which these Fathers were obliged to
infuse, their Children were not equally obliged to cultivate and improve? And
if a Dissolute and Disorderly Family were a Bar to the Master from obtaining
Episcopal Jurisdiction, the Scandal reflected back upon Persons already
advanced to that Dignity, by Posterity by no means such as this Descent
requires they should be, must needs be granted, not a foul Imputation only, but
one of the blackest Instances of Guilt, which Men can draw upon their
Consciences; as will appear more fully by and by, when we come to consider the
Particulars I have to speak to from the Text.

As little, in the mean while, need I labor to prove, that this whole Assembly
of our Brethren are concerned in the Text, notwithstanding all of us have not
the Honor of deriving our Pedigree from the Fathers and Governors of the
Christian Church. St. Paul himself has removed this Objection, by prescribing
the very same Conditions to Deacons, (I. Tim. III. 12.) Let the Deacons (says
he there) be the Husbands of one Wife, ruling their Children and their own
Houses well. Now if the same Qualifications be requisite for an Inferior
Degree, it must needs follow, that that middle Order, which the Necessities of
the Church introduced afterward, must be under the like Engagements, in
proportion as the Quality of their Station, and the Importance of that
Parochial Trust reposed in them render such good Examples profitable.

This is so plain, so acknowledged a Truth, so well considered, no question, by
all in that Capacity, that I will not, I ought not to suppose Care or
Exhortation wanting in any of that Reverend Part of this Audience, to whom the
Words of my Text are more immediately directed: But since we all appear this
Day under another Character, and are to be addressed to, not as Heads, but
Members and Branches of such Families; Permit me, Fathers and Brethren of our
most holy Profession, so to order my Discourse upon this Subject, that the Part
we all have in the Text, by virtue of that Relation in particular, may be
distinctly understood. So shall They (if any such there be among us) who do not
attend to this Obligation to Holiness, be instructed or awakened, by the
Arguments I have to offer, and by the yet more powerful Example of that Piety
and Prudence in You, which ought to kindle their Zeal, and provoke their most
diligent Imitation.

I. Now in order hereunto I shall, First of all, fully and clearly explain the
several Qualifications prescribed in my Text for Children of the Clergy. II.
Secondly, I shall endeavor to enforce These by Motives proper for this
Audience especially to be persuaded by. III. And then I shall in the Third and
Last place, conclude with some short Address to some particular sorts of
Persons, more immediately relating to the Business of this Day.
I being with the Qualifications themselves, and They are Three. (1.) That the
Children of the Clergy be Faithful. (2.) That they be not accused of Riot. And
(3.) That they be not Unruly.

I. First, It is required that they be Faithful. By which is not meant in this
place that Moral Virtue commonly distinguished by the Name of Fidelity or
Common Honesty, but the Knowledge and Sense of those Principles, which above
all others tend most to make Men just and true; even the Belief and competent
Understanding of the Christian Religion: For in the early Days of this Epistle,
when the Gospel was but just setting out into the World, frequent Instances
were to be found, of nearest Relations differing in their Persuasions.
Accordingly many Rules I Cor. vii. I Pet. iii.
are given in Scripture for the mutual Deportment of Persons under such divided
Circumstances, that Diversity of Opinions might not draw on that worse and more
pernicious Consequence, of Uncharitableness, and alienated Affections, and
domestic Strife. Now in that State of the Church, though every private Christian
was not presently condemned, because he had not brought over the rest of his
Family, yet none was thought fit to be trusted with a public Charge in the
Church, who had not given this Proof of his Ability and Zeal in the Service of
the Truth. And hence St. Paul pronounces it necessary for every Bishop to have
Faithful Children, that is, such as were Believers, Converted to, or Educated
in the Christian Religion, Entered into Covenant with God by Baptism, and so of
that Number and mystical Body which are often styled in Scripture Phrase Ephesians.
i. 1. Coloss. i. 2.
, The Faithful.

We live not now, it is true, in an Age of violent Persecution, and the same
professed Opposition against the Gospel, by Jewish or by Pagan Superstition: But,
which perhaps is worse and more ensnaring, in the midst of Hypocrisy and
Artifice, of Schism and Faction, of Error manifold, and shameless Heresy, and
Vice triumphant: Among Men who deny and disgrace their Profession; Either
deforming the Truth by Additions of Man's inventing: Or else mangling and
maiming it by cutting off God's express Revelations; who interpret and
distinguish all Religion away, till they have brought it down to the Model of
their own Notions, and subvert the proper Grounds of all Divine Faith. And if
This be, as it but too manifestly is, our Case, you see, without any
Enlargement of mine, what Care is necessary to preserve those Principles, and
that Religion pure, which our Fathers of this Established Church have instilled
into our Minds: A Church, whose Diligence and Wisdom is particularly visible,
in her familiar, easy, and plain Methods of teaching early Piety; and by a
steadfast Adherence to whose Doctrines and Discipline, we shall take the best
Course of saving our selves from this untoward Generation.

Thus much then is our Duty in point of Faith, with regard to the loosest and
most vulgar Notion of the Thing, as it denotes, A Persuasion of the Truth, and
is opposed to false and dangerous Opinions. But if we take it, as we may and
ought, for that active Principle, by which all we do well is inspired,
invigorated, conducted, a great deal more must be understood requisite under
this first Particular: For how common and how fatal an Error do we find it, for
Men to receive, and readily acknowledge Doctrines, without attending as they
ought to their just Force and natural Consequences? To cry out with those Jews
of old, Jerem. VII.
The Temple of the Lord are These, and value themselves for Orthodox, while yet
their Lives are downright Heathen, and what they abhor to admit in Terms and
Form, is without any scruple out done in wickedness of Actions. Now this
Inconsistence of Practice and Profession is what true Faith always provides
against. It applies it self warmly to the Affections, draws them to a
Compliance with the Judgment, makes the Tree put forth Fruits agreeable to the
Stock, and suffers no Man to allow himself in things, which his sober and more
considerate Thoughts cannot but condemn. In short, it makes us Christians in
Deed, as well as in Name and in Word; and teaches us, that their Condemnation
is and ought to be double, who deprave the Truth with that worst of Errors, an
Ungodly Life. Do not imagine then, my Brethren, that the best Scheme of
Doctrines, how well soever understood, or constantly maintained, will be
sufficient, if they, who hold these, differ nothing in Practice, from the
Wretches who deny or blaspheme them. Religion must begin in sound Persuasions,
but it must never end there: For the true Intent of all Religion is to reform
Men's Manners; and in order to this, it begins with instructing their
Understandings, and giving them a right Judgment of Things. But better is His
Case, who out of honest unaffected Ignorance, does not his Master's Will, than
His, who knows, and does, nay, in despite of all that Knowledge, persists in
doing the Contrary. The Scandal upon these Primitive Bishops had been greater,
and the Objection against them more just, if they had suffered their Believing
Children to lead the Lives of Unbelievers. And therefore the Apostle adds Two
Qualifications more, no less essential to his purpose than the former; and
requires of Them, and in proportion of Us also, what I am now proceeding to
explain in the Second place, viz.

2. That they be not accused of Riot. The Word is of a large Extent, and
signifies all that Profuseness and Debauchery, which profligate and sensual
Wretches abandon themselves to. Vices deformed and unnatural, such as unman us
quite, quench and destroy that Light and Noble Principle which should
distinguish us from Brutes. Consequently, They of all others must offer the
greatest Violence to Christianity, which proposes to refine upon Reason, to
establish the Sovereignty of the Mind more firm, and carry Humane Nature
higher, by teaching it to aspire after Joys Future and Eternal, to abstract as
much as conveniently may be from Flesh and Sense, and improve the Rational into
a Divine Life. And if these Crimes, so just, so foul a Reproach to Christians
and Men in general, can be rendered in any Case yet more monstrous and
abominable, it will be done by that aggravating Circumstance, when We of this
Society shall prostitute our selves to Folly and Shame. For certainly, such
never more absolutely forget who they are, never more vilely stain their Blood,
than when Extravagance and Drunkenness, Sensuality and Lewdness, and any manner
of Impurity or Excess, become the Pollutions of that Degenerate Seed of Aaron,
who ought to be Holy to the Lord, every one of them.

Such is the Guilt of any notorious Instances in this kind: But, if I mistake
not the Apostle's Meaning, he requires somewhat more than the not being
Scandalous for such Vices; and by saying, we ought not to be accused of Riot,
expects that we should not lie under so much as the Censure and mere Imputation
of it. And this is a Difficulty indeed. For I need not say, how much the Clergy
and their Families stand like the common Mark for Censure and Detraction; how
the Debauched and Dissolute expose our very Character, and let fly their
Insolence and Scorn, their Ribaldry and wicked Wit at us, without regard to
God, or Truth, or Good Manners. But This is what we may very well despise. That
which seems of more melancholy consideration, is, that some who pretend a
Respect for the Order, and a Zeal for Religion, do yet upon difference of
Judgment, Personal Prejudice, or something yet less unaccountable, set
themselves with all the Artifice of a sly sanctified Malice, to observe our
Behavior, exercise a busy and envious Curiosity, asperse our Good, aggravate
our Evil, (for we are Men too, and subject to Evil with others) and what is of
indifferent Temper pervert to the worse Sense: condemn our most innocent
Liberties, and debar us those Comforts and Refreshments which God has
forbidden to none, and our Condition renders as necessary to some of Us, as any
others can pretend they are to Them; and, which is worst of all, The Faults and
Failings of a very few in a very numerous Body, these just good Men charge upon
all, and involve the whole Order in their Invectives, without any remorse or
distinction. And, Is it possible, you will say, for any Man to secure himself
against Accusation, in the midst of such professed Enemies, or treacherous
pretended Friends? Perhaps indeed absolutely to secure our selves it is not;
but thus much we may and are bound to do toward it: To make the best use of
the Difficulties such Men put upon us; to 2 Cor. xi. 12.
cut off all occasion from them that desire occasion, and by some decent and
modest Reserves in our Conduct, to minister no Matter for such nice and
delicate Judges of our Consciences to proceed upon. For there are many things,
which, though they do not bind us as private Persons, and considered purely
between God and our selves, yet as Members of a Christian Society, have a very
just and strong Engagement upon us. The Honor of Religion is greatly concerned
in Matters in their own nature Indifferent; and Innocence it self cannot
preserve the Reputation of the Careless and Indiscreet. When therefore St. Paul
has left us both Rule and Example, for that material distinction of 1 Cor. x.
23.
Things Lawful, and Things Expedient, it will become us to transcribe it
carefully in our Practice, by guarding our Conversation so as to give no
Offense, to create no Jealousies, but abstain, if possible, from every approach
to, and appearance of evil. And This I take to be the utmost Importance of the
Apostle's Expression here; that by Romans xii. 17.
providing things honest in the sight of all Men, and doing nothing that
misbecomes our Character, sober and impartial Men may not so much as accuse us
at all; and for the Rest, if They will still be malicious and unreasonable,
that 1 Pet. iii. 16.
They who speak evil of Us as of Evildoers, may find the Shame and Confusion
recoil upon themselves, while they falsely accuse our good Conversation in
Christ.

3. The other Qualification yet behind is, Thirdly, That the Children of the
Clergy should not be unruly: (...), not of stubborn and ungovernable
Disposition, such as no Rule can hold, no Discipline can bend. The beating down
this Spirit of Petulance and Pride is the Business of early Correction and
Restraint; but the keeping it under will require our continual Care, when
Ripeness of Years and Judgment has set us above the Reproofs and the Rod of
them who educated us. For, as of private Families the greater Societies are
compounded, so Domestic Vices and Virtues are the Seeds and Pledges of the
Civil. Here first the Mind is formed, and by the Impressions Men receive, and
the Habits they contract within doors, they grow up to be useful and orderly,
or turbulent and factious, when they appear upon the Public Stage. And if
Religion be considered, as in truth it is, the best and strongest Band of Union
and Good Government, it must be allowed, that nothing better agrees with our
Character, whose very Infancy was seasoned with it, than that Gentleness and
Treatable Temper, which disposes Men to Peace, and Obedience, Submission to
Laws, and Deference to Governors, and Superiors of all sorts. This makes them
humble and modest, respectful and inoffensive, contains them within their own
Sphere, and checks that forward and busy, that querulous and controlling
Spirit, which concerns it self with Matters too high for it. This secures Peace
in the State, and Conformity in the Church, the Breach whereof is in any of its
Members Scandalous and Sinful; but in those of our Education and Parentage,
it is plainly monstrous and detestable.

If then, (to conclude at length this first Head) If in the Days wherein we
live, a perfect and general Goodness be rather to be wished, than with any
probable Reason to be hoped for, let Us at least be careful that We add as
little as may be to the Measure of the Common Iniquity. Let Heresies and
Errors in Religion; Let Luxury and Dissoluteness of Life; Let Schism and
Sedition, Refrectoriness and Disorder be banished from the Tribe of Levi
however; and Let Their Faith and Manners, even speak their Pedigree, and
distinguish them from the common Crowd, as eminently, as their Function did
those venerable Ancestors, out of whose Loins they come. And This, I hope, is
now, and always will be seriously endeavored, at least you will confess it
ought to be so, when I shall have gone through my Second Head, wherein I
proposed,

II. To enforce the Apostle's Directions here by some such Motives, as are more
especially proper for this Audience to be persuaded by.

1. The First of These shall be The Advantage of Religion in general, of which,
as all sincere Professors are, so the Sons of the Clergy, who are so much
nearer related to it, should in an especial manner be, exceeding jealous and
tender. How greatly this is concerned, how much advanced or depressed by Good
or Ill Example, has been already hinted in the Beginning of this Discourse.
And reason good there is why it should be so; For, though Example be not properly
a Rule of Living, yet is the Pattern set by Others a great Inducement to Virtue
or Vice. When therefore Men so greedily catch at every thing that may
countenance the gratifying their corrupt Inclinations; when they are so
extremely industrious to argue themselves out of their Duty, and affect to
distinguish their Abilities by framing Cavils against the Christian Faith; What
Zeal should this excite in Us to oppose that Torrent of Irreligion? what Care
to convince the World, that what we profess is no formal Pretense, no Stratagem
to enslave Mankind, contrived or carried on by our designing Forefathers; but
such as we are serious in, and well content to regulate all our Actions by:
That what in impious Scorn they call our Trade, was not taken up merely to get
a Livelihood, and, when We and our Families had served themselves of it, then,
like other Callings, to be laid aside; but that, as our Pious Progenitors
dedicated their Lives and Labors to God, by the Direction of his own Blessed
Spirit, and chiefly in prospect of that glorious Recompense, which many of them
now enjoy in Heaven; so We, in a just and constant Sense of those Impressions
they have left upon us, esteem nothing so much our Concern, as the Continuance
and Promotion of that Purity of Faith and Manners, by which the Gospel of
Christ is vindicated and adorned. Nor need we suspect, that our Piety will
prove ineffectual to these purposes; for neither is Mankind so bad, so lost;
nor Our Number and Condition so inconsiderable, but that the Exemplary Virtue
even of this Society, may bring great Reputation to the Truth. And many, I
doubt not, would glorify our Father in Heaven, moved by the Brightness of that
Light, shining before Men, which the Orthodox Principles, and Good Works of
such a Holy Progeny might plentifully shed abroad in the World.

And now I am upon this Topic of the Credit of Religion, suffer me, I beseech
you, to recommend the Asserting that of the Protestant Cause, and our own
National Church in particular. Let our Adversaries of Rome answer, if they can,
the Tyranny they usurp over Consciences, in forbidding that to Some Orders of
Men, which Christ has left free to All. The Consequences of that imposed
Celibacy have been too filthy to be mentioned, and too notorious to be denied.
But let not Us furnish them with a more popular Argument than any they have yet
produced in this Point, by ministering just ground of Reproach upon our married
Clergy, from the scandalous Lives of their Posterity. I do not deny, but there
may be considerable Advantage in the single Life of Priests; But what our
Savior says, in a Case not very different, is certainly most applicable to
This, Mat. xix. 12.
He that can, and is disposed, to receive it, let him receive it: that is, It
ought to be left free, a matter of Choice and Convenience, and not made a
matter of Duty and Necessity. And it will lie, I think, in Our power to show,
that infinite Good may come from our Deliverance out of this unreasonable
Bondage. For sure All who consider Religion, and wherein the Promotion of it
truly consists, cannot but allow, that it is better served by educating a Race
of Men pious and devout, sober and temperate, and exemplary in their Lives,
honest and industrious in their Callings, conscientious and useful in their
several Relations and Capacities, (All which, humanely speaking, is a more
probable Effect of a married Clergy, than can be expected from any other
Condition of Men) Religion, I say, gets more by this, than by any Addition of
Gifts and Revenues, with which the Clergy having no Families of their own to
provide for, can ever pretend to enrich the Church.

2. A Second Inducement to the Virtues prescribed in my Text, is a pious and
due Regard to the Reputation of Our Parents: For it is not possible in this
Case, that the Guilty should suffer alone; and the Apostle, by ordering that
Children's Faults should obstruct the Father's Advancement in the Church,
plainly implies, that a great part of this Scandal must in reason devolve upon
Him. Solomon's Maxim, Prove. xxii. 6.
Train up a Child in the way he should go, and when he is old, he will not
depart from it, no doubt is true in ordinary Cases. The first Impressions upon
tender Minds enter so deep, that few ever out-grow them; but the Superstructure
of a whole Life is usually of a Piece with the Foundations laid at the
beginning. If then the Sons of Clergymen shall turn aside to false and
dangerous Doctrines, or grow careless of all Religion; If They shall let
themselves loose to Vanity and Vice; If They shall be disobedient to Laws,
disloyal to their Prince, or schismatical in the Church, the natural
Interpretation of such Enormities will be, that due Care was not taken in
seasoning them with good Principles betimes; that their Parents either wanted
Ability to settle them in the Truth, or Affection and Authority to engage them
in the early Practice and Love of Goodness, or by their own Example encouraged
these Impieties. Nor must we blame the World so much as our selves, for even
such wrongful Aspersions cast upon the Memory of our Ancestors. For Men in
their Judgments proceed upon the general Course of Causes and Effects, and that
which is untrue, may not always be unreasonable. It is our Duty therefore to
obviate the very Suspicions of this kind, not to expose our Reverend
Forefathers so much as to Censure or Question, nor load them with a Blame which
is not Theirs. For there are many Instances of this Injustice, many Exceptions
to the general Rule, many Dispositions so intractable, that the most exquisite
Pains are lost upon them, many so careless or so easily seduced, as either not
to retain, or not to regard the best Instruction and most prudent Discipline.
And this I ought, in somewhat more than mere Charity, to presume the Case of
Those, who miscarry, after living under the Education and Example of Parents,
consecrated to the more immediate Service of Almighty God. Supposing then such
graceless Children to bear but cold, if any Regard to the Honor of Religion,
the Church of which they are Members, or the Families whence they sprung, I
must try if one other Consideration still in reserve, which comes up closer to
them than the former, will quicken them up to their Duty, and that is,

3. Thirdly, The Sinsulness and Danger of a vicious Life, and the very grievous
Aggravation of Their Guilt in this respect above that of common Men.
Considering the Difficulties of Virtue, the Number and Strength of Temptations
with which every Condition of Life is closely beset, and the mighty, the fatal
Bias of Humane Nature toward Flesh and Sense, it cannot seem strange, that
they who enter the Lists naked and unarmed, should become a cheap and easy
Prey to their Spiritual Enemies. These Men, without any early Principles of
Virtue, commit themselves to the World, like a Vessel turned adrift without
Rudder or Ballast, and nothing but a Miracle can preserve them from being
carried about with every Wind of Doctrine, born down by the impetuous Tides of
Lust and Passion, and splitting upon the Rocks of Error, or Luxury, or Faction.
But when Men set out warned and well-fortify'd, rightly instructed what Course
to take, where their Danger lies, and how great it is, nothing less than
wretched Neglect, or wretched Perverseness can make Shipwreck of such Person's
Faith and good Conscience. For though, in the present depraved State of Nature,
the Balance do not hang directly even, yet when our Propensity to Evil has the
Counterpoise of Religious Education, the Advantage thenceforward enclines to
the side of Virtue. In such Cases, The Value of an Immortal Soul, The Awe of a
just and jealous God, One who sees all our Actions, and will bring every Secret
thing into Judgment; The Reasonableness and real Satisfaction, The present and
the future Advantages of a Holy Life; and the Easiness of continuing what from
our Infancy and the very first Use of our Faculties we have been all along
accustomed to, are Preservatives of infinite Efficacy and Consequence. Vice as
well as Virtue is confirmed by degrees; and Habits of any kind cannot be
contracted without much Time, and repeated Practice. A Man so tinctured before
hand must take great pains to be wicked; and offer mighty violence to his
Reason, before he can unlearn and unthink these things again. Imagine then what
Condemnation We must draw upon our Selves, by revolting from God after such
Privileges, for want of which the greater part of Sinners are undone. For God
will judge the World, not only according to Men's Actions, but according to the
Advantages and Opportunities each Man had or wanted, of doing well or
otherwise. And how happy a Difference has his Providence put in this respect,
between Us and many Others? They, many times, are utter Strangers to God and
the Truth, but We have been bred up in a long and intimate Acquaintance with
both: They have frequently the first Impressions still to make, We are only
concerned to see that Ours do not wear out: They have the difficulties of
beginning late, must bend Nature and Custom the contrary way, and strain hard
against the Hill; We have already gained the Rising-Ground, need only to
proceed smoothly, and do as We and our Fathers before us have ever used to do.
And if after all this, We start aside, or turn back again, We are of all
Mortals sure the most abandoned, and must expect to be the most miserable.
Beware therefore, my Brethren, lest that Reproach of our Savior, in a
Circumstance so like This that it needs no Application, be one day the Language
of God and your own Consciences, against any of You, Mat. xi. 21, 22.
Woe unto thee Chorazin, Woe unto thee Bethsaida; for if the mighty Works which
have been done in You, had been done in Tire and Sidon, They would have
repented long ago in Sackcloth and Ashes: But I say unto you, It shall be more
tolerable For Tire and Sidon at the Day of Judgment, than for You.

This is indeed the Condemnation of all Deserters from Virtue and Religion, but
to Us there is One Aggravation more, peculiar to Our Selves. For We are not
only brought up at the Altar, but sustained by it. As therefore the Substance
we expend upon Pious and Charitable Uses, is restoring to God his own, in some
respects more his own, than the Wealth of common Men: So the Misemployment of
our Possessions, our Parts, our Seize, to the Dishonor of Religion, is
not a simple Abuse, but the most perfidious Sacrilege. I am not, nor is the
World, insensible, how few of Our Fraternity have large Inheritances derived
from the Church's Revenues to answer for. The Scarcity of these Instances is
but too visible, and We are met this Day to supply in some measure, the sad and
pressing Necessities of many who feel and smart under the Calamity of a
destitute Widowhood, and friendless Orphanage. But still my Argument is good
for all those Advantages of Education, and the Opportunities of raising our own
Fortunes, which Our Parents usually strain harder to give Us, than any other
Men of equal Substance. The attending wholly to the Work of the Ministry; the
Hospitality and Charity expected and exercised in Preferments of better
Condition; and the too penurious Provision in most, will not leave much even
for these purposes. But be it much or little, still 'twas devoted to the
Service of God before, and as such received by our Ancestors. And if this
Society be, as I steadfastly believe it is, one of the signallest Examples in
the World, of a particularly indulgent Providence; if such a Number of Men of
any Race be no where to be found, of whom so many live in Honor, and Eminence,
and Wealth; or at least in Credit and Comfort, in so many several Professions,
from so very small Beginnings; these unusual Improvements, by the Blessing of
God upon such Men's own Industry, is an Engagement equal to any other, for such
Lives as may show forth his Glory. And this ought to render Our Virtue as much
above the ordinary Standard, as that Divine Favor and Bounty is, which so
amply makes Good to the Christian, what was spoke heretofore of the Jewish
Levi, that the Lord would be his Portion. And if it be not our Care, to
proportion our Piety to our Blessings and Supports, the Account will be but the
more inflamed at the last day; and the Pious Donations and Endowments designed
for the temporal Advantage of our Families, will then become an Article against
them to increase their Eternal Misery.

III. Suffer me but a little longer, while in the Third and Last place I
address my self particularly to some of This our Body, and the more immediate
Business of the Day. Which I shall do with all possible Brevity, and so
conclude.

1. And, First, To You the Worthy Stewards, and All who shall at any time
assist in the Charitable Office of disposing our Orphans and poor Children to
particular Callings in the World. You have heard what sort of Persons all
Children of the Clergy ought to be; and this I hope will prevail with You so to
place and settle them, as may never hazard the corrupting their good
Beginnings; much less the poisoning their Minds with wicked Principles, or
engaging them in vicious Practices. In order hereunto, the Choice of Masters is
of mighty consequence, Men who make a Conscience of ordering and instructing
their Families, as becomes Christians. For if you commit these tender Plants to
Men of Heretical or Erroneous Opinions, of careless or lewd Lives, of a
Factious, Schismatical, and ungovernable Spirit; what can you expect, but that
they should degenerate into the Vices of the Soil, and follow that Example
which is backed with Authority, till they become the direct contrary to that
Description given in my Text?

Again. As to the Callings themselves, I take the freedom to put you in mind,
of the Indecency, the Absurdity, the Danger of obliging such Children to the
Practice of those, whose Gains and Business lie in the Vanities or the Vices of
Mankind. If none of this Progeny ought to be so much as accused of Riot, it is
too hard a Temptation to make Riot their very Support. A meaner or more
Laborious Calling, which ministers to the Necessities of Living, and is of
general use to Mankind, would much better employ their honest though less
gainful Industry; and more become Your Prudence, and Their Birth. Remember You
are the Guardians not of their Fortunes only, but their Virtue; and Persons of
Your Extract and Education need not be told, that the securing That is the
truest Charity, and that there can be no Charity without it. Give me leave
therefore to exhort the fixing in your Minds upon these Occasions, that
Admonition of our Savior, Mat. xvi. 26.
What shall it prosit a Man, if he shall gain the whole World, and lose his own
Soul? or what shall a Man give in exchange for his Soul?

2. Next, I beseech my Brethren of the Laity to consider, not only their own
Personal Obligations to be such as my Text directs, but the Duty of continuing
the same Virtues down to succeeding Generations. For if the Men of Titles and
worldly Pomp value themselves upon the Achievements or Promotion of Noble
Ancestors, and are ambitious to tread in Their Steps; Why should not even the
distant Posterity of Men who have ministered to, and were highly beloved of the
King of Kings, retain an Equal Esteem for the Memory, an Equal Concern for the
Imitation, of their Learned and Pious Progenitors? Think not then the Virtues I
have been enforcing to Us of the first Descent, to be the Engagements of one
single Age; but be jealous for the lasting Honor of Your Families too,
provided this be with a holy Jealousy; and let it be remembered always, that
the Particular Honor of Our Race is Religion: This ought to be looked upon as
Our distinguishing, Our hereditary Character; and, like the Ensigns of other
Honor, to be delivered down to all Successions. A Character, not depending
upon Favor or Fortune to be maintained, but always ennobled by eminent
Goodness in any Condition, and never debased, but by the vile degeneracy of
wicked Principles, and wicked Practices.

3. Lastly. To Those, whose better Circumstances are capable of extending
Relief to our Brethren in Affliction, I must beg leave to recommend, nay even
to conjure them to a Bounteous Liberality. A Liberality suitable to the
Distresses of them that want, and the Engagements of them from whom I ask it.
These Engagements rise several ways; from the Consideration of Humane Nature in
general; from our being of the Household of Faith, and fellow-feeling Members of
Christ's Mystical Body; from that yet nearer Spiritual Kindred, contracted by
our mutual Relation to the Priesthood in particular; from the Necessities to be
supplied, so great as justly to reproach our unnatural hardheartedness, so
innocent and unavoidable, as not to be charged upon Vanity and Vice, but purely
the Work of Providence upon the needy Sufferers; from the Wisdom and Goodness
of that Providence, which by putting such a Difference between the Fortunes of
Men of like Descent, has by the Adversity of some furnished more abundant
Occasion for exercising the Virtue of others; from the Reasonableness of
thanking God for his Blessings, by enlarging our Bowels, and opening Our Hands
wider, where His has dealt them more sparingly. But These, and whatever other
Motives else, (and many Motives more there are) proper to excite our Charity,
have been so often, so justly, so piously, so successfully represented upon
this occasion heretofore, that I dare not so much as suppose it needful now to
insist upon them. And indeed this very Appearance proves it not to be needful;
for All You who come hither know, that Our Solemnities are not designed for
Luxury, or Pomp, but purely to maintain a holy Friendship, to promote Good
Works, to succor those whom Want and Shame will not suffer to come, and to
attain that Greater Blessedness of Giving than Receiving. All therefore that I
urge at present is, that a Just Proportion may be observed in our Giving, and
that some particular Circumstances may be considered, which at this time seem
to require a more than common Compassion. The expensive Burden of a Long War,
in which the Clergy and their Families have had a particular Share, calls for
larger Supplies. The Blessing of Peace, in which the Safety of our Church and
Religion is especially concerned, makes it reasonable to express our Thanks, by
the abundant measure of those Sacrifices with which God is well pleased. Nay, I
cannot forbear to add, that the very Place where we are now assembled is an
additional Argument to the same purpose. For what true Son of this established
Church can without a sensible Joy see the Beauty of this Cathedral, and the
Decencies of its Worship restored, after so many Years being buried in Ruins?
And how can that Joy better exert it self, than by contributing cheerfully to
the Support of those living Temples of the Holy Ghost, for whom I stand here an
Advocate? Thus shall we incline God to continue, to multiply, to sanctify his
Mercies to our Religion and Nation, to our Persons and Posterity, when every
Benefit we receive is made a fresh Incentive of our Zeal for promoting his
Honor, and the Good of our Brethren.

And may this be the constant mutual Effect of all God's Loving Kindness, and
all our Gratitude for it; that his Blessings may produce becoming Improvements
in Holiness, and increase of Good Works, and those Improvements may ensure a
perpetual Succession of more and greater Blessings. Particularly, May this pure
Established Church so often marked out for a Sacrifice, for ever stand and
flourish, the Impregnable Bulwark of the Reformed Religion, and the Joy and
Praise of the whole Earth: May there never want an able, orthodox, and pious
Clergy, to defend her Doctrines with their Learning, and adorn them with their
Lives: and may there ever flow from Them a Holy and Righteous Posterity, sound
and steadfast in the Faith, unblamable in their Conversations, orderly and
useful in their respective Capacities, zealous and rich in Good Works; In whose
Actions their Fathers instructions and Examples may live and shine, and force
even a crooked and perverse Generation to confess, that God is in them of a
Truth. And This is what not We only of This Society are more immediately
concerned to pray and to endeavor always; but a Petition of general Importance
to Religion, to which All Ours who love the Lord Jesus Christ in Sincerity and
Truth, will say, Amen.

FINIS.
THE Design of the Governors, in publishing this Account, is to let the several
Benefactors and others see how well the Charity contributed to the Relief of
the Poor Clergy-mens Families, has been bestowed by this Corporation.

A True Account of the Sums of Money distributed by the Governors of the
Charity for the Relief of Poor Widows and Children of Clergymen, for Fourteen
Years last past. Dated November 11. 1697.
Anno Dom. 1684. l. s. d. To the Widows of Twenty eight sequestered Clergymen
084 00 00 To Sixty eight other Clergy-mens Widows 101 10 00 For Binding
Children Apprentices 100 00 00 285 10 00 1685. To the Widows of Thirty four
sequestered Clergymen 099 00 00 To Ninety eight other Clergy-mens Widows 129
00 00 228 00 00 1686. To the Widows of Forty five sequestered Clergymen 135 00
00 To One hundred and twelve other Clergy-mens Widows 179 00 00 To Children of
Deceased Clergy men 020 00 00 334 00 00 1687. To the Widows of Forty eight
sequestered Clergymen 144 00 00 To One hundred thirty three other Clergy-mens
Widows 170 10 00 To Children ofDeceas'd Clergy men 029 10 00 344 00 00 1688. To
the Widows of Forty nine sequestered Clergymen 147 00 00 To One hundred fifty
seven other Clergy-mens Widows 206 10 00 To Children of Deceased Clergymen 045
00 00 398 10 00 1689. To the Widows of Forty six sequestered Clergymen 138 00
00 To One hundred sixty three other Clergy-mens Widows 257 10 00 To Children of
Deceased Clergymen 043 00 00 438 10 00 1690. To the Widows of Forty five
sequestered Clergymen 135 00 00 To One hundred sixty and six other Clergy-mens
Widows 258 00 00 To Children of Deceased Clergymen 057 10 00 450 10 00 1691.
To the Widows of Forty seven sequestered Clergymen 141 00 00 To One hundred
and ninety other Clergy-mens Widows 296 10 00 To Children of Deceased
Clergymen 074 10 00 512 00 00 1692. To the Widows of Forty four sequestered
Clergymen 132 00 00 To One hundred seventy four other Clergy-mens Widows 289
10 00 To Children of Deceased Clergymen 064 10 00 486 00 00 1693. To the
Widows of Forty sequestered Clergymen 120 00 00 To Two hundred and one other
Clergy-mens Widows 339 10 00 To Children of Deceased Clergy men 052 00 00 511
10 00 1694. To the Widows of Forty sequestered Clergymen 120 00 00 To Two
hundred forty one other Clergy-mens Widows 414 00 00 To Children of Deceased
Clergymen 055 10 00 589 10 00 1695. To the Widows of Forty one sequestered
Clergymen 123 00 00 To Two hundred sixty three other Cergy-mens Widows 438 00
00 To Children of Deceased Clergymen 055 00 00 616 00 00 1696. To the Widows
of Thirty nine sequestered Clergymen 117 00 00 To Two hundred seventy four
other Clergy-mens Widows 465 10 00 To Children of Deceased Clergymen 061 10 00
644 00 00 1697. To the Widows of Thirty sequestered Clergymen 090 00 00 To Two
hundred forty eight other Clergy-mens Widows 425 00 00 To Children of Deceased
Clergymen 068 00 00 583 00 00

Note, That there were many Petitions presented to the Court of Assistants,
this Year, from Widows and Orphans of Clergymen, whom our Stock was not
sufficient to relieve.

Note, That for Fourteen Years last past, the Stewards of the Annual Feast have
bound out Children Appentices every Year, with the Money collected on the
several Feast-days, which is not here reckoned.

We also think fit to represent the Condition of our poor Widows and Orphans
(whose Number increases daily) to the Compassion and Bounty of other
well-disposed Persons that have not yet been Benefactors.

We hope and desire, that it may have this effect especially on such of the
Governors as have not yet Contributed, and other our Worthy Friends, as well of
the Laity as the Clergy, that they may be moved thereby to allow what they
think fit.

All Persons who have already Subscribed, and such as shall please to give any
present Sum, or Annual Benefaction, are entreated to pay the same to the
present Treasurers, Nicholas Beeby Wine-Cooper, in Crutched-Friers, London.
Francis Levet Merchant, in Aldermanbury, London. Edward Fuller Seeds-man, in
the Strand, near Somerset House.
Or either of them, or the succeeding Treasurers, or to any Person deputed
under the Hand and Seal of any of them.

An Abstract of the CHARTER granted by His late Majesty King CARLES II. (of
ever Blessed Memory) for erecting a Corporation for Relief of Poor Widows and
Children of Clergymen: Dated July 1. 1678.
HIS said late Majesty having taken notice, That diverse Charitable Persons had
appeared very forward in Contributing to the Relief of such of the Widows and
Children of Loyal and Orthodox Clergymen as were Poor, and of the good Effect
the same had; and taking into His Princely Consideration, the Great Sufferings
of many of the Clergy in England for their Loyalty; was graciously pleased by
His CHARTER, under the Great Seal of England, to Ordain, Constitute, and Grant,
That the Persons therein named, and their Successors, (to be Elected as is
therein expressed) Be one Body Politic and Corporate, by the Name of, The
Governors of the Charity for Relief of Poor Widows and Children of Clergymen:
And that by the same Name they should have perpetual Succession, and be capable
to Purchase, Have, or Take Manors, Lands, and Hereditaments, etc. not
exceeding the Yearly Value of Two thousand Pounds, and all manner of Gods and
Chattels, and to dispose thereof: And by that Name to Plead and to be Impleaded
in all Actions, etc. And to Act all other Matters and Things, as fully as any
other Body Politic in this Realm can do: And that the said Governors should
have one Common Seal.

And His said late Majesty did further Grant to the said Governors, That there
should be a President, a Vice President, Three Treasurers, and Forty two
Assistants, Members of the said Corporation, and that they, or any Five of
them, (whereof the President, Vice President, or one of the Treasurers to be
One) should be called The Court of Assistants of the said Corporation, who
should have the Management of all the Affairs of the said Corporation, and
should make Laws and Ordinances for the good Government thereof, as well in
matters concerning the said Corporation, as in Electing of Officers, and
Management of their Revenues; and Impose Penalties on Offenders against the
said Laws, and recover the same to the Use of the said Corporation.

And therein it is appointed, That the Persons thereby Constituted, to be the
first President, Vice President, Treasurers and first Assistants, should
continue in their respective Places until the Second Thursday in November 1679.
And from thenceforth, until there should be a new Choice made of Persons to
succeed them.

And that on every Second Thursday in November for ever (or oftener if there be
occasion) there should be a General Assembly of the said Governors: And the
major part of the Members then present, might Choose a President,
Vice President, Three Treasurers, and Forty two Assistants, who should continue
for the Year following; and that in case of the Death of any of the said
Officers within the Year, others might be chosen at a General Assembly into
their Places.

And that such General Assembly might Elect such other Person or Persons to be
Members and Governors of the said Corporation, as they, or the greater part of
them should think fit.

Provided, That the President, Vice President, and Treasurers abovenamed,
should, before they enter upon their Places, take their Oaths before the Lord
Chancellor, faithfully to execute their respective Trusts: And that all other
the Members of the said Corporation, before they act as Assistants, and all
succeeding Presidents, Vice-Presidents, Treasurers, Assistants, and all other
their inferior Officers, should take the like Oath before the Persons by the
said CHARTER empowered to Administer the same.

And that the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, Lord High Chancellor of England,
Lord Archbishop of York, or Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England, Lord
High Treasurer, Lord Bishop of London, Lord Almoner, and the Lord Mayor of
London for the time being, should be Visitors of the said Corporation, and
settle all Differences about the Government thereof, and touching the
Disposition of their Revenues.

The better to promote this Pious Work, it was thought fit hereby to Publish
this Great Favor of His late Majesty, and to set down the Forms of
Subscriptions; and also how any Legacy in Money, or Houses and Land, may be
given by Will to the said Corporation.

I of do promise to pay to the Governors of the Charity, for Relief of Poor
Widows and Children of Clergymen, the Sum of Sterling, on or before the
Witness my Hand.

I of do promise to pay to the Governor of the Charity, for Relief of Poor
Widows and Children of Clergymen, the Sum of Sterling, at the two usual
Feast-Days of the Anunciation of the Blessed Virgin Mary, and St. Michael the
Archangel, by equal Portions during The First Payment to be made at the next
of the Feast Days abovementioned, that shall happen after the Date hereof.
Witness my Hand.

This may be Inserted among LEGACIES in a WILL.

ITem, I Give and Bequeath unto the Governors of the Charity, for Relief of
Poor Widows and Children of Clergymen, the Sum of Pounds, to be paid to one of
the Treasurers.

For Devising HOUSES or LANDS.
ITem, I Give and Devise unto the Governors of the Charity, for Relief of Poor
Widows and Children of Clergymen, and their Successors for ever, all that my
Message and Lands Situate and being in

All Persons who have Collected any Money for the said Corporation, are desired
to pay the same to the aforesaid Treasurers, or one of them, or to give an
Account thereof to Mr. Thomas Tyllot, the Register of the Corporation, at
Doctors-Commons, London; to whom all Persons who shall please to promote this
Charity; or have any thing to communicate concerning the same, may direct
Letters as occasion shall require.

Advertisement.
THE Christians Inheritance. A Sermon at the Funeral of the Reverend Gabriel
Towerson D.D. late Rector of St. Andrew Undershaft, and of Welwin in
Hartfordsheir; Preached at Welwin, October 21. 1697. By George Stanhope, D.D.
Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty.

Printed for M. Gillyflower, H. Bonwick, R. Sare, and M. Wotton.


