A SERMON Preached before the RIGHT HONORABLE THE Lord Mayor, AND Court of
ALDERMEN, AT THE GVILD-HALL CHAPEL, Jan. 20. 1683.

By John Standish, D.D. Rector of Therfield, and Chaplain in Ordinary to HIS
MAJESTY.

Published at the Desire of the LORD MAYOR and Court of ALDERMEN.

LONDON, Printed by H. Hills, Jun. for Robert Clavell, at the Peacock in St.
Paul's Churchyard. 1684.

TO THE Right Honorable Sir, HENRY TULSE, Lord Mayor, And to the Court of
ALDERMEN.
My Lord,
IT was somewhat late before I received your Commands, (for such I ever account
the Desires of my Lawful Superiors) which is one reason that this short
Discourse has been so long in coming to your Hands.

And I shall not trouble your Lordship with any other Apology, because it was
not framed for, nor fixed to any Solemn Time, or Special Occasion, but with an
equal respect to every Day in the Year, or rather to all the Days of our Lives.

Indeed, the Subject thereof is Common, but not therefore to be despised, more
then any other Common Good: more then our Common Prayers, Common Salvation, or
our Common Faith, which the Apostle elsewhere calls our Precious Faith, (or
Honorable, as the Greek imports.) And the more Common things of Public use
and consequence are, they should be so much the more Precious in our Eyes.

It Is true the Scene is laid in LONDON, yet not so confined thither, but it may
reach the remotest parts of the Nation; for this little Mapp presents you with
a Transient view of the present State, and Morals of all ENGLAND.

England! another Canaan, for Beauty, Wealth, Prosperity, Peace, and Plenty
(...) all good things that a Loyal Heart can wish and yet, (I wish I could not
truly say) another Canaan too, for Ingratitude, and forgetting GOD their
Savior. The happiest Nation under Heaven at this hour, and only miserable in
this, that we do not know how Happy we are. For we may fairly challenge all
Europe for a more Gracious KING, a more Glorious CHVRCH, a more Peaceable
STATE, a more Gentle and Easy GOVERNMENT, more Just and Wholesome LAWS, and
yet we cannot, way, we will not see it. We are unthankful still, and still
murmuring, and know not what we would have, unless we would be Angels before
the time.

This provoking ill Humor has of late spread it self throughout the Kingdom;
and therefore my Arguments against it are so General, and take in all sorts and
degrees of Men, all that would be thought good Christians, or good Subjects;
the very Dissenters themselves are not a little concerned therein, if they
please to read them without that false Glass of guilty Prejudice.

However they deal with us for doing our Daty, and speaking the Truth in Love,
so long as we have Patronage and Protection from your Lordships Chair, and that
Honorable Bench, we shall never think our Labor lost, or unrewarded.

The time has been, when Men in Your Lordships High Place, would not endure
sound Doctrine, having itching Ears. Thanks be to GOD and his Vicegerent, that
time is now past, and the Case so well altered, that sound Doctrine, and
sincere Loyalty will as easily go down, and pass muster in the City, as at
Court.

With my hearty Prayers for the long continuance of GODS Blessing upon Your
Lordship, your Loyal Brethren, and the whole Government of this City, I am

My Lord, Your Lordships most Obedient Servant, John Standish.

Deuteronomy. VI. part of the 11, and 12 verses. -- When thou shall have Eaten, and be
Full, then beware lest thou forget the LORD. --
PRosperity and Adversity are the great Theaters of Humane life; the two famous
Tests to prove what Spirit and temper Men are of, for it is an Error of the
Vulgar only, that all is well, when their Gold and Silver, Flocks and Herds,
Corn and Wine increase and grow upon them; Wiser Men find it as hard a task,
(at least) to command and manage a headstrong, flowing fortune, as to keep
themselves from sinking, and being desperate, when they are reduced to their
lowest Ebb, last Shifts, and Wits end. It is an old Question amongst the
learned Moralists, which of the two Estates is most entangled with dangers and
difficulties? the great cry is out upon Prosperity, who by her killing Smiles,
treacherous Enchantments, and stealing Flatteries, Effeminates, and Robbs the
Spirit of its due force and vigor; She basely betrays the Fort by letting the
Enemy in at a Postern, and easily conquers those daring Heroes who never turned
their backs of visible danger: Whom no Adverse affair, not Death it self, in
all its frigthful change of shapes, could ever daunt, or dash out of
Countenance.

And indeed it is a Truth which the Oracles of GOD have vouched to us by no mean
Instances to put it beyond all dispute. For whilst Gideon was a private man,
the least in his Fathers house, and threshed Wheat by the Wine Press, he was a
very Good man, and a great Favorite in the Court of Heaven; the Text says,
that the Angel of the LORD visited and communed freely with him, as a Man does
with his Friend; but then, when once He grew Great, and was fleshed with a
miraculous victory over the mighty Kings of Midian, the same man was not the
same; for he abused his prosperous fortune, and made him an Ephod of the
Earrings taken in spoil, and put it in His City Ophrah, and all Israel went a
whoring after it, which thing became a snare to Gideon and his house. Thus one
bewitching Dalilah subdued the invincible Sampson, when all other Arts and Arms
of Palestine could neither withstand, no, nor find out his strength. Before I
was troubled I went wrong, says King David: And -- It is good for me that I
was afflicted; that set him right. But then again when He sat still at
Jerusalem in a profound Peace, and had nothing else to do, He fell into those
two grievous Sins which cut him out work for Repentance all the days of his
Life. His son Solomon, the wisest Prince that ever swayed That, or any other
Scepter under the Sun, yet stands charged with very great folly toward the end
of his peaceable Reign; for living in all ease and pleasure, and having no
manner of Enemies, but those most deadly ones of his own house, his False
Friends, he unadvisedly suffered them in his Old declining Age to tempt him to
Idolatry. To add no more, Israel in general who found the land of Egypt, that
house of Bondage and hardship, a wholesome School of Virtue, made the blessed
Land of Canaan a Nourse of all Vices, a mere Land of forgetfulness; which Moses
the Man of GOD here having a clear prospect of, he lays in early caution
against it in these words, -- When thou shall have eaten, and be full, then
beware lest thou forget the LORD.

For our due handling of these words I shall endeavor,

1. To state the genuine sense and full importance of the caution.

2. To back and enforce it with some proper Considerations.

3. And Lastly, To tender some short directive Rules how we may best reduce it
to Practice.

I begin with the First; And

1. To forget the LORD, imports in general, to contemn the power of Religion,
and with that old Fool, to say in ones heart, there is no GOD, no Judge, or
Judgment to come; at least to deny Him that Honor and Worship due to His Holy
and Reverend Name, and give it to Another; to put ones trust and confidence in
Creatures or Idols, the works of God's, or of Men's hands, more then the
Creator, and cast his Commandments behind ones back, as if he owed no duty
either to God or Man: It implies a stupid habitual neglect of Gods Service,
which is the great business, and chief end of our Creation; when a Man
immerseth himself so deep in the fruitless cares, the frothy Vanities of this
World, and the sinful Lusts of the Flesh, that GOD is not in all his ferious
thoughts, that is, not in one of them All; but he lives and dies an Atheist,
Epicure, Idolater, or ungodly Infidel, and so plungeth himself, headlong into
that dreadful Doom in the Psalm, The wicked shall be turned into Hell, and all
the Nations that forget GOD.

2. To forget the LORD signifies here more especially, not to recount and
value, not to be duly sensible of, and truly thankful for his past or present
Mercies, and Deliverances; not to lay them to heart, and call them to mind: not
to suffer them to have their proper effect upon us, when his own beloved and of
late distressed People forget GOD their SAVIOR, who brought them out of Egypt
with a high Hand, and stretched out Arm; who led them through the Wilderness,
and fought all their battles for them, drowning some of their Enemies in the
depth of the Sea, and routing all others at Land, and planted them in a good
Land, in another Paradise; even the Land of Promise; a Land of Corn, Wine, and
Oil, a Land flowing with Rivers of Milk and Brooks of Honey. For them to Rebel
and lift up their heel against Him merely out of wantonness, and too much Peace
and Plenty, were beyond all Parallel, if not all Pardon also; for, as the Royal
Prophet observes, the merciful and gracious LORD, has so done his mavelous
works, that they ought to be had in Remembrance. And therefore,

3. And Lastly, To discover the full strength and force of the Caution, we must
fly to that usual figure in Rhetoric, whereby much more is implied then is
expressed, like that of the Prophet, Can a Woman forget her sucking Child, and
not have compassion on the Son of her Womb? It is impossible in Nature: That of
St. Paul, I am not ashamed of, that is, I glory in the Gospel and Cross of
CHRIST, albeit the wise Greeks account it Foolishness; or that of the holy
Psalmist; -- If I forget thee o Jerusalem, let my right hand forget her
cunning; if I do not remember thee, then let my tongue cleave to the roof of my
mouth; the sweet singer of Israel wishes his curious right hand useless, and
his graceful Tongue disabled from chanting any more Hallelujahs to his Harp, if
(instead of forgetting) He does not prefer Jerusalem's distress above his own
chiefest Delight and Joy. Then beware lest thou forget the LORD: That is, be
sure that thou remember to love and honor him in the day of thy Prosperity for
then thou have all the reason in the world, and the; strongest obligations
imaginable, to praise and glorify his holy Name, and that not in Word and
Tongue only, saying GOD be thanked, the LORD be praised; (though that sounds
well) but indeed and in Truth also, as that dying Roman said to his Friend,
Quae voluerit meminisse, quae mandaverit exequi. -- To remember his Will and
Pleasure, and do all his Commands. For to be truly thankful to GOD is certainly
to love him: and if ye love me, keep my Commandments, says the LORD.

And yet after all, that Jeshurun waxing fat in her fresh Pasture, grew sturdy
and restiff, and Kicked against her Feeder, and most shamefully forgot the Lord
her Redemer, appears by the Writings of the Prophets, as a Cloud of Witnesses,
as also by those stupendous Showers of Judgments which fell upon them,
according to the Predictions of those Prophets; and lastly by their utter
Extirpation, and Destruction, their being Blotted out of the List of Nations
for Crucifying the Lord of Life, and Killing their only Lord and Savior. For
to this day they are under a Curse, they are Vagabonds over all the Earth, they
are no People, they have no Laws or Government, no King in Israel, neither God
nor Man.

Which things happened unto them for Ensamples (says St. Paul) and are written,
that is, left upon Record Chiefly, for our Admonition upon whom the Ends of the
World are come.

And therefore lest we should tread in their Ungracious Steps, and forget the
Lord when we are full fed with his Manifold Mercies; lest we should tempt
Christ, as some of them also tempted, and be Destroyed of the Destroyer; lest
our Iniquity also should be our Ruin; I proceed,

2ly. To back and Enforce this seasonable Caution with some proper Arguments or
Confiderations, that it may make the deeper Impression upon all our Spirits.
And,

1. Consider we that by forgetting GOD and growing careless of his Laws in the
midst of our temporal Felicities, we provoke the best Friend we have to become
our professed Enemy. For they draw not GODS Attributes to the Life and Truth,
who allow him only Mercy for a Penitent, and no Justice at all for a
Presumptuous Sinner. They are more False Prophets then Balaam himself, who
would stretch the Words of his Parable to signify, that GOD does not behold,
but Connive at all manner of Iniquity in the beloved Jacob, because he saw none
there at that time, that cried loud enough for Speedy and Public Vengeance,
which is the undoubted meaning of that Place. No; GOD is not so fond of any of
his Servants, as to be in love with their Follies: The dearest Child he has
must taste of the Rod if he deserve it. David was indeed a Man after GODS own
heart in other things, but yet his Murder and Adultery were Damnable Sins for
all that, as he had found by woeful Experience, if he had not carefully washed
them away with his own Penitent Tears, more Richly Influenced with his
Redeemers Blood. St. Peter was a Man of Undaunted Courage, and most forward
Faith at other times, but yet there is no excuse to be made for his denying his
Lord and Master, and that with an Oath, saying, I know not the Man. Israel was
once GODS Elect peculiar People of all others, Engraven upon the Palms of his
Hands, and kept as the Apple of his Eye, (so tender he was of them) but all
this while their Sins were written with a Pen of Iron, and the point of a
Diamond, says the Prophet, to show that the Memory of them was lasting, and
they so far from being winked at, that they were more surely and speedily
punished, then if they had been Aliens. Witness the many Woes and Threats,
Judgments and Curses discharged upon them at diverse times; such as Pestilence
and Famine, Blasting and Mildew, the Sword, the Fiery Serpents, the Heavens
sometimes as Iron, the Earth as Brass. Because my People has forgotten me, I
will scatter them as with an East Wind before the Enemy; I will show them the
Back, and not the Face in the day of their Calamity, Jerem. 18. And again, I
will be unto them as a Lion, or a Leopard, as a Bear bereaved of her Whelps: I
will Rent the Cawl of their hearts, and Devour them like a Lion, says the
LORD, Hos. 13. All this to that Beloved People. So that however Vain Men may
fancy, that their being of the Number of GODS Elect, and in a State of Grace,
is a sufficient Patent or Privilege to excuse their Sins, yet the Case is
clear that they deceive themselves herein, although they be (if 'twere
possible) of the very Elect. For be he Jew or Christian, be he Saint or Angel,
that Forgets his GOD, he thereby Forfeits his Favor and Friendship, and
Incurrs his utmost Enmity and Wrath; he loses the Light of his Countenance,
and makes the Sun of Righteousness appear to him in no other, then that
Terrible shape of a Consuming Fire.

This Argument alone, methinks, should be strong enough to drive the Nail home;
beware lest thou forget the LORD, for thereby thou will make him thine Enemy;
and a Potent Enemy he is, worthy of all thy fear: For he can Torment thee with
a thousand Plagues here, and then Cast both Body and Soul into the Nethermost
Hell hereafter.

2. Consider that to forget GOD when we are Daily Laden with his Blessings,
would argue us extremely disingenuous, and basely Ungrateful, the most
detestable Name of all others; call me that, and call me worse if you can. A
Name that Nature it self abhors: For, not to mention the Stork (that Famous
Symbol of Piety,) very Lions and Wolves, Tigers, and Bears are Civil and
Grateful to their own Parents and Relatives. Only the Noble and Rational
Creature that calls himself Man, in this exceeds the very Beasts that Perish:
That he is sometimes Ungrateful to his own Kind, oftener to his King, but most
of all to his most Gracious GOD. Insomuch that the Almighty does, as it were,
Challenge the whole Creation to Match or Vie with his Unworthyness, Isa. 1.
Hear O, Heavens, and give ear O Earth! for the LORD has spoken; I have
nourished and brought up Children, and they have Rebelled against me. The
Complaint is of Israel still, the peculiar People, and may it be peculiar to
them alone; but let it not be told in Gath, nor published in the Streets of
Askelon, that we should ever deserve that unnatural Brand and most odieus Name
of Ungrateful Christians.

3. Consider the Uncertainty of our present happiness and Halcyon Days of Peace
and Plenty. For GOD lets no Leases for Lives in dispensing his Temporal
Blessings: We are all but Tenants at will, and may be turned out of all, and
Beggared at his Pleasure. There is, ye know, a natural Vicissitude of things:
The whole World is ever turning Round, Day and Night, Summer and Winter have
their mutual Courses. The most Glorious Day is shut up with a pitchy Night, a
dull, uncouth Winter usually follows the most Sprightly Summer; nay, the Sun is
often sequestered of his Noon day Glory by a little Cloud appearing first like a
Man's hand, but afterward showing it self to be more like the Hand of him who
sometimes makes Darkness his Pavilion, though he ever dwells in in accessible
Light. A very lively Emblem of the Instability of all humane affairs, which
admit of as much change of Weather, as Nature it self. For there is seldom one
Sunshine day of Peace, but a Cloud rises in the midst on it, from whence the
Thunder and Lightning of Fatal Wars breaks out of a sudden; however Night is
drawing on, and will at length overtake us, and then all our Joys and Comforts
will suffer a more continued Interruption, perhaps be totally Eclipsed by
Trouble and Misery. Nulla sors longa and, dolor est voluptas invicem cedunt,
brevior voluptas, says the excellent Tragedian; no condition of Life here, not
the best is fixed and immutable: Sorrow and Joy take their turns, (there going
commonly a whole day of Trouble to one hour of Joy) and the Stars in their
Courses fight either for, or against us according as we demean our selves.

Beloved, our Memories are treacherous indeed, if we have quite forgotten the
severe Discipline GOD has of late Years exercised upon this City, and this
Sinful Nation, Chiefly by the devouring Sword, the Raging Pestilence, and the
Consuming Fire; for all which we ought to lay our hands upon our Mouths, and
acknowledge them as just Judgments upon us for our forgetting GOD in the midst
of our Jollity. Those Storms (through Mercy) are at present over, and we in a
very great Calm; we enjoy more Temporal Felicities (if we would see it) then
even heart could wish, as the Psalmist speaks; though we hear of nothing but
Wars, and Rumors of Wars abroad, yet we are not troubled at home, (bating our
own groundless Jealousies, and Superstitious Fears) farther then to sit down
quietly under our own Vines and Fig Trees, and Reap the Fruit of GODS Blessing
upon our own Labors. GOD has marveluosly turned our great Captivity long ago,
as the Rivers in the South: He has ever since given us Beauty for Ashes, The
Oil of Joy for Sorrow, and the Garment of Praise for the Spirit of Heaviness.
All the danger is, lest we also grow sick of Isreal's Disease: Lest we become
proud and presumptuous, wax wanton, and careless of paying him due Returns, and
so make our own Tables a Snare, our very Blessings a Curse. GOD does not intend
to kill us with his Kindnesses; but, if we know not when we are well; if we
cannot wield and manage a full and prosperous Estate; if nothing but a Furnace
will melt us into Tears, and purge away our Dross and Follies, (wretched Dust
as we are!) into the Furnace we must go again even until seven times: The Scene
will certainly alter in a Moment, the Wheel of things turn quite round, and the
end of our sorrows, be far worse then the beginning. Then let not the Pride of
thine Heart deceive thee, O Man, and say not thou, who shall disturb me when I
am at rest in my Possessions, or Transgressions; for though thou exalt thy self
as an Eagle, and set thy Nest among the Stars, yet thence will I bring thee
down says the LORD Obad. v. 4.

4. Consider the many solemn Vows and Promises we offered up to GOD in our
distress, to make our Prayers for deliverance effectual and succesful; for they
will all be required at our hands, as so many further Obligations we freely
laid upon our selves, not to forget the LORD in the day of our Rejoicing.

It is the Natural effect of Adversity to make Men consider, and grow Wiser: To
come to themselves, to their right Wits, like the Prodigal reduced to his last
husk. No Lectures of Morality make such Impression, as those that are backed
with the Rod of Affliction; no Law compels and forces its own Execution, like
that of Necessity, which makes us say proverbially, that has no Law against
it. I remember Lactantius observes well that the very Pagans themselves when
Scourged with depopulating Wars, Contagious Diseases, unusual droughts, great
Rains, Inundations, Storms, Hurricans, or any other grievous public Calamity,
fall down on their knees presently to the GOD of Heaven, and invoke him
earnestly and unanimously, with Prayers and Tears to divert and remove his
Judgment from them. To which he adds, if any of them be reduced to extreme
Poverty, and forced to beg his Bread from Door to Door, he makes use of the
Name of GOD, as the most powerful Argument of his Petition, beseeching Men for
GODS sake to have pity and Compassion on Him. But then (as he goes on)
postquam metus deser uit etc. So soon as ever they are well rid of that danger,
Fear, or Misery, they return in whole Shoals to the CONVENTICLES of their Idol
Gods, and Sacrifice all the time of their Prosperity to them; Lact. Lib. 2.
Divin. Instit.

These were professed Heathen, but what shall we say, if some pretended
Christians are not ashamed to Act the same part, or something very like it.

I might bring in the Merchant in a Storm, who will offer freely even to half,
nay all his Estate to Charitable uses (rather then fail) provided he may have
his Life for a prey: Skin for Skin will he venture for that; but when that
danger is once over and he got safe a Shore, he forfeits his Vow, and cheats
his GOD, by making some three-penny Largess or pitiful Alms to serve the turn.

Or I might tell you at large of the Woman in Travail, who goes for a pure
Saint, a Seraphick Votress, whilst the pangs of Death are upon her, but soon
after her more formal then hearty Acknowledgments, she utterly forgets that
great, though common Deliverance.

But I shall only instance in the Man thrown into a Malignant Fever by his own
intemperance, when the Disease grows upon him, and begins to prey upon his
Vitals, insomuch that his ablest Physicians halt between two opinions, whether
he will Live, or Die, and himself finds small hopes of Recovery from within;
Oh! what Sighs and Groans are fetched from the very bottom of his Heart! what
earnest Prayers, what loud indefatigable Expostulations proceed out of his
Mouth! what an importunate Suit does he present before the Throne of Grace,
that he may be spared a little, little while, and have space to Repent before
he go hence, and be no more seen! what Golden Promises does he freely pass,
what warm Protestations does he make of his speedy Conversion! Oh that I could
but escape this one approaching Fiery Fit! I would most certainly become a New
Man; I would Correct the dangerous Errors of my Ways, Contemn the little Lusts
and Vanities of the World, and serve my GOD with all my Heart, with all my
Soul, and all my Strength. Sweet JESUS grant me but this one Request, try me
once more; and if I be not henceforth a Reformed Man, I ask no more Mercy; then
let me die the Death!

Truly the Man speaks well, and who would not believe that he is in Earnest?
considering they are (for ought he knows) the last words he is to say. Well!
the Almighty hears, and is overcome by his importunity: He restores his Health
and Strength beyond all humane expectation, and renews the Lease of his Life
for many, very many Years. -- Now is it possible for this Man to be worse then
his word? I am afraid -- No; I am ashamed to tell you, but rather refer it to
your own daily and sad Experience. Yet thus much I must needs say, that if
after all this, he Relapse into his former wicked Life, he is Unjust, as well
as Ungrateful to his GOD, and the last Estate of that Man must needs be far
worse then the first. Which that it may never be Verified of any of us, I
befeech you let us call to mind the time past, and seriously reflect upon the
Sacred Resolutions we took, and Solemn Promises we made to GOD in our extreme
distress, and be careful with DAVID to pay all our Vows unto the most High.

5. Lastly, Consider we the true Reasons that moved GOD to turn our Captivity,
pluck down Enemies and Oppressors, and Redeem us from a more than Egyptian
Bondage; to renew our former Peace and Happiness, Restore our lost Religion,
and Ancient Government, and give us Princes as at the first, and Judges as at
the Beginning. For that Success must needs infer a good Cause, is a Turkish
fallacy, which yet of late, has much imposed upon the Christian World. Indeed
it is an old mistake, a Branch of Natural Pride in Men, to attribute Victory
and Deliverance to their own Sword, their own Merit, Prowess, and Gallantry,
whereas they belong to a far different Cause. But Moses has long since
determined against them in the Case of Israel: Deuteronomy, 9.4.5. Speak not thou in
thy heart, after that the Lord thy GOD has cast thine Enemies out before thee,
saying, for my Righteousness has the LORD brought me in to possess this Land,
but for the Wickedness of these Nations the Lord does drive them out; -- Not
for thy Righteousness, or for the Vprightness of thine heart, (as he goes on)
for thou art a stiff-necked and gainsaying People. Thus we ought not to impute
our many and great Blessings, and particularly the late Wonderful Deliverance
of Our Gracious KING, His only Royal Brother, and all His Most Loyal Subjects,
out of the hands of those Bloodthirsty Men, to our own Righteousness, but to
their Malicions Wickedness; to GODS mere Mercy to us, and Exemplary Justice
upon them, for their studied Marders, Solemn Perjuries, Notorious Sacriledg,
formed Conspiracies, unwearied fowlest Treasons, and (which is the Spring of
all their Motions) their damnable Hypocrisy in making a mock of all Religion.

So many and such weighty reasons we have to remember HIM in the day of Peace
and Triumph (who remembered us when we were in trouble: and saved us so lately
when we were upon the very brink of Ruin) and then especially to beware lest we
forget the LORD.

To close up this Second general, it is a thousand pities that fair weather
should do any harm; that when the Sun is most prodigal of his wealthy beams,
and spends his richeft influence to maintain Natures Glory, he should most tan
her Beauty, and scorch her Hair; yet that it is so sometimes every drought can
witness; but it is not to be attributed to any blemish in the Sun, that bright
Eye of the World, whose Rays are ever the same, apt to cherish and preserve
Life, but rather to the indisposition of the matter before him, and thus it is
no fault in the Sun of Righteousness, that his healing beams do ruin and
destroy us; that is the great imperfection of Men, who make their own Happiness
their Misery, and turn their very Mercies into Sins, such Fools and Brutes they
are, that they will be sooner affrighted into a sense of Religion by the Sword
of GODS Judgments, and the black Rod of his Fury, then woed and courted to his
service by those winning Arguments, his Golden Scepter of Love, and Staff of
Comfort. Wherefore that we fall not afleep in security when the World smiles
upon us, and all our endeavors are crowned with success, I come

3. In the Third and Last place, to ^ender you some (...) Directions, how we
should manage a full and prosperous Estate, how we may best reduce this useful
caution to practice. And

1. When thou thy self art happy, don't trample upon, or insult over them that
are in misery, but pity them in some degree at least, and if they suffer
unjustly, do thy utmost to relieve, and help them out; the Disciples thought
they asked our LORD a very subtle Question, -- Did this man sin, or his
Parents, that he was lorn blind? but he tells them, neither, as they meant; he
was not born Blind because he or his Parents were greater sinners than other
men; but for this reason, that they (and others) if they were not blind, might
(...) the glory of GOD in our Saviors working his cure, in the opening of his
Eyes, and men are generally apt to make false constructions of GODS private
Judgments in this Life: where they see them fall heavy they presently cry,
there dwells a more then ordinary ^^^^er, as if there were no after-reckoning,
no Judgment to come; from whence they think themselves obliged to help GOD to
torment him, and fancy they (...) Him service, when they hate, scorn, kick, or
bu^^et him, and heap more coals of fire upon his wretched Head; such fools are
they, and ignorant of the mysterious Tracts, and hidden methods of the Di^ine
Providence, whose ways are all unsearchable, and (...) Paths past our finding
out. How were his Wise and Rational Friends mistaken in the case of poor ^ob?
They concluded from his many and great sufferings, that he was the most wicked
wretch, and noto^^ous Hypocrite under the cope of Heaven, when by GODS own
Testimony, he was the most perfect, up^^ght man in all the Earth, and it stands
upon ever^asting record, that in all this (whether temptation or trouble
brought upon him by Men or Devils) in all this Job sinned not, nor charged GOD
foolishly; wherefore let no Man judge before the time, considering there is
another World, that will set all things right and straight, which; his Folly
thinks go somewhat oddly and awry in this, as we would that men should do unto
us, so let us do unto them, in their straits, and pressures, their
difficulties, and distresses, for if thou should despise or oppress thy poor
Brother, when thou art rich, and full, it may be thou would oppress a JOB, a
man of most admirable virtues, and highest Integrity; and thy weights and
balances are both false, if thou measurest his sins by his sufferings. Suppose
he be a very Judas, and known convicted Traitor; yet what is that to thee? Who
made thee a Judge? It is enough that the Law takes public Justice of him; all
this while the Gospel requires thee not to exclude him out of thy private
Charity; besides (ye know) it is very foul play to strike a man when he is
down, and basest Cowardice to trample upon either a Living Dog, or a Dead Lion.
That Is the First,

2. When thou prosperest in the World, and live according to thy Hearts
desire, then be sure to let, Adversity be the frequent object of thy retired
thoughts and meditations. All things indeed go well with thee to day, but boast
not thy self (says Solomon) of to morrow, for thou know not what a Day may
bring forth, Quamobrem omnes cum res secundae sunt maxim, tum maxim meditari
secum oportet, quo pacte advorsam aerumnam ferant, pericla, damna, exilia, etc.
says the comedian; willing us not to be secure in our prosperity, but then
learn to expect and bear any evil tidings, or adverse fortune. Holy Job (now in
his Wealth and Grandeur) took an excellent course for this, and well worthy all
our imitation, when his Children had been long Feasting together by turns from
house to house, the good old Man went and Offered burnt Offerings according to
the Number of them all; For it may be (said he) my Sons have Sinned, and Cursed
GOD in their Hearts. Though he knew of nothing but a Lawful Recreation, yet, it
may be, for fear of the worst, he went to his Devotions, and offered Sacrifice;
as knowing there would be no hurt in that however, but that it might prevent
some unseen Mischief. And indeed common Prudence may instruct us all to look
for Mischances, and expect Troubles before they come, that when they do come,
we may be upon our Guard to receive them. After Wit is for none but Fools to
brag of; a Wiser Man takes his Measures by looking (...), as well before, as
behind him, and so is able in time to take out the Sting of an Evil before it
can reach him. Then, think of Losses, when you thrive the most, of Wars in
Peace, of Want in Plenty, of Grief in Joy, of Sickness in Health, and of Death
it self in the midst of Life, and then no Change of things can surprise or harm
you, but (as St. Paul observes) all things shall work together for good to them
that love GOD.

3. Use thine abundance with all Moderation, abuse it not to gratify thy
craving Lusts, and Insatiable Affections. for they are absurd and unreasonable
men, who think they do not truly rejoice in GODS Blessings, runless they may
Sacrifice them by wholesale to their greedy Appetites; who madly fancy they
cannot be happy, if their desires be held to any Stint or Bounds. hence comes
all their excess in Eating and Drinking, and other Lawful Pleasures: They think
to take their fill of Enjoyment, and glut themselves with the Marrow and
Quintessence of all Good things, and so mistake the Quantity for the Quality;
whereas in truth, all Earthly Pleasure Commends it self in nothing more, than
as it is more seldom-used. Therefore, if GOD has given thee Increase of Corn
and Wine, use them with all Caution, and Sobriety. Ear not too greedily of the
Corn: For a full Belly is most unfit for Devotion and Contemplation; besides
that it breeds ill Humors, and endangers Health. And drink not too freely of
the Wine; for though it be good and Generous, and move it self aright, yet too
much thereof will Intoxicate; it will drown thy Reason and Parts, enervate all
thy Faculties, and Powers, and make thee forget, or deny the Lord thy GOD, or
take his Holy Name in Vain. And for all other lawful Diversions take that one
Counsel of the Wise, experienced King, Prove. 25. Have thou found Honey? Eat so
much thereof as is sufficient for thee (and no more) lest thou be filled
therewith, and womit it up again. There Is no other way but that, to prevent a
Surfeit, whether in Body or Mind. But you will say perhaps, what must I them do
with mine Abundance? For after this rate of Dieting my self, I shall never live
to spend it. Why, yes; there is another, a more excellent way to be rid of the
overplus to better advantage; and that shall be my

4. Direction. Be Hospitable, Charitable, and free to Communicate what thou
can well spare, to Relieve the Wants and Supply the Necessities of others.
For GOD has made thee Rich on purpose to be their Steward and Almoner, and (as
little as some Men heed it) will one day expect a good Account of that
Stewardship. It is the Misers great mistake to think at his Choice and Liberty,
and purely in his own Power, whether he will expend his Superfluities in good
works, or no; for the Law of Justice requires, it of him, although, from the
manor, end, and some other circumstances, we commonly call it Charity. That
Fool in the Gospel needed not to have put himself to so much trouble and Charge
in building his Barus bigger, to lodge his plentiful Crop; there was Barn-room
enough in the World, if he would have seen it; for, as St. Austine observes,
the Bellies of the Poor are GODS Granary.

If therefore thou have any Bread to spare, cast it upon the Waters (as Solomon
advises that is, venture it among the Multitude, rather then fail) though
never so troublesome and unworthy, and thou shall find it again after many
days; for however Men may be ungrateful, yet GOD is not unrighteous to forget
any work or labor of Love. St. Paul bids us Charge them that are Rich in this
World, that they be Rich in good Works, ready to distribute, willing to
Communicate. And again, that, as they have Ability, and Opportunity, they do
good unto all Men, especially to them who are of the Household of Faith; he
means chiefly those, that Minister at the Altar, and daily watch over your
Souls. For this is pure Religion, and undefiled before GOD, whereby a Man shall
not only preserve himself Innocent and impregnable to all the Temptations of a
full and prosperous Estate, but also make himself Friends of the Mammon of
unrighteousness, who when he fails here, may receive him into those
everlasting Habitations of GOD and his Son JESUS CHRIST, and all his Holy
Saints and Elect Angels.

5ly. and lastly, For yet thou lackest one thing, without which all other
directions will prove Vain and Useless; and that is this: Resolve, with
Penitent David, to give thy self unto Prayer; To implore the Grace and
Assistance of GODS Holy Spirit day by day, whose proper Work and Office it is
to Sanctify all Conditions of Life to us: As well to keep us down when we
begin to be Elevated into Pride, as to buoy our Spirits up, and be our
Comforter in extreme Distress.

Prayer is that powerful Engine whereby the Kingdom of Heaven suffers
Violence, and the Violent take it by Force: whereby Mortal Men wrestle with the
Immortal GOD, and will not let him go till he has blessed them. That Sedulous
Importunity which once extorted Justice from an Unjust Judge, must needs be
ever prevalent for Mercy with the Righteous Judge of all the Earth.

I had almost said that (under GOD) the KING ows his late never-to-be-forgotten
Preservation, in a great Measure, to the Prayers of the Church offered up daily
on his behalf; that GOD would save him from all his undeserved Enemies, whose
tender Mercies are Cruel, and their very Prayers and Preachments are of Cursing
and Lies, as the Psalmist speaks.

I Am sure his Martyred Father, of ever Blessed Memory (whose Innocent blood
perhaps GOD is making especial Inquisition for at this time) has left us an
useful Note to this purpose, amongst other his Sacred Relics, which I shall
crave leave to Read you in his own Royal Words.

One of the Greatest Faults some Men found with the Common Prayer Book, I
believe, (faith that Great, Good and Just Man) was this: That it taught them to
Pray so often for me; to which Petitions they had not Loyalty enough to say AMEN,
nor yet Charity enough to forbear Reproaches, and even Cursings of me, in their
own Forms, instead of Praying for me. (...). chapter 16.

The Text is so very plain that it needs no comment, (were I worthy to make it)
and therefore so I shall leave it. Mean while (to return to may own Argument,
from this Digression, I could not fairly avoid) Who art thou O Man, who upon
any score, can trust to thine own strength? It will betray, and fail thee; it
is no better then a broken Reed, for though the Spirit may be sometimes
willing: though thy Judgment be convinced, and thy Will also made a Proselyte
to resolve upon this, or that good work, yet it is often left undone, in regard
the Flesh is always weak.

-- Video meliora proboque. Deteriora sequor -- is the natural Man's true Motto;
it is all he can justly pretend to, to commend Virtue in the notion, but
condemn it still in his own Practice; and I must observe it to you for a great
Truth (however some may seem to Preach quite the contrary Doctrine, or at
least, not to press this so often, nor so earnestly as they should) That, Men's
trusting to their own natural Powers, and not regarding, nor duly asking GODS
special Grace and help, (as if they meant to bid despite to his Holy Spirit) is
one main, if not the only reason of their persisting in their old impieties,
and particularly, of their abusing and forfeiting their temporal blessings, and
hazarding their hopes also of Eternal Life. For thus says the Lord GOD, Jer.
17.5. Cursed be the Man that puts his trust in Man, or makes Flesh his Arm!
Be it the Man himself, or any other mere Man, all is a case; he is still
accursed.

Wherefore let no Man living boast of his infirmities, nor Glory in his shame;
let us not presume upon our own Strength (or Weakness rather) nor magnify the
powers of Nature in derogation to the Grace of GOD, by which alone we must be
saved; but rather let us with Holy David (as in utmost duty bound) Make the
LORD our only confidence, the most High GOD the Rock of our Salvation.

And forasmuch as the Eternal Son of GOD our Savior has solemnly, and freely
promised us, that whatsoever we shall ask the Father in HIS NAME, He will give
it us: and particularly this inestimable and necessary Gift of his Holy SPIRIT,
recorded for our great and endless comfort, St. Luke 11.13. and St. John 15.16.
(which by the way, is the true reason that all our Public Prayers run in that
Name and Style, and are shut up, and bidden GOD speed for the sake and merits
of JESUS CHRIST OUR LORD.)

Let us humbly, heartily, and incessantly mention the Holy Name of JESUS before
the Throne of the Eternal TRINITY; that GOD would vouchsafe his Holy SPIRIT to
dwell in all our Hearts, to help our Infirmities, and lead us into all Truth,
to subdue our natural Pride, and sanctify all our Mercies Spiritual and
Temporal; that we may use this World, and not abuse it, and ever be careful,
lest in the midst of the many and great Blessings we now enjoy, we should
forget the LORD, the Author of them all; that so he may not be provoked to
forget, but may in much mercy remember us, in that day when he makes up his
Jewels, and may bind up our Souls in the bundle of Life; which GOD grant for
the same JESUS sake, our only Redeemer, to whom with the FATHER and the Holy
GHOST, Three Persons, and One GOD, be all the Power and Glory, Praise and
Thanksgiving, now and for ever more, AMEN.

FINIS.

