THE Spiritual Chemist: OR, SIX DECADS Of Divine Meditations On several
Subjects.

By William Spurstow D. D. Sometime Minister of the Gospel at Hackney near
London.

My meditation of him shall be sweet, Psalm. 104. 34. LONDON, Printed in the
Year, 1666.

The Preface to the Reader.
Christian Reader,
THe natural Sun in the Firmament, whether we consider the vastness of its
Globe, or the splendor, and dazzling of its light, or the variety and
beneficialness of its motion, and operations, attended with duration, and
perpetuity, is the top, and Prince of all inanimate beings. Yet the least
insect that the most Artificial Microscope can discern life in, is able to
weigh against it, and in genere entium is more perfect. How excellent a being
then is the Soul of man, that does not only outstrip the Sun, but all other
sensitive things, even those that have the most lively (...) as the Philosopher
calls them, which the Orator translates Virtutum simulacra, the faint
imitations of Reason. Now, among the many demonstrations of the excellency of
the Humane Soul, the operations of it do abundantly witness for it, and among
them, to go no farther, the operations of those two supreme Faculties, the
Understanding and Will, in apprehending, and loving God. These are more
excellent than the Suns enlightening the world. I choose to instance in that,
because the ornament, beauty, life of all things depend upon it; for to what
purpose were these things made, were it not that the light of the Sun made them
Proxime visibilia? Yet this is nothing in compare with the Soul of man, in its
apprehending and loving God. This speaks the Subject endued with a principle
not to be transcended (but only in degree) in perfection. You cannot have more
persect operations in heaven in kind, though you may in degree. Angels, and
Souls made perfect, it is true, do this more entirely, more perfectly, more
constantly, and unweariedly: But in knowing God, and making choice of him, in
loving, and cleaving to him, the souls of holy men do according to the capacity
of the present state communicate with them.

Now these two have a mutual aspect on each other, and the happy Conjunction of
Knowledge and Devotion speak the Soul Regular and Uniform in its Acts, and to
be in a good measure of spiritual health. When Knowledge does guide and steer
as it were Devotion, and Devotion does in a kind of gratitude warm, and inflame
our Knowledge; which otherwise is apt to chil, and grow cold, as experience
shows in many knowing Creatures, in whom the waters of the Sanctuary have put
out the fire. And as the separation of the love of God from the knowledge of
God breeds swarms of hypocrites in the visible Church, so the separation of the
knowledge of God from affection to God, begets a strange kind of wild fire in
the Spirits of men; and while they have Zeal for God (which is nothing but
Affection in its full stature, got out of its swaddling clothes) without
Knowledge, they are but like a Ship without a Rudder or Ballast, that is a prey
to every Pirate, and if it miss them, is carried by its own levity, and the
winds impetuousness, on its own ruin. When therefore the blessed Spirit comes
to work in the soul, he first enlightens the mind, and sets open, (...), the
gates of light, and then the Will echoes to the Understanding, and certainly
that action is most congruous to so excellent a being as the Soul, when the
Mind takes its aim before the Affections shoot. For otherwise, though the
action does prove materially good, yet it is no more commendation to him that
does it, than to him that shuts both his eyes, and then contingently hits the
mark. The apprehensions and affections of Man's Soul, being thus regulated, and
conjoined, do admirably fit and dispose for that we call Meditation: (I mean
Divine and Christian Meditation,) which is the offspring of a good heart, and
a good head. How excellent and sweet an employment this is, none can know, but
those that have tasted it, and have the skill to spiritualize all objects, and
providence, turning every thing by a Divine Chemistry, in succum, and
sanguincm, into spirit and nourishment. Making the Word, and Works, and
Ordinances of God as so many Rounds to climb up to a more clear Vision, and
fervent love of God; and then descending make these a clear Mirror wherein
they see themselves, and to be like windows, to let in that light into the
private and dark recesses of the heart, that discovers the hidden works of
darkness; and so provokes the soul to endeavor a more through purgation of it
self, which it is the more easily exstimulated to, being under a deep sense of
Gods purity, and a serious affection to be like him. But this duty of Divine
and Spiritual Meditation, is a thing that in this degenerate age the generality
of Christians are utter strangers to, and very hardly brought to the practice
of. Though there was never any time wherein the thoughts and minds of men were
more busy and active, and the helps, inducements, and encouragements more
plentiful and cogent, and the calls and invitations on Gods part both by his
Word and Works more frequent. Yet it is a work of inexpressible difficulty, to
bring these subtle and volatile acts of the mind to a fixation, to make any
considerable immoration, upon those subjects that are in themselves of the
greatest worth, and to us of the nearest consequence. Now considering, that man
is by God made a providential Creature, and does naturally cast up damages, and
gain, and project the obtaining the one, and avoiding the other. I have
therefore thought it worth the enquiring what should be the reason of their
awkness to this beneficial employment; and considering that Knowledge and Love
are the two things that dispose for it. I have thought it might arise from some
defect in these, and sometimes thus argued. Surely, this wisdom is too high for
fools, that men that have incrassated their souls, and almost extinguished this
Divine Lamp by shooting themselves so deep in sensuality and worldliness, that
they who have wellnigh forgot their God, their own being, their happiness,
should ever be able to mount so high as Meditation. But when I considered, how
stupid or sottish soever these men were by debauchery, or pretended to be
through want of education, yet they were ingeniously wicked, and could in their
minds lay Schemes of villainy, and that their fantasies were always minting
and forging wicked devices, which they could in their second thoughts revise
and polish, and, like a Second Edition, make the Model to be Auctior and
nequior, larger and more wicked. I then saw no excuse for them that had wit
enough to be wicked, but none to do good. And therefore looking further into
the ground of it, I found it arose from the second, want of love to God, which
is the stream that sets all the Wheels of the soul a going; the true Spring of
motion, and which strongly conglutinates all the musings of the soul. For to
this work of Meditation there is not so much required vastness of knowledge, as
rectitude of affections, not so much the head of a Scholar, as the heart of a
Christian. Neither is it hindered by any thing more than by carnal, and low
affections, which both dim the eye of the understanding, and clog the appetite
that it cannot hunger after, or relish these heavenly and spiritual dainties.
Besides, there is this further reason to be given, That this part of Religion
is inward, and removed from the eyes of Spectators. Now, if it be difficult to
bring men to a form of Religion any further than advantage, interest,
conveniences, and the like, will stand with it, (which is the true reason many
cry down all Forms, because they feel their lusts pinched by them.) Much more
difficult is it to bring men to those inward, and vital acts of Religion, which
would not only imprison, but mortify, not only check and stunt, but eradicate,
and exterminate sin. As for that Religion which the Apostle Peter calls, (...),
The hidden man of the heart. And the Apostle Paul, (...), being a Jew inwardly,
(...), the circumcifion of the heart in the Spirit; and in another place,
(...), The new Creature, which stands in a self exinanition, in conversing with
God, in a separation from all ungodliness, and unrighteousness, in conforming
our selves to Christ, and living in obedience to his Laws. These are looked on
by a great many, but as Platonic Ideas, or as an Eutopia, or the Philosophers
happy man, things that are entia rationis, the dreams of melancholy fancies,
and not worth the troubling our selves about.

How much do we then owe to those noble and generous souls, that in charity to
our ignorance, and dullness, have given us a proof of the employment of their
minds, and have so freely unbosomed themselves to us, in their Meditations, and
Soliloquies? In which we have the most free and genuine workings of their
souls. These being the honey in the combs of their labor and industry.
Certainly, Christian Reader, thy soul cannot but cleave to fuch persons, whose
drift and design thou see it is to exalt God and set forth his Divine
Perfections. Do thou not feel a strange alteration in thy soul, while thou
do but air thy self at those flames that heated their souls? Do thou not
find thy heart glowing within thee, while thou art conversing with their
labors, and while light is reflected upon thee from their discourses? Can
thou look upon such as less than Cherubims conversing in the flesh? Is any
Oratory more piercing, and ravishing, than the meditation of God in his divine
perfections, communicating himself to us fully and freely in the best way
through his Son? Is any zeal more commendable than that which is spent in
consuming the lusts of thy own heart? Or any desires more justifiable than the
pantings and thirstings for him that thirsted after our thirst? Or does any
time run off more smoothly, and which thou can reflect upon the spending of
with more comfort, and satisfaction, than that which is spent in such holy
flights of the soul? O blessed work and employment, and happy are those souls
that do continually live in it.

In this sweet, and blessed work, was this Reverend Author much employed. Some
tastes of which are here offered to thee, though but a part of what he
intended, ten Decads at least being what he had proposed to tender to public
view, but God took him to himself before he had completed them.

The other part is but a begun Discourse concerning the Wiles of Satan, I may
say but begun, for where the Author gave it his last hand, thou shall find an
Advertisement in the reading of it. It being made up out of some Notes of his
own, as will appear to the Judicious; it is the same thread, but the tying it
in knots is some disadvantage; yet as in an Organ or Virginal, the Pipes and
Strings are not of the same extent or dimension, yet all serve to make the
melody. So those short and little heads compiled of the Authors materials, will
I hope make the work somewhat harmonious, though it is every way short of what
it should have been, had the same hand that began it finished it. A work it is
however of very great concernment, and every way becoming a Minister, and a
Christian, to understand his Enemy, to discover his Art, and Policy, to unmaske
and bring this great Deceiver into open view, Ut praemoniti, simus praemuniti,
being forewarned, we may be fore-armed. The thoughts of this good man were
much upon this subject, in subserviency to his Lord and Masters end of coming
into the world, (...), that he might loosen, or dissolve the works of the
Devil; and he the rather revived this work now, which he had several years ago
discoursed of, not only because he found himself more improved, and fitted for
it; but because he saw the necessity of the Church required it. The spirit and
courage of Christians being almost spent in intestine quarrels, and broyls,
they needed the alarm of this common enemy, to reduce them to order, and unity;
and some demonstrations of his craft, in endeavoring to do that by policy, and
underhand devices, he could never effect above board with all his power and
strength.

But before I close this Preface, I cannot but speak a few words of the Author,
Dr. William Spurstow, who as he lived beloved of his friends, so he died of all
his friends much lamented, not so much for their own, as the Public loss of
him, being a person of such an excellent spirit, that he was many ways useful,
and serviceable. I shall not say any thing of his abilities of mind and
judgment, since it appears by those things extant of his, that he was none of
those Praecocia ingenia, Apuleius speaks of. Those ratheripe Wits, as one calls
them, that are fair in the blossom, but fail in the fruit. But he held such an
excellent tenor in his Ministerial labors, that the more wise and judicious
any were, the more they were delighted in him, and cleaved to him. But there
were some graces in him in higher and more eminent degree, that may speak him
an example to us that survive. Such were:

First, His profound, and real humility, and that is a root-grace that has
many in it; and this is the true ascension of the soul: For as the first step
downward was by Pride, so the first step to heaven is by Humility. And as man
did descend in ascending to be like God, so we ascend in descending to be like
Christ in Humility. This was the glory of this Author, though he had singular
worth, yet he always expressed a singular humility, not only in denying those
things, which ordinarily men make the fuel to pride, none of which he wanted,
but in condescending to those of low degree, if he might but be serviceable to
them. Which was apparent in that freedom of access, and converse with those,
between him and whom there was otherwise a great disparity, especially in that
humbleness of mind he showed after any large receipts, or performances, wherein
he showed himself like Moses, though his face shone he knew it not.

Secondly, His Charity both in giving and forgiving, the latter of which, as it
is most noble, so it is the most difficult, and that which is peculiar to
Christ Disciples. As for the former, though the World might expect more visible
and pompous demonstrations of it, yet that charity is best, which, like the
waters of Shiloh, run softly, and the more private in this case the better. Our
Savior would have our good works shine, and not blaze. Now, that he was not
deficient in this, may appear in that he was no hoarder, nor left he any Sums
behind him; by which it appears plainly, that he lived to the utmost (if not
beyond) the extent of his In-come, which also in vulgar estimation was double
to the reality.

Thirdly, To this may be added his Meekness, and Patience, the natural result
of Humility, in which graces he was eminent, being seldom or never transported
by passion, or if at any time those passions which do repugn that grace did
arise, they soon had a counterbuff from the divine principle was in him. He
always had an innocent, and grateful cheerfulness in his Converse, that
rendered it very acceptable, being very free from that morosity of spirit which
many times is like a cloud in a Diamond, and like a Curtain before a Picture.
And yet as the sweetest Rose has its prickles, and the industrious Be (that
makes the healing and mollifying Honey and Wax) her sting: So he had a sting of
holy Zeal, which wisdom had the conduct of, that it was not put forth upon
every trivial provocation; he knew when, and where, and how far to show it; and
in Gods Cause his Zeal was better tempered, than, like a brittle blade, to fly
in shivers, and wound bystanders; but it was true metal, and would cut deep,
so as to leave impressions behind it.

Fourthly, Add to this his peaceable disposition, a great ornament to
Christianity. It was his principle, and practice, not to have that by
contention he might have by peace; and for peace sake, though he durst not sell
the truth, yet he did often C^dere de jure, depart from his right, and that, Ne
Evangelium detrimenti aliquid capiat, for the Gospels sake, that it might not
suffer by him. He loved those of a peaceable spirit, and was grieved at the
contrary spirit and practice in any, though his friends. He did heartily bewail
our divisions; and how desirous he was to obey those commands of the Psalmist
and the Apostles, Pursue peace, ensue peace, noting both the vehemence and
swi^tness of the prosecution. If some did know, they would not, it may be, be
satisfied; and if others did know, they would, it may be, be offended, and
therefore it is best to leave that to him whose judgment is according to
truth. But I remember I am to write a Preface, not a Narrative of his life. He
was a lover of goodmen. Loving and faithful in his Relations; a good Child, a
good Father, a good Husband, a good Brother, a good Master, a good Neighbor, a
good Friend, a good Governor, a good Subject, a good Minister; and all because
he was a good Christian. He was full of heavenly Ejaculations, contented and
patient under the loss of his desired Relations. And as they say the Swan sings
sweetly before his death: So was his heart, drawing near his change, full of
thankfulness, being like a Vessel that wanted vent. For being graciously
preserved in the Visitation, and restored to his friends, he expressed in all
his Converses with them, a deep sense of Gods mercy, and a fear least we should
soon forget it, and grow cold in our returns of praise, and obedience; and
therefore did advise that we would become Monitors to one another, and call
upon one another not to forget that God who had so eminently preserved us. Thus
was the blessed Spirit of God tuning him for eternal praises, and winding his
heart up to that sweet and heavenly work, it pleased God by a short and sweet
passage to take him unto. His death was not so much sudden, as speedy. Sudden
death is evil, when death finds a man unprepared, but speedy death is a great
mercy. The Prodromi and Harbingers of death being many times more terrible than
death; which made a good man say, I bless God I fear not death, yet I dare not
say but I fear dying Meaning, that the best Christians have something of nature
in them. The Jews, among the several ways of dying they reckon up, say, that
of Moses is the best, who died at the mouth of the Lord, God took away his soul
with a kiss. Yet Censorious Worldlings are ready to make strange glosses, and
comments upon such passages of providence, which it would become them rather
with a holy silence to adore, than with a bold curiosity to pry into. Let them
remember that known saying, Qualis vita, finis it a, He cannot have an ill
death, that leads a good life. I would therefore exhort thee, and all others,
so to live, that we may have that (...) Augustus the Emperor prayed for, and
that many Saints have, (if it were the will of God,) desired, in both
acceptations of the Word in the preparation of soul, and the easiness of
dissolution. That the knot of life may rather be untied than cut; and that our
Souls may go, like Ships richly fraught, with full Sails, upon a calm Sea,
under a gentle Gale, into the Haven of Happiness, So prays he Qui --
A long sequitur vestigia semper adorans.


The Contents of the Meditations.
Med. 1. UPon a Mote in the Eye Page 1 Med. 2. Upon a piece of battered Plate 2
Med. 3. Upon the Galaxia or milky way 3 Med. 4. Upon a Picture and a Statue 5
Med. 5. Upon a Graff 6 Med. 6. On a Glass without a foot 7 Med. 7. Upon the
sight of a Lilly and a Violet 9 Med. 8. On a Crum going the wrong way 11 Med.
9. On two Lights in a Room 12 Med. 10. On building after fires 13 Med. 11. On
the Torrid Zone 15 Med. 12. On strength and length in Prayer 17 Med. 13. On the
Morning Dew 18 Med. 14. On a Pearl in the eye 21 Med. 15. On spiritual and
bodily sickness 23 Med. 16. On a Lamp and a Star 24 Med. 17. On a Chancery Bill
26 Med. 18. On the Philosophers Stone 28 Med. 19. On a Greek Accent 30 Med. 20.
On a debauched Minister 33 Med. 21. On the golden C^lf and braz^^Serpen^ 36
Med. 22. On the Circulation of the blo^d 39 Med. 23. On a multiplying Glass 41
Med. 24. On Gravity and ^evity 43 Med. 25. On False Median^s 45 Med. 26. On the
Royal Oak 48 Med. 27. On the Weapon^ Salve 53 Med. 28. On the Rudder of a Ship
56 Med. 29. On the Balsome Tree 60 Med. 30. On the palpitation of the heart 63
Med. 31. On the shadow of a man 66 Med. 32. On the moulting of a Peacock 68
Med. 33. Upon a Pleasure ^oat 71 Med. 34. Upon putting out a Candle 74 Med. 35.
On a Prison 76 Med. 36. On the motion of the Sun on a Dial 79 Med. 37. On a Sun
Dial and a Clock 82 Med. 38. On the payment of a Pepper corn 84 Med. 39. On the
Bucket and the Wheel 87 Med. 40. On Banishment 90 Med. 41. On the Breast and
the Sucking bottle 94 Med. 42. Upon mixtures 98 Med. 43. Upon Time and Eternity
101 Med. 44. On a Physicians feeling the p^lse 106 Med. 45. On a Be hive and a
Wasps nest 109 Med. 46. On Contentment, and Satisfaction 113 Med. 47 On
Perching a piece of Clo^b 117 Med. 48. On a Grave newly made 121 Med. 49. On a
Spring in a high ground 125 Med. 50. On the vanity of Wishes 129 Med. 51. On
First fruits and ^leanings 134 Med. 52. On a Rock 139 Med. 53. On a counterfeit
piece of Coin 143 Med. 54. On health of body and peace of conscience 147 Med.
55. On a Looking glass 152 Med. 56. On going up an high Mountain 157 Med. 57.
On the Bible 162 Med. 58. On the Spiritual Warfare 169 Med. 59. On going to Bed
174 Med. 60. On the natural heat^ and the radical moisture 178
The Contents of the Wiles of Satan.
Chap. 1. Containing an Introduction to the words, and division of them Page 1
Chap. 2. Containing the main Proposition, and sum of the Discourse 7 Chap. 3.
Wherein is showed the great ability of Satan to tempt, in six Sections. Sect.
1. Because in his nature he is a spiritual and intellectual essence 11 Sect. 2.
From the duration and long experience of the devil 18 Sect. 3. Because it is
the only business he has to do 25 Sect. 4. Because of the number of the evil
Spirits, and the unity of their Counsels 29 Sect. 5. From his great and strange
Artifice to convey suggestions to evil, in such a manner, as they cannot be
distinguished from the lustings of our own hearts 33 Sect. 6. From the
sutableness between his suggestions, and corrupt reason. 37
Chap. 4. Containing an enumeration of some of Satan's Wiles in twenty two
Sections. Sect. 1. To tempt by method, and by the practice of lesser sins, to
make way for the more fa^cile committing greater 40 Sect. 2. A vexatious and
restless importunity in urging to the doing that sin he tempts to 47 Sect. 3. A
ceasing to tempt, and faining a flight 52 Sect. 4. Touching Satan's policy about
the end and the means 57 Sect. 5. His strange and artificial disguising objects
63 Sect. 6. Ensnaring of all sorts of Persons in the use of lawful things 67
Sect. 7. Suiting his temptations to the Ages and Conditions of men 69 Sect. 8.
The insinuation of many suggestions in an undiscernable way, that we cannot
difference them from our own thoughts 70 Sect. 9. The drawing men aside by
plausible opinions, and Doctrines, that come near the Scriptures in show 72
Sect. 10. Under pretense of setting up the Spirit to cry down the Word 76 Sect.
11. His working many lying signs and wonders 78 Sect. 12. His assaulting with
temptations to our knowledge, and experience unheard of 79 Sect. 13. His Wiles
about holy duties 80 Sect. 14. His suffering false remedies to prevail 82 Sect.
15. His making false Syllogisms by which he works upon the guilt of conscience
83 Sect. 16. His persuading Christians to keep his counsel 85 Sect. 17.
Assaulting us in such temptations wherein we least suspect our selves 86 Sect.
18. Satan's flattering us with hopes of returning out of sin by speedy
repentance 86 Sect. 19. To keep the wounds of the soul raw and smarting 87
Sect. 20. To draw aside the soul to some sin when it is in the pursuit of some
great mercy, or near the enjoyment of it 87 Sect. 21. To make the duties of a
Christians general and particular calling interfere 88 Sect. 22. To bring us
from one extreme to another 89
Chap. 5. Wherein are laid down several Antidotes against the Wiles of Satan.
Sect. 1. Antidote 1. Christian Sobriety, and Watchfulness 91 Sect. 2. Antidote
2. Resolution, and Christian courage 93 Sect. 3. Antid. 3. Make use of the Lord
Jesus Christ 95 Sect. 4. Antid. 4. Be abundant in the use of prayer 101 Sect.
5. Antid. 5. Take heed of giving place to the devil 103 Sect. 6. Antid. 6. Take
heed of venturing upon the occasions of sin, and coming near the borders of
temptation 104 Sect. 7. Antid. 7. Diligence and industry in your Calling 106
Sect. 8. Antid. 8. Sincerity of heart 107 Sect. 9. Antid. 9. What is profitable
to the enemy is hurtful to you, and what hurts him helps you 109 Sect. 10.
Antid. 10. Have an eye often to Scripture encouragements 109

Errata.
Page 58. line 23. read fruitur. p. 176. l. 10. r. sinless. The rest the Reader
is desired to mend as he observes them.

The Spiritual Chemist, OR Divine Meditations on several Subjects.
Meditation I. Upon a mote in the Eye.
OF what a strange temper is the Eye, which a small mote can so extremely
trouble, and a wide world cannot satisfy? and what a strange vanity is the
world, a single dust of which is more powerful to afflict and torment, then an
entire confluence of all its pleasures can be to give ease, or to delight? For
were the globe of the whole earth turned into a delicious Paradise, that the
eye might behold nothing but a perpetual spring of beauty, and that every sense
might be continually feasted with the choicest objects that such a Garden could
produce; yet alas a corn of its sand, an atome of its dust put or lodged
accidentally in the eye, would create such violent shootings, such keen
prickings and burnings, as would foon force a man to send forth complaints that
his anguish is far above his pleasure, and that he had much rather forgo the
one, then undergo constantly the other. Oh! what a weak and empty bubble is
all worldly happiness, which breaks and vanishes into nothing, by the power of
a small dust? and what a matchless difference is there between heavenly and
earthly comforts, when a drop of the one can sweeten a briny sea of sorrow, and
a world of the other cannot assuage the anguish which arises from a single
mo^e? Lord therefore let not me be among the number of those that receive their
good things in this life, I ask only a pittance for my passage, but not an
abundance for my portion in them; yea though thou should give me no Kid to
make merry with, yet will I not murmur at thy bounty to Prodigals, if thou will
say Son, all that is laid up is thine, though thou have little or nothing of
what is laid out; but I will pray, Turn Lord mine eyes from beholding, and my
heart from affecting earthly vanities, and fix all my desires upon heaven, that
I may look and long for it, in which there is nothing that can offend; but
every thing that will delight and satisfy to Eternity.

Meditation II. Upon a piece of Battered Plate.
IT is methinks a meet Emblem of a suffering Saint, who by afflicting strokes
may lose somewhat of his accidental beauty; but nothing of his real worth. In
the Plate the fashion is only marred; but the substance is neither diminished
or embased. If you bring it to the Scale, it weighs as much as it did; if you
try by the Touchstone, it is as good Silver as it was. And is it not thu^ with
a S^in^ when bruised and broken with many sore pressures? His luster and repute
with men may be p^eu^iced and e^lipsed by them, but not his person or his w^rth
with God; if he be weighed in his unerring Balance, he will not be found the
lighte^; if ex^mined by ^his Test, he will no^ be esteemed the less precious.
It is no^ the Cross that makes vil^^ but Sin; not the passive evils which we
suffer, but the active evils which we do. The one may render us unamiable to
men, but the other makes us unholy before God; The one raze the Casket, and the
other makes a flow in the Jewel. H^ppy and wise therefore is that man who
makes Moses his choice to be his pattern in choosing Affliction rather th^n
Sin; esteeming it better to be an oppressed Hebrew that builds the Houses and
Palaces of Brick, than an uncircumcised Egyptian to dwell in them, for when he
is tried he shall receive the Crown of life which the Lord has promised to
them that love him.

Meditation III. Upon the Galaxia or milky-way.
THe milkie way, according to Aristotle, is a shine or Brightness caused by the
joint rays of a multitude of imperceptible Stars, and not a Meteor; But it is
not my purpose so much to find out, or determine what it is, as to meditate a
little upon the place where i^ is, The Milkie way is in Heaven, the true Canaan
and Land of Promise, in which Rivers of pleasure and sweetness do everlastingly
overflow; and while we are absent from it, we are like Israel in the Desert,
apt to complain of daily wants, and to be discouraged with various fears. How
greatly therefore is it becoming us who profess to seek such a Country to long
earnestly after it in our desires, and to travel toward it in patience; not
fearing the difficulty of the way, but animating our selves with the perfection
of the end, in which rest and glory, which are here divided, shall both mee^,
and for ever dwell together? If Mare rubrum, the Red Sea of Affliction, be the
passage; Via lactea, the milkie way of life, and bliss will be the end. And is
it nor better to wade through a Sea of blood to a Throne of glory, than to
glide along the smooth stream of pleasure unto an Abyss of endless misery? A
good end gives an amiableness to the means, though never so unpleasing; The
bitter Potion which brings health is gladly taken down by the Patient: But
Poison in a golden Cup, when made as pleasing as Art and Skill can temper it,
can never be welcome to any who understand the sweetness of life, or dread the
terror of death. The way is good (says Chrysostom) if i^ be to a Feast,
though through a blind Lane; if to an Execution not good, though through the
fairest Street of the City; himself was bidden to a Marriage Dinner, and was to
go through diverse Lanes and Allies, crossing the high street he met with one
led through it to be Executed, he told his Auditors, Non qua, sed quo, not the
way, but the term whither it led, was to be thought upon. Lord then let not me
be anxious what the path is that I tread, whether it be plain or thorny,
pleasant or difficult, bloody or milky, so it lead to thee, who art Alpha and
Omega, the beginning and the ending of blessedness, but to walk cheerfully in
it till I come to thee my everlasting rest.

Meditation IV. Upon a Picture and a Statue.
IN what a differing manner is the Image and representation of the same Person
brought into these two pieces of Art? In the one it is effected by the soft and
silent touches of the Penfill, which happily convey likeness and beauty
together: In the other it is formed by the rough and loud strokes of the
hammer, and by the deep cuttings and Sculptures of Instruments of Steel: In as
strange and far differing way is the heavenly Image of God formed in the souls
of new Converts, when first made partakers of the Divine Nature. In some God
Paints (as I may so speak) his own Likeness by a still and calm delineation of
it upon the Table of their hearts: In others he Carves it by afflicting them
with a great measure of terrors, and wounding their souls with a thorough
sense both of the guilt and defilement of Sin. But in this diversity of
working, God is no way necessitated, or limited by the disposition and temper
of the matter, as other Agents are; but is freely guided by the Counsel of his
own will, which is the sole rule and measure of all his Actions toward the
Creature, as his Word is of theirs toward him. Lord therefore do with me what
thou please; Let me be but thine, and I will not prescribe thy Wisdom the way
to make me thine; bruise, break, wound, yea, Kill, Lord, so that I may be made
alive again by thy power, and bear thy holy Image, according to which I was
first made, and to which by thy grace and might only I c^n be restored.

Meditation V. Upon a Graff.
IT was an ancient Saying of the R^bbins, Lumen soepernum nunquam descendit
sine indumento, that Divine Light does never descend without some Clothing:
While we are veiled with Mortality Truth must vail it self too, that it may the
better suit our capacity, for in this our imperfect Estate, its native Luster
is too excessive for our weak eyes, and its spiritual being too refined for our
narrow understandings, which ^o imbibe and take in their objects by the
mediation of the senses with which they have contracted an entire league and
amity. Observable therefore it is, that in Scripture the highest and most
divine Mysteries of the Gospel are imbodied in the terrene Expressions of
Me^aphors, Similitudes, Allegories, and so represented to our view. Thus the
efficacy and secrecy of the New Birth is set forth by the winds blowing when
and where it lists; The Resurrection of the body by Corn sown, which is not
quickened except it dye: The Glory of Heaven by a Marriage Feast: And among
others, our Mystical Union with Christ by the Insition of a Graff into a
foreign stock, which aptly shows forth the entire de^endance we have upon
Christ, without whom we can do nothing, and how also we that are at a distance
from him, are truly made one with him. But yet methinks it is matter both of
delight and wonderment, to see how much the spiritual implantation out-goes the
natural. In the natural, sweet Graffs are advised to be set in sour Stocks;
for though it be proper to the Stock to be vehiculum alimenti, the conveyance
of the nourishment, yet virtus temperamenti, the quality of the Juice comes
from the Graff, and not from the Stock. But in the spiritual it is quite
otherwise, the Graff is vile and worthless, but the Root to which it is united
is precious. The Scion of a Crab is put into a tree of life, the wild Olive,
into the true Olive, and is thereby so changed as that it can no more
degenerate into what it was, but shall for ever abide what the Almighty power
of grace has made it to be, a branch of righteousness bringing forth the
fruits of new obedience to the glory of him who has made this blessed Change.

Meditation VI. Upon a Glass witbout a foot.
THat which chiefly renders this Glass of little or no esteem is not the
Brittleness of it, which is common to every Glass, but an unaptness for use and
service through a particular defect, in regard it has only a capacity to
receive what is put into it, and no ability to retain it unless some hand, or
other foreign aid supply the place of a natural foot. In the hand it is useful
to convey drink to the thirsty, or a Cordial to the Patient; but as soon as it
is out of the hand through mere weakness it falls and spills the liquor, if not
ruin it self. O how lively does this imperfect Glass resemble the best
Condition of Believers on this side he^ven, who in themselves are not only
brit^le, and so apt to be irrecoverably broken; but are also totally unable to
retain either grace or comfort with which Christ is pleased to fill them,
unless he bear and hold them always in his hand? And O how great is the care
and love of Christ, to preserve such Frail Creatures to life, and to honor
such weak Instruments in his constant service? Who can think upon this goodness
of Christ, and not be transported with Raptures and Ecstasies in the deep
admiration of it? Who can believe that sure Salvation that is in him, out of
whose hand no man can pluck us, and not passionately desire it? Is it not
better with us, than it was with us in Adam, who had Feet to stand upright, but
no Hand which might preserve him from falling? Freewill has made many
Servants, but has it ever made one Son? Are not all that are saved Children of
grace? Let others then magnify Natures Power, and like sick men talk
confidently of walking, when upon trial they cannot stand: I shall always
desire to have a due sense of my own emptiness and weakness, and to make this
my daily prayer, that Christ would always fill me with his grace, hold me by
his hand, and use me ever in his service.

Meditation VII. Upon the sight of a Lilly and a Violet.
THese two Flowers brought to my Mind a saying of Hierom to this effect, That
it is better, and more honorable to be a Lilly then a Violet: Which, when
stripped of its Metaphorical Clothing comes to thus much, That, to be always
pure is more commendable, then to bear the blush of a Sin: Spotless Innocence
does far exceed the greatest Penitency. A Truth questionless it is beyond
Controversy, and no way needing the aid of the School to determine, that
Innocens est praestantior poenitente; The Innocent is more worthy then any
Penitent. Innocence being the only Robe of Glory, with which Man was covered
when first Created; and of which, had he not divested himself, he had never
experienced Shame, or Sorrow; they both being Passions that had their entrance
into the World with Sin, and shall in the same Moment with it Die and Expire.
But yet next to this Virgin Purity from Sin, The most desirable thing is true
and unfeigned Penitency for Sin; Which, though it cannot restore a Man to his
Primitive State; Time Lost, and Innocence, being two irrecoverable things; yet
it will (through Gods Ordination) abundantly capacitate him for Mercy and
Pardon. When Ephraim Smote upon the Thigh, and was ashamed, because he bare the
reproach of his Youth, how earnestly did God remember him: Is Ephraim my dear
Son? When the Prodigal returns a Penitent, how affectionately does his Father
embrace him, and falling upon his Neck kiss him? how does he cut off, and
prevent a part of his Confession, which he was purposed with himself to have
made, by his speedy calling for the Ring, the Robe, the Shoes, to adorn him,
and the fatted Calf to Feast him? O blessed Lord! how willingly would I
therefore (who have nothing of the unspotted purity of the Lilly) partake
plentifully of the Tincture of the Violet? how fain would I, who have had a
Forehead to commit Sin before thee, have a Face to blush for Sin done against
thee? my Sins are as the sand of the Sea for number, O that my Tears were as
the Water of the Sea for abund^nce. But who, Lord, can make me of a Proud and
unhallowed Sinner, a real and Broken Convert but thy self? That Grace, by which
mine whole Man must be molded to a Penitential Frame, is altogether thine:
heart, hand, eyes, tongue, cannot in the least move without thee: they are
lifeless Members till thou quicken them; yea Rebellious till thou subdue them:
do thou therefore by a powerful Energy fit every part for its proper Duty; let
my hand smite the Breast, as the fountain and root from whence all mine
Iniquities do spring; let my tongue confess them, mine eye mourn for them, my
face blush, and my heart bleed for them: then shall I unfeignedly say, and
acknowledge, My ruin is from my self, but in thee is my help O Lord.

Meditation VIII. Upon a Crum going the wrong way.
What more mean and contemptible thing can there be then a single Crum, either
in regard of its doing the least hur^, or effecting the least good; and yet,
like the Tongue, which S^. James says, is a little Member, ex^ollit sese, it
bo^steth great Matters: in the Mouth (it is true) it has scarce substance
enough to be felt; but, in the Throat, it is such as can hardly be endured. If
it descend into the S^omach, it can contri^ute nothing to the support of Life;
but, if it miss the due passage to it, how often does it threaten Death? and
sometimes also effect it: O, how frail and mutable is the Life of Man; which is
not only Jeopar^ed by I^struments of War and Slaughter, which are made to
destroy, but by an Hair, a Raisin-Stone, a Feather, a Crum, and a thousand such
inconsiderable things, which have a power to extinguish Life, but none to
preserve it? How necessary then is it to get Grace into the Heart, when the
Life that we have hangs thus continually in suspense before us? and, how
circumspect should we be of small sins, which create as great dangers to the
Soul, as the other things can to the Body? They that live in the Pale of the
Church perish more by silent and Whispering Sins, then by Crying and Loud Sins,
in which, though there be less Infamy, there is ofttimes the grea^er danger,
in regard they are most e^sily f^llen into, and most hardly repented of; like
knots in fine Silk, which are sooner made then in a Cord or Cable, but with far
more difficulty are unloosed again. Let us therefore (who often say that' a M^n
may live of a little) think also of how much less a Man may Die, and miscarry,
not in his Body only but in his Soul also.

Meditation IX. Upon two Lights in a Room.
WHat an Amicable, as well as Amiable thing is Light? for, these two Tapers
which enlighten the same Room, do not shine with a Divided, or with a
Confounded, but with an United Light, as the Optics do clearly demonstrate by
the distinct shadows which they cast: and yet the Eye which is benefitted by
both of them, to a more full and perfect discerning of its objects, cannot
difference the rays and strictures that flow from them, or assign, which is
the Light that comes from the one, or from the other. Such I have sometimes
thought is the Harmony between the Natural Light of Gifts, and the Supernatural
of Grace, meeting in the same Person; though they be both differing in the
Original, yet in the Subject, in which they are seated, they shine not with a
Divided, or a Confounded, but with an United Light: and, in their Efflux and
Emanation so conspire, as that they greatly better him in whom they are
conjoined, and cast a mutual luster also upon each other: One being as the Gold
which adornes the Temple, and the other as the Temple which sanctifies the
Gold. Let no Man therefore despise the Light of Gifts, as needless to the
Perfection of a Christian; nor yet so magnify it as to be injurious to the
Light of Grace, no more then he would put out one of his Eyes as useless,
because when he winks with the one, he can see as well with the other: there
may be a reason sometimes to shut one Eye, but there can be none at any time
for to extinguish it.

Meditation X. Upon Building after Fires.
IT is the saying of Florus the Historian concerning that fatal Fire of
Corinth, in which all its Edifices were consumed into Ashes, and its Statues of
Brass, Silver and Gold melted into one common Mass: Aeris notam pretiosiorem
fecit ipsa opule^tissimae urbis Injuria; That the Vastation of that wealthy
City was an occasion to make the Metal of it to be highly esteemed in after
Ages. The like may be said concerning many Buildings, that the Flames which
have turned them into desolate ruins, have occasioned a following beauty and
stateliness in the second Fabrics, far above what the first ever had. How often
have we seen by such accidents the dimensions of Buildings enlarged, the Forms
and Models of them much bettered, the whole with much more Art and Cost
Enriched, so as to fill the beholders with delight and wonder? Can man thus
improve disadvantages, and make Burnings and indigested heaps to serve as a
Foil to his Art and Skill? can he effect a kind of Resurrection, and New Birth
to what was once destroyed? what then can God do, whose power is perfected in
we^kness, and like the Sun shines brightest when environed with the blackest
Clouds of difficulties? Surely he can, yea, and undoubtedly will give a being
to the Bodies of his M^rtyrs, which the Fire has consumed into Ashes, and the
Wind has scattered into distances. He will awake his Saints, who have made
(for Age) their Beds in the Grave, and have filled their Mouths with the
Gravel and Slime of the Pit: He will call for his redeemed ones from out of the
deep Se^, and from the Mawes of Fishes that have devoured them, and give to
every one of them, not only the same Specifical, but the same Numerical Body,
changed in its Properties, but not in its Essence, Chrified with Angelical
Perfections, but no^ Tr^nsubstantiated from a Corporeal to a Spiritual
substance: Is not all this done already in Christ? our Nature in his Body is
Spiritualized, to tell us, that for possibility it may be, and for certainty it
shall be so in us. He is our Brother, therefore we may be like him; and he is
our Head, therefore we must be like him in a Conformity to his Glorious Body.
Why therefore should I fear the greatest Enemies of Life, the Fire, the Grave,
or the Sea? Is there any thing too hard for God? is not his Power and his
Promise engaged to do that for me which he has done for my Savior? has he
not said that those that sleep in Jesus he will bring with him? Lord help me to
make it my only care to have my Life Holy, that my Resurrection may be happy;
to live to Christ, that I may live with Christ: and from a Netherlander in the
dust below, may be made a Citizen of the New Jerusalem which is above, and
rejoice in the joy of thy People, and glory with thine Inheritance.

Meditation XI. Upon the Torrid Zone.
When I think, or read what strange Descriptions the Ancients have made of the
Middle, or Burning Zone, which, in regard of its excessive Ardours, they judged
altogether inhabitable: and how much experience has evinced their ignorance,
in asserting the healthful, temperate, and pleasant Dwellings that are to be
found there. I cannot but Parallel them with the Misreports that Carnal Men,
through blindness of Mind, or Pravity of Heart have taken up, and spread abroad
of the ways of Religion and Holiness, rendering them to the World less
tolerable then the Scorchings of the most Torrid Zone, and more dreadful then a
Howling Desert. Such which require Austerity, and admit no Latitude; such which
by continual Conflicts make Watery Cheeks, and bleeding Hearts, and what not;
which may serve as a Flaming Sword to deter any from entering upon the Confines
of an Holy Life. But, is it not matter of Wonder, that Experience, which puts
an end to all Contradictions that can rise up against it, and stops the Mouths
of Gainsayers, should not silence those unjust Calumnies that have been long
cast upon Religion by such Men who speak evil of those things which they know
not? Can there be any thing more unreasonably charged upon it then that which
is contrary to the experience of Believers? Honey may as well cease to be
Sweet, because the Sick Man says it is Bitter, as the Paths of Holiness to be
Pleasant, because Carnal Men affirm them to be irksome and difficult: and the
Sun may be as well accused of Darkness, because Dim and Purblind Eyes can see
little or nothing of the light of it. Let them be asked who have Sequestered
themselves from the Vanities of the World that they might enjoy God and
themselves the better, whether they have wanted that satisfaction which they
expected? or have missed what they have left? or have cause to complain of what
they endure? And they will tell such Questionists that they have not left their
Delights, but exchanged them; that Religion is Joyful, though not Dissolute;
that it has its Songs, though not its Frolicks; that a good Conscience can
Feast it always, though it cannot Revell it; that Gods Service is Free, though
not Lawless; that they can do what is Decent, Expedient, or Lawful, though not
what is Sinful. How vain then are the Cavils, with which Worldlings, like
malicious Elimasses pervert the strait ways of God? And, how causeless are the
Scorns which they pour forth upon those that walk in them? will they not at
length (like the Drivel of those that spit against the Wind) return upon their
own Faces? or like Arrows shot up against the Sun, fall upon those that
undertake such vain attempts? Lord, though many will not believe what others
have seen and testify, yet let not me ever disavow, what thou have been
pleased to let me see and know: But, let me always confidently say with David,
I have seen an end of all Perfection, but thy Commandments are exceeding broad.

Meditation XII. Upon strength and length in Prayer.
When Cicero was asked which of Demosthenes his Orations he thought best, he
wittily replied, the longest. But, if the question should be, which of Prayers
are the best, the answer then must not be, the longest, but the strongest: not
the Prayer that exceeds in quantity, but that which excells in quallity. In
Moral actions the Manner of working is a Swaying Circumstance; a Man may sin
in doing good, but not in doing well: how few then are there which manage this
duty of holy Prayer aright? Some mistake the Language of Prayer, and think it
consists of nothing else then the clothing of their meaning in apt
expressions, with a tuneable delivery of it: Others presume, that if necessity
have put an edge upon their Requests, and stirred up some passions of
Self-love, that they cannot fail of acceptance. Others again put much in the
length of their Prayers, measuring them by the time which is spent, rather then
by the intention which is exercised in them. But alas, how wide are all such
apprehensions from the truth? and how fruitless will such duties be to those
that are no otherwise busied in them? The Prayer, which is as delightful Music
in Gods Ears, is not that which has the quaint Note of the Nightingale, but
that which has the mournful Tones of the Dove. Broken sighs and groans are the
best Eioquence with God, and become Prayer; as unexpected stops and rests (made
by Musicians) do grace the Music with a kind of Harmonical Aposiopesis, or
Elipsis; it is not the Prayer that Indigency and natural desires do sharpen,
but which the Spirit does enliven that is prevalent with God. The one is as the
cry of the young Ravens, and the other is as the voice of Children that are
taught to cry Abba, Father. It is not the many words of a proud Pharisee that
obtain the blessing, but the pit by and short Confession of a penitent
Publican, who is sent away justified. Ah Father! may sometimes be more
effectual with God, who searches the hearts, and knows the mind of the
Spirit, than a prayer that is stretched forth like an Evening shadow to a
wonderful length. The one, though it be short, may, like a small figure in a
Number, stand for much: and the other, though great, like a volume of Ciphers,
may signify nothing. Let therefore such who are frequent in the duty of
prayer, especially young Converts, who are apt to think above what is meet of
their own enlargements, endeavor to turn their length into strength, and to
remember that there is a wide difference between the gift and grace of prayer,
and that it is one thing to have Commerce with God in duties, and another to
have Communion with him; The one is such which strangers may have in their
mutual traffic, but the other is proper to friends, who are knit together in
love.

Meditation XIII. Upon the Morning Dew.
THe Meditation of this Subject is no less facile than delightful, like Jacobs
Venison, it is soon come by, because God has brought it to my hand, having
often in his Word resembled the Dew, (which makes the earth fruitful,) to his
Grace, that makes the hearts of men, naturally barren, to bring forth fruits of
righteousness; so that it is no difficult task for to draw an useful parallel
between the one and the other in sundry respects.

The Dew is of an heavenly original, the nativity thereof is from the womb of
the Morning, it ^arrieth not for man, nor waits for the Sons of men. And is
it not thus in the grace of Conversion? Is not that wholly from above, without
any Preparations, Congruities, Concurrencies, that do or can arise from the
flesh? We are made active by grace, but we are not at all Agents in fitting our
selves for Grace. As no man can be antecedently active to his first birth; so
neither can he be to his second birth: Of Gods own Will we are begotten by the
Word of Truth.

The Dew also in its descent and fall is silent and imperceptible, it flies
every sense of which it may seem to be a proper object. It is so subtle, as
that the sharpest eye cannot see it; so silent, as that the quickest ear cannot
hear it; and so thin, as that the naked hand cannot feel it. When it is come it
is visible, but how it comes who can tell? After such a secret manner often times
are the illapses of the Spirit, and the operations of his grace upon the heart;
his Teachings, his Tractions, his Callings are all efficacious to draw, to
persuade, yet the way is hidden, and the soul, ere ever it is aware, is made
like the Chariots of Aminadab.

The Dew again, as Naturalists observe, is most abounding in calm and serene
seasons, when the Heavens are least disturbed with winds and storms; Ros est
humidum quid e serenitate concretum minutatim labens; it is a moisture drawn up
by the Sun in the day, and then falling by small innumerable drops in the
night. And is it not thus in the grace of God? Are not those hearts refreshed
most with it, that are least disquieted with Earthly Cares, and tossed too and
fro with Anxieties? Are not such, like Gideons Fleece, plentifully wet with the
Evidences of Gods love, when others, like the ground about it, are wholly dry?

Lastly, The Dew is of a growing and reviving nature, which brings a life and
verdure to Fields, Vineyards, Gardens, Flowers, which the cold would chill, or
the heat would scorch. Therefore when God promised to Israel the beauty of the
Lilly, the stability of the Ced^r, the fruitfulness of the Olive, to effect all
this he says, he will be as the dew. And what ground can but bring forth when
he who is the Father of the Rain, and begets the drops of the dew, shall
himself descend upon it in bounty and goodness? Who can but love him with a
love of duty, whom he shall thus tender with a love of mercy? Who can but love
him with a love of Concupiscence, as being more desirous of new Influences,
than satisfied with former Receipts, whom he so freely loves with a love of
Beneficence? O Lord, my Soul thirsts for thee as the gaping and chapped earth
does for the moisture of the Heavens; I am nothing, I can do nothing without
thee; my fruitfulness, my growth, my life depend wholly upon the droppings of
thy grace; when they dew lies all night upon my Branch, my glory is fresh in
me, and my whole man is as the smell of a field which the Lord has blessed. Be
not therefore unto me. O my God, as a Cloud without Rain, left I be as a Tree
without fruit. But let thy grace always distill upon me as the dew, and as the
small rain upon the tender herb, and then shall I be as the ground, which
drinks in the showers that come often upon it, and brings forth fruit meet
for him by whom it is dressed, and receive also new blessing from God.

Meditation XIV. Upon a Pearl in the Eye.
What specious names have Physicians put upon diseases, who call a Plague Sore
a Carbuncle, and the white film, which takes away the delightful sight, a
Pearl in the Eye? Do they gild over Diseases, as they do their Pills, or a
Bolus, that so their Patients may less fear and feel the evil of the one, as
they less taste the bitterness of the other? And are any by such slender
Artifices brought into an opinion that a Carbuncle is less mortal or loathsome
than any other swelling that has not so gay a name? Or that blindness which is
caused by a Pearl in the Eye, is more comfortable than the loss of sight that
comes by other accidents? Methinks Reason should not run at so low an ebb in
any, as to please themselves in such fancies; may not a Poison have a name that
sounds better to the ear; a color more pleasing to the eye, and a taste that
is more grateful to the Palate, than the Antidote which expels it? May not
Alchimy glister when Gold looks pale? And yet alas! in spiritual maladies, in
which the danger is so much the greater by how much the soul is of more value
than the body; with what strange delusions are many transported? who when their
minds are poisoned with Error and Blasphemy, do then put upon their corrupt
Opinions and Tenants, the glorious names of Revelations, Visions, Raptures,
refined notions, and what not, that may confirm themselves in their own
dotages, and win others into an admiration of their persons. Thus Montanus gave
out himself to be the Comforter that Christ had promised to send forth into the
World. Arius proudly boasted, that God had revealed something to him, which he
hid from his Apostles. And Eunomius fondly imagined that he was taken up to
Heaven, as Elias was; and had seen Gods face, as had Moses, and was wrapped up to
the third heaven, as was Paul. But what other thing are these Follies, or
rather Phrensys, than as if an Israel te infected with the botch of Egypt, and
overspread with it from the sole of the foot to the crown of the head, should
boast that he had robbed the Egyptians of their most precious Jewels, and had
decked himself with them? Would not men pity his distemper, rather than
believe his confidence? Would not they offer medicines to heal him, rather than
suffer him to perish under his miserable delusion of possessing great riches?
How is it then that in matters of faith, in which there is both clear evidence
and certainty, Heretics, that are no other than ulcerous persons, fitter for.
Dogs to lick than Christians to love, should throughout all Ages so easily gain
to themselves such a great multitude of Proselytes only by putting fair Names
upon foul Errors? It is because men for their lusts sake will not see, but
willingly corrupt themselves in those things which they know? or is it because
God has smitten them with a spirit of blindness that they shall not see, for
their not receiving of the truth in the love of it? Surely, whatever the cause
be, such is the infatuation, as that I had need both to tremble, and to pray:
To tremble, at the sad woe which is denounced by God himself against those that
call evil good, and good evil; That put bitter for sweet, and sweet for
bitter. And to pray, as David did, Teach me thy way O Lord, I will walk in thy
truth, unite my heart to fear thy name.

Meditation XV. Upon Spiritual and bodily sickness.
THe soul has its maladies, as well as the body; and such that for their
likeness to them, do often borrow their names from them. Pride, is a Timpany;
Avarice, a Dropsy; Security, a Lithargy; Lust, a Calenture; Apostasy, an
Epilepsie. And yet (though these names of bodily diseases do happily serve to
point and shadow out the nature of spiritual) how wide is the difference
between the Patients of the one and of the other, in regard of those qualities
which may dispose them for a cure and recovery out of them? In the diseases of
the body it matters not whether the Patient know the name of his disease, or
understand the virtue of the medicines which are prescribed, or be able to
judge of the increase, height, and declination of his distempers by the
beatings of his pulse; the whole business is managed by the care and wisdom of
the Physician, who often times conceals the danger on purpose least fear and
fancy should work more than his Physic, and hinder the benefit of what he
applies. But in the maladies of the soul it is far otherwise; the first step
unto spiritual health is a distinct and clear insight of sin, such which makes
men to understand the Plague of their own hearts; Christ heals by light, as
well as by Influence; he first Convinces them of sin, and then gives the
pardon, he discovers the disease to them, and then administers the medicine.
Ignorance is a bar to the welfare of the soul, though not of the body, and
makes the divine remedies to have as little effect upon it, as Purges or
Cordials have upon the Glasses into which they are put. It is Solomon's
peremptory Conclusion, that a soul without knowledge is not good, nor indeed
can be, because it wants a principle, which is as necessary to goodness as a
visive power to the eye to enable it to discern its object. How can he ever
value holiness who understands not what sin is? Or desire a Savior who has no
sense of his need? O therefore, blessed Lord, do thou daily more open my eyes,
that I may see my self to be among the sinzers, and not among the righteous;
among the sick, and not among the whole; that so I may be healed by thee, who
came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance; nor to save the
whole, but the sick. Be thou my Physician, and let me be thy Patient, until
thou make me to say, I am not sick, because thou have forgiven me all mine
iniquities.

Meditation XVI. Upon a Lamp and a Star.
SUch is the disparity between a Lamp and a Star, as that happily it may not a
little be wondered at, why I should make a joint Meditation of them which are so
greatly distant in respect of place, and far more in respect of quality, the
one being an earthly, and the other an heavenly body. What is a Lamp to a Star
in regard of influence, duration, or beauty? Has it any quickening rays
flowing from it? Or is its light immortal, so as not to become despised by
expiring? Can it dazzle the beholder with its serene luster, and leave such
impressions of it self upon the eye, as may render it for a time blind to any
other objects? Alas! these are too high and noble effects for such a feeble and
uncertain light to produce, and proper only to those glorious bodies that shine
in the Firmament. But yet this great inequallity between the one and the other
serves to make them both more meet Emblems of the differing estate of Believers
in this and the other life, who in Scripture, while they are on this side
Heaven, are compared to wise Virgins with Lamps burning, and when they come to
Heaven, to Stars shining, which endure for ever and ever. Grace in the best of
Saints is not perfect, but must, like a Lamp, be fed with new supplies that it
go not our, and be often trimmed that it be not dim. Ordinances are as
necessary to Christians in this life as Manna to the Israelites in the
wilderness though in Canaan it ceased; And therefore, God has appointed his
Word and Sacraments to drop continually upon the hearts of his Children, as the
two Olive trees upon the golden Candlestick. What mean then those fond conceits
of perfectists, who dream of living above all subsidiary helps, and judge
Ordinances as useless to them, as oil for a Star, or a snuffing of the Sun to
make it shine more bright? It is true, when we come to heaven such things will
be of no more use to our souls, than meat or drink will be to our bodies; but
yet while we are on the Earth, the body cannot live without the one, nor the
soul without the other. Do thou therefore, holy God, perserve in me a due sense
of my impotency and wants, whose light is fading, as well as borrowed, that so
I may daily suck supplies from thee, and acknowledge that I live not only by
grace received, but by grace renewed, and while I am in this life, have light
only as a Lamp in the Temple, which must be fed and trimmed, and not as a Star
in Heaven.

Meditation XVII. Upon a Chancery Bi^l.
ONe cause and original can have but one orderly and genuine birth, else what
means our Saviors question, Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of
thistles? Or that of S^. James, Does a fountain at the same place send forth
water sweet and bitter? May it not then justly be the opinion and mind of many,
that the least fruit of any holy Meditation can never grow from such a bramble
of Contention as a Chancery Bill? And that from such a spring of Marah, a sweet
and delightful stream can never issue? Yea, who will not be ready to take up
Nathanaels question, Can any good thing come out of Nazareth? And then what
better answer can I return to such than Philips, Come and see? And now let me
say what I have often thought, That between such a Bill and most men's
Confessions of sin in prayer, in which they implead themselves to God, there is
too great a likeness in this respect, that the complaints in both have more of
course and form than truth and reality. In the one it is Mos curiae, the usage
and custom of the Court for the Plaintiff to pretend Fraud, Rapines,
Combinations, Concealments done and made to the prejudice of his right, which
yet he never intends to prove against the Defendant, but only to make use of as
a ground of inquiry. And is it not thus also in the other? Are there not in
Prayer large Catalogues and Enumerations of sin, which many charge themselves
with before God, as if it were their great work to justify God in their self
condemnation? Pride, Wantonness, Hypocricy, Contumacy, are the black, shall I
say, or Scarlet sins, that are among others instanced in? And yet what other
thing is intended by them than to make up the outside of a Prayer? These sins
are only placed in it, as dark shadows in a Picture to set it off with more
advantage, and to commend it rather to men than to God. In the doing of the
duty they think not in the least the worse of themselves for what they say
against themselves, nor would have others so to do; else how comes it to pass,
that in charging themselves so deeply at Gods Tribunal, there is as little
appearance of shame or sorrow in their face, as there was of a Cloud in the
Heavens when Elijahs Servant returned this Answer, that there was nothing? Now
though it be no part either of my work or purpose to justify or condemn the
practices of humane Judicatories, which admit loose suggestions, that are
Arrows shot at random, because that now and then they serve for a discovery:
Yet I cannot but condemn and abhor that the confession of sin in prayer should
be as slight and overly as the complaints of a Chancery Bill, and that
particular sins specified in it, and aggravated with heinous Circumstances,
should be no other than things of course, done rather to lengthen out the duty
then affect the heart; to discover quickness of Parts rather then truth of
grace. What is this but to make Prayer i^ self, which should be as sweet
Incense burning upon the Golden Altar, to be as an Offering of Sulpher, or
Assafaetida? What is this but to mock God, the great searcher of the heart,
with vain words, and to publish to the World how little they fear his anger, or
vallue his pardon? for if the Confession of Sin be formal, how can the seeking
of forgiveness be real? O holy Lord preserve me from such hypocrisy, and
remember not what in this kind I have been guilty of: my desire is to judge my
self, not in word, but in truth, and unfeignedly to beg, that I, who am in the
court of thy justice wholly inexcusable, may in the Chancery of thy Mercy
become altogether inaccusable.

Meditation XVIII. Upon the philosophers stone.
THis Lemma, or Title may happily as much affect such who make Gold their God,
as the sight of the Star did the Wise Men, hoping that it will be both a light
and guide to the discovery of that rare and matchless secret, of turning the
more base and inferior Metralls into the more noble; Iron into Silver, and
Brass into Gold, and so Enrich them with an Artificial Indies. But I can sc^rce
resolve my self whether the Philosophers Stone, which is thus framed for
wonders, be not rather a Speculation than an absolute reallity, or an attempt
assayed by many, rather than an Atcheivment attained by few or any: How many
have melted down Ample Revenues in their Crusibles, and while they have, with
much labor, sought the Sublimation of Metals, have sunk themselves into the
deepest beggary? and how have others consumed their time, if not wasted their
Estates in a fruitless pursuit of it? and yet have seen no other change then
what age and care has made in themselves, by turning their golden hair into
silver hair; or at the best have gleaned up some few Experiments only, which
have not Compensated their cost and travel. But, what if any Man, after long
search and study, can Archimedes like cry out joyfully, that he has found?
Yea, what if every Man, who have busied his thoughts, and employed his time in
diving into this Mystery, should be able to effect such a Change, and to
multiply his Treasure as the Sand? yet, how worthless and inconsiderable would
such productions of his Philosophical Stone be found, if compared with the
noble and transcendent effects of the Divine, or Theological Stone, which
Christ promises in the Revelation to him that overcomes: whose worth, as it
is far greater, so the way to obtain it is more facile and certain, it being
not a work of labor, but a gift of grace. This Stone is of such power and
energy, that whosoever is possessed of it, can have nothing bef^l him, which it
changes and turns not to his good: it turns all temporal losses into
spiritual advantages; all crosses into blessings; all asflictions into
comforts: it dignifies reproach and ignomy; it changes the hardship of a
Prison into the delights of a Palace; it is an heavenly Anodyne against all
pains, and makes the Soul to possess it self in patience in every condition.
It is a Panacea, an universal Salve for every Sore, to all acci^ents that can
befall a Man; It is as the Seal to the W^x, putting upon them a new st^mp and
figure, and making them to be what they were not before, and what they never
could have been without it. Such it is that he who has it, has all good: and
he that wants it (whatever else he seems to possess) has little less then
nothing. Who then can without mourning as well as wondering, think at the
prodigious folly of those Men, who labor in a continual fire to effect the
Stone of the Transmutation of Mettalls, and yet deem this Divine Stone scarce
worth the begging of God in a Prayer? Is this wisdom to toil in the refining
of Clay, and to be able to make a dull piece of Earth to shine, and then to
value our happiness by it? is this wisdom to set a low rate upon what God has
promised to give, and highly to esteem what we can do? O Lord, if this be the
Worlds wisdom, let me become a fool: I had rather have this Divine Stone of thy
Promise, then all the Treasures that Nature and Art can yield. Let the
Mountains be turned into Gold, the Rocks into Diamonds, the Sands into Pearls,
yet this Stone with the New Name written in it, is to me more desirable then
all, as being a sure pledge of life and happiness in heaven.

Meditation XIX. Upon a Greek Accent.
ACcents are by the Hebrews aptly called Sapores, Tastes, or Savors, because
that Speech, or Words, without the observance of them, are like Jobs White of
an Egg, without Salt, insipid, and unpleasant. In the Greek they derive their
name from the due tenor, or tuning of words; and in that Tongue words are not
pronounced according to the long or short vowels, but according to the accent
set upon them, which directs the rise or fall, the length or brevity of their
pronunciation; now, what accents are in the Greek to words, that methinks
circumstances are to sins, which, as so many Moral accents do fitly serve to
show their just and certain dimensions, and teach us aright to discern how
great or small they be: and he, that without respect had unto them, does judge
of the bigness of sins, is like to err as much as a Man that should take upon
him, without Mathematical Instruments, to give exactly the greatness of the
Heavenly Bodies, and to pronounce of Altitudes, Distances, Asspects, and other
appearances, by the scantling of the Eye: Is not this the Scripture way to set
out Sin, by the Place, Time, Continuance in it, and repetitions of it? does not
God thus accent Isreal's sins by the place in which they were done? they
provoked him at the Red Sea, where they saw the mighty works of his power, in
making the deep to be their path to Canaan, and the Egyptians Grave. They
tempted him in the Wilderness, where their Food, Drink, Clothes, were all made
up of Miracles; the Clouds yielding them Meat, the dry Rock Water, and their
Garments not waxing old. Dot^ he not aggravate them, by the long space of their
continuance in them, in saying, that they grieved him forty years? does he not
number the times of their Reiterated, Murmurings and Rebellions, and make it as
a ground for his Justice to destroy them? Necessary therefore it is, that in
the duty of Self-examination, and reviewes of the Book of Conscience, we do not
only read over the naked Facts which have been done by us, but that we look
into those Apices peccati, little dots and tittles, which are set upon the
heads of many sins (the Circumstances I mean with which they were committed) or
else we shall never read that book aright, or learn to know what sins are
great, or what small. The Fact and the Circumstance are both noted in the
Journals of Conscience, though they be not happily equally legible; and he that
is truly peni^ent will make it a chief part of his work to find out one as well
as the other, as being the best means both to get the heart broken for sin,
and from sin. What shame? what fear? what carefulness? what revenge will a
serious sight of the several aggravations that meet in the perpretation of a
sin move and stir up in the heart of a sinner? will he not say, what a beast am
I to ^in thus against so clear light? to break so often my own vows, to defer
so long my Repentance and Rising again? what revenge shall I now take of my
self to witness my Indignation? what carefulness shall I exercise to evidence
the truth of my return? what diligence shall I use to redeem my lost time, who
have joined the Morning of the Task, and the Evening of the day together?
These, and such like thoughts, will sin, when it is Read as it is Written, and
Accented, in the Conscience produce. But a general ^nowledg and sight of it,
without such particularities, will neither m^ke nor leave any impressions but
what are both slight and confused. Do thou therefore, holy God, teach me to
understand the errors of my ways aright, and by the light of thy spirit make
me to see that Circumstances in sins are not Motes, but Beams, and greatly
intend their guilt, if not their bulk; That so I may mourn for those sins
which Carnal Men conceive to be but so many black nothings; and abhor my self
for those Corruptions in which they indulge themselves.

Meditation XX. Upon a debauched Minister.
IT is a Truth, though it has been questioned by some, and denied by others,
that the Function of a Minister is Formally executed by Gifts, which are not
made effectual by his Personal Sanctity, but by the grace of God in the hearer.
The one may move Morally, but it is the other which works Efficaciously; and
for any to conceive otherwise is a smatch of Donatisme, who made the validity
of Ordinances wholly to depend upon the real goodness of those that Administered
them; which opinion, if it were true, it must necessarily follow, that there
must be an absolu^e knowledge in the People, of discerning unfeigned Grace in
the heart of the Minister, from all pretended semblances and shows, or else
what comfort can they have in the validity of his Acts, while this suspicion
abides upon them; that is, if he be not really holy, all that he can do is no
other then a Nullity? we must then distinguish between the grace of gifts,
which God bestows for the good of the Church, and the gift of grace, which he
gives for the good of the Soul of him who is partaker of it: By the one of
these a Man may become a Minister; but without the conjunction of both he can
never be a good Minister. Holiness then, as it is that which no Man can be well
without, so a Minister least of all; it being the great end of his Office to
turn Men from sin to God, and to draw Men up from earth, yea from the danger of
Hell to Heaven: And should he not do what he Teaches, and second his Doctrine
with his Example: he must needs sin against his Calling, which always
heightneth the notoriety of the fact. No sins being so inexcusably sinful, as
those that are committed against Men's Callings: For a Steward to be a Thief,
for a Physician to be a Murderer, for an Ambassador trusted with the Affairs of
his Prince to be a Traitor, are Crimes of greater Infamy in them then in
another. How then can the impieties of a Minister but be above all others, by
so much the worst, by how much his Calling is above all others the best? what
then can be more prodigious, then for him, who should be Gods Mouth to the
People, to have his Tongue set on Fire of Hell, and not touched with a Coal
from the Altar? or for him whom God has honored with that high employment of
winning Souls, to be an accursed Appollyon in undoing and destroying them by
his nefarious and impure living: If he that shall break the least Commandment,
and Teach Men so, shall be called least in the Kingdom of Heaven, what then
shall he be called who breaks the greatest Commandment, and Teaches Men so?
surely I scarce know what to call him, who has of a Minister thus transformed
himself into a Monster, he is not a Star in Christ's right hand, but in the
Dragons Tail, which drew many from Heaven and cast them down upon the Earth. He
is amongst the Prophets, the Simeon rightly called Niger, not for his
Complexion, but for his Conversation: he is in the House and Temple of God, not
as the Priests which did bear the Ark, but as the Beasts which drew it and
shook it. For, if the sins of any Man do loosen and endanger the Foundations of
Christian Religion, it is the wickedness of Ministers, which makes many to
question whether there be an Heaven, an Hell, or a God. And though it may
possibly now and then fall out, that the Seed of Divine Truth, like Corn sown
by a leprous hand, grow up into some fruit; yet how small is the good that is
wrought by this Doctrine, to the great hurt that is done by the dissolute life
of such a Minister? is it likely that he, who in the Pulpit pleads for honor
to be given to Christ's Person, obedience to be yielded to his Precepts, faith
to be exercised in his Promises, and when he is out of it g^insayes all that he
has spoken in his sensual practices, should win many Disciples to Christ? will
he be ever much hearkened unto who decries Drunkenness, Swearing, wantonness,
as the high-Rodes and Paths to destruction, and yet turns not his own feet
from walking in them? will it not be said unto him, Physician heal thy self?
or, thou hypocrite, first cast out the beam out of thy own eye, and then shall
thou see clearly to cast out the mo^e that is in thy Brothers eye. But what
ever the issue be, whether Men hearken, o^ not hearken, yet will the condition
of such a Minister be most sad in the great day: if he be instrumental in the
saving of any, yet they shall be none of his Crown or Joy, nor in the least
extenuate his misery, but aggravate it, in that he has been only to them as a
standing Statue, to point out the way to heaven, not a living Companion to walk
with them in it. How much then will it augment his pains and anguish, when the
blood of many misled and lost Souls must fall upon his head, and he be
condemned as the cursed Murderer of them? O that these few words might prick
the hearts of such, who have worn the badg of God, and yet done the Devils
work, who have been his Servants by Office, and his Enemies by Practice, that
they might timely think both of saving themselves and others. However, blessed
God, help me to do the Ofsice of a Minister, and keep me from the punishment of
a Minister. Pardon mine inabili^ies in thy Service, and deliver me from
scandalous sins. Enable me to bear Reproach for Christ, but let me never be a
re-Proach to Christ, or his Gospel.

Meditation XXI. Upon the Golden Calfe, and the Bra^en Serpent.
THe Makers of these two Images were Moses and Aaron, such a pair of Brethren
as History cannot parallel for Eminency, and whose Names outshine greatly all
others of the like alliance that have an honorable mention in the Book of God.
Where are there two Brethren in that Sacred Chronicle, so renowned for sundry
Miracles done by them? or so highly dignified by Titles given to them by the
Spirit of God as they? Moses being styled signally the Servant of God; and
Aaron, the Saint of the Lord: and yet how strangly differing are their two
Images? they are unlike in the Matter; the one being of Gold, and the other of
Brass? unlike in the Figure, the one a Calfe, the other a Serpent: but most
unlike in their Effects, the one Killing, and the other Healing. Vi^^lus aureus
occidit Serpens Aeneus sanat: The Golden Calfe that kills, and the Brazen
Serpent that saves alive. One would think that the same Fountain should as soon
send forth Salt Water and Fresh, as either of these to do any thing that should
terminate in such contrary effects, by whose harmonious Conduct Israel had been
led as a Flock of Sheep through the Wilderness. But what if their Actions did
Jarr? yet, who could readily conceive that Aarons Calfe should be as a
destroying poison? or that Moses his Serpent should be as an effectual
Antidote to save alive? did he not flee from his Rod when turned into a
Serpent, as fearing to be hurt by it? And was not this Brazen Serpent in shape
and figure like to those fiery Serpents, that had stung many Israelites to
death? from whence then comes this strange difference between the one and the
other, is it not from hence? Aarons Calfe, though made of Gold, was without,
yea against a command of God; but Moses his Serpent, though of Brass, was by
his special appointment. Let the Institutions of God be never so mean and
despicable to the eye of sense; yet they shall obtain their designed end: and
let the Inventions of Men be never so rich and costly, yet they will be found
to be no other then hurtful vanities. Who is of so small an Insight in the
Mystery of Idolatry and Superstition, as not to observe how they affect a Pomp
and Splendour in their Religion, as if when they had made it Gay, they had made
it Good? and how greatly they despise the simplicity of that Worship which is
not clothed and decked with an external Grandeur? But will a Clove in the Mouth
cure the unsavory breathings of corrupt Lungs? or will the Leper^ making of
himself brave with the finest Garments cause the Priest to pronounce him clean,
when he comes to behold his Sore? then may such arts and palliations of men,
wedded to Idolatrous practices, vindicare the evil of their doings, and
justify them to be such as God will not condemn. But as Religion is not a
thing left to any man's choice, to pick out from that diversity, with which the
World abounds, what best pleases himself; so neither are the ways and Mediums
of the Exercise of it at all in his power. As God is the object of Worship, so
the means by which he is honored, and his servants benefited that use them,
must be appointed by himself. His will and not man's must be the sole and
ad^quate Rule. For all Ordinances do not work necessarily, as the Fire burns,
or as the Sun enlightens the Air; nor do they work Physically, as having an
inherent power to produce their effects; but they are operative, by way of
Institution, and receive their virtue from God, who therefore appoints weak and
insufficient things to the eye of Reason, that himself may be the more
acknowledged in all. What could be more unlikely to heal the bitings of a fiery
Serpent, then the looking up only to a Brazen Serpent? or to restore to the
blind Man his ^ight, then the anointing of his eyes with Clay and Spittle? And
yet these things God and Christ are pleased to make use of; not from indigency,
as if they could not work without means, but from Wisdom and Council, to show,
that they can work by any: Let no Man then fondly make it his Work, or count it
his duty to honor God with his Inventions, though specious and beautiful in
his own eyes; but let him value and prize Gods Institutions, though to outward
appearance they be contemptible. The Blew-Bottles, and other Weeds in the Field
are more gaudy and delightful to the Eye than the Corn amongst which they grow;
but yet the one are worthless, and the other is full of strength and
nourishment.

Meditation XXII. Upon the Circulation of the blood.
THough it be no confessed Maxim, yet it is an opinion which many Physicians
do confidently assert, that the motion of the blood is Circular, and that the
blood which is in the feet has a reflux back into the heart. But it is not for
me, if there be a difference between those who are of the secrets of nature, to
undertake the decision of it least it be said to me, as i^ was to Moses, when
he mediated between the two Israelites that strove, Quis te constituit Judicem?
Who made you a Judge over us? I shall therefore turn my thoughts from it, unto
the circulation which is in the civil body of Society, wherein the affections,
habits, manners, as a kind of spiritual blood, may be truly affirmed both to
flow upward from the inferior parts of it to the superior, and to descend
again from the superior parts of it to the inferior. But yet this
disproportion is to be observed, that the Efluxes both of good and evil which
move downwards, are more quick and operative, than those which ascend from
below upwards. Great persons by their manners and carriage do sooner make
impressions upon persons of a meaner rank than they are able to reflect back
upon them again. This Moral Circulation therefore may teach those who are as
the noble and Architectonical parts of the civil body full of power and
influence, to be exact and circumspect in their converse and living, that
others, upon whom their influences fall, may be drawn by them to a love of
holiness, and not seduced to lusts and intemperancies by their example. If he
who was rightly surnamed Copronimus, have a fancy to the smell of horse-dung,
as to besmear himself with it, all his Courtiers, in a servile compliance unto
him, will qualify themselves for his company by using no other perfumes. Yea,
if greater Beastialities be used by other Princes, they are not likely to want
followers. The whole Court will be soon, like Jacobs Cattle, spotted and
speckled, as being apt to conceive, with some tincture of the Colors which
they see in those waters whereof they daily drink. It being an hard thing to be
an Obadiah that fears God greatly in Ahabs Court, or a Saint in Neroes
Household. But though evil in those who are in high places be more infectious,
and the good more powerful than it is in others; yet the vices of those who are
in a lower Station have a tendency to corrupt the greatest, as the head in the
body natural is often distempered by the feet. And so the virtues that are in
them are also operative to influence those that are in dignity above them, to
the making of themselves evil, if not more good. The luster of St. John's
Sanctity, though clothed with Camels hair, extorts reverence from Herod in his
Robes; and Paul's excellent demeanor of himself at the Bar, well-nigh overcomes
Agrippa upon the Bench to be a Christian. O how careful then should every man
be, who in what condition soever he stands is a part of the body of humane
society, to abhor evil, and to cleave to that which is good? When the effects
both of the one and other are not terminated in our selves, but do more or less
benefit or hurt others as well as our selves.

Meditation XXIII. Upon a Multiplying Glass.
WHat a vain and fictitious happiness would that be, if a poor man, who had
only a small piece of money, should, by the looking upon it through a
multiplying Glass, please himself in believing that he is now secure from the
fears of pressing wants, his single piece being suddenly minted into many
pounds, with which he can readily furnish himself with fuel to warm him,
clothes to cover him, and food to satisfy him? But alas! when he puts forth
his hand to take a supply from what he beholds, he can feel nothing of what he
sees; and when the Glass is gone that presented him with so much Treasure, he
can then see nothing but his first pittance, which also becomes the less
desirable because of the disappointment of his hopes. Upon what better
foundation does the felicity of the greatest part of men stand, which is not
fixed upon any true and spiritual good, as its proper Basis, but upon the
specious semblances of a corrupt and mutable fancy? What is it that rich men do
not promise themselves, who conceive riches to be a strong Tower? They think
they can laugh at Famine, and when others, like the poor Egyptians, whose
Substance is exhausted, sell themselves and their children for food, they can
buy their bread at any rate. If Enemies rise up against them, they question
not, but they can purchase a peace or a victory. If Sickness come, oh how can
they please themselves in thinking that their Purse can command the Physicians
skill, and the Drugsters shops. Elixars, Cordials, Magisterial powders, they
conceive beforehand will be prescribed both as their diet and Physic: And
every avenue of the body, at which the disease or death may threaten to enter,
shall be so fortified, as that both of them shall receive an easy and quick
repulse. Now what are all these representations but the impostures of the glass
of fancy, which, like the colors in the Rainbow, have more of show tha^ of
Entity. Does not Solomon counsel men not to labor ^o be rich? And expostulate
with them, Will thou set thine eyes upon that which is not? Does not our
Savior call them, deceitful Riches? And Paul, uncertain Riches? What then can
they contribute to the real happiness of any man? Surely the transient sparks
that with much difficulty are forced from the flint, may as soon add light to
the body of the Sun, as Riches can yield any solid comfort to the soul, or keep
it from lying down in the bed of darkness and sorrow. Away then from me ye
flattering vanities and gilded nothings of the world, get you to the Bats, and
to the Moles, and try what beauteous rays you can dart into their eyes. I will
hence no more behold you in the Glass of Fancy, but in the Glass of the Word,
which discovers that ye are always vanity and vexation, no objects of trust in
the times of strait, or price of deliverance in the day of wrath. It is
methinks observable that four times in Scripture this saying is repeated, That
Riches and Treasures profit nothing in the day of wrath, twice in the Book of
Proverbs, and then again by two Prophets, Ezekiel, and Zephaniah. Doubtless
these holy men knew what an universal proness there is in the minds of most to
exalt Riches above Righteousness, and to think, that by them Heaven might be
purchased, and the flames of Hell bribed. How else could such words ever drop
from the mouths of any, that they had made a Covenant with Death, and were at
an agreement with Hell to pass from them? But, Lord, keep me from imagining to
save my soul by Merchandise, or of entituling my self any other way to the
Inheritance of Heaven, than by the Blood of Christ, who is my Life, my Riches,
my Rejoicing, and sure Confidence.

Meditation XXIV. Upon Gravity and Levity.
THe Stoic Philosophy was famous for Paradoxes, strange Opinions, improbable,
and besides common conceit, for which it was much admired by some, and as
greatly controuled, and taxed by others. Howbeit, not Stoicisme only, but every
Art, and course of life and learning has some Paradoxes or other, but
Christianity has many more, which seem like nothing less than truth, and yet
are as true as strange. What can be more contrary to the Principles and Maxims
of Philosophers, than to hold that there is a regress from a total privation to
an habit? It was that which the Epicureans and Stoics derided in Paul, when he
preached the Resurrection from the dead; and yet Christians build all their
happiness and confidence upon it. What can seem to carry more of a
contradiction in it than that saying of our Savior, He that will lose his life
shall find it? And yet it is a truth of that importance, that whosoever follows
not Christ's counsel will certainly miss of life. What will happily appear more
novel and strange, than that which I shall now add by inverting the common
Axiom, and affirming this as a truth, Levia tendunt deorsum, and gravia sursum,
Light things fall downwards, and heavy ascend upwards: The lighter they are the
lower they sink, and the heavier they are the higher they rise; and yet this
Riddle has a truth in it. In Scripture the wicked that must fall as low as
hell are resembled to things of the greatest Levity as well as vileness, Dust,
Chaff, Smoke, Fume, Scum: and the Saints that must ascend as high as Heaven,
are likened to things of weight as well as worth: To Wheat, the heaviest of
which is the best; to Gold, which is of Metals the weightiest, as well as the
richest; to Gems and precious Stones. that are valued by the number of the
Carrats which they weigh, as well as by their luster with which they sparkle.
Yea, God has his Balance to weigh men and their actions, as well as his
Touchstone to try them. He is a God of knowledge, by whom actions are weighed,
says Hannah in her Song: And if he find great men a lie and vanity upon the
Balance he will not spare them. What a severe Judgment did God execute upon
Belshazzar, who being weighed and found wanting, was in the same night cast out
both from his Kingdom, and from the Land of the living? And what a dreadful
Sentence has Christ foretold shall come from his mouth in the great day
against those who have made a vain and empty profession of his Name, who are
bid to depart from him, and go accursed into everlasting fire, not for doing
evil against his, but for not doing of good unto them? A form of Godliness
without the power will condemn, as well as real and open wickedness: To be
found too light in Gods Scale may be a bar to heaven, as well as the load of
many sins. O remember who has said it, Except your righteousness exceed the
righteousness of Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the
Kingdom of heaven. How gladly then would I persuade Christians, that the best
way to climb the Jacobs Ladder, which has its foot on Earth, and its top in
glory, is to be fully laden with all fruits of holiness. Christi sarcina pennas
habet non pondus, the burden of Christ is not a pressing weight, but a winged
thing which carries the Soul upwards, and helps it to soar aloft toward God
himself. None are crowned with greater glory, or set upon higher Thrones, than
they who have their fruit unto true holiness above others.

Meditation XXV. Upon false Mediums.
THe fruition of the end, is the Sabbath of all action, having this property in
it, to quiet as well as incite the Agent; for nothing moves that it may move,
but moves that it may rest. And yet though the end be always desirable, it is
by Agents who act freely, and out of choice often missed, and falls short of,
as well as enjoyed. And this sometimes comes to pass by their dividing the
means from the end, presuming they may obtain the one, and yet not use the
other. With this Sophism Satan has cheated many of Salvation, while he has
made them confident of happiness, and yet careless of holiness; and to think
they may Inn with the righteous, though they never travel with them in the
way, that they may reap glory, though they sow seed to the flesh. Sometimes
again they miss the end though they use the means, because they do not
proportion the one to the other. They use the means, but it is, as some
Patients take Physic, to stir the humors rather than to carry them away, and
thereby endanger themselves, rather than effect a cure. Many through the
strength of Conviction yield that if they will have heaven something must be
done by them; but their study is rather to find out the invisible point, where
nature and grace part, than to abound in all manner of holy Conversation, and
so while they strive to do no more then what will save them, they miserably
fall short of what is requisite. Others again miscarry in regard of the end, by
pitching upon false and vain means, such when labored and persisted in do not
profit in the least. Would any man wonder at his disappointment, that should
hunt an Hare with a Snail? Or to hit the Mark should shoot an Arrow out of a
Butchers Gambrel? Or to make a Tree fruitful should cloth the body of it with
costly Silks instead of feeding the root with good mould? Would not this folly
be rather greatly reproached by all, then his frustrated endeavors in the
least be pitied by any? And yet how many men who would brand such a person with
the deepest mark of folly and madness are guilty of as great infatuation in
matters of far higher moment? Is there any thing that can be of more real
consequence, than the eternal welfare of an immortal soul? Can the care of
Anxiety be too great what Rocks to shun; what paths to tread; what means to
use, that may bring the soul and salvation together? And yet behold what an ill
choice of Mediums do such who profess themselves wise make to effect it: The
Idolater, he after a strange manner first makes his God, and then begs his
happiness from it; one part of the Wood he burns, as Fuel to serve him, and
the other part of it he serves and dreads as a Deity, and falling down unto it,
worshippeth it, and says, deliver me for thou art my God. The wretched
Libertine he thinks it little skills what Religion any man is of, so he be but
true unto it, and walk according to the Rules and Principles of it: as if
Heaven were a Port to which all Winds would drive; an Inn in which Travelers
that journey from contrary quarters may be equally received. The Pharisaical
Christian lays the stress of his Salvation upon his Duties, which at best are
like chains of glass, more specious then strong; like flourishings in
Parchment, that cannot bear a fiery trial. O how few are they who consider that
Heaven stands like a little Mark in a wide Field, where there are a thousand
ways to err from it, and but one to hit it? yea, though God has said that
there is but one Sacrifice by which we can be perfected; but one Blood by which
we can be Purified; but one Name by which we can be saved; yet how hardly are
the best drawn to trust perfectly to the Grace revealed, and to look from
themselves to Christ, as the Author and Finisher of their blessedness? To make
them a right choice of the way that leads to Salvation, is not an act of
Natural Wisdom, but of Divine Illumination, and Teachings of the Spirit, who
both inlightneth the Mind, and inclines the will to choose the one thing which
is necessary. O therefore, holy Father, seeing thou have made the whole
Progress of Salvation, from first to last to be in Christ, and by Christ;
Election to be in him, Adoption to be in him, Justification to be in him,
Sanctification to be in him, Glorification to be in him; grant, that whatever
others do, I may never choose the Candlelight of Reason, but the Sun of
Righteousness, as the guide of my feet into the paths of life, and both in
life and death say, as that blessed Martyr did, none but Christ, none but
Christ.

Meditation XXVI. Upon the Royal Oak.
THe Perfections of God, his Sovereignty, Power, Wisdom and goodness are seen
as in a bright mirror, not only in the standing works of Creation, but in the
transient works of Providence, who does, as Job acknowledges great things
past finding out, and wonders without number. But among the many signal Birth^s
of Providence this which my thoughts are now upon may justly challenge the
right of the Firstborn in a double portion, both of Meditation and Admiration:
As then Zacheus to see Jesus climbed up into a Sycamore-Tree, and thereby
gained not only a sight of Christ, but a gracious look, and comfortable words
from him: let us also climb this Royal Oak, that we may have an awful ^ight
of God, such, as may not only fill us with wonder, but further us in holiness,
which is the great end of Gods Providence as well as of his Ordinances. And
the first step or motion that I shall make to ascend this Oak by, is the
consideration of Gods Power, in using the same Creatures, not only in
differing, but in contrary Services, as he is pleased severally to apply them.
The Fire at the same time preserves the three Children in the Furnace, and
devours the Instruments of their Persecution: The Red Sea is Isreal's Path to
Canaan, and the Waters a Wall on each hand, but both are made the Egyptians
grave: The Earth opens her Mouth to swallow up Corah and his Company, but it
helps the Woman in her flight by opening its mouth to drink in the Flood,
which the Dragon sent forth from his Mouth to destroy Her. The Trees of the
Field fight for David, and contribute to his Victory more than his Army; for it
is said that the Wood destroyed more than the Sword: An Oak Arrests Absalom in
his flight, who is caught and hanged in it, as if it would point out what was
the just reward of his Treason and Rebellion against his King and Father; But
an Oak succors our Prince in his retreat from the strength and power of a
prevailing Enemy; and though it can ^ender no Wreaths or Crowns to him, yet it
spreads forth its Arms to receive him, and keeps him in so much safety as to
deliver good Men of their Fears who were afflicted for his Jeopardy, and to
disappoint others of their hopes who were Vainly Confident that he would be
found either among the number of the Slain, or of the Prisoners; But God was
seen in the Mount, making his Escape to be far more wonderful in every Man's
eyes than their Victory. Who then would not Adore and Fear such a God, at whose
Beck, Fire, Water, Trees of the Field, yea and all Creatures become Enemies, or
Friends, as he pleases to make them.

A second step is the consideration of Gods absolute Sovereignty over all
Potentates, and Kings of the Earth; who, as Elihu expresses it, Breaks in
pieces the Mighty without number, and sets others in their stead. How full are
the Sacred Chronicles of strange Vicissitudes and Changes which God has made
in the Crowns and Scepters of Princes? Saul's Kingdom is taken from him and
given to David: Rehoboams is rent in twain, and of twelve parts two only
possessed by him: Athalia she usurpes the Throne, and destroys the Seed Royal:
Joash is slain by a Conspiracy: Manasseh is bound in Fetters: Zedekiah has
Judgment given against him to take his farewell of the light, in beholding the
slaying of his Sons, and then to have both his eyes put out. How easy were it
to fill a Volume in this kind? but what need we search further into History,
have we not seen as sad Spectacles as we can any where read? h^th not Royal
Blood been shed upon a Scaffold, to the shame and reproach of Religion? have we
not seen Persons of mean extractions, leaving their Cottages, and dwelling in
Kings Palaces, when Sovereignty has been forced to take up the lodging of a
Crow? have we not seen that disquieting Prodigy, of Servants upon Horses, and
Princes walking like Servants on foot? Now, to what end does God thus shake the
Mountains, and make the greatest in Power to be as the Chaff of the Summer
floores? is it not to stain the Pride of the Arm of Flesh, and to let every one
know that Power belongs unto the Lord, and that it is better to trust in the
Lord, then to put confidence in Princes?

A third step, or motion, discovers to us how easily God can hide Persons and
things from Man, when Man can neither hide Counsels from God, nor yet himself.
Adam runs from God, and seeks shelter among the Trees of the Garden; but God
finds him out: he sowes Fig Leaves together to cover his Nakedness, but God
espies it. The Wings of the Morning can carry no Man to such a distance as that
God shall not behold him; nor the pitchy darkness of the Night make such a
Covering, as he cannot look through, to whom the darkness and the light are
both alike. The only way for a sinner to hide himself from God, is to hide
himself in God. But with what facility and variety of ways can God secure and
keep those whom Men design to destruction? David and ^ix hundred Men are in
the sides of the same Cave into which Saul enters, and he perceives it not.
Joash is hid ^ix years in the Temple miraculously from the bloody Sword of
Athaliah: and our Sovereign is no less wonderfully for some days preserved in
an Oak, as in a Sanctuary, though his Enemies make a most strict search for
him, there being no Nation, or Kingdom, under their Power, whether they did not
send to seek him; and though they took not an Oath of them that they found him
nor, yet they proclaimed ample Rewards to any that would discover him. We read
in Judges of an Angel that sat under an Oak, and may we not well presume, that
this Oak, which had a Prince in the top of it, had also an Angel at the bottom
of it, if we well weigh the Eminency of the deliverance.

A fourth step gives us to behold the rich Mercy, and the great Faithfulness of
God, who though he does afflict, yet does not forsake; who as he casts down, so
he raises up: as he takes away, so also he graciously restored. Was ever
Prince reduced to sorer straits? Did he not at once conflict with dangers of
Life, Poverty, Banishment, disappointment of Counsels, and a daily setting
back of his hopes by new difficulties and emergences that did arise? and yet
how wonderfully did God make these Mountains to become a Plain; the confused
noise of Warriors in Battle, was not heard, Garments rolled in Blood were not
seen; neither were the Firr-trees terribly shaken in the Field; all was
effected not by might nor power, but by the Spirit of God. The Temple, in which
there was neither Hammer nor Axe, nor any Tool of Iron heard, was not built in
a more calm and still manner than his Throne was Erected. And he who was as a
Stone rejected for a long time, by certain Builders, at length became the
Head-Stone of the Corner. May we not then well say this is the Lords doing, it
is mavelous in our eyes? Let me therefore make here a pause, and in stead of
a further progress, say as Moses did, I will stand and see this great sight, a
Prince once disguised in a poor and mean habit, and now clothed with Robes of
Majesty; once an Exile from three Kingdoms, and now possessing the just
Royalties of them all. Once necessitated to climb an Oak to preserve his own
life, and now daily ascending the Throne to give out the Laws of life and of
death unto others. O what a web of wonders are here, of which God has made
garments of Praise and Salvation for him, whom many judged to be not only
smitten but forsaken of God? Admiration methinks now is better then words; and
silence, in an awful beholding of these things, is more expressive then a free
speaking of them. I shall therefore break off this Meditation, which I cannot
happily end, adding only this short Prayer, That the good will of him that
dwelt in the Oak, as well as in the bush, may still be seen in the blessings
that come from him, upon the Head of our Joseph, and on the Crown of the Head
of Him that was separated from His Subjects, but is now wonderfully restored to
them.

Meditation XXVII. Upon the Weapon Salve.
Who was the Author of this Weapon Salve, cannot certainly be affirmed: Some
attribute it to Paracelsus, who was very pregnant in mysterious Inventions:
others to one Parmensis Anshelmus an Italian, who was called a Saint, as Simon
Magus of old, the great power of God, though both were no better then grand
Sorcerers. But whoever he were, the Ointment is much famed (yet not altogether
unquestioned) for its strange manner of healing and curing of wounds, differing
from other Physical Applications in a double respect: The one is, that it is
applied not to the person who receives the wounds, but to the active Instrument
that inflicts it, which is a subject not at all capable of sickness, or sanity,
of ease or pain, and so cannot be receptive of the alterative power of the
Ointment, which, if it work by a vertual contact, must necessarily have the
intermedial Bodies to participate of it. The other is, that this Salve effects
its Cure at distances, which are inconsistent with the Rules of a mediate
Contact, it heales the Patient when he is a hundred miles off, as well as when
he is near; and that requires a vicinity of place, as well as a right
disposition of the Medium. Now these differences, though they have served to
heighten its esteem in the apprehensions of many, and have given occasion to
Learned Men, who are great admirers of Sympathies, to Write for it, or to be
fautors of it; yet others of no less worth and repute have divided from them,
and have slighted it as an empty vanity, or censured it as a Magical impiety.
For my part I am not satisfied with such subtle nicities as are used to defend
it, of common and universal Spirits, which convey the action of the remedy unto
the part, and conjoyn the virtue of bodies far disjoined, neither can I think
it worthy of such speculations; it commonly healing but simple wounds, and
such, which being kept clean, need no other hand then that of Nature, and the
Balsam of the proper part. But there is a Weapon Salve of which it is easy to
speak much, but Impossible to say enough; so full it is of divine and
mysterious wonders, if we consider either what it is, or what the cures are
which it effects, or what the distance is in which it operates. Would you know
what this Salve is? it is the Blood of Christ Crucified, whose sufferings do
all turn to the advantage of Believers: the Blood is his, but the Balm is
theirs; the Thorns are his, but the Crown is theirs; the Price is his, but the
Purchase is theirs: Would you hear what Cures it does? it heals inveterate
Ulcers, and mortal Wounds; it extinguisheth the Fiery Darts of Satan; it draws
forth the Venom of the Sting of Death; it eases Pressures; it destroys
Yokes, and what not, that rises up as a let or bar 10 a Believers life or
happiness. Would you know the extent of its virtue, and at what a distance it
operates? Paul tells us, that by the Blood of his Cross Christ has reconciled
all things unto himself, whether they be things in Earth, or things in Heaven.
There is no Person that can stand so remote, or be at any such Angle; or Corner
of the Earth, but he may partake of the influence of it, if he do but cast up
an eye of Faith toward Heaven, and be as fully healed as any other. Like as
the stung Israelite who lay in the utmost part of the Camp did receive equal
benefit by looking to the Brazen Serpent, with him that stood next unto the
Pole upon which it was Erected. O therefore let not any, who are excercised
with Spiritual Conflicts cast away their Confidence, but fight the good fight
of Faith unto the end: for though they be not invulnerable, yet none of their
Wounds are incurable. The Blood of Christ is more powerful to Save, than Sin,
or other Enemies to Destroy; else the great end of Christ's Coming into the
World, of being a Physician to the Sick, a Deliverer to the Captive, an Healer
of the Brokenhearted would be in vain, and all the Saints must be still in
their Sins. Set then Faith on work ye that Faint and Droop in your Minds; and
say not, who shall go up for us to Heaven, and bring this Salve-unto us that we
may liye? or who shall go over the Sea for us and bring this Sovereign Balm
of Gilead unto us, that we may be healed by it? Do but Believe and the Cure is
wrought. Faith is the Instrument which makes a vertual Contact between Christ
and every Believer: It receives healing Grace from him, and straitwayes conveys
it unto the Subject in which it is to terminate. For as Futurition in respect
of the Existency of things is no prejud^ce to the Eye of Faith in the beholding
of them as present; So neither is distance of place any hinderance to the
efficacy of the touch of Faith, but that it may forthwith transmit the Sanative
Efflux of Christ's Blood unto him, who by Faith touches him: The Woman that
labored many years of the Bloody Issue, in the same instant that She touched
the Hem of Christ's Garment, felt in her self, that She was healed of her
Plague. But I am jealous, that whilst I commend this sacred remedy, some
presumptuous Sinner, who is more apt to abuse Grace, than a Wounded Spirit to
improve it, should make no other use of it than to think he may sin securely,
and needs not fear what bruises and wounds he contracts, seeing the Cure is
certain and speedy. I can therefore do no less then express my self in an holy
Indignation against such, who would make the precious Blood of my Savior
subservient to their lusts, desiring rather to be freed from the danger than
from the Dominion of their sins. O my Soul come not thou into their secret;
unto their Assembly mine Honor be not thou united: Cursed be their lusts, for
they are vile, and their desires for they are devilish. Let me bless God who
has made me whole, and sin no more, least a worse thing come unto me.

Meditation XXVIII. Upon the Rudder of a Ship.
AMongst other Similitudes, which St. James uses to show that great matters
are effected by sm^ll means; this of the Rudder of a Ship is one, and he
ushereth it in with a signal word, which the Scripture often prefixeth to
weighty sayings, to render them the more remarkable: Behold also the Ships,
which though they be so great, are driven of fierce winds, yet are turned about
with a very small Helm whithersoever the Governor lists. The right guidance
of this single part is of such consequence to the safety of the whole, as that
every irregular motion may either hazard the Vessel, or greatly hinder its
progress, when it answers not the just point of the Compass. How continually
are these words of direction, Starboard, Starboard, Port, Port, spoken by him
that eyes the Compass, repeated by him that holds the Helm, to prevent all
danger that might arise from mistakes. Or else how suddenly would Rocks, Waves,
or Sands make a prey of them? Well then might Aristotle in his Mechanical
Questions propose it as a Problem worthy of a resolution, why a little helm
hanging upon the outmost part of the Ship, should have such a great power as to
move a vast bulk and weight with much facility, amidst storms and gusts of
wind? And may we not answer, that the wisdom in these Arts is Gods, though the
industry in the use of them is man's. But the more power it has, the more apt
Emblem it is of that faculty of the Will, which in all moral actions is the
Spiritual Rudder of the soul, to turn the whole man this way or that way as it
pleases. The Position of the School is a truth, Inclinatio voluntatis est
inclinatio totius compositi: The inclination of the will is the inclination of
the whole person, and according to the rectitude, or pravity of its motions
both the man and his actions are denominated good or evil. And hence it is that
Austin does often define Sin by a mala voluntas, and good by a bona voluntas,
because of the dominion which the Will has in the whole man. Of how absolute
concernment is it then, that this great Engine which commands all the
inferior powers of the soul, be not disordered. If there be a Dyspepsie in the
Stomach, an inflammation in the Liver, or a taint in some other Vital, what can
the less noble parts of the body contribute unto its health? If the Foundation
be out of course, how can the Building stand? If the Spring be polluted, who
can expect the Streams should be Christalline? If the will be vitiated, how can
it be, that Fear, Hatred, Love, Joy, Desire, which in the sensitive part are
Passions, but in the soul are immaterial affections, or rather operations of
the Will, and are found in Angels themselves, should be pure and free from the
corruption of their principle? It is therefore necessary that this spiritual
Rudder have also a spiritual Compass by which it may steer, that so its motions
may not be destructive, or at the least vain. And what can this Compass be but
the Word and Will of God? Conformity and obedience unto which is the only
happiness as well as the whole duty of man. It is man's duty to will what God
wills, because as he was made like unto God in his Image, so he was made for
God in his end. And it is the happiness of man to will and nill as God does,
because he thereby only comes to obtain a true and perfect rest: Else Seu caret
optatis, seu fruitio miser est; whether he have or want what he desires, he is
still miserable; like Noah's Dove, restless and fluttering till it can find out
an object wherein it may acquiesce; Like the Grave and the Horse-leech, always
craving and never satisfied. See then, O Christian, from whence is it that this
world, which is a tempestuous Sea unto all, proves so fatal to many in the sad
shipwreck of their eternal happiness. Is it not from the lawless motions of
their will? which when not governed by the will of God, as its perfect rule, is
Cupiditas non voluntas, an impetuous and raging lust rather than a will. What
was it that ruined our first Parents, and in them all their Posterity, but the
inordinacy of their will; by which they lost both their happiness and holiness
at once? And what is it under the Gospel into which Christ resolves the
damnation of those that perish? Is it not that they will not come unto him that
they might have life? All obedience or disobedience is properly, or at least
primarily in no part but in the will, so that though other faculties of the
soul in regeneration are sanctified, and thereby made conformable to the will
of God, yet obedience and disobedience are formally acts of the will, and
according to its qualifications is a man said to be obedient unto God or
disobedient. O that I could therefore awaken both my self and others to a due
consideration of what importance it is, like a wise and industrious Pilot to
guide this Rudder of the soul, the will of man, by the unerring Compass of the
will of God. Heaven is the Port for which we all profess our selves bound, and
can it ever be obtained by naked and inefficatious velleities, by a few faint
wishings and wouldings? What blind Balaam would then miss of it? What sloathful
man, that hides his hand in his bosom, and will not so much as bring it to
his mouth again, might not then possess it, as well as any Caleb, or Joshuah,
that wholly followed the Lord, or as David who fulfilled all his wills?
Methinks that saying of our Savior should be as a Goad in the side of every
sluggard, Not every one that says unto me Lord, Lord, shall enter into the
kingdom of heaven: but he that does the will of my father which is in heaven.
However, O holy God, let it quicken me to all diligence in an entire conformity
of my will to thy will, that so I may readily do what thou command, and let
me esteem it as the best part of heavens happiness, that I shall one day do it
perfectly, as the Angels which behold thy face.

Meditation XXIX. Upon the Balsam Tree.
SOme faces are by the Painter drawn with less difficulty than others, the
lineaments and features of them being such, as are more easy for his eye to
observe, and for his hand also happily to express. And so it is with some
Subjects of meditation above others, which with less labor of the mind are by
the Pencill of the thoughts formed into lively resemblances of heavenly things,
and thereby bearing a proportion to our Senses, do convey spiritual mysteries
in a facile and delightful manner to our understanding. Such a subject is this
Balsam Tree, which while I think of the place of its growth, the way of
obtaining its Juice, and the sovereign virtue that it has to effect strange
cures, and to heal Inveterate diseases, it carries forthwith my thoughts to my
blessed Savior, who is the only repository in which God has laid up all his
invaluable treasures of healing Balsams. It readily suggests to me such moving
Considerations as serve to exalt Christ's Excellency in my heart, and to endeare
him to me in all the ties of choycest affections; And that it may do so to
others, I will draw the parallel between this Tree and Christ, that others may
see what a sweet representation it is of him, who, as David says, forgiveth
all our iniquities, who heals all our diseases. First, the sole place of this
trees growth is in Emanuels Land. It is Plinies observation, Balsamum uni
terrarum Judeae concessum est; it is a special grant bestowed by God upon
Judea: the Country which is renouned for Christ's Birth is also only celebrated
for this Balm, all other Nations wholly wanted it, or at least had none like
it. Moses tells us, that it was anciently one of the Is^maelites Commodities
which they carried from Gilead to Egypt. And Ezekiel says it was Isreal's and
Judahs Merchandise to Tyrus. Does it not then genuinely point out unto us, that
the whole world must be beholding to Christ for Salvation and healing? Does it
not as a spiritual Hierogliphick, assert that weighty Doctrine of Peter's, That
there is no name under heaven given amongst men, whereby we must be saved, but
by the name of Christ? Why then do men lay out their money for that which is
not Balm, Why do they take hold sometimes on one Creature, and sometimes one
another, saying, Be thou our healer, let this ruin be under thy hand? Is it not
one of those glorious Appellations which God in Scripture is pleased to take
unto himself, Ego Jehovah curator tuus; I am the Lord that heals thee? Take
heed then, O Christian, when thou art under any distress, or under any malady
to cheat thy self with false remedies, to use Fig leaves instead of Figs
themselves. Adam took the one, which did only hide his nakedness, but not cure
it; but to restore Hezekiah, God took the other. Use what God has appointed,
not what thou fanciest.

Secondly, This Bals^me tree drops and weeps forth its Balm to heal their
wounds, that cut and mangle it, and did not our blessed Savior do thus? What a
strange requital did this great innocent and holy person make unto those from
whom he suffered? They mock and revile him hanging upon the Cross, and he
prays, and begs forgiveness for them. They shed his blood, and he makes it a
precious Medicine to heal their putred sores. They smite and pierce him to the
heart with a Spear, and he erects in his heart a fountain to wash them from
their sin and uncleanness. Was it ever heard, that a Physician would sweat and
bleed for his surfeited Patient? Or that an offended Prince would expiate the
foul Treasons of his Subjects with his own life? Surely well might the Apostle
say, that God commended his love toward us, in that while we were yet sinners,
Christ died for us. Be astonished, O ye Angels of Heaven, who delight to pry
into Gospel mysteries at this Abyss of divine love, from which Seraphims
themselves cannot but detract if they should in the least conceive, that they
could either fathom with their knowledge, or express in their praises. And be
ye melted, O rocky hearts of sinners, with the ardency and strength of such
love, which is stronger than death it self. It was his love which held him upon
the Cross to finish your salvation when death could not hold him in the grave.
Let this love of Christ constrain you henceforth not to live unto your selves,
but unto him that died for you.

Thirdly, This Balm which distills from this wounded tree is of such virtue and
efficacy, as that it is Medicina omni morbia; Physic to cure all diseases,
being applied inwardly or outwardly. It allayeth the Headache, it restores thy
eyesight, helps the Astmah, purges Ulcers, cures the poysonful Sting of
Serpents, heals all kind of wounds. Is not then this Balm in the Letter an
apt Emblem of the Balm in the mystery of the blood of Christ? Which is of an
unlimited power and excellency. What is the evil that can befall any, for which
this is not a certain Cure? Oh when taken inwardly, as in the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper, it is both Food and Physic, it enlightens the dark mind, it
heals the broken in heart, it fills the hungry with good things. When sprinkled
outwardly, as in Baptism, it is effectual to stop the Leprosy of Sin, to cure
the venom and rage of Lusts, to mollify the stony heart, and to make fruitful
the Barren? Be then of good cheer, O ye drooping and afflicted souls, let me
say to you, as Paul to those in the tempest, The lives of none of you shall be
lost. If you complain, No sins like yours; let me add, There is no Salvation
like Christ's. If you say, you are a Systeme, a fardle of sins and lusts, hear
what the Apostle says, The blo^d of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin. No
man ever miscarried for being a great sinner, but only for being an impenitent
sinner. Be not in love with your sins, as Beggars are with their sores, that
will not part with them, and then doubt not of your Physicians skill, or care.
It is his peculiar glory, that never any Patient miscarried under his hand,
though such was their condition, that they were all utterly incurable by any
other.

Meditation XXX. Upon the palpitation of the heart.
THe Pearl which in the Oyster is a disease, in the Cabinet is a Jewel of rich
value, and in the Ear an Ornament of an orient beauty: and such a thing is this
trembling or palpitation of the heart; in the body it is a sad malady, in the
soul it is an heavenly grace: They who are afflicted with the one, seek
earnestly to the Physician for a Cure: And they who want the other, importune
God to obtain it from him as a blessing when once they know the excellency and
worth of it. Who is the Favorite of heaven, with whom the high and lofty one,
that inhabiteth Eternity, will dwell? And to whom he will look with an eye of
protection, with an eye of care and delight? Is it not to him that is of a
contrite heart, and that trembles at his word? Who is the best Saint on Earth?
Is it not he who uses most diligence to work out his salvation with fear and
trembling? All duties are best done when accompanied with this holy trembling.
Prayer and Confession of sins are never better made, than when we imita^e those
Penitents in Ezra, who sat trembling in the street of the House of God. The
Word is never more awfully received as the Will and Command of a Great King,
than when received as the Elders of Bethlehem did Samuel, who trembled at his
coming. O methinks I cannot without wonder read how Paul lived among the
Corinthians, in fear and much trembling, as sensible of the weight of his
Ministry, and how they again received Titus, Paul's Messenger, with the like
affection, not entertaining him with costly banquets, with Court-like
Salutations, but with fear and trembling, which is the highest respect that can
be showen to the Doctrine of Christ. Yea, the Supper of the Lord it self,
though it be a Feast of Love, in which Christ qui est totus amor est caput
coenae, who is all love, is the chief and only dish, that a Soul has to feed
upon, is best Celebrated with a Divine trembling, which may correct our joy,
and keep it from degenerating into a carnal mirth. The sparkling rays of light
which are reflected from the polished Diamond, are much beautified by those
tremulous motions which the eye beholds in the Stone: And so spiritual joy
receives no little addition of luster and sweetness by the mixtures of
trembling that appear in it. How great then is the folly and wickedness of
those Sons of Belial, who scoff at the awful behavior which any exercise in
the Servi^es of God? as Michal did at David's dancing before the Ark, as if it
were nothing but Pu^illanimity, which would beseem Children better than
Christians, who startle often at their own groundless Imaginations: But are the
Angels Cowards, which tremble in the presence of God? Is it any thing
unbecoming them who continually stand in his presence to express a fear of him,
as well as love unto him? How then can it be indecent for worthless Creatures
to serve the great Jehovah with a holy awe and fear of his Majesty? O God, I am
conscious unto my self how little all my duties have been intervened with this
divine grace. I have prayed before thee, but not trembled, I have received a
Law from thy mouth, but I have not feared thee, the Great Lawgiver, nor
trembled at thy Commands. I have heard often of thee by the hearing of the Ear,
yet I have not abhorred my self. And therefore I humbly beg of thee, that thou
would help me to sanctify thy name in my heart, and to make thee my fear,
and my dread; that so I may neither abuse thy mercy, nor yet provoke thy
Justice.

Meditation XXXI. Upon the Shadow of a Man.
HOw absolute, as well as general is David's assertion, Surely every man walks
in a vain show, or Image, leading an imaginary rather than a real life: Fleeing
away as a shadow, rather than abiding as a substance. How shall I therefore fix
a Meditation upon the shadow of a shadow? Or hint ought that may be useful to
any man, which grows only from so slender a principle as his own shadow? And
yet if it be true which Lorinus says, that the Art of Imagery was ex umbris
nata, first learned from a due observation of those resemblances, and
proportions, which the shadow bears unto the body; why may not some moral
Considerations be suggested unto us from the different motions, opposite
variations, sudden vanishings, which every man may daily behold in his own
shadow? Are not these genuine thoughts for a man to conceive, that it is with
him, and with every Christian, as it is with those who walk with their faces
toward the Sun, the dark shadow is quite behind them, but when they turn from
the Sun, it forthwith changes its place and comes before them. When they
travel with their faces to the Sun of Righteousness, their paths are full of
light and comfort; but when they turn from him, what dark Images of death? What
ghastly apparitions of hell and destruction do go before them every step they
tread? Yea, the farther they wander from God, how does their te^^cu^ increase,
and their fears multiply, which are stretched out like the shadows of the
Evening, until at length they be swallowed up in the black darkness of the
night? O that Apostates would think of this, who after they have set their
faces toward Heaven, do again turn them toward Hell; who, after they have
known the way of righteousness, depart from the holy Commandment delivered unto
them. Can your hearts endure those dismal spectrums, that you shall continually
behold? Will you not, like the Hypocrites in Zion, at length cry out, Who shall
dwell with devouring fire, and everlasting burnings? O that the Children of
light and of the day would consider this, what great changes are made in their
Estates and Comforts by their aversions from God? Have they not cause to say
and wish as Job did? O that I were as in the days when God preserved me; when
his Candle shined upon my head. When his favor was like the Sun in the Zenith,
which casts its Beams so directly, as that it makes no shadow at all. Surely,
they will find, that the shades of sin are far more dismal than the darkest
nights of affliction; and that unless the light of Gods favor, which like the
Sun on the Dyal of Ahaz, has gone down many degrees, do return back again as
many, they cannot, like Ezekiah, have any comfortable assurance that they shall
live and not dye. O Lord therefore hold up my goings in thy paths, that my
footsteps be not moved, and let me always be rather as those whose faces are
toward Zion, though I go weeping, than as those who turn the back upon thee,
and consider not that their steps go down to the Chambers of death.

Meditation XXXII. Upon the Moulting of a Peacock.
SUch is the gayety of the Peacocks Plumes, that Nazianzen (as I find him
cired) says, that when he spreads his Starry Wheel the Peahen is provoked to
lust; And the Naturalists, who describe his properties, affirm, that he is
ambitious of Praise, and affects to show his Beauty, when commended by
spectators, in a stately tread, and free displaying of his various colors
against the Sun, which may cast a luster upon them. But alas ^ How short is
the continuance of his Glory? how small is the distance between his delight to
expose himself to the view of others, and his shame to be looked upon by any?
for no sooner do those specious Feathers, in which he prided himself, fall from
him, but he walks sorrowfully, and has then (as is observed) latronis passum,
the shifting pace of a Thief, who flies the light, and the eye which beholds
him: He is then dejected with the sense of his loss, as one that is robbed by
the Autumn of his Summers riches. Can we have now, though we should make it
our study, a more clear Comment upon that Text of St. Paul's, The Fashion, or
Figure of this World passes away? or a more apt Emblem of Worldly Men's
behavior when so it does, then this pensive Bird affords unto us? What is the
World, with which Men are so passionatly inammoured, but a surface, an
outside, not so much a Beauty, as a Lust, as St. John styles it? and what are
all those tran^^ent Felicities of Honor, Fame, Riches, by which some are
distinguished from others; but so many Crowns of breath that have nothing of
any firmness, or solid consistency. What are they but so many painted bubbles
which shine and break? O methinks I never wanted words till now, to express
their emptiness! how shall I say something, that may speak them less then
nothing? and yet in what admiration are these things had with most? How do Men
affect to have the eyes of others to behold them? and the mouths of others to
applaud them? How highly do they who want any of these specious vanities thirst
after them? and how hardly can any bear the loss and privation of what this way
they enjoy. And yet this is only certain, that all these things are most
uncertain. The Sick Man's Pulse is not more uneven in its beatings; The leaves
of Trees more various in their falling; or the Feathers of Birds more facil in
their moulting, than the Fancy and Pomp of all Earthly greatness is frail in
its continuance. How many accidents do make a change where Men do promise
themselves the most firm stability? How soon is Jobs hedge pulled up, who said
he should die in his nest, and multiply his days as the sand? And David's
Mountain removed, and he troubled, who pleased himself in its strength? What
strange alterations does the frowns of a Prince make in a Courtiers glory?
Hamans plumes of honor and riches which were lifted up and spread to the
wonder of beholders, upon the change of Ahasuerus his Countenance flag and
trail in the dirt like the Peacocks train in a storm, yea drop and fall off;
leaving him exposed to the utmost of shame and ignominy. What stedf^stness had
the rich Man in his great Possessions beyond his own conceit? he promised
himself the rest of many years, and yet lived not to see another morning. Death
made subitum pennar^m depluvium, an unexpected breach upon his designed
projects; and while he thinks to Impe his wings for an higher flight and mount,
he falls as low as the grave. Can we then make a better, or more seasonable
meditation, when we find our affections carried out to the prizing and seeking
of such perishing vanities, then to expostulate thus with our selves? Why is my
foolish heart eaten up with cares? mine eyes robbed of sleep, mine hands
wearied with uncessant labor to grasp clouds; Shadows, trifles, that have
little of reallity or worth, and less of duration: are these the things that
make Angels happy? are the Robes and Crowns of S^ints made of no other Matter
then that we may see in the Courts of Princes? O what a poor place were Heaven,
if it had no other riches, beauty, excellency, than what might be fetched out
of the bowels of the Earth, or the bottom of the Seas and Rocks? Add but
Eternity to such Common Comforts, and you turn them into burdens which cannot
be borne; into a satiety that produces loathing, and not delight. It is a
change only that makes them to be grateful, it being sometimes as pleasing to
want them as to have them; to lay them aside, as to put them on. Is it not then
wisdom for me, for every one to make a right judgment concerning true
happiness? and to know that it is one thing, and not many things; and yet it is
sufficient for all persons, for all places both in Heaven and Earth; for all
times both in this life and after it. It is ever the same, and makes us ever
the same, it has no change in it self, but the communication of its growth in
us, and what is now Grace, shall be Glory in Heaven. If it could decay or
loose, it were not happiness but misery. Lord therefore what ever others judge
or think, make me like the wise Merchant willing to sell all to buy the Rich
Pearl, yea to contemn all for the one thing necessary, and to say as David
did, Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none upon Earth, that I
desire besides thee.

Meditation XXXIII. Upon a Pleasure-Boat.
APrivate house is often built by the same Model which Princes use for their
Palaces, the dimen^^ons only being contracted, with the observance of the
same Figure. And so a Boat, or Vessel of Pleasure, differing in its use and
design, as well as in its bulk from another Ship, is yet by the skill and
Ingeny of the Artist exactly made after the mould or shape of the tallest Ship
of War and Traffic; it having its Rigging, Sails, Anchors, Cables, False
P^rts, and what not that please the fancy and eye of the beholder? b^t how many
of these things are more for pomp and b^auty then for use and necessity? when
the Vessel it self is made only to receive the carasses and blandishments of
the Sea, and not to endure the hardship of a storm. It is not an A^k for
necessity, as Moses his was, not an Ark for safety, as Noah's was, but a Vessel
for Pleasure; and therefore a gentle breath that may swe^l the Saile^, and the
curling of the Waters that may cause a little agitation; and a serene sky,
which may invite the Fishes to sport, do much heighten the delight of the
Passengers; but loud Winds, Waves that roar, Clouds which mask the Heavens
with darkness, carry in them so many Im^ges of death, and soon t^rn their
Pleasure into afrightments, and put them upon nothing more than an earnest
longing and wishing for the safety of the Shore. But the resolute Mariners in
their Ships they both expect and prepare to wrestle with such difficulties,
they ply their Sails, they fathom the Sea with their Line, they have their
hand to the Helm, and their eye to Heaven, they let fall their Anchors, and
ride amidst the Tempest till it has spent its fury, with an undaunted Courage.
I have now methinks set forth in an Allegory, the Temporary Professor, and the
sound and real Believer; the one having only the form, and the other the
power of godliness; the one serving himself, and the other his God, in the Work
of Religion. In the Sunshine and Prosperity of the Church, who spreads a fairer
Sail of Profession then the Temporary? who seems more eager of following
Christ Coast after Coast then he? who is more expressive of his joy and delight
in his approaching to Ordinances, who more confident in his boastings, of
following Christ, and dying with him, when others leave him, then he? And yet
if but a Cloud of an hand breadth arise in the Firmament of the Church, who is
more full of boding fears and repentings in himself than ever he went so far?
If Christ be but apprehended, and led away to the High Priests Palace, to be
there buffe^ed and spit upon, who more ready to say, I know not the Man, or if
it be needful to renounce all with an Oath? Now the ground of all this is,
because he makes his Religion an Art, rather than a Duty, and does rather
inform and actuate it, then is informed and guided by it. He took it up not to
honor God, but to better himself by it, and therefore resolves if he cannot be
a gainer, he will be no loser. But how greatly differing from such an one is
the true and real Christian? who enters into Religion as into a Covenant of
Marriage, which requires Performances, not retractions, and has its
Praemeditata Commoda, and incommoda, forethought of Burdens, a^ well as
Delights. He looked upon the Church of Christ, not as a Pleasure Boat, which is
only for pastime, but as a Ship, that must expect storms, though not fear a
wrack because Christ is in it. And therefore he is resolved with fortitude to
withstand the Corruptions of the Times, to outface the sins and scorns of
Men, to be valiant for a Truth trampled upon, and not to be ashamed of a
Persecuted Profession, and to bear up against the threats and malice of the
most Potent Enemies with an unbended constancy. Did not Peter and John thus
against a Synod of Pharisees? Paul against the Contradiction of the Jews?
Athanasius against the Power of Constantius, and the countenanced Arians? And
Chrysostom against the pride and rage of Eudoxia? He indeed is not worthy of
Christ who is allured only to come to him upon expectations of Pleasure, nor
he that is kept from him for the fear of ensuing dangers. Do thou then, O
blessed Savior, make my heart upright in my coming unto thee, and fix my
confidence so in thee, that Seas of troubles may never separate me in the least
from thee; and if at any time, like thy timorous Disciples, I cry out, Lord
save me I perish: do thou calm my fears, though not the storm, that so I may
possess my soul in patience, and believe, that thou will either be my Pilot,
to bring me safe to sho^r, or my Plank to save me from ruin and perishing.

Meditation XXXIV. Upon the putting out of a Candle.
LIght and darkness are in Scripture the two most usual expressions by which
happiness and misery are set forth unto us. Hell and Heaven which will one day
divide the whole World between them, and become the sole Mansions of endless
woe, and blessedness, are described, the one to be a place of outward darkness,
and the other an Inheritance in light. But it is observable also, that as the
happiness of worldly Men, and Believers is wholly differing; so the light to
which the one and the other is resembled, is greatly discrepant. The happiness
of the wicked worldling is compared unto a Candle, which is a feeble and dim
light, and consumes it self by burning, or is put out by every small puff of
wind; but the prosperity and happiness of the righteous is not lucerna in
domo, as a Candle in an house; but sol in Coelo, as the Sun in the Heaven,
which though it may be clouded, or eclipsed, ye^ can never be extinguished, or
interrupted in its course, but that it will shine mo^e and more unto the
perfect day, till it come to the ful^ess of Bliss and Glory in Heaven. May we
not then rather bemoan, than envy the best conditioned of Worldly Men, who
comes out of a dark womb into a dark world, and has no healing beams of the
Sun of Rig^hteousness arising upon him to enlighten his paths, or ^o direct
his steps. What if he have some few ^^rictur^s of light, which the Creatures,
that are no better than a rush Candle do seem to refresh him with, and in the
confidence of which he walks for a time; yet alas! how suddenly do the damps
of asfliction make such a light to burn blew, and to expire, and to leave him
as lost in the pitchy shades of anguish and despair? How do the terrors of
darkness multiply upon him every moment all those evils that a restless fancy
can suggest? He sees nothing, and yet he speaks of ghastly shapes that stand
before him: He cannot tell who hurts him, and yet he complains of the stinging
of Serpents, of the torments of fiery flames, of the wracking of his limbs. If
he have Cordialls put into his mouth, he spits them out again, as if they were
the gall of Aspes, or if he have food ministered unto him he wholly rejects it,
as that which will help to lengthen out a miserable life; and yet die he dares
not least worse things befall him. If death approach, he then cries out, as
Crisorius in Gregory, Inducias vel usque ad ma^e, inducias vel usque ad ma^e; a
truce, a respit Lord until the Morning. So great are his straits, as that he
knows not what to choose, or what to fly. O that I could then affect some fond
worldlings with the vanity and fickleness of their condition, who have nothing
to secure them from an endless night of darkness, but the wan and pale light of
a few earthly comforts, which are ofttimes far shorter than their lives, but
never c^n be one moment longer. Have you no wisdom to consider, that your Life
is but a span, and that all your delights are not so much? Have you never read
of a state of Blessedness, in which it is said, that there shall be no night,
and they need no Candle, neither light of the Sun, for the Lord God gives them
light, and they shall reign for ever and ever? or are you so regardless of the
future, as that you will resolvedly hazard what ever can fall out, for the
present satisfaction of some inordinate desires? Do you not fear the threatening
of him who has said, The Candle of the wicked shall be put out? O then while
it is called to day make David's prayer, from your heart, say, Lord lift thou up
the light of thy countenance upon us, thou shall put gladness in my heart more
than in the time my Corn and Wine increased.

Meditation XXXV. Upon a Prison.
SEneca has this saying, Precogitati mali mollis ictus, that the stroke of a
forethought evil is more gentle and soft than if it were wholly unexpected;
which suits well with Saint Peter's counsel to the scattered Believers, not to
think of the fiery trial, as if some strange and new thing had happened unto
them. A Wise Sufferer therefore must do as a wise builder, sit down first and
count his cost, left afterward he expose himself to shame and scorn. He must
first view a Prison in his mind before heenter into it with his body, and
thoroughly weigh what it is he must forgo, and what he must undergo, or else he
will soon, like Issachar, couch under his burden, and faint in the day of
adversity, his strength being small. For the change which a Prison makes is the
greatest that can befall any, next to the Grave, and is but a little short of
it, if not equal unto it. Who can set down the several sad evils which attend
it in distinct particulars? And who can sum them up into a total, that will not
amount unto a death? Is not Liberty, which every being naturally affects,
turned into Bondage? Is not the Society of friends, which is the sauce, if not
the food, of life, changed into Solitude? Is not Light, whose approaches were
anciently saluted with welcome light, industriously shut out, to make both
Bonds and Solitude the more irksome? Is not every Sense offended with objects
that are displeasing unto them? What does the Eye behold but the face of a grim
Jayler? What does the Touch feel unless it be hard Fetters and cold walls? What
is the Smell affected with, unless it be a loathsome stench? What does the Ear
hear, but the rattling of Chains, or the groans of some who are breathing out
their last? And what is the food that is tasted, unless it be the bread of
adversity, and the water of asfliction? And is it not then wonderful, that such
a condition as this, which is as the very valley and shadow of death, should
ever be passed thorough without any distracting fears, without heart breaking
sorrows, yea, with great rejoycings in such tribulations? It is true, that some
there be who, like sullen Hawks, live upon the frets, and bear many of these
things out of the stoutness of their stomach and their natural courage. But
alas! this is not to suffer as a Christian, who does not suffer out of
obstinacy, but out of Conscience; who is not supported by his own inherent
strength, but by the power of God, which puts forth its self in such glorious
effects often times, as that it makes a greater change in the Prison for the
better, than ever the vilest Prison can make in the Prisoner for the worse. Is
it not the presence of the King that makes the Court, let the House be never so
mean where he resides? What then can that place be less than a Palace where
the Presence of God dwells in a special manner? He that shall read in the Book
of the Revelations of a City or place that had no Temple in it, nor had no Sun
or Moon to shine in it, and then break off, would sooner conjecture that he was
beginning the description of some forlorn place under the Northern Pole, than
of the heavenly Jerusalem: But when he shall understand that God and the Lamb
are the Temple of it, and the glory of God and the Lamb are the Eternal Light
shining in it, he will then say, as an awaked Jacob, Surely this is none other
but the house of God, and the place where himself dwells. Such like thoughts
must that man have of a Prison who knows no more of it, than what it is in
appearance, a place of bondage, solitude, darkness, and sore wants; but he who
has in this condition once experienced the presence of God in it, how
differently will he speak of it? Have not many of the Saints, when shut up in a
Dungeon, dated their Letters to their Friends from their Palace, from their
delectable Orchard, from their delicious Paradise? Have they not gloried in
their bonds, as being Gods Freemen, though man's Prisoners? Have they not in
their solitude been ravished with the sweetness of that Communion they have had
with God, who alone has been better than a thousand Friends? Have they not
been filled with hidden Manna in their souls, when their bodies have been
pinched with the sharpness of Famine? Have they not in the midst of their
Conflicts cried out, If it be thus sweet to suffer for Christ, how full of Joy
unspeakable will it be to reign with him? May I not then say to this timorous
Christian, as God did once to Israel, Fear not to go down into Egypt, For I
will go down with thee into Egypt, and I will surely bring thee up again. Fear
not to go into a Prison, in which God will be with you, and out of which he
will deliver you with joy and triumph. It matters not what your pressures be if
God put under his Everlasting Arms, or who your Enemies be if he be your
Friend; or what your sorrows be, if he be your Comforter. And this I may add,
that commonly in the greatest straits, he shows the greatest love, as waters
run strongest in the narrowest passages. As the sufferings of Christ (says
Paul) abound in us, so our Consolation abounds by Christ. O therefore say as
David did, Though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death I will fear
none evil; for thou art with me, thy rod and thy staff they comfort me.

Meditation XXXVI. Upon the motion of the Sun on the Dyall.
IT was the saying of one, who was none of the least of the Philosophers, to
him that asked him what he was born for? That it was to contemplate the Sun:
But though it be not the end of man's breath, yet it may well be the object of
his thoughts, in regard both of its beauty and motion. Holy David takes notice
of them both in the same Psalm, in which he compared the Sun for its Luster to
a Bridegroom coming out of his Chamber clothed in such shining Array, as may
draw the eyes of Spectators toward him: And for its swiftness to a strong
Champion, who runs his prescribed course, both speedily and unweariedly. Tully,
in his Academicall Questions, says, Tanta incitatione fertur ut ejus celeritas
quanta sit ne cogitari quidem posset. It is whirled about with that vehemence
that the greatness of the Suns speed cannot easily be imagined. Is it not then
a Riddle, that at the same time when it travels thousands of miles in the
Heavens it should make so slow a motion and progress on the Dyall, as not to
move above the breadth of an inch or two? To the quickest eye its motion is
imperceptible, and it so moves, as we can only say it has moved, not that it
does. Now from whence comes this inequality, but from the vast disproportion
between the Heavens and the Earth, the one being but as a Center or small prick
to an immense Circumference. O how happy and regular also would the lives and
actions of men be if after the same manner they were moved to heavenly and
earthly objects? To the one with a swiftness like to that of the Sun in the
Firmament: To the other with an insensibleness, like to that of the Sun upon
the Dyall. Surely such a disproportion does the differing worth and excellency
between the one and the other justly challenge in our pursuit of them. Is it
not meet that he who casts a single glance of his eye to the Creature, should
bestow a thousand looks on his Savior? And when he creeps to one as a Snail,
to fly to the other as the Eagle to the Carcass? He alone moves to God as much
as he ought, who moves to him as much as he can, and strives to repair the
imperfection of that motion, with a real dislike and regret of the slowness of
his own heart to the best of goods. But alas, if the rule by which men walk
must be thus bounded, or dilated according to the object to which they move,
where shall we find that person that thus proportions the outgoings of his
soul in his care, desires, or industry? If the standard and measure of goodness
should be taken, from the unweariedness of men's travels, from the strength of
their affections, or from the fixed bent of their resolutions to obtain what
they design to themselves as their end: Who must not then put the Crown of
blessedness upon the he^d of the Creature which ought to be set at the foot of
the Creator? Who must not then conclude, that it is better building Tabernacles
here, than seeking a Country which is above? Do not men contract their hearts
to the things of Heaven, and dilate them to what is below? Do they not run and
pant, to the very breathing out of their souls, after perishing vanities, when
they cannot be drawn to set one foot toward spiritual and divine Excellencies?
Do they not take the Wings of the Morning, and fly to the utmost end of the
Earth in their musings and thoughts to find out riches that will not profit in
the day of wrath? when their Essaies to Heaven are as weak as the Grasshoppers,
who give only a small slirt upwards and then falls down to the Earth again. O
that I could with plenty of tears bemoan that monstrous Ataxie and perverseness
which sin has wrought in the most noble parts of man. Was not that agility of
mind given unto him by God, that he might have his Conversation in Heaven,
though his abode was on Earth? And that he might enter into the holy of holies,
not like the High Priest, once in a year, but in every prayer and duty, like a
winged Angel, behold the face of God, and look into those things that are
within the Veil? But now alas! he can only, like that lapsed Angel, compass the
earth to and fro in his thoughts, and descend as low as hell in his lusts, but
cannot raise himself above the world to the performance of the least good. I
feel, O my God, continually the sad change which sin has made in me, not so
much destroying my Faculties, as perverting them; I have not lost the use of
them, but the rectitude of them. I am no more weary of sinning, than a swift
stream of running; the same weight of sin that hinders me from running the race
which is set before me, hurries me to evil, and makes me, through the
impulsions of Satan, to gather strength by an accessory impression. In the
births of sin I am, like the Hebrew women, lively and quick of delivery; but in
the bringing forth of whatever is good, like a slow Egyptian that needs the
aid of a Midwife. l therefore beg of thee holy Lord to heal my distempers by
thy grace, and to renew me in the spirit of my mind that I may run the way of
thy Commandments when thou have enlarged my heart.

Meditation XXXVII. Upon a Sun-Dyal and a Clock.
THese two Artificial measures of time give one and the same account of its
motions, but in a very differing, if not contrary, manner. The Clock does it by
a motion of its own; but the Sun-Dyall, while it self is fixed, by an
extrinsick motion of the Sun upon those Lines drawn upon it effects the same
thing. And this occasioned me to think in what a differing way the same
services and duties of Religion are done by those that profess it. Some, like
Clocks, have a Spring of motions in themselves, and the weight that quickens
and actuates it is love: They pray, confer, exercise holiness in their
Conversation in a progressive manner, Salvation being nearer to them than when
they first believed. Others again are like Sun-Dyals, that are as useless posts
in a gloomy day, and are destitute of all principles of motion. The Sun moves
upon them, but they stand still. The Spirit comes upon them, as it did on Saul,
but themselves are not in the least moved by those duties that others may think
they profit by. There is a light and shine which passes upon their gifts and
abilities that may render them useful as well as visible unto others, but it
effects no alteration in their hearts to the bettering of themselves. What
divine Visions and Prophesies did Balaam both see and utter concerning Israel?
And how remarkable is the Preface which he sets before them? The man whose eyes
are open has said, yet his heart is fixed to his lust of Covetousness, and he
is so far from taking the least step toward their Tents, which with admiration
he beholds to be goodly, as that he gives Balack counsel how to destroy them.
Let not then any rest in a bare illumination or transient work of the Spirit
upon them, as if that such things would be sufficient evidences of the goodness
of their con^ition. Light may make a good head, but it is heat and motion that
must make a good heart, without which all profession of Religion is but an
unsavory Carcass. Be wise therefore O Christians, and build not the foundation
of your eternal happiness upon such uncertain principles. May not the Spirit
assist where it never inhabits? May it not move upon him, whom it never
quickens? Were not many workers of iniquity, who were workers of miracles? Were
not many famous for their Prophesies, who were infamous for their Profaneness?
Are not such things made by Christ, the plea of many in the last day for their
admittance into heaven, whom he will not know? Why then should any be so
foolish to make that a Plea to the Judge which he knows beforehand will be
rejected? The best way to discern our condition, is not to argue the goodness
of it from the light which the Spirit darts in upon us, but by the motions
which it produces in us. As many as are the Sons of God are led by the Spirit
of God, in a constant way of progression, from grace to grace, from virtue to
virtue. Such light, as it is sudden in its Eruptions, so it is also in its
Interruptions; the one often times are as speedy and momentary as the other. Look
therefore to the attractions of the Spirit by which you are moved, and drawn to
walk in holy ways, rather than to such motions of the Spirit, which pass only
upon you, but do not beget any motion or stirring in you.

Meditation XXXVIII. Upon the payment of a Pepper-corn.
LOgicians have a Maxim, that, Relationes sunt minimae entitatis and maximae
efficaciae, Relations are of the smallest Entity, and of the greatest efficacy:
The truth of which may appear in the payment of a single Pepper-corn, that
Freeholders pay to their Landlord, they do it not with any hope or intent to
enrich him; but to acknowledge that they hold all from him. To effect the one
it is of too mean a value, yet it preserves the Lords right as fully as a
greater Rent, and aggravates the Tenants folly to withhold, more than if the
demands had been higher. To such an one may be justly said, what Naamans
Servant spoke unto him, If the Prophet had bid thee do some great thing,
would thou not have done it? How much rather then, when he says to thee,
wash and be clean? If the condition which mere bounty happily has made so
easy, had been by the same hand and power restrained to a more costly and
^mple homage, ought it not to have been performed? How much more when nothing
is required, but what may witness a dependency and not burden it? How
inexcusable then must the ingrati^ude of those men be, who receiving all their
blessings from God, withhold that Pepper-corn of praise and honor from him,
which is the only thing that they can pay, or that he expects? To c^st the
least Mite into his Treasury, which may add to its riches, is beyond the Line
of men or Angels, for if it could admit an increase, the abundance of it were
not infinite: but to adore its fullness, and to acknowledge that from it they
derive theirs, is the duty of all that partake of it. This is the only homage
that those Stars of the Morning, and sons of God, who behold his face, do give
in heaven, and this is it which the Children of men should give on Earth. But
alas! from how few are those sacred dues tendered to God, though all be his
debtors? Does not the rich man, when wealth flows in upon him like a river,
forget that the Lord only gives him power to get riches? And sacrifice unto
his Net, and burn Incense unto his Drag? Is it not the sin that God charge
all Israel with, that they rejoice in a thing of naught, and say have we not
taken horns to us by our own strength? Yea, does he not expressly say, thar he
will nor give his glory unto another? Shall any man then take it unto himself?
And yet what stolen bread is so sweet to any taste as the secret nimmings and
purloynings of Gods glory are unto the palate: of most? If any design be
effected, they think that their wisdom has brought it about; if any
difficulties be removed, they ascribe it to their industry; if success and
victory do build upon their Sword, it is their own arm, and right hand that
has obtained it. O how great is that pride and unthankfulness which reigns in
the hearts of men, who affect to rob God, rather than to honor him, and to
deny him to be the Author of what they possess, than to acknowledge their
Tenure that they hold all in Capite. Stealing from men may be acquitted again
with single, or double, with fourfold, or sevenfold restitution. But the
filching from Gods glory can never be answered; for who can give any thing to
him which he has not received? Others may steal of necessity, to satisfy
their hunger; but such violate out of pride and wantonness the Exchequer of
heaven, and shall never escape undetected, or unpunished. Consider therefore
this all ye who are ready to kiss your own hands for every blessing that comes
upon you, to what danger you expose your selves, while ye rob God, whose name
is Jealous, who will vindicate the glory of his neglected goodness in the
severe triumphs of his impartial Justice. It is Bernards Expression, Uti datis,
ut innatis est maxima superbia, to use Gods gifts as things inbread in us is
the highest arrogance, and what less can it merit, than the very condemnation
of the Devil? Whose first sin (as some Divines conceive) was an affectation of
independent happiness, without any respect or habitude unto God. I cannot a
little wonder, that the blackness of his sin, and the dreadfulness of his Fall,
should not make all to fear the least shadow and semblance of such a crime in
themselves as must bring upon them the like ruin. Look upon him ye proud ones,
and tremble, who are abettors of Nature against Grace, and resolve the
salvation of man ultimately into the freedom of his Will, rather than into the
efficacy of Gods Grace; who in the work of Conversion make the Grace of God to
have only the work of a Midwife, to help the Child into the world, but not to
be the Parent and sole Author of it. Is not this to cross the great design of
the Gospel, which is to exalt the honor of God and Christ? that he that
glories might glory in the Lord. And is not every tittle of the Gospel as dear
to God, as every little of the Law? Can then any diminish ought from it and be
guiltless? Oh fear then to take the least due from God, who has threatened to
take his part out of the Book of Life, and out of the holy City, and from the
things which are written in the Book of God. Non est devotion is dedisse prope
totum, sed fraudis retinuisse vel minimum, It is not devotion, says Prosper
rightly against his Collator, to acknowledge almost all from God, but accursed
theft to ascribe though but a very little to our selves. Lord therefore,
whatever others do, keep me humble, that as I receive all from thee, so I may
render that tribute of praise which thou expectest from me both cheerfully, and
faithfully; and though it can add nothing to thy perfection, no more than my
beholding and admiring the Suns light can increase it, yet let me say, as holy
David did, Not unto us O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name be the glory for
thy mercy and for thy truths sake.

Meditation XXXIX. Upon the Bucket and the Wheel.
THe saying of Democritus, which he spoke concerning Philosophical truth, that
it did latitare in jute^, hide it self, and take up its abode in a dark and
deep Well, may much more be affirmed of Theological truth when the whole
Doctrine of the Gospel is called the Mystery of Christ, and the great Mystery
of Godliness, that there should be three distinct Persons in one Essence, and
two distinct Natures in one Person. That Virgi^ity should conceive, Eternity be
born; Immortality dye, and Mortality rise from death to life. Are not these,
and many more of the like intricacy, unparalelled mysteries? May we not then
justly say, as the Samarita^ woman did to our Savior when he asked water of
her, Puteus profundus est, the Well is deep, and who can descend into it, or
fathom it? And yet such is the pride and arrogance of many men, as that, not
contenting themselves with the simplicity of believing, many make Reason the
sole standard whereby to measure both the Principles and Conclusions of Faith,
for which it is as unapt as the weak Eye of a Bat to behold the Sun when it
shines in its full strength; or the Bill of a small Bird to receive into it
the Ocean. These high mysteries are not to be scanned, but to be believed; the
knowledge and certainty of which does not arise from the evidence of reason,
but from the revelation made of them in holy Scriptures; the mouth of God, who
is truth it self, and cannot lie, has spoken them, and therefore it cannot be
otherwise. But must then reason be wholly shut out as a useless thing in the
Christian Religion, or must it be confined to the agenda matters of duty and
morality, in which it cannot be denied to be both of necessary and constant
use? Surely even the Credenda, also the Doctrines and points which are properly
of Faith, do not refuse the sober use of Reason, so it be employed as an
Handmaid, and not as a Mistress. I have therefore thought that Faith is as the
Bucket, which can best descend this deep Well of mystery, and that Reason is as
the Wheel, which stands over the mou^h of it, and keeps always its certain and
fixed distance: But yet by its motion is instrumental both to let down the
bucket, and also to draw it up again. Faith discovers the deep things of God,
and then reason teaches us to submit our selves and it to the obedience of
Faith, that so it is. But it never becomes more foolish and dangerous then when
it busies its self in inquiries, and makes Nicodemus his question, How can
these things be? then it turns giddy, and loses its self in distracted rounds
and motions. Alas ^ how unlike would the ways and Counsels of God be unto
himself, if they were no other but such as the Wisest of Men could trace out?
How little glory would Faith also give to God, if it did not put forth its
strength in asserting his Power to effect greater things then can fall within
the compass of Natural disquisition? Yea, how should the Gospel, in its
Institutions, Doctrines, and Worship, be acquitted of the Jews stumbling at
it, as dishonorable to their Law; and the Gentiles deriding of it, as absurd,
in their Philosophy, if that Reason must be the measure of its Mysteries?
Nature is so far from finding out what the Gospel discovers, as that it cannot
y^eld un^o it, when it is revealed, without a spirit of Faith to assist i^. Be
wise therefore, O Christians, and set bounds to your Reason, beyond which it
may not pass, as Moses did to the Israelites, whilst Faith descends into the
deeps of Gospel Mysteries, which Angels with strerched out necks have more
desire to pry into, then ability perfectly to understand. Now the boundary of
Reason is, Conf^rre and infer; to confer one Scripture with another; and to
infer Conclusions, and to deduce Instructions thence, by a clear L^gi^il
Discourse. But if it go further to g^z^, it may justly fear to be smit^en of
God: and like a Pyoneer, or bold Miner, which digs in too far for his rich
Vein of Ore, ^eet with a damp which choakes him. My Prayer therefore shall be
that of the Apostles to Christ, Add nobis fidem: Lord increase our faith. For
if my faith do not exceed, my reason, though advanced to as high a pitch as
ever Solomon had, yet might I well be numbered among those, whom St. Peter
says are blind, and cannot see afar off.

Meditation XL. Upon Banishment.
EXile is a Change of place that brings no evil with it, but in opinion; a
Complaint, and affliction wholly imaginary, is the description some have made
of it. But it seems to me to be rather a Stoics vaunt, than a Christians just
estimate, of the evils of that condition. What trial else would it have been of
Abraham's Faith, to leave his Country, Kindred, and Fathers House, and to go to
a Land God would show him? or why did God enjoin Israel to pity Strangers;
because themselves had been Strangers in the Land of Egypt. Why have
Legislators deemed it as a punishment for grand Crimes, and next to Capital? or
why have many looked upon it as worse than death, choosing rather the lot of the
Goat that was to be Sacrificed, then the lot of the Escape Goat, which was to be
sent into the Wilderness? is it not because (as Philo says) death is the full
end of all evils? but Banishment the beginning of many new ones? Want, Scorn,
Oppressions, Unjust Jealousies, are the daily hard Measures that Exiles must
expect to meet with; he must thank him who demands his Coat, that he asks not
his Life; and he must often times redeem his Life, with that little Money which
he has, that should buy him Bread to preserve it. He must be armed with
nothing but patience, least he be apprehended as one that has in design the
death of some other. And yet how many Arguments of comfort can my thoughts
suggest to such Christians, who for the Truths sake either dread this Cross, or
feel it. They break forth so on the right hand, and on the left, as that
methinks I may say, Sing O ye Banished, cry aloud, for more are the comforts of
the desolate, than the comforts of those that sit under the shadow of their own
roof. I will not tell you that you have the same Sun and Moon to shine upon you
that Kings have; that the Stars appear unto you in the same greatness and
beauty which they do to others. That you enjoy the same common Elements that
all do. These, and such like topics are to be plentifully found among the
Moralists. But all their Precepts and Sentences are like Arrows that fall
short of the Mark. They could never reach that solid contentment they levelled
at. Hear then ye dejected Christians what your comforts are, whose Cr^sses are
no more than others, and whose supports are far greater. Are you Banished from
your Native Country? what other condition do you undergo then Abraham did, the
Father of the Faithful, and the Friend of God, and will you murmur if God deal
with you no worse then with his Favorite? if you are out of your own Land, do
you not still tread upon your Fathers ground? is not the Earth the Lords, and
the sullness of it? did never any thrive in a strange Soil, and like
transplanted Trees gain by the Change? have ye forgot what God did for Joseph
in Egypt? or for Daniel and his Associates in their Captivity? who like Stars
when they set in one Hemisphere, did rise gloriously in another? But if still
you be impatient, and in dislike with your Estate, let me ask you if the best
of a wicked Man's condition be not worse? Is it not better to hunger and thirst
for righteousness sake, then to fare deliciously every day with the rich
Glut^on in the Gospel? Is it not more eligible to be an Israelite in the
Wilderness, then to be a Cour^ier in Egypt? can you not speak better of your
Miseries then wicked Men can do of their Mercies? you may say, blessed Hunger,
blessed Poverty, blessed Mourning, blessed Persecutions and Revilings; Christ
himself having blessed your Afflictions, and also cursed their enjoyments: He
has entailed an eternal woe upon all those things wherein they place their
welfare; their Riches, their Fullness, their Mirth, their Applause, and Credit
with all Men: and he has promised to them that endure temptations a Crown of
Life when they are tried. Be not therefore dismayed O ye of little Faith, who
have every bitter thing at present sweetened with Promises, and within a little
while shall have all the hardships of a desert, turned into the Plenty of an
Heavenly Canaan. And yet methinks some there be, who are still unsatisfied, and
ask if it be nothing to part with dear Relations, and society of Friends? and
to be cast upon strange Faces, and Languages, that they understand not? to be
at once in great measure both deaf and dumb, not hearing what others say to
them, and being also unable to speak the least word to others. That these are
sore evils I shall not make it any part of my task to deny; But yet how many
are there who have exposed themselves to all these evils, and have undergone
them voluntarily. which you suffer out of constraint? have not some for
curiosity sake, and a thirst of ^nowledg traveled through vast and dangerous
Wildernesses, and borne, with much patience, the excess of heat and cold? Have
not others out of a covetous desire of gain parted with Friends and Country for
many years? may I not then send the faint-hearted Christian to learn of the
resolute Worldling, as Solomon does the Sluggard to the Pismire; shall he set
an higher estimate upon Earthly Treasures then you upon Heavenly? shall he
outface dangers that you shrink at? shall he quit Parents and Children that
are pieces of himself, and embrace solli^ude in foreign Regions, and shall you
reckon your self as free among the dead while you do the same thing? O what
advantages have you above him, both to do and suffer? In your sollitude you may
say as Christ did in his, Yet am I not alone, because the Father is with me. In
your Sorrows you may glory as Paul did, This is our rejoicing, the testimony
of our Conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity we have had our
Conversation in the World. ln the loss and spoil of your Estates, you may pray,
as Paulinus did, when the Goths ransacked Nola: Domine, ne excrucier propter
auram and argentum; ubi enim omnia mea sunt tu scis: Lord, let not the loss of
these things disquiet me: for thou know where I have said up all my
treasures. In your Banishment you may comfort your self with the common lot of
all believers, who are no other then Pilgrims, and Strangers, while they are at
home in the Body, and absent from the Lord? I shall add no more but an
excellent saying of Basil, Cui adhuc patria solum dulcis est, nimis delicatus
est, cui omnis terr a patria for^is est, cui omnis terra exilium sanctus est,
He to whom his Native Country is only sweet, is too delicate: he to whom
every Land is his Country, is valiant; and he to whom als Earth is a
Banishment, is truly holy.

Meditation XLI. Upon the Breast and the sucking-Bottle.
THe Word of God, by which Men are turned from darkness unto light, is
sometimes compared unto Seed, and sometimes unto Milk; and the Ministers of it,
sometimes unto Fathers, and sometimes unto Nurses: This double relation points
forth their double Duty, which is not only as spiritual-Fathers to beget Men
unto Christ; but as nursing Mothers, to give them the full Breasts of the
sincere Milk of the Word, that they may grow thereby, and of newborn Babes
may become strong in the Faith, and filled with all knowledge and wisdom in
the things of God. But how is this done? is it by Reading only the Scriptures,
without giving the Sense, though that be a Public Ordinance of God, and highly
to be honored of all, or by a diligent and well digested Preaching of them, in
which the Truths delivered are sucked in as Milk from the Breast that partakes
of the warmth and spirits of the Nurse? Some Ministers who have consulted more
for their own Ease then their Peoples Profit, have endeavored to maintain
Reading to be Preaching, as if that were a sufficient discharge of their Duty.
But what then will become of the Apostles question? Who is sufficient for these
things? it should then be rather who is not sufficient? or of what use will be
his Counsel, To Preach in season, and out of season, and to divide the Word of
God aright, as a workman that needs not be ashamed. True it is, that if
Preaching be taken largely, sor any Declaration, or Publishing of the Word of
God, it cannot be denied to be Preaching; but if it be taken strictly for
Preaching, by way of Office, and for Ministerial Publishing of the Gospel, then
it is quite another thing. Was there not a wide difference between the Woman of
Samaria her making known of Christ, and the Apostles Preaching of him; or
between Andrews calling of his brother Peter before he was pu^ into his
Apostolical Office, and his Preaching of Christ when Commissionated by him? and
what less difference is there between a Naked Reading of the Scripture, or some
other set Discourses, and the Powerful Preaching of the Word? But if Trial and
Experience could better Evince than Argument, those who justify the Opinion by
their Practice; I could wish that such might bring forth their Children, who
have lived wholly upon the singular means of Reading, and let their
Countenance be looked upon, and the Countenance of those who have had the Word
duly Preached unto them, and then let others Judge whether their Countenance
appear as fair and fat as their Brethrens. O how quickly would it be discerned
which they are, which have received their nourishment from the Breast, and
which from the Bottle? it would soon be judged that the weak are the Flock of
Laban, and the strong the Flock of Jacob, which God has by far blessed above
the other. Think then upon it, O ye sloathfull ones, to whose care God has
committed the welfare of many Souls, ho^ you will answer your neglect to God ^
If the Chief Officer was afraid that his withholding the Kings appointed Meat
from Daniel and his Companions, might endanger his head to his Lord, should he
see their Faces worse liking than the Children of their sort; what cause will
ye have to fear the displeasure of Christ when he shall behold the wan and pale
looks of those for whom he died, by your de^eining the Breast from them, who
should have been nourished up in the words of Faith, and good Doctrine? Nor
shall ye, O Christians, who slight Ordinances, and turn your back upon the
Breasts of Consolation, which are held forth unto you, escape any better then
the Ministers who deny them to their People: If it be a sin to do the one, it
is no less, if not greater, in you, to do the other. They sin against the
Souls of others, and you sin against your own Souls: And yet how great are
the numbers upon whom the guilt of this Crime may be Charged? Some think that
they are past their Childhood, and therefore Wean themselves; they know as much
as their Teachers can tell them, and to what end then should they still give
them their Attendance; to hanker after the Breast is for Babes, not for grown
Persons? But are not they who thus speak puffed up, and know nothing as they
ought? Is not this whole life a state of Infancy in respect of persection? does
not the Apostle say, that we see but darkly, and know but in part. Why then
should the old Mnasons be more ashamed of these Breasts, then the young
Timothies? David Professed himself as a weaned Child from the World, but never
from the Word. Others please themselves, that though they go not to Hear, yet
they Read good Books, and better Sermons at home, than their Ministers can
make; and so take themselves not to be less zealous, but only more discreet
than their Brethren who do not the like. And yet who can excuse such Persons
from the guilt both of folly and wickedness? Is it not solly to refuse the warm
breast, and to suck the Milk from the bottle, when it is dispirited, and has
lost both its warmth and lively taste? and what less difference is there
between a Sermon in the Pulpit, and in the Pr^ss? Is it not also wickedness to
offer Sacrilege for Sacrifice, and to rob God of one Duty, to pay him another;
to withhold the greater, and to seem Conscientious in the less? Are they not in
thus doing fures de se, thieves to their own Souls, depriving themselves of
the profit of both, while they are wilful neglecters of each. Be wise
therefore, O Christians, in keeping up an high esteem of the Word Preached, and
be always as Babes for hunger and desire after it; though not for knowledge and
understanding in it. And remember that there is no way so dangerous to lessen
your desires, as to keep your selves fasting from it. For the Word of God still
creates new appetites, as it satisfies the old; and enlarges the capacities of
the Soul, as it fills it. Use good Books as Apothecaries do their Succedanea,
one simple to supply the want of another; when the Preacher cannot be had then
make use of them; but let it rather be to stay the stomach in the absence of an
Ordinance, then to satisfy it. And when you enjoy both, say as Aristotle
sometimes did of the Rhodian and Lesbian Wine, when he had tasted of both; that
the Rhodian was good too, but the Lesbian was the pleasanter. Holy Books are
good, and relish well, but the Word Preached is more sweet; the one is as the
Wine the Bridegroom provided at the Marriage Feast, and the other as that which
Christ made, which was easily discerned by the Governor, who knew not whence
it was, to be by far the better.

Meditation XLII. Upon Mixtures.
THe wise God has so tempered the whole Estate of Man in this life, as that it
consists altogether of Mixtures; There is no sweet without sower, nor sower
without sweetness. All simples, in any kind, would prove dangerous, and be as
uncorrected drugs, which administered unto the Patient would not recover him,
but destroy him. Constant Sorrow without any Joy would swallow us up; and
simple Joy without any Grief would puff us up, both extremes would agree alike
in our ruin: he being in as dangerous a case who is swollen with Pride, as he
who is overwhelmed with Sorrow. This Mixture then, though it seem penal and
prejudicial to our comfort, is, yet Medicinal, and is by God, as a wise
Physician, ordered as a Diet most suitable to our Condition; and if we did but
look into the grounds of it, we shall find cause to acknowledge Gods wise
Providence, and to frame our hearts to a submission of his will, without
murmuring at what he does. For have we not two Natures in us, the Spirit and
Flesh, the New, and Old Man? have we not twins in our Womb, our
Counter-lustings, and our Counterwillings? Are we not as Plants that are seated
between the two different Soiles of Earth and Heaven? Is there not then a
necessity of a mixed Diet, that is made up of two contraries? The Physician is
not less loyal to his Prince if he give to him an unpleasing Vomit, and to a
poor Man a cheering Cordial, because his Applications are not according to the
dignity of the Person, but to the quality of the Disease: neither is God the
less kind when he puts into our hand the bitter Cup of asfliction to drink of,
then when he makes us to cast of the Flaggons of his sweetest wine. Paul his
Thorn in the Flesh, what ever the meaning of it be, was useful to keep down
that tumor of pride, which the abundance of Revelations might have exposed him
unto; and so joined together they were like the rod and the Honey which
enlightened Jonathans eyes: when he had tasted the sweetness of the one, God
would have him feel the smart of the other. At the same time also when God
blessed Jacob, he Crippled him, that he might not think above what was meet of
his own strength, or ascribe his prevailing to the vehemence of his Wr^stling,
rather then to Gods gracious condescension. Yea who is it that has not
experienced such Mixtures to be the constant Methods which he uses toward his
dearest Children? what are the lives of the best Christians but as a Rainbow,
which consists half of the moisture of a Cloud, and half of the light and
beams of the Sun? Weeping (says David) may endure for a Night, but Joy comes
in the Morning. And what other thing does the Apostle speak of himself, when he
gives the Corinthians an account of his Condition? As dying, and behold we
live: as chastened, and not killed: as sorrowful, and yet always rejoicing:
as poor, yet making many rich: as having nothing, but yet possessing all
things. Blessed then is he who does without repining yield himself to the
dispose of Divine Providence, rather then accuse it, and looks not so much to
what at present is grateful to the sense, as to what for the future will be
profitable to the whole. For in these Mixtures, Magna latent beneficia (...)
non fulgeant, great advantages do lie hid, though not shine forth. Hereby we
are put upon the exercise of all those Graces which are accommodated to our
imperfect state here below, whose acts shall not be completed in Heaven, but
shall all cease, as being not capacitated for a Fruition: and yet are of great
use while we are on this side Heaven. How necessary is Patience to bear up the
Soul under trials that it fret not against God who inflicts them? How greatly
does Hope temper any present souer by its expectation of some happy change that
may and will follow, and so works joy in the midst of sadness? How even to
wonder does Faith manifest its power in all distresses, when it apprehends that
there are no degrees of extremity unrelieveable by the Arm of God, or
inconsistent with his compassions and friendship? Again, such Mixtures serve to
work in us a greater hatred of sin, and an earnest longing after Glory; in
which, our life, light, joys, are all pure, and everlasting. Our life is
without any seed of death, our light without any shadow of darkness, and our
joys endless Hallelujahs, without the interruption of one sigh. Therefore are
we burdened in our Earthly Tabernacle, that we should the more groan to be
clothed upon with our house which is from Heaven. Therefore yet have we the
remainders of sin, by which we are unlike God; and the first fruits only of
the spirit, by which we resemble him; that we might long and wait for the
Adoption and Redemption, wherein what ever is blended and imperfect shall be
done away. When not to sin, which is here only our Duty, shall be the top
branch of our reward and blessedness. O holy Lord, I complain not of my present
lot, for though it be not free from mixture, yet it is greatly differing from
what others find and feel, whose lines are not fallen in so fair a place: But
still I say, when shall I dwell in that blessed Country where sorrows dye, and
joys cannot? Into which Enemy never entered, and from which a Friend never
parted? When shall I possess that Inheritance which is a Kingdom for its
greatness, and a City for its beauty, where there is Society without Envy, and
rich Communications of good without the least diminution.

Meditation XLIII. Upon Time and Eternity.
THe two Estates of this and the other World are measured by Time, and by
Eternity, as their just and proper measures, there being nothing in this World
which is not as transient as Time, nor in the other which is not as fixed and
lasting as Eternity. How inexpressibly then must the good and evil, the
happiness and the misery of those two Estates differ from eac^ other? What is
the duration of all earthly greatness in respect of the stability of heavenly
glory, but as a flash of lightning to a standing Sun in the Firmament; or as a
spark ascending from a furnace, to a never setting Star? What are the most
fiery trials of this life, either for intension, or length, unto the
everlasting burnings and scorchings of hell; but as the soft and gentle heat of
a blushing face, unto the constant flames and torments of the bowels? What are
Racks, Stone, Colic, Strangury, Convulsions, heaped together into an extreme
horror, but as the simple grudgings of an Ague, to the desperate rage and
anguish which the least bite of that worm that dies not creates in the lowest
faculty of the soul? There are additions to things which are limited, and
diminuent terms of that to which they are annexed; and contain in them (as
Logicians speak) oppositum in opposito, one opposite in another. He that says,
a dead man, or a painted Lion, by saying more, says less than if he had said
but a man, or a Lion only, without any such additions; it is all one in effect
as if he had said no man, no Lion: For a dead man is not a man, neither is a
painted Lion a Lion. Such are the additions of Time, which put to good or evil
express less than if nothing had been added. He that says, happiness for a
season, or sorrow for a time, says less than if he had said happiness or
sorrow only: For perfect happiness or sorrow cannot be circumscribed in the
narrow limits of Time, no more than Immensity in the points of a place. What is
happiness that will expire, but misery at a distance? Or what is sorrow that
endures only for a time, but an evil, supported by hope? But add Eternity to
good or evil, and it makes the good to be insinitely better, and the evil to be
infinitely worse. Can I then do less than wonder, that men, who carry eternal
souls in their bosoms, such as are of kin to Seraphims, yea, advanced to the
participation of the Divine Nature, that are the immediate Subjects of Endless
woe, or bliss, should yet so live, A^ si fabula esset omnis eternitatas, as if
Eternity were a fable; as if they had neither God to serve, or souls to save?
May I not say, be astonished O heavens at this, and be horribly afraid, be ye
very desolate, as the Lord himself did at Isreal's folly? What greater stupidity
can there be, than this which most are guilty of, to busy themselves, like
Martha, about perishing trifles, and to neglect the one thing which is
necessary? To be thoughtfull of things below, and seldom think of heaven, till
death summon them to leave Earth? To make Salvation the by-work of their lives,
and the fulfilling the apperites of the flesh their chiefest task and care?
Were it not a strange thing if a man, who is to be judged on the morrow, and to
receive the sentence either of a cruel death, or of a rich and honorable
estate, could not keep in mind the concernments of the next approaching day,
without tying some Scarlet thread upon his finger as a significant Ceremony to
remember him? Or the writing of some Caveats upon the posts of the Prison which
might hint unto him what danger his life is in? Is it not much more strange
that the weighty matters of eternal life, or eternal death, should not by their
own greatness press the heart of man unto a constant remembrance of them,
especially when he knows not what a day may bring forth? Can the miscarriage
of such a person be other than dreadful, when their follies, as well as their
pains, shall make them to gnash their teeth, and to curse themselves for the
neglect of that great Salvation which has been often tendered them in the
Gospel? When they shall feel everlastingly, what they could never be persuaded
for to fear? When they shall be convinced that at a far cheaper rate they might
have been Saints in Heaven than Salamanders in Hell? O that I could therefore
awaken and excite all those whom the present enjoyments of the world serve as
Opium to cast them into a deep sleep, and will happily be angry with those that
seek to raise them out of it, though they keep them from perishing in it. And
how can I better do it, than in St. Chrysostomes expressions to this purpose:
Suppose a man, says he, much desirous of sleep, and in his perfect mind, had
an offer made of one nights sweet rest, upon condition to be punished an
hundred years for it, would he except of his sleep upon such terms? Now, do not
they (who would be loath to be reputed fools) do far worse, that for the short
fruition of a few transient delights, hazard a double Eternity, the loss of an
Eternity of blessedness, and the sustaining of an Eternity of miseries? for
what other proportion can all earthly things bear to heavenly, in respect of
their duration, than a few beatings of the pulse, or twinklings of the eye,
unto Myriads of Ages? Be then timely wise ye worldlings in a frequent
consideration of your eternal being that you may not pass your life away in a
dream of happiness, and awake in the horror of a begun Eternity in misery. Say
unto your selves, are we not in the world, as the Child conceived is in the
womb, not to abide there, but to come out in a due time to a more full and free
life? Why then do we fondly think of building Tabernacles here? Why do we so
please our selves in our present condition, as to be wholly regardless of our
future? Is not death such a combat as we never enter into but once, and
therein are either saved, or shin eternally? Why do we then make little or no
provision against what we know will, and must certainly follow? Do we think
that our glory shall descend after us, and screen us from Gods siery
indignation? Will our riches purc^ase heaven, or bribe hell? Will the
firstborn of our body be accepted for the sin of our soul? What is it that
makes our cares and fears so preposterous, are we anxious for to morrow, and
though^less of Eternity? We fear the Grave, and mock at Hell, we dread the
Lightning, and slight the Thunderbolt. O methinks such pungent Interrogations
should startle the most sec^re if they would but put Conscience upon an answer,
and not, like Pilate, only ask the question, and then go their way. It is men's
living by sense, that is that stone of stumbling upon which they ruin
themselves: Some surfeit and over-charge themselves with sensual delights, as
that their Intellectuals are wholly lost to all acts of Reason; others who have
jealousies concerning their future estates, are more willing to venture what
the issue will be, than undergo an impartial trial; they fear more what
sentence Conscience will pass, than the Condemnation that God will inflict. Few
there be that put Time and Eternity in the Balance, and weigh them one against
the other, or consider, that life, upon which Eternity depends, is a vapor, a
wind, a span, at most, which the further it is stretched, the more painful it
is: And that Eternity is a bottomless gulf, which no Line can fathom, no time
can reach, no tongue can express. It is a duration always present, a being
always in being, an everlasting now; It swallows up all revolutions of Ages,
as Pharaohs lean Kine did eat up the fat, which when they had eaten them up, it
could not be known that they had eaten them, but were still as at the
beginning. What strange thing can we imagine that in its duration would not be
effected? A tear let fall from the damned once in ten thousand years would fill
the earth with far more water than it was covered with in the Deluge. A dust
taken from the Mountains, and ^neven parts of the world, would in the like
intervals level the Universe, and turn it into a Plain, and yet there would be
still an Eternity behind. Never, never, is the killing word that breaks the
heart of all these hopeless Prisoners that lie buried in the flames of Hell.
Suppositions and possibilities which I tremble to think of, if they might be
but turned into promises unto them of the termination of their anguish and
torment, O how would their hearts revive within them, and how thankfully would
they acknowledge Gods goodness unto them? Do thou therefore, O glorious Lord,
who art the Ancient of days, the Rock of Ages, the Father of Eternity, teach
me to number my days that I may apply my heart unto true wisdom, that I may
walk in the way of life which is above to the wise, and depart from hell
beneath.

Meditation XLIV. Upon a Physicians feeling the Pulse.
HOw often and how exactly do Physicians feel the Pulse of their Patients? Not
a day passes without a strict observation of the motions that it makes,
according unto which they judge both of the greatness and danger of the
distemper, and what the Issues are like to be both in respect of life and
death. They do not as other Visitors, ask the Patient how he does, but inform
him rather how he is, and from the report which they make of his malady, his
fears and hopes are the more or less. And yet how rarely do they feel their own
pulse, who are so seemingly anxious about another? Days, Weeks, Months do
Elapse, and pass away without any such studious heeding of themselves, as they
continually in their profession Exercise toward others. And yet happily in so
doing they are as the Priests in the Temple, who (as our Savior says)
profane the Sabbath and are blameless. But they occasion me to think of the
practice of many, who cannot so easily be acquitted; Such who are severe
observers of other men's ways and actions, and as great neglectors of their
own; who are far more glad that they can espy a fault in others, than grieved
that it is committed: who presume to look into the breast, and to discover how
the Affections, which are the pulse of the soul, do bear and work in every
duty. In some they mislike the heat of their Zeal, as too much resembling an
high and vehement pulse, whose strength and quickness comes not from health,
but from a Fever. In others they condemn lukewarmness, an indifferency, whose
affections they judge to be as a weak and slow pulse, or as the Spring of a
Watch that is wellnigh down, which Clicks and moves very faintly. In some again
they observe an inequality in their Profession, which is accompanied with
frequent stands and pauses that they make; like Asthmatical and shortbreathed
persons, they run a while and blow longer, before they can move again. And upon
these they look with as sad a countenance as a Physician does upon his Patient
that has a false and intermitting pulse. Few or none can be found to escape
their censure, who observe the failings of others, as some ancient Critics did
the imperfect Verses of Homer, which they learned by heart, not at all
regarding the many good. But what can be more contrary to the Law and rule of
Christianity than such practices? How many Prohibitions are gone out of the
Court of Heaven to stay such irregular proceedings? Are we not by Christ forbid
to judge that we be not judged? To judge nothing before the time until the
Lord come? And yet what if any man could know the true temper of the affections
of others, as fully as a Physician c^n distinguish a well and a sick pulse,
would this knowledge be any advantage unto him while he is both ignorant and
regardless of his own estate? Would he thereby find such joy and comfort in
himself, as he that by an impartial examination of himself can discover the
truth and sincerity of his own heart to Christ, though he can say nothing of
others? Surely this man, as the hungry, would be filled with good things, when
the other, as the rich, should be sent empty away. He, as the humble Publican,
would be justified, when the other, as the proud Pharisee, should be condemned.
Let others then, Physician like, study the condition of others, I shall look
upon it as my duty, and make it my work, not to find out what others are, but
what I am in regard of my unfeigned love and affection unto Christ, who has
transcendently merited my love, though I am wholly unworthy of his.
Erasistratus is famed in History for discovering the love of Antiochus to his
Mother-in-law which shame forced him to conceal, by the motion of his pulse,
which he observed to move differently in her presence from what it did at other
times. O how happy should I deem my self if I could find the pulse of my
affections always working more quick and lively in me whenever I behold my
Savior present in the feast of love, in which he is pleased not only to let me
see him, but to enjoy him; or when I hear his name mentioned in a duty, or when
I read his name written in his Word, which is therefore the sweeter because his
name is so often in it; but I have cause to be ashamed at the uneven temper of
my heart, which discovers it self in those intermissions of love and affection
that I too often labor under; how often am I chill and cold in the same duty?
At what poor trifles do I often stick, when my love to him should blush at the
name of difficulty? Can I ever do, or suffer for him too much, whose
perfections render him wholly incapable of being loved too much? If I were
melted in the Flames and Ardors of Divine Love, might I not say still there are
degrees and intentions of heat, which I want, and others have? Christians
should be the rivalls of Seraphims; whose Name expresses them to be of a
flaming Nature, and whose Employment, in Isaiahs Mysterious Vision, is to cry
one to another holy, holy, holy Lord God of hosts: he is the object to which
those Flames that warm them do aspire and tend. O that my heart, like the
Prophets Lips, were touched by some Seraphim, that I might love Christ, which
is the best of Duties, with an heart flaming with the Fire of Heavenly Love,
which is the best of tempers.

Meditation XLV. Upon a Bee-bive and a Waspes nest.
THose two insects have, as the Naturalists observe, a likeness in sundry
Particulars: The Waspes have one common habitation, as well as the Bees, and
are under the Government of a King; who, as the King of Bees, is the largest,
and most beautiful among them: In the Building of their Cells and Combs they
are exact, and make them much like to the Bees both for their figure and size:
But they make no Honey at all, nor yet any Wax that is for service; they live
only upon Rapine, and are injurious to most kind of fruits; like Thieves they
enter by force into the Hives of Bees and devour the Honey which has with much
industry been gathered by them. So eager are they after what is sweet, as that
any narrow mouthed glass set near the Hive with a little sweet liquor becomes a
snare to drown and destroy them, and a security to the Bees to prevent their
Theft, which pass the more freely into their Cells, not tempted to endanger
theit lives, or to neglect their Work by the sight of such a pleasing bait. And
now whither my thoughts carry me, who cannot easily conjecture? is there not a
double Polity, or Society of Men, the one of which may justly be resembled to
Waspes, and the other to Bees? It was Tertullians saying long since, Faciunt
favos and vespae, faciunt Ecclesias Marcionitae: Waspes make Combs, but they
are empty ones; and so Heretics make Churches, but they are void of Truth,
which is that sweet Honey that is to be found only amongst the Assemblies of
the Faithful. What else is the Church of Rome, notwithstanding all those
pretenses which it makes of being a Mother-Hive, but a Neast of Angry Waspes,
under the Rule and Sway of a Spiritual Abaddon: how many swarms have gone out
from thence, not to make Honey, but to destroy what others have made? frauds,
robberies, violence have been the things which they have practiced, and with
which their habitations have been filled; have they not thrust their Stings
deep into ^housands, who have detected their Impostures, and have endeavored
to hold the Mystery of the Faith in a pure Conscience? Have they not wasted
many places, which were like the Garden of the Spouse, full of precious fruits,
into which her Beloved might come, and eat of his honey and hony-combe? who can
express the rage and scorn with which they have trampled upon those, that durst
not abett their impieties? how fond and fruitless then must the attempts of
those be, who, as if they had forgotten what Amaleck had done are setting on
soot overtures of Peace, and terms of Accommodation between Protestancy and
Popery? as if the distances between the one and the other were more seeming
than real, and might as readily be brought together as the two extremes of a
Serpent, who can, when he pleases, cast himself into a Circle, and take his
Tail into his Mouth? But who knows not that a little leaven leaveneth the
whole lump; and so will a little Error diffuse its poison through the whole
body of truth, like a drop of oil on Cloth, it no sooner falls then spreads;
like a spark on Tinder it catches, and runs at once. And therefore Paul would
not for one hour give place unto false Brethren, least the Truth of the Gospel
might be endangered. To do it then with the least prejudice to Truth is
sinful; and to effect it without it is impossible. Sooner may they reconcile
Antipathies in Nature, than in Religion: When therefore they have combined Fire
and Water, without extinction of each other, and made an amity between the Dove
and the Hawk, between the Waspe and the Be; So that the one shall not infest
the other, then may they promise themselves success, in making up the breaches
between Babylon and Zion. But O that they who are so sludious to make strife to
cease between the Philistines and the Israelites, would bend their Minds to
heal the Divisions of Israel, among whom there are great thoughts and
searchings of heart. Is it not pity to see the Industrious Bees, whose Labors
are so useful to their owner, to make a War in the Mouth of their Hive, and to
kill one another by those Stings with which they should defend their Cells
against Waspes and Drones? and is it not then a sad spectacle to behold
Christians who should be joined together, fidei vinculo, glutine Charitatis; by
the Bond and Cement of Faith and Love, to be divided one from another, and in
Animosities to draw the Sword, and to sheath it also in the Bowels of each
other? And yet such heats there have sometimes been, and still are between
Brethren. I could methinks give way to my Sorrow, and let it overflow the
Banks, to see Professors to be less tender of Christ's Body, than the Soldiers
were of his Coat; and few or none to prize that Unity which is the Glory of the
Faith of the Gospel. Have we not all one Father, God blessed for ever? have we
not all one Elder Brother, Jesus Christ, who is the Firstborn of every
Creature? are we not all quickened by one Spirit, who is a Spirit of Love? are
we not all under one Solemn Vow of Baptism, in which we have dedicated our
selves to Gods Service as his Soldiers? how can we then turn Enemies one to
another? O God do thou, who have made that blessed Promise of giving thy People
one Heart, and one Way, put into them a Spirit of Wisdom and Love, that they
may walk Wisely to those that are Without, and Lovingly one toward another;
that by this all Men may know that they are Christ's Disciples, and believe that
thou have sent him.

Meditation XLVI. Upon Contentment and Satisfaction.
IT is our Saviors Maxim, that Man's life consists not in the abundance of
things which he possesses. If there be any happiness upon Earth, it is in that
we call Contentation, which comes from the Mind within, and not from the
things without. Perfect Satisfaction is to be had only in Heaven, where we
shall be happy, not by the Confinement, but by the Fruition of our desires:
Then (says David) I shall be satisfied, when I awake with thy likeness. How
happy therefore is every Godly Man's Condition, who are the only Persons that
are instructed in the Mystery of Contentment while they live on Earth, and
shall be in Heaven the sole Possessors of perfect and everlasting Blessedness?
True it is, that Philosophy has greatly prized, and earnestly sought this Rich
Jewel of Contentation; but Christianity has only found it. The Moralists
have exercised their Wits in giving of Rules to attain it, and have let fall
some Sentences that may deserve to be put in the Christians Register, but they
could never look into the true Grounds from whence sound Contentment does
arise, and upon which it is to be built. The highest of their Precepts have not
(as I may say) the root of the Matter in them, and are therefore insufficient
wholly to compose the Mind, to such a Calm and Even Temper, as may, in the
variety of Changes, show and discover its self to be so reconciled to its
present Condition, as not to lose its Inward Peace and Serenity, whatsoever the
Storms and Cross Accidents are from without. What are the Considerations which
they prescribe as a support against Poverty, Sickness, Imprisonment, loss of
Friends, Banishment, and such like Evils? are they not Persuasions drawn from
the Dignity of Man, from the vanity and uncertainty of all outward things; from
the shortness and frailty of Life, from the befalling of the same things unto
others? But alas ^ what slender Props are these to bear the stress and weight
of those Armies of Trialls, which at once may affault the Life of Man. These
may happily serve as secondary helps to alleviate the bitterness of some
Afflictions, when we are apt to think them greater than what others have felt,
or longer than what others have endured: But to keep the Mind in Peace in the
midst of all aestuations from without, there must be more Effectual Remedies
than either Nature or Morality can suggest. From whence then can true
Contentment arise but from Godliness, which has a Sufficiency to establish the
Heart? it is that alone which brings a Man home to God, out of whom neither
Contentment, nor Satisfaction can ever be had. It is that which acquainteth a
Man with that great Secret, of Gods Special Providence over his Children, who
Rules the World, not only as a Lord, to make them sensible of his Power, but
as a loving Father to make them confident of his goodness, whereby he disposes
all things for the best. O when Faith has once apprehended this, how firmly
can it rest upon the Promises which are made to Godliness, both of this life
and that which is to come? How can it work far more Contentation with the
meanest Food, than others have with the costliest Delicates; with the poorest
Raiment, than others have with their richest Ornaments? It is Faith only that
teaches a Christian like a skillful Musician, to let down a String a Peg
lower, when the Tune requires it; or like an experienced Spagirick to remit, or
intend his Furnace as occasion serves. Such an one was Paul, who learned this
heavenly Art, not at Gamaliels feet, but in Christ's School, the Holy Spirit of
God being his Teacher, so that he knew both how to want and how to abound, and
in whatsoever State he was therewith to be content. Let none then so far admire
those Heathen Sages in those speculations of theirs concerning this Mystery, as
if they had attained to hit that Mark at which they levelled, and had arrived
at the utmost boundaries of it. Whenas in all their Essays, they have fallen
as far short of true Contentation, as Sick Men's Slumbrings and Dreams, do of a
sound and healthful rest. Of all their Precepts and Rules I may say as Erasmus
did of Seneca, in an Epistle of his, Si legas eum ut paganum, scripsit
Christian si ut Christianum, scripsit paganice; If you read them as the
Sayings of Heathens, they speak Christianly; but if you look upon them as the
Sayings of Christians, they speak Paganly. And how could it be that they should
ever do otherwise? they being wholly destitute of the Light of Grace, and the
Guidance of the Spirit, which are both requisite to this high and holy
Learning? the one as a Principle, and the other as a Teacher. But yet this I
must say also, that they have done enough to shame many, who, enjoying the
Benefit of Divine Revelation, and living in the open Sunshine of the Gospel,
have profited thereby in so small a Proportion beyond them. Who can forbear
blushing to see those who Profess to be Christians, to live so contrary to the
Law and Rule which they should walk by? to seek contentment, not by moderating
their desires, but by satisfying them, which will still increase, as things
come on: like to Rivers, which the more they are fed, and the further they run,
the wider they spread. Can it rationally be deemed by any, that those things
which are Sums in the desire, and Ciphers in the fruition, should ever effect
contentedness in the mind? Is not the deficiency that Men see in their
abundance the ground of their Multiplying it? and can they ever, by the
Additions which they make, heal its deficiency? why then should any try and
attempt such fruitless projects, which cannot but end in disappointment?
Methinks I should not need to expostulate the matter with Christians: That
anointing which teaches them all things, should instruct them in this, that
Godliness is the only way to Contentment in this life, and satisfaction in the
other. But Lord, however others live, help me to bring my Mind to my
Condition, which is as well my duty as my happiness while I am on earth; and to
rest assured that in heaven thou will bring my Estate to my Mind, which is
that I may enjoy thee in whose presence is fullness of joy, and at whose right
hand there are pleasures for evermore.

Meditation XLVII. Upon the Perching of a piece of Cloth.
Laws, signally good, often times derive their birth according to the common
Saying, from evil Manners, springing like fair and beautiful Flowers from a
black and deformed Root: And so likewise the many and ingenuous Explorations of
finding out the difference between things of worth and their Counterfeits; and
of seeing into the particular defects of Commodities, have been occasioned from
the multiplicity of deceits, which have risen either from natural semblances,
or corrupt Practices. The skillful Lapidary has, by his observation, learned
to know a false Stone from a true, which the common Eye cannot distinguish. The
Herbalists do difference Plants sometimes by the Root, sometimes by the Taste,
when the likeness of the Leaf is perfectly the same. The Cautious Receiver,
that he be not couzened by adulterated Coin for true, makes an Artificial
Touchstone of his Senses, he bends it, he rings it, he rubs it, and smells to
it, that thereby he may find out what it is: The circumspect Merchant contents
not himself with the seeing and feeling of his Cloth as it lies made up; but he
puts it upon the Perch, and setting it between the light and himself draws it
leasurely over; and so discovers not only the rents and holes that are in it,
but the inequality of the threads, the unevenness of its spinning, the spots
and stains that are in it, and what not? that may make it either to be
rejected for its defects, or approved for its goodness. O how impartial a Judge
is light; which neither flatters friends, nor wrongs enemies; which manifests
the good as well as the evil to what ever it is applied? This kind of trial
hints to me the best manner of doing that work, which every Christian ought to
perform with the greatest care, the searching and examining of his own ways. I
may learn from what is done to the Cloth, to do the same Spiritually to my
self, by setting my actions between the light of the Word, and the Discerning
power of Conscience, that so the one may discover, and the other may judge what
their rectitude or pravity is? and this is best done when every parcel of the
Conversation is looked into, and scanned, as the Cloth that is drawn over the
Perch; then it is that I find the unevenness of my Duties, the distractions of
my Thoughts, and the unbelief of my Heart, which runs as a continued Thread
from one end of the Duty unto the other. Then it is that I espy those secret
stains of Hypocrisy which discolor my services, and blemish them to God,
when they seem fair to the eye of Man; Then it is that convinced of my
filthiness, I cry out, My Person wants a Priest, which is deformed with
infinite guilt, that without him cannot be covered. My nature wants a Priest,
which is overrun with an universal leprosy, that without him cannot be cured.
My Sins want a Priest, which are for their number as the sands, and for their
greatness as the Mountains, that without him can never be pardoned. My holy
things want a Priest, which are defiled with the daily Eruptions of sin and
folly, that without him can never be accepted. And who is it that thus vieweth
himself by this perfect Law of Liberty, that is not thus affected? What faith
Paul of himself? I was alive withcut the Law once, but when the Commandment
came sin revived, and I died: who was once more full of conceired abilities to
perform the Righteousness of the Law without blame? Who was more presumptuous
in self-Justifications, and elated thoughts of his Perfection, than the
Apostle, while he was without the Law? that is, not without the Letter, but
without the Spiritual sense and penetrative power of it; but when the
Commandment came in its Vigor and Life, how suddenly did all those
misperswasions of his own Righteousness vanish into nothing? He then lost his
confidence of being Saved by his obedience to the Law; and by the light of it
discovered those inward Lustings, and desires to be sinful, and such as
subjected him unto Death, which before were wholly neglected and unseen. As I
would therefore incite Christians to an Ex^ct discussion of their ways, so
would I also direct them to look upon them through no other medium then the
Light of the Word: Wherewith (says David) shall a young Man cleanse his ways,
(or as the Original imports, make clear as Crystal) by taking heed thereto
according to thy Word? The Heathen were not altogether Aliens to this Duty of
Self-Examination; it was Sextius his custom, as Seneca reports it, when he
betook himself to his Nights Rest, to question his Soul, Quod hodie malum tuum
sanasti? cui vitio obstetisti? What Malady have thou this day cured? What vice
have thou withstood? It was also Pythagoras his counsel to his Scholars, that
each Man should demand of himself, Wherein have I offended? What good have I
done? But al^ss! how confused and in-distinct was that light by which they made
this search? How little can the Candlelight of Nature discover of the evil of
Sin, whose Rules and Principles do so much fall in, and suit with the wills of
the Flesh? What Camel Sins did the very best of them swallow down, without the
least straining at them? What swarms are there of sins, which Christians
complain of, that the Natural Man is totally ignorant of, and can no more
discover, without the aid of the Word, than the Eye can discern its own
Bloodshed without the help of a Glass? We have Paul's own confession in this
particular, I had not known lust, except the Law had said, thou shall not
covet. Before he only saw some sins that were as beams for their magnitude,
but now he is sensible of the smallest motes. To the Law then, and to the
Testimony do you betake your selves, O ye sincere and upright ones, when you go
about this Work! fear not its Purity, but love it; shrink not at its Searching
Power, but yield up your selves to a free and voluntary admission of its light;
yea rejoice and be exceeding glad, that by the Light of the Word, ye can trace
sin home unto its receptacle, and can both judge it and mortify it in the seed
and root of it, which is the surest and best Way of destroying it. He is
amongst the Firstborn of Christians, who communes most with his own heart,
and looks oftenest into the Books of Conscience, which Writes Journalls, and
not Annalls, and is most likely to obtain a double Portion both of Peace and
Grace; but when he has done all, let him make David's Prayer the close; Search
me, O Lord, and know my heart: try me, and know my thoughts, and see if there
be any wicked way in me, and lead me in the way everlasting.

Meditation XLVIII. Upon the sight of a Grave newly made.
IT is happily no pleasing sight, but questionless very profitable, to look
sometimes into the house appointed for all living, as holy Job calls the Grave.
Though nothing less than beauty can be seen which may delight the Eye, yet much
may be beheld that may passionately affect the heart. The thoughts which it
sugested to me were like unto the Cloud that was between the Camp of the
Egyptians and the Camp of Israel, which had both a dark and bright side: The
one casts down, and the other raises up, but both are useful. My dark and sad
thoughts sprang from the consideration of the entry of death, which came into
the world by sin; it is sin that has made all the Funerals that ever have
been. In our Creation, death had neither matter in us, nor right over us: Our
Innocence was free of any necessity of death. As God made us living Creatures,
so his power was able to sustain us immortal creatures; we had bodily life by
our soul in our body, and spiritual life by Gods Image in both, but sin brought
on us death of all sorts: Death spiritual, in the loss of Gods Image, death
bodily in the begun corruption of our body, and death eternal in the endless
ruin of both. And whom would not this single thought afflict with dread and
sorrow to see what a change sin has made in the condition of man? If Adam
would have lived without sin, he might have lived without end: But now by his
credulous receiving the Serpents Poison, Death is glued to our nature,
necessity of evil to the freedom of our will, and all misery to our selves.
Another dark and posing thought did arise from the progress of death, which
keeps no order or method. It thrusts its sickle not only into the ripe corn,
but the green blade; it nips the blossom, as well as gathers the fruit; it
dissolves the knot that was but new made between the soul and the body, as well
as that which age and years had con^^rmed. There were I observed skulls of all
Sizes: There were some who had never seen the Sun to pass from one Tropic to
the other: Others there were whose life could not be reckoned by days, or
hours, but by minutes; they dropped only from the Womb to the Grave. And is not
this amongst the secrets of God, that thousands should thus pass through the
world, and be determined to different Estates for Eternity? What can I say? But
that the ways of God are unsearchable, and his Judgments past finding out. As
it now shows his Sovereignty, thus to deal with his Creatures as it pleases
him; so the Great Day will manifest the Wisdom and Justice of God that is wrapped
up in these mysterious providence. He that is the Judge of all, will be found
to be righteous toward all. A third sad thought, The consuming power of the
grave did stir up within me, so that I was ready to say, Can these dry bones
live? Can these mingled dusts be distinguished? Can the dusts that are
scattered into distances be ever united? Does not the Noble and the Base, the
Saint, and the Sinner lie equally under the power of corruption? Who then would
not dread to descend into the Grave, and make Hemans question, Will God show
wonders to the dead, shall the dead arise and praise him? But when I consider,
that Believers in their ascending into heaven, do only let fall their bodies to
the earth, as Elijah dropped his Mantle, when he was taken up, and that their
Spirits return to God that gave them. That Death strikes not on the New man,
but on the Tabernacle which is a common Lodging both to Flesh and Spirit, my
fears are greatly Alleviated, for who is much solicitous for the Cabinet when
the Jewel is safe. Yea, when I think that death, which separates our persons
from the world, our soul from the body, and every part of our body from
another, cannot dissolve our Union with Christ; but that then we sleep in him,
and shall be raised by him, and conformed to him, as the pattern of our glory.
O how do these most radiant thoughts dispell both the black fears of death, and
the lightsome comforts of the world, as the rising Sun makes the bright stars
of heaven to vanish, as well as the dark shades of the night? How little then
does the love of this life, or the difficulties of death abate the desires of a
Believer, to be dissolved and to be with Christ, which is far better? Who can
wonder at old Simeons importunity to depart in peace, when his eyes had seen
the Salvation of God, and his arms embraced it? Who would not be of the same
mind that has once tasted of the Clusters of the heavenly Canaan to long after
the full Vintage? How pathetical is that of Austin upon Gods answer to Moses,
Thou can not see my face, for no man can see me and live. Who replies with
great confidence, Lord, is that all that I cannot see thy face and live? Eja
Domine, moriar, ut te videam; videam, ut hic moriar, nolo vivere, volo mori,
dissolvi cupic, and essecum Christo. I pray thee Lord then let me dye, that I
may see thy face: Or let me see thee that I may dye in this place. I would not
live, I would dye, I desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ. Thus also
have other Saints been affected, who have had death in desire, and life in
patience. O what a strange change then has Christ made in death and the grave,
and his grace in the heart and affections of Believers? Death, which sin
brought into the world, is now become the only means to destroy and kill sin.
Death, which is only contrary unto life, is now turned into a Port and passage
into life: So that when we pass out of this life we lose neither life nor
being, but are admitted to a more glorious life and being than ever we had.
Death, that before was an armed Enemy, is now made a reconciled and firm
friend, a Physician to cure all our diseases, and an Harbinger to make way for
glory. The Grave also by Christ's lying in it, is become a bed of rest, in which
his Saints fetch a short slumber until he awaken them to a glorious
Resurrection. It is the Chamber into which he invites his beloved ones, to hide
themselves until his indignation be past; the Arc, into which he shuts his
Noah's whilst he destroys the world with an overflowing deluge of his wrath
and displeasure. And therefore it is, that by his grace they are not afraid to
meet Death, which others would shun, and make it as a voluntary offering unto
God, which others pay only as a necessary debt. Yea, they esteem it as one of
the choicest Jewels in that exact Inventory, that Paul has made of the riches
of Believers, and next unto Jesus Christ, bless God for it, as the greatest
mercy. O holy Savior, do thou then who art the Lord both of the dead and of
the living, unto whom all ought to live, and all ought to dye, enable me thy
servant to love thee above life, which of all blessings is the sweetest, and to
hate sin above death, which of all evils is the bitterest to nature: that so I
may have this testimony of the power of thy grace in the change of my heart,
that for the enjoyment of perfect Communion with thee I can gladly lose my
life, and be separated from sin, can willingly undergo death, which is of all
evidences the Clearest.

Meditation XLIX. Upon a Spring in an high ground.
THe additional blessing, which Achsah sought of Caleb her Father was Springs
of water for her south or dry land, who gave her the upper and the nether
Springs: If the distinct recording of this particular in Scripture carry any
thing of importance with it, is it not that he gave her some portion of Land
that was well watered, as the low valleys for the most part are? And that he
gave also such Springs that by their high lying were apt to convey their stream
to the enriching of other parts that stood in need of such helps to make them
fruitful. Now, what is it that can more commend a Spring, than a free diffusion
of its waters, and the spreading of its moisture, not only to grounds that are
near, but to such as are at a distance from it, and what can more conduce unto
this commodious usefulness than the Springs rise from some hill, or place of
ascent? Another Spring may happily serve to water some little spot of ground, to
benefit some private Garden, but an upper Spring will greatly advantage a large
Inheritance. Such a like difference methinks there is in the moral Well-springs
of grace and holiness, as is between the natural, according to the diversity of
subjects in which they are seated. Grace in a poor man is as a nether spring,
which is not less useful through a defect of water, but through an incapacity
to make any large communication of it, in regard of those circumstances in
which he stands: His wants, his paucity of Friends, the little notice the world
takes of him, the slightings that Poverty exposes most men unto, are all great
obstacles to the eternal diffusions of his grace, though not to his intrinsecal
fullness of it. But grace in a great Person is like an upper Spring, which may
convey it self far and near, because of the many advantages which he has above
others: His Counsels will be sooner harkened unto, his Reproofs will overawe
more, his Conversation will win more, his Example having the force of a Law. So
willing have many been to make Greatness their pattern, as that they have
imitated their infirmities. Dyonisius his Courtiers affected to seem to be
purblind, and justle one against another, that so they might be like their
Prince. Alexanders Followers would imitate him in their gesture, and go as if
their shoulders were one higher than the other, because there was some
inequality in his. Among the Persians they were wont highly to esteem a long
and narrow head, and were industrious to fashion the heads of their newborn
Infants to such a shape, because some of their Kings heads were of that figure.
O what pity is it then that greatness and goodness should be ever out of
Conjunction together, or be as Stars of a different Hemispheer, that are never
seen shining at the same time? Yea, why should not those who are the highest
among men affect also to be the best that so they might bring a beauty and
shine into the world, that they might allure others not only to behold it, but
also to imitate it, by conforming themselves to their happy example? It is the
saying of Plutarch, that rare Moralist, That God is angry with them that
counterfeit his Thunder and Lightning; his Scepter, and his Trident, and his
Thunderbolts he would not have any to meddle with: He loves not that any should
imitate him in absolute Dominion and Sovereignty: But he delights to see them
darting forth those amiable and cherishing beams of Justice, Goodness, and
Clemency. Without these things be conveyed down unto others by those who have
the reins of Power and Government in their hands, though they look upon
themselves as Gods on earth, yet they are as unlike to the God of heaven as a
blazing Comet is to a bright and glorious Sun, or a deceitful Glowworm to an
heavenly Star. What low thoughts Solomon himself has of Sovereignty when put
into an ill hand, we may read in his Book of the Preacher, where he tells us,
that better is a poor and a wise Child, than an old and foolish King who will
not be instructed, to manage his power and authority for the good of those that
are under him. It is wisdom that makes a man's face to shine, but most of all
those that are in highest places: Good in them is most conspicuous, and both
more applauded and Imitated than in others. What evil cannot a King forbid,
whose wra^^ is as the roaring of a Lion? What good can he not encourage, whose
favor is as a cloud of the latter rain, which promises an harvest of
blessings? I cannot but wonder at the great changes which the Scripture reports
to have been made by godly Princes, in the midst of a general Apostasy, such as
Asa, Jehoshaphat, Ezekiah, Josiah who purged the Land from a spreading
Idolatry, and restored Sabbaths, Ordinances, and Temple-worship to their power
and purity, who have bowed the hearts of the people toward them, like to the
top of a fishers Angling rod, this way or that way as it pleases them. Who but
Princes that had grace in their hearts, and power in their hands, could have
ever effected such things as might well seem to be of insuperable difficulty? O
that I could therefore suggest such Considerations that might prevail with all
whose conditions God has raised above others, to be accordingly instrumental
in the doing of good to others that move in a lower spheer. Shall I say, God
expects it from you? If I do, it is no other than what himself has spoken,
when he says, He will get him up to the great men, for they have known the way
of the Lord, and the Judgment of their God. Or shall I say, God signally
commands it from you above others? Is it not to you that he particularly calls?
Be wise now O ye Kings, be instructed, ye Judges of the earth. Serve the Lord
with fear, and rejoice with trembling, kiss the Son, lest he be angry, and ye
perish from the way. Do you think, that greatness does rather exempt from, than
oblige to obedience, or that you shall have a more favorable Audit at the last
Day, when every man must give an account of himself unto God? Be not deceived,
God will enquire what you have done more for him above others, as he has for
you above thousands, and woe be unto you if you be found too light. Your
Exaltation in this life will serve only to make your casting down to be the
more dismal in the other, and to confirm the truth of that Proverb, Inferni
pavimentum fit ex magnatum galeis, Sacerdotum capitibus; That Hell is paved
with the Corslets of Noblemen, and the skulls of Priests.

Meditation L. Upon the vanity of Wishes.
TRue and perfect happiness is a good which neither the light of Nature can
discover, nor its endeavors obtain; it being as impotent to the acquiring of
it, as it is blind to the beholding of it. And yet there is nothing in which
man less apprehends himself at a loss, than in this, of fully contriving at
least, if not effecting his own happiness. Who is it that is not confident,
that if he might have the liberty of his options to wish whatever he would, and
to have them turned into realities for him; but that he could readily frame to
himself a condition as full of happiness, as the Sun is of light, or the Sea of
water? What poor and contemptible thoughts would he have of all that glory of
the world which the devil showed to Christ as a bait, when he tempted him to
the worst of sins, to those stately Schemes and representations, which he could
suppose to be the objects of his delight? If wishes were the measure of
happiness, what is it that the boundless imagination of man would not suppose
and desire? What strange changes would he forthwith make in the Universe, in
levelling of Mountains, in raising of Valleys, in altering of Climates and
Elements themselves? Happily he might wish that the Sea were turned into a
delicious bath, in which he might sport himself without any fear of drowning;
that the Rocks were as so many polished Diamond, the Sands as so many fair
Pearls to beautify it, and the Islands as so many retiring houses of pleasure
to betake himself unto when he pleases. He might wish that all the Trees of
the earth were as the choicest plants of Paradise, every one of which might at
his beck bow down their branches, and tender their ripe fruit unto him. And
thus may he multiply his wishes, until every spire of Grass, and every dust of
the earth have undergone some remarkable mutation according to the lust of his
fancy, and yet be as far from any satisfaction in his desires, or rest in his
thoughts, as the Apes in the Fable were from warmth, which finding a Glowworm
in a cold night, gathered some sticks together, and blew themselves breathless
to kindle a little fire. For all these supposed gaieties, are not the
perfection but the disease of fancy, which has (as I may so speak) a Boulimia,
in respect of objects, as some corrupt and vitiated appetites have in respect
of meats, who though they eat much are yet never satisfied. And hence it is,
that men who enjoy plenty, and are far from having any just cause to complain
of want, do yet, as unsatisfied persons, feed themselves with fond suppositions
of being in such an estate and condition of which they can have no possibility,
much less any real hope for to obtain. The ambitious man pleases himself in
thinking how bravely he could King it, if he were but set upon a Throne, and
how far he would outstrip all other Princes that have been before him both for
state and glory; he fancies what pleasures he would have for his recreation,
what meats for his Table, what persons for his attendants, what Laws for his
Government, and then, Absalom like, he wishes in himself, O that I were made a
Judge in Israel. The covetous person, whose heart is set upon Riches, never
cease in the midst of his abundance to desire more. Riches and his desires
still keep at a distance; as they come on, so do his desires come on too, the
one can never overtake the other, no more than the hinder wheels of a Coach can
overtake the former. If he should, as Peter, cast his hook into the Sea, and
take up the fish that first comes up, with a Stater or piece of money in his
mouth, how eagerly straitwaies would he wish to take a second, and then a
third, yea, how would he still renew his wishes, so as sooner to empty the Sea
of all its fish, than to satisfy his desires with accumulated treasures. But
are these, O vain man, the highest wishes with which you would impe your
present enjoyments, and so make your speedy flight unto perfect happiness? What
if all these suppositions and wishes, which are (as I may so speak) the
creations of fancy, were real existency? Yea, what if your condition did as far
exceed the pomp of all humane Imagination, as Solomon did the fame that was
spread abroad of him? Might I not yet say, as David did, O ye Sons of men, how
long will ye love vanity, and seek after leasing? Are these things for which
Angels will give you the right hand of fellowship? Or will this glory make them
stoop to become ministering spirits unto you? Though you may conceive as highly
of your selves, as the Prince of Tyrus did of himself, who said he was a God,
and sat in the seat of God, yet they will look upon you no better than gilded
dust and ashes. That which they adore, and with wonder look into, is not the
happiness of the worldings, but of believers, who are blessed, not according to
what they ask or desire, but far above whatever could have entered into the
thoughts of men and Angels to conceive. Who could ever have said to God, as
Haman did to Ahasuerus, if he had been asked, What shall be done to the man
whom God delights to honor? Let the foundation and corner stone of his
happiness be laid in the exinanition of the Son of God, let him come from
heaven to earth to purchase it with his blood: let his nature be dignified by
being personally united unto the Divine Nature, let him be a coheir with him
who is the brightness of his Fathers glory, sit with him upon the same Throne,
and be conformed to his likeness: let him stand for ever in the highest and
sweetest relations unto the three most glorious Persons, having God to be his
Father, his Son to be his Elder Brother, and the Holy Spirit to be his Friend
and Comforter, are not these things such, as may pose Angels to tell whether is
greater the wonder or the mercy? May it not be truly said, that Omnipotency it
self is exhausted, so that there remains neither power in God to do, nor wisdom
to find out a greater happiness than this, which he has vouchsafed to man in
his lowest condition? Can there then be any additions made by the narrow
conceptions of weak Creatures? Let me therefore expostulate with Christians,
whose happiness in Christ is complete, and yet, as if there were an emptiness
in their condition, are still hankering in their minds after the worlds
vanities, and wishing, like carnal Israelites, to eat of the Fleshpots and
Garlic of Egypt, as if the true bread from heaven were not a sufficient and
satisfying food. Is there any thing in the world which you cannot find made up
to you in Christ? Are not all the scattered comforts which can be had only in
the Creatures by retaile, as being parcelled out some to one and some to
another, to be had fully in Christ, in whom they are summed up, as broken
particulars are in the foot of an account? Though he be, Bonum formaliter
simplex, a good formally simple, yet he is, Eminenter multiplex. A good
eminently manifold. And there is more to be had in Christ, than can be had any
ways out of him; who, as the first figure in a number, stands for more than
all the figures that can be added unto it. Whom, says holy David, have I in
heaven but thee? And there is none upon earth that I desire besides thee.
Surely, if Heaven, which has legions of beauties and perfections in it, yield
nothing worthy of his love and affection but God and Christ, we may well
conclude, that Earth, which is as void of good, as Heaven is full, can have
nothing in it that is to be desired by us. Why then should any, in whom Christ
is the hope of glory, be as the men of the world, who cry out, Who will show us
any good? For them to be unsatisfied who feed upon vanities is no wonder; but
for those who possess him that is, and has all things, it is strange that they
should seek any thing out of him. Quid ultra quaerit, cui omnia suus conditor
fit? aut quid ei susficit, cui ipse non sufficit? What can be se^k further
(says Prosper) to whom his God is made every thing? Or what will susfice him,
to whom He is not sufficient? I know but one wish that any Believer has to
make, and that is the wish of St. John, with which he seals up the Book of God,
as the common desire of all the Faithful, with which I shall shut up this
Meditation, as with the best of wishes: Come Lord Jesus, even so come, as thou
have promised, come quickly, in whose presence there is fullness of joy, and at
whose right hand are pleasures for evermore.

Meditation LI. Upon first Fruits and Gleanings.
What the Apostle says of the heavenly Bodies, that one Star differs from
another Star in glory, is true also of the heavenly Laws and Commands of God,
as well Ceremonial as Moral, that they differ from each other in their weight
and worth. Some of which set forth the greater things, and others the less; as
may be easily seen in this double Command of First fruits, and Gleanings; one
of which is far greater than the other, though the less is not to be neglected,
because it is a stream that flows from the same Fountain, the Sovereign will
and appointment of God. But that we may the better take the Dimensions of this
Law of First fruits, let us view it by the help of some Considerations, as
Astronomers by instruments judge of the Altitude, and Magnitude of a Star. We
may first see it in the extent of those things in the offering of which God
would be honored and acknowledged; he required the firstlings of Men and
Cattle, the first fruits of trees, and of the Earth, in the sheaf, and in the
threshing floor, in the dough, and in the loaves. It did reach to all their
Substance, and the increase, which without this Service was but a polluted and
an unclean heap.

Secondly, In the solemn manner of the offering of them unto God, which was to
be done with an humble Confession of their Fathers poverty; A Syrian ready to
perish was my Father, and of the hard bondage in Egypt sustained by them, and
with acknowledgment of Gods gracious looking upon their Affliction, Labor, and
Oppression, bringing them also forth with a mighty hand and outstretched arm,
with great terribleness, and with signs and wonders, and giving them a Land
that flows with milk and honey.

Thirdly, In the express command for the speedy payment of them, they were not
to be delayed, much less withheld; to keep them back was robbery, to defer them
was disobedience, and rendered them rather to be of the Gleanings and Corners of
the field, which God had appointed to be reserved for the poor; then of the
First fruits which he required for himself. It was an injury to the moral duty
which they did teach of Consecrating to God the first and prime of their years,
and abilities, which is to him far more acceptable than all Offerings and
Sacrifices whatever; for how could it be, that he who was careless of the Rite
and Ceremony, which typified his duty to him, should ever be mindful of doing
that which was the marrow and substance of it. And now when I think that First
fruits only were the shadow of our early honoring God, and remembering him in
the day of our youth, when all the faculties both of soul and body are in their
vigor and strength. I cannot but wonder, as well as mourn, to see that under
the Doctrine of the Gospel, which reaches men to deny all ungodliness and
worldly lusts, that thereby they might become a kind of first fruits unto God
and the Lamb. So few make Religion the work of the morning of their Age, and so
many of the Evening. What else is this, but to give the First fruits to Satan,
and the Gleanings to God; To him the finest of the flower, and to God the bran?
But tell me, O ye deferrers of holiness, who make it both the least and the
last work of your lives. Is it only necessary to die to God, and not 10 live to
him? Or is it reasonable to say as that young man did to his Companion, when he
saw Ambrose dying, Tecum viverem and cum Ambrosio moriar, I would live with
thee, and dye with Ambrose? Is not this to mock God, whom yet you would have to
save you? And to minister matter of triumph to the God of this world, whose
Captives you have been, that though the God of heaven pay you your wages, yet
you have done wholly his work? Unto you therefore, O men, I call, and my voice
is unto the Sons of men, be not deceived, God will not be mocked: It is not the
owning of him when you can serve neither your selves, nor your Lusts any
longer, that will be acceptable unto him: It is not a few bedrid prayers, that
are as those Ears of Corn which Pharaoh saw in his dream, withered, thin, and
blasted with the East wind, that will expiate those black Crimes with which
your ill-spent life is overspread. Can an Offering of Gleanings, which is made
up of robbery, and disobedience, of wronging the poor, and violating the
Command of God, ever hallow the whole Harvest? No more can such duties be
availing to reconcile you to God, who requires that you should seek him early.
Yea, has he not cursed the deceiver, which has in his Flock a Male, and
sacrifices to the Lord a corrupt thing? And what are you but deceivers? Who
waste the Lamp of time that God has given you to work by, in the sinful
delights of the flesh and alienate the chief of your strength and parts from
him that should have been honored, both with the first and best of your
abilities, and in your Age have nothing to offer to him, but a large bedroll of
heinous enormities, which may justly bring down your gray hairs with sorrow
unto the grave? How blessed a thing is it then for Men to give to God the
first fruits of their Youth, that he may not give them bitter after-fruits, and
cause them to feel more smart of their sins in their Old Age, then ever they
found pleasure or delight in them in their Youth? and what better Persuasions
can I suggest, then to consider,

First, That early Piety gives both to the Person, and to his Services a
peculiar Pre-eminence and Dignity above all others. The Naturalists observe,
that the Pearls that are bred of the Morning Dew, are far more bright and
clear, than those which are bred of the Evening Dew: And so are those duties of
a greater worth and beauty, which are the fruits of a Morning, and not an
Evening Godliness. It is the commendation of Hezekiahs Reformation, above all
others of the Kings of Judah, that in the first year of his Reign, in the first
Month, he opened the doors of the House of the Lord. It is that which makes
Josiahs Memory to be as a Box of precious Nard, that while he was yet young, he
began to seek after the God of David his Father. It is an Honorable Testimony
which Paul gives to Epenetus, that he was the first fruits of Achaia unto
Christ: and the like is that which he gives to Andronicus and Junia, that they
were in Christ before him: To have a Precedence in the Faith, is not only a
happiness, but a dignity. What glory can be greater, then to be a Jeremiah
sanctified from the Womb; or a Timothy nourished up in the words of Faith?

S^condly, The comfort of Age, is a well-spent Life; When a Man comes to the
Grave as a Shock of C^rne in its se^son, and not as a bundle of Tares to the
Fire; when the Bones are full, not of the Sins of Youth, but of the Services
that were then done to God; when a Man can say, as dying Hezekiah, Remember O
Lord I beseech thee how I have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect
heart, and have done that which is good in thy sight. O it is sad when the sins
of youth become the burden of age ^ if the Grasshopper then be a weight to the
Body, what a pressure will heaps of Mountainous sins be to the Soul? Age at
the best has sufficient Griefs; it is of it self a Sickness, and a Neighbor
to Death, and needs not the bad provisions of Youthful Follies to make it
worse. Let then the Counsel of Wise Solomon be acceptable unto you who are yet
in the spring and flower of your age, to Remember your Creator in the days of
your youth; and then if Death make you Pale, before Age make you Gray, you will
have this comfort, that you are old in hours, though not in years; and bave
lived much, though not long; as having lost no time in sowing Seed unto the
Flesh, as most do, who make youth a foolish Seed-time to a Mourning Age; and
Old Age a bitter Harvest to a foolish Youth. Or if your Almond-Tree shall
flourish, and that a more gracious Old Age shall succeed a gracious Youth, Old
Age it self shall be followed with a Crown of endless Glory.

Meditation LII. Upon a Rock.
IT is the saying of the Moralists, That Accidents which befall Men have a
double handle, by which they may be apprehended; So as that if they be rightly
taken, they become not only less burdensome and unpleasant, but also of use
and advantage to those that sustain them: like bitter Herbs that are by the
skill of the Physician turned into a wholesome Medicine. The like may be said of
this present Subject, that it has a double aspect under which it may be
represented to our Consideration, each of which will suggest thoughts far
differing one from another, and yet both have their rise from Scripture. Does
not God bid us look unto the rock from whence we are hewn, and to the pit
whence we are dug? And then what can it hold out to our view, but the misery
of our natural condition, our deadness, deformity, barrenness, and
untractableness to any good? Is it not the complaint of the best, that their
hearts are Stony and Rocky, and that they are apt to stand it out with God, and
not to yield to the Work of his Grace? is there any evil that in their account
is more insuperable then a flinty heart? When did Moses, who had faith to work
many Miracles, most distrust, but when he was to make the Rock to yield Water?
though God commanded him to speak only to it; yet, as deeming it insufficient
he smote it twice. And yet is it not the Promise of God to take away the stony
heart, and to give an heart of flesh? And is it not that which I beg, that God
would mollify both my Natural and Acquired hardness, and preserve me from
Judicial hardness; That so I may not resist Pharaoh. like his Messages, his
Miracles, his Judgments, and his Mercies, and grow worse in stead of being
better. I would that God might be a Rock to me; but I would be as Wax unto him,
that so I might be apt to receive Divine Impressions from him. It is my sin to
be as a Rock to God, unflexible and sooner Broken then Bent; But it is my
unspeakable comfort to think that God will be a Rock to me, who stand in a
continual need of his aid and power, to uphold me, who, if I be not built upon
him, cannot subsist; and if I be not hid in him can have no salvation. I cannot
therefore but give some scope and line to my thoughts, that I may the better
take in the honey and sweetness that drops from this Metaphorical Name of God,
who is often styled in Scripture, the Rock of Israel; the Rock of Ages; the
Rock of Salvation. But here I must use the help of the Schools, who rightly
inform us, that when any thing of the Creature is applied to God, it must be,
via remotionis, by way of remotion; and via eminentiae, by way of transcendent
eminency.

First, by way of remotion: All defects and blemishes whatsoever are not in the
least to be attributed unto him who is absolutely perfect; as Heralds say of
Bearings, the resemblance must be taken from the best of their properties, and
not from the worst. Is a Rock deformed, and of unequal parts? God is the first
of Beauties, as well as of Beings, and all his attributes are equally infinite;
his Justice is of as large extent as his Mercy; and his Wisdom as his Power. Is
a Rock unsensible of the straits of those that fly unto it for succor? so is
not God, who is both a Rock and a Father of Mercies: Who can read the
expressions of his ten^erness, and not be affected? How shall I give thee up
Ephraim? how shall I deliver thee Israel? how shall I make thee as Admah? how
shall I set thee as Zeboim? mine heart is turned within me, my repentings are
kindled together.

Is the strength of a Rock intransient, and fixed in it self, not communicating
its ver^ue to what lies upon it? So is not the strength of Israel, who is a
living, and not a dead Rock, and gives both life and power to those that are
united to him. I can do all things (says holy Paul) through Christ
strengthening me. Is a Rock Barren, and can yield no food, though it afford
shelter; So is not God, who is a full storehouse, as well as a free refuge; a
Sun as well as a Shield.

Secondly, By way of Eminency, all perfections whatsoever, either for degree or
kind, which put a worth or value upon the Creature, are to be found insinitely
more in God. Is a Rock strong, and dashing in pieces all resistance made
against it? God is incomparably more: He (says Job) is wise in heart, and
mighty in strength, who has hardened himself against him and prospered? Is a
Rock durable, and not subject to change, by the many revolutions of Ages that
pass over it? God is far more immutable, his years are throughout all
Generations: he is the same yeseerday, and to day, and for ever: In the Lord
Jehovah is everlasting strength. Is the shadow of a great Rock desirable in a
weary Land, to bear off the scorchings of the Sun, and to revive the fainting
Traveller? what a covert and hiding place then is God, against all storms, and
heates whatsoever, raised either by the rage of Men, or by the Estuations of a
troubled Conscience, and fomented by the Malice of Satan? Is a Rock of an
awful aspect for its height, and apt to work upon the head of him that looks
down from the top of it? How great then is God whose glory is above the
Heavens? whose faithfulness reaches unto the Clouds, whose righteousness is
like the great Mountains, and whose Judgments are a great deep? And now
methinks I may say to my Soul, as David did unto his, Why art thou cast down O
my Soul? and why art thou disquieted within me? Cannot God keep him in perfect
peace, whose Mind is stayed on him? is not he a very present help in the times
of trouble? what evil can befall me, under which his everlasting Arms cannot
support me? What Seas of Trials can overwhelm when God shall set me upon a
Rock that is higher than I? As I my self cannot climb it, so neither can my
Enemies power ever reach it. A Believer can only be wounded by his own fears;
as the Diamond is only cut by its own dust. Peter sunk not till his Faith
failed him: if his confidence had risen, as the Wind and Billows did, he
would have greatly honored his Lord, as his Rock, upon whom he was built, and
have been highly commended by him, as he was for the good Confession he made of
him.

But, O blessed Savior, if Peter cry out, Save Master I perish, how much more
shall I, who fall far short of his little Faith? and am apt to fear, not only
in the deep Seas, but in the shallow Brooks: not only when the Waves roar,
but when the petty Streams murmur? Do thou therefore, holy Lord, teach me to
know what a Rock thou art, and cause all thy glory to pass before me, as thou
did before Moses, that so I may see every attribute of thine, as so many
Clefts in the Rock, to which I may run in time of danger, and rejoice to find
how I am compassed about, with thy power, wisdom, faithfulness, and goodness,
from whence more sure comfort will arise, than if a numerous host of Angels
should pitch their Tents round about me.

Meditation LIII. Upon a Counterfeit piece of Coin.
Whit Physicians say of some Diseases, Illi morbi sunt peric^losissimi qui
sanitatem Imitantur; That they are most dangerous dangerous which seem to
imitate and come nearest unto health, may be applied fitly to adulterous and
spurious Coins, that the greater resemblance and likeness they have to the
true and genuine, the more pernicious and destructive they are to the Public;
wasting though insensibly not only private Estates, but the common Treasure
and Riches of a Nation. And therefore the falsifying of Coin, which bears the
Image or Arms of the Prince, as the general Warrant to ratify the goodness of
it, has been made a Crime of the same Complexion, with the highest attempt or
act done against his Person, the same Capital Punishment being inflicted upon
him that is found guilty of the one, as is upon him that is guilty of the
other. What can be done more to deter any from such Practices, then the loss of
Name, Estate, Life, in a ghastly and ignominious death? and yet these
severities, which should be as the Boundaries at the foot of the Mountain, to
keep all from offending, are insufficient to restrain many whom the love of
gain, and the hope of secrecy do embolden to run a sad hazard, that they may
enjoy the sweet. Secrecy in sinning, though in some respect it ex^enuates a
sin, as making it less scandalous, and less contagious, yet it is a powerful
attractive to incline to the Commission of a sin. Jos^phs Mistress was most
vehement in her soliciting of him to folly, when none of the Men of the house
were within. The Harlot in the Proverbs makes that as her Plea to the Young Man
to hearken unto her, That the good Man is not at home, he is gone a long
journey, he has taken a bag of Money with him, and will come at the day
appointed. It was that which put an edge upon the Covetousness of Achan, to
take the goodly Babylonish Garment, the two hundred shekels of Silver, and the
wedge of Gold, that he could do it without the privity of any, so that none
could charge him with the breach of that strict Command which God had given, of
not taking the accursed thing, least they make themselves accursed, and the
Camp of Israel accursed, and trouble it. Usually when shame and punishment are
the sole Motives to deter from sin; the secrecy of doing it, by which both may
be declined, swayes prevailingly to the commission of it. But how far more
presumptuous are they, who adulterate not the Coins of Princes, but the Truths
of God, and stamp his Name upon their Inventions, to give a Credit and value
unto them? Have such workers of iniquity any darkness and shadow of death where
they may hide themselves? Do they think, that though Kings cannot discover
those often times that violate the Dignities of their Crown, that they also can
escape the knowledge of the most High? or is not he as jealous of his Word,
which he has magnified above all his Name, as they are of every piece that
carries their Image and Inscription upon it? has he not declared himself to be
against those that Prophecy the deceits of their own heart, and use their
Tongues, and say, the Lord says? Ye^, has he not denounced the most dreadful
of Curses against all Embasers, or Clippers of his Heavenly Coin? To the one he
threatens all the Plagues that are written in the Word of Truth; and for the
other, he shall take away his part out of the Book of Life, out of the holy
City, and from the things that are written in the Book of God. Who can read
such a Sentence and not tremble at the thoughts of it? And yet though God be
(as Bernard speaks) Sapiens Numm^larius qui non accipiet nummum fractum vel
fictum. A wise Exchanger that will not take Money that is broken, or false,
though we cannot mock him, as one Man mocketh another, how many do take a
liberty to mint Doctrines and Tenants that have only the Semblance, but not
the Purity and substance of Divine Truth? and upon these they set the Name of
God, that they may the more easily deceive the incautious? As Pompey built a
Theater Cum Titulo Templi, with the Title of a Temple: and Apollinar is the
Heretic a School Cum Titulo Orthodoxi, with the Title of Orthodox: What
prevalency such Arts in this kind have had, I would the defections of many
Particular Persons, yea of Churches did not abundantly witness; Was not the
whole Church of Galatia soon removed from him that had called them into the
Grace of Christ unto another Gospel? by their false Teachers blending the
necessity of Circumcision with the Gospel? and of Works with Faith. And did
not the Corinthians comply more readily with the false Apostles then with Paul?
Ye suffer, if a Man bring you into bondage, if a Man devour you, if a Man take
of you, if a Man exalt himself, if a Man do smite you on the face. It is the
temper and disposition of most to be far more circumspect and jealous in the
concernments of their Estates, then of their Faith; and to use both the scale
and the test to find out false and light Coins, when in matters of Faith, the
question is seldom made, whose Image and Superscription do they bear? It is
enough if they please Fancy, or else have the allowance of such whom they have
in admiration. Can I then do less then bemoan the slightness and indifferency
of Christians about Truth, which is the only deposite that God has
Concredited to the Saints? and awaken both my self and others to buy the Truth
at any Rate, but ^o sell it or debase it at no Rate. Rob but God once of his
Truth, and what Riches of Glory do you leave him? Is not he the God of Truth,
and are not ye witnesses, Chosen by himself, to give Testimony unto it? And can
you dishonor him more, then to make him like the Father of Lies, while you
either spread the infection of Errou^ to others, or receive it from others into
your own Bosom? Bethink therefore your selves, you who Deliver the Oracles of
God, that you be not as the Lying Vanities of the Heathen, which deceived those
that repaired unto them: What comfort can you ever have in departing from the
Form of sound Words, and in Speaking Affected and Swelling words? which are one
of Satan's Lures to seduce into Errors? Who can ever understand Behmens greeming
of the inward Root? or the Canting of the Familists, of being Godded with God,
and Christed with Christ? And be you wise, O Christians, in the differencing of
such impure Gibberish from the Holy Dialect of the Spirit. Let not such Arts,
which serve only as the light of the Fowler in the night, first to amaze the
Birds, and then to bring them into the Net, ensnare and captivate you; Keep
untainted from Errors, the doctrines of Faith that you profess, which will be
your glory; and the Duties that you perform to God from hypocrisy, which will
be your Comfort. Let not your intercourse with Heaven be in such Services that
are gilded only with words of Piety, which make them specious to Men, and
wholly destitu^e of sincerity, which can alone commend them to God. Would it
not be a piece of inexcusable folly, for any to heap up a Mass of Counterfeit
Coin, and then to value himself to be worth thousands? And is it not far
greater for Men to think that they have laid up much Treasure in Heaven, and
are rich toward God, by the Prayers that they have made, and other Services
that they have done, which will all be sound at the last day dross, and not
gold? and will produce no other return, then the increase of a sore
Comdemnation? O the thoughts of it are dreadful, to think, how many will be
found poor miserable, and naked Laodiceans, who confidently presume, that they
are rich, and increased with goods, and have need of nothing. I cannot
theresore but Pray, Lord help me to buy of thee Gold tried in the fire; and to
get such truth of Grace into my heart, that I may never be amongst the number
of those who are justly hated by Men for hypocrites in this World, and
condemned by God for hypocrites in the other World.

Meditation LIVE. Upon health of body, and peace of conscience.
IT was an high and Eminent testimony given by S^. John to the Elder Gaius, in
the Prayer that he made for him, with an earnest wish that he might prosper,
and be in health, even as his Soul prospers. It is a Crown that I could
heartily desire might be deservedly set upon the head of every one, that is
called by that honorable Name of Christian; and then I doubt not, but those
reproaches, which are daily cast upon them, would fall as far short of them, as
stones that are thrown at the Sun; and those Scandals, at which those who are
without do stumble, would be removed, and they also won, by their Conversation
to the obedience of the Faith. But alas ^ I must invert the Apostles wish, and
if I will wish true Prospe^ity to the Saints themselves, Pray that their Souls
may prosper, and be in health, as their Bodies prosper: So unequal is the
welfare, for the most part, that is between the one and the other. Where may I
find the Man? or who can tell me what is his Name, whose care and observance
has so far prevailed, as to make his Soul in an equal Plight with his Body?
and to keep the one as free from Lusts, as the other from Diseases? Who ever
thought it necessary, that Pensions should be given to Orators to dissuade Men
from running into Infected Houses? or to be out of love with Mortal Poisons? Is
not the least jealousy and suspicion of such things Argument enough to secure
themselves against dangers that may fall out? But is there not need to admonish
and warn the best and holiest of Men, that they abstain from Fleshly Lusts
which war against the Soul? Is it not requisite to bid the most watchful to
take heed of a Lethargy, when the Wise Virgins are fallen asleep? Did not
Christ himself Caution his Disciples against having their hearts at any time
overcharged with surfeting and drunkenness, and the Cares of this life? And
yet the meanest of their Condition might seem to exempt them from such Snares?
From whence then is it that the welfare and health of the Body should be more
studiously endeavored by all, then the well-being of the Soul in its Peace and
Serenity is almost by any? Is it not from the strength of fleshly Principles
which abide in the best, and darken often times the eye of the understanding,
that it cannot rightly apprehend its own concernments? If there were but a
clear insight into that Blessedness, into which Peace of Conscience does Estate
a Believer, it could not be but that it being laid in the Balance with the
health of the Body, it should as far over-weigh it, as a full Bucket a single
drop; or as the Vintage of Wine a particular Cluster: True it is, that health
of Body is the Salt of all outward blessings, which without it have no relish
or savor; neither Riches nor Honors, nor Delights for the Belly or Back, can
yield the least Pleasure where this is wanting; So that the enjoyment of it
alone may well be set against many other Wants. And better it is to enjoy
health without other additional-comforts, then to possess them under a load of
Infirmities. And yet I may still say, Quid Palea ad Triticum? What is the Chaff
to the Wheat? Though it be the greatest outward good that God bestows in this
Life, it is nothing to that Peace which passes all understanding? Sickness
destroys it, Age enfeebles it, and Extremities imbitter it. But it is the
Excellency of this divine Peace that it works joy in Tribulation, that it
supports in Bodily languishments, and creates confidence in death. Who is it
that can throw forth the Gauntler, and bid defiance to Armies of Trialls, to
persecution, distress, famine, nakedness, peril and sword; But he whose heart
is established with this Peace? the ground of which is Gods free love; the
Price of which is Christ's satisfaction; the Worker of which is the Holy Spirit;
and the Subject of which is a Good Conscience. This was it that filled old
Simeons heart with joy, and made him to beg a Dimission of his Savior, whom
his eyes had seen, his arms embraced, and his Soul trusted in. What a strange
thing is it then, that there should be so few Marchant-men that seek this
goodly Pearl, which is far above all the Treasures of the Earth, that are
either hid in it, or extracted from it? Many say, Who will show us any good?
but it is David only that Prays, Lord lift up the light of thy Countenance
upon us. Others like the scattered Israelites in Egypt, go up and down
gathering of Straw and Stubble; when he, like an Israelite indeed, in the
Wilderness of this World, seeks Manna, which his Spirit gathers up and feeds
upon with delight; and then cries out, Thou have put gladness in my heart, more
then in the time, that their Corn and their Wine increased. It is the love of
God shed abroad in the heart, that doubleth the sweetness of prosperity, and
sweetens also the bitterness of asfliction: A wonder only therefore it is, not
that few should seek, but a much greater, that any in this World should live
without it. Can any live well without the Kings Favor, either in his Court, or
Kingdom? And yet there are many places wherein such Persons may lie hid in his
Dominions, when the utmost ends of the Earth cannot secure them against Gods
frowns. But if any be so profligate as Cleopatria-like to dissolve this Jewel
of Peace in his Lusts, and to drink down, in one prodigious draught, that which
exceeds the World, in its price, and yet think they can live well enough
without it; let them consider how they will do to die without it. Sweet it is
in life, but it will be more sweet in death; ^t is not then the Sunshine of
Creatures, but Saviourshine that will refresh them. It is not then Wine that
can cheer the heart, but the Blood of Sprinkling that will pacify it. The
more Perpendicular Death comes to be over our head, the lesser will the shadow
of all Earthly comforts grow, and prove useless, either to assuage the pains
of it, or to mitigate the fears of it. What is a fragrant posie put into the
hands of a Malefactor, who is in sight of the Place of Execution, and his
Friends bidding him to smell on it? or what is the delivering to him a Sealed
Conveyance, that Intitles him to great Revenues, who has a few minutes only
to live? But O what excess of joy does fill and overflow such a poor Man's
heart, when a Pardon from his Prince comes happily in to prevent the Stroke of
death, and to assure him both of Life and Estate? This is indeed as health and
marrow to the bones. And is it not thus with a dying Sinner? who expects in a
few moments to be swallowed up in those flames of wrath? the heat of which
already scorch his Conscience, and cause Agonies and Terrors which imbitter all
the comforts of life, and extract cries from him that are like the yellings of
the damned; I am undone, without hope of recovery: Eternity it self will as
soon end as my misery: God will for ever hold me as his enemy, and with his own
breath will enliven those Coals that must be heaped upon me. Of what value now
would one smile of Gods Face be to such a person? how joyful would the softest
whisper of the Spirit be, that speaks any hope of Pardon, or Peace? would not
one drop of this Sovereign Balm of Gods favor let fall upon the Conscience,
heal and ease more then a River of all other delights whatsoever? Think
therefore upon it, O Christians, so as not any longer through your own default,
to be without the sense of this Blessing in your hearts; that so in life, as
well as in death, you may be filled with this Peace of God, which passes all
understanding. If Prayer will ob^ain it, beg every day a good look from him,
the light of whose Countenance is the only health of yours. If an holy and
humble Walking will preserve it, be more careful of doing any thing to lose
your Peace, then to endanger your health; remember that Peace is so much better
than health, as the Soul is better then the Body.

But Grant, Holy Father, however others may neglect, or defer to seek Peace
with thee, and from thee, yet I may now find thy Peace in me by thy Pardoning
all my iniquities, and may be found of thee in Peace without Spot, and
blameless in the great day.

Meditation LV. Upon a Looking-Glass.
What is that which commends this Glass? is it the Pearl, and other precious
stones with which the Frame that it is set in is richly decked and enammelled?
or is it the impartial and just representation which it makes, according to the
Face, which every one that beholds himself brings unto it; Surely the Ornaments
are wholly foreign, and contribute no more to its real worth then the Cask
does to the goodness of the Wine into which it is put; or the ^ichness of the
Plate to the Cordial in which it is administered. That for which the Glass is to
be esteemed, is the true and genuine resemblance which it makes of the object
which is seen in it, when it neither flatters the Face, by giving any false
Beauty to it, nor yet injures it, by detracting ought from it. To slight then
or neglect the Glass for the meanness of its Case, and to value it only for
its Gaiety, is no better then the folly of Children, or the brutish Ignorance
of those, who prize the Book by the Cover, and not by the Learning that is in
it. To quarrel at the Glass for its returning a most exact and absolute
likeness of the Face that is seen in it, is to despise it for its excellency,
and can come from no other ground, than a consciousness of some guilt. Is it
not for this very respect, that beautiful persons both prize it, and use it
happily too much? It being the only means whereby they come to be acquainted
with their own comeliness, and to understand what it is that allures the hearts
and eyes of all toward them. Who then but those whose features Nature has
drawn with a Cole, rather than a Pencil, or whom age and sickness have robbed
of what they formerly prided themselves in, shun the familiar use of it? Or be
angry when they look into it, as if it upbraided them, rather than resembled
them? Phryne, the famous Harlot, throws passionately away her Glass, saying,
Qualis sum nolo, qualis eram nequeo; As I am I will not, as I was I cannot
behold my self: And yet is not this anger against the Glass causeless? Does it
make the gray hairs on the head? Or the pock-holes and wrinkles in the face? Or
does it discover only what Age and Diseases have done? And let them see what
they cannot conceal from the eyes of others? Now, what does all this argue, but
an averseness in men to understand the truth of their own condition, and a
willingness through self-flattery to deceive themselves in thinking of what
ever they have above what is meet? Great must needs be the impatiency against
truth, when the silent reflections of a Glass, that vanish as soon as it is
turned from, kindle such dislikes in the breast as to make them to cast it from
them, for doing only the same thing to them which it does to others. Here
methinks we may learn the ground, why carnal men are offended at the Word, both
in putting scorn and contempt upon it, by the low and mean thoughts they have
of it, or else by the anger which they express against it, in throwing this
blessed Mirror from them, in as great, though not so good, an heat as Moses
did the Tables which he brake beneath the Mount. Some pick a quarrel with the
plainness of the Word, as if it wholly wanted those Embroideries of Wit and Art
that other writings and discourses abound with, and had none of those quaint
and taking Expressions that might win upon the affections of them that converse
with it. But is not this to make such use of the Word as Young Children do of
the Glass, more to behold the Babies in their own eyes, than to make any
observance of themselves? Is the Word writ or preached, to have its reflections
upon the Fancy, or upon the Conscience? Is it to inform only the head, or to
reform the heart? If the inward man be the proper Subject of it, the simplicity
of it conduces more to that great end than the Contemperation of it with
humane mixtures. It is not the painted, but the Crystal Glass by which the
object is best discerned. Others again are not a little displeased with the Law
or Word of God, because when that they look into it both their persons and sins
are represented in a far differing manner from those conceptions they ever had
of the one or of the other. In their own eyes they are, as Absoloms, without
any blemish; but in this Glass they appear as deformed Lepers, and spread with
an universal uncleanness, and who can bear it to see himself thus suddenly
transformed into a Monster? Now, their sins, which they judged to be as little
as the Motes in the Sunbeams, appear in amazing dimensions, and it is to them,
not a Looking-glass, but a Magnifying glass. Thoughts of the heart, glances of
the eye, words of the lips, the irruptions of the passions are all censured by
it, as deserving death, and there is nothing can escape it, which as a Rule it
will not guide, or as a Judge condemn. O how irksome must this needs be to
carnal and unregenerate men, who abound with self-slatteries, and presumptions
of their own innocence and righteousness, who can with as little patience
endure the convincing power of the Word as sore eyes can the severe searchings
of the light? We need not then wonder that the Word has so many Adversaries,
who take part with Nature against Grace, setting their wits on work by
distinctions, and blended interpretations, to make it as a Glass breathed and
blown upon, which yields nothing but dim and imperfect reflections. Is there
any thing that the Word does more clearly assert than the loathsome condition
of man's Nature with which he comes into the world? Is it not expressed by the
filthiness of the birth which every Child is encompassed with when it breaks
forth from the Womb? Is it not resembled to the rottenness and stench of the
Grave into which man is resolved when he is said to be dead in sins and
trespasses? And yet how many when they view themselves in this Glass give out
to the World that they can see no such thing? Celestius of old thought that
original sin was Res questionis, non fidci, matter rather of dispute, than of
faith. And some of late have been more bold, calling it Austins figment. But
the more injurious others are to this Divine Mirror of truth, the more it
behooves every good Christian to be studious in vindicating it from the scorns
of such that despise it for its simplicity, and from the impieties of others
that seek to corrupt its purity: and to show that for what cause others hate
it, he most affectionately love; and prizeth it. Thy word is very pure, (says
David) therefore thy Servant loves it. Can you do God better service, while
you honor his Word, which he has magnified above all his name? Or can you do
your selves more right, than to judge your selves by that which is so pure that
it neither can deceive, nor be deceived. What though it present you with the
sad spectacle of your sins, which may justly fill you with shame and
self-abhorrency; does it not show unto you also your Savior, who is made unto
us, Wisdom, and Righteousness, and Sanctification, and Redemption? And cannot
this joyful sight raise you more than the other can cast you down? O fear not
to see your sin, when you may at the same time behold your Savior? A mourning
heart is the best preparation for spiritual joy, and serves to intend the
height of it, as dark colors do to set off the Gold that is laid upon them.
Give me therefore, O Lord, a broken and relenting heart, that Sin may be my
Sorrow, and Christ may be my Joy; let all my tears drop from the eye of faith,
that I may not mourn without hope, nor yet rejoice without trembling. Let me
see my sins in the Glass of the Law to humble me, and my Savior in the Glass
of the Gospel to comfort me; yea, let me with open face so behold his glory, as
to be changed into same Image from glory to glory.

Meditation LVI. Upon going up an high Mountain.
LOrd, who shall dwell in the Mountain of thy holiness? was a question made by
the Prophet David, but the answer returned unto it was by the Spirit of God,
who can give the best Character of all those who shall be received into
Claritatis Consortium, a fellowship of glory and bliss, as Tertullian
expresses it. The situation of the place, the quality of the persons do both
speak it to be a work of difficulty, and disvover also the ground of the
paucity of the Travelers in whose hearts those ways and ascentions are that
seek to God. Most of the men of the world, like Abraham's Servants, stay below
at the foot of the hill, while he and his Son go up to worship; or choose
rather, like Ahimaaz, to run the way of the Plain, than, with Cushi, the way
that was craggy and mountainous. But few there be that see under what a
necessity they lie of obtaining of heaven, and of dwelling in the Mountain of
Gods holiness, or understand the comfort that a continued progress in this
Journey yields to those to whom Salvation is nea^er, than when they first
believed. Can it therefore be amiss to evince those who are yet to make the
first step toward their own happiness, what timely diligence they had need to
use, that in the end they may not fall short of it? And to encourage those that
are on their way, that they may go from strength to strength, till they appear
before God in Sion. And how may I better do either, than by showing to one, the
great distance in which they stand from heaven, and to the other, the good
proficiency they have made, which is often times as indiscernable to themselves,
as the swift motion of the Ship is to them that are in it. There being no
Complaint more frequent in the mouths of Saints, than that they have got no
farther, than what many years since they judged themselves to have attained
unto. The natural man's distance is far greater than he thinks of, so that he
cannot easily step into Heaven as he presumes. He is not born near its Consines
or Borders; but in the very extremity of remoteness from it. The distance is
not only a distance of place, but of disproportion, and unlikeness, whereby he
is wholly unmeet for it: Yea, there is in him not only a dissimilitude, but a
formal contrariety and opposition against heaven, which must be destroyed and
taken away before he can come thither. He is darkness, and Heaven is an
Inheritance in light. He is a Sink of filthiness, and Heaven is a place of
purity; He is wholly Carnal, and the happiness of Heaven is spiritual; And what
fellowship (says the Apostle) has righteousness with unrighteousness? what
Communion has light with darkness? And what Concord has Christ with Belial?
Can it then be rationally thought an easy task to subdue this contrariety;
and to make flesh and blood meet to inherit heaven? Does not the straitness of
the way, and the height of its ascent, require a putting off, and a casting
away, every sin that hinders from running the Christian Race, and ascending the
holy Hill? Is it not necessary, that the opposition and diffimilitude extending
it self over the whole man, that an answerable change should be made in every
part? I have read, that it is affirmed by excellent Artists, that though
gladness and grief be opposites in nature, yet they are such neighbors and
Consiners in Art, that the least touch of the Pencil will translate a crying
into a laughing Face. But such is not the opposition between sin and grace, as
to admit so facile a change in the turning of a Sinner into a Saint. It is not
effected by a small touch made upon the face, but by a powerful work upon the
heart, yea, upon the whole sou^ Does not the Scripture set it forth by a New
Birth, by a New Creation, which are of all mutations the greatest, and fully
evince the vast distance that is between every natural man and Salvation?
Deceive not your selves therefore O ye loose Professors, nor ye fond and
presumptuous Moralists, who are apt to think that the shadows of your duties
and civilities will extend themselves to the top of this holy Mountain; and who
when you read of the young man who answered Christ discreetly, that he was not
far from the Kingdom of heaven, judge your selves both in knowledge and
practice his Equals, and that you want not many steps of entering into that
blessed Canaan of rest and glory. For what will proximities or degrees of
nearness avail if the end it self be not attained?

Exaltations toward heaven, if they lift not into heaven, serve only to make
the downfall the greater; and no man stumbles more dangerously, than he who is
upon the brow of an high Mountain in respect of ruin? It is not then a ground
for any to sl^ck their pace, or intermit their diligence in heavens way upon
the confidence that they have not far to go. But rather to intend their care
and pains, that they lose not those things which they have wrought, but that
they may receive a full reward. And this let me say, if an apprehended nearness
work not such effects, it is a dream, not a reality; a presumption, rather than
a progress, and will have as sad an issue as the happiness of that poor
Fisherman, who, sleeping in the sides of a Rock, dreamed that he was a King,
and leaping up suddenly for joy, found himself miserably broken and rent in the
bottom of it.

But I fear that while I propound the difficulties, which are great, as well as
many, intending thereby to shake only the Pillars of those men's Confidence, who
consider neither the length of the way, nor the hardness of the task by which
Salvation is attained; that I may dishearten others, who, after all their
travel and labor, complain that they have striven much and gained little; and
that their hopes of laying hold on Eternal life do rather languish than
increase, doubting that the Journey is much too long for their short life to
finish. Gladly therefore I would lift up the hands which hang down, and
strengthen the feeble knees, that they might be animated in the way, and not
despair of the end. Now how can this be better done, than by giving such Signs
and Evidences that will best serve to manifest their motion and proficiency;
the not discerning of which is the ground of those fears of their spending
their strength in vain, and their laboring for naught? And is not this more
readily perceived by looking downwards to those objects that are below, than by
looking upwards to the heavens, which will after all climbing to them seem to
be still at the like distance as they were at first.

Suppose that a man after hard labor and toil in reaching the top of some high
and steep Cliff, should conclude that he had wearied himself to no purpose, in
the gaining of a delightful prospect, because the Sun appears to be at the same
distance, and also of equal bigness, as when he was at the bottom of it; or
that the Stars seem still to be but as so many twi^ckling watch lights, without
the least increase of their dimensions, or variation of their figure: Might he
not be easily refuted, by bidding him to look down to those Plains from whence
he had ascended, and behold into what narrow scantlings and proportions those
stately buildings and Towers were shrunk and contracted, whose greatness as
well as beauty he erewhile so much admired? And may I not with the like
facility answer and resolve the discouraged Christian, who calls in question
the truth of his heavenly progress, because all those glorious objects which
his Faith eyes, and his soul desires to draw nigh unto, seem still to be as
remote from him, as at his first setting out, by wishing him to consider,
whether he cannot say, that though heavenly objects do not increase in their
magnitude or luster, by the approach that he makes to them; that yet all
earthly objects do sensibly lose theirs by the distance that he is gone from
them? And if he can but so do, surely he has no cause of despairing to obtain
heaven, who has traveled so far on the way as to lose well near the sight of
Earth. If once his faith has raised him to that height, as to make the glory
of the world to disappear, and to be as a thing of naught, it will quickly land
him in heaven, where his fears of miscarrying as well as his lass^ude in
working will be swallowed up in an everlasting rest. And he that did once
believe more than he saw, shall for ever see far more than ever he could have
believed. Lord therefore do thou, who give power to the faint, and to them
that have no might, increase strength to me, who wait upon thee; renew my
strength, that I may mount up with wings as an Eagle, and may run and not be
weary, and walk and not faint, until I come to the utmost bound of the
everlasting hills, and behold thy face in glory.

Meditation LVII. Upon the Bible.
QUintilian, who makes it a question, why unlearned ^en in discourse seem of^
times more free and copious than the Learned, gives this as the answer; That
the one without either care, or choice, express whatsoever their present
thoughts suggest to them, Cum doctis sit electio and modus: When the other are
both careful what to say, and to dispose also their Conceptions in due manner
and order. If any thing make this Subject difficult to my Meditation, it is not
want but plenty, which is so great, as that I must, like Bezaleel and Aholiab,
be forced to lay aside much of that costly stuff which presents it self to me.
And what to refuse, or what to take in, is no easy matter to resolve. It will,
I am sensible, require and deserve also more exactness in choosing what to say,
and what not to say, concerning its worth and excellency, and how to digest
what is spoken, than what is meet for any to assume unto himself. I shall
therefore account that I have attained, my end, if I can but so employ my
thoughts as to increase my veneration to this Book of God, which none can ever
too much study, or too highly prize; and with which to be well acquainted, is
not only the chief of duties, but the best of delights, and pleasures. What
would be our condition in this world if we had not this blessed Book among us,
would it not be like Adams, when driven out of Paradise, and debarred from the
Tree of Life? Would it not be darker than the Earth without the Sun? If the
world were fuller of Books than the heaven is of Stars, and this only wan^ing,
there would be no certain way and rule to Salvation: But if this alone were
extant, it would enlighten the eyes, make wise the simple, and guide their feet
in the paths of life.

True it is, that for many years God made known himself by Visions, Dreams,
Oracles, to persons of noted holiness, that they might teach and instruct
others; But it was while the Church of God was of small growth and extent, and
the persons to whom Gods Mess^ges were Concredited of unquestioned Authority
with the present Age. But afterward the Lord spoke to his Church both by Word
and Writing, the one useful for further revealing Divine Truths, and the other
for the recording of them, that when the Canon was once completed, all might
appeal unto it, and none take the liberty of coining Divine Oracles to himself,
or of obtruding his fancies upon others.

And were there no other use of this Book of God than this, that it should be
the Standard for the trial of all Doctrines, it were to be highly prized for
its worth; without which the minds of men would be in a continual distraction,
through the multitude of Enthusiasts, that would be pretending Commissions from
heaven, none knowing what to believe in point of Faith, or what to do in point
of Obedience, or whereby to difference the good and evil Spirit from each
other. But this single benefit (though it can never enough be thankfully
acknowledged to God by us) is but as a Cluster to the Vintage, or as an Ear of
Corn to the Harvest, in respect of those many blessings that may be reaped from
it. Does not Paul ascribe unto it an universal influence into the Welfare of
Believers, when he ennumerates so many noble Ends for which all Scripture is
profitable? What is it that makes any man wise to Salvation? Is it not the
Scripture? What is it that instructs any in Righteousness, and makes him
perfect, and thoroughly furnished unto all good works? Is it not the Scripture?
Is not this the only Bock by which we come to understand the heart of God to
us, and learn also the knowledge of our own hearts? Both which as they are the
breasts of mysteries; so they are of all knowledge the best, and fill the soul
with more satisfaction than the most exact discovery of all created Beings
whatsoever. What if a man could, like Solomon, speak of Trees, from the Cedar
that is in Lebanon to the Hysop that grows upon the Wall, and of Beasts,
Fowls, and Fishes, and yet were wholly ignorant of his own heart, would not the
light that is in him be darkness? Or what if a man could resolve all those
posing questions in which the Schoolmen have busied themselves concerning
Angels, and yet know nothing of the God of Angels, would he not become as a
sounding Brass, and a tinckling Symbal? Is the knowledge of these things the
great end for which our understanding was given unto us? Or is it any further
desirable or profitable than as it conduces to the knowledge of God? Does the
rectitude of our actions, and the holiness of them, flow from the knowledge we
have of any Creature, or from the knowledge of God? Is not his Will the Rule,
and his Glory the End of all that we do? And how should we ever come to know
what the good and acceptable will of God is, but by his revealing it unto us?
Which he has done most clearly and fully in this blessed Book of his, the
Scripture of truth. That then which commends this Book, and renders it worthy
of all acceptance, is the rich discoveries that it makes to us concerning so
Excellent a Being as God is, whom it acquaints us with in his Nature,
Perfections, Counsels, and Designs, in relation to the Eternal Salvation of
man. It contains not any thing that is mean or trivial; the matters in it are
all of no less glory for any to behold, than of weighty importance for all to
know.

Do we not read in it, with what Majesty God gave forth his Sacred Law, when
Thunders, Lightnings, dark Clouds and Burnings were used as Heralds in the
promulgation of it? And yet may we not again see the hidings of his power, in
the wonderful Condescensions of his goodness? How does he entreat, woo, and
importune those whom he could with a frown, or breath easily destroy, and
pursue with bowels of mercy, such whom he might in Justice leave, and cast off
for ever? Are there not in it Precepts of exact purity, that are as Diamonds
without fl^ws, and as fine Gold without dross? In all other Books, they are as
the most Current Coyns, that must have their Alloyes of baser Metals; But in
this they resemble the Author, who is light in which there is no darkness, and
a Sun in which are no spots. Are there not in it promises of infinite value as
well as goodness, in which rewards are given not of Debt, but of Grace, and to
such who have cause to be ashamed of their Duties, as well as their Sins? Are
there not in it Premoxiions of great faithfulness, in which God fully de^^ares
to men what the issues of sin will be? And proclaims a Judgment to come in
which the Judge will be impartial, and the Sentence most severe, against the
least offenses, as well as against the greatest; What is it that may teach us
to serve God with Cheerfulness, to trust him with confidence, to adhere to him
with resolution in difficulties, To submit to his Will with patience in the
greatest extremities, that we may not be abundantly furnished with from this
Book. It alone is a perfect Library, in which are presented those deep
mysteries of the Gospel, that Angels study, and look into both with delight and
wonder, being more desirous to pry into them, than of perfect ability to
understand them. They are such, that had they not been revealed could not have
been known, and being revealed, can yet never be fully comprehended by any.

Was it ever heard, that he who was the maker of all things, was made of a
Woman? That the Ancient of days was not an hour old? That Eternal life began
to live? That he, to whose Nature Incomprehensibility does belong, should be
enclosed in the narrow limits of the Womb? Where can we read but in this Book,
that he who perfectly hates sin, should condescend to take upon him the
similitude of sinful Flesh? That he, who was the Person injured by Sin, should
willingly be the Sacrifice to Expiate the guilt of it, and to dye instead of
the Sinners? Are not these such Mysteries as are utter impossibilities to
Reason? And at which, like Sarah, it laughs, rather than, with Abraham,
entertain them with an holy reverence and joy when made known? Reason is
busy in looking after Demonstrations, and enquires how this can be, and then
scorns what it cannot fathom: But Faith rests it self in the Revelations of
God, and adores as a mystery what he discovers. Yea, it makes these Mysteries,
not only Objects of its highest Adoration, but the grounds of its sure comfort
and confidence. From whence is it, that Faith fetches its security against
Sin, Satan, Death, and Hell? Is it not from this, that he who is the Savior of
Believers is God-man manifested in the Flesh? That he who is their Sacrifice
through the Eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to God, to purge their
Conscience from dead works to serve the Living God? That he who is their
Advocate did raise himself from the dead, and ascende^ into the highest Heavens
to make everlasting Intercessions for them? Can then any depreciate this Book,
or abate the least Iota of that awful Esteem which upon all accounts is due
unto it, and be guiltless? Or can any neglect this Book as unworthy of their
reading, which God has thought worthy of his Writing, without putting an
affront upon God himself, whose Image it bears, as well as declares his
Commands? And yet I tremble to think how many Anti-Scripturists there be, who
have let fall both from their Lips and Pens such bold Scorns, as if Satan stood
at their right hand to inspire them. It was open Blasphemy, and worthy that
Antichristian Crew of Trent, to affirm, That though the Scripture were not, yet
a body of saving Divinity might be made out of the Divinity of the School. The
profaneness of Politian shall make his name to rot in a perpetual stench, who
never read the Bible but once, and said, it was the worst time that ever he
spent. And yet what are the fruits of his studies, but such as Gellius styles,
Scholica Nugalia, a few trifling Commentaries, and Criticisms. More I could
readily name of the same Stamp, that have presumed Impiously to scoff at the
Revelations of God, as others at his Providence, but who can take pleasure to
rake in a Dunghill that may enjoy the fragrancy of a Paradise; I shall
therefore turn my thoughts from them, and, as having nothing to cast over their
wickedness, shall, Sanguinem pro velamento obtendere, call my blood into my
face, and spread it as a Vail in blushing for them, that should have blushed
and been ashamed for themselves. But though the Word of God cease not to be a
reproach unto them, yet I shall bind it as a Crown unto me. Though they reject
the Counsel of God against themselves, yet I shall make his Testimonies my
delight, and the men of my Counsel, and shall make the prayer of the Psalmist
to be my daily prayer, that God would open mine Eyes, that I may behold the
hidden wonders that are contained in his Law.

Meditation LVIII. Upon the Spiritual Warfare.
WHo can either think or read what a Slaughter was made by one Angel in the
numerous Army of Sennacherib, who in a night destroyed a hundred fourscore and
five thousand Men, without reflecting upon the vast disparity that is between
the strength and power which is in Angelical and Humane beings? Great things
are recorded in Sacred History to be done by some of Isreal's Judges, and David's
Worthies, which would be looked upon as impossibilities, if the Spirit of God
were not the Voucher of the Truth of them. Shamgar slew six hundred Philistims
with an Ox Goad; Sampson with the Jaw Bone of an Ass laid Heaps upon Heaps;
and Adino the Tachmonite lifted up his Spear against eight hundred, whom he
slew at one time. But if these, and the like remarkable Acquists, which others
also are famed for, and have their Names Enrolled in the List of Worthies, were
as several Parcells brought into one Total, how far short would the foot of
the Account be, in regard of this number which fell by the Sword of one Angel?
Well then may the Scripture give to them the Names of Mighty ones, of
Principalities and Powers, such as excel in strength. How quickly would a
Legion of such Elohims turn the whole World into a Charnel-house, filled with
the Sc^lls and Bones of its Inhabitants, when a single Angel can in a small
space of time Change so many living Persons into dead Carcases? How soon could
they cloy and surfeit the Grave it self, which is as unsatiable as any of those
four things, that say, It is not enough? Does not all this therefore greatly
heighten the wonder of the Spiritual Warfare, in which a f^ail Christian, who
has not put off the infirmities of the Flesh, does yet go forth to Fight and
War with the Combined Hosts and Powers of Darkness? If young David were looked
upon as an unequal Match by Saul, and all Israel, to Combat with Goliath, the
vastness of whose Stature, and Warlike Arms had struck a terror into the whole
Camp; how strange must it needs be deemed, that one, who to the outward view,
is as any other Man, should Conflict not with Flesh and Blood, but with
Spiritual Wickednesses, which are for number many, and for Power great? What is
one weak Lamb to resist the Lions of the Forest? or one harmless Dove to
encounter with the Birds of Prey? as impotent as either of these, may the
strongest of Men seem, to do ought to deliver themselves, or to offend any of
their Spiritual Enemies when they assault them. But yet the resolved Christian,
who is called to an holy Warfare by God, he does such noble Exploits against
Sin and Satan, as cause both a shout and Wonder in Heaven. Angels are affected
to behold what a great fight of Asflictions he endures; what Repulses he gives
to the reiterated Assaults of enraged Fiends; and when at any time worsted, how
he Rallies again, recovers his Ground, and comes off both with Victory and
Triumph, putting to Flight whole Armies of those Infernal Anakims. It is worth
our enquiry and knowledge then, to understand wherein this great Strength of a
Christian lies, which is not a Natural, but a Mystical and Sacramental
strength, like Sampsons? But it lies not in his Hair, but in his Head, and in
his Armor, which for the Efficiency of it, as well as for the Excellency of it,
is called the Armor of God.

First, The Head of every Believer is Christ, who derives an influence of life
and power worthy of himself. I can do all things (says Paul) through Christ
that strengthens me: There is a continued Efflux of virtue that goes from
him, which to every Christian communicates a kind of Omnipotency: He, who
without Christ can do nothing, can in him do every thing. What a Catalogue of
forces does the Apostle m^sier up in the Eighth of the Romans, from which he
supposes an opposition may come? Life, Death, Angels, Principalities, Powers,
Things Present, Things to Come, Height, Depth? And that he may leave out none,
adds, nor any Creature: And yet pronounces of them, that in all these We are
conq^erors, yea more then conquerors: Which, as Chrysostom Interprets it, is
to overcome them with ease, without pains, and without sweat. O then that
Christians did but understand their own strength, that they War in the Power of
his Might, who spoiled Principalities, and Powers, and made a show of them
openly, leading them as so many Pinioned Captives after the Chariot of his
Cross, whereon he showed many signal Testimonies of a Glorious Victory, in
saving a Thief without Means; in Rending the Vail of the Temple from the top
to the bottom; in Shaking the Earth, Cleaving the Rocks asunder, opening the
Graves, and causing many Bodies of Saints to arise. How greatly would these
thoughts keep us from being weary and faint in our Spiritual war, and make our
hands steady like the hands of Moses, until the going down of the Sun of our
Life.

Secondly, A Christians strength lies in his Armor, which when rightly put on,
is able to preserve him, that the evil one touch him not: There is no standing
in the Bat^ell without it, and there no fear of perishing in it. When did ever
Satan bruise or wound the head of him, that had the Helmet of Salvation for his
Covering? or endanger the Vitals of him, who had put on the Breast Plate of
Righteousness, and had his loins girt about with truth? What one fiery dart of
the wicked did ever so burn, that the Shield of Faith could not quench? or what
way of sufferings could not he walk in, whose feet are shod with the
preparation of the Gospel of Peace. Methinks when I consider that God who best
knows the utmost both of Satan's Power and Policies, is the Maker of the
Armor: It is a voice becoming every Soldier of Christ, to say, of whom should
I be afraid? If he call us to Fight, and furnish us with Arms that are unable
to defend us, or to offend our Enemies, he would suffer in his Glory, as well
as we in our Comfort; he would then have his champions to be Satan's captives,
and the Banner which they spread in his Name, to become Hells Trophie. And can
he, do you think, endure at once to see the destruction of his People, and the
dishonor of his Name? Whosoever therefore thou be, that art clad in this
Armor of Proof, let me say unto thee as the Lord to Gideon, Go in this thy
Might, and fight the Battles of Jehovah. Take unto you that Sword of the
Spirit, that will kill Lusts, and make the Devils to flee: It has wrought
Wonders in all Ages, and its Edg is still as sharp as ever it was. By the Word
of thy Lips (says David) I have kept me from the paths of the destroyer. It
is written, said our Savior, when he Foiled his and our Adversary, and put him
to flight after his repeated Assaults. And in that great Battle that we ^ead
was fought between Michael and his Angels, and the Dragon and his Angels, he
and his Host were overcome by the Blood of the Lamb, and the Word of their
Testimony. Let every Man then have his Sword upon his thigh, because of fear in
the night: Put not off your Armor till you put on your Robes. It is made to be
worn, not to be laid up, nor yet to be laid down, because our Warfare and our
Life are both finished together; till then there is not a Truce, much less a
Peace for to be expected? Sooner may we contract a league with Poisons, that
when taken down they shall not kill; or with fiery Serpents and Cockatrices,
that they bite nor, then obtain the least respit in this War, in which the
Malice of Cursed Devils is as unquenchable as the fire of Hell, to which they
are doomed. Lord, therefore do thou, who art the Prince of Life, the Captain of
Salvation to all thy People, who have finished thine own Warfare, and beholds
theirs, enable me to VVrastle, that I may neither faint nor fall, but prevail
unto Victory; show fo^th thy Wonders in Me, whose Strength is Perfected in
Weakness, that I may overcome the Wicked One. And though the Conflict should
be long and bitter, yet make me to know, that the sweetness of the Reward will
abundantly Recompense the Trouble of the Resistance; and the Joy of the
Triumph, the Bloodiness of the War.

Meditation LIX. Upon going to Bed.
HOw like is the frail Life of Man to a Day, as well for the inequality of its
length, as the mixture that it has both of Clouds and Sunshine? What a
kind of exact Parelia are Sleep and Death; the one being the ligation of the
Senses, and the other the Privation of them? And of how near a kin is the Grave
to the Bed, when the Scripture calls it by the same Name? when the Clothes that
cover us do the like office with the Mould, that must be cast and spread over
us? When therefore the Day, and the Labors which Man goes forth unto are
ended, and the darkness of the Night disposes unto Rest; what thoughts can any
better take into his Bosom to lie down with? then to think, that Death, like
the Beasts of the Forest may creep forth to seek its prey, and that when it
comes there is no resistance to be made, or delay to be obtained. It spares no
rank of Men; but slayes the rich as well as the poor, the Prince as well as the
peasant: The Glass that has the Kings Face painted on it, is not the less
brittle; neither are Kings, that have Gods Image represented in them the less
mortal. And whether it comes in at the window, or at the door, whether in some
Common, or in some unwonted manner who can tell? Many often times fall asleep in
this World, and awake in the other, and have no Summons at all to acquaint them
whither they are going. And yet though every Man's condition be thus uncertain,
and that his Breath is in his Nostrils, where there is as much room for it to
go out, as to come in; how few do make their nights repose to serve as a
memorial of their last rest? on their Bed to stand for a model of their Coffin?
Some pervert the Night, which was ordained to be a Cessation of the evils of
Labor, to make it a season for their greater activity in the evils of sin.
They devise (as the Prophet says) iniquity upon their Beds, and when the
morning is light they practice it, because it is in the power of their hand.
Other are easily brought asleep, by the riot and intemperance of the day,
owning their unhappy rest not to the dew of nature, but unto the gross and foul
vapors of sin, which more darken and eclipse their reason than their sleep?
their Dreams having more of it in them than their Discourse. Others again by
their youth and health seem to be seated in such an elevation above death; as
that they cannot look down from their Bed into the Grave without growing dizzy,
such a steep Precipice they apprehend between life and death? Though this
distemper does not arise from the distance between the two terms, but from the
imbecility of their sense, which cannot bear the least thoughts of a
separation from those delights and pleasures to which their Souls are firmly
wedded. When therefore the most of men are such unthrifts of time, and like
careless Navigators keep no Journal or Diary of their motions, and other
occurrences that fall our. What need have others to make the Prayer of Moses
the Man of God, their Prayer? So teach us to number our days, that we may
apply our hearts unto wisdom. He who was Learned in all the Sciences of the
Egyptians desires to be taught this point of Arithmetic of God; so to number,
as not to mistake, or make any error in the account of life, in setting down
days for minutes, and years for days. A Man would think that a little
Arithmetic would serve cast up so small a number, as the days of him, whose
days are as the days of an hireling, few and evil? and yet it is such a
Mystery, that Moses begs of God to be instructed in it, as that which is the
chief and only knowledge. Yea, God himself earnestly wishes this wisdom to
Israel his People, O that they were wise; that they understood this, that they
would consider their latter end! Can we then render the night more senseless?
or keep the Bed unspotted from those Impurities that are neither few nor small,
then by practicing duly this Divine Art, of numbering our days? which is not
done by any speculation, or prying into the time or manner of our death: but by
meditating and thinking with our selves what our days are, and for what end
our life is given unto us; by reckoning our day by our work, and not by our
time; by what we do, and not by what we are: By remembering that we are in a
continual progress to the Chambers of death; no Man's life being so long at the
evening as it was in the morning. Night and day are as two Axes at the root of
our life, when one is lifted up, the other is down, without rest: every day a
Chip flies off, and every night a Chip, and so at length we are hewn down, and
fall at the Graves mouth. O what a wide difference is there between those that
lie down with these considerations in their Bosoms, and others, who pass their
time in pleasures, and allow not the least portion of it, to think what the
issues are that a day or night may bring forth? How free are their
Conversations from those sensualities and lusts, which others commit in the
day, and lie down with the guilt of them in the night? How profitably do they
improve their time who count only the present to be theirs, and the future to
be Gods; above those, that fancy youth and strength to be a security of the
succeeding proportions of their life? yea, how comfortable is death to those,
who are in daily preparation for it, as well as in expectation of it, above
what it is to others, who are surprised by it in the midst of those delights,
in which they promised themselves a continuance for many years? In what a
differing frame and figure does it appear to the one and to the other? The one
behold it as a Bridge lying under their feet to pass them over the Jordan of
this life, into the Canaan of eternal Blessedness; and the other as a Torrent
roaring and frighting them with its hasty downfall: Gladly therefore would I
counsel Christians, who enter into the Church Militant by a mystical death,
being buried with Christ by Baptism, and cannot pass into the Triumphant, but
by a Natural death, to bear daily in their Minds the Cogitations of their
inevitable end, as the best means to allay the fear of death, in what dress
soever it comes, and to make it an inlet into happiness whenever it comes. As
Joseph of Arimathea made his Sepulcre in his Garden, that in the midst of his
delights he might think of death; So let us in our Chambers make such Schemes
and Representations of Death to our selves, as may make it familiar to us in
the Emblemes of it, and then it will be less ghastly when we behold its true
visage. When we strip our selves of our Garments, think, That shortly (as St.
Peter says) we must put off this our Tabernacle. I, and think again, what a
likeness there is between our Night-Clothes, and our Grave-Clothes, between the
Bed and the Tomb. What a little distance there is between life and death, the
one being as an Eye open, and the other as an Eye shut: in the twinkling of an
eye we may be living and dead Men. O what ardors of lus^s would such thoughts
chill and damp? what sorrows for sins past? what diligence for time to come to
watch against the first stirrings of sin would such thoughts beget? It being
the property of sin to divert us rather from looking upon our end, then
embolden us to defy it. Lord then make me to know my end, and the measure of
my days, that I may in my own Generation serve the will of God, and then fall
asleep as David did, and not as others, who fall asleep before they have done
their work, and put off their Bodies before they have put off their sins.

Meditation LX. Upon the Natural Heat, and the Radical Moisture.
THere is a Regiment of Health in the Soul, as well as in the Body; in the
inward Man as well as in the outward Man; they being both subjects incident to
distempers, and that from a defect, or excess in those qualities, which when
duly regulated are the Principle, and Basis of life and strength. What
preserves and maintains the Natural life, but the just temperament of the
Radical Moisture, and the innate heat? and what again endangers and destroys
it, but the heat devouring the moisture, or the moisture impairing the heat?
When either of these prevail against each other, diseases do suddenly follow.
And is it not thus in the Soul, and Inward Man? In it those two signal Graces
of Faith and Repentance, do keep up and cherish the Spiritual life of a
Christian; Faith being like Calor innatus, the Natural heat; and Repentance
like Humidum Radicale, the Radical moisture. If then any by believing should
exercise Repentance less, or in Repenting should lessen their Believing, they
would soon fall into one of those most dangerous extremes, either to be
swallowed up of Sorrow and despair, or else to be puffed up with security and
presumption. Is it not then matter of Complaint that these two Evangelicall
Duties (as some Divines have called them) which in the practice of Christians
should never be separated, should be looked upon by many to oppose, rather then
to promote each other in their operations: Some out of weakness cannot
apprehend what consistency there can be between Faith and Repentance, whose
effects seem to be contrary, the one working Peace and Joy, the other trouble
and sorrow; the one Confidence, the other fear; the one Shame, the other
boldness. Now such as these, when touched with the sense of their sin, judge it
their duty rather to mourn, then to believe, and to feel the bitterness of sin,
then to taste the sweetness of a Promise, and put away comfort from them, least
it should check and abate the over-flowings of their sorrow. Others again,
whether out of heedlessness, or wilfullness, I will not determine, when they
behold the fullness of Grace, in the blotting out of sin, the freeness of Grace
in the healing of Backslidings, they see so little necessity of Repentance, as
they think it below (as they so speak) a Gospel Spirit to be troubled for that
which Christ has satisfied for. It is not Repentance that they should now
exercise, but Faith; Sorrow seems interpretatively to be a jealousy of the
truth of Gods Promise in forgiving, and of the sufficiency of Christ's
Discharge, who was the surety, who has not left one single Mite of the Debt
for believers to Pay. Sorrow therefore seems to them as unseasonable, as it
would be for a Prisoner to mourn, when the Prison door is opened, and himself
set free from debt and bondage.

Thus this pair of Graces and duties, concerning which I may say as God did of
Adam, it is not good that either of them should be alone: are yet divided often
times in the practice, though indissolubly linked together in the Precept. Fain
would I therefore evidence to the weak the concord of these two graces, in
respect of Comfort: and to the wilful the necessity of them both, in order
unto Pardon.

Unto the weak therefore I say, That the Agreement between Faith and
Repentance, does not lie in the immediate impressions, which they make upon the
Soul, which are in some respects opposite to each other; but in the Principle
from which they arise, which is the same, the Grace of Christ; and in the end
which is the same, the salvation of Man, and in habitude and subordination that
they have one to another; for Repentance is never more kindly then when it
disposes us to the exercise and actings of Faith; whose comforts of joy,
Peace, and Serenity of heart, are as Gold which is best laid upon sad and dark
colors; or as the Polished Diamond, that receives an addition of luster from
the watering of it. Gods Promise is, that the Believing Jews, who look upon
Christ by an eye of Faith, shall be also great Mourners, They shall mourn for
him as one mourns for his only son, and shall be in bitterness for him, as
one that is in bitterness for his first borne.

Unto the careless, or wilful, I also say, That God never forgiveth sin, but
where also he gives a Penitent and Relenting Heart; So that though Faith has
a peculiar nature in the receiving of pardon, applying it by way of Instrument
which no other grace does; yet Repentance is the express formal qualification
that fits for pardon, not by way of causality or merit, but by way of means, as
well as of command, which arises from a Condecency both to God himself, who is
an holy God, and to the nature of the Mercy, which is the taking and removing
of Sin away. Never dream then of such free grace, or Gospel mercy, as does
supercede a broken and a contrite heart, or take off the necessity of sorrowing
for sin. For Christ did never undertake to satisfy Gods wrath in an absolute
and illimited manner, but in a well ordered and meet way, viz. the way of Faith
and Repentance. How else should we ever come to taste the bitterness of sin, or
the sweetness of grace? How to prize and esteem the Physician if not sensible
of our disease? How to adore the love of Christ, who redeemed us from the Curse
of the Law, by being made a Curse for us, if not burdened with the weight of
our Iniquities? Yea, how should we ever give God the glory of his Justice, in
acknowledging our selves worthy of death, if we do not in a way of repentance
judge our selves, as the Apostle bids us? Was not this that David did in that
solemn Confession of his? In which he cries out, Against thee, thee only have I
sinned, and done this evil in thy sight, that thou might be justified when
thou speak, and clear when thou judge. Can I therefore wish a better wish
to such who are unsensible of their sins, than Bernard did, to him whom he
thought not heedful enough about the judgments of God, who writing to him,
instead of the common Salutation, wishing him, Salutem plurimam, much health,
said, Timorem plurimum, much fear; that so their confidence may have an allay
of trembling? Sure I am that it is a mercy that I had need to pray for on my
own behalf, and I do, Lord, make it my request, that my faith for the pardon of
sin may be accompanied with my sorrow for sin, and that I may have a weeping
eye, as well as a believing heart, that I may mourn for the evils that I have
done against my Savior, as well as rejoice in the fullness of mercy that he
has showed to me in a glorious Salvation.

FINIS.

