A SERMON Concerning God's Deferring to answer Men's Prayers: Preached before
the King and Queen AT WHITE HALL, November the 11th 1694.

By GEORGE STANHOPE, Chaplain in Ordinary to their Majesty's, and Vicar of
Lewisham in Kent.

Published by Their Majesty's Special Command.

LONDON Printed for Richard Sare at Grays-Inn-Gate in Holbourn, 1695.

St. Matthew Chapter XV. V. 28. Then Jesus answered and said unto her, O Woman
great is thy Faith; Be it unto thee, even as thou will. And her Daughter was
made whole from that very hour.


COnsidering the very precarious and depending State of Humane Nature, what
infinite Variety of Miseries and Wants we are all subject to, and how Weak and
Unable the very Greatest of us are to supply those Wants, or prevent those
Miseries, or even to sustain our selves under either: Man must needs be of all
Creatures the most Disconsolate and Forlorn, were there not some higher and
better Refuge, than his own Strength and Wisdom, provided for him to have
recourse to. Our Maker therefore, who best knew our Necessities, has commanded
us to take Sanctuary in his Good Providence, and expressed the Tenderest Care
of us. He has directed that we should pour out our Hearts before him, and show
him all our Trouble; and has encouraged the Performance of this Duty, with
Gracious Promises of Pity and Redress, and a Constant Readiness to hear, and
help, and do, as He sees most expedient for us. But because His Thoughts are
not always as Our Thoughts, and the Love of a Father is tempered with the
Wisdom of a God; from hence it comes to pass, that many times what we ask is
not granted at all; and at other times it is not granted so soon as we desire
and expect it. Now in order to the composing our Minds under such Delays and
Disappointments as these, that we may not rashly suspect God of Unfaithfulness
to his Word, it is necessary to consider the Reasons of those Dispensations to
us. And Reasons there always are, did we but duly attend to them, abundantly
sufficient to convince us, that neither is He Unjust or Unkind, nor we
neglected or forgotten.

The absolute Denial of our Prayers is capable of an easy Resolution, because
we often ask Stones instead of Bread, Matt. vii 9, 10.
and Serpents instead of Fishes. That is, We mistake our own Good, and do not
see far enough into the Nature and Consequences of things, and must therefore
in reason look upon it as an Act of Kindness to be denied. Since our Father
denies us, only because he loves us, and because he understands better, and
chooses better for us than we do for our selves.

But why those things which are really for our Advantage, and are at length
given us, because they are so; why These, I say should yet be withheld, even
when our Necessities are pressing; why those Supplications, which are
themselves acceptable, should yet be rejected and discountenanced for a Season,
and the Anguish of our Souls increased by sad Repulses: This seems to carry
something more of Difficulty in it. For in such a case it is natural enough for
a Man to argue thus in his own Breast. If the subject of my Petitions be not
for the Glory of God, and my own Good, then is it not proper for him to grant,
or me to receive at all; and the most Solicitous Application will not, ought
not to obtain it. But if it conduce to both these two Great Ends, (as to be
sure it does one way or other, because it is granted at last) why does not then
this Divine Father hasten the Felicity of his Children? Why does not his
Goodness double the Favor; by giving speedily, what his Wisdom sees fit to
give, though later, and more slowly?

That this is sometimes the Method of God's Dealings with Mankind, is
particularly manifest from the most remarkable Instance of a Canaanitish Woman,
described here at large from the One and twentieth Verse, to that of my Text
inclusively: She entreated no Trifling or unnecessary Favor, but one, upon
which the whole Quiet and Happiness of her Life depended; the Cure of a Child
in a most deplorable Condition; Jesus? Matt. viii. 5, 6, 7.
When the Centurion besought him in behalf of his Servant only, he met his
Desires half way; and immediately replied, I will come and Heal him. But here a
wretched Mother comes, whose Soul was quite overwhelmed with Passion; she
suffers in and for her Daughter, feels all her Tortures, is shaken and
oppressed by all her Phrensies and violent Agitations, dies every Moment afresh
under all her Tearings and Foamings, and is pierced through with every cutting
Shreek and Groan; all Nature works within her, and she throws her self at his
Feet with all that Disorder and Perplexity of Heart, which none but Mothers
know, none but Tender and Afflicted Mothers can make any tolerable guess at.
And yet this otherwise kind Master, contrary to his Custom, seeks cruel Excuses
to put her off. She pursues him from place to place, allows him no leisure to
harden in, but melts him down with Tears, and deafens him with repeated Cries
and Complaints. His Disciples themselves could hold out no longer, at laft, and
pleased to be thus vanquished, applauds and rewards her unwearied Zeal; does,
as it were, delegate a Power to her to work the Miracle her self; makes her the
Disposer of his Gift, and the Carver of her own Fortunes. Then Jesus answered,
and said unto her, O Woman, great is thy Faith, Be it unto thee, even as thou will. And as she desired, so it was most effectually, she only begged that her
Daughter might be restored to her self, and the whole Force of Hell was no
longer strong enough to resist her, for her Daughter was made whole from that
very hour.

The several Steps taken in this Proceeding, and the manner of granting at
last, in such comprehensive Terms, and with so peculiar a Character of the
Petitioners Virtue, give us great reason to conclude, that, as the first
Refusals were not out of any real Unkindness, so the following Compliance was
either occasioned, or enlarged however, by means of that Faith, which our Lord
so highly extols. And then the most effectual Course to answer the Design of
this whole Passage, both with regard to the particular Case before us, and to
our own Prayers in general, of which this Case is set here as a Pattern, will
be to treat of the Words under the Three following Heads. I. First, To assign
some Reasons why God delays the giving what we ask for some time, though he do
not intend absolutely and altogether to withold it from us. II. Secondly, To
show what Qualifications are requisite in our Prayers, to render them Effectual
and Successful, notwithstanding, and after such Delays. And, III. Thirdly, To
consider how God's being wrought upon by Prayers so qualified, is confistent
with the standing Order of Providence, and the Unchangeableness of the Divine
Nature and Counsels. I. First, I am to render some account, why God delays the
giving what we ask for some time, though he do not intend (as the Event of this
Story plainly proves) absolutely and altogether to withold it from us. And of
this we may gather two very substantial Reasons from the Case now under our
Consideration.


1. The first is, That these Delays enhance and add to the Blessing, when we do
at last receive it. The Satisfaction Men take in what they possess is not
always proportioned, either to the real Value of the Things themselves, or the
Want the Persons have of them; or the Advantages they reap from them, but
depends chiefly upon the Sense and Disposition of their own Minds. The most
valuable Enjoyments are sometimes utterly lost and thrown away, because they
are slighted and overlooked. Our Necessities are not always duly understood,
and when they are not so, the most seasonable Reliefs will be sure to fall very
low in our Esteem. So that to give a true relish to any Happiness, the
principal and most necessary Work, is to possess the Soul with a right Notion
of its Indigent State, and the urgent occasion we have for it. And according to
this Notion our Resentments will be more or less Grateful, and the Gift more or
less Welcome, when we have attained it. This seems to be the very Reason, why
those Blessings, which lie in common to all the World, are so little set by;
because scarce any body considers the Benefit of That, which is open and easy
to every body. It comes without our Seeking, and therefore it passes by without
our Observing too. Matt. v. 45.
The Sun shines alike on the Evil, and on the Good; and the Rain descends as
liberally on the Unjust as on the Just. The kindly returns of Day and Night,
and Heat and Cold, seem to be fixed by Laws of Nature, and are usually tempered
in Order and Measure. And though the Advantage of these things be Unspeakable,
yet because it is Universal and Uniform, we grow wanton in the Enjoyment, and
are but very lightly affected with the Convenience of them to us. And if this
be the Condition of those Blessings that are absolutely necessary to preserve
the World, and sustain this Life, of which we are so immoderately fond; how
much more may we be expected to disesteem those others, that are only
Additional Comforts, and tend not to the Support, so much as the Delight of
Mankind?

Herein then is One great Good of Afflictions, such as justifies both the
Wisdom and the Kindness of God in appointing them, that they help us to discern
something particular in our own case, and awaken us into a Sense of our Wants,
and by the Deliverance recommend God's Goodness infinitely more to us, than
uninterrupted Prosperity could ever have done. Health is the same in it self
when constant, as when restored; and Preservation the very same, when nothing
has threatened our Safety: But yet every Man naturally entertains a Recovery
from Sickness, and an Escape from Danger, with a more Sensible Pleasure, than
if those Difficulties had never happened to him, and feels his Soul more
powerfully wrought upon to be Thankful, than if he had never found occasion to
fear or to complain at all. And all This seems to depend upon One Cause, which
is, That in this Body we lead Lives of Sense, as well as Reason; and cannot
therefore consider things always Abstractedly, and as they are in their own
Nature, but must judge of them as they appear to us. And those Appearances are
generally but Cold and Feeble, except some visible Change of our Affairs alter
the present Habit of our Minds, and leave a strong and lively Impression upon
us. And then the longer such Impressions last, the lower we are reduced, and
the greater the Alteration is, the better still shall we taste and value that
Mercy, which restores us to our former Ease and Happiness again.

Now if this be the Condition of those things which make the Subject of our
Prayers, it must needs be so with our Prayers themselves too. For One great End
of Praying, is to publish our Wants, and to seek Relief and Supplies suitable
to them; to bewail our Miseries, and to implore the Divine Favor and
Assistance. And because this is sometimes done coldly, and of course only, God
holds his Hand till we feel the Smart; and are brought to a due sight of our
Circumstances, by being pinched under them. Thus he aggravates and prolongs our
Sorrows, it is true; but withal he magnifies the Mercy, which turns our
Heaviness into Joy: A Joy, that we should either not have felt, or have felt
but very slightly, if the Deliverance had prevented, or met our first Wishes,
and the Burden had never gauled, or weighed us down at all. So necessary is it,
according to the present Constitution of Humane Nature, that Men should be
taught Wisdom at their own Expense; and that God should sometimes restrain the
Overflowings of his Bounty for our Good: That so by hindering his Blessings from
becoming Easy, he may prevent that greater Mischief, the Sin of their becoming
Cheap and Contemptible to us.

This single Consideration of working us up to a right Apprehension, and a just
Estimate of the Benefits Prayer obtains for us, is sufficient to acquit God of
any Unkindness, and reconcile us to all the Difficulties and Delays we can meet
with from him. He gives as he pleases, and he knows best when, as well as what
to give. He defers not because he grudges the Gift, but only waits the most
proper Season, that he may give when it will be most Acceptable, and when we
are best prepared to Receive, and to Relish, and to Improve by the Favor.

But yet this is not all: For when I say, that such Delays add to the Blessing,
my meaning is, not only that they heighten it in our Opinion, but that they add
to it in Reality, and procure us a greater Plenty and Proportion. For Prayer
being a Duty which God has commanded, and wherein he delights, the very
performing it as we ought, gives us a fresh Title to what we ask. So that
whatever Considerations besides might recommend us to his good Graces, this
enforces all the rest. He has solemnly engaged himself to the Good Man, and
made the answering his Requests a Debt. And He is not only Just, but Generous
in his Payments; none of our Concerns lie dead in His Hands, and if the Returns
be slow, it is only that they may be made at last with greater Interest. As the
Gospel furnishes us no where with an Example of so many Repulses, as this Woman
of Canaan suffered, so does it rarely, if ever, set before us an Instance of so
large a Commendation joined with so Comprehensive a Grant. In other cases we
meet with such Answers as these, Luke xviii. 42. John iv. 51. Matt. viii 7.
Receive thy Sight; Thy Son lives; I will come and Heal him, and the like. But
here the words resemble those of the Angel to Jacob, Thou have Power with God,
Genesis xxxii. 28.
and with Man, and have prevailed. Our Savior seems to personate a Man
conquered by some Superior Force, and to acknowledge that no Spoils can be too
Rich for so gallant a Victory. The usual way of Consenting, it seems, was too
narrow and too mean, and therefore he resigns up himself to her Disposal, and
cries out with an Air of Ecstasie and Admiration, Oh Woman! Great is thy Faith,
Be it unto thee even as thou will.

And that This is no Special Case, or Particular Privilege, but what every
Devout Person has a Right to expect, we are assured by that Parable in the
Eleventh of St. Luke, made use of by our Savior to encourage Earnestness and
Perseverance in Prayer. For though the Friend there would not lend his
Neighbor three Loaves, upon the account of any Kindness or Old Acquaintance
that was betwixt them, yet because of his Importunity (says the Text) he was
content to rise out of his Bed, Luke xi. 8.
and give him as many as he had occasion for. The design whereof is to assure
us, that even Asking it self has something of Virtue, and much Efficacy in it.
And surely we are then of all Creditors most Happy, when He, who in Mavelous
Condescension is pleased to call his Mercies our due, does not only pay us Use
for them, while he keeps them in his Hands, but loves to be often called upon
for Payment: Nay; puts our very Importunity into the Account also, when we
press hard for that, which nothing but his own Free Grace could in any Sense
have made Ours.

2. Secondly, Another excellent Reason for God's Deferring to answer our
Prayers, is, That he may by this means improve our Virtue, and illustrate it to
the World, and so both make, and show us in some good Degree fit, and worthy to
receive the Blessings we Pray for. He deals with us as a Discreet and Tender
Father, and suits the Methods of his Providence to our truest Advantage. Now,
This is the Reformation of our bad Habits, Correcting the Perverseness of our
Dispositions, and Consulting which way we may best advance in Innocence and
Goodness. Where a ready Condescension to our Requests, will conduce most to his
Glory and our Good, he gives Readily and Liberally. Where an Absolute Refusal
will contribute more to these great Ends, it is an Act of Love and Goodness, as
well as an Instance of his Wisdom to deny us. And where the Suspending our
Mercies for a time will be most Beneficial, there we are put off till a more
convenient day. Thus Almighty God proceeds always upon the same Principle,
which we ought to go upon in respect of these Worldly Enjoyments. And that is,
That Health and Sickness, Prosperity and Affliction, Successes and
Disappointments, are but so many Instruments put into our Hand to do good with.
That the most Valuable of them all, are yet then most truly and only Valuable,
when they are made Occasions of promoting our Virtue: And that even the most
Distastful Accidents; when they better our Minds, become Blessings, exceeding
great Blessings. Since then all these are but so many several sorts of
Discipline, and constantly intended either to amend, or to exercise us, we have
no reason to Repine at the Means, provided they do but conduct us to the End
that Sanctifies them. And since we are under the Care of One, who is Wiser than
We, and understands our Tempers, and our Necessities, much better than our
selves do, let us leave it to Him to choose both his own Times, and his own
Proportions, and be very Confident, that when We have done our Part, he will
not fail to give, not only the Thing that is best, but in the Season that is
best for us. Indulgent Parents know, and feel, and, when it is too late, repent
the Mischief of being too Easy to their Children. And therefore our Heavenly
Father, who sees the ill Effects of such Indulgence, how Froward, and Peevish,
and Insolent we grow, when we are never crossed, cures this Fretful and
Impatient Disposition, by using us to stay a while; and checks the Eagerness of
our Sensual Appetite, by withholding sometimes what we want very much, and most
passionately Desire.

Now this is an Easiness of Temper necessary to be attained by every Christian,
but attained it can never be, except by Practice and Experience. Where we find
it in Perfection, it is a most Noble and Glorious Pattern for others to copy
after; and therefore the Dispensations that employ it, are no less proper to
exercise the Strong, than to confirm the Weak. Thus it was in our present Case:
This Woman seems to have been admirably prepared, and of a Disposition that
needed no new Forming. And therefore our Savior's Denials did not so much
Increase or Occasion her Virtue, as they called it forth, and provoked her to
exert it. Had her first Petition been granted, she had passed off in the common
Crowd of Beggars, and we had never known more of her, but only that she Asked,
and that she Received. But the Difficulties she found in obtaining her Request,
and her Prudent Behavior under them, did not only vindicate our Lord's
Kindness to a Stranger, from all the Cavils of the Captious Jews; but have
Immortalized her Name in Story, and rendered her a most Illustrious Example and
Encouragement to Future Ages. An Example of all those Graces, which must
conspire together to recommend our Prayers, and render them Successful.

II. And this puts me in mind, that I ought to hasten to my Second Head, that
so having vindicated the Goodness of God in sometimes Delaying to grant, I may
show what Qualifications are requisite on our part, to make our Prayers at last
Effectual, notwithstanding and after such Delays.

Now those which the Words, and this Relation, (for to It I confine my self)
give me occasion to insist upon at present, are Three, viz, Fervency, Humility
and Perseverance. For these are but so many Parts and Ingredients, whereof that
Faith is compounded, which my Text so highly commends.

1. First, The Fervency of our Prayers is necessary to demonstrate that we are
in good Earnest, and Seriously Desirous of the things we ask for. Prayer is not
the Business of the Tongue, nor of the Body, but of the Mind, and the
Affections. And the God, whose Quality it is, to understand the inward Parts,
as well as to know every word in our Mouths, will have but very little Respect
to the Lips, or the Knee, if the Heart be wanting: That is, If the
Supplications we prefer be Giddy and Unthinking, Languishing and Loose. All the
Vigor and Efficacy must come from within; those Pure and Holy Flames, which a
Just Reverence for God and his Adorable Excellencies, and a Feeling Reflection
upon our own Wants, have kindled within us. These will spread and exert
themselves, and actuate the whole Mass in such a manner, that every part shall
conspire by outward Signs, to express the inward Devotion of our Souls. But
when Men pretend to approach the Throne of Grace, and do it with Coldness and
Indifference; when they come into the Court, and more Immediate Presence of
God, with Disrespect, and trifle with the King of Heaven; when Wandering Looks,
and Irreverent Postures betray the distance of their Souls and Bodies, that
they neither are togehter, nor consider where they are, How can we expect These
Men should succeed? Or if the Voice be loud, the Gesture moving, and yet the
Mind some other way employed, this may be Ostentation, but Zeal it is not; And
the being seen of Men, and applauded by the Spectators, is all the Reward due
to such Prayers. For they are only Affectation and Pomp, and at the best a
solemn Passion pretty well acted.

Think thou then, O Man, that God will hear thee, when thou hear not thy
own self? Are Words, and Sounds, and empty Noise, of such Worth, that they
should incline the Majesty of Heaven, when even Men Scorn and Laugh at Forms,
and things by Rote? And yet such are all the Prayers of a roving and uncomposed
Mind. For without Attention, and Thought, and Serious Desire, the Labor is
only that of the Lip; and so much Air broken into Sound, without any Sense or
Signification at all. Thou go to public Theaters, and there see
Spectacles Tragical and full of Horror; Prosperous Villainy, and Injured
Innocence; Calamities, and Tortures, and Deaths, enough to Soften the Hardest
Heart: Yet not one Tear falls, because you know very well all this is but
Shadow and Show only. And art thou so Vain to suppose, that God will be moved
with a Scene of Devotion, with an empty Representation of a Prayer? Shall not
He distinguish between Reality and Disguise, but be so Profuse, so Absurd, to
reward thy Counterfeit Addresses? Formality in Truth, is in some Respects worse
than Coldness: This neglects God, but That plainly Mocks and Affronts him. So
impossible is it, that any outward Testimonies of Devotion, though never so
Decent and Proper, should be of any Value at all for their own Sakes. And for
this reason, possibly, our Prayers are called in Scripture a Sacrifice and an
Incense, because they are rendered acceptable by the self-same Methods that
those were wont to be. It is the Burning that creates the Sweetsmelling Savor,
and it must be the Earnestness and Warmth of our Prayers, that alone can make
Them come up as Incense before the Throne of God.

2. The next Qualification requisite in our Prayers is Humility, and of This we
have many remarkable Instances in the Person before us. The slight our Savior
put upon her by his Silence, between the Jews and Her; Dog, Dogs she is
contented to be reckoned, if that would entitle her to a Dog's Portion; that
Cure of her Daughter, which in comparison of those frequent and mighty
Miracles, wrought in the Country of the Jews, and for the Benefit of the
Children, was but as the Crumbs that fall from the Master's Table. And herein we
have a fair Copy set us, of those mean and vile Opinions of our selves, with
which the Majesty of Heaven and Earth should be approached. When Dust and
Ashes, when a Creature Frail, and Poor, and Corruptible, is allowed the
Privilege of attending a Glorious God, what Resentments, what Behavior can be
respectful enough to express the Infinite Distance! But especially, when that
Creature, so contemptible by Nature, has yet debased it self much worse by
Sin; when it is not only Poor and Low, but Polluted and Odious in his sight.
Oh! What Apprehensions of the Divine Favor can be agreeable to so Mighty, so
Gracious a Condescension.

Access indeed we have, and we are commanded to come with Boldness to the
Throne of Grace. Heb. iv. 16.
But it should always be remembered, that it is a Throne of Grace, that the Seat
of Judgment not any of us are able to stand before; That Mercy is the only
thing we can pretend to, and that even This is in no degree due to us for our
own Sakes, but purely upon the account of Another, who purchased it for us at
the Price of his own Blood. That therefore we can have no Injury done us,
because of our selves we have no Right, no Desert, no Claim to put in. That if
we be passed by in Silence, or if we be Reproved and Checked by the Sad
Reproaches of our own Conscience; All this is the Effect of our own
Unworthiness. If Others are preferred before Us, and enjoy larger Measures of
the Divine Bleffings, still this is no Robbery to Us, nor any Just Occasion to
complain of a Partial and Unfair Providence. If we obtain our Petitions, this
is indeed the Excess of Bounty. If we wait long, He is Master of his Favors,
and may do what he will with his own; and we are to consider, that our Business
is to ask a Gift, and not to demand a Tribute. So that every thing that may
conduce to the laying us Low in our own Thoughts; every thing that may help to
speak our Modesty, and Reverence, and Submission, is all little enough for
Wretches so Miserable, so Unworthy as We. And there cannot be a greater
Absurdity, than to fly in the Face of God, and, like some Insolent Beggars, not
only Grudge that we are not satisfied, but Curse and Revile the Hand that
detains it from us. So did not the Mother in the Text. Instead of fancying her
self ill used she bore all, and improved by all the Discouraging Arguments
urged against her: She made her very Humility and Patience of Denial a new
Incitement to ask again: And thus became most Eminent for the other
Qualification requisite in our Prayers, which, I told you, is

3. Perseverance. How necessary a Duty this is, the very Terms in which our
Savior has directed us to Pray, are of themselves a plain and sufficient
Intimation. For he who bids us Seek, implies that we must not leave off Seeking
till we have Found: Matt. vii. 7.
And he who commands us to Knock, expects we should continue at the Door till
we are heard, and it be opened unto us. But besides that, Matt. vii.
The Parable of the Father and the Son; Luke xi.
of the Friend and his Neighbor in Distress for Provision to entertain his
Guest; and that other of the Widow and the Unjust Judge, (...). x viii.
all agree in the Necessity and the Efficacy of this Virtue. So that as St.
Chrysostom somewhere says, ^om. 5.
We must not only ask, that we may receive; but we must ask for that very
reason, because we do not receive; for we are often denied, only that we should
ask again; and if we receive not at last, it is not owing to any Unwillingness
in God, but to some Defect, some Weariness, and Impatience of Mind in our
selves.

It were perhaps much more Useful and Seasonable upon this occasion to enquire,
which way this Indefatigable Importunity comes to be so well accepted; When we
find, that among Men nothing is more Troublesome and Displeasing. And the
Difference seems to lie very much in This: That in God there is no End of
Goodness, no End of Power, both which in Men are bounded within a narrow
Compass. Too much Pressing to Men is therefore Harsh and Ungrateful, because
this is obliquely to Reproach them; and taxes either their want of Inclination,
or their want of Ability to gratify us. But He, who is Omnipotence and Love it
self, can be subject to no such Reflections. Our Necessities can never exhaust
his Stores; and his Bowels are so tender, Jer. xxxi. 28
that he is said to Watch over Men to do them good; it is of his Bounty that
all our Wants are supplied; and the very withholding from us where they are
not, is it self an Act of Kindness. And Our persisting in Prayer argues that we
think so. For when Men take it ill to be denied, they naturally grow Sullen,
and disdain to use any farther Entreaties. The same Boldness and Constancy
which were Immodest and Blameable to a Creature, is therefore most Commendable
in our Addresses to God: In this case it is not only consistent with Modesty,
but the strongest Evidence of it. For it speaks us well Contented, and Easy,
and of a Resigned Spirit; it submits to his Wisdom, and confesses his Goodness
and our Unworthiness; when we will not suffer our selves to be prevailed upon
by Sturdiness and Despair; nor resent these Repulses with Anger and Pride; but
are still satisfied to repeat and reinforce our Requests, and to wait his own
time and good Pleasure for the accomplishing our Desires.

III. All that now remains to answer the Design of my Text, is to speak
something very briefly to my Third and Last Head; wherein I promised to
consider, How the Efficacy of Prayers thus Qualified, as you have seen, is
Consistent with the Standing Order of Providence, and the Unchangeableness of
the Divine Nature and Counsels.

Now by this Unchangeableness, we are to understand, that God can never alter,
i. e. he cannot cease to be what he is, nor be diverted from any of his
Perfections, so as that he should leave off to be Holy, and Just, and Good, and
Wise, and the like; for That is his Nature, and in it is no Variableness, James
i. 17.
neither Shadow of turning. Nor can he Reverse what he has positively and
absolutely Decreed, or be false to any of his Promises; for these are his
Counsels, and they are Yea and Amen, 2 Co^. i. 20,
fixed immutably, and stand fast for Ever and Ever. But these Determinations do
not reach so far, as to bind up every thing, and every accident in the Chains
of a Fatal Necessity. He has left many things at large to be the Rewards of
Men's Virtue, See Dout. xxvili. Isa. i. 19.20.
or the Punishments of their Wickedness. These are promised and threatened under
certain Conditions, and as those Conditions are fulfilled or neglected, the
Promise or the Threatening takes place accordingly. So that for God, Exodus
xxxii. 11. -- 14. Psalm. cvi. 23. -- 30.
upon Men's Prayers and Repentance, to give what otherwise he would not have
given; or to avert those Judgments, which would certainly have overtaken them,
if These had not come in betwixt, and stopped the Blow, is so far from Changing,
Jerem. xviii. 7, 8, 9, 10.
that it is the greatest Mark of Truth, and Constancy to his Word; the most
exact way of observing those Eternal Rules, which his Wisdom and Providence
has all along formed and prescribed to it self; Ezekiel. xxxiii. 13, 14, 15, 16
the properest Accomplishment of those Revelations made to Mankind in Scripture
for their Encouragement, and which he has there inviolably engaged always to
govern the World by.

There is indeed a Temper in Men, that affects to be courted, and flattered,
and fawned upon; and complies with the Requests of others out of mean and
little Ends. But this is the Effect of Pride, and Passion, and Interest; much
different from those Condescensions of Almighty God, who, though he cannot be
subject either to Weakness or Corruption, may yet be prevailed upon by such
Methods, as becomes a Reasonable, and Wise, and Generous Mind. And therefore,
when Men pay the Homage due to his Infinite Majesty; when they throw themselves
entirely upon his Goodness, cast all their Care upon him, commit their Souls,
and all their Concerns, into his Hands, and that with such Reverent and Strong
Persuasions of his being a Faithful Creator, that no Delays, no Refusals can
tempt them to suspect or distrust him: This is such an Argument to help and
favor People in Distress, as every Great Spirit, every Man of Honor and
common Good Nature, would think it a Fault to hold out against. So that for God
to show himself flexible upon such Occasions, cannot in reason be charged with
Fickleness or Levity, but is a Gracious Compliance upon Just and Reasonable
Motives. And to harden himself against the continued Cries and Complaints of
Suitors thus qualified, would much more misbecome the Character of Sovereign
Judge, and Infinitely Good Ruler of the whole World.

To conclude then in one Word. You see that it is impossible for Men to Pray in
vain, provided they do but Pray as they ought; That (as the Collect for this
Day insinuates) God is our Refuge and Strength, 23d Sunday after Trinity.
always ready to hear the Devout Prayers of his Church, and that they who ask
Faithfully, will not fail to obtain Effectually. Nay, that when he seems Deaf
to all our Applications, his Mercy is even then providing some better thing for
us; and that the slowest Grants are usually the most Plentiful and Advantageous
at last. And, if the very Denial, if the very Delay of our Prayers be for our
Benefit, Where can we possibly find any Objection to discourage us in this Duty?

Let us come then, my Brethren, to the Throne of Grace, but let us come full of
Holy Zeal, and Humble Modesty, and Unshaken Perseverance. Let us lay Siege, as
it were, and make a close Pursuit upon this Savior of the World. He only hides
his Face for a Season, to make us more Diligent and Eager in the Search of him:
Et fugit ad salices, and se cupit ante videri. He withdraws himself from our
first Assaults, that we may renew the Attack with more Vigor, and loves to
have what he delights to give seemingly forced out of his Hands. Let us then
beset him every where, attempt him in Public and in Private, in the
Congregation, in our Families, in our Closets, in our Beds; for This is a Holy
Violence, and ought to be committed. This is the only Combat, for which no
Time, no Place can be Unseasonable; and it is the only one too, in which we are
sure of Victory at last, if we do but continue Wrestling, and not let go our
hold.

And Reason sure there is for all our Vehemence, when the Success is of such
Consequence to us. For though Our Children be not Lunatic, yet we need a Cure
no less Miraculous, than this Woman in the Text did; and that for a Relation,
which ought to be much more Dear and Tender to us. For, alas! our Souls are
grievously vexed with a Devil, yea with a Legion of Devils; wild unruly
Passions, and Exorbitant Lusts, that rend, and tear, and torment us. This
Possession is much too strong to recover our selves from; nothing less than the
Almighty Word of our only Savior can release and restore us. To Him therefore
we must come, Even to T^^, O Blessed Jesus! O cast us not off utterly, but
bring us back to our right Mind. We are not indeed worthy to be called thy
Children, yet in Pity, O Gracious Master, disdain not to feed us with the Crumbs
that fall from thy Table. We would only, that thou vouchsafe to Heal, and to
Pardon; Mercy, Mercy is our only Cry, Have Mercy on us thou Son of David. Say
but Thou to our Distempered Souls, Be it unto You, even as you will, and we
shall be made whole from this very hour. Amen.

FINIS.

