SATANA NOATA: OR, The Wiles OF SATAN IN A DISCOURSE Upon 2 Cor. 2. 11.

By William Spurstow D. D. Late Minister at Hackney.

Be sober, be vigilant; because your Adversary the Devil, as a roaring Lion,
walks about seeking whom he may devour. Whom resist steadfast in the faith, 1
Pet. 5. 8, 9. LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1666.

The Wiles of Satan.
2 Cor. 2. 11. Least Satan should get an advantage of us: for we are not
ignorant of his devices.
Chapter I.
Containing an Introduction to the words, and division of them.

SEldom or never do Judges become Advocates; they give Sentence on the Crime,
but they never plead the Cause of the Offender. In doing the one, they
discharge the most solemn duty of their place: But in undertaking the other,
they descend as it were from the Throne to the Bar. and go both below
themselves, and besides the Rule: A pleading Judge being no well-tuned Cymbal.
And yet if we look into these two Epistles of Paul, we shall find him
exercising both these distinct Offices toward the same Person in one and the
same Cause. In the first we may behold him as a just, and severe Judge, drawing
forth the spiritual Sword of the Church, and smiting with it the Incestuous
person, in as great an height of zeal as Samuel did Agag, to the cutting of him
off from all Communion with that body, of which he was a Member. He being the
first (as Calvin expresses it) Quinitorens Ecclesiae tam turpi not a
maculasset. who stained the beauty of that Church with so foul a Sin and
Scandal. And if we turn our eyes again to this Second Epistle and Chap^er, we
may see the same Apostle performing the Office of a most Compissionate
Advocate, in pleading the Cause of him to the Corinthians, who by his Command
was cut off, and cast out from among them. He who was the subject of his
Censure as a Judge, is now the object of his entreaties as an Advocate. And the
Arguments which he uses for his reception into the bosom of their love are
not more numerous than weighty. A brief view of some of which will not be
impertinent, in regard they lead us in an orderly way unto the Text, which is
the last, but not the least of those many persuasive Pleas which he urges on
his behalf.

The first is drawn from the Law of Equity, which is, as Philo calls it, (...),
the Nurse of Justice. Sufficient to such a man is the punishments which was
inflicted of many, Ver. 6. Rewards and Punishments, though they be the golden
hinges, upon which the vvelfare of every state turns, yet are they to be
regulated by a just, and si^ measure. No Censures are to be excessive, much
less Church Censures, whose end is chiefly medicinal, they being (as Austin
speaks of the Corrections of God) Castigationes Emendatoriae, non
interfectoriae; Chastisements to procure amendment, not to work ruin.

A second Plea is from the present danger, Least perhaps such an one should be
swallowed up with overmuch sorrow, Verse. 7.

Inward troubles and perplexities of mind are far more corrosive and wasting
then outward: The Wheels of a Clock, whose motion is strong, wears sooner then
the Finger which moves gently without. They are oftentimes like a tempestuous
and angry Sea, which does not only toss the Ship but sink it. And it became
not them to be Spectators of any Man's ruin, without casting forth some Cord or
Plank, by the help of which he might reach the Shore. It is Jobs Censure of him
who shows not pity to the afflicted, that he has forsaken the fear of the
Almighty, Job 6. 14.

A third is, That he might have a Proof of them, whether they be obedient in
all things, Verse. 9. Spiritual Fathers, as well as Natural delight in the
reiterated acts of their Childrens Obedience, as being the most legible
Characters of a Son-like Disposition: And therefore the Apostle, who had only
a single trial of their willing compliance to his commands, seeks the
confirmation of it by a second Testimony: that as they had showed themselves
forward in putting away from among them that Person, whose sin was not to be
paralelled among the Heathen; so now they would, at his entreaties, show the
like readiness in the readmission of him into their love and favor who of a
presumptuous Sinner, was become an humble and broken Penitentiary.

A fourth Plea is from his own practice; He had for their sales forgiven him,
as in the sight or Person of Christ, verse. 10. That is, as he first awakened
them to judge the sin, with which for a time they were not affected; so now, by
his example, in his sincere Pardoning of it, as in Christ's sight, he did induce
them to do the like, and also teach them how to temper their zeal aright, in
being neither too remiss in using the Censures of the Church, nor yet too
rigorous in retaining of them when inflicted: both extremes being alike
prejudicial to the beauty of their zeal. It being with it, as with the Blood
in the Body, which if it be dilutus, watrie, through phlegm; or sublimatus
nimis, too fiery through Choler, makes the Complexion too wan and sallow, or
too red and high colored.

A fifth Plea is that that comes under present Consideration, and is to be
insisted on as the Subject of this present Discourse: Lest Satan should get an
advantage of us, etc.

In this Verse there are two principal parts, which do equally divide and share
it between them.

First, A useful Caution of Circumspection; Lest Satan should get an
advantage: The general Concernment of which is employed in the relative Particle
Us. For in this matter, Satan, as a Common Adversary, did endeavor more then a
single Supplantation; he did not Bait a Hook, but Spread a Net. For should the
Incestuous Person through despair miscarry, it might occasion a Rent between
the Apostle and the Corinthians, that would hardly be made up: It might render
the Gospel less amiable to those upon whom it had newly dawned; and cause it to
be as unwelcome and offensive, as light is to weak and sore eyes. It might
blemish the Censures of the Church, as having too deep a Tincture of
Pharisaicall Rigor: and having their whole Power tending rather to destruction
then to edification. Therefore it is that the Apostle, like a wise Physician,
is more then ordinary anxious, that the Patient die not under their hands, and
Satan get the advantage of them both by his sin, and sorrow. In the Original it
is (...), which by Interpreters is diversely expounded. The Vulgar reads it, Ne
Circumveniamur: That we be not Circumvented by Satan, who like a cunning
Wrestler, or Fencer, is various, and uncertain in his Motions, that he may take
the better hold, or strike his Adversary with the greater advantage. Beza, Ne
superemur; That Satan get not by far the better of us: not by open Force, but
by unfore-seen artifices, and slights. Erasmus, Ne occupemur a Satana: Lest
Satan should usurp upon us; that is, lest he who has nothing of right, should
by fraud obtain a kind of possession among us, by snatching and taking him from
us as his own, who is a member of our body; the entire union of which we ought
to preserve from such Ruptures and Avulsions, by the due tempering of our zeal
and charity toward those, who by the strength of Temptation fall into sin, and
by their deep sorrow testify their unfeigned Repentance for sin. Others again
(Etymologically enough) conceive it to be a Metaphor taken from Avaritious and
greedy Persons, that for Gaines-sake do in their Contracts and Bargains, by
guile and fraud overreach those whom they deal with. In all these Expositions
there is so full a Concurrence and agreement to the Circumstances of the Place,
and the Practices of Satan; as that I shall not, by giving a pre-eminence unto
any one above the other, determine the Judgment of the intelligent Reader which
to take, but wholly leave him to his free Choice. This only I shall intimate,
that our Translation seems ^o favor the last.

The second is the forcible and prevailing Motive to stir up their
Circumspection: For we are not ignorant of his devices. The Greek word for
devises, is (...): which in its general acceptance does signify the thoughts,
and musings of the mind (as Estius observes) but in a more strict and confined
sense it is applied unto such thoughts that are on purpose framed to deceive;
and by studied artifices to bring about designed ends in any kind whatsoever:
Such are Ambushments in War, Slights in Wrestling, Deceits in Gaming, Policies
in State, Fallacies in Disputing, Dark and covered Sentences in Rhetoric, in
which one thing is spoken and another intended: these Quintilian in his
Institutions calls Noemata. When therefore the Apostle says, that he was not
ignorant of Satan's Cogitations (as the Vulgar and others also render the words)
it is not to be understood of any intuitive power and ability which he assumed
to himself, of discerning and prying into the most retired thoughts of the
Prince of darkness, which are only open and naked to the eye of God, whose
Sacred Royalty it is to search the hearts both of Men and Angels; but of a
practical and experimental knowledge, which he, and other Belivers also attain
unto, by a diligent observance of their ways and actions, in which they
discover the misterious arts and snares of the Tempter, spread like the Nets of
a cunning Fowler, to entrap them in every motion and step that they make, not
only by his various allurements unto sin, but also by his perverting of their
best Duties, so as to make them to be losers thereby, and himself to be the
only gainer. And this was it in which he sought to get the better of the
Corinthians, turning their just zeal against the sin of the incestuous Person,
into an inexorable severity against his Repentance, though he was well nigh
swallowed up of Sorrow.

Chap. II.
Containing the main Proposition, and Sum of the Discourse.

I May happily be deemed to have lingered overlong upon the borders of the Text,
and to have spun out the Explication of a few words into too long a Thread; but
my purpose herein was only to free them from any difficulty which might seem
to sit upon them, as dark shadows on the tops of the Mountains, or Mists on
the Valleys, that intercept the light. And now methinks they are like a bright
and unspotted Mirror, which exactly presents the Object, or Species that is
shed upon it, to the eye of every beholder; So clearly do they hold forth this
one Proposition, in which both the parts of the Verse, the Caution of
Circumspection given, and the Ground, or Motive to it, do equally center.

That Satan is full of devises, and studies arts of Circumvention, by which he
unweariedly seeks the irrecoverable ruin of the Souls of Men.

It is the observation of the learned Zanchy, that Satan has above twenty
distinct Names and Appellations given unto him in the Scripture; some of which
set forth the high impurity of his nature, in opposition to that state of
holiness in which the blessed Angels stand, and from which he is fallen; and in
this respect he is styled an Unclean Spirit, Mark 9. 25. A Spirit of Wickedness
in the abstract, Ephesians. 6. 12. The Evil One, by way of eminency, Matthew. 13. 19.
Other of his Titles speak the Sovereignty and Dominion which he exercises over
multitudes of Men, and hence he is called by our Savior, the Prince of this
World, John 12. 31. And by the Apostle, the God of this World, 2 Cor. 4. 4.
Some again of them point out his Malice, and fierce rage, armed with Power,
hence he is called the Accuser of the Brethren, Rev. 12. 10. A roaring Lion,
not seeking whom he may bite, but whom he may devour, 1 Pet. 5. 8. A great red
Dragon, that out of his mouth sends forth Waters, Rev. 12. 15. and with his
Tail easts down the third part of the Stars of Heaven to the Earth, Rev. 12. 4.
Others of them again declare his craft to deceive, his wiles to ensnare, his
dexterity and skill to tempt: and in this regard he is said to be the Father of
Lies, John 8. 47. The Old Serpent, that by his windings and turnings deceives
all the World, Rev. 12. 9. The Tempter, Matthew. 4. 3. And this Name some think
to be so peculiar to the Devil, as that it agrees to no Person, or thing
besides, save as it is his Instrument; that though Men tempt Instrumentally,
the World Materially, yet Efficiently Satan only is said to Tempt. But amongst
the many ways by which the Holy Writ does signalize the transcendent emnity
that the Devil bears to the Church and Chosen of God, there are none that are
to be more eyed, or dreaded then his pernicious wiles and devices. He
captivates more by his bidden Snares, then he wounds by his fiery Darts: He
poisons more as a hissing Serpent, then he devours as a roaring Lion: He
cheates more as a Tempter, then he hurts as an Accuser. And as he in his
immediate workings has always been, and still is more mischievous to the
Church and Truth of God, by his Machinations and arts, then by his open force:
so likewise have those Instruments, and Emissaries of his in the succession of
all Ages, proved more fatal to the welfare of Religion, that have used rather
the Head of this Serpent, then the Paw of this Lion; and have carried on their
designs rather by fraud and subtilty, than by an hostile War and defiance. The
Midianites vexed Israel more by their Wiles, Numb. 25. 18. then the combined
Powers of all the Kings of Canaan by frequent Battles. The Samaritan Faction
obstruct the building of the Temple by false insimulations, Ezra 4. 6. By
scornful de^isions, Neh. 4. 3. By pretenced compliances of building with
Zerubbabel, and the chief of the Fathers, Ezra 4. 2. So Julian the infamous
Apostate did more endanger the Gospel, and lessen the number of its Professors,
by his Serpentine Pollices, then all his Predecessors had done by their bloody
Persecutions, as Austin and other of the Ancients have truly observed. Yea, and
Romish Babylon it self, though it has exceeded in cruelty all the Edomites of
the former Ages, in making her Garments red, and her self drunk with the blood
of the Saints as with new Wine, yet the advancement of the Papacy has been
effected, after the Working of Satan, with all power, and signs, and lying
wonders; and with all deceivableness of unright cousness, 2 These. 2. 9, 10. In
faining Apparitions of Angels and Spirits, in forging of Decrees of Counsels,
and corrupting of Fathers, in sembling and dissembling of Piety, in swearing
and forswearing, in sawnings, flatterings, bribings, and the use of all arts of
cousenage and imposture that wickedness it self can devise or exercise. If then
it be a stu^y and labor not unusual to the Military Profession, to record the
Stratagems of the most renowned Chieftains in War, as Vegetius, Frontinus, and
others have done; to (...) of the ordering of Armies, and the ranging of them
into several forms, and figures, as Aelian in his Tacticks has done; or to
Write with Lypsiois of the Warlike Engines and Weapons of the Ancients: It
cannot but be both grateful and necessary to acquaint such who are engaged in
a spiritual Warfare against Satan and his infernal Legions, what be his methods
of Temptation, his arts of loose skirmishing, and close fighting with those
against whom he sets the Battle in array: What be the ways of his retreates,
and fained flying, that so they may neither be ensnared by his Wiles, nor
vanquished by his Power. To this end therefore, in the pursuance of that
needful Truth which I have propounded to insist on, I shall endeavor the
performance of these five following Particulars.

First, To demonstrate the great abilities of Satan, as a Tempter, to effect
and bring about his cursed designs, in making his Suggestions to become our
Sins; his Snares our Chains; his Baits our Food; his Will our Rule; and his
Inventions our Circumventions.

Secondly, To set down, not by way of Enumeration, but of Instance, some of
those grand Stratagems, and usual Polices, which too often render him the
Conqueror, and us the Captives: For he who has (as Jerome speaks) nomina
mill, a multitude of distinct Names, has also mide nocendi arts, as many
arts to hurt and destroy.

Thirdly, To furnish the Combatans in this War and Conflicts, with Weapons out
of the Tower of David, Cant. 4. 4. the Armory of the Holy Scripture, such,
which being mighty through God, may bot^ pierce the Scales of this Hellish
Leviathan, though shut up together as with a close Seal, Job 41. 15. and may
also safeguard them against the sore danger of his poysonful and fiery arrows.

Fourthly, To resolve some Queries, the discussion of which will properly fall
under the subject in hand.

Fifthly, To shut up the whole Discourse with such practical deductions, and
inferences, as may be like the emanations of the Sun, that carry both light and
heat with them.

Chap. III.
Wherein is showed the great ability of Satan to tempt.

TO evince first the great ability of Satan to tempt, who ever since he left
his own station, has never ceased to malign ours, and is become both by office
and practice a Tempter, that he might draw man from his happiness into the same
irreparable and cursed condition with himself, I shall offer these six
Demonstrations.

SECT. I.
FIrst, In his nature he is both a Spiritual and an Intellectual Essence, in
each of which respects his advantage over man is very great, who in the most
refined, and supreme part of his being falls as far short of an Angel, as a
small glittering spark does of a fair and well pollished Diamond, or a
twinkling star, of a refulgent Sun. An Angel (says Bellarmine in his heavenly
Scale) is a most perfect and spiritual substance. But the Soul is a Spirit
imperfectly, and by halves; as being the form of an earthly body, and part of a
man, who is a middle kind of Creature, and has something in common with Angels
above him, and with Beasts which are below him. As a Spirit therefore Satan can
convey himself and his suggestions both to the Understanding and Will, in a
more intimate and efficacious manner than any humane Agent possibly can. For
when one man becomes a Tempter to another, he uses the mediation of the
outward Senses, to which he can only apply and communicate the object; but he
cannot by any Physical or natural power gain an immediate access unto the
internal faculties of the soul, and lodge the temptation, as Joseph's Steward
did the Cup, in Benjamins Sack without his privity. But such is the power of
this infernal Angel, as that though he be totally debarred from all kind of
intercourse with the immediate and immanent operations of the Reasonable soul,
and can no more look into the thoughts, and musings of the heart, than a common
eye can pry into the bowels of the earth, and describe those numerous
conceptions with which it travels in its womb; yet he can as easily get into
the Fancy, which is next to that mysterious Chamber of the Soul, which to God
alone is all light, and to every created power all darkness, as any man can
enter into a room, that is possessed of a Key that gives him free admittance.
And he can make use of all those Species and Signatures of things that are
lodged in it, disposing and ordering them as a Painter does his many Colors,
that lie confusedly before him in their several She^s, to express the
Portraiture and Image of that Person, which he would delineate by them: And he
can both continue and reiterate the presentation of the objects which he offers
to the fancy, as often and as long as it pleases him. Now, how much such a
power, when permitted by God, can further a compliance in the soul to all those
suggestions which the Father of lies does secretly instill, we may easily
conjecture, if we d^ but a little consider, what the natural use of the Fancy
is both to the Understanding, and the Will. To the Understanding it is a prompt
assistant in matter of invention to supply it with variety of objects whereon
to work; and from the quickness of its operation, the multiplicity, levity, and
volubility of the thoughts do chiefly arise, which when they become excessive
through an undue, and overhasty obtrusion of the Species, are to be deemed
both in natural and moral things as a disease, and distemper of the Faculty,
rather than a power or perfection; in regard that the worth of some objects
does justly require an immoration and fixed stay of the thoughts upon them. To
the Will its office is to elicit and excite its desires toward some convenient
and pleasing object, in which for the most part it is so successful, as that
often times plausible Fancies do more take and sway with the Will, than knotty
and severe Arguments; there being a natural aptness in men to be moved by such
inducements, as carry in them more beauty to entice, than force of reason to
compel; the freedom of the Will being seemingly less infringed in the one than
in the other. When therefore that Satan, by reason of the spiritualness of his
being, can have such a free access unto the Fancy, and can improve all the
images and representations of things that are in it, to the insinuating of
himself, and his Serpentine suggestions both to the Understanding and Will, and
that so inwardly, as that he is said to put it into the heart of Judas to
betray Christ, Joh. 13. 2. To fill the heart of Ananias to lie to the Holy
Ghost, Acts 5. 3. So powerfully, as that the Scripture uses the same word to
express the working of Satan in the Children of disobedience, Ephesians. 2. 3. by
which it sets fo^^h the efficacious, and powerful working of God in Believers,
Phil. 2. 13. How can it otherwise be but that he must needs be a powerful, and
prevailing adversary? But yet this difference must be put between the
operations of the one and the other, that the Spirit of God works by divine
infusions of grace, which effectually sway the soul to an assent or consent,
Satan only by moral persuasions, which may be powerful to solicit, but not to
constrain. And in this respect he is (as Hierom truly styles him) Host is
infirmus, qui non potest vincere nisi volentem, A feeble and weak enemy, who
can only overcome him that yields, not him that resists; and hurts him that
puts his weapons into his hand, not him that keeps them in his own.

Secondly, As he is a Spiritual, so he is also an Intellectual being; and by
the same Law of Creation, by which he excells man in the one, he far also
outstrips him in the other. Now, if in the understanding of Adam there was such
an inbred force and power, that when God brought all the Creatures to him as
their Lord, to see what he would name them, Genesis 2. 19. the did in their name
characterize the nature, and not give it unto them at random, (as the Socinians
wickedly imagine, who make him little above the stature of a Child in
Knowledge.) How much more must the Angelical nature be endowed with innate, and
implanted Species of things, that are more universal and extensive unto several
objects, it being the most supreme in the Hierarchy of intelligent Creatures,
for whose sake all natural objects were made that they might be known and
discerned by them. True it is, that Satan by his voluntary defection from God
has lost that glorious Robe of holiness that made him a Peer of heaven, and
dignified him with the title of a Son of God; and has also (as I conceive)
impaired his natural abilities, so as that he is become in power, wisdom, and
knowledge inferior to those glorious Inhabitants of the Sacred Palace, who
have kept their first estate, and not departed from that purity that is as
ancient as their being. For why should not the sin of Angels operate as
strongly upon them, as the lapse and disobedience of man did upon him, whose
Spirituals were thereby wholly destroyed, and his Naturals sorely maimed. But
though his Fall has debased his being, yet it has not totally changed it, he
has still the nature though not the perfection of an Angel, and though he be
inferior to them, whose equal originally he was in all kind of endowmen^s, yet
still he retains so great a superiority over the Elementary, Sensitive, and
Intellectual part of the world, as that he is not only dreaded for his power,
which sometimes he puts forth in wonderful effects; but is also adored for his
wisdom and knowledge as a God, by many Nations in it. And it is observable,
that Beelzebub, who 2 Kin. 1. 2. is called the God of Ekron, in Luke 11. 15. is
termed the Prince of Devils. In the Kingdom of sin and darkness he is a God,
but in the Kingdom of grace he is a Devil, and more ghastly than hell it self by
his sinful deformity; and though he seldom of never appears in that dress, but
palliates and gilds his suggestions, as that they sometime seem to be rather
illapses from heaven than smoke arising from the bottomless pit, and to savor
more of Angelical purity than of Diabolical filthiness; yet is he not therefore
to be the less observed by us, but it stands us in hand to be the more watchful
that have such a Serpent to deal with, that can hide his deadly poison with a
beautiful and shining s^in. And if the Ancient Church, while Austin was a
Manichee, and a busy wrangler against them, were wont to pray, (as Possevine
in his life reports) Ab Augustini Logica libera nos Domine, Lord deliver us
from Augustines subtilty and reasonings; How much more have Believers need to
make the like prayer, and often to reiterate it, Lord deliver us from the Arts
and Fallacies of Satan, whose malice is great, whose abilities are matchless,
and do transcend the line of humane wisdom, when drawn out to the utmost period
of its extension.

But besides, as the measure of his knowledge is more full and ample, so the
manner of his knowledge and apprehending objects is more noble and perfect than
the way by which man comes to the knowledge of things that are before him. The
Schools, which abound with many intemperate Nicities, and curious Disputes
about the understanding of Angels; (in which they justly incur the increpation
of the Apostle, Col. 2. 18. of intruding into those things which they have not
seen,) though in other particulars they are not a little divided, yet in this
Position their Consent is well in the general, that Angels are Creaturae
intelligentes, sed non ratiocinantes: Beeings that are full of knowledge, but
not such as exercise a plurality of intellections in reasoning and
Argumentation as we do, whose knowledge is much built upon Deductions, and
Consequences, that are derived from confessed principles. They grant Angels
knowledge not to be simultaneous, but successive; so as that they know hoc post
hoc, one object after another; but it has not any dependency, so as to know
hoc ex hoc, one thing by or from another, but by one single view or intuition,
they fully discern the object that is before them; as a man does the face of a
friend as soon as he beholds him, without the least hessitancy, or enquiry who
he is. Now if we should take it for granted that the knowledge of Angels is
thus exact, and that at first sight the same object is better understood by
them, than it can be by the many and most pregnant conceptions of the humane
intellect, it must needs evince the abilities of Satan in tempting to be such,
as that man cannot but be as unmeet an adversary to enter into the Lists with
him, or to maintain a dispute against him, as the young Infant would have been
to have resisted the Sword which Solomon called for, to divide it between the
two Harlo^s. But I shall not need to wind up the knowledge of Angels to so high
a key of perfection, or to abet the common opinion of the School, to make it
any part of the Basis or proof in demonstrating the power of the Devil as a
Tempter. For I conceive with Cameron and others, that their knowledge is
arguitive, (as he terms it) and not intuitive, and that they do reason from the
effect to the cause, from the sign to the event, as is apparent in those
Conjectures that they make about the thoughts of men, which no Angel either
good or bad can otherwise discover, than by some commotion which they cause
externally in the body, or internally in the Passions; Only such is the
marvelous quickness and agility of their Conceptions, as that their
intellectual motions are in respect of ours as the motion of the Sun in the
heavens, to the motion of the shadow on the Dial; like the swift flight of an
Eagle to the creeping of a Snail; or the readiness of an expert Arithmetician,
to a slow and unskilful Accountant, who can in a fewer minutes resolve that
which you demand of him, than the other can in many hours, or happily days.
And this vast imparity which is between the Angelical and Humane understanding
is enough to make good this first demonstration of Satan's ability to tempt, as
he is both a spiritual and intellectual Essence. I shall now proceed to
another.

SECT. II.
THe second Demonstration which aptly confirms the same truth with the former
is from the duration, and long experience of the Devil, who is thereby become
skilful to destroy, and to have his temptations like the Arrows of a mighty
expert man, none of which return in vain, Jer. 50. 9. In Scripture as he is for
his natural endowments, often styled (...), a knowing or intelligent one, so he
is for his acquired subtilty called an old Serpent, Rev. 12. 9. having been
well nigh as long a Tempter, nay, a murderer, as he has been an Angel. Who
must needs therefore by the many revolutions, and successive generations of
men, in which he has not been an idle spectator, but a busy actor, be more
versed in this Art and Mystery of wickedness, than he was in the nonage and
infancy of his being, when he first clothed himself in the shape of a Serpent.
For it is proper only to God, to whose knowledge all things are present, at all
times, and before all times, not to be taught by experience. But there is no
Creature so perfect in its knowledge, but it may and does learn something for
the time present, and to come, by the times which are past. Experience is li^e
the honey that Jonathan tasted, which enlightened his eyes, and made him more
fit for action, than he was before: It begets an aptitude for the managing of
such affairs, which youth can no more undergo, than David could the Armor of
Saul which he had not tried. Who is more meet to minister Physic to a weak and
crazy patient, than an ancient and well practiced Physician? Who more able to
medicine a wounded Spirit, and to ease a troubled Conscience, than an holy and
experienced Divine? Who may be better trusted to fit at the Helm of a State
than such persons whom years have made both venerable and prudent? It was the
rash advice of Rehoboams young Counselors, that had well nigh lost him his
Crown, and occasioned the ten Tribes to fall off from the House of David, and
to form themselves into a distinct Kingdom, 1 Kings 12. 20. They seemed in
their Counsels to exercise more metal and courage than the old men that stood
before Solomon his Father, but the other discovered more wisdom. New Liquor
when first tunned works and stirs more in the Cask, than other; but yet is as
unfit to be drawn as their Counsel was to be followed. It was also the unmeet
choice of persons in the Council of Arimine, deputed by the Orthodox unto the
Emperor, that did (as Sulpitius judiciously observes) much injure the truth,
they sending young men that were, Parum docti, and parum cauti, little learned,
and as little cautious in the weighty Affairs of Religion, with which they were
entrusted; when the Arrians sent an equal number of their faction, who were,
Senes callidi, and ingenio valentes, Aged men and crafty, well furnished with
wit and learning, whereby they easily prevailed against them. And what other
issue could be expected when unskilful Novices were to take up the Wasters
against ancient and cunning Masters of the fence? It is multitude of years that
teaches wisdom (says Elihu,) Job 32. 7. and produces those mature fruits,
which youth, that is like a Plant not well rooted, is unable to bear. Homer,
who extolls his Nestor as an Oracle for wisdom, as a Fountain for fluency and
sweetness of speech, does yet withal make him as wonderful for his age, as
peerless for his perfection. Josephus also attributes the Art of Astronomy to
the Patriarchs of the first Age, who taught their Posterity the motions of the
Heavens, and the courses of the Stars, by certain Monuments and Pillars in
which they had set down the observations, which themselves had experienced in
those many Centuries of years to which the life of man was then extended. It
being one end (as some have deemed) of Gods giving unto them so long a time
above others, that they might be the Authors of this Science unto after Ages,
which otherwise after that great Systole or contraction of man's life by God
himself, would hardly, if at all, have been attained to. If then time and
experience be so requisite to knowledge and wisdom, as that it is in some
things the genuine Parent of it, and in other things the great improver of it;
How much then must five thousand years experience enable Satan to tempt, who
has all his time been as diligent an observer of men, as he has been an
Adversary against them? How skilful must he be in this his black and accursed
Art, who has compiled his temptations into Systemes, which he has in
readiness by him, and does with much Art continually make use of; being one
that knows not in the least what it is either to forget, or grow old. Sublunary
beings, though they do from time receive a maturity and perfection, yet it is
not extended in a Parallel line with their duration; as they have a time of
beauty and strength, so also have they an age of deformity and weakness; and by
their long fitting under the deathful shades of the wings of time, are at last
wasted and worn out. But Satan feels none of its powerful impressions; time
has rather still added to him, then taken ought from him, multiplying
continually those experiences which increase his subtilty, and advantage him in
tempting, as I shall show in three Particulars.

First, His long experience, as a Tempter, has made him exact in descerning,
and choosing the fittest seasons for it, the right timing of which has a
powerful and effective influence into all kind of Enterprises whatever. Upon
whose Sword does victory most constantly build its Triumph, then his, who is
most diligent in espying, or improving of advantages against his enemy? whose
entreaties and persuasions do with sweetness more allure, and with mildness
overcome the harshness and severity of some Men's temper, then his, who observes
mollissima fandi tempora, the softest and most calm seasons of speech? Whose
Husbandry is crowned with a more successful harvest than his, who is most
prudent, and circumspect about the Seedtime? Opportunity is the joint of time,
and he who wisely can hit it, is never disappointed in his aims. One blow on
the Iron as it comes glowing and sparkling from the Forge, does more easily bow
it, and fashion it, then many re-doubled strokes, when it is returned to its
natural coldness. One timely pull does more facilitate the raising of the Bell,
then many unskilful and laborious tuggings at the Rope. Now, as there are none
equally watchful to Satan to espy any advantages; so there are none alike
knowing to discern the very nick of time when the Temptation will be most
prevalent. Man often miscarries, and his undertakings become like Immature
Births, because he knows not his time, Eccles. 9. 11. But Satan is more
successful in his, because he acts from experience, and fully understands when
and how to apply himself, to every age and constitution. All his methods of
temptations are like to the Aphorisms of Physicians, which are nothing but the
Collections of experimental observations, drawn into rules, to direct and order
their practice by. And as Galen makes the two Legs, upon which the whole Body
of Physic does stand, to be reason and experience: so may I say, that the two
chief parts in which the art of the Devils subtilty in tempting does consist,
are the greatness of his natural knowledge, and the length of his experience.

Secondly, His Experience, which now amounts to above five thousand years,
does much advantage him in Tempting, as it makes him dexterous, and ready in
the obviating of difficulties, and replying to every doubt that is made, when
any suggestion is propounded and urged by him. For though Satan can with great
artifice palliate and disguise the deformity of sin, by giving it a false
complexion, by drawing a veil over it, or by showing it halfe-fac'd; as Apelles
painted King Antigonus to conceal the want of his eye: Yet there are but few
temptations to scandalous and gross sins, but at first propounding they startle
the Consciences of natural Men, much more of others, and raise a cloud of
objections, which must be scattered, before their consent can be gained. Now
the objections, or doubts which arise in Men's minds of this present Age, are
no other then what Satan has again and again met with in every Generation and
Succession of Men; yea almost in every Person, when tempted by him to the same
or like sin. And as he still expect; for the future to find the same
reasonings, to hinder and keep off a compliance with his suggestions; so what
replies or answers he has experienced to be most prevalent, either for
perverting the knowledge, or staggering the faith of the tempted, them he still
makes use of from time to time, to remove the same prejudices that stir in
others, when set upon by him, to commit the same sin. And this it is which
oftentimes startleth and perplexeth many Christians, not only that they are
tempted to sin, but that their pleas and arguments against it are so suddenly
answered, and replied unto: No sooner can they Ob. but the old Serpent will
Sol; and like a subtle sophister have always somewhat to return to whatever
they can Object. But if they did consider that as the evils to which they are
tempted are no other then what has been suggested unto thousands, so their
arguments brought against them are no other, then what he has been thousands
of times acquainted with, and replied unto, they would not so much wonder at
his nimbleness in this kind, nor take the way of arguing as most convenient to
Oppose him. Christ's increpation Avoid Satan, Matthew. 4. 10. did more foil him
then all Reasonings and Authorities produced: And the safest way for us to come
off clear with him, is rather to be resolute in a flat denial, then busy in an
eager dispute. When Naomi saw that Ruth was steadfastly minded to go with her,
the left speaking unto her, Ruth 1. 18.

Thirdly, His experience anim^tes him with confidence to assault the best and
holiest of Saints, if not to extinguish their light, yet to eclipse their
luster, if not to cause a shipwreck, yet to raise a storm, if not to hinder
their happy end, yet to molest them in their way. Such practices he has found
not only to have some success against the strong, but to intimidate and
discourage the weak, who are apt from the particular foiles of renowned
Christians in the Faith, to make sad conclusions against themselves, and to cry
out, Quid facient tabulae, si gemant columnae? What shall the spars and rafters
do, if the pillars of the building tremble? What shall the reeds and willowes
do, if the cedars be shaken? Who is he that has wrastled with him, and not
halted? Who is he that has entered the Field against him, and not been wounded
by him? Was not Noah a just Man, and perfect, one that walked with God, when
all flesh had corrupted their way, smitten with the darts of this Apollyon
between the joints and the harnese? Was not Lot, whose righteous soul was vexed
from day to day with the unlawful deeds of Sodom, enticed by his arts into the
complicated lusts of drunkenness and incest? Was not David, (a Man after Gods
own heart) a sad instance, both of his power and Man's frailty? when through his
instigation be makes a second crime to be the vizard of a former; and to cover
the deformity of his Adultery, first becomes a Tempter to send Vriah drunk to
his Bed; and then a Murderer when that will not do, to dispatch him to his
Grave? How then shall I, who fall as far short of them as a winters day does of
a Summers day, who have neither that life, heat, or heavenly influences, with
which they were filled, be ever able to stand? But yet, as no Man ought to
presume that there are any degrees of Grace, that will exempt him from Satan's
on-sets, who is not afraid to war with Michael and his Angels, Rev. 12. 7. much
less with the Woman and her Seed; so none ought to despair, by reason of the
weakness of his Grace, of maintaining a Conflict with him, because though his
rage has been great, and his stratagems many, yet has he never been able to
make the Seed of Grace, in its conception, to prove abortive; nor to destroy a
Believer in his swadling-bands, much less in his Armor.

SECT. III.
A Third Demonstration, which may farther evince the abilities of Satan in
Tempting, is, that it is the only design and business that he has propounded
unto himself, and has prosecuted with most unwearied diligence, ever since he
has become of an holy Angel an impure Devil.

First, It is the grand and sole business in which he lays out himself, and
thereby becomes not only more dexrerous in it, but also more formidable. It is
an Italian Proverb, Liberamea ab homine unius negotii: Lord deliver me from a
Man who has but one business to do; he will be sure to mind and tend it, and
thereby get many advantages against an encumbered adversary, who can never
obtain the least against him. For it is with the powers and faculties of
rational beings, as it is with other things, which become more or less active,
and vigorous, according to the combination or division which they undergo:
Many small wax lights, which of themselves burn faintly, when put into one
Totch or Taper, send forth a bright and shining flame: many little Bells which
tinkle together to the pleasing of Children, when melted, and cast into one
great Bell, do affect the ear with a more solemn and awful sound: and many
single Threads, which snap asunder with the least touch, when twisted together
make a strong Cable, which can withstand the fury and violence of a storm. So
it is with the Mind, the more it is scattered and divided through multiplicity
of objects, the more weak it is; and the more it is fixed on one single Object,
the more masculine and strong are the operations of it, either in good or in
evil. And therefore David, who desires to excel in holiness, makes it his
Prayer, Psalm 86. 11. that God would unite his heart to fear his Name: Hierome
reads it, Unicum fac cor meum; Make my heart one: that is, incline it only to
thy fear; implying thereby, that divided interests in the heart do both
distract and weaken it: When the Scripture likewise would set forth the
wonderful depravation of Man's estate, it says, That every Imagination of his
heart was only evil continually, Genesis 6. 5. There is not the least contrary
Principle to check, or to restrain those ebullitions of lust, which slow and
ascend from the heart, as water from a Fountain, and sparks from a Furnace.
Now thus it is with Satan, he is wholly bent to evil, and makes it his only
study to dive and search into Men, that he may the better fasten his
temptations upon them. It is the question which God puts to him, Job 1. 8. Have
thou considered my servant Job? or as the Septuagint renders it, Have thou
attended with thy Mind? In which is employed what his practice and end is, in
going too and fro in the earth; he does not travel it as a Pilgrim, but as a
Spy, that observes narrowly every person and thing as he passes along: He sets
not forward a step but he does as it were debate every Man's estate, temper,
age, calling, company, that so he may with the greater advantage tempt to evil,
and thereby bring Men into the same misery and condemnation with himself. And
indeed whosoever duly weighes the perfect antipathy that is in Satan, both unto
God and Holiness, can hardly conceive in what other thing he should exercise
himself, then to tempt and solicit Men to sin. For such is the greatness of his
malice, that, as the Schools determine, it cannot admit any farther degree of
augmentation, his will being immovably fixed to evil as its ultimate end.
Needs therefore must his malice and hatred dispose him to the doing of such
evils as may bear a proportion to the greatness of it. And wherein can it in a
higher way discover it self, then in designing, and effecting the ruin of the
souls of Men by pernicious Counsels and devices? If there be any one thing in
which so discontented a Person, as Satan is, can take delight, it is in his
Trade of Seduction, and Destruction, in making others as irrecoverably lost and
miserable as himself.

Secondly, As tempting and ensnaring of Men is his only business, so his
diligence in it is matchless. He was going too and fro in the earth, and
walking up and down in it in Jobs time, Job 1. 7. and in Peter's time he was a
roaring Lion, walking about, seeking whom he may devour, 1 Pet. 5. 8. The
Beasts of the earth, though they hunt after their Prey, yet when the Sun
arises, and Man goes forth to labor, they gather themselves together, and
lay them down in their Dens, Psalm 104. 22. But this infernal Lion is restless
in his motions, and compasses the earth with as much unweariedness as the Sun
does the Heavens. It is true be tempts others to idleness, but himself is never
idle. The Fowler is desirous that the flying Bird would alight upon the ground,
or perch upon some Tree; but all the while he is in motion, that when it so
does it may the better become his mark: So the Devil, he does what he can to
lull others asleep in idleness and sloth; but he then cease not to shoot his
darts, and to spread his snares. When Samson was asleep on Dalilahs knees, she
caused his Locks to be cut off, Judges 16. 19. and wrought all that mischief
upon him, that terminated not in the loss of his eyes, but in the loss of his
life. While the Servants slept the enemy came and sowed his Tares, Matthew. 13.
25. Oh! how well would it go with Christians, if the diligence of their
Adversary would provoke them to watchfulness, and kindle in them an holy
industry unto all good, that so they might approve themselves to be Dei
Milites, Gods Soldiers, to sight against all evil: and Operarii Dei, Gods
Workmen and Servants in doing all good. Sure it is their complaints would be
fewer, and their comforts would be greater. But alas! what a sad complaint may
I now take up, and whilst I speak of the diligence of the Evil One, mourn
over the security and negligence of most Professors, amongst whom a waking Eye,
and a working Hand are as rare to be found as a Sword and a Spear among all the
People of Israel, 1 Samuel 13. 22? How few are there that have taken the alarm
though they be called upon, so as to stand upon their Watch against
temptations? How hard is it to persuade Men that to walk circumspectly is a
duty? or, that to be diligent in their Callings is one of the best Antidotes to
preserve the Soul from the putrefaction of lusts, and to fence it against the
Incursions of an Affiduous Tempter? It is a common Proverb that the Lion is not
so sierce as he is Painted; and it it a received opinion that the Devil is not
so hurtful an Enemy as he is represented to be. It is no wonder then if his
designs be so successful, and his Triumphs many, when the greatest part of Men
are no way anxious to proportion their care and watchfullness, either to the
greatness of their own danger, or their adversaries diligence.

SECT. IV.
A Fourth Demonstration, which may discover the power of Satan to tempt, is
taken both from the Number of the evil Spirits, and the Unity of their
Counsels, which meet all in one common center of an irreconcilable hatred to
Gods glory, and Man's happiness.

First, Their Numbers are great, which renders their Power, as well as their
Counsels exceeding dreadful. Weak things, which when few are contemptible,
when seconded with multitude become irresistible. Caterpillars, Frogs, Locusts,
Flies, by the excess of their number make the proud heart of Pharaoh to stoop,
who cannot free himself or his Kingdom from such impotent Adversaries. The
Whale, of which God says, that upon the earth there is not his like: He is a
king over all the children of pride, Job. 41. 33, 34. Of all creatures by Sea
or Land, that pride themselves of their might and strength, he is the chief;
and yet Pliny says, that the Herrings do by their vast numbers oppress and
destroy sometimes the biggest Whales. How dreadful then must that opposition
be, that arises from such creatures, that are for their nature powerful, and
for their numbers past finding out. The School men who would seem to be expert
Benjamites to hit at a hairs breadth every mark at which they aim, and not
miss, speak as confidently of the number of good and evil Angels, as if they
had looked into the Muster-Roll both of the Heavenly host, and the Infernal
Legions, and yet their assertions have as little agreement with each other, as
the testimonies of the false Witnesses concerning Christ, no two of them
speaking the same thing. Aquinas conceives the number of them in their Creation
to exceed incomparably all material substances, and his reason, as Estius sets
it down, is, because the more perfect any beings are in their nature, the
greater is their excess, either of Magnitude, if they be corporeal, or of
Number, if they be incorporeal. As therefore the Heavenly Bodies, which are
most perfect, do wonderfully surpass all inferior bodies in quantity; so do
the spiritual Angels in number. Now of these vast numbers, say some, the one
half become Apostates. Others, from a mistake of that place, Rev. 12. 4. of
the Dragons drawing of the third part of the Stars of Heaven after him, have
fondly concluded, that a third part of them fell, when as it plainly speaks of
a defection in the Church. Others again have made the number of fallen Angels
equal to the number of the elect Men that shall be saved, who are to supply
the breach that was by their defection. But what light o^ evidence do any of
these positions carry in them, that may gain the understanding of sober Men to
a belief of them? are they not nicities, that are as unfit to build upon as
the dreams of sick Men? It is enough that the Scripture, though it acquaint us
not with the certain number of good or evil Angels, that of the one it tells
us, that there are thousand thousands that Minister unto God, and ten thousand
times ten thousand that stand before him, Daniel 7. 10. And that there is an
innumerable company of Angels, Heb. 12. 22. And that it represents unto us the
evil Angels by a Kingdom, which implies multitudes; and by a Prince whose
greatness lies to the extent of his condition, and the number of his Subjects.
Surely we need no Hermits Visions to inform us that the air is full of
malignant Spirits, and the earth of their snares to entrap the inhabitants of
it. St. Paul points out to us their number as well as their power, when he
faith, that we wrestle not with flesh and blood, but against principalities,
against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this World, against
spiritual wickedness in high places. Ephesians. 6. 12. Oh! what a troublesome passage
must every Christian expect in his way to heaven, who is to conflict with
Armies of these infernal Anakims? How necessary is it that he put on the Armor
of God for protection, and fight in the strength of God to obtain a victory?
For in his own might no man can prevail. If Elijah, a Prophet of an Heroic
Spirit, complained of his being left alone to contest with the Priests of Baal,
and the Idolaters of Israel, so as to grow weary of his life, how apt will the
best of men be to faint and sink in the long and sharp Conflicts, that must be
undergone with the Combined forces and powers of darkness, if not aided and
supported by the strength of Christ? If therefore we would be successful
Combatants in this Spiritual Warfare, we must do as David did, who prepared to
encounter Goliath by disarming himself of his warlike Habiliments, going forth
only in the name of the Lord of Hosts; we must put off all carnal confidence,
which will be as unuseful to us as Saul's Armor was to him, and be strong only
in the Lord, and in the power of his might, this is that that will both animate
us in the fight, and give unto us an assured victory in the Issue.

Secondly, As their Number is great, so their Unity and agreement is wonderful.
In Satan's Kingdom are no divisions, Mat. 12. 26. In his Armies no mutinies for
want of pay, no complaints of hard marches, though they be continually
compassing the earth to and fro. That there should be an Union amongst the
heavenly Host is not strange, in regard they are all as so many melodious
Instruments tuned to one Key; as so many Needles touched with the same
Loadstone, which fixes them invariably to one point: they dwell with him, and
in him who is love it self. But is it not matter of admiration, that an entire
oneness, which is so much wanting on earth, should be found in hell? What is
Hell but the Common Sewer and Drain into which those Lusts of Pride, Wrath,
Envy, and Bitterness, from whence Wars do arise, do empty themselves? Have
Devils any love? Is there any print of that noble quality, which is as amiable
as the Sun to be found in the territories of darkness? What then is that
Ligament or Cement, that so firmly ties and conjoyns them together? It is no
other but a perfect hatred both to God and man, it being the one thing designed
by them to rob God of his glory, and man of his happiness and to effect this
the Conspiracy is strong, and League inviolable. The good Angels rejoice at the
conversion of a sinner; and the evil Angels at his destruction: The ruined
sinners are the only Trophies and spoils of Hell. Oh! blush then ye Saints, who
have so many Sacred bonds to unite you to God, and also to one another, and yet
by Divisions are set at a distance from each other, making the enemies valiant,
as the Historian speaks, by your discords. Are you not all the Brethren of one
Father, God blessed for ever? And of one Mother, Jerusalem, which is above?
(...), Brethren of the whole blood, like Joseph and Benjamin? Have you not
sucked the same breasts? And been nursed up with the same sincere milk of the
Word? Are you not all (...), joint heirs of the same glorious inheritance
reserved for you in the heavens? Are you not led by the same Spirit of God, who
is a Spirit of love and goodness, and does not Generare accipitres, sed
columbas, beget birds of prey, but Doves whose Bills are never seen to be
bloody in the least? Shall not then love effect that in you, which a cursed
hatred does in Devils? They are one by a Common principle of wickedness, which
runs through them; and shall not you be one who are so closely knit together
with so many and such strong ties? That the lustful Goats should push at one
another is no matter of wonder, but that the tender Lambs should doss and
strike at each other cannot but be for a lamentation.

SECT. V.
A Fifth Demonstration of Satan's power and ability to tempt, is, From his great
and strange artifice to convey suggestions to evil after such a manner into the
heart, as that they cannot be distinguished from the lustings and ebullitions
of depraved nature. It is not only difficult to find out any certain Character
between Malum seminatum, and innatum, morsum serpentis, and morbum mentis; The
evil that is sown, and the evil that is inbred, between the bitings of the
Serpent, and the disease of the mind, as Bernard expresses it; but it is, as
he conceives, wholly impossible: He professing that after much search and
study he could never clearly know, Quid cordi, quid hosti tribunt, what he may
charge upon his heart, and what upon the Tempter. Now his advantage of thus
insinuating, and winding himself into the bosom does much promote and further
a compliance with his suggestions, because men are more apt to be swayed by
such thoughts which they look upon as the natural births of their own hearts,
than ever they would be by such which they discern to be sorrain, and to be
injected from an irreconcilable and a sworn Enemy. If any Print or Signature of
Satan did in the least appear in his suggestions, by which the tempted might
discover when the motions to any sin did come from him, and when from
themselves, neither his success not their danger would either of them be so
great by far as now they both are. For it cannot be reasonably imagined that
any should so readily close with, or hearken un^o what they find him to be the
Prompter of, as to what they deem to have its rise from their own breast,
without any other mover than themselves. The bird takes the Egg or Young for
its own, though laid or put into the nest by another hand, which therefore it
does with an unwearied diligence both hatch and feed; but if it should once
descry it to be otherwise, it would forthwith cast it out and destroy as
spurious. And so those sinful motions, which are injected into men's hearts by
the evil one, but reputed by them to be no other than the natural births of
their own minds, are more dandled in their thoughts, and sooner gratified by an
actual compliance than ever they would be, if discovered to have their original
from the Tempter. When Satan stood up against Israel, and provoked David to
number the People, 1 Chronicles. 21. 1. It was not by making such impressions, as
might evidence him to be the Counselor of the fact, but by exciting such
affections of vainglory and self-confidence, which naturally abound in the
hearts of Princes when their Armies are victorious, and the face of their
Affairs like a serene Sky without any mixture of Clouds. Thus Benhadad grows in
his demands upon Ahab, as if he would try what it was that he dares deny, by
adding a second Message to his first, in which he inlargeth the terms of his
submission to the searching of his house, and the houses of his Servants, and
the taking away of whatsoever is desirable in their eyes, and being refused the
doing of it, he proudly boasts, that the dust of Samaria shall not suffice for
handfuls for all the people that followed him, 1 Kings 19. 10. And so
Senacherib, fleshed with the many Conquests that he had obtained over diverse
Nations, swells with pride, till he breaks into blasphemy: Who are they among
all the Gods that have delivered their Country out of my hands, that the Lord
should deliver Jerusalem out of my hands? 2 Kings 18. 35. Yea, good Hezekiah
had his heart so far lifted up within him by the fullness of his Treasures, and
the multiplicity of his provisions both for War and Peace, as that he vainly
boasts of them to the Ambassadors of the King of Babylon, 2 Chronicles. 32. 31. And
from such latent seeds of pride, which breed in the best of hearts, as moths in
the finest garments, did Satan kindle this inordinate desire in David, of his
knowing the number of his warlike forces, which the just expostulations of Joab
and the Captains of the Host could not allay. He delighted in this thing, and
the Kings word prevailed, 2 Samuel 24. 3. Thus also in tempting of Christ, he
makes use of Peter's natural affection to his Master to dissuade him from
suffering death, Mat. 16. 22. Little did Peter suspect that the words which he
spoke, Satan prompted, and that he was but an Instrument to convey the poison
of a temptation as black as hell into his Saviors bosom, the consequences of
which would have been more dismal than if the Stars had dropped from heaven, and
the Sun been blotted out of his Orb, or the whole Creation had become as
shrivelled Parchment before the fire. For what had become of all the Chosen of
God, must they not have died in their sins, if Christ had not died for their
sins? Must not heaven have been empty of glorious Saints within, though thick
set with glistering Stars without? Must not the work of Redemption have been
like the structure of an unwise builder, who began to build, but never finished
what he had begun? But alas all these astonishing evils were not in the least
discerned by Peter, much less designed. Little did he think of being a Tempter
to his Lord, or of receiving such a check from Christ, as to have his name
given to him whose work he did: Get thee behind me Satan. And in this
mysterious and hidden way does he still manage his suggestions both in the
hearts of Believers, and others also, that so their compliance might be the
more facile to the evil to which he tempts, while he is not detected to be the
first mover to it. Old Isaac would not have been persuaded to have eaten of
Jacobs Venison, though he greatly loved it, if that he could either by
questioning him who he was, or by feeling his hands, have discerned him not to
be his Son Esau. So thoug^ men have a secret liking to the sin to which they
find themselves moved, yet if the instigations unto it did appear to them to
come from Satan, it would rather make them tremble, as Isaac did when Jacobs
subtilty was found out, than any ways beget in them further hankerings to
hasten the fulfilling of it. But that which makes the mystery of these his
undiscerned impressions the more strange is, that though in the same temptation
he reiterate the deception again and again, yet is it not more perceived by us
at the last than it was at first. We are still at as great a loss to trace out
any difference between his injections, and the natural lustings of the heart to
evil, as we should be to find the path of a Serpent upon a Rock, who though he
passes often over it, yet leaves not, as worms and snails do any filth or
slime behind him that may descry his various and crooked windings.

SECT. VI.
A Sixth Demonstration, with which I shall shut up this first general Head of
Satan's ability to tempt, is from the sutableness that is between his
Suggestions and corrupt reason. He cannot in the least offer violence to the
soul, or break in upon it by a forcible entry whether it will or no; The body
may be liable to his violence, but not the soul. The Assertion of Bonaventure
is a truth, Inducit Diabolus, immutat Deus, nemo cogit. The Devil may allure,
God only can effectually change, but none can compel us. When therefore he
tempts to sin, he insinuates himself by such Topics that are pleasing to
Carnal Reason, and apt to beget a ready compliance with his suggestions.
Profane and Atheistical wretches he bears in hand that Religion is but a
cunning and devised Fable, a mere Scare Crow, set up by Preachers to keep
simple and weak People in awe; That Heaven and Hell, things so much spoken of,
are but imaginations, the one a pleasing dream, and the other a false fire,
that frights more than it hurts, and that they which seem to dread it most, are
yet sometimes venturous enough to do such things from which a flaming Tophet
should wholly restrain them. Now what dry rinder sensual hearts are to such
suggestions that fall upon them as sparks, who can be so blind, as not to
perceive? Are not their secret wishes? Oh I that there were no God to judge
them, no hell or prison of burning flames to torment them? Do they not what
they can to cut off the hand of Conscience that it may not smite them? And to
put out its eyes that it may not see them? How easily then are they drawn into
that opinion which they would gladly have to be a truth? And how justly left of
God to such horrible delusions, that sinning without fear they may perish
without remedy? Others again, who by Convictions are awakened to some more
serious apprehensions of God and Religion, by specious suggestions he persuades
that the strictness of life, which some few pretend unto, is but an affectation
of singularity, in which they strive not so much to be like God, as to be
unlike their neighbors, that it is an heavy yoke which they put upon
themselves, and none of that easy yoke and light burden, which Christ commands
them to take upon them. They need not fear but that they shall speed well
enough though they be not so scrupulous as others, who stick at every small
matter, as if Salvation consisted altogether of Punctilioes, and could never be
obtained without an Arrival at the highest pitch of Sanctity. If they pray
sometimes when they think of it, read the Scripture when their leisure best
serves them, and see the Church now and then in fair weather, it is as much as
needs. Are not these whisperings of the Serpent of an enchanting nature? Are
not these kind of reasonings sured to most men's tempers, who in Religion affect
rather to discover that invisible point where Grace and Nature part, than to
pursue after the attainment of a perfect stature in holiness? Who think that a
taste of Godliness, like a little Physic on the knives point is more desirable
than the making of it a man's daily food? The Verse in Gellius, which Lipsius in
his Politiques says pleases him, Religentem oportet esse, religiosum nefas,
has many more approvers of it than himself, who deem a slight tincture of
Religion useful to themselves, and yet nauseat as some abominable thing, the
deep and double dye of it, so as to have it like a prevailing principle to give
a Law and Rule to their whole Conversation. As then the ground becomes
fruitful, not by receiving, but by liking of the Seed that is cast into it, so
Temptations become successful, not by the hearts bare reception of them, but by
its secret relishing and affecting of them. If Satan, who is the evil
Seeds-man, scatter any seeds of Temptations, to which the heart is Solum
subactum, as a prepared and disposed soil by the corrupt principles that lodge
in it, they will quickly sprout forth into acts, and grow into a root that will
bear G^ll and Wormwood. Can I then better put a period to this first General
than by giving the good Christian a brief, yet serious Caution, of listening to
those corrupt reasonings, with which Satan does often feather those Arrows of
Temptations, that are shot out of his Bow, that they may the better reach the
mark to which they are directed? Man is a Reasonable Creature, and is apt to be
swayed by any thing that carries a semblance of Reason, and if sin come in any
such dress, the Will is soon gained to embrace the motion, and the sin it self
to be finished, which the Apostle tells us brings forth death, James 1, 15.

Chap. IV.
Containing an Enumeration of Satan's Wiles.

I Now come to the Second Part of my designed task, which is to discover the
Policies and Devices of this Grand Master of Craft, not by compiling an entire
body or Systeme of them, or undertaking to give an exact and just account of
their Number, which is a work as hopeless as the telling of the stars, and
calling of them by their names; but the singling and choosing out of the full
heap, some which in the Spiritual Warfare are of most frequent use, and of
greatest danger, that so every Soldier of Christ, who is engaged in it, may
see what need they have to exercise watchfulness, as well as courage, having to
do with such an Adversary, who is no less active in his Subtilties, than
impl^cable in his Malice. Malo cautior esse quam fortior, fortis saepe captus
est, cautus rarissime. I had rather be cautious than valiant, the valiant are
often ensnared, but the cautious seldom.

SECT. I.
FIrst, It is a pernicious device and wily stratagem of Satan, To tempt by
method, and by the practice of lesser sins to make the way more facile for the
commission of greater. He casts down none suddenly from the Pinnacle of an high
profession into the lowest Abyss of wickedness, but leads them rather by
oblique descents and turnings, lower and lower, until their steps at last take
hold on hell. The beginnings of sin, as well as of grace, may fitly be
resembled to a grain of Mustardseed, which is of all seeds the least; but the
growth of it is such, that the birds of the air come and lodge in the branches
thereof. Sin appears at first like Elijahs Cloud, and afterward darkens the
whole face of heaven: Or is as the head of a River, which has nothing of
breadth or depth, yet by its running increases and swells into the similitude
of a Sea: Small offenses by Satan's industry become the Parents of signal
Crimes. Has not anger, which sets no other bounds to it self than blood and
death, taken its rise from a small disgust or dislike; as sometimes a mortal
Gangrene from a slight prick of an Artery? Have not completed impurities often
derived themselves from the glance of a wanton eye? Or from some light and
foolish gesture? What was the beginning of those complicated sins in David, his
Murder and Adultery, was it not an unhallowed look? Did not Lust, which like a
moral Jaundice spreads its deformity over the whole man, discover it self at
first in the Eye? It is Calvin's Observavation, that the Kingly Prophet in those
Expressions, Psalm 1. Of walking in the counsel of the ungodly, of standing in
the way of sinners, and sitting in the seat of the scornful, points out how by
little and little men turn aside from the right way. First, they hearken to
wicked Counsels and Solicitations to sin, which are as the seed of evil
actions; and then the Devil enticeth them to join themselves in fellowship with
sinners, till at length they become proud mockers, scorning both the reproofs
of men, and the Judgments of God; and through depraved principles of
Conscience, speak good of evil, and evil of good. Now, how this gradual manner
of Satan's tempting serves his design of drawing men to sins of the greatest
scandal and presumption, we may easily see if we do but consider that lesser
sins make way for greater four ways.

First, By way of deception, little sins men conceive of, as they do of slight
distempers of the body, that if need be are soon mastered and overcome; an
ordinary Apozem or decoction, a gentle Sweat, or a few Meals abstinence, are
prescriptions valid enough to make a clear riddance of the one; and a
resolution or two taken up, of leaving what has been done, or of doing
otherwise than before, will as readily cure the other. But there is no Custom
so weak that has not more power over our nature than we intended first to give
it, insomuch that many have been overborn with those actions, the effects
whereof they presume to be at their own dispose. For as Children turn round so
long in sport till at last they fall down when they would stand, so there are
many who indulging themselves in little slips and failings, bring themselves to
such an evil dizziness of mind as throws them down when they purpose to stand
and to break off from the paths in which they walked. When therefore a man
finds that he is tempted to sin because it is little, and may at any time be as
easily left as taken up, let him look upon it as a double imposture of the
Devil, who if he make it seem little in or before the doing of it, can make it
appear much greater when it is done: Or if he would persuade him that it may
without difficulty be left, let him remember there is a wide difference between
running up a hill, and running down a hill; he that runs up a hill may stop
when he will, but not so if he runs down: So if a man be climbing the hill of
grace he may sit down, or slack his pace as he pleases, and shall not want
happily Arguments good store to move him to it; but if he be once stepping down
the hill of a bad life, he can hardly give over till he come to the very bottom
of it, till he has finished his sin, which when it is finished brings forth
death, James 1. 15.

Secondly, By way of disposition. Small sins are as the priming of a Post or
Pillar, that prepare it for the better receiving of those other Colors that
are to be laid upon it, and in which it is to stand: or as the praevious
dippings of the wool in diverse liquors, that it may drink in more fully the
tincture of the Scarlet. They beget powerful inclinations in the soul to
greater sins, and make a way for their entrance by corrupting men's
apprehensions of sin, both in respect of its deformity, and its Magnitude, no
sin being equally ghastly, and big to look on to him that admits of familiarity
with the least of sins, as to him that abstains from all appearance of evil. It
is Josephus his Observation, That Solomon's foul defection to those stupendous
impieties of Idolatry, and inordinate love of many strange women, did take its
beginning from some lesser slips and failings against the Law of God; as his
setting the Brazen Sea upon twelve Oxen, and making the Figures of Lions and
Cherubims upon the borders of it. And to him, and other ancient Hebrews, who
are of the same Opinion, does Grotius incline, adding also his multiplying of
Chariots and horses against the express Command of God, Deuteronomy. 10. 17. as
another lapse in the way before his strange departing, and forsaking of the
way. I shall not make it my work to determine what special warrant Solomon
might have for what was done by him about things of the Temple, which would
free him from that part of the Charge; but this I think that whosoever shall
look into his Penitential Book of the Preacher, may easily find that his Fall
was not Perpendicular, and such which at once cast him as low as ever any of
the Holy Men of God fell, but a sinking and sliding downwards by degrees; and
from him learn, who was the Wisest Man that ever was or shall be, that it is
not wisdom that will keep a Man from the worst of sins, if he once allow, or
favor himself in lesser evils.

Thirdly, By way of Substraction, and withholding of that which may hinder the
Commission of greater sins, the powerful preservatives against presumptuous
evils are an awful fear of God, and a heart touched with the due sense of sin;
How can I do this great wickedness and sin against God, was Joseph's Plea to his
Mistress, when she tempted him to folly, Genesis 39. 9. and David's heart, when
tender smote him for an irreverent touch of Saules garment, as well as for the
cruel Murder of Uriah, 1 Samuel 24. 5. Now both these will a customary living in
small sins waste and destroy, by making the heart brawny and stiff: a path that
is trodden only by the foot of a Child, will, by its often going upon,
contract a hardness as well as the beaten Road, and so will the heart in which
little sins have a common passage too and fro, as well as the heart that is as
the highway that leads to destruction; for all sin has the same tendency,
though it do not work the effect in the like degree. As then they who would
keep themselves from a confirmed Stone, use daily helps to carry away the
smaller gravel, so to prevent a flinty and obdurate heart, the care must be
constant, and the practice frequent of purging the conversation from little
sins. Oh, if once the exercise of this duty be neglected, it can hardly be
imagined how suddenly Men come to do worse than ever. Whence is it that Men
sport themselves in the commission of those sins, at the mention of which they
would once have trembled? and brutishly wallow in the midst of that mire, the
least speck of which they would not formerly should have been found upon their
garments? Is it not from their compliance of lesser sins, that make them grow
regardless of greater? Is it not from their neglect of the fear of God, a
powerful Antidote against the growth of sin? this is made the cause by God
himself of Isreal's multiplied wickedness, Jer. 9. 3. They proceed from evil to
evil, and they know not me says the Lord.

Fourthly, By way of Palli^^ion and hiding them when done. All sin, as it has
death for the w^ges of it, Romans 6. 23. so it has shame for the companion of
it; thence it is that Men seek to cover one sin with another, deeming it better
to be guilty of two faults, then to be evicted of one. And usually a greater
sin is made the covering of a lesser, as the vizard which is worn to disguise
and hide a Person, is more deformed then the Face that it is put upon. Sarah at
the Angels Tidings that she should have a Child laughed, and when he observes
it, she denies it, Genesis 18. 15. to hide one sin she commits another, she tells
a lie to free her self from the charge of laughter. And this second sin, if
circumstances be weighed, will be found greater then the first. David, to
conceal his Adultery with Bathsheba covers it with the Murder of Uriah her
Husband: A strange Fig-lea^e to spread over so soul a Crime; but whether will
not the shame of sin drive a Man? if so holy a Person as David make this his
security, having done evil to do worse. And thus also that excellent Woman
Eudocia the Empress, and Wife of Theodosius the younger, (as Sixtus Senensis
relates the Story) having an Apple given unto her by the Emperor of a wonderful
bigness, that had been presented unto him as a rarity, she bestows it upon
Paulinus, a learned Person; and for that cause of great intimacy and
familiarity with her, he not knowing from whom the Empress had received it,
tenders it to the Emperor, hereupon the Emperor sends for his Wife, asks
her for the Apple, she fearing because of his earnest enquiring after it, that
her giving it away might displease the Emperor, made answer, that she had
eaten it; he urged her to tell the truth, she swore that she had eat it: upon
this the incensed Emperor brings forth the Apple as a Testimony against her,
and in his jealousy killed innocent Paulinus, and hated his Wife, who before
was greatly beloved by him. Is it not then matter of complaint as well as of
wonder, that this practice should be the common salve that many use to make
others to deem them innocent when they have done evil, to add to denialls
oaths, curses, and bitter imprecations, of themselves, little regarding what
guilt they contract before God, so they may but seem blameless before Men. But
let such know, that they sow the Wind, and shall reap the Whirle-winde; and
that as they cover one work of darkness with another, God shall add one
judgment to another; and by the scorching flames of his Wrath shall make them
to read the Truth of that divine Maxim, He that hides his sins shall not*
prospor, but whosoever confesses and forsakes them shall have mercy, Prove. 28. 14.

SECT. II.
SEcondly, A second device and circumvention of Satan is, A vexatious and
restless importunity in urging to the doing of that sin to which he tempts, In
a temptation are three parts.

First, Suggestion; or the casting of evil thoughts into the Mind, John 13.
2. It is said that the Devil put it into the heart of Judas to betray his
Master; Immisit ut sagittam: He threw, as a Dart, that thought into him,
finding it then a sit season both for him to make such a Motion, and for Judas
to receive it.

Secondly, Persuasion; or the backing of the suggestion with Arguments, which
may sway the understanding to approve and incline the will to consent to that
evil as good. And then he presses sometime by way of Terror, propounding sad
events, that will undoubtedly follow, if there be not a yiedling to do what is
suggested. Thus many are moved to a practice of stealing and couzening, through
a conceived fear of want and penury, which will else inevitably fall on them.
Others unto lying and perjury, to preserve their life and liberty, which may be
otherwise hazarded, if not lost. Thus Peter both denied and forswore his Lord
to save himself from that danger, which his being with him might otherwise have
exposed him unto. Sometimes by way of enticement, setting before them the
profit and advantage that will accrue by their compliance with his motion. And
thus Ahabs Prophets, through the suggestion of a lying spirit, persuaded him to
go up to Ramoth-Gilead, because of the prosperous success that should attend
his undertaking, 1 King. 22. 21. And with a far more alluring bait would the
Devil have courted our Savior, to have done homage and fealty unto him, by
promising to invest him in a right to all the Kingdoms of the World, upon that
single condition, Matthew. 4. 9.

Thirdly, The last part is a vehement and continued instigation to put in a
speedy execution what is suggested; and this is the utmost extent of Satanical
Power, 1 Chronicles. 21. 1. It is said Satan stood up against Israel, and provoked
David to number the People: The Syriack renders it, Praecipitem tulit Davidem;
He hurried David headlong, not by compelling him, but with instance, again and
again enforcing the motion till it was effected, notwithstanding Joabs just
expostulations and averseness to it. The Fencers rule which (says Lypsius) is
repete double, and follow the blow when made, is Satan's practice to the
tempted, who pursues often times his suggestions with that violence, as to rob
them of their sleep, that they may wake to his temptations, to urge them,
whether in company or alone, whether in their callings, and recreations, or in
their solemn duties to God, to give them no freedom nor respit, till he gain
that from them by importunity, which he could not by argument and persuasion.
Now how powerful a means this is to obtain an end when persisted in, and
after received denialls and repulses, to turn opposition into a yielding, the
Scripture will furnish us with full and pregnant evidence. What was it that
drew from Samson the discovery of that secret that cost him his life, but
Dalilahs restless importunity? who pressed him daily with her words, and urged
him, so that his soul was vexed unto death, Judges 16. 16. He whom the combined
power of the Philistines could not overcome, is foiled by the flattering
solicitations of a Woman; so as to become both their laughter, and their prey.
What was it that made the unjust Judge in the Parable to resolve of avenging
the Widow of her enemies? but a fear, least by her continual coming she should
weary him, Luke 18. 5. The Original word (...) is very emphaticall, which Beza
renders, Ne me obtundat; least she should beat or buffet him. It is the same
with that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 9. 27. I keep under my Body, and bring it into
subjection, alluding to the Roman Cestus, in which kind of Fight, or Cuffs, it
was the aim of the adversary to bring each other to stoop and fall under his
blows. Yea our Savior seems to ascribe a more prevailing power to
importunity then to friendship, that the one will extort what the other cannot
entreat, Luke 11. 8. I say unto you, though he will not rise and give him
because he is his friend, yet because of his importunity he will rise and give
him. Can it then be matter of wonder to any Christian, as if some strange thing
had befallen him, to find himself not only tempted to evil, but incessantly
pressed with vehemence to the doing of it? Or need he, as not knowing the cause
of his trouble inquire as Rebekkah did, Why am I thus? Is not Satan a subtle
enemy? and is it not his designed aim to make the life of every believer
uncomfortable, or unholy? the one by an irksome importunity to evil, the other
by a consent and yielding to the doing of it? Is it not one of his ar^s and
methods to work a despondency in those that resist him, by continuing his
assaults after a long and tedious conflict, in which they have born up against
him, that so despairing to be Conquerours, they may yield themselves Captives?
yea has he not by this policy staggered many Christians; so as to make them
say, Malum illud verbum, victus sum, that evil word (as Parisiensis calls it) I
am overcome? and so to choose rather to do the sin, then any longer to endure
the trouble of his assaults. True it is happily that such who have not
experienced the continued violence of Satan's instigations in this kind, of
putting them upon the Commission of a particular sin, may judge it no hard task
to persist in the denial of it, and to turn a deaf ear to all his
Solicitations and Importunity, it being easy to conceive many things to be
more facile then we find them to be when assayed. But to them who thus think,
let me recommend a due weighing of these three considerations.

First, The frailty and weakness of the Flesh; which can as ill bear long
temptations, as long afflictions: What the length of afflictions will expose
unto, David hints to us, when he says, The rod of the wicked shall not rest
upon the lot of the righteous, least the righteous put forth their hands unto
iniquity, Psalm 125. 3. And will not the rod of the wicked one do as much by
its long continuance? The Devil knows (says Luther) that we are earthen
Vessels, which cannot always bear multiplied knockes, and violent strokes;
and therefore those of whom he cannot obtain his will by force, and fraud, he
seeks to overcome by a continued importunity, and this way he vanquisheth
many, who want patience to endure, though they have at first courage to resist.

Secondly, The art that Satan mingleth with his violence; His urgency, is not
to a course and way of sin, but to the single act and commission of it. That
which is often repeated and said over by him in his pressing of it, is, do it
but once, try this time only, Why not once? Why not now? Is it not better to
ease our selves of the vexation by yielding once to the motion, then to be
always under it? He knows that if a sin be once committed it will leave a
proneness to do it again: and if the terrors of doing of it, which are commonly
greatest at first, be once broken through, it will not be a matter of
difficulty to obtain the consent to the doing of it the second and third time,
because the heart must needs be less bent against it in Prayer, and the power
of grace and faith less vigorous to resist it, when weakened by yielding to
sin, Conscience also less tender and affected with the sense of it.

Thirdly, The inequality of temper which is in the best; Grace that makes the
opposition to Temptations, that are both violent and long, does not always
work alike in the Soul, no more then the Pulse beats alike in the Body; it
has sometimes operations that are quick and strong, and at other times such as
are slow, and languid, there being none that stand quite out of the shadow of
sin, though out of the region of death. Can it therefore be an easy work to
bear up against Satan's pressing instigations unto evil, when the spiritual
part is often clogged, and made less active by the Flesh, yea, when it is
weakened by its treachery? Surely were it not that the bowels of Christ were
moved in him unto his when in such a condition, as he was toward Peter when
Satan desired to have him, that he might sift him as wheat, their faith would
fail. Let me then bespeak compassions for all those, who labor under restless
importunities of the Tempter, days, months, years, prompting them to some
one sin, being no more able to flee from them then to outrun themselves, or to
cast them off, then to shake off their own Flesh. To any that have tasted the
sweetness of holiliness, what can be more hateful then daily instigations to
sin? And to such who understand the blessedness of Communion with God, what can
be more bitter, then to find themselves fast chained as it were to a Devil, who
makes such applications of vile objects to their fancy continually, that they
cannot turn in the least from? If it were burdensome to Antipheron Orietes,
whom Aristotle reports to behold always his own Image standing before him; how
irksome must it needs be to a gracious heart, to be always haunted with the
spectacle and image of some sin as black as Hell? May I not say then on their
behalf, what Hezekiah spoke by his messengers to Isaiah the Prophet, 2 Kings
19. 3. This day is a day of trouble, and of rebuke, and blasphemy, wherefore
lift up a Prayer for them: O Pray, that God would be their shield, and his
power might be manifested in their weakness, that the Evil one might not touch
them with any assimilating touch; who though he do molest them, may not yet
defile them; and though he fight against them, may not yet prevail over them;
but that with the temptation God would make a way to escape, that they may be
able to bear it.

SECT. III.
A Third Device and Policy of the Prince of darkness; Tenebrifer not Lucifer
(as Bernard styles him) is, a ceasing to tempt, or after some short conflict to
faigne a flight, not from necessity, but from design. It is said, Josh. 8. 15.
That Joshua and all Israel made as if they were beaten before the Men of Ai,
and fled by the way of the Wilderness: But it was to draw them from their
fenced City into the Power of an Ambush, set to ensnare them: And this among
other stratagems which Brasidas in Thucidides calls (...) belli, the thefts of
War, Satan often uses, dissembling a flight, that thereby he may the better
steal a victory, and bring unlooked for mischiefs upon those from whom he
seems to fly. Parisiensis says, it is omnium insidiarum periculosissima, of
all his snares and wiles the most dangerous: because that as he designs it for
evil ends, so it seldom misseth of success; few heeding to observe whether
his flight be pretended, or real; whether his ceasing to tempt be out of
skill, in order to some hidden design, or out of constraint caused by the
resistance of faith. I shall therefore endeavor to show: First, What Satan
aims at in his seeming flight: Secondly, How to distinguish it from that which
is real, and forced by the firm opposition which Faith makes against him, and
the victory that it obtaines over him.

First, By this Policy he seeks to infect, and swell the heart with pride,
which to keep down and destroy is one great end of Gods suffering his to be
tempted. Pride is a sin which it is hard to kill or to starve, so suitable a
Soil is the heart to nourish it above all other sins whatsoever, and so apt is
every occasion to make it put forth afresh; but nothing does more quicken and
actuate it then greater atcheivments. It is Tacitus his observation, Rebus
secundis etiam egregii duces insolescunt, Renowned Generals are puffed up with
success, especially against an enemy of repute and eminency. And is there any
adversary that can contribute more to his glory who puts him to slight, then
the great Dragon, that old Serpent, called the Devil and Satan? Is not he the
Prince of the Air, and the God of the World? are not his Territories full of
Captives, whom he has miserably enthralled? Has he not more Vassalls then
Christ has Subjects? Must it not then be matter of just glory and triumph, to
defeat and overcome him, by whom such multitudes are vanquished? But yet as he
that striveth must strive lawfully; so he that glories must glory lawfully,
which must be in the Lord, in the power of whose might he is made strong, else
his glorying will be both his sin and snare. And this Satan so fully
understands, as that in the heat of a Temptation he makes certain Cessations
and unexpected retirements, on purpose to deceive by the vain hopes of a
supposed victory. And are not many by this deceit lifted up, as if their
Conflict were at an end, and the Field wholly won by them? Do they not pride
and please themselves in thinking how they shook off the infernal Viper with as
much ease, and as little hurt to themselves, as Paul did that Viper that came
from the bundle of sticks, and fastened on his hand? Do they not slight others
who complain of long and sore temptations with which they are buffeted, as if
they did spring rather from their weakness, than the power of the Tempter? Oh
when men thus set imaginary Crowns on their own heads, how unlike are they to
those holy Elders who cast their Crowns before the Throne of God, saying, Thou
art worthy O Lord to receive glory, and honor, and power? And how like unto
him whom they think they have foiled? By being tainted with that sin of pride
which cast the Angels out of heaven, and condemned them to be reserved in
everlasting Chains under darkness unto the judgment of the Great Day.

Secondly, By this Art he seeks to induce a spirit of security, and to possess
the heart with vain presumption of a future peace and freedom from his
assaults, than which nothing can prove more fatal to a Spiritual Warfare. That
saying of Epicharmus, (...), Remember to distrust, is more useful Counsel to
none than to a Christian when not frowned upon by the World, nor molested by
Satan; for changes will come both from the one and the other: The World will
prove a false Friend, the Devil a true Tempter. After three sharp repulses
given him by our Savior, he departed only for a season, Luke 4. 13. And can we
expect that he will be beaten out of heart, and made a Coward by us? When
resisted, and put to slight again and again, he will return, if not to conquer,
yet to vex. But nothing will more hasten his return than a drowsy security,
that is the season which he watches for, that is the end of his ceasing to
tempt, and his seeming departure; and when he finds us, like the men of Laish,
living careless and at ease, Judge. 18. 7. then he smites, not as the good Angel
did Peter, to awaken him, Acts 12. 7. but, as the fierce Danites, to kill and
destroy as much as in him lies. Then it is that he sows those noxious tares
that come up afterward to the prejudice and hurt of the good Seed, Mat. 13.
25. Then it is he comes and brings seven worse Spirits with him, making the
last state of that man more miserable than the first, Luke 11. 26. Let none
therefore please themselves in a sinful ease and rest from temptations, as if
the work were wholly done, when in truth nothing is done; but let them look how
they come by it, and examine whether it be not a practice of the Enemy, rather
than a reality; whether it spring not rather from a ceasing of the Tempter to
stir, than from a victory obtained against him, now how to difference the one
from the other is the next particular that I am to descend unto.

To find out therefore the truth of the one from the imposture of the other, I
will set down briefly these three Rules.

First, Look what means and ways of resistance have been used to put Satan to
flight; Have instant prayers been made to God? Have the goings out against him
been in the power and might of Christ? Has the Sword of the Spirit, which is
the Word of God, been set against the motions of sin, and the pressing
instigations of the Tempter? What is it that has at any time been done to put
a period to the Conflict? For as Livy says, Stultitia est, sedendo, ac votis
debellari credere posse: It is a folly to believe that by sitting still, and
naked wishes, Enemies can be conquered and overthrown: Victory attends upon the
diligent and industrious, not upon the slothful. If then temptations vanish and
disappear we know not how, and that no account can be given of the Calm and
Peace that we do enjoy, as the fruits of prayer and other means used for the
obtaining of it, we have cause to be jealous that the freedom and rest we have
is but an Artifice of the Adversary to make us secure, and thereby the more
easily to ensnare us: Nemo enim celerius opprimitur, quam qui nihil timet; none
being sooner vanquished than he who fears nothing.

Secondly, When ever Satan is really worsted, sin is wounded. He is never put
to flight but Lust receives a mortifying blow, for the fight is both made and
maintained by Faith, and other graces of the Spirit, which carry in them more
immediate opposition unto sin than unto Satan, it being the great work of every
one that is begotten of God to keep himself that the wicked one touch him not,
1 John 5. 18. Not that he tempt him not, but that he defile him not by any
assimilating touch: And this is the only way by which a Believer can be said
both to resist him, and also to overcome him; we cannot kill the Devil, nor
weaken in the least his power, but as we mortify Lusts which are the matter
that he works upon, and the less of it he finds in us, the less able he is to
hurt us. If therefore a Temptation go off, and the heart be not set more
against sin, so as to loath and hate it, which is an interpretative murder of
sin, as well as of our Brother, 1 John 3. 15. So as to pray and watch more
against it, we cannot well conclude our rest and ease to be good when it wants
grace as its companion, and the quiet fruits of righteousness as its evidence,
Heb. 12. 11.

Thirdly, When the wicked one is overcome and driven to a flight, there will
abide upon the soul a lively senseof so great a mercy, which will manifest it
self in a deep apprehension of those treacheries, and deceits that the heart
did abound with in the hour of trial, and a self abhorrency for them in an
humble and thankful acknowledgment of strength and power from Christ, whereby
it is unable to fight a good fight, and to obtain an happy victory, in a
careful treasuring up the experience it has had of Gods faithfulness in its
greatest straits, in a timely preparation and laying in of spiritual provisions
for another concounter, as knowing that its warfare will not be completed till
it come to heaven. These, and such like effects, are the issues of those
Temptations in which Satan is put to flight, and the ground of it is, because
it is done in the exercise of those means and graces of the Spirit as always
leaves the soul in a better temper than it found it.

SECT. IV.
A Fourth device of this spiritual Abaddon is touching the end and the means
wherein he puts cheats upon thousands, either by dividing between the one and
the other, or by busying them in the use of false and ineffectual means to
attain it, or by causing them to use good means in an undue and sinful manner.

First, It is a piece of Satan's Sophistry to separate between the means and the
end, and to make men to presume, that though the one be neglected the other may
be obtained; to this folly he would have tempted our Savior, Mat. 4. 6. When
he set him upon the Pinnacle of the Temple, he would have persuaded him to have
cast himself down, and there given a proof both of his Sonship and Gods
fatherly care of protecting of him, but as it is a sin to distrust God in the
want of means, so it is no lesser sin to presume to be saved without them when
they may be had; It is not an honoring of God by an absolute trust in him, but
a tempting of him by a wanton pride in subjecting his power to act and work
according to our pleasure; but yet though Christ has armed men against this
Sophism of the Tempter by his own example, who would not betake himself to
reliance on God for safety in an extraordinary way, when not debarred of the
common and usual way. How great are the number of those (...), who tempt God by
unwarrantable practices, throwing themselves into needless dangers and
extremities that his power may appear in their deliverance and preservation?
Cassian I remember tells a Story of three persons, who in the confidence of
Gods providing for them took a tedious journey into a Desert, in which two of
them miserably died with hunger, the third only returned as a sad spectacle of
their folly. And Brentius has a Relation of an Anabaptist Woman, who invited
many Friends to Supper, but took no care to have any thing to set before them,
fondly presuming that the Table should be furnished by God. But what are these
presumptions, in which men thus divide between the end and the means, any other
than the scorn and laughter of those who deride their folly, and yet through
the seduction of the Devil become guilty of far greater. When they are
Confident of heaven, and Careless of holiness, they are secure of the end, and
yet tread not one step in the way that should bring them to it. Are not these
as vain as those who expect a Harvest without a Seeds time? Can any perish with
more clear selfconvictions of Gods Justice in condemning them than these? Do
they need to look into the Decrees of God to see the roots of their
miscarriage? Or into their own Consciences? May not they say, the Serpent has
beguiled them, while they have hearkened to his Counsels, who was a liar, and a
murderer from the beginning?

Secondly, The subtilty of Satan, touching the end and the means, is seen in
his putting of men upon the pursuit of those ways and mediums, which do not in
the least serve or conduce to that end for which they are used: So that though
the intended end be good, yet they fall as equally short of it, as those who do
nothing at all to obtain it, and are like misguided Patients, who by their
Medicines are not cured, but killed. And who can count the thousands, or rather
Myriads, that are held under the power of this delusion of the Devil? May we
not ask the most of those who busy themselves in seeking a state of happiness,
why do you lay out your money for that which is not bread? Or why are you as
those who build in the fire, where the structure consumes as fast as it is
raised? Let us look abroad a little, and see if it be not a truth: And shall we
need to take a view of that strange and sudden spread of Mahumetanism? Where
the Seductions of a brutish Impostor have prevailed to the deluding of Nations
and Kingdoms, who have subjected themselves to his Laws, and are drunk with the
expectation of his carnal promises? Or shall we confine our Prospect to the
Roman Profession of Religion? Who though they impropriate salvation to
themselves, and exclude all others, who come not within the Pale and Verge of
their Church, have yet dangerously swerved from the rule and path of life.
Harlot-like they have laid the dead Child in the room of the living Child,
their own corrupt Fancies and Inventions in the place of Gods Institutions, and
in the observation of lying vanities forsake their own mercies. God has set in
the Church, not as a trimmed Lamp in the Sanctuary, but as the fixed Sun in the
Firmament, the good Word of his Truth, to discover fully the knowledge of his
Will, which is the just measure of all that obedience which he both requires
and rewards: But they in this great Luminary have found, what some Astronomers
have of late discovered in the Sun, Vultum maculis infectum, A face stained
with dark spots; and therefore charging it with obscurity and defectiveness
have betaken themselves to unwritten traditions to be the guide and rule of
their Faith as well as the Word, though all the light in them be but as the
blaze of a Candle in the Socket that is neither sweet nor certain. God has
styled himself, A God hearing prayer, and that unto him all flesh shall come,
Psalm. 65. 2. But they have imparted this Divine Honor to Saints, for which
they have neither Precept, Promise, or Example in the Scripture, robbing God of
the glory of his goodness, whose arms are always stretched out to receive
those that come to him in Christ's name, whose bowels are ever yearning toward
their necessities, and ready to prevent their prayers with his bounty. And then
what need can there be of heavenly Courtiers to render him more propitious to
the fulfilling of their requests? God has made eternal life to be of Grace,
not of Works, that it might be sure, it is his gift, Romans 6. 23. It is his
Promise to them that love him, James 1. 12. Fecit se nobis debitorem non
aliquid anobis accipiendo, sed omnia promittendo: He has (says St. Augustine)
made himself a Debtor, not by receiving ought from us, but by promising all
unto us. But they going about to establish their own righteousness, have chosen
rather to plead their title unto it by way of right and justice, and to assert
a dignity and value in their Works, to which the reward is due, not of Grace,
but of Debt: Can we think these are apt Mediums to bring the Soul and Salvation
together? or that they are not rather as Chains of Glass more specious then
strong? Are they not artifices rather then realities, brought in by those, who
in the Apostles Dialect are seducing Spirits? 1 Timothy 4. 2. And embraced by
those who received not the love of the Truth that they might be saved? 2 Thessalonians.
2. 10 Have we not then just ground to depart from the Tents of these Men, as
Israel did from the Tabernacle of Korah, Dathan and Abiram, and to touch
nothing of theirs, least we be consumed in all their sins? They may return unto
us, but we cannot return unto them; according to Gods command to the Prophet,
Jer. 16. 19. Unless we should change the Truth of God into a lie, and serve the
Creature more then the Creator, who is blessed for ever.

Thirdly, The subtilty of Satan touching the end and the means, is seen, in
making men to miscarry in the use of right Means, by their using of them in an
undue manner, and so to fail of the end for which they are appointed by God.
And this is the way by which he prevails over multitudes of Professors, whose
Duties, though done, daily prove wholly fruitless in the issue, because of
their heedless manner of performing them. Prayer is the key of blessing, which
only opens the Treasures of heaven, both in regard of grace and comfort; and
yet how many ask and receive not, because they ask amiss? The echo does not
return an answer to every sound; no more does God to every Prayer. Duties
without life provoke God rather then please him; and gratify Satan rather then
trouble him. He cares not how much Men hear, or how often they Pray, if that he
can but allay their intention and fervency in both, either by distracting their
Minds, or deading their Affections, so as to make them the Sceletons of
duties, without a Soul to enliven and actuate them; naked forms, without any
power of Godliness. How contemptible does God speak of his own Institutions,
when done in a careless and loose manner? When Israel came to appear before
him, he asks who has required this at their hands to tread his courts? Isai.
1. 12. Incense is an abomination, New Moons and Sabbaths he cannot away with,
Verse. 13. He curses them as deceivers that have in their Flock a Male, and
sacrifice unto the Lord a corrupt thing, Mal. 1. 14. And threatens to spread
the dung of their Solemn Feasts upon their faces, Mal. 2. 3. Is it not then
matter of wonder as well as of complaint, that those who own the appointed
Ordinances of God to be the sole Rule of giving glory to him, and obtaining
good from him, should yet for the most part satisfy themselves in the doing of
Duties rather then in the fruits they reap from them? Is it not an
interpretative omission, though not a formal neglect, to make that to be the
task of the outward Man, which should be the employment of the whole Man; to be
the work of the Lip, which should be the service of the heart? Will a Prayer,
that is like an Arrow from a slack Bow, which never pierced the breast, ever
pierce the Heavens? Will the hearing of the Word, in which the running Sands in
the Glass are more eyed then the Minister, as giving hopes of a close, ever
convey its sweetness to such an hearer? Will a Sabbath that is spent only in
the forbearance of Bodily Labor, without any Ascentions of the Soul to God in
holy Meditation, or Breathings after him in servent Prayer, either fill a Man
with the fore-tastes of Heaven, or make the fruition of God in an eternal
Sabbath to be deemed as his only happiness? And yet such overlie Schemes, such
Bodily exercise, which profits not, are the Services which most give unto
God, presuming also that he is as well pleased with them as themselves, whilst
through the Devils craft, and the deceitfulness of their own hearts, they look
upon them as evidences to difference them from both the Profane, who reject
the thing that is good, and from the erroneous, who are led out of the right
way by the Fancies and Inventions of Men.

SECT. V.
A Fifth Device and Policy of Satan is his strange and artificial disguising
of objects, so as to make them to appear to be what they are not, yea, contrary
to what they are in truth, and reality. When Tamar designed to accompany with
Judah her Father-in-Law, she put her Widows garments off from her, and attired
her self as an Harlot, and sat in an open place, Genes. 38. 14. that she may
the better effect her purpose, and what the issue was the story tells us. So
oftentimes when Satan would allure and tempt to sin, he presents the object,
not in its natural dress, but clothed in such a manner, as best suites with
what he aims at, as may be easily seen both in his attractives unto evil, and
disswasives from good.

First, Evils which have a deformity inseparably cleaving unto them he hides
and palliates Virtutis minio (as Bernard speaks) by giving them a superficial
die and tincture of virtue, whereby he many times deceives the incautious, and
serves also the hypocrite with specious pretenses: How does the covetous
Person, whom the Lord abhors, Psalm 10. 3. please himself in his sordid
Parcimony, as if he only practiced frugality, and followed the Counsel of our
Savior, of Gathering up the fragments, that nothing be lost? John 6. 12. With
what a show of Religion does he deny bread to the hungry, and clothing to the
naked, whilst he shelters himself under the assertion of Paul, that if any
provide not for his own house he has denied the Faith, and is worse than an
Infidel? 1 Timothy 5. 8. And yet his hand is shrunk up toward the one, as well as
to the other. He turns away from the stranger under a pretended care of
Providing for his Family, and he robs them of their due necessaries, by making
thrift a Cloak for his avarice. Is not also the Laodicean, or lukewarm
Professor, under the like delusion, in regard of the apprehensions he has of
his spiritual estate? Who is it that prides himself more in his moderation and
discretion, as if he alone had hit the Golden Mean, and joined the wisdom of
the Serpent, and the innocence of the Dove together, being not overheated
through the fiery passion of zeal, nor frozen and stupid through the
dissoluteness of Atheism and Profaneness? And yet may not we say, that which
is highly esteemed among Men, is abomination in the sight of God? has he not
expressed how irksome such a temper is to him, when for this very cause he
threatens an whole Church to spew it out of his Mouth? Rev. 3. 16. Yea, and
seems to wish it rather to be wholly cold, then to have such an imperfect
participation of both the extremes; not but that cold is more remote from
heat then lukewarmness; but yet as it is a state, or condition, it is worse,
because Men are very rarely, and with great difficulty recovered out of it;
being like to those who lie in pleasant Dreams, and are loath to be awakned
out of them. It is Cassians observation, which the experience of others may
seal unto as a truth; Ex frigido saepe fit calidus, and calido quandoque
frigidus, at rarissime ex tepido sit calidus; That often times of cold one is
made hot; and of hot sometimes one returns to be cold; but seldom or never do
any from lukewarm come to be hot.

Secondly, As he allures to evil, by covering its deformity with his
artificial Paint and Varnish, so as to entitle it to the name of a virtue,
rather then of vice, or sin; much like to a deceitful Coyner that stamps the
Kings Image upon his spurious Metal, to make it pass the more unsuspected: So
on the other hand, when he would dissuade from good, he represents it under the
most contemptible form and appearance, to create such prejudices and dislikes
against it, as may cause them to apprehend that it is naturally of that
complexion in which it appears to them; that by this means Men may scorn the
Profession of it, rather then embrace the Practice of it, and look upon it as a
thing that rather detracts from their worth and esteem, then adds ought to it.
No broken glass can render a beautiful Face more distorted and misshapen,
either by multiplying the parts, or misplacing of them, then he does the most
amiable things of grace and holiness. Is it not through Satan's subtilty that
Religion it self has such an unpleasant aspect in most Men's eyes? Is it not
through the mists that he raises that it seems to be a dark and opake body,
and not a bright and glorious Luminary, which fills the breast in which it is
seated with light and peace? It is he that suggests to the Atheist, that to
disdain it is a piece of reason; and to the Profane, that to neglect the
Profession of it, though they own the Principles of it, is a point of
Gentility. It is he that makes the World judge the zealous Christian to labor
of a Phrenzy, and the patient Man, that bears injuries without revenge, to be
a coward and stupid Person, that resents not affronts; and he that exercises
self-denial to his unruly appetite, and curbes with a strong reine the desires
of the Flesh, to be no better then a Stoicall Fool, who seeks to reduce Men
to the condition of stocks and stones, and to extirpate all affections as
excrescencies of Nature, rather then to cherish them as its genuine offspring.
O how powerful are the arts and effascinations of this infernal Magician, who
can thus make Men best pleased with that estate, in which they are rebels to
God, and slaves to lusts; and from which they can expect nothing but
amazements, horrors, and distractions of mind, which will at one time or other
afflict those who prostitute their Consciences to such impieties, as have in
them the highest mixture both of folly and madness? Have we not need to mind
Men of Christ's Counsel, Judge not according to the appearance, but judge
righteous judgment, John 7. 24. When so many easily fall in love with gilded
abominations, and greatly disesteem and scorn what is truly noble and Divine,
by the uncouth vizards that are put upon it? Have we not need to set before
Men's eyes that Woe that is denounced against them that call evil good, and
good evil, that put darkness for light, and light for darkness, Isai. 5. 20.
When not a few are under the power of strong delusions, and believe a lie?
Surely it is not unnecessary in this Age of prodigious looseness, wherein this
imposture of Satan has so far prevailed, as that it is thought plea enough to
defend the worst of Debaucheries, and to vindicate them from censure, by the
putting upon them some gay name; which is much at one, as if a Leper should
expect to be reputed clean, because he has covered his foul Ulcers with costly
Clothing: or as if a Patient should be in love with his disease because the
Physician calls it by some name which he has on purpose invented to please his
fancy.

SECT. VI.
A Sixth Device, or Machination (which like the net cast on the right side
takes multitudes; or like the Bow of Jonathan, and the Sword of Saul, never
returns empty) is Satan's ensnaring of all sorts of Persons in the use of
lawful things. The Adage is not more common then true, Licitis perimus omnes;
that we are undone by lawful things, rather then by sins: the smooth and
deceitful stream carries mo^e to the whirlpoole, which irrecoverably sucks
them in, then the rough and loud waters, which affright Passengers from
venturing upon them; Oh this is a great snare. Many Men can give no account of
Time, Parts, States; but Hunting, Drinking, Hawking, etc. Satan by his art and
cunning making Men to transgress the bounds in the use of Pleasures,
Recreations, nay even necessary things. Therefore take heed what you do, or how
you walk, and be sure to set boundaries to your selves, remembering that excess
may turn that which is good into an absolute evil; eating may become gluttony,
industry in a Man's Calling may become covetousness, recreations may become
looseness, when they are unbounded, and not according to the rule and Warrant
of the Word.

An Advertisement to the Reader.
When the Reverend Author of this Discourse had gone thus far, in giving this
Work his last hand, it pleased God to p^t an end to his Conflict and Labors,
and to call him to rest in another World. Now because it has been an old trick
(not to this day mended, though often complained of) to thrust forth Books into
the World, either for Credit, or Profit, or some other design, under the Names
of such Persons as might make them more passable. Therefore it was thought sit
to give this Advertisement.

First, That the Authors own fair Copy reached no farther then the beginning of
this Section.

Secondly, That the rest that follows, is only a collection out of his loose
Papers and Notes; but it is all his own, without any Addition. Accept therefore
(good Reader) what is here essayed toward the completing this Work, out of
his own Papers; which if the Author had lived to finish, thou would have had
more large and exact. The two last generals which are propounded Chapter II,
are wholly omitted, because nothing could be found about them in his own Papers.

SECT. VII.
THe seventh Wile of Satan is, suiting his temptations to the Ages and
Conditions of men.

First, Unto Ages: He observes Young Years, Middle Age, Old Age; so also to the
Ages in Christianity, as the Apostle John shows, 1 Epist. c. 2. 12, 13, v.
where he writes to Babes, Young men, and Fathers, as those that are subject
unto several temptations, and so had need be cautelous.

1. Young men he tempts to Lust and Wantonness, therefore Paul bids Timothy
flee youthful lusts, 2 Timothy 2. 22. And O that I might prevail with young men to
possess their Vessels in holiness, and to remember their nature is that nature
Christ has taken on him. It is the Apostles Argument, 1 Cor. 6. 19. Your
bodies are the Temples of the Holy Ghost.

2. He tempts middle Ages to a (...), he stirs up an itch of honor, and of
being some great ones, of building their Families, and laying foundations of a
name; and in this very snare many are caught, who by this very temptation have
their thoughts, and minds so possessed, as that they wilfully resist light, and
put themselves upon courses, that turn away their hearts from God. It is the
thought, and project of many a man, that after he has feathered his neast, and
done so, and so, he will bethink himself of his soul. Thus sundry of the Popes
sought the Popedom by unlawful Arts, especially Sylvester the Second, etc.

3. He has temptations for Old Age (...), Covetousness, Peevishness.

Secondly, He observes the Condition of men as well as their Ages, and
Constitutions, the Estates in which men are set. If men be afflicted and sad in
Spirit, such he affrights with fears, and fancies, that are as ghastly as the
evils themselves; A melancholy person, whose fancy is like a broken Glass, he
fills with Jealousies, Surmises, that make it swell as the Water of Jealousy
did the belly of the guilty woman. O a dark heart is Satan's shop to hammer his
temptations in. If a man is poor, then he tempts him to turn stones into bread,
as he did Christ when he was hungry. If rich, then to turn bread into stones,
that is the Devils Alchymy. Thus he works with men's States, Conditions, and
with their Humors, and Passions, as Agrippina, when she poisoned her Husband
Claudius, mingled the poison with the meat which he loved most.

SECT. VIII.
THe eighth device is, the insinuation of many suggestions and temptations in
such an indiscernable manner, and way, as that we cannot discern, and
difference them from the reasonings. and thoughts of our hearts, which if men
could, they would not so easily hearken unto. Bernard, in his 32. Sermon. on
Cant. says, Nulli hoc mortalium possibile puto, ut discernat inter morsum
serpentis and morbum mentis, I think, says he, it is scarce possible for any
man to put an exact difference between the biting of the Serpent, and the
concupiscence and pravity of the mind. So again in the same place, Non accepi
fateor, unde assignem certam notionem inter partum cordis, and seminarium
hostis. I have nor, says he, attained to assign any distinction between the
Birth the heart travels with, and the evil Tares the Enemy sows and casts in;
it is most uncertain what I should attribute to my self, what to him. Now if
Satan can thus cast in suggestions, in such an insensible manner, he must needs
gain an advantage, because this way the gates of the soul are more readily
opened to him. If men did apprehend such and such suggestions came immediately
from the Devil, they would abhor to yield or hearken to them.

But when they apprehend them to be nothing but motions, and desires arising in
themselves, they are more apt to entertain a parley, and to comply with them. If
Peter, when he tempted Christ to spare himself, Mat. 16. 22. had conceived it
had been from the Devil, certainly he would never have said it; but he looked
upon it only as the stirring of his own affection. If David had thought, that
the provocation to number the People had sprang from Satan, he would not have
been so earnest in it. But that which makes this Wile of Satan more dangerous,
is, that though he have many times circumvented us in this kind, yet we know
not how to beware of him. If one through show of Friendship, or through
slattery has been injurious to us, we can ever after beware of him, and not
admic him to counsel us; but here it is otherwise. When Satan has come to day,
and deceived us in this kind, he may come again to morrow, and do it, because
we cannot discern between his suggestions, and our own thoughts. Yet we may
suspect them, when we find that they are (1.) Against nature, such where the
very shadow of a thought peeping out strikes the flesh into a trembling. (2.)
When sudden and violent like lightning. (3.) When without reasonings, being
accompanied with importunity.

But the best remedy against this Wile is not to be curious in the search to
distinguish between his suggestions, and our concupiscence, but to be careful
not to consent, and to remember Omnis mali cogitatio, est antiqui serpentis
caput, (as Parisiensis out of Jerome speaks,) that evil thoughts are the head of
the old Serpent.

SECT. IX.
THe ninth Wile, which is a very great subtilty and device of Satan, is in his
delusions about Doctrine, in seducing and drawing men a side into error by
plausible Opinions and Doctrines, that seem to come near the Scripture in show,
and being like unto it as Alchymy is like Gold. Such are, as Epiphanius says
of the Cantharides, Auricolores, but they spit poison venenum ejaculantur. A
pregnant instance of this we have, 2 These. 2. 1, 2. and 1 Pet. 4. 7. Some false
Teachers (for Satan has his Apostles and Ministers as well as Christ) came
with the plausible Doctrine of Mortification; For what could tend more to
Mortification than the thoughts of the nearness of the Day of Judgment; and to
strengthen this opinion, they pretend they came to the knowledge of this truth,
partly by Revelation from the Spirit, partly by computing the Years, and partly
by something the Apostles had written. Now, what was there in this opinion that
was hurtful? Two things may be said for it, (1.) That it is an opinion that
comes very near the Scripture; does not Peter say almost the same thing, Be
sober and watch, the end of all things is at hand, (...). Nay, does not Paul
say the very self-samething, 1 Cor. 10. 11. The ends of the World are come.
(2.) It tends much to Mortification, and the practice of holiness, Do you think
men would not live holily if they did apprehend the Day of Judgment near, that
it would be shortly? Would not this keep down abundance of corruption? How does
Jerome profess himself overawed with this, that he thought he heard the sound of
the last Trumpet whatsoever he was a doing?

But to discover this Wile, let me again tell you two things: (1.) Wherein it
differs from the Scripture. (2.) To show the danger of it.

First, It differs from Scripture thus, the word Peter uses is (...),
appropinquat, approaches; and so Paul says, the ends of the world are coming.
But the word Paul expresses their opinion by is (...), instat, it shall be upon
them living, hoc anno, as Grotius says, this year; and so the word is in other
places used for things present, 1 Cor. 3. 22. (...), all are yours, things
present, Romans 8. 38. Now they said the day of the Lord is upon us; it is a
word, as Grotius says, noting proximity, nearness. So that their drift was to
bring the day of the Lord within such a small space, as within a year or few
months.

Secondly, Wherein lay the danger of it, what got Satan by it? To show the hurt
of this opinion, he might aim at three things by it.

1. It might occasion liberty in sin, some might reason as they 1 Cor. 15. 13.
Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall dye. The rage of wicked and
ungodly men might put them into excess of riot, Rev. 12. 12. Satan himself has
great rage, knowing his time is but short: and so wicked men, when they know
their time is but short, that they have but a little space to take their fill
of sin in, they might be brought to a greater animosity against what was good,
and to a greater excess in all that was evil.

2. It might work a great deal of consternation, and dejection in weak
Christians, whom the very thoughts of so great and sad a day approaching might
either with trembling, or fear, or many jealousies overwhelm.

3. The main end was this, to weaken the authority of Scripture; admit but a
lie in Scripture, and all its Authority will fall to the ground. Let it be once
entertained or taught by Scripture or divine Revelation, that Christ shall come
at such a time, and this time not answering, now faith comes to be weakened; as
the delay of Christ's coming bred scoffing in some, 2 Pet. 3. 4. and made others
say, there is no Resurrection, or that it is past already.

And thus Augustine, in his 80 Ep. writing to Hesichius, that was troubled in
this kind, and apt to think the day of judgment might be such a time, thus
advises him, to beware how he leaned to such opinions, reproaches and
insultations of enemies, Multos infirmos a Christiana fide avertentium, dicendo
tam fallaciter regnum esse promissum, quam fallaciter dicebatur cito esse
venturum. That many weak ones would be drawn by them from the Christian Faith;
and they would say there was no more certainty in the thing it self than in the
Prediction, that it should be so suddenly; And he adds, Qui dicit dominum
citius esse venturum optabilius loquitur sed periculosius fallitur. The
Doctrine of Christ's speedy coming is more desirable, but the mistake is more
dangerous. So that the danger is in this, a man may call in question many other
truths, as well as them which before he thought he did believe. Therefore let
me speak to you that are Christians, do not think those Doctrines that seem to
come near, and be like the Scripture, may presently be entertained, or
hearkened to, but be sure that they come up to the Scripture, and be adaequate
to the Rule, if not, they are in no wise to be hearkened unto.

O that we had in this kind the Zeal and Affection of our Forefathers, who did
contend for the truth, that they would not lose an Iota, one tittle of it. The
Council of Nice would not gratify Arrius in a Letter, (...) and (...), he
would grant Christ was of a like, not of the same substance. By the sound he
seemed to come near the truth. But as two men upon the top of two Mountains
seem so near they can shake hands, but must go a great way before they meet. So
it is here, they seem near the truth in words, but were a great way off it. And
so the Nestorians in acknowledging the Virgin Mary (...), not (...), a letter
only changed, but made a wide difference; and so the Latin and Greek Church,
in the procession of the Holy Ghost, differed in a Preposition. The Greek would
grant the Holy Ghost to proceed by the Son (...), not (...); and so for the
filioque added to the Nicene Creed. Truth must not be lost by things that come
near it; if any Doctrine come not up to the Scriptures, it must be rejected. If
it go beyond them, it is straw and stubble on the foundation. If it fall short,
it is error also. Remember that corrupt opinions, like Changelings, are many
times laid in the place of the right Child, which is Truth. O foolish
Galatians, says the Apostle, who has bewitched you that you should not obey
the truth? a Metaphor taken from those that use Witchery, and present false
shapes to the eyes, as the Witch of Eudor did the likeness of Samuel to Saul;
but remember this is a Wile of Satan, who himself abode not in the truth, Joh.
8. 44. Labor to have the Signature of all Divine Truths imprinted on your
minds. Veritas animae pabulum, as Lactantius calls it, Truth is the food of the
soul. It is Sponsa humani intellectus, ex ea generat sobolem, as Parisiensis,
the Spouse of the Understanding, by which it has issue. It is a part of that
Armor the Apostle calls Armor of light. Converse then much with God the
Father of Lights, James 1. 17. with the Word, which is a Book of light; with
the Saints, the Children of light, if you would escape this Wile.

SECT. X.
THe tenth Subtilty of Satan when these things will not do, then under pretense
of setting up the Spirit, and Revelations, he labors to cry down the Word of
God, and all the ordinary Ministerial Officers Christ has appointed in his
Church, and all Doctrines and Explications of Scripture are cashiered and
rejected. These are (...). Our first worthy reformers found a bitter conflict
herein: For they no sooner had prevailed to restore the Gospel, and expel the
darkness of Popery in Germany, and other parts, but straitway Satan sows his
Tares; they called those that adhered to the Scriptures, Vocalistae,
Literalistae, Vocalists, Literalists; and hereby they made the work of
Reformation odious, as Eli his Sons made the Sacrifices of the Lord to be
abhorred. And as in Superstitious times he kept down the truth by Superstition,
and pompous Ceremonies, so in times of Reformation by pretended Revelations,
and Teachings above the Word. And this the Apostle does much aim at when he
says, 2 Cor. 11. 14. That Satan transforms himself into an Angel of light.
This delusion I speak the rather of, because that in these times wherein
Reformation has been much pretended, the World by pretenses of Revelations,
and impulses of the Spirit, has cast off the Word. This Art he improves two
ways:

First, Some are mere pretenses, when wicked and wretched miscreants do on
purpose, and knowingly use this way as a pretense to color all their
wickedness. Thus Mahomet, to color his wickedness in the seducing the people,
pretended the fits of the Falling sickness he was troubled with to be certain
Ecstacies and Ravishments, at the appearance of the Angel Gabriel, and the Dove
picking the Corn out of his Ear to be the appearance of the Holy Ghost. And
thus often times those who use such cursed pretenses come to be admired, and
esteemed, who else would have been accounted as naught. As Augustine speaks of
two Donatists, Primianus, and Maximianus, that if they had not taken that way,
Primianus might have been Postremianus, and Maximianus might have been
Minimiamus.

Secondly, He improves this subtilty by deluding the fancies of men with a
concurrence of pride, and selfadmiration, so as to entertain thoughts that none
know so much of God, nor have such secret Communion with him as they, and that
thereby they have sundry particulars above all the world revealed to them. Thus
some have magnified themselves in particulars, that have been revealed to them,
that have come to pass.

Acosta the Jesuit tells us of one that was a very great Scholar, that
through delusions and fancies fell into such a conceit, as he believed he had
holiness given unto him above Angels, and that he was the Savior of the world
in regard of efficacy, and Christ in regard of sufficiency; that he had the
Hypostatical Union offered to him, and that he did refuse it. Thus Satan puffs
men up with pride, that he may make them instruments of confusion and ruin to
the Church. Therefore as an Antidote against this keep to the Word, 2 Pet. 1.
19. You have a more sure word of Prophecy. Notwithstanding all Satan's
Stratagems to adulterate it by Heretics, to destroy it by Tyrants, to debase
it by profane scoffing at it, yet hold to the Word, ad Legem, and testimonium,
if they speak not according to them, it is because there is no light in them.

SECT. XI.
THe eleventh Wile, by which Satan wins and allureth many to the hazard and
peril of their Eternal welfare, is by the working many lying Signs, and
Wonders, and Miracles. That look as God, for the advantage of his Gospel, did
at the first publishing it confirm it with many Miracles, and Wonders, Heb. 2.
4. So Satan, for the facilitating a belief the better to his lies, and
falsehood, does put forth much of his power in the working of lying signs and
miracles. This the Scripture often expresses as a policy above all he almost
uses, Mat. 24. 24. For there shall arise false Christ's, and false Prophets,
and show many signs and wonders. Rev. 13. 13. 2 These. 2. 9. Where the coming of
that man of sin is described to be after the working of Satan, (...), with all
power, and signs, and lying wonders. Which words do imply, as I conceive, both
the manner, and means of Antichrists working. (1.) The manner of Antichrists
working is after the way and manner of Satan's working; that is, it holds
proportion unto that way that he uses to take. (2.) It is by the means of
Satan; he as a fast friend of Antichrist puts out his power in his behalf for
the working many lying signs and wonders: which are called lying signs and
wonders in two respects: (1.) In regard of their formality, they want that
which should constitute a true miracle. For a Miracle truly called, is the
doing some work extraordinary that runs into the senses exceeding the power of
any Creature, as to make the Sun stand still in the Heavens by a word, etc.
Now, all Satan's workings are but sometimes a deceiving of the sense, as
Pharaohs Magicians; sometimes a deluding of the fancy; sometimes there is an
exposing of secret things of nature to the sense of the Ignorant, who not
knowing the depths of nature, think it a wonder; sometimes by applying of
Actives to Passives, all which fall short of Miracles. (2.) They are called
lying in regard of the end of them, they tend to draw from the truth, and
therefore are not to be credited, Gal. 1. 8.

SECT. XII.
THe twelfth subtilty of Satan is to assault and afflict Christians with such
temptations as to their knowledge and experience are unheard of, which happily
they never heard any others to be tempted to, nor believe that ever any but
themselves have had experience of. This Parisiensis calls, Extraneitas
tentationis, temptations that they cannot parallel or sample. Now, when
Christians are exercised with such temptations, it exceedingly amazes them, as
new Engines and weapons, not before seen by Soldiers in former fights, do
amaze the Soldier, and take off his courage; and as new diseases, of which
Physicians have had no experience, do most pose and trouble them, and
oftentimes discourage both Patients, and Physicians. So oftentimes new
temptations do most amaze and sad the soul.

Hence come those complaints tempted ones do utter, No body was ever troubled
as I am, who was ever assaulted with such blasphemous thoughts, such
Atheistical injections, as I dare not speak or mention? Sure if I were not
worse than others, I could not have such thoughts; if I were not forsaken of
God, he would not suffer me to be thus tempted. But in this case you must
remember what Paul speaks to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 10. 13. There is no
temptation happened to you but what is common to man; I may truly say to such,
they think it new, yet it is that which some Christian or other have had
experience of. You know what Elias said to God, and what Gods answer was, Romans
11. 3. says he, I am left alone, and they seek my life. But what says the
answer of God unto him, I have reserved to my self seven thousand men, etc. So
you think you are alone in this or that temptation, but alas there are a
thousand in the Militant Church that are afflicted with the same temptations,
and Stratagems of Satan.

SECT. XIII.
THe thirteenth Wile is about holy duties, and that (1.) In putting us to do
good duties upon wrong ends, which wholly alter their property. It is a true
Axiom in Philosophy, Quod forma in naturalibus, finis in moralibus, What the
form is in naturals, the end is in morals. In moral things the end specificates
the action. Jehu's slaying Ahabs Children, was not obedience, but murder,
though done by Gods Command, Hos. 1. 4. God required it as a righteous
satisfaction to Justice, but Jehu did it out of ambition, therefore God says,
I will avenge the blood of Jezreel upon the house of Jehu. Alms are good when
they come like oil that makes no noise, but not when a Trumpet is blown before
them. Prayer is good when it comes from Zeal, but it is but howling when it
comes from lust, Hos. 7. 14. Worshipping God is good, but if it be for base
ends it is but self-seeking. Oh therefore look to all duties, God must not only
be the Object, but the End; Worship must have no end below it self.

Or (2.) Satan's VVile is, when he cannot hinder from duty, then he endeavors
to spoil them; he will excite to duties, but to do them unseasonably. It is the
commendation of a duty when it is done in season, Psalm. 1. The blessed man
brings forth his fruit in due season. Now, when he cannot put out the Candle,
he will make it sparkle and flair, as in Martha, Luke 10. 40, 41. or he will
turn affection the wrong way. The Jews were zealous for the Law, and he stirs
up that against the Gospel. Saul had a conscience of serving God, 1 Samuel 13.
12. and he forces him to offer Sacrifice. The Corinthians were at first too
remiss toward the Incestuous Corinthian, after too severe; he sees some heat,
and he drives it on too much; ^he will make us tyrannize in some service, and
some duties he will make tyrants unto us, his aim is by marrying Religion and
Tyranny to discourage men from Religion.

(3.) His design is to press Christians with some violent assault when they are
preparing themselves for duty, or to afflict them so in the duty, that it may
be rather their work to keep off the fowls from the Sacrifice, than to give up
themselves to God in the duty as they should do. Therefore he presses
Christians with extraordinary discouragements when they are to perform
extraordinary duty, that if he cannot keep them from ordinary, he may keep them
from extraordinary duties, and labors to make them so uncomfortable, as many
are afraid to perform them. Thus many are kept month after month, and year
after year, from ever meddling with the Sacrament (who will pray and hear,)
through the violent assaults of Satan, so that some have given over duties for
a kind of ease, rather than be so assaulted. All I shall say to this is,
whatever your discouragements are give not over.

Satan may imbitter a sweet duty by his temptations, but he shall not make it
ineffectual; while you are wrestling and striving, his design is but by this
violence to make you give over, to choose rather to walk in a kind of peace,
than to maintain a war in the performance of duty.

SECT. XIV.
THe fourteenth Wile is by suffering false remedies to prevail. The Devil
suggests these to keep men from the true, and tells men, as Samson did Dalilah,
if he be so and so used he shall be overcome. Thus the Jews used their
Phylacteries, as (...), remedies against enchantments. And those two
Commandments upon which Christ says hang the Law and the Prophets, the
Christians did, from the superstitious Jews, write them in Schedules, and hang
them about their necks, as little Gospels; but those were portanda in cord,
non in corpore, as Jerome says well upon Mat. 23. they were to be laid up in
the heart, not to be worn about the body. So the Papists use Salt, Spittle,
holy Water in their Exorcisms, but these the Devil, that hellish Leviathan,
esteems less than the Leviathan, in Job 41. 27. does of Iron, which he
esteems as straw, and of Brass as rotten wood. Beware then of his counterfeit
weapons; think not these things will affright the Devil, rather look up to God,
as David, who prays, that God would turn the counsel of Achitophel to
foolishness, 2 Samuel 15. 31.

SECT. XV.
THe fifteenth Wile, is by making false Syllogisms, by which he works upon the
guilt of conscience, and this consists in laying to our charge sins of omission
or commission, in which the Major or Minor is false. As now he will lay to our
charge many particular sins and corruptions committed by us, as pride,
hypocrisy, self-respects, and so many duties omitted, or done overly. Which
temptation if drawn in a Syllogism, either the first or second proposition is
false.

He in whom such sin raigns as hypocrisy is, is not the Child of God. But such
a one art thou, etc. the Minor here many times is false. It is true, a Child of
God cannot be an hypocrite, but he may have hypocrisy in him; the best way
therefore to resist this temptation, is to try whether hypocrisy reign in
thee, and this he will press by aggravating the evil, and extenuating the good,
that he may bring men into trouble. Sometime by making false Majors, as that to
relapse into the same sin is not compatible with grace, and for the trial he
gives false rules and standards to judge by. Thus he troubles weak Christians,
about their graces and comforts, by false Syllogisms. He aggravates their
imperfections in the former, tells them what falls they catch when they would
run; what distractions they meet with when they most intend their minds, and
how can Gods Eye, that is pure, behold these things with delight? Now to
discover the fallacy of this Argument: You must know, that as we are not to
place the strength of our confidence in our own righteousness, as if it would
abide the severity of Gods trial, For how can man be justified with God, Job
25. 4. So the perfection of our righteousness is not to be measured by the
perfectness of the work, but by the uprightness of the will, and sincerity of
the endeavor aspiring toward perfection. Every failing does not make a man an
hypocrite. Jehoshaphat had many failings, he made a League of amity with Ahab,
2 Chronicles. 18. 3. He went to Ramoth Gilead with him, notwithstanding Micaiahs
Prophecy against it, 2 Chronicles. 18. 27, 28. Though reproved by Jehu the Prophet
he joins in a special League with Ahaziah, Ahabs Son, 2 Chronicles. 20. 35. He
bestows his Son upon Ahabs Daughter, 2 Chronicles. 21. 6. Yet God reckons him a holy
man, 1 Kings 22. 43. It is said, He turned not aside from that which was right
in the sight of the Lord. If therefore obedience be interrupted, cast not away
your confidence. If any man sin we have an Advocate with the Father. You have
to do with a God, that will make thy works at last more than at first. So in
point of comfort he argues: If thou had faith thou would have joy and
peace; but thou have no joy, therefore no faith; for 1 Pet. 1. 8. Believing ye
rejoice. Now to answer this we are to know, that Faith is the root upon which
all true joy grows, it is the flower whereof that is the stalk, but it is not
always to be found flourishing upon it. There are three seasons when joy is
most eminent, and when God does most abundantly dispense it.

(1.) In young Christians, in Lambs whom he carries in his bosom, Isa. 40 11.
With joy and comfort that they may be strengthened. God would not carry Israel
by the way of the Philistims, Exodus 13. 17. Lest the people see war, and repent.

(2.) After great storms God makes broken bones to rejoice, Psalm. 51. 8. Make
me to hear joy and gladness, that the bones thou have broken may rejoice. After
storms come the greatest calms; after his Children have been in the Depths, the
greatest Exalrations.

(3.) When God calls men to witness his truth, Acts 27. 23. When Paul was to
appear before Caesar, God sends an Angel to comfort him. We must consider,
there may be the root when there is not the fruit; that which Faith is to look
at, is what the Gospel reveals. Now the Gospel does not reveal that we shall
have no sorrow or trouble, but that the Covenant of peace shall not be removed
from us, Isa. 54. 10.

SECT. XVI.
THe sixteenth Wile is to persuade Christians whom he does thus afflict to keep
his counsel, so as either through shame or fear they dare say nothing, like men
that have foul diseases, had rather dye than tell the Physician. Like the
Lacedemonian Boy, that suffered the Fox to eat out his bowels, and would not
reveal it; So many suffer temptations to eat out their hearts. Thus Satan
wounds, and would not have Christians complain; he tempts, and sollicites, and
would not have Christians to ask counsel, and so many times the burden falls
the heavier, and the wound smarts the more. Whereas if experienced Christians
were acquainted with them it might be a help to them; as Wind stifled in the
bowels of the Earth shakes it, but finding passage does no harm; so oftentimes
the very opening the Devils temptations is enough to scatter them. We should
therefore seek for remedy, by communicating our grief to wise Christians, that
will pray for us, and not deride us; and not gratify sin in that it loves so
well, viz. to be concealed and hid.

SECT. XVII.
THe seventeenth Wile, is to assault us in such temptations wherein we least
suspect our selves, and to which happily neither constitution, nor any custom
of ours carries us, but only the present occasion draws forth our corruption.
Thus men that are many times by nature patient, and exceeding pitiful, yet
suddenly transported into a passion, become cruel. Thus Theodosius the
Emperor, upon a mere passion, one of his Soldiers suffering an injury, put to
death at least three thousand in Thessalonica. Some of the Ancients are of
opinion, that the Devil stirred up the Israelites to make the Golden Calf that
he might put Moses in a heat, who was the meekest man, that so he might break
the Tables of the Law, and might not reprove their sin. Therefore suspect your
selves prone to every sin, do not repose any thing upon Constitution, etc.

SECT. XVIII.
THe eighteenth Wile, Hopes of returning out of sin by a speedy repentance, and
a timely revocation. But where is the promise of return? Are there not rather
dreadful threatenings, of permitting such to go on to final Apostasy? It is
easy to throw thy self headlong from the Pinnacle of the Temple, but thou
caust not stay thy self from falling without a Miracle; Our hearts are like
Spring-Locks, will shut of themselves, but will not open without a Key. Non est
laus stetisse in pinaculo, sed stetisse, and non cecidisse, as Augustine says:
It is is no commendation to stand on the Pinnacle, but to keep out standing, and
not to fall, when we are in such danger.

SECT. XIX.
THe nineteenth Wile, to keep raw, and smarting, any wounds, that the Spirit
has inflicted upon the conscience of any poor soul. True it is, Satan is not
able to afflict immediately and really the conscience of a man, no more than he
is able to comfort a man's conscience; as it is Gods Prerogative to know the
heart, so it is to afflict and comfort the heart. But yet Satan may help to
keep the wounds raw, by disturbing the fancy, and filling them with horror,
and terror; he may shake and rattle the Chains, though he cannot put them on
upon any poor soul, and thereby keep them from comfort which is their portion;
and therefore when terrors so affright, as to the prejudice of all medicines,
we may suspect the hand of Satan in them.

SECT. XX.
THe twentieth VVile is to draw aside the soul to some sin when it is in the
pursuit of some great mercy, or near the enjoyment of it, that so either their
hands may be weakened in the pursuit, and give over through the apprehensions of
their own guilt, which always weakens confidence, or else may help to spoil
the sweetness of it in the enjoyment. Thus when Israel was nigh the enjoying of
a great blessing, the Land that God had promised: Upon the borders they fall a
murmuring, by their hearkening to the Spies, who had brought an evil report
upon the Land, Number. 13. 32, 33. It is a Land that eats up the Inhabitants,
and the people that we saw in it were men of a great stature, and there we saw
the Giants, etc. So that hereby they neglected the duty, and let the mercy at a
low rate. So that those that are beggars, and expectants of any great mercy,
had need to be watchers too.

SECT. XXI.
THe one and twentieth VVile, to make the duties of a Christians general and
particular calling interfere and clash one with another. There is a double
calling in which every man is set: There is Vocatio ad faedus, and vocatio ad
munus; or as we use to speak, a general, and a particular calling, it is termed
our general calling, not only for its extent, but because the things we are
called to are but one and the same, and common to all; we are called to the
same duties, to the same promises, to the same profession, etc. The particular
calling is that in which men are not called to one and the same duty, but do
act according to several gifts, one in this employment, another in that. Now
both these are to be performed regularly, and this is the excellency of a
Christian when he so orders his particular calling, that it does not eat up the
time that is due to his general calling, and when he so orders his general
calling, as that it does not take away the time that God has allotted for his
particular calling; now Satan's great Art is to disturb Christians in the
performance of these. Some therefore are never quiet, but when they are
hearing, praying, etc. but their particular callings and relations they never
mind; this is Satan's design to disturb them by putting them upon prayer, when
diligence is required in their particular calling. O^h^rs he takes off from
hearing, and praying, and those duties which belong to Christians, as such,
under pretense they must provide for their Families; that so while they care
for their bodies, they may altogether neglect the care of the inward man.
Therefore know it is a great part of a Christians prudence, and that which
affords a great deal of comfort, duly to manage both callings, when you do not
let the time of your callings devour the time of your duties, but let your soul
have its portion of your time as well as your body. Separate then your souls
for a season to go up in the Mount, and converse with God, that you may be more
sit when you come down again to converse with men in your particular callings.

SECT. XXII.
THe two and twentieth, and last Wile, is that which the Text hints, an
endeavor of Satan to bring us from one extreme to another, that we may be kept
from the golden mean, wherein Grace stan^s as well as Virtue, which you know is
seated between two Vices, as Solomon's Throne was between two rows of Lions. And
this device he uses in matters of sin, in matters of duty, and in matters of
Doctrine.

In matters of sin. Thus the incestuous Corinthian, is first puffed up with
pride, and sins presumptuously, and then when by the Censures of the Church he
is awakened to see his sin, then he is well nigh swallowed up with sorrow.

In religious duties, first he tempts to a neglect of them, or such a rigorous
tyranny, that makes many to groan under them, and lie under woeful snares. And
this device he accounts the more prevalent, because we are apt to think often
times that the very work of grace lies in the highest opposition to that sin or
vice that sits heaviest upon our hearts, when as indeed sins and vices are
not only opposite to virtues, but one to another, be sure therefore remember
grace lies in a middle way. Sorrow for sin is not desperation, confidence in
God is not presumption, but the middle way, Faith leaves both extremes, and
closes with God according to the Rule of the Word.

So again in matters of Doctrine. Basil writing against Sabellius to overthrow
his Haeresie, uttered some inconvenient expressions about the Trinity. And
Augustine in his zeal against the Pelagians who slighted Baptism, was carried
out so that he became durus pater infantum, pronouncing those dying unbaptized
not to be saved. But I shall not insist any longer upon that second general,
the enumeration of Satan's VViles.

Chap. V.
Wherein are laid down several Antidotes against the Wiles of Satan.

THe next thing is to lay down some Scripture Antidotes and preservatives
against them. That may keep you, not from being tempted by Satan, but from
being touched by the evil one, as St. John phraseth it, 1 John 5. 17. That the
evil one touch you not, (...), it is the same word used 1 Cor. 7. 1. The evil
one does not touch him so as to produce his own Image and likeness upon him.
Though I undertake not such Antidotes and preservatives as shall totally free
you from his Wiles, yet I shall lay down Antidotes against his poison. Such
premonitions against his subtilties, such Scripture Armor against his rage and
malice, as will, if used, keep you from being overcome by him.

SECT. I.
CHristian Sobriety and Watchfulness. This we have from the Apostle Peter, 1
Pet. 5. 8. Be sober, be vigilant, because your adversary the devil goes about
like a roaring Lion, etc. Sobriety stands in a moderation toward the things of
this life. Pleasures, Riches, Honors, they are the usual baits with which
Satan hides all his hooks, and temptations, that so they may not be easily
discerned, and an immoderate thirsting, a keen eager appetite after these
things, is the ready way to bring a Believer into the midst of snares. They
that will be rich, says the Apostle, 1 Timothy 6. 9. whose desires and appetites
are filled with the great things of the world, fall into many snares: Sometimes
to strain their consciences by deceit; sometimes to do evil actions, it may be
to make the stream of their actions great by the blood of others. But now as we
must be sober in tempering our hearts, and affections, so we must be watchful,
which is a duty required of us as Christians, but indispensably necessary as we
are Christian Soldiers, engaged in bello semper, et si non in praelio, as Livy
speaks, always in a War, though not always in battle; a Christian has no
peace but in his conscience, and the grave. Nay, it is an irreconcilable
Controversy, it is (...), Venenata non ferunt inducias, a war without a truce.
Therefore a Christians life is c^lled a Warfare; they are trained up non in
deliciis, sed in castris; not in the pleasures of a Court, but the hardiness of
a Camp. Christ, who is their he^d, is therefore called in Scripture, a man of
war, Exodus 15. 3. A Leader, and Commander to the People, Isa. 55. 4. A Captain,
Heb. 2. 10. And Christians, who are his Members, Soldiers, 2 Timothy 2. 3. Thou
therefore as a good soldier of Jesus Christ endure hardship; their course of
life, a fight, 1 lim. 4. 8. They which oppose them, enemies, Luke 1. 71. Their
temptations, assaults, 1 Pet. 2. 11. This, as Chrysostom says, is confirmed
by the authority of God himself, Genesis 3. 15. I will put enmity between thy seed
and the seed of the Serpent. Therefore we must carry our selves as Soldiers,
and maintain our watch. Now, though watching in the first signification does
relate to the body, and does imply more than to awake from sleep, for it is
Cautae attenti^, qua res aliqua diligenter curatur; it is a heedful care and
observing any thing we desire to keep safe; yet in a metaphorical sense it is
applied to the mind, and so it is a circumspect, and wise care in observing the
frame and deportment of the whole soul. It is (1.) a circumspect care, so those
two words the Apostle uses a^ ou^ prayer do import, Ephesians. 6. 18. (...), which
signifies such a watching as not to lay the eyes together, of (...), minimum
quid, sic gry apud Latinos, and (...) somnus, it notes not the least tendency
to sleep. It is a Military kind of Speech, says Grotius, from the watchings in
war, which are usually most strict. Another word is Col. 4. 2. (...), which
Eustachius derives of (...), susci^o, such a watching wherein men do stir and
rouse up themselves. (2.) It is a wise care; watching is nothing else but the
exercise of prudence. (3.) It must be of the whole soul, every faculty must be
observed; as at every Avennue there is a Sentinel, so on every Faculty there
must be a watch. And have not we need thus to watch against sin, and unto duty?
Shall Satan be watchful, and we be drowsy? Shall he continually go about
seeking whom he may devour, and shall not we be circumspect to consider how we
may deliver our selves out of his paws? It was certainly an upbraiding to the
Disciples, Mar. 14. 33. Simon, sleep thou? Could you not watch one hour?
Judas non dormit, Judas does not sleep: They were not so diligent to save their
Master, as Judas was to betray him. And is it not a great reproach to a
Christian, that he is not so watchful to save himself, as the Devil is to
destroy him? Exercise watchfulness over your corrupt natures; the devil may
tempt us, but he cannot hurt us without our consent; he has astutiam suadendi
non potentiam cogendi; he may persuade, but he cannot compel: our Corrupt
nature is the tinder upon which Satan strikes all his sparks; as Birdlime is
made of the dung of birds, so Satan's snares are made out of the dispositions
that are in the heart to sin. The Alchymists that boast of turning Iron into
Silver, Copper into Brass, assign the ground from the subalternation of
Metals, that there is a disposition in those Metals to receive the Perfectum
of the other. So Satan forms his temptations, upon our innate disposition, he
draws out into act those latent dispositions in us. (2.) Watch over the
Peccatum in deliciis, over the master sin, the bosom sin, watch strictly over
this.

SECT. II.
THe second Antidote is Resolution and Christi^^ courage; This is as necessary
as watchfulness. Watchfulness is good to prevent evil, and Christian Resolution
to undergo it. And we have need of Resolution, for he that will be a Christian
must expect opposition; we must not think to pass out of Egypt without
Pharaohs pursuing us: Or to travel through the wilderness of this world without
opposition from these Amalekites. Satan will be in arms against us if he
perceive but thoughts of our departure. If once we be but big with any holy
resolutions, he will persecute us, as he did the woman in Rev. 12. Therefore be
resolute. This the Apostle exhorts to, Ephesians. 6. 10. Finally Brethren, be strong
in the Lord, and in the power of his might, put on the whole Armor of God.
Why? That you may be able to stand against the Wiles of the devil. Take up
resolution in the name of Christ to hold out, Judge. 20. 22. The men of Israel
encouraged themselves, and set the Battle again in array. Libentius te
insequitur adversarius fugientem, quam sustineat repugnantem, and audacius
insist it a tergo quam resistat in faciem, as Bernard, He does more willingly
pursue than fight, and he is more bold when we turn our backs, than when we set
our faces against him: Courage and constancy will bring victory. If you resist,
you overcome; he may persuade, but cannot force. It was all Eve complained of,
Genesis 3. 13. that the Serpent deceived her, not that he constrained her; and
therefore he chose the Serpent, Non quia fortior, sed quia callidior, not
because he was the strongest beast in the field, but because he was more
subtle. To encourage our selves, consider we have a better Captain, better
Armor: He fights with fleshy weapons, but the weapons of our warfare are not
carnal, but mighty through God. Our own resolution is nothing without God.
Satan knows there is nothing so mutable as man, it is proper to him, as
immutability is to God. And lastly, we have a better reward.

SECT. III.
THe third Antidote, in resisting the Wiles of Satan, make use of the Lord
Jesus Christ, and that in two particulars: First, As a pattern to know how to
resist temptations. And secondly as an aid and succor.

First, In resisting temptations, make use of Christ as a pattern, who did
combat with Satan to teach us to combat. The first promise God made to fallen
man was, That the seed of the woman should bruise the Serpents head, Genesis 3.
15. And the first work Christ undertook after his solemn inauguration into his
Office was to fulfill this promise, as we see in Mat. 4. by entering the field,
and coping with him and all the powers of darkness in a single duel. Now, as
Abimeleck said to his followers, Judge. 9. 48. What you have seen me do, that do
you. So Christ our Captain bids us look unto him, and observe him in these four
particulars:

1. Observe the weapon Christ chose to foyl him by, and to resist all the
temptations of Satan withal; he could by his power have rebuked and silenced
him, as easily as he did the winds and waves, but he does it by the Word; and
to variety of temptations he uses but one weapon, the Word. Against
temptations to distrust, against temptations to presumption, to blasphemy,
says Christ, it is written, man lives not by bread. And again it is written,
Thou shall not tempt, etc. Now in this let Christians take Christ as an Example
to resist Satan's suggestions by the Word; take your Arrows from that Quiver,
your advice from that unerring Oracle, I have hid thy word in my heart that I
might not sin against thee, Psalm. 119. The Word both discovers Wiles, and
fortifies against them. It first discovers all the temptations of Satan, it is
a Crystal Glass in which you may see all the turnings and windings of this old
Serpent. Bernard compares Christians, that are diligent in the Word, unto those
Doves, in Cant. 5. 12. that sit by the waters, because they can in them the
better discern the motion of the Hawk in the Heavens: So the Word discovers the
snares of Satan. When Joshua and the Israelites were not careful to ask counsel
of God, they were caught by the policy and craft of the Gibeonites: So when you
neglect to consult with God and his Word, no wonder if the policy of Satan
prevail against you, Jer. 8. 9. They have rejected the word of the Lord, and
what wisdom is in them? Secondly, It fortifies against the Wiles of Satan, and
furnishes with many weapons and Arguments against them. If he promise great
things, and so would seduce you that way, look into the Word, and there are
better things than he can promise. For Satan can promise nothing, but either
thou have it already, (and the same water is sweeter from the Fountain than
when it passes through a sink,) or thou have better, thou walk among fewer
snares, thou have an overplus of spiritual goods for thy defect of earthly.
Consider, the offers of Satan are not for comforts but snares, not for the use
of life, but the provisions for sin. If he threaten, look into the Word, there
are greater and sadder threatenings. What is his wildfire, to fiery
indignation, to snares, fire and brimstone, a horrible tempest, that the Lord
threatens to rain down upon sinners, Psalm. 11. So that in every kind you are
furnished by the Word.

And here let me commend to you the excellency of this Weapon our Savior made
use of: It is called by the Apostle, Rev. 1. 16. The sword of his mouth, and by
the Apostle Paul, The sword of the Spirit. And there is no sword like this, as
David said of Goliahs. All must give place to this. That Culter Philosophicus,
that was by a strict and daily observation of the stars, made so as that it
would cut in sunder an Anvil; Alexanders sword that cut the Gordian Knot; Ehuds
sword that killed Eglon King of Moab, must give place to this, that cuts
asunder all the gins and snares of Satan. The power of the Word is seen in
this, that though it has all disadvantages to hinder its operation: Yet the
Word of Gods mouth does not return void. If applied to great persons, it makes
them tremble. Where the word of a King is there is power, Eccles. 8. 4. and who
may say unto him, what do thou? Yet with it Elijah wounds Ahab, 2 Kings 21.
19. Paul does but brandish it, and Felix trembles, Felix in his Robes, Paul in
his Chains. Micaiah, a Prisoner, pronounces death to Ahab, 1 Kings 22. 27. The
most secret sins the Word finds out, and cuts off the first risings and
stirrings of it. The World always stomacked it, yet the Word gets ground and
is effectual, as Augustine says, Come to a man in a Lethargy and pinch him,
come to a man in a Phrenzy and tie him, Uterque irascitur, sed uterque sanatur;
both are angry, but both are cured. But alas, how is this spiritual weapon
neglected, undervalued, abused?

Some men know not the Word, have no weapon in their houses. They care not the
Scriptures should speak any thing to them; Like that Cardinal Rivet mentions in
his Orthodoxus Catholicus, who after he had heard Beza's Oration in the
Possiack Convention, Utinam aut ille mutus fuisset, aut nos surdi essemus, I
would either he had been dumb, or we deaf. Alcibiades hit a Schoolmaster a box
of the ear, because he had not Homers Works in his School; how much more may
we be angry with those that have not the Bible in their houses? Others
undervalue the Scriptures, as Politian, that rejected them, as unfit for his
polished style, and yet spent all his time upon trifles. Calderinus dissuaded
his Scholars from reading the Scriptures, yet Commented upon Virgils filthy
Poesy of Priapus. But take heed of despising the Word. Take heed of bringing
to it proud hearts. As some wear Swords to show their gilded Pummels, and
velvet Scabbards, so many use the Word for ostentation, rather than to ward
off wicked suggestions with it.

Secondly, As you should observe Christ in the choice of his VVeapon, so make
use of the skilfulness and aptness of Christ in the applying the Word to the
temptation, and in making use of the Word against the variety of Satan's
temptations. You may observe how aptly, and readily Christ makes use of several
Scriptures in resisting temptations, Mat. 4. 4. It is written man shall not
live by bread alone, and therefore we should depend upon the Providence of God
in the midst of straights. It is written, thou shall not tempt the Lord thy
God, Ver. 7. and therefore we should not presume to expect blessings without
the use of means, when God vouchsafes them to us. It is written, thou shall
worship the Lord thy God, Ver. 10. therefore we must not blaspheme him, and
give his honor to another. Now all these Scriptures our Savior brings them
out of one Book of God, they are all taken out of Deuteronomy. Now if one Book
will afford such plenty, what then will the whole Book of God? We should
therefore furnish our selves with variety of Scriptures against variety of
temptations. A Christian that is well skilled in the Word is like one that has
a Plaster ready to lay on as soon as the wound is made, and thereby the danger
is prevented. Therefore study the Scriptures, that you may have Antidotes
against this and that temptation, that you may have wherewith to answer Satan.
Alsted (as I remember in his Cases of Conscience) tells of one Johannes Gatius
that was so perfect in the Scriptures, that it was thought if all the Bible had
been lost, yet it might have been in a great measure recovered by his dexterity
and readiness in it. It is a great commendation to be ready in the Scripture,
but to be so ready as to improve it upon all occasions against temptations is
the glory and excellency of a Christian. Get a skill in the Word, that you may
have it in a readiness, and be able to apply it. It is true, knowledge is the
eye of the soul, which must direct how it must be applied. Ignorant men pervert
it to their own destructions, they wound themselves, not their enemies. But
general discourses are like the beams of the Sun dispersed in the air, which
warm and cheer; but particular application is like the beams collected in the
burning glass, which unites the beams, and makes them burn. Apply the word to
thy self, if thou art tempted to Covetousness, remember life consists not in
abundance. If to uncleanness, the Lord knows how to reserve the wicked, 2 Pet.
2. 10. Especially them that walk after the flesh in the lusts of uncleanness,
Heb. 13. 4. Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge. If to inordinate fear,
apply Luke 12. 4. If to distractions in troublesome times, that of Psalm. 55.
22. Cast thy burden upon the Lord. Thus have the Word in readiness, like
Solomon's Worthies, Cant. 3. 8. that had their sword on their thigh, ready to be
out of the sheath presently, and labor for skill to manage it.

Thirdly, Look to Christ as a pattern in his constancy in resisting
temptations; in his perseverance against renewed assaults; our Savior was long
in the field, he was forty days together tempted, Mar. 1. 13. Those that are
recorded in Mat. 4. were after the forty days. When he had fasted forty days,
then the Tempter came, and persuaded him to turn stones into bread; the
Evangelists record only those chief and last temptations. Now let us learn of
our Captain to fight a good fight without discouragement, and without changes;
though temptations change, yet let not us change, though they be multiplied,
yet let us keep on our warfare and maintain our courage.

Fourthly, Make use of Christ as a Pattern in the manner of resisting. Thus, by
proportioning the resistance to the rise and growth of temptations; when
temptations rise higher, and are more gross, then we are to be more earnest,
proportioning our resistance according to the vileness and sinfulness of them.
That temptation of Christ to blasphemy, Christ did reject and resist in another
manner than he did the two former. There he only answers, it is written, but
here he says, Get thee behind me Satan. He does not only resist it by the
Word, but expresses a loathing and an indignation, and so should we when
temptations assault us, that strike immediately at Gods glory, we should
express a loathing, and abhorrency of them; and certainly, such temptations to
Atheism, Murder, Blasphemy, etc. are best resisted by abhorrency of them, and
loathing them, not by disputing with them, as Parisiensis says. Some
temptations are resisted per fugam, by flight, as flee fornication. Some per
indignationem, by indignation, as a man has his anger moved when he is offered
nothing near the worth of his Commodity. So when a man is tempted for trifles
to sin against God, and hazard his soul, Sola unius syllabae pronunciatione
ejus jacula confringuntur, etc. It is enough to resist such temptations with
that interjection, Fie, fie upon such filthiness, fie upon such blasphemy, and
this is by many thought the safest way.

Secondly, You must make use of Christ as your aid and succor, as well as your
pattern; not only as a pattern to know how to fight, but make use of his power
and strength to fight the better. Be strong in the Lord, and in the power of
his might, Ephesians. 6. 10. And Heb. 2. 18. He is said to be able to succor them
that are tempted. Go not into the field therefore alone. In profane Duels,
wherein men challenge one another the field for small punctillioes of honor,
or happily for worse things, (in which, as Bernard says, Unus lethaliter
peccat, alter aeternaliter perit, One mortally sins, and the other eternally
dies,) they seldom appear without Seconds, that they may see there be no wrong
done, and that they may call for aid if need be. Much more should Christians in
this divine Conflict, and wrestling with Satan, take Christ along with them. We
should not go in the strength of our own resolutions, or our own vows, but we
should go against Satan, as David did against the Philistim, 1 Samuel 17. In the
name of the Lord. When we do so, we always prevail, and when we do
otherwise, we are always foiled. No conflicting with Satan but in Gods
strength; remember Christ is able to succor, he has an ability of
sufficiency, and an ability that arises from experience.

SECT. IV.
THe foutrh Antidote is to be abundant in the use of prayer; as faith is the
best of graces in resisting Satan, so prayer is the best of duties. The neglect
of prayer was the beginning of Saul's fall, as most of the Fathers interpret
that place, 1 Samuel 14. 19. When Saul commanded the Priest to withdraw his hand
from the Ark. They say of the Palm tree, that all its strength lies on the
top; it is true of a Christian, all his strength lies above. There is a
threefold use of prayer. (1.) As a duty, for prayer is an offering, the Prophet
compares it to Incense; Psalm. 141. A Sacrifice is but a visible prayer, and
prayer is nothing else but an audible Sacrifice. (2.) As a dignity, when a man
does abstract himself from earth, and grow into a familiarity with God; it is a
Mount Tabor, wherein the soul has admirable transfigurations, and sees not
Moses and Elias, but God. (3.) There is a necessity of prayer, for God has
left prayer as our City of refuge on all occasions to flee to. Paul would have
the Thessal. pray, (...), without ceasing, 1 These. 5. 17. The Ephesians (...),
Ephesians. 6. 18. There is no duty at all times so seasonable and useful as prayer.
When we want blessings, prayer is the Key whereby we unlock the Treasury of
heaven, and gain the blessings we need. When we are assaulted by Satan, it is
one of the best weapons we can use to defend our selves with. When David knew
not how to withstand the wisdom of Achitophel, who was then as an Oracle of
God, he prays, Lord turn the counsel of Achitophel unto foolishness, 2 Samuel
15. 31. So do thou pray, O Lord turn the counsel of this hellish Adversary into
folly. So when Jehoshaphat was in a great strait, the Captains of the Enemy
having beset him about, 2 Chronicles. 18. 31. Jehoshaphat cried out, and the Lord
helped him, and moved them to depart from him. This now is our way to betake
our selves to prayer, as Bernard excellently says, Gravis quidem nobis
tentati^ sua, sed long gravior illioratio nostra: His Temptations are grievous
to us, but our Prayers are far more grievous to him. You do not know how you
wound his head with Prayer, when he bruises your heel with Temptations.
Therefore be much in prayer, it works deliverance from men, from devils, from
all the straits you can be surrounded with. For this cause, says the Apostle,
2 Cor. 12. 8. I besought the Lord thrice, viz. when he was under the buffetings
of Satan. Pray, says Christ, that you enter not into temptation; so pray that
you fall not under temptation when you are entered. Prayer, it delivers out of
temptation, Mat. 26. 41. Watch and pray that you enter not into temptation. In
tentationem cadit, qui ad orationem non vadit, says Chrysologus, he is sure to
go into temptation that goes not to prayer. In temptation it gives a supply of
strength, Exodus 17. 11. Moses Sword was stronger than Joshuahs. And then it
buckles on all our armor about us, for prayer is Armatura armaturae, the
Armor of the Armor; and though it have no distinct part to which it is
applied, yet it must be used with every piece of the Armor, without which all
the Armor will be as no Armor.

SECT. V.
THe fifth Antidote is, Take heed of giving place to the Devil. It is the
Apostles counsel, Ephesians. 4. 27. That is, yield not the least compliance with any
temptation of Satan, Malae cogitationes sunt antiqui serpentis caput, says
Jerome, The thought of evil is the letting in the head of the old Serpent, by
which he will quickly wind in his whole body.

When you parley with Temptations, and take them by little and a little into
your thoughts, which at the first rising you should spit at, the victory is
half got by Satan. It is not good to let poison melt upon the tongue, it should
be presently spit out. Daliances with temptations have proved fatal unto many,
of which many instances might be given. It is a remarkable saying of Solomon,
Eccles. 10. 13. of a foolish man, the beginning of the words of his mouth is
foolishness, but the end of his talk is mischievous madness. If you admit the
one, the other will follow.

SECT. VI.
THe sixth Antidote is, Take heed of venturing upon the occasions of sin, and
coming near the borders of temptation; do not expose your selves to them.
Bernard, in his 3 Sect. de fragmentis septem misericordiarum, says of himself,
Tribus modis memini, me servatum; That he was preserved from sin three ways:
Occasionis substractione, by withdrawing the occasion; Resistendi data virtute,
by having power given to resist; Affectionis sanitate, by having his affections
healed and changed. For I had, says he, easily fallen into many sins, Sed Deo
miserante, etc. but God having mercy on me, did not suffer such an occasion to
apprehend me. Job says of himself, Chap. 31. 1. I have made a Covenant with
mine eyes, why then should I think upon a maid? And Solomon bids those that are
given to wine, not to look upon it when it is red, when it gives his color in
the cup, when it moves it self aright, Pro. 23. 31. Objects have in them a
kind of efficiency, and they do work the heart accordingly to good or bad, as
men are in themselves good or bad. The beholding of Jesus Christ, and the eying
of him in his death and suffering, is an excellent and powerful means to
mortify lusts and corruptions. So to quicken any lust, or corruption, is to
present the object to the sense, and the mind, which does suddenly awaken those
corrupt dispositions, and inclinations that are there, and call them out as the
presence of the Iron does that virtue that is in the Loadstone. Some Physicians
say, that every body has in it a natural Balsome, which will of it self heal
any wound or hurt the Creature has received, provided it be kept clean from
extrinsick putrefaction: But we are so far from this naturalBalsome, that we
have in us a natural poison, that is, original sin, that receives
corroborations as it were from every object and occasion. Thus the Scripture
tells us, that Eve her self, when in innocence, saw the fruit that it was good,
and was thereby induced to taste of it, the bitterness whereof she found
unanswerable to that what it promised to the sight. Take heed therefore of
coming near the borders of temptations; beware of objects and occasions that
may inflame you; our hearts are powder, and therefore we must take heed of
sparks. Give not an indulgence, nor liberty to the eyes. Solomon when he played
the Critic, he did not withhold his eyes from whatsoever he desired, Eccl. 2.
10. But when you are to do the office of Christians, you must circumscribe, and
confine your eyes and other senses. And if you would mortify your eyes,
mortify your hearts; the eye and the heart have a great sympathy. The way to
keep your selves from being hurt by objects and occasions, is to keep the heart
pute, to subdue sin there. Laying the Medicine to the heart, is like putting it
to the wound: The other is like laying it to the weapon, that is not so
natural. We must therefore lay a strict Law upon every member of our body, yet
we must not think so to look to the heart, as to neglect the outward man. In
Navigation, Cosmography is no less useful than Astrology, because all the
observations of the Stars, are in reference to the earth, and to the place to
which they sail: And in our spiritual Voyage to heaven, it is no less requisite
that we study the Map of our own earth, than to study the Globe of heaven
whither we are sailing.

SECT. VII.
THe seventh Antidote against the Wiles of Satan, is diligence and industry in
your calling. The Bird while it is flying is safe, but when it sits and perches
upon a tree, it becomes an object for any instruments wherewith to shoot it,
and destroy it: And so a Christian; when he is busy in his Calling, is in a
great measure safe from temptations, but when he becomes idle, and does not
busy himself in that station God has set him in, he becomes fit ground and
soil for Satan to sow any temptation and lust in. Idleness exposes the soul to
all its spiritual enemies; and whereas it is the devils business to tempt us,
it is an idle man's business to tempt the devil. It is a good answer to the
devil when he tempts to sin, Non licet, it is not lawful to do it: but it is a
stronger, and better in somes opinion, Non vacat, I am not at leisure. I cannot
attend such motions. Such answers do put Satan beyond his usual arts, they put
him more to a loss. He had much rather enter a dispute about the lawfulness,
than be turned off with, I am not at leisure. It is a golden rule Divines give
to tempted persons, to be diligent in their Callings; as I remember it was
Jeroms advice to his friend Rusticus, Semper boni operis aliquid, facito, ut
diabolus semper te occupatum inveniat; To be always doing some good, that the
devil might always find him employed. Think of this, you who run out of your
Callings, who neglect your Callings, who think it a piece of bondage to be
subject to a Calling. Alas you are the nearer to temptation, and the more
subject to be taken in his Wiles, Hoc habet ignavia, ut interdum secura sit,
tuta vero nunquam. This is the misery of idleness, an idle man is sometimes
secure, but never safe. Ille tutus, cui nullum imminet periculum, securus qui
non curat periculum. He is safe who is above danger, he is secure who fears no
danger.

SECT. VIII.
THe eighth Scripture Antidote, is sincerity of heart; which many understand by
the girdle of truth, Ephesians. 6. 14. Truth in its Latitude is by some understood in
this place, but I shall propose it in a double consideration: First, Doctrinal,
and so truth implies a conformity in our understandings to the will and mind of
God. Truth in the general is nothing but the conformity of one thing to
another, whereof one is the Sampler, the other the Exemplification. The Sampler
or Pattern is God, and the mind of God in his Word, and unto that ought every
one to have their judgment and understanding so conformed, as to have it
agreeing with it, and not to admit of other impressions, that are different
from the Word of God. Thus in Scripture we are warned not to be tossed to and
fro with every wind of Doctrine, Ephesians. 4. 14. To hold fast the pattern of
wholesome words, 2 Timothy 1. 12. Secondly, Truth may be morally considered, as it
is opposed to hypocrisy, and so it is the correspondency of our outward
actions to our inward affections, for as our inward affections must have their
stamp from God, so must they endeavor to print their true stamp upon our
actions, as the seed that is sown in the ground, bears the like seed above
ground, and the fruit is not unlike the tree; no more should we in our
moralities, sustain one person in our bosom, another in our countenance. This
Aquinas calls simplicity, Subjicit virtuti veritatis simplicitatem, a qua
tantum ratione, distinguitur, docetque illam nominari simplicitatem ex eo quid
non tendat in diversum, as Cressolius observes, says he, he refers simplicity
to the topic of truth, from which it is only rationally distinguished, and
informs us that it is called simplicity, because it does not tend to diverse
things, as inwardly to intend one thing* when outwardly it pretends another.
This the Scripture holds forth, Josh. 24. 14. Fear the Lord, and serve him in
sincerity, and in truth. Psalm. 51. 6. Thou love truth in the inward man. Now
both these branches as they are included in this girdle of truth, so they are
both necessary to withstand the Wiles of the Tempter. Get your judgments
settled in the knowledge of the truth, so as not to be removed from it as the
Galatians were, Gal. 1. 6. for it is the method of Satan, to hold forth false
Doctrines in the similitude of divine truths, by which he deceives the eyes of
their judgments, who are unstable in the ways of God. And here he begins in
the judgment, that is first corrupted, and then derives its contagion to other
faculties; as the bloodshed eye is first vitiated, and then represents all
objects of its own color; be sure therefore to keep sound your judgment. Oh
into what an Abyss of error will corrupt principles in the understanding lead
men into? But then labor also for sincerity and uprightness of heart, which
alone works constancy and perseverance. Let there be no hypocrisy in your
profession of Religion. Labor to be Nathanaels and Jacobs. Get this in
opposition to double mindedness; diversity of interests will make the mind
unstable in all its actions. (...), A double-minded man, says the Apostle
James, is unstable in all his ways, like a Wave of the Sea, tossed to and fro.
But when the heart is sincere, and single in the ways of God, when a man does
with a single eye look at God, and his glory, he is greatly secured against
Satan. Satan cannot do with him as he does with another man. This girdle of
truth is his ornament, and his strength.

SECT. IX.
NInthly, I will lay down one general Rule, or Antidote, drawn from War; those
that write about Rules, and matters of War, give this as general counsel, as it
is laid down by Vegetius, de re mil. Lib. 3. c. 26. Quicquid tibi prodest
adversario nocet, quicquid illum juvat, tibi semper officit. Whatsoever is
profitable to the Enemy, is hurtful to you, and whatsoever is profitable to
you, that is hurtful to your Enemy. For his gain is our loss, his rise our
fall, his honor our shame, his help our hinderance. Therefore study with your
selves what that is may advantage Satan in any kind, and be sure that is
hurtful for you: And if there be any thing profitable to you, that is hurtful
to Satan. As Prayer, Heavenly Meditation, Converse with Promises, Society with
the Saints, all these, and many other of the like, must needs be good for us,
because they are detrimental to Satan.

SECT. X.
TEnthly, and lastly, As a powerful Antidote against Satan's temptations, have
an eye often to Scripture encouragements. The War into which a Christian is
entered, who wrastles with the Prince and powers of darkness, is a fierce war,
but yet you are not without encouragements in this War. If your enemy be great,
God has furnished you with good Armor, Put on then the whole Armor of God,
Ephesians. 6. 13. it is called Gods Armor, because it is made by God. The Hebrew
uses to put the name of God to things, to note the excellency of them. No
Weapons will serve to fight against the devil but Gods, nothing will make you
shot-free but the Armor of God. Now, as your encouragement is in having this
Armor, so your safety lies in putting on the whole Armor; it has all the
same Maker, it is all the same Metal, not like N^buchadnezzars Image, the head
Gold, the breast Silver; all is alike precious, and all alike useful. Now
therefore put on your Armor. If your Enemy be subtle, you have an expert
Captain. If the brunt and conflict be hard, look often to the Crown that is
promised, Jam. 1. 12. Will not a Crown make a full recompense? Si victoriosi
fuerimus hic illic erimus gloriosi, as Bernard says. If here we are
victorious, there we shall be glorious, having instead of a Helmet a Diadem,
for a Sword a Palm, for a Shield, Chlamidem deauratam, a Cloak or Mantle
wrought with Gold; for the Breastplate the Robe of delight. And is it not in
the mean time better, Premi, quam perimi, to be kept low, than utterly ruined?
Is it not better to bear the weight of our Armor, than feel the fiery darts of
the malignant one? If you dread because Satan is a fiery Serpent: Remember
Jesus Christ is that Brazen Serpent who can heal all his stings. If you are
afraid of his roaring because he is a Lion, 1 Pet. 5. 8. (...), a devouring
Lion, and a roaring Lion: Remember Jesus Christ is the Lion of the Tribe of
Judah; he is a Lion for valor, as the other is for cruelty. You have then
three great encouragements, your Captain is stronger, your Armor better, and
your Reward excellent, and glorious. And therefore when you think the pressure
is hard, and the fight bloody, remember these are the things which use to
encourage other Soldiers, and should much more encourage Christian Soldiers.

And now do not lay up these Antidotes in a paper, as you use to do Antidotes
that are prescribed by a Physician, that you will use when you please, but use
these continually, have them about you in a readiness. Satan is always
tempting, he has always fiery darts about him, though he does not throw them.
He is always biting at the heel, therefore be you always ready to make
resistance. And do not think these things are useful in times of great trial,
but not now. This is a Wile of Satan to keep you from profiting, and therefore
look on what has been said, as a Call from heaven to awaken you to diligence
in your Christian Warfare, and to resist him who has many devices to destroy
you, and who abounds in all subtilty and industry to bring his devices to pass.

FINIS.

