Imprimatur,

Guli. Fitz. Gerald Rev. in Christo Patri Archiepisc. Dublin. totiusque
Hiberniae Domino, D. Cancellario a Sac. Domest.
December. 27. 1670.
EPISCOPAL JURISDICTION Asserted, According to the right Constitution thereof,
BY His Majesty's Laws, both Ecclesiastical and Temporal. OCCASIONED By the
Stating and Vindicating of the BISHOP of WATERFORD's CASE, With the Mayor and
Sheriffs of Waterford.

By a Diligent Enquirer into the Reasons and Grounds thereof.

Ne quid falsum audeant, Ne quid verum non audeant.

My Lord Coke's Rule given to all such as take upon them to write: Jurisdiction
of Courts, cap. 9. DVBLIN, Printed by Benjamin Took, Printer to the King's
most Excellent Majesty; And are to be Sold by Mary Crook, (...)

THE BISHOP of WATERFORD'S CASE WITH THE MAYOR and SHERIFFS OF WATERFORD,
Stated and Vindicated, etc.
THe late Proceedings at Waterford, betwixt the Bishop, and the Mayor and
Sheriffs of that City, making a great Noise abroad, and furnishing Discourse
for most Companies that met together; I made it a while my business, to enquire
into the true state thereof; the better to discover, if I could, what
proportion the Matter it self held with the Talk made, and Censures passed by
Men thereon: While I was thus employed, I could not choose but observe, That
there was still retained too much of the old Malignity of spirit; and how
readily some persons catched at any occasion, to inveigh against Bishops, and
traduce both their Order, and Jurisdiction. Moreover, That they who were most
loud an clamorous against the Bishop of Waterford proceedings in this Case,
were indeed such a least understood the true Grounds and Reasons thereof;
insomuch, as when they have vented their Clamors with greatest eagerness, they
have been known for all that, to ask, What it was that the Bishop did? Whereas
they who had attained some competent knowledge therein, were more moderate and
reserved.

Hereupon I judged, That this Enquiry would be feasonable, because I might
thereby be able to give my self satisfaction about it, and, peradventure, be
instrumental to the undeceiving the unwary and easily seduced; or, convincing
the wilfully erring persons therein: This, I think, will be no difficult Task
to perform; if Men will but once be brought to think that they may mistake, or
that they may be too much biased with prejudices, and, thereupon, resolve to
act like what they would be thought to be, ingenuous and rational Men. In
prosecuting of this Design, I propose two things as the principal Subjects of
this Enquiry; The one is, concerning the matter of Fact; The other is,
concerning the matter of Right in these proceedings.

Concerning the matter of Fact, my entrance into that shall be, by premising a
passage or two, relating to the preceding, and to this present Bishop; which
may inform us what manner of welcome both were saluted withal, at their first
coming to Waterford.

When at His MAJESTY'S Happy Restoration, the late Bishop first came thither,
the graver and better Sort gave him a cheerful Entertainment; but, a perverse
Generation, very prevalent in that City, treated him at a far different rate; I
think, no Usages could be more barbarous and rude, than he experienced there:
Frequent Affronts were offered him, Libels spread abroad of him, Papers of
Queries sent and tendered to him; such, as were full of ridiculous Nonsense,
yet full of Petulancy and Malice.

The industry and travel of that Pious Prelate, to reduce to, and settle that
People in their Duty and Obedience to Gods Church, and Gods Anointed; His
Assiduity in Preaching; His Exemplariness of Living, are sufficiently known to
all: The base slighting of which, will (I fear) lie heavy one day on the
Consciences of some Men.

When this Prelate was one time about to discharge two solemn Offices, the one
of Preaching, he found his Pulpit, foully defiled with Excrements (so as must
not be named) and the other Office of Baptising, the Font was defiled in the
like beastly and unseemly manner. These, and many other unkind and ungrateful
Usages, contributed not a little to the shortning of his life; and (God forgive
me if I judge uncharitably) the same, I think, have been continued, to work the
like effect on his Successor; and, peradventure, they would be more increased,
if they could but accomplish the Eradication of the whole Order, together with
the extinction of both their persons.

The worthy Prelate, now in the Sea of Waterford, at his Entrance thereinto,
having first inspected the state of his Diocese at large, and set in order the
Affairs thereof. His next care employed him about the Cathedral Church of
Waterford, where too he met with the like barbarous welcome that his
Predecessor had done before; for shortly after his first coming to Waterford,
going to Solemn Prayers at the Cathedral, attended with many of his Clergy, he
found the way that he must walk, from the Body of the Church into the Choire
toward the Bishops Throne, most beastly defiled with Excrements again: But not
discouraged herewith, the Repairing, Beautifying, and Adorning of that Church,
is that which he is seriously intent upon; so as that in a short time, he
brought the Choire thereof (at no little Expense and Charge of his own) to that
comely and graceful Uniformity that it is now to be seen in; such, as may at
once delight and awe the Beholders, so well attemper'd together are some
innocent and pleasing Ornaments, with the more solemn and grave Furniture added
thereto; for which, he received shortly after, the Thanks of a scurrilous Libel.

The Body of that Cathedral, together with some Out-Chappels adjoining thereto,
the Tower and Bells do by Ancient Charter-party belong to the Corporation of
Waterford, to keep in good and decent Repair: In lieu of which, the said
Corporation of Waterford, have the disposing of all Burying places therein, and
receive to their own use such Emoluments and Profits as do accrue thereby: And,
as I have been Credibly informed from a knowing person, that has inspected the
Ancient Records of that City, the Corporation became Enfeoffed in certain
Lands, bestowed for these purposes, namely, To maintain a Public
Schoolmaster; And, To uphold in good and constant Repair, the Body of the
Cathedral, Out-Chappels, Tower and Bells, as is before mentioned.

The Bishop being Religiously zealous in prosecuting this good Work which he
had begun, intimates to the Mayor, and rest of the Corporation of Waterford,
the Duty belonging to them in behalf of the Church; he is very instant, and
pressing with them, that what in Duty they were obliged to do, they would with
Alacrity and Cheerfulness enter upon: But, Excitements to Acts of Devotion, and
such pious Works as this, find but cold Entertainment in these days of
languishing Piety and Charity: And so truly they did with these Men, They
alleging their present Poverty, and exhausted Revenue, whereby they were
rendered unable to undertake so chargeable a work: Nay, there wanted not some,
who gave it out openly enough, That the proceeding in such a Design, was, if
not unnecessary, yet then unseasonable: And that if it must be done, the
Clergy, who had got an ample Revenue in the City, were the fittest to effect
the same.

Notwithstanding these little Shiftings and Tergiversations used by these Men,
the Bishop is not discouraged yet in his Religious endeavors; but persisting
still in his purpose, what by entreaties and persuasions, his own good example,
and other rational motives, he at last prevails with them. Hereupon, both to
ease the Charge of the Corporation in some measure, and to forward the Work,
Voluntary Subscriptions are gathered from many persons, as well Strangers, as
others, Citizens of Waterford, for the new Casting and Hanging a Ring of Bells,
the Bishop himself subscribing very liberally and bountifully thereto; and from
his particular Friends, procuring many other considerable Subscriptions, which
Subscriptions, as I have heard, came to near One hundred pounds. To this was
added, By the Mayor and City-Council, a great Tax or Rate (which, together with
the Subscriptions, might make in all Two hundred and seven pounds, or
thereabouts) and by them Levied upon the Inhabitants of the City. I dispute not
how justifiable the making and Levying this Tax was, nor why that which ought
to have come from the Chamber and Public Revenue of the City, was to be
supplied by a personal Tax upon the People; whether this was done to make good
their former Allegation of Poverty, or whether this was done to save the
City-stock, I take not upon me to determine; perhaps it was for both these
ends, and perhaps it was for one more (like the Actings of a wise and politic
People) namely, to reflect the Odium thereof from the querulous Inhabitants
upon the Bishop, as if by his forcible impulse and instigation, they were
necessitated to this extraordinary course: But while these things were thus
carrying on, one remarkable matter intervened, well worthy here to be inserted
and taken notice of.

When the Bells in their metal were to be sent to Bristol for the New-casting
of them, and (as I have before touched) Subscriptions had been made by many
persons both of that City, and such as were strangers for the very purpose of
New-casting, and Hanging of the Bells; yet such were the sordid and penurious
Designs of the chief Leaders of Affairs in Waterford, whether to intervert the
money designed for that, to some other purpose, or to save their own slender
proportions concerned therein, the Mayor that then was, that is, he that was
Mayor in the Year One thousand six hundred sixty and seven: This person, the
Mayor (I say) dealt underhand with one Aram (in whose Ship the Bells were to
be carried over) to this purpose; That he should reserve a certain quantity of
the metal, which would in value be sufficient to defray the Charges of Casting
the rest; and the remainder to be made use of for such a Ring of Bells as had
been there before time, which (was said) would serve the turn well enough: For
this we are to know, that besides the metal of five Bells that were taken out
of the Tower of the Cathedral of Waterford, the Bishop had added seven Bells
more, that had been retrieved out of the hands of some private persons, who in
the late times of Confusion and Demolishment, had secured them in their own
possession.

This pretty thrifty Project, the said Aram acquaints the Bishop withal, and
shows him the then Mayors instructions under his hand, and desires the Bishops
advice and direction what to do therein: The Bishop hereupon sends to the
Mayor, desires his company, speaks with him, urged to him the baseness and
unworthiness of the thing he had given direction for, brought the Mayor to a
sudden a bashment and confusion; and so altered quite, and prevented the Design
of defraying the Charge of Casting the Bells, by withholding a great part of
their own metal. And over and above that, spoiled their Plot, of their being
Gainers of Two hundred pound and upward ( viz. by the Subscriptions and Tax
before mentioned) which in likelihood would have passed current, if this holy
Cheat had not been discovered; for this is to be further observed, That besides
the voluntary Subscriptions before spoken of, the great Tax that I said was
laid on the people of Waterford, was pretended to be Subsidiary, and as a
Supplement to the Subscriptions for the Bells; so as the Deficiencies of these
might be made up by the help of the other.

And this very thing was then pretended, when this unworthy Design was in
agitation, and ready to be put in execution. This Aram is now dead;
nevertheless, there is a competent Witness, a person of good Credit yet
remaining alive, who saw the Paper of Instructions that was given by the Mayor,
and was present when it was delivered to the Bishop, and heard the Bishops
Expostulation with the Mayor about the same.

Such then was the state that the Church business was in on the City part: when
Michaelmas comes leading to the Year One thousand six hundred sixty and eight
(Michaelmas is the time for the New Elected Mayor and Sheriffs to be Sworn, and
take their place) much was expected from this New Mayor, as having professed to
bear a Filial respect and obedience to the Church: And truly there wanted not
plenty of good promises, and some plausible overtures from him; but very little
in the Church-concerns was done. Much noise and outcry there was about the
money levied and collected; That Workmen were not paid; That some Materials
belonging to the Work were not satisfied for; That what money was collected,
was not distributed, as was intended. I know not how grounded they were, but
some Suspicions were conceived, some whispering Rumors passed abroad, that
instead of this money being disposed to a Public use, it went into private
Pockets. And if it were so, it was said, That would not have been the first
instance of that kind in Waterford.

Hereupon the Bishop, in order to consult with the Mayor and Sheriffs, desires
them to give him a meeting, that as they had undertaken the raising, receiving
and disposing the money levied and collected for the Church and the Bells, so
they might give an account what was become of it, and how disposed of: For,
know, that the charge of Casting the Bells, and providing Clappers, Ropes, and
all other things requisite about them, as they came from Bristol, amounted but
to One hundred and sixteen pound one shilling and six pence; a Sum, much less
than what the Rate and Subscriptions made: But about this time, while these
things were thus discussing, the said Mayor told a Person of good Quality, That
as for giving an Account to the Bishop, he would be content to do it, in case
he were desired thereto in a friendly manner; but otherwise he would not,
because as he was Mayor, so he was not subject to the Bishops Jurisdiction.

Well, notwithstanding that he was thus (as he termed it, and it was so indeed)
in a friendly manner desired again thus to do; yet neither he, nor the two
Sheriffs did give the Bishop a meeting as was desired of them; whereupon the
Bishop orders a Process to issue out, and Convents them before him in the
Consistory; They refuse to appear, though being duly Summoned, and so run into
Contempt. Being called again, and then appearing, they were for their former
Contempt enjoined an easy Penance; They aggravate their former, with this new
Contempt in disobeying the Bishops Injunction, and thereupon are mildly
Censured by the Bishop; Not Excommunicated, as was falsely rumor'd and mouthed
abroad by Men that regarded not what proceeded from them, whether Truth or
Falsehood, so it might but serve their purposes; but large intermissions of time
there were betwixt every of these Proceedings, as will be showed hereafter: And
thus stands the matter of Fact in this whole Transaction.

Upon a Reflection now made on this whole matter in one Review, Will not the
Carriage of these persons appear of a strange form and kind, to any sober and
indifferent Man? Hardly, I think, will it be paralleled by President of any
such that has formerly been; Hardly be entertained with Credit, that any such
had lately been. And the whole Proceeding being so as is here briefly declared,
Let the Persons concerned herein, be so ingenuous, as freely to confess and
acknowledge the same. If yet this be denied (so may the truest Narrative of
things be, and yet have never the less of Truth in it for all that) yet there
is so much, and so clear Evidence to Verify what has been set down, That if
any Attempt be made of standing to such a Denial, then an easy producing of
this Evidence, will both shame those Deniers, and add to the Confirmation of
the Truth hereof. Howbeit, some particularities in several passages of this
Proceeding, may find in the following Sections a more seasonable Discovery and
Enlargement. In the mean time, the Question de Jure, falls in to be discussed,
concerning the justifiableness of the Bishops proceedings herein.

Three main Exceptions I find much insisted upon, and urged against these
Proceedings.

The first is, in relation to the Persons thus Convented and Censured; for they
being the Mayor and Sheriffs of a City under His Majesty's Government, and
representing His Person; it is said, That thereupon they became exempt from any
Episcopal Jurisdiction.

The second Exception is, in relation to the Cause they were called in question
upon; for that is affirmed not to be of Ecclesiastical, but Civil cognizance,
because said to be grounded on a real Contract betwixt the Corporation and the
Church; and so the holding Plea, and judging of Contracts, belongs not to the
Consistory, but to the Temporal Courts.

The third Exception is, in relation to the manner of Proceedings, which are
affirmed to have been precipitous and hasty, without such form and regularity
as ought to be observed therein, and therefore illegal and unjustifiable.

To these three Exceptions, I shall oppose and endeavor to make good these
three following Propositions, which will both invalidate any force that might
be in the Exceptions, and likewise assert and make good the Legality of what
was done herein.

I. Prop. The Bishops Jurisdiction in the Case before mentioned, was Legally
founded in respect of the Persons proceeded against.

II. Prop. The Bishops Jurisdiction over these persons, was Legally founded, in
respect of the Cause proceeded upon.

III. Prop. The Bishops Jurisdiction was Legally managed in this Cause against
these Persons, in respect of the manner observed in the proceedings thereof.

I. Prop. The first Proposition, The Bishops Jurisdiction in the case before
mentioned (was legally founded in respect of the Persons proceeded against) To
make this good, is that, which I am first obliged to endeavor. And I do it
thus, by laying my foundation in this received Maxim concerning Spiritual
jurisdictions; That in all matters and causes of Ecclesiastical cognizances,
all Persons within any Diocese regularly and de jure communi, are subject to
the jurisdiction of the Bishop of that Diocese: The original proceeding of
which institution (I mean as to the actual Exercise of such jurisdiction)
depends upon, and derives principally from the bounty and munificence of
Christian Emperors and Princes. As for jurisdiction merely spiritual convei'd
in, and at the time of Consecration, inhaerent in every Bishop, as he is such,
I here speak not of, otherwise than as it is the foundation and ground from
which this Actual exercise does arise, and has the enlargements made to it,
both subjectively in respect of persons made subordinate thereto; and
objectively in respect of matters and causes appropriated to it.

Sundry instances making this Assertion good, might be had in the Imperial Law:
But so it will appear to be, to him that will but consult, Titulum de
Episcopali judicio in Codice Theodosiano, Et Titulum de Episcopali Audientia in
Codice Justinaneo. Et legomni innovatione cessante. leg. Privilegia ibidem de
Sacro, Sanctis Ecclesiis: whence Tholosanus Syntagmat. lib. 47. de divisione
judicii number. 12. 13. Inferrs this rule, Prelati sunt ordinarii Judices Rerum
and Personarum suae jurisdictionis: And moreover adds this, Caesares tuentur
and defendunt sacerdotate judicium, and Privilegia ejus legibus stabiliunt: And
Gothofred on the former of these Laws, infers this as a standing rule,
Innovatum contra Canones non subsistit. By the ancient Canons Bishops were
invested with this judiciary power: Christian Emperors favorably confirm the
same, and any innovation thereupon is of no force. The same power of
jurisdiction in Bishops is allowed of and made good by Charles the Great In
Capitular. lib. 6. cap. 28.

Paulus Fiacesius in his Book called Praxis Episcopalis cap. 4. Articul. S.N.S.
Lays down this Rule, Episcopus in sua dioecesi, habet intentionem fundatam
super omnes de diaecesi: And to confirm the said rule so laid down by him, he
produces there the Authority of many places in the body of the Canon Law.
Indeed where the matter is not of Ecclesiastical cognizance, It is the
incompetency of the matter or cause, not the quality, or place, or office of
any person, that exempts him from that jurisdiction; for as the f^rementioned
Author observes, Number. 2 Ibidem Episcopus alium Episcopum morantem in sua
dioecesi, ratione delicti ibidem commissi judicare and punire potest. If a
Bishop have jurisdiction over another Bishop within his own Diocese, where the
Fuct is of Ecclesiastical cognizance; there is certainly the ^ike, if not a
more forcible reason, that the Bishops power should reach to all others of his
Diocese.

And Javolenus has delivered this Rational and elegant Rule, Cui jurisdictio
Data est, ea quoque concessa esse videntur sine quibus jurisdictio Explicari
non potest L. 2. (...) de jurisdictione omnium judicum. The granting, of a
jurisdiction, implies a grant of all those things that conduce to a right
discharge and exercise of it: A power is included herein of presiding over and
calling all parties under that jurisdiction to answer in judgment, of using
Coercive means to such as are refractory and contumacious, and bringing matters
to a final and full Execution. Gothofred says well hereupon: Quoties casus
omissus virtute and (...) expressi comprehendi potest, toties ad illum fieri
debet extensio.

But least this position may less pleasingly relish with some pallates,
because of the Authority I have hither to made use of to establish it by: The
Imperial or Civil Law being not allowed in these Kingdoms, save only in some
particular Courts and causes, which is to be said of the Canon Law likewise:
And in respect of the latter of these two, some men are apt to look asquint
upon any thing that is drawn out of it, or grounded thereon; They are ready to
cry out upon such a thing, as a Popish encroachment, tending to Advance the
Miter and Keys above the Crown and Scepter Yet these make up a part of the
Kings Ecclesiastical Laws being so qualified as by Statute is required in 25
Hen. 8. cap. 19.
. To prevent this, or any the like imputation, my next, and that my principal
endeavor, is to show its accordance with the State, Constitution, and Laws of
these Kingdoms of England and Ireland under His Majesty's Government; that is,
with the Ecclesiastical, and with the Municipal Laws thereof, and with the
Kings Prerogative Royal. In respect of all which, I do not doubt to affirm,
That this position viz. [That all persons whatsoever within any Diocese
regularly, and de jure communi, are subject to the jurisdiction of the Bishop
of that Diocese in matters and causes of Ecclesiastical cognizance.] That this
position, I say, is agreeable to the Ecclesiastical Laws of these Kingdoms;
Not repugnant to the Municipal Laws thereof; Neither is it, thirdly, any thing
intrenching upon, or infringing His Majesty's Prerogative Royal; These all
require distinct and particular considerations.

1. It is agreeable to the Ecclesiastical Laws of these Kingdoms, in His late
Majesty's Proclamation of Royal Assent given to the Book of Canons and
Constitutions Ecclesiastical of this Church of Ireland, Anno 1634. I observe
two things relating to our present purpose, the former is a strict injunction
upon all persons whatsoever to observe and obey them. We do not only by our
said Prerogative Royal and Supreme Authority in causes Ecclesiastical, ratify,
confirm and establish by these our Letters Patents the said Canons, Orders,
Ordinances and Constitutions, and all and every thing therein contained, as is
aforesaid; but do likewise propound, publish and straightly enjoin and command
by our said Authority, and by these our Letters Patents, the same to be
diligently observed, executed and equally kept, by all our loving Subjects of
this our Kingdom, in all points wherein they do or may concern every or any of
them, according to this our Will and pleasure hereby signified and expressed.

The other thing I observe therein, is that impartial Execution of them (which
is required to be made, and by whom to be made) upon all persons whatsoever
that refuse to obey them: so it afterward follows Straightly charging and
commanding all Archbishops, and all others that exercise any Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction within this Realm, to see and procure, that the same Canons,
Constitutions, Orders and Ordinances, be in all points duly observed. Not
sparing to execute the penalties in them severally mentioned upon (Any) that
shall wittingly or willingly break or neglect to observe the same: as they
tender the Honor of God, the peace of the Church, tranquillity of the Kingdom,
and their duties and service unto Us their King and Sovereign. All are
commanded to obey these, none have an Immunity from being punished if they do
not obey them.

In the last Canon of that Book, It is decreed, That if (Any) within this
Nation shall despise and contemn the Constitutions thereof (Ratified and
confirmed by Regal power) or affirm that none shall be subject to them, but
such as were present and gave their voices to them, He shall be Excommunicated,
and not restored, until he shall publicly revoke his Error. In the 140 Canon
of the Church of England, published Anno 1603. It is more particularly and
expressly set down and declared, that all manner of Persons, both of Clergy and
Laity, are to be subject to the Decrees mentioned in them in causes
Ecclesiastical: Although they were not themselves particularly assembled in the
same Sacred Synod.

Let us now put both these things observed, together, and the result is this:
Here is a jurisdiction declared in respect of certain matters and causes, and
in respect of Persons indefinitly set down over all: And in whom is this
jurisdiction declared to be? namely, in Archbishops, Bishops, etc. over whom
is it declared to be? over all surely. The injunction of inflicting penalties
in case of disobedience is as universal and extensive subjectively, as is the
command of obedience: Here is no distinction nor exemption made of any Persons,
under any qualification, or Vested with any office, or subordinate civil power,
so as they should be thereby privileged from Ecclesiastical jurisdiction in
matters appertaining thereunto. And Vbi lex non distinguit, ibi nec nos
distinguere debemus, where the Law makes none, neither may we make any
distinction.

I have made my first instance in these Canons as part of the Kings
Ecclesiastical Laws: But I am not to learn, that when the Authority of our
Canons is urged, and that obedience which is required to them, is called for,
There are a generation of such as are wise in their own conceits, men of mighty
deep understandings, who think they pierce further into things, and understand
more than their poor shallow Brethren are able to do: And these will question
the Validity of these Canons, and their legal obligingness on the Kings
Majesty's Subjects. To all such therefore I shall fairly offer a few,
considerations, and then leave in to their own sober thoughts to determine,
wha^ Coherence there can be betwixt a disowning, (...) the Authority of our
Ecclesiastical (...), and the profession of being dutiful and obediene Subjects.

1 Many learned men, both of the Municipal and Civil Law, join in this opinion,
and affirm, That the Kings Majesty may by virtue of His Supreme Authority in
matters Ecclesiastical, confirm and ratify into the force of Law Canons made
in Convocations, and that they be a part of the Kings Ecclesiastical Laws.
Princeps tanquam supremus post Deum gubernator potest in causis Ecclesiasticis
statuere quicquid verbo divino, statutis and consuetudinibus Regni sui non
repugnaverit Cosen. de Politeia Ecclesiastic. Anglicana Tab. 1. A. And then he
specifies the matter of his former. Assertion thus, viz. That this supreme
power of our King, is in Condendis novis legibus, sive canonibus, in ijsdem
administrandis and relaxandis cirea statum Ecclesiasticum: and this done, cum
Regius assensus fuerit adhibitus iis, quae Synodus decernenda Censuerit ibidem
Tab. 2. In Synod Nationali vel provinciali Regis rescripto convocato, nihil
tractari aut determinari potest nisi eo assentiente, nec quicquam vim legis
obtinet, priusquam Regalis assensus adhibitus fuerit. Dr. Zouch. Descript.
Juris Eccles. p. 1. Sect. 2. See also to the same purpose, Dr. Duck de
authoritate Juris civilis in Anglia lib. 2. cap. 8. p. 3. Sect 27. And the Lord
chief Justice Cook 4. p. Instit. cap. 74. cited thereby him.

2 The King himself in the Proclamation before mentioned, declares that such
Canons, Constitutions, etc. agreed upon by the Archbishops, Bishops, and
Clergy of Ireland, to the end and purpose by him limited and prescribed unto
them, He has given His Royal assent, according to the form of a certain statute
or Act of Parliament made in that behalf; And by his Prerogative Royal, and
Supreme Authority in matters Ecclesiastical, he has ratified and confirmed the
said Canons being one hundred in number, by his Letters Patents under his great
Seal of Ireland; And then follows His Majesty's strict injunction upon all His
loving Subjects of this Kingdom to obey and execute the same, which I insisted
upon before.

3. Besides His Majesty's Prerogative Royal and Supreme Authority in causes
Ecclesiastical, the King is likewise by Act of Parliament vested with power for
this purpose, and that is the Statute 25 Hen. 8. cap. 19. called the Petition
and Submission of the Clergy to the King; For the Bishops and Clergy in
Convocation having each one severally promised in verbo sacerdotis, never
henceforth to presume to attempt, allege, claim, or put in use, or enact,
promulge or execute any new Canons, Constitutions or Ordinances without the
Kings most Royal assent had and obtained thereunto; upon which promise and
submission it was enacted by Authority of Parliament; That all Convocations in
time to come should always be assembled, by the Authority of the Kings Writ.
And that the Kings license and authority being had, they might make, promulge
and Execute such Canons, Constitutions and Ordinances Provincial and Synodal,
which being ratified, confirmed and approved under His Majesty's Great Seal,
they then become of legal force upon the Subject. This Proviso indeed follows,
That no Canon nor Ordinance shall be made or put in Execution by the Authority
of the Convocation of the Clergy, which shall be contrariant, or repugnant to
the Kings Prerogative Royal, or the Customs and Statutes of this Realm etc.
Rastals collection word (Rome) numb. 1. Which Statutis is but declarato^y of
the Common Law, says my Lord Coke, 4. Instit. cap. 74. p. 323. So that the same
is grounded both on Stat^to and Common Law.
The like Statute to this particular we have enacted in Ireland, Entitled, An
Act against the Authority of the Bishop of Rome in vicessimo Octavo Hen. 8. and
referred to in the Proclamation before spoken of in the second consideration.

A Great Lawyer one Mr. J.M. (in a speech before a Committee of the Lords, at
the Parliament held Anno 1641.) Having occasion to speak of this Statute (for
his speech was against the Canons made the year before) avouched plainly that,
that clause, The Clergy shall not make Canons without the Kings leave,
implies not that by his leave alone, they may make them: But certainly the
most knowing men in any Science or faculty, have not the privilege of never
mistaking in what they say: for to him that advisedly considers the matter and
scope of that Statute, it will appear plainly, That the abridging the
over-growing power of the Clergy assumed by them in making and enacting
Canons, and pressing their authority on others: And together with this, the
cutting them off from any relation to the Bishop of Rome, and making them
dependants on the King alone, for the better ordering of what should be debated
and determined in their Synodical meetings; were, if not the only, yet the
principal aims of that Statute: Add here further, that a successive and
continued practice from the time when that Statute was made to this day,
delivers the best and truest sense of it. Practiea est legum optima
intellectrix. Baldus.
For thus as I have set down, it was practiced in the times of Edward the 6th,
Queen Elizabeth 1562. King James Anno 1603. King Charles the first in this
Kingdom of Ireland Anno 1634. And though I say nothing of the Canons themselves
made in the year 1640. (because all authority as to them is annulled by Act of
Parliament, Anno 13 Caroli Secundi) yet the Commission granted to the
Convocation of that year, at the first opening of the Parliament, and of it,
was according to Law; and this speaks plainly of the Kings leave and license
granted and alone needful herein; see more fully thereof in Dr. Heylins life of
the Archbishop of Canterbury, p. 423.424.425.

I conclude this matter with the decision of a great Casuist: He in discoursing
of Ecclesiastical Laws, and the manner how they are enacted in the Church of
England. Jus condendi leges Ecclesiasticas (says he!) est paenes Episcopos,
Presbyteros, aliasque personas a totius Regni clero rite electas and in
legitima Synodo rite congregatas: Ita tamen; ut ejus juris, sine potestatis
exercitium in omni Repub. Christiana ex Authoritate Supremi Magistrate us
Politici pendere debeat: Idque and aparte Ante (ut loqui solemus) and aparte
post vir: ut nec iis statuendi Canones Ecclesiasticos causa liceat convenire,
nisi autipsius mandato and inssu ad id negotii convocatis: aut ejus saltem
authoritate, Venia ab eo petita and obtenta munitis: Nec Canones in quos illi
sic consenserint, tali sint, aut vim aliquam habeant obligandi, quoad supremi
Magistratus assensus accedat: Cujus approbatione and publica authoritate
simulac confirmati fuerint, illico pro legibus habendi sunt and subditos
obligant, Bishop Sanderson; de conscient. obligat. Praelect. 7. Sect. 30. Mr.
Hooker Eccles. Polit. Book 8. in p. 219.220.221. etc. Thus much has been said
touching the Canons of our Church, and their Authority, so far forth at this
present, as suits with the present occasion, and what they were produced in
proof of.

In several Provincial Constitutions we find it Decreed, That concerning
matters belonging to Ecclesiastical cognizance, proceedings may be made against
any Layman or public Officers, as Sheriffs and others, even to the inflicting
public Censures upon them. Many of this kind will occur to the Reader that is
conversant in them; That Constitution Aeterna Sanctis de paenis, Enacted in a
Council at Lambeth under Boniface Archbishop of Canterbury Anno 1260. In the
time of King Henry the third. And that Constitution ut invadentibus de
immunitate Ecclesiae, Enacted by the same Boniface; likewise the Constitution
contingit aliquando eodem, And Accidit Novitate perversa eodem, Enacted by John
Stratford Archbishop of Canterbury in the time of King Edward the third. Now if
it be here said, that these Constitutions were made before the Statute of
Praemunire came forth, and so proceeded more peremptorily, and not with that
submissive regard and dutiful obedience to the Crown, as they ought to have
done. I answer, by acknowledging those Constitutions to aim indeed at the
restraining of the Kings Prerogative, and of his Temporal Courts, and therefore
not of any force now, or that proceedings should be guided thereby. Sir Tho.
Ridley in his View etc. leaves it without decision, whether these constitutions
be annulled by the Act of Parliament viz. 25. Hen. 8. c. 19. He determines not
absolutely, I say but refers it to better judgments.
But this mention is made of them to show Historically what was then practiced
and held usually; and moreover to evince, that where the Rights of the Crown
are not thereby impaired, nor any of the Kings Temporal Courts invaded;
Ecclesiastical proceedings may be made against any Person, and his being in any
subordinate civil office does not exempt him therefrom. I must yield to, and
acknowledge what the Statute 25 Hen. 8. cap. 19. has determined, viz. All
Canons, Constitutions, Ordinances and Synodals Provincial that had been then
made, are received into the body of the Ecclesiastical Laws, and are
Established to be the Ecclesiastical Laws of England, and become of good force
and validity: but with this necessary proviso herein, quatenus consuetudinibus
and statutis Regninon repugnant, nec prerogativae Regiae adversa^tur, Dr. Zouch
de jure Ecclesiast. p. 1. Sect. 1. So the Statute it self reports of them, that
they are of force and still binding, so far forth, as they be not contrariant,
nor repugnant to the Laws, customs, and statutes of this Realm, nor to the
Danger or Hurt of the Kings prerogative Roya.

In the Formula of Juridical practice for causes Ecclesiastical set forth by
Francis Clerk, and which is approved in all the Consistories and other
Ecclesiastical Courts of England and Ireland. In this Formula, I say, There is
a title, namely, the two hundred and fifteenth title of that Book, after what
manner to begin and proceed in any Ecclesiastical cause (perhaps at the
instance of a party) against any Community as Dean and Chapter, Master,
Fellows, and Scholars of any College, etc. In the body of which title, the
manner of proceeding against any Mayor and Community of a City, particularly
that of London, is described; whence I make this Collection, That what is
declared as a matter to be observed in Ecclesiastical practice, when occasion
requires a proceeding against any Mayor or Community of a City: that does
certainly imply, that such a Mayor and Community are subject to Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction, and consequently to such penal coercions and censures (the matter
so requiring it) as are properly inflicted thereby. Hitherto concerning the
first particular, that this position is agreeable to the Ecclesiastical Law.

2. As this position is agreeable to the Ecclesiastical Law, so it is not
repugnant to the Kings Temporal Laws, or the Municipal Laws of these Kingdoms.
It is not repugnant to the Statute Law: The Statute called Magna Charta
confirmed by King Henry the Third in the Ninth year of His Reign, and by so
many Kings since this Statute (said to be the Ancientest written Law that is
now extant, and the Breviate and Summary of all the written Laws of England and
most beneficial to the Subject) declares in the first Chapter thereof, That the
Church of England shall be free, and have all her Holy rights and liberties
inviolable.

Et habeant omnia jur a sua integra) that is, all Ecclesiastical persons shall
enjoy all their lawful jurisdictions, and other rights without any diminution
or substraction whatsoever. D. Coke, on Magna Charta. cap. 1.

Jura sua) says the same Author ibidem, prove plainly, that no new rights were
given to them, but such as they had before hereby are confirmed, so that it
follows, that what amplytude and fullness of jurisdiction they had before, is
hereby confirmed.


In the Thirty seven Chapter of the said Statute, There is a Reserve to all
Archbishops, Bishops, etc. Of all their Liberties and Privileges: one branch
of which Liberties and Privileges and Rights, is this power of jurisdiction
over all persons in their respective Diocesses.

Edward the first, the Son and Successor of this King, ordained the Statute
called circumspecte Agatis in the thirteenth year of His Reign. It has been
affirmed concerning this Law, that it was a prelatical Constitution, because
inserted in the Provincial Constitutions in the title de foro competenti: or at
the most, one only of the Kings Writs issuing out on some occasion leading
thereunto. But to confirm the Authority hereof, My Lord chief Justice Coke
determines of it after this manner; though some have said this was no Statute,
but made by the Prelates themselves: Yet that it is an Act of Parliament, is
not only proved by our Books, but also by an Act of Parliament. Instit. p. 2.
p. 487. In this Statute then (set down as a boundary, betwixt the Spiritual and
Temporal jurisdiction) full power and authority is given or confirmed rather to
the exercise of jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, over all persons indistinctly, in
such cases as belong to and are mentioned in it.

In the Ninth year of His Son and Successor King Edward the second, came forth
the statute called Articuli cleri, by the form and purport of which, it
appears, that for any matter Ecclesiastical, indefinitely Men may be cited;
and if cited, then subject to all judicial consequences therein. In the Twelfth
Chapter of this statute, The question is put, Whether the Kings Tenants be
subject to the Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, as others are; and if they may be
Excommunicated for their manifest contumacie, and after forty days continuing
so, whether they may be signified and attached by the Kings Writ? The answer
given to the question is such: It was never yet denied, nor shall be hereafter.
The close of which Statute is after this manner. Ratifying, confirming and
approving all and every of the Articles aforesaid, with all and every of the
Answers made and contained in the same, do grant and command them to be kept
firmly and observed for ever, willing and gran ting for us and our Heirs, that
the foresaid Prelates and Clergy, and their Succe^sors, shall use, execute and
practice for ever the jurisdiction of the Church in the Premises after the
Tenor of the Answers aforesaid, without quarrel, inquieting or vexation of our
Heirs, or any of our Officers whatsoever they be. Poult. Collect of statutes p^
101. in fine cap. 16.
It seems the Kings Tenants supposed themselves such specially privileged
persons, as to be thereby exempted from spiritual jurisdiction; but that would
not serve their turns, And so a pari, what would not be sufficient for them,
will not be sufficient for others though in office under the King.

During the long Reign of Fifty years of King Edward the Third, the great
Charter was several times confirmed. The liberties, privileges, and franchises
of the Clergy were new ratified in the fourteenth and five and twentieth years
of His Reign. And so in the first, sixth and eighth and twelfth years of
Richard the second. In the first second and fourth years of Henry the fourth,
It was enacted, That the Lords Spiritual as well as Temporal, should have and
enjoy all their Rights and Liberties.

I grant indeed that in the Reign of two of these preceding Kings, viz, Edward
the third, and Richard the second, that the two statutes of Proviso's and
Praemunire were made: But he that shall duly observe the end wherefore, and the
matter wherein, and the persons against whom these statutes were made, will not
be able to find that any abridgment, but rather a firmer settlement of
Episcopal jurisdiction, in the right Constitution of it, was intended and came
thereby: That which was mainly aimed at, and provided against in these
statutes, was, to repress the encroachments of the Pope of Rome, even upon the
Bishops legal jurisdiction it self. The Pope by His Emissaries in England, from
time to time drained the Kingdom of its Wealth; He invaded the Kings Sovereign
Rights, by Mandates De providendo, and expectative Graces, granted of
Ecclesiastical livings before the Incumbents were dead: And besides, He boldly
entrenched on the Kings Temporal Courts, many such unreasonable greivances
there were; which both King and People felt the load of, and which to make them
the heavier, were fetch as far as Rome, to be put upon them.

But all this while, here are no exemptions to any particular persons, or civil
Officers to free them from Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, where it proceeded in
due manner, and was exercised in matters properly cognizable by it; That which
must have the note of remark put upon it, is this: Provision is here made under
severe penalties against acting by a derived power from, and in an Usurped
jurisdiction under the Sea of Rome; This no English Bishop might do then; This
no Bishop in England or Ireland, might, or does, or may do now.

One Act of Parliament will best serve to give light to another. Now the
statute 25 Hen. 8. cap. 21, affirms expressly, that the statute of provision and
praemunire of the 16th Richard secundi, was made against such as sue to the
Court of Rome against the Kings Crown and Dignity: so that Episcopal
jurisdiction in each respective Diocese, and in matters of Ecclesiastical
cognizance, is so far from being impaired by these statutes, that in truth it
is more firmly fixed and corroborated thereby.

All these things were before the Reformation in England, toward the dawning
of which, we meet with a noted statute in the 23th year of King Henry 8. cap.
9. designed, as is conceived, to restrain the Exorbitances used in summoning
people out of the Diocese wherein they inhabit without leave of their
Ordinaries: which thing, as it tended to the great vexation of the persons so
cited; it also aimed at the very encroaching on the several Ordinaries Rights,
on pretense of some legantine power, or Nuncio's Court or other extraordinary
cause. In the preamble of which Statute, it is affirmed, That all persons of
any quality or condition may be cited before their Ordinaries: (so it be in
proper cause and due Order) The body of that statute provideth, that no
citation be made out of the Diocese where the party dwells, but where some
spiritual offense or cause is committed or done. So that a contrario sensu
(says the learned and judicious Dr. Cosen Apol. p. 67.) in any offense or
cause spiritual, any Subject may be cited within his or her Diocese: And in
some peculiar causes there mentioned, and recited, they may be cited out of
their Diocese. Now the power of citing, presupposes a full jurisdiction: that
is, a power to proceed further thereupon in all due requisits and forms that
belong to any cause, whether it be upon instance, or of matter of correction.

Since the Reformation that all jurisdiction Ecclesiastical is de facto, as it
was always de jure united to, and so derived from the Imperial Crown of
England; there is by the statute of the first of Queen Elizabeth, cap. 1. Full
power and authority given to the Ecclesiastical Judges for the Executing of
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction as before time. See also a statute made in Ireland,
in the 28. year of King Henry the 8. called an Act against the Authority of the
Bishop of Rome: toward the latter end thereof -- Provided, that
notwithstanding this Act, or any other Act made for the taking away of the said
Bishop of Romes Usurped power, Authority, Pre-eminence, Jurisdiction or any
other thing or things in the same comprised; That all and every Archbishop,
Bishop, Archdeacon, Commissary and Official, and every of them, shall, and may
use and exercise in the name of the King only, Vid. infra p. 53.
all such Canons, Constitutions, Ordinances and Synodals provincial, being
already made, for the direction and order of Spiritual and Ecclesiastical
causes, which be not contrariant nor repugnant to the Kings Laws, statutes and
customs of this Land, nor to the Damage and Hurt of the Kings Prerogative
Royal, in such manner and form, as they were used and Executed before the
making of this Act: till such time as the Kings Highness shall order and
determine according to his Laws of England, and such order and determination,
as shall be requisite for the same, and the same to be certified hither, under
the Kings Great Seal, or otherwise ordered by Parliament.

And while I am thus enumerating the several statutes which the former position
is not contrariant to, but rather strengthened by, I must not omit the making
mention of those statutes and Acts of Parliament that are set out and
published, merely upon Ecclesiastical causes and matters (which are reckoned by
some, as those that enter into, and make up the body of the Kings
Ecclesiastical Laws, Zouch de jure Eccles. p. 1. Sec. 1. etc.) whether these be
matters of a civil or criminal Nature: matters of civil cognizance are either
such as concern Precontracts and other matrimonial causes. In Ireland, 33 Hen.
8 cap. 6. In England. 32 Hen. 8. c. 38. 1 and 2 Edward 6. c. 23. 1 Elizab. 1.
o^ such as concern Testamentary matters, 21 Hen. 8. cap. 5. In this Kingdom, 28
Hen. 8. cap. 18. Also matters of Tithes, and the pursuits and impleadings
thereup on: He^^, 33 Hen. 8. c. 12. In England to the two Statutes mentioned
before, called circumspecte Agatis, and Articuli Cleris These may be added,
viz. 1 Richard 2. c. 14.27. and 28 Hen. 8. c. 20. 32 Hen. 8. c. 7. 2 Edward 6.
cap. 13. Concerning all which, all persons, without distinction of place or
office, who are concerned in any of these causes, they are subject to Episcopal
jurisdiction, to which the same causes do appertain, and by which they are
managed. And for matters which are criminal: To pass by other statutes, I
instance in these two only. The one De Excommunicato capiendo, in 5 Elizab. c.
23. where the several crimes therein mentioned, subject all such as shall be
detected and found guilty of any of them to the Ecclesiastical Tribunal: The
other is the statute for Uniformity of Common Prayer, etc. 1 Elizab. cap. 2.

In this statute, after a charge given in this Solemn and strict manner -- The
Queens most Excellent Majesty, The Lords Temporal, and all the Commons in this
present Parliament assembled, do in Gods Name earnestly require and charge all
the Archbishops and Bishops, to endeavor their utmost for the due execution
thereof^^ And then it follows for their power and authority in this behalf --
Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and singular the
said Archbishops, Bishops, etc. and all other their officers, exercising
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, as well in places exempt, as not exempt, within
their Diocese, shall have full power and authority by this Act, to reform,
correct and punish by censures of the Church, all and singular Persons, which
shall offend within any of their Jurisdictions or Diocesses after the said
Feast of St. John the Baptist next coming, against this Act or Statute, any
other Law, Statute, Privilege, liberty or provision, heretofore made, had, or
suffered to the contrary notwithstanding. See a so the statute made secundo
Elizab. cap. 2 here in Ireland. The thing we had in hand to make good was this:
That all persons whatsoever within any Diocese regularly, and de jure communi,
are subject to the Bishop of that Diocese in matters and causes of
Ecclesiastical cognizance, and that this position is not repugnant to the
statute Laws of these Kingdoms: This I think has been fully evidenced, and
needs no further enlarging upon.

And to give one instance of this jurisdictive and coercive power in Bishops
over all indefinitely, it shall be in the matter of substracting and detaining
of Tithes, a cause properly and anciently cognizable before them. That ample
Charter granted by King William the first to the Clergy, and mentioned at
large by Mr. Seldom in his History of Tithes, cap. 8. p. 225. The conclusion of
which is after this manner: Quicunque decimam detinuerit per justitiam Episcopi
and Regis (si necesse fuerit) ad redditionem arguatur. Startle not, Reader, at
the eying of this, that the Bishops power of Justicing has here precedence of
place before the Kings: conceive not, that this was to set Episcopal power on
high, and make Regal Authority subordinate to it: But this declares, to whose
judicial cognizance under the King, the proceeding against detainers of Tithes
(of what quality and condition soever they be) does immediatery appertain, and
who is the Officer and Minister of Justice therein: And the Kings power being
after mentioned, is so set down by way of judicial order and consequence, not
of subordination in power and Authority: Thus much these very words (si necesse
fuerit) plainly do import, as if it were said, should any of these detainers
prove refractory and contumacious against the Bishops authority, so that there
were a necessity of invoking the secu^ar power, the King would then be present
therewith, and by poenal coercions compel them to give obedience thereto.

Now for what concerns any other part of the Common Law, it may be also both
safely and truly in respect of the thing it self affirmed, That Ecclesiastical
proceedings according to the position laid down, bears no contrariety
therewith, as is set down by Dr. and Student, lib. 1 c. 6. That Episcopal
jurisdiction is of force in this Kingdom even by the Laws of this Realm, in
certain particular instances mentioned, is reported by Dr. Cosen from a certain
Author writing in King Hen. 8th time ( Apol. part 1. p. 7.) The Author is
showing, that the Bishop of Rome has not, nor ought to have any jurisdiction in
His Majesty's Kingdoms by the Laws of this Realm: The medium whereby he proves
this thing is this, because Certificates of Bishops in certain cases are
allowed by the Common Law, and admitted in the Kings Courts; But the Popes
Certificate is not admitted, vid. Lord Coke Instit. 4. cap. 74. circa initium.
and de jure Regis Ecclesiastico, p. 23. and 26. and diversos casus thidem
citatos. Besides, in the statute of Appeals, 24 Hen. 8. cap. 12. mention is
made of spiritual jurisdiction exercised in causes belonging to the same, and
it is there expressly said, That such exercise is grounded on the Laws and
customs of this Realm: circa mitium dicti statuti. Now certainly a statute best
informs any one, what is truly, and what is agreeable to the, Common Law. The
Bishops are by the Common Law the immediate Officers and Ministers of Justice
to the Kings Courts in causes Ecclesiastical, Lord Coke de jure Regis
Ecclesiastico, page 23.

And for what belongs to any custom or ancient usage that has the force of Law
among us, I cannot find out any such that is impugned by what I have affirmed:
But thus I may safely determine, That if any manner and course of things
established by long use and consent of our Ancestors, and still kept on foot by
daily continuance and practice, be a custom, and may set up for a Law
not-written: Then certainly the thing that has been affirmed (that is, the
exercise of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction by Bishops over all persons within
their respective Diocesses, and in causes belonging to it) and thus far
endeavored to be proved, is not at all contrariant thereto, but of perfect
agreement, yea of the same Nature with it.

Are there any that after all this will make their reply, and tell us of
persons exempted from Epis^^ pa^ power, and the exercise thereof bound up and
restrained in respect of such, and for proof of this will allege the
Authoritative proceeding of King William the Conqueror, who would not suffer
any Bishop to Excommunicate any of his Barons or Officers, for Adultery,
Incest, or any such Heinous crime, except by the Kings command first made
acquainted therewith. By the way it must be known, that the word Baron, is not
to be taken in that limited and restrictive sense, as to understand thereby the
Higher Nobility, to which Votes in Parliament do belong: But generally for such
who by Tenure in chief, or in Capite held land of the King, Seldom spicelegium
ad Eadmerum, referente Tho. Fullero B. 3. Histor. Eccles. p. 4.

Whatsoever now shall be collected hence to overthrow what has been before
said, is easily answered: For King William very well understood his own Imperal
power and right over the whole body Politic (whereof the Clergy were a part)
And that by virtue thereof, the Actual Exercise of both Civil and
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction did flow from him. And that he might where and when
he saw cause, restrain the Execution of either, how long, or in respect of what
persons he pleased, and this by special privilege and immunity granted by him
to such persons: And yet that jurisdiction so restrained, be no more impeached
thereby, than the ordinary settled course of the common Law, by the Exemption of
one or more particular persons from being proceeded against therein. Let us
seek to understand this by a very plain and familiar example every day
obversant before us: His Majesty has a standing Army in Ireland in Pay, and
under His Command: All the Officers and private Soldiers therein, for some
good reasons best known to himself in His great wisdom, are exempted from any
Civil, or criminal Impleadments before the Ecclesiastical or Temporal
Tribunals, without leave first had and obtained from His Royal self, or His
Vice gerent here. Now will it not be a weak and inconsequent way of arguing, to
conclude from hence, that the Judges in the Peinpora Courts have not an
universal jurisdiction subjectively, in respect of those over whom they are
appointed, because a few a^e by special privilege exempted from it? It will be
so too certainly, to conclude the like of the Bishops, the Kings Ecclesiastical
Judges in the Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, because s^^re certain person or
persons may by peculiar dispensation be taken out of the same: let the utm^st
be urged that can be fetched out of this present instance from William the
Conqueror, yet we shall find enough to still and quiet that (and in the same
kind too) remember we but the 12th chapter of the statute ca^ed Articuli Cleri,
a^ the before mentioned: By that it will be apparent, That King William even in
this particular, did not so narrowly bound Episcopal jurisdiction, as King
Edward the second did let it loose, extend and enlarge it. The one exempted his
servants and Tenants from the Ecclesiastical jurisdiction: The other almost
three hundred years after, and by a statute Law, gave both up, and fully
submitted them to it.

Without more ado: The question is not whether the King as Supreme Governor
over all persons, in all Ecclesiastical things and causes, may exempt any of
his Retainers, or any subordinate Officers in places of Civil power under Him,
from being impleaded or proceed^d against in Ecclesiastical Courts: But the
question is, whether he has Actually done it or no, or if done it, whether to
persons so qualified as our case proceeds upon. The former I do not, I must
not, I dare not deny: For the Regal power and Supremacy reaches as far in
granting privileges and immunities to any (who are thought worthy of the same)
in respect of Ecclesiastical matters and trials, as it does in respect of civil
matters and trials. What he may do in the one, he may do in the other. Thus I
read, That the King by His Prerogative may give protection to such persons as
are His debtors, so as not to be sued by their Creditors till Himself be
satisfied, Fitz. Not. br. fol. 28. B. Instances more might be given of this
kind. So he may likewise exempt from the Ecclesiastical jurisdiction: But that
His Majesty has Actually done this to persons so qualified as our case
proceeds upon, and quatenus, as they are so qualified; is that thing the
contrary to which I have hitherto engaged my self to make clear, and have yet
something remaining to add thereto: For the present instance from William the
Conqueror; It was no restraining of Episcopal jurisdiction, but in such a
particular matter reserving to himself the power of appointing the exercise of
it: or if it yet will be looked upon as a restraint put thereon, yet it must be
withal considered, that he did not so much limit and restrain in this case, as
he was pleased to give greater scope to it in a matter of far greater
importance, as shall be showed by and by.

Mean while I sum up this point thus; That the Established course of
Ecclesiastical proceedings, is not repugnant to the Municipal Laws of this
Kingdom; that by the gracious indulgence and concessions of our Pious Princes,
a liberty and power is granted by them to the Bishops to exercise actually
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction upon the Subjects of the Crown: That they may be
summoned: That refractory and contumacious persons may by coercive power be
reduced to good order: That compulsories may be issued forth and censures
inflicted, where just occasion requires, and all due requisits have preceded:
They may hear and determine in causes of instance between party and party, and
also proceed against any criminals (under Ecclesiastical cognizance) of what
quality and condition soever they be, for correction, and reformation of
manners.

3. This Position, That all persons within any Diocese regularly, and de jure
communi, are subject to the jurisdiction of the Bishop of that Diocese in all
matters and causes of Ecclesiastical cognizance, is not any way intrenching
upon, or infringing His Majesty's Prerogative Royal. The Kings Prerogative is
called by Sir Henry Spelman, Glossar. ibid. Lex Regie dignitatis: by the
Civilians, Jus Imperii: by the later Feudists, jus Regaliorum: And the import
of all these, is comprised in this description given thereof. The Kings
Prerogative is that special power, pre-eminence, or privilege that the King
has in any kind over and above other persons, and above the ordinary course of
the Common Law. Cowell ibidem. A branch of this is the Kings Legistative power
in Ecelesiastical matters and causes, with the advice and consent of such as
are appointed thereto. And by the Statute of King Edward the second, in the
Seventeenth year of His Reign, called Prerogativa Regis, it is said, That
whatsoever Gracious concessions the King is pleased to make unto the Honor of
Gods Church and good of the Common wealth, and for the remedy of such as be
grieved; He would not that at any time they should turn in prejudice of
Himself, or of His Crown; but that such Rights as appertain to Him, should be
saved in all points: Rastal's Collection ibidem. Now the Actual Exercise of
Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, being that which by special Favor of our Kings is
granted to the Bishops after a very large and ample manner; if any thing
therefore in that Grart, should tend to the diminution of the Rights of the
Crown, yet by the Statute before mentioned, these is still a salvo to them in
all respects whatsoever; so that in regard of His Majesty's Prerogative Royal,
in this particular branch of it, as well as in all the rest, the Position
before set down, does not, nay, cannot indeed infringe the same.

I touched a little before the derivation of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction as to
the executive part of it from the Crown: As every Bishop at the time of his
Consecration, d^es by Solemn Oath recognize the Kings Majesty to be the only
Supreme Governor in this Realm, in all Spiritual and Ecclesiastical things and
causes, as Temporal; and by receiving from the King a Patent of Restitution of
His Temporalities, is thereby invested with Actual Jurisdiction (that is, a
power to exercise and execute such Jurisdiction, in foro externo and
contentioso, in such causes as belong thereto) so in the exercise and
proceedings made in the same, he depends upon the King, from whom he derives
his a thority and right to exercise: In all Appeals made to the King in His
Chancery, He defers to him, as habenti Supremam authoritatem Ecclesiasticam,
being the chief and Supreme Ordinary; and, acquiesces in his final and ultimate
decisions.

A little before, I mentioned a Grant of King William the Conqueror, wherein
great scope was given to Episcopal Jurisdiction; it is now proper to set down
what that was, and this Historical account we may take thereof: By this King,
an entire Jurisdiction was assigned to the Bishops by themselves, wherein they
should have cognizance of all matters and causes relating to Religion. It
seems, by the Ancient Saxon Law, the Bishops and Sheriffs jointly kept their
Courts together at certain set times of the year; in the Conquerors time, these
two Jurisdictions thus concurring, were parted asunder: Fullers Church History
of Britain, Book 3. p. 5. from Eadmer, who lived in the time of King Henry the
first, gives some account hereof Spelman in Glossar. v. Hundredum.
: But I shall set down the same, in the words of a late, and a learned Writer,
proper to the occasion he was upon.

Conquestor porro Forum Ecclesiasticum a Laico distinxit: Nam cum antea sub
Anglo-Saxonibus, singulis mensibus Aldermannus seu Praeses una cum Episcopo jus
dixissent in Curia Centenaria, quam Hundredum dicimus, mandavit Episcopis and
Archidiaconis, ne deinceps jus dicant in Curia Centenaria sed in loco per
Episcopum designando, ibique judicent secundum Canones and Leges Episcopales,
and contumaces contra little mandata Excommunicationis sententia, and Brachio
Regio parere cogantur, cum Praecepto Vicecomitibus and Praepositis Regiis dato,
ne aliquem in jus vocent coram se de iis quae ad Forum Episcopalem spectant.
Dr. Duck, de Authoritate Juris Civilis in Regno Angliae, lib. 2. cap. 8. p. 2.
sect. 26. And in the margent of his Book, alleges Apud quem^^ See this Charter
more amply and fully declared; the same being granted and directed to
Rhemigius, the first Bishop of Lincoln, ib.
Coke's Instit. p. 4. cap. 54. and lib. 2. cap. 6. sect. 135. Char. 2. Rich. 2.
m. 1.

By this it appears, how early the exercise of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction by
Bishops was on foot in the Kingdom of England, and that as it derived it self
from the Crown; for besides this distinct constituting of an Ecclesiastical
Court from the Court of the Tourn, even before the separation, before spoken
of, was made; yet the Bishops had then the judicial cognizance of
Ecclesiastical causes and matters peculiarly reserved to them, so it is plainly
colligible from the Laws of King Edgar, among which this was one; Celeberimus
autem ex omni Satrapia conventus his quotannis Agitor: cui quidem illius
Dioceseos Episcopus and Aldermannus intersunto quorum alter jura divina, alter
jura humana populum edoceto: Lord Coke on the Statute of Circumspecte Agatis v.
Curia Christianitatis. I might yet trace Antiquity higher in this point, but my
reading is too slender, and my opportunities too mean, that I should think my
self able to give a punctual and exact Account thereof; Take notice only in
brief, what the Pen of a learned Writer has set down -- The British, Saxon, and
Danish Kings, did usually with their Clergy, or great Council, make
Ecclesiastical Laws, and regulate the external Discipline of the Church within
their Dominions: Among the Laws of King Edward the Confessor, these were two of
them; one, that makes it the office of a King to govern the Church as the Vicar
of God; another, supposes a paramount power in the King over the Ecclesiastical
Courts, because they were to take cognizance of wrong done in Ecclesiastical
Courts: Archbishop Bramhall's Vindication of the Church of England, etc. p. 67.
King Edward the Confessor was indeed after the time of King Edgar before
mentioned; but taking both together, and what was done by both, thence is
showed, that the practice of former Kings was followed by them; and that there
was an Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction then and before exercised by Bishops, which
exercise thereof derived from, and was regulated by these and other preceding
Kings of England.

That which has been said, makes very fair for our purpose, and points out to
us to take notice of these several observable things.

1. That the Exercise of Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical by Bishops, in the right
constitution thereof in the Kingdom of England, had no deperdance on Rome.

2. That much of the intermediate practice in this kind, degenerated from its
first and right institution; and until the time of Henry the eighth, was a mere
usurpation and encreachment on the English Crown.

3. That whereas it is said, The Bishops were to judge secundum Canones and
Leges Episcopales, by Canons (I understand) the Canons of General and
Provincial Councils abroad, especially the first four General Councils,
according as was Enacted by the Emperor Justinian, Authent. collat. 9. Novell.
131. cap. de Regulis. and cap. Sancimus igitur: And by Leges Episcopales, I
understand their Home-laws; I mean, the Ecclesiastical Laws made by the
British, Saxon, and Danish Kings, with the Council of their Bishops, variety of
which may be found, by him that will consult Sir Henry Spelman's Councils. The
body of the Canon Law was not then in being; my meaning is, it was not so as
such: The several particulars that the Decrees consist, and were made up of,
were indeed then and long before in being; but they were not compiled together,
till near fourscore years after this^s and that was done by Gratian the Monk,
in the year (as some say, for there is much difference in the computation of
this time) 11 49. ( Ridley's view, etc. p. 74.) And by Eugenius the third
allowed to be read in the Schools, Of Greg. 9. set forth Anno 1230.

The Decret. in sexto Anno 1297.

The Clementines of Clent. 5 set forth Anno 1317. And not long after, were
extant the Extravagan's of John the 22d, and other Popes.


and to be alleged for Law: And for the Decretals, etc. Clementines and
Extravagants, they came in successively along while after: Here, by the way, is
seen the vanity and wildness of some men's fancies, that by all means will have
Bishops Courts to be of Pop^sh extraction; and, that both in their Erection and
Constitution, they receive influence and authority from the Romish Consittory:
Than which, nothing is more untrue in its self, and unhist or ical, as to the
right deducing the primitive Institution hereof (not to speak of the Eastern
Churches) even in the Kingdom of England it self.

4. This is also hence observable, That the present course commanded, and
observed by the Bishops in the Exercise of this Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction,
suits nearly with the ancient state thereof; and is so far from damnifying the
Prerogative Royal, that it mainly asserts and vindicates the same.

It might perhaps be doubted, That different Jurisdictions in one Kingdom, and
those exercised by persons of different professions, though deriving from one
Supreme Head, would rather cause, than prevent many inconveniences; and those
inconveniences so bad in their nature, as to detract from, rather than add to
the Supreme Magistrates Dignity and Prerogative; as namely, by introducing
confusion and disorder in the management of both, and in the causes and matters
to be managed in them, and occasioning continual jealousies and distastes
betwixt the persons appointed to manage them, observed by my Lord Bacon's
Advancement of Learning, Aphor. 96. But, in truth, no such ill Effects do
follow hereupon; for distinct Jurisdictions exercised by persons of several
orders and professions in these Kingdoms, and vested with authority from the
Supreme Magistrates so to do (though juridical proceedings therein be different
from the ordinary form and prescribed coursel of the Common Law) argues
unplenitude, not a defect of power; an advancing of it, not derogating from it,
in that Supreme Magistrate granting the same; his great wisdom and prudence in
a determinate stating the nature and bounds of each Jurisdiction; the
appropriating certain causes to be heard and determined in them respectively,
commanding all His Subjects to give due obedience thereunto, in such causes as
are limited to those Courts, and which any Subject may be concerned in: And as
both derive from, soito depend upon him, in an equal poise as to the Authority
belonging to each; so that all the supposed inconveniences are sufficiently
provided against: And the ordering all these things in this set manner, is an
effect of the Kings high Prerogative enabling him so to do, and is both by
Custom and Law among us allowed of The King is the indifferent Arbitrator in
all Jurisdictions, as well Spiritual as Temporal, and it is a Right of His
Crown to distribute to them; that is, to declare their bounds: Lord Hobbarts
Reports. Dr. Jame 's Case.
; observe with me these following instances.

The Kings Majesty is plyased to confirm a peculiar Jurisdiction granted by His
Royal Progenitors, to the two Universities of Cambridge and Oxford: The
Chancellor of each University, or his Commissary, administer Justice according
to the Civil Law, and the Customs and Statutes of the University, where the
persons at variance together are Students, or one of them at least is such;
insomuch as in personal Actions for Debt, matters of Accounts, or any Contracts
made within their own Precincts, and in some criminal matters likewise, none of
them may be called to Westminster Hall; but the cognizance thereof belongs to
the Chancellor of the said University, or his Commissary, as is before said. If
any Appeals be made from Sentences given in any such Trials, they are first
interposed to the Regents, last of all to the Kings Majesty himself: Cowell.
Interp. in verbo (Privilege) Dr. Duck ut supra. sect. 30. Will any man now say,
That the Exercise of this power, is intrenching on the Kings Prerogative,
because His great Courts at Westminster are not applied to, and a Jurisdiction
distinct from and independent upon them is exercised? Surely no, because the
Exercise of this power is granted by Royal Charter; it proceeds from, it
depends upon, it is done in an acknowledgment of the Kings Supreme Power and
Prerogative.

There is a Court of great Dignity and Honor, called the Court of the
Constable and Earl Marshal of England: Herein are determined all Contracts
touching Deeds of Arms out of the Realm, as Combats, Blazons of Armory, and the
right of bearing Arms, etc. proper to particular Families; the manner of
proceeding in this Court, is according to the form of the Civil Law L. Coke
Jurisdiction of Courts. ca. 17.
, the use and authority of which, is of great sway herein: Appeals that are
interposed from any definitive sentence in this Court, are brought to the Kings
Majesty Himself, not to His Chancellor, the municipal Law is altogether
secluded from hence; Justice is administered, Delinquents are punished, without
any relation to that, or the Judges thereof; yet the Kings Prerogative is not
infringed by the exercise of this Jurisdiction, because it is derived from the
King.

I might add here the Court of the Admiralty, the peculiar Jurisdiction
exercised within the Cinque Ports by the Lord Warden thereof: In these Courts,
matters both civil and criminal are tried according to the course prescribed by
the civil Law; but in the following Leafs I shall have occasion more distinctly
to write something relating to these matters, and respectively to these two
Courts. Now as it is in these different Jurisdictions they derive from the
King, His Subjects are bound by command from Him, to obey the Authority
thereof; if they refuse to obey, by poenal coercions proper to each, they may
be compelled to it; yet still the Royal Prerogative is not any whit diminished,
nor the Rights of the Crown at all impaired hereby: As it is thus (I say) in
the distinct Jurisdictions, so it is in the exercise of Episcopal Jurisdiction
in the Ecclesiastical Courts.

And now I have uttered thus much, I perceive my self beginning to walk on a
narrow, slippery ridge, where a steep precipice is on each side. The danger of
falling on one hand, is, least I abase the Prerogative so low, as to subject
the King in Ecclesiastical causes and matters under the Resolves and Decisions
of Classical Assemblies Huic Disciplinae omnes orhis principes and Monarchas
fasers suos submittere and parere necesse est Travers. Discipline. Ecclesiast.
p. 142, 143. Bishop White in his Preface to his Treatise concerning the Sabbath.
, as the Presbyterians do; or bring Him in subordination to the Bishop of Rome,
as the Papists do. The danger on the other hand, is the over-exalting of the
Prerogative, so that it might be thought we attribute to the King (as sometimes
the Papists object to us) a power to exercise Sacerdotal Offices in the Church,
to inflict censures And yet our Law attributes much in this particular, and
that very highly to the King: Reges Sacro olco unct^ spiritualis Jurisdiction^s
sunt capaces. 33 Edw. 3. Aid de Roy. 107. Coke. Cawdrie's case. p. 16.
, etc.

Now to walk even and steady betwixt these two dangerous downfalls, is that
which must be endeavored; and therefore whereas we own, and solemnly recognize
the Kings Supremacy in Ecclesiastical matters and causes, it is to be
understood according to the sense and meaning set down in the words of the 37th
Article of the Church of England, and also in the Article of the Church of
Ireland concerning civil Magistrates. The Kings Majesty has the chief
Government of all Estates Ecclesiastical and Civil within His Dominions, see
Queen Elizabeth's Injunctions set forth in the first year of Her Reign. Now
this Supremacy keeps the King above all others within His own Kingdoms; and, it
keeps Him from a subordination either to the Presbytery or the Papacy; and it
is such a Supremacy as is only Political and Architectonical (as it is phrased)
that is, a power paramount over all His Subjects, to see that each sort of such
as are under His Government, as well Ecclesiastics, as others, do their duties
in their several and respective stations; and that all things be acted by
proper and fit Agents, for preserving both Church and State in tranquillity and
safety.

Thus it appears, that nothing either belonging to Ecclesiastical Order or
Jurisdiction, is exercised by our Kings in their own persons, according as is
fully declared in the following parts of the said Article. Neither does this
give any countenance to Erastianism, as some have (improperly enough) inferred
from thence; herein, as has been described, is seen the Kings Supremacy: By it,
He is the Keeper of both Tables; He governs and regulates Affairs so both in
Church and State, as may best conduce to the preservation of true Piety to God,
and right Justice to Men.

From this power paramount and Supremacy, does descend the Bishops power of
exercising Jurisdiction; that is, exercising the same actually; I say,
actually: for, as our Divines do distinguish (Archbishop Bramhall's answer to
R.C. p. 160, 161. Bishop Sanderson de conscient. obligat. praelect. 7. sect.
29, 30. Bishop Bilson of Subjection, par. 3. p. 293. in octavo. Mr. Hooker
Eccles. Pol. B. 8. p. 213, etc.) There is an habitual, and there is an actual
Jurisdiction; habitual Jurisdiction flows from Episcopal Order, actual
Jurisdiction, is a Right and liberty granted, opportunity and means afforded of
exercising and reducing that habit into act; and that, in foro externo and
contentioso, after a certain and peculiar manner appointed therein. Thus the
King has His Ecclesiastical Laws, and His Ecclesiastical Courts, and His
Ecclesiastical Judges See Sir Joh. Davies Reports. Pramunire versus finem.
; there are causes of such and such a Nature appointed by the King to be judged
of by them, in those Courts, according to those Laws Many things the Popes
formerly have taken upon them to give directions of, and Enact Canons
concerning Episcopal Jurisdiction (under this salvo) in ordine ad spiritualia:
which things are matters merely of civil intercourse and commerce betwixt man
and man; such are those titles in the Canon Law, de emptione and venditione, de
rerum permutatione, de transactionibus, de depesito, etc. Testamentary and
Matrimonial, and Decimal matters, are amongst these likewise; but although
these may better seem to have the aspect of matters spiritual, yet that
spiritual men have any Jurisdiction therein, must not be imputed to the nature
of the things themselves, nor to any superiority that they have over other men
by reason of them; but this must be imputed to the Roval bounty and munificence
of pious Kings; who, for the Honor of the Church, have so ordered those Causes
to be of Ecclesiastical cognizance, and that their Subjects concerned therein,
should be obedient to Ecclesiastical Judges therein. Hereupon a Learned Bishop
declares, That the Popes Decrees, Judgments and Executions in these Cases, if
claimed from Christ as things spiritual, and not granted by Caesar, are but
open invasions of Princes Rights, calling those things Spiritual, which indeed
be Civil and Temporal. Bishop Bilson's Christian Subjection, page 2. Sir Robert
Wiseman, The Law of Laws.
: All persons within their respective Diocesses (that is, certain circuits and
precincts of Jurisdiction by the King set out to each Bishop, and those in
their bounds and limits, either to be contracted, or extended, as He pleases)
are commanded to be subject to them; if they refuse, may bu^ constrained to it.
In matters of Appeal, the last complaint is ever to be made to Him; He is the
final and ultimate Judge, who by fit Delegates appointed thereunto, does
redress grievances, answer complaints, and finally and absolutely determine
what is brought before Him. The Learned Archbishop and Primate of all Ireland,
a little before mentioned, has given a full and satisfactory Account of this
matter; his words are these, worthy our best observation.

Neither do we draw or derive any spiritual Jurisdiction from the Crown, but
either liberty and power to exercise actually and lawfully upon the Subjects of
the Crown that habitual Jurisdiction which we received at our Ordination; or
the enlargement of our Jurisdiction objectively by the Princes referring more
causes to the cognizance of the Church; than formerly it had: or lastly, the
increase of it subjectively, by their giving to Ecclesiastical Judges, an
external coercive power which before they had not. To go yet one step higher,
in cases that are indeed spiritual, or merely Ecclesiastical, such as concorn
the Doctrine of Faith, or Administration of the Sacraments, or the ordering or
degrading of Ecclesiastical persons, Sovereign Princes have (and have only) an
Architectonical power, to see that Clergy men do their Duties in their proper
places; but this power is always most properly exercised by the advice and
ministry of Ecclesiastical persons; and sometimes necessary, as in the
degradation of one in Holy Orders by Ecclesiastical Delegates: Vindication of
the Church of England from Schism, etc.

The Exercise of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction by Bishops thus being stated and
settled in the likeness that it carries with the other instances before set
down, neither invades not impairs, but much advances and amplifies the Kings
Prerogative. It comes to pass indeed by this means, that the Kings Supremacy is
preserved firm and safe in the Ecclesiastical Polity.

I know a great Objection is made against all this from hence, because that in
Ecclesiastical proceedings, Citations, Decrees, and other instruments, issue
forth in the Bishops, but not in the Kings Name; whence would be inferred, That
such attempts and judiciary proceedings, made, not in the Kings Name, are
invasive on the Royal Prerogative. In order to the Answering of this Objection,
let it be observed, That there are two great Offices in the Kingdom of England;
the one, that of the Lord High Admiral; the other, that of the Lord Warden of
the Onque Ports: These have great inflience in foreign parts, upon the Sea, and
within the Lands. I before gave you some intimation of their distinct
Jurisdiction and manner of jurisdical proceedings, different from the Courts of
the Common Law: Both the jurisdictions of these two great Officers are ample
and authoritative, yet both the Lord Admiral, and the Lord Warden of the Cinque
Ports, do send forth Writs in their own Names, and they do it (says Dr. Cowell
in verbo, Court.) as the Bishops hold their Courts by the Kings Authority
(virtute Magistratus sui) In the High Court of the Earl Maishal the same
practice is observed. In the Universities, Processes, and Writs, issue forth in
the Chancellor, Vice Chancellor, or their Commissaries Name. Will any now
presume to challenge any of these jurisdictions for invading the Kings
Prerogative? Will any dare to say, That they pare off some rights, or pluck
some flowers from the Kings Imperial Crown? I suppose not. How comes it to pass
then, that the Bishops jurisdiction does? Whatsoever may be alleged in defense
of the other, may be said (and it may be something more too) in justification
of this: And know moreover, That proceedings in these Temporal distinct
jurisdictions go much further upon the persons of men, than those of any
Ecclesiastical Court does, even to the imprisoning of them, and in all of them
(except that of the University) to the inflicting of capital punishments. And
it deserves our further observing, what the great Lawyer Sir Edward Coke says
touching this very thing. Albeit the proceedings and process in the
Ecclesiastical Courts be in the Name of the Bishops, etc. It follows not
therefore, that either the Court is not the Kings, or that the Law whereby they
proceed, is not the Kings Law; for taking one example for many, every Leet and
View of franck pledge holden by a subject, is kept in the Lords Name, and yet
it is the Kings Court, and all the proceedings therein are directed by the
Kings Laws; and many subjects in England have and hold Courts of Record, and
other Courts, and yet all their proceedings be according to the Kings Laws and
customs of the Realm, De jure Regis Eccles. p. 39. The Learned Bishop Sanderson
has convincingly demonstrated, That Citations and Decrees in the Bishops Name,
no way encroacheth on the Kings Authority; and that they who urge the contrary
have this meaning, rather to do the Bishops hurt, than the King service, and
that their affections (so far as by what is visible we are able to judge) are
much what alike toward both: His Book called Episcopacy not prejudicial to
Regal power, p. 3, 4. Bishops proceedings in Ecclesiastical Courts under the
Name, Style, and Seal of the Bishop. See this largely discussed and declared to
be warrantable by Law, by my Lord Coke's comment on the Statute of Marriage, 32
Hen. 8. p. 685, 686, 687.

But this Objection is taken up again, and urged with new force from hence;
That in the First year of King Edward the Sixth, it was by Statute Enacted,
That the Bishops should make their processes in the Kings Name, and that their
Seals should be the Kings Arms. This Statute, says Mr. Rastall, was repealed 1
Mariae 1. And that Statute not being revived by Queen Elizabeth in her Reign,
all proceeded well enough without danger: But in the first Parliament of King
James, there passed an Act for continuing and reviving diverse Statutes, and for
repealing of some others, 1 Jaccb. c. 29. Into the body whereof a clause was
cunningly conveyed, for the repealing of that Statute of the Reign of Queen
Mary, by which King Edward 's stood repealed: Upon this account it was, that a
little before our late turbulent confusions in England, this very thing was
urged against the Bishops, and their proceedings were declared to be bold
usurpations, and encroachments on the Prerogative Royal, and violations of the
Law.

But as it is usual, where men are prepossessed against any thing, they are apt
to run into many mistakes about the some: It happened so in this very matter;
Much ^^lse was raised, much stir made hereupon by the Anti^prelatical party; as
if the Bishops who had given themselves out to be the most zealous assertors,
were indeed become the only dangerous impugners of the Kings Prerogative: That
now they were deprehended in the very design, and therefore must needs fall,
having no plea to make for themselves, and having the mischief of their own
visible and illegal actings witnessing against them. At this rate, their
Adversaries vaunted, and fore-judged them; and no doubt, (as matters went in
those times) the severest animadversion that could have followed hereupon,
would have been made, if further proceedings therein had not been seasonably
prevented by the wisdom of a pious and prudent Prince.

For the Blessed King Charles the First, having beee made acquainted, what
advantage these forward and busy people were designing to make hereof, to the
overthrow of His Ecclesiastical Courts, and the Bishops His Judges in them. He
did (as Dr. Heylin reports in the life of Archbishop Laud, p. 342.) call
together in the year 1637, the two Lords Chief Justices, the Lord Chief Baron,
and the rest of the Judges and Barons, and propounds to them these three
following particulars to be certified of. 1. Whether processes may not issue
out of the Ecclesiastical Courts in the Name of the Bishops. 2. Whether a
Patent under the Great Seal be necessary for the keeping of Ecclesiastical
Courts, and enabling Citations, Suspensions, Excommunications, and other
censures of the Church. 3. Whether Citations ought to be in the Kings Name, and
under His Seal of Arms: And the like for Institutions and Inductions to
Benefices, and corrections of Ecclesiastical Offenses: And the like for
Visitations, whether an express Commission or Patent under the Great Seal of
England were requisite?

To which three Proposals, the said Judges unanimously on the First of July in
the fore mentioned year concurred, and certified under their Hands: By
Answering to the First thing propounded, affirmatively; and to the other two,
negatively: And that the forementioned Statute of Edward the Sixth, is not now
in force: Whereupon, the King issues out His Proclamation, wherein having first
taxed the libellous Books and Pamphlets, published against the Bishops; and
after a recital made of these proceedings, He concludes the Proclamation thus
-- That His Majesty thought good, with the advice of His Council, that a
public Declaration of these the opinions of His Reverend and Learned Judges,
being agreeable to the judgment and resolution of former times, should be made
known to all His Subjects, as well to vindicate the legal proceedings of His
Ecclesiastical Courts, and Ministers, from the unjust and scandalous imputation
of invading or intrenching on His Royal Prerogative, as to settle the minds,
and stop the mouths of all unquiet spirits: That for the future, they presume
not to censure His Ecclesiastical Courts, or Ministers, in these their just and
warranted proceedings. And hereof His Majesty admonishes all His subjects to
take warning, as they will Answer the contrary at their peril, etc. Resolutions
unanimously given by all the Judges and the Earons of the Exchequer (says my
Lord Coke.) are for matters of Law of Highest Anthority, next unto the Court of
Parliament. Sir Edward Coke 2 Instit. p. 618.


But some men's minds will not be satisfied with any thing of this nature, yet
are willing to embrace what is fortified with Parliamentary Authority. Both
therefore to gratify them, and more thoroughly to confirm the matter in hand,
we have also this Parliamentary Authority to offer unto them: For although by
an Act of Parliament in the Seventeenth year of King Charles the First, all
jurisdiction Ecclesiastical was quite abrogated and annulled, (I speak in
respect of England; for here in Ireland no such Act was ever made) nevertheless
at the happy Restoration of our Gracious Sovereign that now is, viz. Anno Dom.
1660. The said Act of the 17. of King Charles the First is repealed; and that
was Anno decimo tertio Caroli Secundi; and in that Act of Repeal it is thus
declared -- That the said Act of the 17. of King Charles the First
notwithstanding. All Archbishops, Bishops, and all others exercising
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, may proceed, determine, sentence, execute and
exercise all manner of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, and all censures and
coercions appertaining and belonging to the same, before the making of the Act
before recited, in all causes and matters belonging to Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction, according to the Kings Majesty's Ecclesiastical Laws, used and
practiced in this Realm, in as ample manner and form, as they did and might
lawfully have done before the making of the said Act.

This Act is indeed attended with three Provisoes. The first is concerning the
High Commission Court, which is excepted from having any revival, or force, or
authority given to it, or to the erection of any other such like Court by
commission hereby. The second Proviso is concerning the Oath, called the Oath
ex Officio, which is excepted against, and forbid to be tendered, or administered
unto any in the exercising of any Spiritual jurisdiction. The third Proviso is,
to limit and confine the power of Ecclesiastical Judges in all their
proceedings, to what was, and by Law might be used before the year 1639.
(observe the year mentioned to be 1639, which plainly includes, allows, and
confirms King Charles the First His Proclamation, in the year 1637. In this
clause and branch of this Statute, provision is also made against any
confirmation to be given to the Canons, made Anno 1640.

These particulars only excepted, and here provided against all Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, as to it is exstensiveness in all causes of Spiritual cognizance,
and over all persons (of what quality and degree soever they be, or in what
Office soever they are) in those causes, is firmly ratified and established.
Bartolus his Rule is truly applicable here, Exceptio firmat Regulam in
non-exceptis.

But let all this be granted (will the Excepters say) that proceedings in
Ecclesiastical Courts against private persons, either in matters of instance,
or correction, are not entrenching on the Prerogative Royal; yet the case is
otherwise, when such proceedings are bent upon public Officers, as Mayors, and
Sheriffs, etc. because they are vested with the Kings Authority, and nearly
represent His Person. They are His Ministers and Dispensers of Justice, and by
such proceedings against them, public affairs might be hindered of their
dispatch, and the Kings business not be executed. I Answer, (there is no
otherwise in this case) For, if the matter be justifiable, that is, if the
cause any such proceeding is begun upon, do belong to Ecclesiastical
cognizance, then the Spiritual Jurisdiction in the Bishops management reaches
such public Officers, as well as others, and that without invading, or in the
least violating the Kings Prerogative: If occasions so require, Ecclesiastical
censures may be inflicted on them, as well as on any other of the Kings
subjects that do offend. And yet the doing of that will not be a censuring the
King in Effigy, as some have, with very little reason, and but too much
passion affirmed. Observe we what may be done, and adjuged against such public
Officers, in the Kings Temporal Courts.

A Mayor and Sheriffs may be impleaded before the Kings Temporal Judges in
causes Civil. The people of Waterford may remember one or two instances hereof
very lately; when the Schoolmaster there sued the Mayor and Sheriffs, before
the Lords Justices of Assize, for detaining the Salary they had contracted to
pay him. A Mayor of any City or Corporation, may be arrested, may, during the
time of his Mayoralty, be sued to an Out-lawry in the Kings Temporal Courts.
The Kings Temporal Judges may upon contempts, convent Mayors before them; and
occasion so requiring, commit them to prison. It is not long since that a case
in Waterford was coming near this, when in one Whaley's cause, a Writ of Error
was brought from the Court of the Kings Bench: This the Mayor refusing to obey,
and complaint thereof being made to the Court, a Pursuivant was ordered to
attach the Mayor, and bring him before the Judges, there to answer his
contempt; which undoubtedly would have been done, if the Execution of that
Order had not been seasonably prevented, by an Affidavit made to this effect,
That the Mayor did not refuse to obey the said Writ of Error, but only
deferred the admitting of it, until he sat judicially in Court; the same
having been before privately exhibited to him. By this means that proceeding
was stopped, which else would have manifested, that the Mayor of Waterford is
not so absolute, but is indeed under control, and may be convented and
punished by the Kings temporal Judges, without any affront done to the King in
Effigy, or to his power and authority; which he the said Mayor in his proper
station, and within his own Precinct does bear.

And that Sheriffs even while they are in the exercise of their Office, may be
proceeded against in the Kings Temporal Courts, none can be ignorant of, that
understands the practice of those Courts, and remembers there is such a Court
as the Exchequer, or has undergone the Office of a Sheriff: A Sheriff, by the
Statute of Westminster, 1. cap. 9. Anno tertio Edvardi primi, for not doing his
Duty, and for concealing of Felons, may be fined and imprisoned. One Bronchard
in Queen Elizabeth's time being Sheriff, had an Information Exhibited in the
Star Chamber against him, for returning one that was not chosen a Knight of the
Parliament, Abridgement of the Reports of the Lord Dyer, 425. A Sheriff of
Barkshire was committed to the Fleet, and fined by the Court of Common Pleas
for unjust taking of Fees: Brownloes Reports, second part, p. 283. I doubt not,
but the Learned in the Municipal Laws, are able to furnish out plenty of
instances of this kind.

Well then, Mayors and Sheriffs may be Impleaded, may be Outlawed, may be
Arrested, may be Fined, may be Imprisoned in the Kings Temporal Courts, by,
from, and before his Temporal Judges: And in all these Inflictions, here is no
Fining, no Arresting, no Out-lawing, no Imprisoning, no Attaching the King in
Effigy, nor any intrenching upon his Authority from himself to his subordinate
civil Officers: Here Is no hindering the dispensing of Justice, no obstructing
the Kings business, nor letting the execution of His Majesty's service in the
hands of these public Officers; that is, at all dreaded hereby. And pray, How
then comes it to pass, that the case is not the same, when in matters of
Ecclesiastical cognizance, the Kings Ecclesiastical Judge in his Ecclesiastical
Courts proceeds against such persons, by penalties proper and usually inflicted
therein? Is not the Kings Authority in His Ecclesiastical Courts in matters
belonging to them, as forcible and coercive respectively to the manner of
proceedings therein, as the same Regal Authority is in the temporal Courts in
matters belonging to them, and respectively to the manner of proceedings
therein? The King has both Jurisdictions united in Him (as has been largely
before showed) Rex habet omnia jura in manu sua: It is a Maxim concerning the
King, which I read cited from Bracton, lib. 2. c. 24. So it is also said, Rex
est mixta persona quia tum Ecclesiasticam turn temporalem Jurisdictionem habet.
11 Hen. 7.12.
Now all is completed in these two Jurisdictions, which although they may be
diverse, yet they are not contrary in him; they are both radically and
fundamentally in him, and derivatively only in all Officers and Ministers of
Justice in either kind. Is the King then absolute in the one, and yet limited
in the other? less powerful in his Ecclesiastical, than in his civil Supremacy?
That is, Supreme, and not Supreme: Thus to say, is either to contradict ones
self, or neither better nor worse than plainly to derogate from the Kings
Ecclesiastical Supremacy; and to give him the Name, but to deny the Thing: It
incurs the danger of implied, if not direct disowning Regal Supremacy in all
causes Ecclesiastical, and over all persons that may be concerned therein. It
is plainly to make a magis and minus in that Authority, which will not admit
any such thing Regia dignitas est indivisibilis. Coke 4 Instit. c. 48.
, it being always equally and alike forcible in all; that is, chief and
supreme in both Administrations, Ecclesiastical and Civil. Let Us state a Case
or two for better illustration sake.

A Suit is commenced in the Ecclesiastical Court, before the Bishop the Kings
Ecclesiastical Judge presiding therein, concerning a matter (we will suppose)
not properly cognizable there: The Defendant hereupon sues out a Prohibition,
which he exhibits before the Bishop, the Ecclesiastical Judge. This the Bishop
refuses to admit, and notwithstanding the same, proceeds in the cause.
Complaint hereof being made to the Court granting the said Prohibition, an
Attachment is awarded against the Ecclesiastical Judge It may be so, and issues
out of the Chance^y, although the Prohibition came from the King, Bench, or
Common Pleas. Lord Come. cap. 8. 4 Instit.
: He is apprehended, and brought to answer for his contempt, in refusing to
obey the Kings Prohibition. I question not now, but to have a free concurrency
of every man's vote, allowing this to be very legal and just, because the Kings
Authority in the Temporal Court, and in such matters as belong thereunto, is,
in this case, contemned and disobeyed, and therefore ought to be answered for
by the contemners of it.

Now invert the case a little: A Bishop, the Kings Ecclesiastical Judge,
convents before him in the Kings Ecclesiastical Court, a person bearing some
civil Office, suppose the Mayor of a Corporation, or some Sheriff of a County,
perhaps at the instance of a party, perhaps in a matter of correction. This
Mayor or Sheriff refuses to appear upon the Summoning; or appearing, refuses to
obey such Injunctions as are given him by the Bishop; and for his contempt
therein, has a censure inflicted on him. Tell me, now, ought not this case be
allowed as legal and just as the other? The reason is certainly the same,
because the Kings Authority in his Ecclesiastical Court and matters belonging
thereunto is contemned, and disobeyed, and therefore ought to be answered for
by the contemners of it; and if the reason be the same, partiality or prejudice
may make a disparity; but in the true nature of the thing there is none at all:
For the Kings Authority being equally committed to both spiritual and temporal
Judge, in the concernancy of such things as belong to each; the violaters and
contemners of either (be they of what quality and condition soever) are justly
punishable by those in either Jurisdiction, who are vested with Authority
respectively for executing the same.

But there are those who will not be satified with all this; and that they may
not seem to be without some grounds, they are not without their Objections
against it: It will therefore be very pertinent to the present design, to free
our former Assertion from such Inferences as hence may be made contrary to it.
The Assertion was this, That the Exercise of Episcopal Jurisdiction over
persons in Office of civil power and trust, is not any way intrenching upon, or
infringing His Majesty's Prerogative Royal. To this, there is first opposed
that Branch and Article of the Statute of Clarenaon, of which we find mention
made by Matthew. Paris, in his History of the Reign of King Henry the second, the
chapter that begins thus [ Anno Domini 1164.] in these words, Nullus qui de
Rege tenet in capite, nec aliquis Dominicorum Ministrorum ejus Excommunicetur,
nec alicujus eorum terrae sub interdicto ponantur, nisi prius Dominus Rex, si
in Regno fuerio, conveniatur, vei justitiarius ejus, si fuerit extra Regnum, ut
rectum de eo faciat: Et ita, ut quod pertinebat ad Regis Curiam ^bi terminetur:
Et de eo quod spectat ad Curiam Ecclesiasticam ad eandem mittatur, ut ibidem
terminetur.

I did a little before, and do now again acknowledge, That the King of England
may by His Prerogative Royal, when and to whom he pleases, give exemption from
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction: But that He has done it to persons in subordinate
Offices of civil power, is not proved from this instance; all the dispute will
be, who are comprehended under this expression (Dominicorum Ministrorum) what
kind, and sort of persons are pointed at thereby: And here I say plainly, that
persons in subordinate Offices of civil power, are not these Dominici Ministri
Regis. My Lord Cokes Exposition hereof, is my warrantry and authority for
saying so 2 p. Instit. Exposition on the 12th Article of the Statute called,
Articuli Cleri. 9 Ed. 2.
. The place I refer to in the Margent, will inform us, That Dominici Ministri
Regis, are such as belonged to the Kings Household, as the Tenentes de Capite,
are such, as held of the King by Grand Serjeanty, and Knights service, and were
to give their attendance on the Kings person whenever required thereto. To
these is this exemption granted; but note here withal, that the exemption in
this Statute is not absolute, but proceeds with a reserve and a limitation;
that if the cause, any such person is to be convented upon, be judged by the
King, or His Justice in the Kings absence to belong to the Ecclesiastical
Court, thither both cause and person must be sent, and that person
(notwithstanding such exemption) be proceeded against, and that cause there be
determined. That which is in the principal aim and provision of this Statute,
is this, that the King be made acquainted before any censures be inflicted on
any account, upon any of His servants and attendants.

But there is something further objected (and that supposed to be more
forcible) by a late Author, who has put himself to the expense of a great deal
of labor and industry, in searching out of some presidents, and (as he
conceives) warrantable Authorities whereby to evince the limiting and binding
up of Episcopal Jurisdiction, in respect of persons vested with secular power,
and command; namely, that such persons are by peculiar (and that Regal)
exemption freed from all coercive authority thereof. Among other things
produced by him, I pitch especially on two, which appear to have the greatest
stress laid upon them. The one is an ancient Record in the time of King Henry
the third, of this Tenor. The Provest of Bourdeaux had been Excommunicated by
the Archbishop of Bourdeaux without the Kings License; whereupon, King Henry
writes to that Archbishop, and sharply expostulates with him, That he had
Excommunicated His Provost without his License, and commands him forthwith to
absolve him. Upon the like account, says the same Author, King Edward the
First, Claus. 8. Ed. 1. Dors. 6. and Claus. 31. Ed. 1. Dors. 11. issued out
Writs to his Bishops, commanding them not to Excommunicate his Bailiffs and
Officers (and absolve them, if Excommunicated) without his previous License and
Order. Mr. Pryn's Animadversions, etc. on the fourth part of Sir Ed. Coke's
Instit. p. 404.

At a distant view of these instances produced, they may seem to have a goodly
appearance, and to serve well the end intended in their production; but come we
to a nearer inspection, and more narrow examination thereof, and they will be
found weak and useless for any such purpose. Let it be granted, that by
Bailiffs are understood Sheriffs, and other Officers in secular Authority, such
as have the Government in Corporations, as Mayors, Portrives Glossar added to
that Edition of Mat. Paris, printed at London, 1640.
, etc. Yet I make no doubt to affirm, that still the former Assertion stands
firm and unshaken. To make good this, a little recourse must be had to other
Historical occurrences in the Reigns of these two Kings, Henry the third, and
his son and successor Edward 1. For these will give us the best light and
guidance to discover the grounds wherefore, and and the matters wherein, these
prohibitory Writs issued out, and the ends aimed at by them. It has been said,
that that Age was the very Crisis of Regal, and Papal power in the Kingdom of
England; then was the sharpest conflict betwixt both, and thence forward the
Papal power began to dwindle and decline: And as a disease makes the sharpest
assault upon Nature, immediately before it begins to abate; so did the Papal
power at this time before its declension. The exercise of Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, did then de facto derive from, and was dependant upon the Sea of
Rome; and so it came to pass, that the spiritual Court, or Court Christian, was
reputed aliud forum a foro Regio; and King Henry the third experienced many
attempts made to limit, and restrain his Prerogative, insomuch, as with great
insolence, his Bishops threatened to Excommunicate Him Sir Richard Bakers
Chronicle, the Reign of He^. 3d.
. They were propt up and supported by Papal Authority, and after such a daring
and confident manner were they inspirited from Rome, as to look upon themselves
in their actings utterly independent on the Crown; and then it was chiefly,
that by the greatness and prevalency of Boniface Archbishop of Canterbury,
Uncle to Elianor then Queen of England, that many Provincial constitutions were
Enacted concerning matters of mere temporal cognizanced; and encroachments were
daily made on the secular Courts, and Excommunications, and other censures were
thundered out against the Kings Bailiffs and Officers: But why? only, because
they opposed them in the execution of such constitutions. Hereupon proceeded
these prohibitions to the Bishops; upon these grounds they were commanded not
to censure such Officers and Bailiffs; that is, for so executing their Offices,
and discharging their Allegiance, and Duty to their Princes. Here was no intent
to restrain the Bishops in the right exercise of their Jurisdiction touching
such matters as truly belonged to it, but to keep them from exceeding their own
bounds, and meddling in matters which were not cognizable before them.

And thus much appears plainly from that clause in the very Record it self (set
down by this Author in the place before mentioned) Si vero Praepositus noster
aliquid deliquerit contra dignitatem Ecclesiasticam, faciemus cum juri parere,
postquam delictum fuerit nobis denuntiatum, pro quo interim eum abso^vi
faciatis. So that here is no more than what the ordinary Writs of prohibition
do import. The King requires to be informed of the true state of that cause his
Officers are convented upon, so he ^equires to be in the case of any of his
other Subjects, upon address made to him concerning the same. If the matter be
found to belong indeed to E^c^esiastical cognizance, the parties concerned
therein be they in any office or place of power (so as belongs to the present
case) they must be subject thereunto: But if the matter do not so belong, the
King will rescue them thence, and shield them with his Regal protection, and
not suffer an incompetent Court to have any authority over them.

But see the ill luck that this Author has in alleging this Record, for whilst
he makes a show of advancing the Kings Prerogative in one kind, he does really
depress it in another I cannot contain my self from calling upon the Reader,
and desiring him to observe, and then wonder, that any one should insist upon
this Writ, as any way advantageous to the thing he bestirs himself to make good
thereby, when it is said in the very body of it in relation to the Bishops --
Non attendentes quod ab ordinariis locorum non possint Excommunicari Ballivi
nostri, nisi de Excessibus eorum prius fuerit nobis relata querela propter
sedis Apostolicae nobis indultum privilegium. I wish the Reader would be at the
pains to consult the very Record, set down by this Author in the place of his
Book, referred to before.

And I pray, let any one consider this advisedly, and then tell me, What right
does that man to the Crown of England, that whilst he appears mightily busied
in asserting the Supremacy thereof, will yet make it dependant on Papal
Authority? Is it come to this, That the King of England must ask leave of the
Pope to put any restraint upon his own Bishops? The production of this Record
makes better to gratify the Papists, than to prove the thing it is produced
for; though, in truth, neither the one, nor the other, gets any real advantage
hereby. Historians observe many miscarriages in this Kings Government, during
his long Reign of fifty and six years; among which, this application which he
made to Rome, was not the least: The most knowing of his Subjects were much
displeased thereat; for, as one Historian informs us Mat. Paris. Anno 1250. p.
777.
(and he a Votary to the Pope) in another case happening but two years before,
viz. in the 36th year of this Kings Reign, and which this passage must
undoub^edly refer to) Non sine redargutione peritorum haec fecit Dominus Rex
quod scilicet conquestus fuerit super haec Domino Papae: The Pope to be sure
was forward enough to engage himself in the concerns of Princes, and so would
make himself more officious to gratify the King than was needful; whereas the
provision which by the Laws was made against any such encroachments, and the
Kings own Regal power to put the same Laws in execution, would have given him
better relief, than any indult or dispensation from the Pope could do.

Well, upon the Reasons before specified, prohibitions issued out from King
Henry, to keep the Bishops from censuring his Officers; but notwithstanding
them, still they would be encroaching on the Kings Rights in his temporal
Courts, and so they continued to the time of King Edward the first, the son and
immediate successor of the former King; and thence proceeded the issuing of
that Kings prohibitory mandates, Requiring and commanding the Bishops not to
Excommunicate his Bailiffs and Officers without his previous License and Order:
That is (as by what is to be collected from the state of affairs in these
times) until the King fully understood the nature of the cause these Officers
and Bailiffs were convented upon; for, as I declared before, they were often
censured and excommunicated, because they opposed the Popish encroachments on
the Kings temporal Rights; therefore the King would understand the true grounds
of such proceedings, that if the matter were of civil concernment, his Officers
might be freed from such vexatious and unjust prosecutions; but if it appeared
to be of Ecclesiastical cognizance, they were then delivered up to the
Jurisdiction thereof.

This, I conceive, to be the very genuine and true meaning hereof, for these
reasons; first, because it is consonant to the end and purport of other Writs
of the like nature; the Author has not recited these Records at large, which if
he had done, very probably something plainly directing to this conception might
have been found therein. Moreover, by the Statute called prohibitio formata de
Statuto Articuli Cleri Which Stature had ^e^^^ence to certain Articles of the
Clergy ^^h bi^ed in Parl^ament, hold Anno 51. Hen. 3.
, made the beginning of King Edwards Reign: The spiritual Jurisdiction is not
at all restrained subjectively, that is, respectively to persons being of this
or that condition or quality; but only objectively as to causes, namely, such
as had been usurped before by the spiritual Courts. Lastly, this is made good
also from approved practice in this very Kings Reign, as will appear by this
remarkable story that now follows.

Thomas, the Noble Earl of Lancaster, had to wife Alice, only Daughter and Heir
of Henry Earl of Lincoln; at the same time, John Earl of Warren was married to
King Edward the first his Niece; yet the said Earl Warren by great force, and
strong hand, caused the said Alice Countess of Lancaster to be fetched from the
Earl of Lancasters house in Canford in Dorset shire, and in great pomp and
bravery (in despite of the Earl of Lancaster) to be brought to him to his
Castle of Rye^gate in Surrey, where they lived in open advowtry. John Langton
was then Bishop of Chichester, and Chancellor of England; and being a man of a
brave spirit, and fearing not the face of great men, according to his office
and duty he called the said Earl Warren in question, for the said shameful and
open Adultery, and by Ecclesiastical censures Excommunicated him for the same,
as he well deserved, says my Lord Coke, who reports this Story Exp^f^^ion on
the Statute called, Articuli super Chartas Anno 28 Edvard 1. page 573.
.

This happened about the 29th year of King Edv. 1. and surely is an instance
proper to inform us what the right state of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction was
then; and that supposing the matter to be indeed belonging to the
Ecclesiastical Tribunal, no person of greatest dignity under the King, nor any
others in civil office and place of power are exempted from it, nor did the
Kings prohibitory Writs give any such exemption.

Thus it was while the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction did de facto stand divided
from the Crown, and before our Kings reassumed their Rights in the same; But
forasmuch as now there is an entire Union of both jurisdictions in one supreme
King and Governor: the exercise of the Ecclesiastical jurisdiction is
certainly at least as extensive, as full, and as Universal now as it was
before. And whereas the obtaining and having the Kings leave and license to the
inflicting any censures on His Bailiffs and Officers, is mentioned in those
prohibitory Writs, whence it may be inferred, that admitting, Ecclesiastical
judges may proceed against, and censure (occasion so requiring it) the Kings
Officers in civil powers; yet the Kings leave and order so to do, must first be
had and obtained: To this, I say, that now by the right constitution of
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, and as the exercise thereof is derived from the
Crown, the Kings leave and license in the whole procedure thereof, is
implicitly indeed, yet as truly and certainly had and obtained, as if a
particular and express mandate from the King were issued out upon each several
cause, civil or criminal that belongs to the cognizance thereof: The
E^clesiastical judge acts by a power as immediately derived from the King, as
any Temporal Judge does: The Bishop is as amply and completely Commissionated
for the Exercise of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, both subjectively, and
objectively, in foro Externo and contentioso (which Commission passes in His
Majesty's Letters Patents for Restoration of the Temporalities) as any other
Temporal Judge in any of the Kings Temporal Courts: And upon this account it is
as truly affirmed, That nothing is done in the Ecclesiastical Court Rege
inconsulto, as the same is said concerning the Temporal Court. Habet Rex
diversas Curias, in quibus diversae Actiones terminantur, says Bracton, and he
lived in one of these Kings Reign, viz that of King Henry 3d, whence Sir Edward
Coke draws this conclusion, That the King has committed and distributed all
his whole power of Judicature to several Courts of Justice; and in this he
refers to Ecclesiastical Courts as well as Temporal: And from the Statute 24
Hen. 8. cap. 2. he declares thus, That the Laws Ecclesiastical and Temporal,
were, and yet are administered, adjudged and executed by sundry Judges His
Jurisdiction of Courts, cap. 7. p. 70.
, etc. Hence is that saying, That the King does judge by his Judges. Thus in
matters of Ecclesiastical cognizance, the King judges by His Ecclesiastical
Judges; and whatsoever persons are any way concerned therein, and impleaded in
the Ecclesiastical Court, the King by His Ecclesiastical Judges has the hearing
of them, and determining, in their causes, and His leave and license goes along
therewith.

By virtue of being thus deputed and commissionated by the King, the Bishops
have and execute an exterior Jurisdiction, which is as extensive and universal
over all persons in causes belonging thereunto, as is the Temporal
Jurisdiction, in the management of the Temporal Judges; and where the Kings
Commission is, there is His power, and there is His consent: And where that
Commission does not abridge and limit, there all proceedings made by power from
it, have assuredly the Kings leave and license in conjunction with them.

But if still notwithstanding all that has been said, it be persisted in, that
there is a disparity of power in the two Jurisdictions as to the extensiveness
thereof subjectively, so as that the Ecclesiastical Judge in his way of
proceedings may not, but the Temporal Judge in his way may proceed, against any
civil Officers, as Mayors and Sheriffs, etc. found Delinquents in any kind. I
demand, How does it appear to be so? What Law is there that constitutes this
Disparity? What legal course prescribed and set down to restrain the
Ecclesiastical Judge, in case he will be intermedling with such persons? (for
it is irrational to imagine there should be such a Law, and yet that it should
be destitute of sufficient means to uphold and maintain it self by.)

Truly I am not so vain, as to say there is no Law extant which constitutes
this Disparity, because I know no such; but I have been seriously inquisitive
and diligent in searching after this, but cannot attain a knowledge of any
such; and would any be so kind to inform me, I should thankfully own that
kindness.

Next, for any legal course prescribed and set down to restrain Ecclesiastical
Judges, in case they will be intermedling with such persons: If there be any
such, it must be one or other of these three ways. 1. By Writ of Provision and
Praemunire. Or, 2. By a Writ of Indicavit. Or, 3. By a Writ of Prohibition. (By
one or other of these) the Ecclesiastical Judge is restrained in his
proceedings, and c^mmanded to desist from prosecuting further such matters, as
being before him, are referred to, in those Writs.

Now concerning the first, That Provision and Praemunire has no place nor use
in this matter, I do for the present plainly declare, and afterward I shall
have occasion more largely to prove it. 2. Then, for the Writ ^f Indicavit,
that is notoriously known to lie there where a Suit of Tithes is commenced in
the Ecclesiastical Court, which does amount to a fourth part or above of the
whole Benefice; or it lies for the Patron, where his Clerk is impleaded for
the Advowson (i. e.) the Right of Patronage.

3. There remains only the Writ of Prohibition: This is said to be twofold;
Prohibitio Juris, Prohibitio Hominis. Prohibitio Juris is such as is grounded
on any Statute or Law of this Land. Prohibitio Hominis is such as has no
precise word or letter of the Law to sustain it, but is raised up by Argument,
and by way of surmise, and as the wit of man will suggest.

Now put these Prohibitions of both sorts together, and I dare boldly affirm,
that none of either kind have been, or can, or ought to be granted, so as to
supersede the Ecclesiastical Judge from his legal proceedings against any
person (where the matter proceeded upon is indeed of Ecclesiastical cognizance)
merely because such a person bears some office of civil power, is a Mayor,
Sheriff, Portrieve, or any other in like place of authority: And this is the
reason why I take so much confidence in delivering this affirmation, because it
is the incompetency of the cause brought into trial before the Ecclesiastical
Judge; and not this or that quality or condition of the parties proceeded
against, that always makes way for moving for, and granting of, a Prohibition.

Thus much has been said for the removal of these Objections, and still it is
clear and evident, that the exercise of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction by the
Bishop over all persons whatsoever within his Diocese, in matters and causes
truly belonging thereunto, tends not at all to the impa^ring or invading the
Kings Royal Prerogative.

It has been the glory of our Kings to keep the Rights and Liberties of the
Church safe and entire, and never to interpret a just exerting and using of
their Jurisdiction, to be a diminishing of their Royal dignity. In some old
Presidents of the Writ de Excommunicato capiendo (A privilege peculiar to the
Church of England above all the Realms of Christendom that I read of, says Dr.
Cosen, Apol. par. 1. p. 9.) The King declares thus, Nolumus quod libertas
Ecclesiastica per nos vel Ministros nostros quoscunque aliqualiter violetur
Register. in bre. orig. p. 69. a. And again, Jura and libertates Ecclesiasticas
illaesa volentes in omnibus observari, ibidem. But I have one greater instance
hereof to add here: At the time of His Majesty's Coronation, the Oath that He
is pleased then to take, has this Article therein -- That He will grant, keep
and confirm to His people of England, the Laws and customs to them granted by
the Kings of England, His lawful and religious Predecessors; and namely, the
Laws, customs and Franchises granted to the Clergy by the glorious King St.
Edward his Predecessor, according to the Laws of God, the true profession of
the Gospel established in this Kingdom, agreeable to the Prerogative of the
Kings thereof, and the ancient customs of this Land.

Afterward, one Bishop present, reads this Admonition to the King before the
people with a loud voice -- Our Lord and King, we beseech You to pardon and
grant, and to preserve unto us, and to the Churches committed to our charge,
all Canonical Privileges, and due Law and Justice; and that You would protect
and defend us, as every good King ought to be a^ Protector and Defender of the
Bishops and Churches under His Government. -- Whereto the King answers with a
willing and devout heart, I promise and grant my part, and that I will preserve
and maintain to you and the Churches, etc. By Canonical privileges that belong
to them and their Churches, there must needs be employed the Honor of their
several Orders, as, that Bishops should be above Presbyters, etc. together with
all their due Rights and Jurisdictions. Dr. Stewards Answer to a Letter
concerning the Church, and the Revenues thereof. --

Of these Laws, Customs and Franchises granted to the Church and Clergy, this
of actual exercising Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical in causes belonging thereto,
is (as I have before showed) one, and that a principal one too: Now to imagine,
that the King will bind Himself by Oath to the confirming of such Charters and
Grants, which he either resolves not to keep, or such as are detrimental to
Him, and tend to the impairing His Prerogative, is neither consistent with
Reason, nor Loyalty, nor Religion. Here is no need of that Writ in the Kings
behalf, called, Ad quod Damnum: As what damage and prejudice will come to the
King by confirming Episcopal Jurisdidiction, and allowing the actual exercise
thereof; for, in truth, the exercise thereof kept in its right constitution and
dependence (for such a Jurisdiction is only here intended) is so far from
diminishing the Right, and darkning the Jewels, of the Crown, that they receive
a greater luster and resplendency thereby.

We have spoken of the Kings Oath, which He is pleased at the time of His
Coronation to take for the benefit and security of His Subjects: There is also
the Subjects Oath which they are to take in Recognition of the Kings
Sovereignty, and in testimony of their fidelity to him, I mean, the Oath of
Supremacy; a consideration of which is very proper and pertinent to the matter
in hand, especially, that one branch which the Taker there f^swears to, and
declares that -- To his power he will assist and defend all Jurisdictions,
Privileges, Preheminences and Authorities united and annexed to the Imperial
Crown of this Realm. In which words, the E^^ esiastical Jurisdiction is (if not
only) yet specia^ly aimed at: Now let such persons that are p^aced in Offices
of civil Power and Authority, and conceit themselves not subject to
Ecclesiastica^ Jurisdiction (because of their being in such Offices) and who
yet do take this Oath at the entrance into their Offices; let them, I say,
soberly and advisedly bethink themselves, how consistent an Oath taken for the
observance and defense of the Ecclesiastical J^r^sdiction, is, with a plain
disowning of such Ju^^ction as to themselves, or impugning of it, and bearing
themselves disobediently to it, or exempting themselves from it, in matters
which the Law has clearly appropriated to it: or, in a word, to act any thing
to the prejudice of the lawful proceedings thereof. It is frivolous and vain to
allege, that they acknowledge, and will submit to this Jurisdiction in the
King, and yet at the same time deny their submission to the exercise of it by
the Bishops. This, I say, is a vain and frivolous Allegation, because it is not
a notional and speculative acknowledgment, that such a Jurisdiction is united
and annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm, which only fulfills the imp^rt
of this Oath: But it is an obedience in practice by submitting to the lawful
exercise of it, that is the soope and intendment of it. Now the King exercises
no judiciary power in His own person, but commits it to His Judges (the King
has wholly left matters of Judicature, according to His Laws, to His Judges
Lord Cole. 4 In^it. p 71.
) And the Bishops are those Judges to whom the Ecclesiast. Jurisdiction is
committed, and to them the execution thereof belongs; now what is done in
deregation of that power and authority (derivatively) residing in them, is done
in like manner in deregation of the same power primitively; that is, as it is
originally in, and derives from the King Himself. I have said thus much
concerning this branch of the Oath of Supremacy, not that I take upon me to
judge any man; but because I take it to be my duty to recommend the
consideration of this thing, as a matter of very weighty concernment, and fit
to be made with all sobriety and seriousness.

I sum up all delivered on this first Proposition under this Head, That Bishops
proceeding by Authority, and deriving the actual exercise of their Jurisdiction
from the King, are the Kings Ecclesiastical Judges, dispensing Justice in the
Kings Ecclesiastical Courts, according to the Kings Ecclesiastical Laws. And
that the same Jurisdiction reaches to, and over all persons whatsoever within
their respective Diocesses; all which is agreeable to the Ecclesiastical Laws
of these Kingdoms, and not repugnant to the Temporal Laws thereof, nor yet
infringing in any kind the Kings Prerogative Royal; and therefore the Bishop of
Waterford's Jurisdiction in the Case before laid down, was legally founded in
respect of the persons proceeded against.

Prob. II. The second Proposition is this. The Bishops Jurisdiction over these
persons, was legally founded in respect of the cause that this proceeding was
made upon. The cause was the rendering an account of Moneys given, and received
to pious uses; and rendering of an account of a large Rate, levied to the use of
the Church, as also concerning the Reparation of the Body of the Cathedral
Church at Waterford, That the Bishop is, the proper competent Judge, to exact
an account of all such Moneys so given, and so to be disposed of will not, I
suppose, be denied, or, if it be denied, the worst of it is, it is but the being
put to the proof of it, which is no very difficult task; and for sureness sake
shall by and by be made good. And for the Reparation of Churches, that the same
belongs to Ecclesiastical though the Law be clear for it, will ye be made more
clear, by having those Laws for it, produced. But before that be entered upon,
some notice must be taken of what has been alleged, and passed roundly from
the mouths of many, that concerned them selves much in his matter: That by
ancient contract, the Mayor, Sheriffs, and Commonalty of Waterford, stand
obliged to the making good this Reparation; whence the Inference it made, That
all contracts being of civil cognizance therefore the Bishop was no competent
Judge of that branch of the cause which was brought before him, the same being
not cognizable in the Ecolesiastical Court.

This Allegation at the first hearing, seemed mighty fair and plausible,
insomuch as, some persons, otherwise no Enemies to Episcopal Jurisdiction, were
much concerned, and startled thereat: And when they first heard it, they
concluded presently that the Bishop had taken a matter in hand, which he ought
not to have moved a hand toward, as not appertaining to his jurisdiction, and
so has usurped on the Temporal Courts: Nay, so strangely transported were some,
that in their heats they did not stick to affirm, that the Bishop by doing what
he did, had incurred some heavy penalty, which they would not abate of an Ace,
less than a praemunire it self. And many, and hard, and bitter were the
cenfures, that several open mouths pronounced upon him: But causes as well as
persons are sometimes prejudged; and both were so in this case. As a
preparative to the clearing, and making good, that both cause, and person were
thus prejudged, I shall speak something concerning the matter of contract, so
mainly insisted upon, and that which raised the cry; as if the Bishop grounded
his proceeding on that contract, and therein encroached on the Temporal
Jurisdiction.

Let it therefore for the present be supposed, That the Bishop did ground his
Ecclesiastical proceeding on that contract (although indeed the cause was not
so laid, yet supposing it were) the inference that is thence made peradventure
is not good, as that the doing thereof was an encroachment on the Temporal
Jurisdiction. Peradventure I say it is not; For I will not be positive in what
I am about to write; but referring my self to better judgments, I freely submit
to their decisions herein.

This I propose then, That all matters of contract, arising from, or upon
causes originally of Spiritual cognizance, are not exc^^ded from the
Ecclesiastical Tribunal. I put this case not much differing from that which we
have before us. Titius a parishioner of Dale, with leave of the Parson, and
rest of the parishioners, builds up an Isle, or Out chapel, adjoining to the
Parish Church of Dale, and intends to reserve the same to himself, and
relations, for the use of a burying place, and undertakes to keep this
Out-chappel, from time to time, in sufficient, good, and decent repair.
Notwithstanding this obligation so to do, the repair of the same is neglected.
If the question were put to me, before whom, and in what Court, Titius may be
sued, and compelled to make good the reparation thereof, I should not doubt to
answer, that Titius may be proceeded against by the Ordinary, ex Officio, or
impleaded by any voluntary Promoter of the Office, in causa reparationis
Capellae, etc. The Church wardens may present that neglect, and the person
guilty of it. One Article usually given to present upon, is this, Whether the
Church or Chapel in the Body, and Chancel of it, be in good repair; If it be
not, through whose defaclt comes it to pass, that it is not; and this Article
is grounded on the 93d Canon of this Church. So then as the neglect and default
is punishable by the Ordinary; the reformation likewise thereof in making good
the repair, (otherwise by contract undertaken for) is to be enjoined by the
Ordinary.

Moreover, Pensions out of Churches, or any Annual Portion beeoming due from
any College, Bishopric, Cathedral Church, or Deanery, to be paid to any
Rector, Vicar, or Curate of a Parish Church; if they be detained, the same are
demandable, and to be recovered in the Ecclesiastical Court, according to the
Statute, viz. 34 35 Hen. 8. cap. 19. Now the Right of paying any such Pensions,
and Annual Portions is grounded on Ancient-contract, obliging thereunto.

In Compositions Real for Tithes, made either between the Parson of one, and
the Parson of another parish, for the stating and settling each others right,
and to prevent, litigious impleadings of each other. Also compositions made
between the Parson, and some one or more of his parishioners, touching the not
paying any Tithes at all, but a certain, settled, and determinate sum in lieu
thereof: This is usual in this Kingdom, for Mills that grind corn, to compound
for a certain sum, to be paid instead of the Toll-tythe. Now the Ecclesiastical
Judge before whom these compositions are to be alleged, may hear and determine
thereof. Tit. 120. Cler. Prax. Sir Thomas Ridley's View, etc. part. 3. chap. 3.
Sect. 6. Cose^. Apol. p. 1. chapter 10.

There is a cause of Ecclesiastical cognizance, called Negotium subtractionis
Dotis, causa nuptiarum promissae. The case is thus; Titius in consideration of
Matrimony, to be contracted and solemnized with his Daughter Partia by
Sempronius, promised Ten pounds to Sempronius, The Matrimeny being solemnized,
and Titius not paying the promised sum, Sempronius impleads him before the
Ecclesiastical Judge for the same, Titius sues out a prohibition;
Notwithstanding which, Sempronius obtains a consultation, wherein is affirmed,
That the Court Ecclefiastical may proceed therein. This you may find reported
by Dr. Cosen. Apol. p. 1. page 26. And the several. Opinions of Common Lawyers
concurring therein. More instances might be given of this kind, to evince, That
all contracts arising from matters which are in their Original of Spiritual
cognizance, are not excluded from the Ecclesiastical Tribunal; observe what is
further said: Although promises and contracts of Money, are generally pleadable
in the Courts of the common Law, yet, as Bracton writes, Causae de rebus
promissis, ob causam Matrimonii, in foro Ecclesiastico terminari debent; quia
cujus juris and jurisdictionis est principale, ejusdem erit, accessorium: And
in another place he gives a reason for the same, quia semper videndum propter
quid, aliquid sit, aut permittatur. Zouch. Jurisdiction of the Admiralty. p. 64.

I do not affirm an absolute parity between these cases, and that which is
before us; I referred my self before, and do now still submit what is said to
the judicious decisions of others: But, this is yet upon the supposal, that
what is objected, was really so, as is objected, the contrary to which is most
clear; for as touching what relates to this Vindication, there is no need at
all, to strain any doubtful or disputable case, to make it favor the matter in
hand; for the contract here pretended, was not insisted upon, so as to make a
foundation of any jurisdictive proceeding, in the Ecclesiastical Court
thereupon.

It Is true, the contract gave occasion to the Bishop to call upon, and admonish
the Mayor, and Sheriffs of Waterford, to look after what belonged to their duty
to be done. They being thus stirred up, make rates, levy, and collect Money
from the several Inhabitants for this end, of repairing the Body of the
Cathedral, etc. They receive the voluntary contributions for the Bells. The
Money thus levied, collected, and received, is little disposed of for the uses
intended: The Church remains unrepaired, the other works are neglected; now
what was regularly, and legally to be done in this case, was regularly, and
legally entered upon; the work of reparation it self; the accounting for Money
levied, raised, contributed and received for that purpose, and other matters
relating to the Church, are the grounds of this proceeding, as by the several
Acts of Court remaining in the Registry of Waterford, may more fully appear.

Now that these are justisiable grounds, whereon legally to found an
Ecclesiastical proceeding, comes to be made good, which I shall do, by laying
down and proving these three Assertions.

1. The rendering an account of Moneys given, and received for pious causes; and
the right disposing thereof, belongs to the Bishop within his own Diocese, to
call for, and see performed.

2. Reparations of Churches, with all the incidents thereunto, both by
Temporal, and Spiritual Law, appertain to Ecclesiastical cognizance.

3. The penalty of Praemunire will not be incurred by any Ecclesiastical Judge
for making such proceedings.

1. The rendering an account of Moneys given and received for pious causes; and
the right disposing thereof, belongs to the Bishop within his own Diocese, to
call for and see performed: Pious causes are set down in the Law to be of many,
and various kinds, and to enjoy many and various privileges; for the many and
various kinds of them, see Leg. illud, and Leg. Sancimus. Cod. de Sacro-sanctis
Ecclesiis; and Lindwood in cap. it a quorundam. ad Verb. pias causas. de
Testamentis lib. 3. Provincial. Constitut. Among which, these especially fall
under our disquisition; namely, Legacies, or other Donations, either bestowed,
for the erecting of Hospitals, and Almshouses, and endowing them with
sufficient means, and adding to such endowments, for the sustentation and
maintenance of aged, sickly, decrepid, weak and helpless persons, as Prisoners,
Orphans, Widows, etc. Or such as are bestowed for the erecting, and repairing
of Churches, and providing of such decent O^naments, and other Utensils, as are
requisite therein; also such as are bestowed for the celebration of Divine
offices, at certain times, and seasons appointed.

Now although I have delivered this Assertion universally, yet it is to be
understood with restriction to those kinds of pious causes, that I have
particularly specified. The Imperial Law allows a very ample and large power to
Bishops, in order to the regulating and disposing of these to their intended
purposes, Authent. collat. nona. Tit. de Sanctissimis Episcopis, cap. 23. See
also the Canons called the Apostles Canons, cap. praecipimus 40 ibidem. Item
cap. Tua nob is; and cap. Johannes. de Testamentis. And concerning such things
as belong to Almshouses, and Hospitals of any (but Royal) foundations, our
Statute Law is very express herein -- And as to other Hospitals which be of
another foundation, and patronage than the Kings, the Ordinaries shall enquire
of the manner of the foundation, estate and governance of the same, and of all
other matters, and things necessary in this behalf, and upon that make
correction and reformation after the Laws of Holy Church, as to them belongs,
An. 2. Hen. 5. cap. 1. stat. 1.

And whereas in some particular cases of this nature, it is appointed by the
Statute 43 Elizab. cap. 4. That by certain Commissioners authorized thereunto
to under the Great Seal of England, such Lands, Moneys, Goods, and Chattels as
have been given to such Godly uses, as are there mentioned, should be rightly
ordered, and all misemployings thereof be prevented and regulated; yet there is
a proviso in that Statute, to this end -- That neither this Act, nor any thing
therein contained, shall be any way prejudicial, or hurtful to the Jurisdiction
of the Ordinany or power of the Ordinary; but that he may lawfully in every
case execute the same, as though this Act had never been had or made: Rastall.

And where there is a grant of Money, or other moveable goods, made by any
person either in his life time, or bequeathed by Legacy, at the time of his
decease for such pious causes, as the erecting and repairing of Churches, or
buying such decent Ornaments, and Furniture as belong to the same, etc. That
the Money, or other moveable goods thus granted, or bequeathed, be disposed for
such uses, and according to the intent of the Donor, belongs to the Bishops
care to look after, and see performed: Insomuch, as they in whose hands such
Moneys, and Goods are detained, may be convented before the Bishop, and made to
render an account thereof. And the prosecution made herein, may be either of
office, or at the promotion of the Church wardens of that, or such other
Parish, to which the same is given. Detentio legatorum ad usum pauperum, and
quemlibet alium pium usum: detentio bonorum ad publicos usus Ecclesiae
destinatorum, ad Episcopalem jurisdictionem pertinent, Cosen. Tab. vii. A.

To this purpose it is, that in Articles given at Episcopal Visitations, one is
to enquire what Lands, Possessions, or other Richts are belonging, or deemed
and reputed to belong unto any Ecclesiastical Benefice, and in whose hands they
are, and how they have been in their hands: Which Article of Enquiry is
grounded on the 44th Canon of this Church of Ireland; and cognizance of these
things belong to the Ecclesiastical Courts, and may (as I said) be taken
therein, by the Ecclesiastical Judge, either of mere office, or office
promoted, etc. and whether soever it be, that such Rights become due by Legacy,
or any other Donation.

A man by his Testament bequeaths Goods to the Fabric of a Church, the
Executor is to be sued for this in Court Ecclesiastical, and thus it is
determined at common Law; see for this a consultation granted. Register. p. 57.
a. cited at large by Dr. Cosen. Apol. par. 2. p. 100. But what if any issues
and profits out of certain Lands and Tenements growing, and belonging to any
Church, be detained? They also may be sued for, and recovered in Court
Ecclesiastical: If a Terr-Tenant holding Land, that has usually paid for such
a Tenement a pound of wax, or such like, unto the Church, do withold it, the
Churchwardens may sue him for it in Court Ecclesiastical. Dr. Cosen. par. 1. p,
45. And he alleges for this an ancient Author, one Goodall, who wrote in the
time of King Henry 8th, and entitled his Book, Of the Liberties of the Clergy
by the Laws of the Realm.

And observe, that although a pound of wax, and such like, is only here
mentioned, yet it is not the tenuity, and meaness of the thing that gives a
right in this case to sue for it in the Spiritual Court: But because there is a
right so to do, the same course of proceedings may be followed, were the
profits so accrewing, and so to be disposed of, far more valuable. I will
instance but in one case more (which the Dr. mentions in p. 3. chap. 8. p.
102.) An Ordinary proceeded ex Officii sui debito, to the correction of crimes,
and excesses of those that were under his jurisdiction: And amongst other
objected Articles against a Knight, for not sufficient reparations of a Church,
tending to the correction of his soul, by reason of his detaining of that,
which he ought not. This, says he, is allowed in the Register, Tit.
consultations fol. 53.6. I might, but shall not need, to add more for the proof
of this first Assertion.

2. Reparation of Churches, with the incidents thereunto, both by Temporal and
Spiritual Law, appertains to Ecclesiastical cognizance, I call these the
incidents thereunto. The business of making Rates for such Reparations;
inspecting the money so rated; questioning those that refuse to contribute
their proportion; and calling to account for money so collected. These are all
dependant on the other, in case of any judicial proceeding that shall happen to
be made thereon; the reason is given in this, as in all other things of like
nature, in that excellent law; Nulli prorsus. Cod. de judiciis; the sum of
which is this, Ne continentiae causarum dividantur.

Now the Temporal Law is express for the proof of this, in the Statute of
circumspecte agatis. An. 13. Edwardi Primi. Among the thirteen cases there
recired, and appropriated to the Ecclesiastical Tribunal. This is one, viz.
Prelates may punish for leaving Church yards unclosed; or for that the Church
is uncovered, or not conveniently decked. This Statute is also inserted in the
provincial constitutions, collected by Lindwood, Tit. de fore competenti; and
so is become part of the Kings Ecclesiastical Law. Several Common Law cases are
cited for this by Meriton, in his Guide for Churchwardens, Sect. 37. And note,
says he, That the Ecclesiastical Court has cognizance of the reparation of
the Body of the Church. He instances in the Body of the Church, because
(not-excluding the other parts) mention is there made of the Parishioners, to
whom the repair belongs, and who are to contribute to the same.

Dr Cosen in the First part of his Apology, cap. 7: informs us thus, touching
this matter: When a Prohibition was sued out (says he) for proceeding
Ecclesiastically in a matter concerning the Reparation of the Body of a Church.
A judgment was given thereupon, in a consultation to this effect (which he
says is recorded in the Register, cited by him thus [ page 43. a.] Vobis
igitur significamus quod super emendatione and reparatione defectuum corporis
Ecclesiae juxta consuetudinem approbatam, facienda, procedere poteritis, and ea
facere quae ad forum Ecclesiasticum nover it is pertinere, (...) a
prohibitione, non obstante. And by reason of defects in the reparation of a
Church (says the same Author) ibid. Money it self may lawfully be sued for in
a Court Ecclesiastical; as appears by another consultation, Reg. page 48. a.
And so it is provided in the very Stature of circumspecte agatis. The words are
these mentioned in it. -- In which case none other penance can be enjoined but
pecuniary. See Lindwood ad verbum. Sub poena. cap. Sint Ecclesiarum Rectores.
De Officio Archidiaconi, Lord Coke de jure Regis Ecclesiastico, p 9.

3. The penalty of praemunire will not be incurred by any Ecclesiastical Judge,
on account of any proceedings of this Nature. The proof of this Assertion
depends upon two things, viz. The truth of the two former Assertions, that the
cause proceeded upon, was properly belonging to the Ecclesiastical Tribunal,
and that the Bishop the Ecclesiastical Judge proceeding therein, acted not by,
or from any foreign jurisdiction or power. Both these are so manifestly true,
that I might supersede my self the labor of saying any more therein. But
because some men's mouths were opened wide, and loud in that point, as if when
by Law they could not, they would yet by their clamorous votes, and confident
affirmings, involve the Bishop in the penalty of this Statute: It will
therefore, I think, be both a seasonable undertaking, and proper to our
purpose, to write something more particularly concerning the same; and the
rather, because the imputation of incurring the penalty, contained in that
Statute, is oftentimes (at least) threatened against those that are careful, and
active in the discharge of their Office of Trust, in matters of Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction.

It has been the observation of a late Historian, ( Fuller, Church History,
Book 4. p. 149.) that this Statute of pramunire has had the hard hap not to be
honored with so many readings thereon, as other Statutes: And therefore I
suppose, the course now taken by me, in speaking something hereof, will appear
the more excusable: If not having opportunity of viewing the few readings, that
have been made thereon, by the Learned in the Common Law, I have recourse to
such other Writers, as upon some occasional emergency, or other incidental
matter, have treated thereof.

The Writ of praemunire facias, grounded principally on the Statute, made in
the 16 year of King Richard the Second, cap. 5. is awarded against those that
have procured any Process, or Bull of the Pope from Rome, or elsewhere, for any
Ecclesiastical place, or preferment within this Realm, or does sue in any
foreign Ecclesiastical Court, to defeat, or impeach the Kings Courts; and the
party offending herein, is liable to grievous penalties, mentioned in the said
Statute: This account of a praemunire, (as abstracted by him from the Statute)
I take from Sir Thomas Ridley, in his View of the Civil and Ecclesiastical
Laws, p. 3. c. 1. Sect. 1.

Some later Statutes (says Dr. Cowell in the word praemunire) do cast this
punishment on other offenders: As denying the Kings Supremacy the second time,
by the Statute 1 Elizab. 1. falls under the punishment of praemunire. And by
the Statute 13 Eliz. cap. 2. He that affirms the Authority of the Pope, and
refuses to take the Oath of Supremacy, falls under the like penalty: so they do
likewise by the Statute of the 13 of the Q. cap. 1. that are seditious talkers,
or affirm the Q. Majesty to be an Heretic.

Now let us put all these together, and whatsoever else is collected from the
Statutes made before, and after the Reign of King Richard the Second, touching
these matters: Put all these (I say) together, and what, either in gross or
tale, will they make to disadvantage the matter we have in hand? or what can be
found, either in the Bishop, or his proceedings, impeachable from thence? Is it
his being appointed to, and settled in the Ep^scopal See of Waterford and
Lismore? None can affirm that: For he receives not this by any Bull from Rome,
but by Donation and Investiture from the King of England. Is it the actual
exercising of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction within his Diocese? That cannot be
neither; because he is not empowred to this by any Foreign Authority, but by
his Majesty's Letters Patents for his Consecration; and by His Majesty's
Letters Patents for restoration of the Temporalities. Are any of his
proceedings against the Kings Crown and Dignity? No, They tend not to promote
any foreign power, but to maintain the Kings Prerogative and Supremacy, over
all persons in causes Ecclesiastical: Does he refuse to take the Oath of
Supremacy, or fall under any of those crimes mentioned in the Statutes of Q.
Elizabeth, and which are liable to the penalties of praemunire? This cannot be
said, He took the Oath of Supremacy, on other occasions required by Law: And he
took it (as is appointed) at the time of his Consecration. Lastly, are any
things done by him, whereby the Kings Courts are impeached and defeated? Not
this, because He the Kings Ecclesiastical Judge in the Diocese of Waterford and
Lismore, hears and determines matters of Ecclesiastical cognizance in the Kings
Ecclesiastical Court there, according to, and by the Kings Ecclesiastical Laws:

Whence then may we conceive, arises this imputation of a praemunire? There is
indeed no ground for it, but in the fancies, (and would I had not reason to
say) in the wishes of such, as are so ill affected, that they do not patiently
endure the Episcopal office, much less allow the exercise of any Jurisdiction
by a Bishop.

Observation of former times, and reading, besides present experience of things
now, brings to our knowledge the restless practices of some, that endeavor by
all contrivances of wit and policy, to load with odious charges the exercise of
Episcopal Jurisdiction; and (if it may be done) to draw it within the penalties
appointed by this Statute of Praemunire: yet there are many sober and wise men,
who have declared openly enough their opinion, That as all Jurisdiction
whatsoever in these Kingdoms, is radically in the King, and so an Union of
Ecclesiastical and Temporal Supremacy, is in him; there can therefore lie no
Praemunire at this day against any man exercising Jurisdiction subordinately
under the King; which every Ecclesiastical Judge both does, and acknowledges
himself to do: See to this purpose Dr. Cosen in his Apol. p. 1. cap. 18. Sir
Tho: Ridley ut supra, Dr. Cowell in the word Praemnnire: Whatsoever, says he,
is now wrought or threatened against the Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, by color
of the same [ Statute of Praemuni^e] is but in emulation of one Court to
another, and by consequent a derogation to that Authority, from which all
Jurisdiction is now derived, and the maintenance whereof, was by those Princes
especially purposed: Nam cessante ratione, cessat Lek,

Sir Thomas Smith, a person of great judgment, one who well understood His
Sovereigns Right and Prerogative, and wou^d not detract any thing in the least
manner from it, declares his sense herein after this manner -- Verum in
praesentiarum Curia Christianitatis perinde atque caeterae omnes, virtutem vim
authoritatem imperium, jurisdictionemque suam, praeterquam Serenissimae Majesti
and Diadem^ti Regio, post immortalem Deum, Potestati aut Principi, accepta
resert Nemini. Id si verum esse concedas (quod esse constat verissimum) tum
Sanctioni Statuariae de Praemunire nullus per Angliam locus relinquitur; quando
alibi quam in Curia Regis, ac Reginae, jus nullum dicitur. De Repub. Anglicana.
lib. 3. cap. 11.

There is a certain word indeed in that Statute, viz. [alibi] the Court of
Rome, or elsewhere; and this word is supposed, to be meant of, and refer to,
Bishops Courts: So I read that Fitz. herbert a great Lawyer reports it. Tit.
praemunire number. 5. Howbeit, saving all respect to so great a Lawyer, yet this
is judged by many grave, and learned persons, (see those before mentioned) to
be a forced and groundless construction made thereof. The word it self is of an
ambiguous and variable signification; it may refer to the Bishops Consistories,
and it may, as well, not refer to them; it may refer to any Foreign Courts and
Judicatories, and any other Courts of these Kingdoms, that are not Courts of
common Law So it seems it may refer to the Court of Admiralty, in my Lord
Coke's opinion. 4. Instit. cap. 22.
, or any Courts whatsoever (most agreeable to the purport of that Statute)
wherein any thing is done in derogation of the Regality of our Lord the King;
it is a slippery and uncertain word, none can take sure hold of it; no
determinate and precise meaning can be affixed to it.

This word then being so doubtful and uncertain, and the penalty of this
Statute being so severe, as Imprisonment during life, for feiture of Goods,
Lands, Chattels, Tenements, Ejection out of the Kings favor and protection;
and since the noted Rule is this, in poenalibus causis benignius interpretandum
est. L. 145. (...). de Reg. Juris. parag: finali. Now it would be so far from a
benign, as to prove indeed a most rigorous sentence, to pronounce the falling
under so great a penalty, on occasion of this expression, so full of ambiguity
and uncertainty.

May I presume, with the good leave of the Learned in the Municipal Laws of
this Kingdom, to interpose my conjecture concerning this word [ Alibi, or
elsewhere] (for where there is ambiguity, there is room for conjecture) I have
the ground, of what I have to say, from Dr: Cosen, Apol. p. 1. cap. 18. It was
in the sixteenth year of King Richard the second, that this Statute was
Enacted, that was in the year of our Lord, One thousand three hundred ninety
and three; at which time, and for some time after, the Schism about creating of
Popes (which is reckoned, and so called, the Twenty ninth Schism, Isaacksons
Cronolog. p. 353.) was very rife, and hot in agitation. Boniface the Ninth was
at Rome, and Clement (called the Seventh) made by the French Cardinals, was at
Avignion in France; here was at the same time, as had been before, two Popes
actually exercising Papal Jurisdiction; both making Cardinals, and both
striving to extend their power and authority so far, that other Kingdoms, as
well as the places where they were resident, might be under the influence
thereof: Now so it was, that this Statute of Praemunire, being intended for the
utter exclusion of all Foreign Authority, it might be judged necessary to cut
off all intercourse betwixt the Kings Subjects, and the Popes Consistory,
whether at Rome, or elsewhere; and that Processes, and other judicial Writs, as
well dated from Avignion, or any other place, as from Rome, might make the
purchasers and pursuers of them, liable to the penalties intended by that
Statute.

But there is something further alleged here, That although the Ecclesiastical
Courts as now established, are not in the general intent included within this
Statute; yet then surely they are, when causes belonging to the Temporal
Courts, are by Ecclesiastical Judges retained, and proceeded in: I know it
passes as a very current Opinion among many, That for an Ecclesiastical Judge
to deal in any cause, not belonging to his Jurisdiction, is Praemunire: Great
is the Authority that bears up this Opinion; and for the greatness sake of the
Authority, many are the Adherers to it. In my Lord chief Baron Boltons Justice
of the Peace, cap. praemunire. There is first a recital of the several
Statutes, concurring in, and concerning this crime; then follows certain Book
cases, or resolutions (as his Lordship expresses it) added, for the better
explanation of those Statutes. One of the said cases, is to this effect, viz.
the 21. -- Note that the words of the Statute, are in Curia Romana vel alibi,
which is intended in Curia Episcopi: And therefore if a man be Excommunicated,
or profecuted in the Spiritual Court, for a thing which appertains to the
common Law, he that prosecutes such a Suit, is in case of praemunire: for this
there is alleged in the margent, 5 Ed. 4. fo. 6.

Before I was stopped with what is thus set down, and what I find affirmed by
others to the same effect, I was ready to say, That it must be a very forced
streining of that Statute, that will be able to wring such a sense out of it.
But, who am I, that I should oppose my obscure meaness, to the authority of so
great a person? May I have fair leave therefore, to offer only a few things to
be considered of touching this matter, in behalf of the Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, and the Judges belonging to the same?

And first, whereas it is said, that by the word [alibi] in the Statute, is
intended Curia Episcopi: I refer the Reader to what has been before spoken of
this particular thing; and further, I may now seasonably notify one thing,
observable in the very Statute it self, that may lead us by a more certain hand
to perceive, what this word [alibi] has a reference to, and what it has not:
For, whereas in the aforesaid Statute of praemunire, Anno 16. Richard 2d. cap.
5. It is Ordained, That none shall purchase or pursue in the Count of Rome, or
(elsewhere) any Processes, Bulls, etc. nor the same bring within the Realm,
viz. these His Majesty's Dominions. This (be it spoken under correction) cannot
rationally be intended de Curia Episcopi, here within this Blealm; the reason
is plain, because Curia Bomana vel^alibi, where such Processes and Bulls, etc.
are purchased and pursued, and from whence they are brought within the Realm;
these, I say, must be somewhere out of the Realm (for the bringing in of a
thing, excludes the obeing of that thing there already) but the Bishops Courts
are within the Realm, and none of these Processes brought into the Realm, can
be from them; and therefore this word [alibi] has no reference to, nor can it
be intended of, them.

Add hereunto, That the occasion inducing this Statute, and recited in the
preamble to lit, seems not all to favor this sense of the word: The Coinmons
in Parliament having with great vehemence and earnestness, represented the
several Grievances the Kingdom lay under, among others, these are especially
mentioned, viz. The Popes Excommunicating of Bishops for executing the Kings
Commandments; the Popes translating of them from See to See; sometimes out of
the Kingdom, against their own, and contrary to the Kings Will: The Lords
Spiritual being therefore demanded (as the Lords Temporal had been before) what
their Advice and Will was in these cases: The Archbishops and Bishops, and
other Prelates, openly disclaimed the Popes insolent carriage toward the King,
and His Subjects; and declared, That they would, and ought to stand with the
King in these cases, in lawfully maintaining of His Crown, and in all other
cases touching His Crown and Regality, as they be bound by their Allegiance:
Whereupon (says the Statute) It is Ordained and Enacted, That if any purchase
or pursue, etc. from the Court of Rome, or elsewhere, etc. May I not here well
demand, what relation either in the occasion, or sense of the Stature, can be
made up betwixt Bishops Consistories, and this word [Alibi]? Bishops in their
Jurisdictions were troubled by the Pope, as the King Himself was in the right
of His Crown; both are complained of, both redressed by this Statute. How can
that which is the Grievance complained of in the preamble of the Statute, come
to be the thing aggrieving in the latter part of it? The truth is, provision is
here made against the setting up, and abetting of all Foreign Authority; but
Domestical proceedings in Ecclesiastical Courts, are not related to. This I am
confident to affirm, by this Authority following, The preamble (says my Lord
Coke from Pl. Com. fo. 369. Stowells case) in every Statute is to be
considered, for it is the Key to open the meaning of the makers of the Act, and
mischiefs which they intend to remedy. Also from a case 4 Ed. 4. fo. 4. and 12.
The same learned Judge declares thus -- Every Statute ought to be expounded
according to the intent of them that made it, where the words thereof are
doubtful and uncertain, and according to the rehearsal of the Statute; and
there a general Statute is construed particularly, upon consideration had of
the cause of making the Act, and of the rehearsal of all the parts of the Act,
etc. 4 Instit. cap. 74. It is a general Rule allowed by all Laws in
construction of Statutes, Quamvis lex generaliter loquatur, restringenda tamen
est ut cessante ratione and ipsa cesset, cum enim ratio sit Anima vigorque
ipsius legis, non videtur Legislator id sensisse quod ratione careat etiamsi
Verborum generalitas, prima facie aliter suadeat: Idem. Ibidem.

And for the Book-case related to, and the inference made therefrom, hear what
a learned person has delivered very fully and appositely concerning that: (not
in answer to this Judges opinion) for he wrote many years before him; but to
invalidate an Assertion of the same nature with this, and from the same
Book-case, viz. 5 Ed. 4. fol. 6. praemunire. and made by one he then contended
with) This case does but speak of the Excommunication by a Bishop, and not of
every dealing whatsoever in a matter belonging to the Kings Regality; and what
if it had been twice so adjudged, both of them in such corrupt times, when as
the Royal Prerogative of the Kings of this Land to be Supreme Governors in all
Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, due to them in Right, and by Gods Law, was not de
facto united to the Crown: For the Bishops then did not claim their
Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, next and immediately under God, from the Crown, as
now they do; but seeing this part of Regal power, is now no less truly and
fully vested in the Crown, than is the Temporal; so as the Laws allowed for the
Ecclesiastical Government, are termed by sundry Parliaments, the Queens
Ecclesiastical Laws, and Laws of this Realm, as well as those that were first
originally made here: And the Bishops are proved to have their Authority and
Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical derived down unto them from the Queens Highness
under the Great Seal of England. Is it then the like reason, still to comprise
their Jurisdictions and Courts under that word of [Alibi] as if their Courts
and Jurisdictions were not now the Queens, nor yet belonging to Her Regality?
Cosen. Apol. p. 3. chapter 7.

Furthermore, the holding plea of a matter belonging to the common Law by an
Ecclesiastical Judge, (so constituted as he ought to be, and now is) does not
tend to the disinherision of the Crown; that is, not to the impairing of any
Regality, Power or Pre-eminence belonging to the same, and therefore cannot be
the crime of praemunire. The Statute 25 Hen. 8. cap. 21. declares concerning
whom, and how offending the Statute of the 16 Richard secundi, was framed,
namely, such as sue to the Court of Rome against the Kings Crown and Dignity
Royal; one Statute best explains another. So then, where the Authority that is
acted by, is the same, a mistake in the matter to be proceeded upon, or manner
of proceeding in, does not infringe that authority: The reason is, because the
Kings authority empowring to act, is still acknowledged; and what is judicially
done thereby, proceeds by power derived from Him, not from any power set up
against him. I presume it will be readily granted, That the upholding and
securing the Kings Supremacy in all causes, and over all persons, is that,
which principally, if not solely, is aimed at by this Statute: And then it
plainly follows, that where that Supremacy is maintained, no breach of that
Statute can be made, nor penalty incurred by any, for a mistake only of the
matter, that any Plea (in Subordination to the King as Supreme) is held upon.

The worst that is to be said in this case, is this, That he who being a
spiritual Judge, does take cognizance of any temporal matter, offends in going
beyond his Commission; and truly this is bad enough, but not so bad neither, as
to bring under the guilt of praemunire: If it were, observe the consequence,
what that would be; for it would as certainly and unavoidably expose a temporal
Judge to the penalty of a praemunire, if he proceed to hear and determine in a
matter of Ecclesiastical cognizance (because that is beyond his Commission) as
(...) would expose a spiritual Judge to the same penalty, that he intermeddles
with causes of temporal cognizunce; for observe well what Bracton says in
relation to both Jurisdictions, and the proper Judges of each -- Cum diversi
sint hinc inde Jurisdictiones, and diversi Judices, and diversae causae, debet
quilibet ipsorum imprimis aestimare, an sua sit Jurisdictio, ne falcem videatur
ponere in Messem alienam. Again, Non pertinet ad Judices Soeculares, non
pertinet cognoscere de iis quae sunt spiritualibus annexa sicut de decimis,
etc. Bract. l. 5. c. 2. apud Hookerum Ecclesiast. Pol. lib. 8. p. 218. I may be
thought to have made a strange, confident, and odd inversion upon these two
cases; but for my share, freely I do acknowledge, that it is above the reach of
my reason, to conceive of any difference herein; for as both Spiritual and
Ecclesiastical Courts are now constituted, deriving from the same Regal
Supremacy, that the Temporal Courts do; the consequence is as good on one hand,
as on the other.

Indeed I should not have exposed my self to the censure of being thought too
bold in the concerns of Temporal Courts, and Temporal Judges, especially in
such an inversion as this, so liable to be frowned upon: But the truth is, I
found it made to my hand, by the person whose name I have often used, and whose
Authority I much depend upon: Is not (says he) the Prerogative Royal in and
for causes Ecclesiastical, as high and as rightly settled in the Prince, and
incident to Her Highness Crown and Regality, as the same is for Temporal power
and authority? What cause is there then, seeing [seu alibi] in the Statute
signifies (in true construction) any place ^hatsoever besides Rome: That every
holding Plea by an Ecclesiastical Court, of a matter wherein it ought not to
hold, should at this time be reckoned a thing contrary to the Queens Regality,
more than dealing in any Ecclesiastical cause, should be in any temporal Court
at Westminster? for no Statute of provision or praemunire, assigns these for
causes; which have indeed, grown since by collections, whilst the Popes
usurpation was continued in the Land. Against which oftentimes, the Remedy by
prohibition could not serve the turn: Cosen. Apol. par. 3. chapter 7. p. 87.

But admit the worst, let there be a disparity allowed, let the failing be on
the Ecclesiastical Judges side, yet still he is the Kings Ecclesiastical Judge;
And there is a favor always on a Judges side, so far as to presume, That he
is fit to Act in what he is appointed to; and that he does Act according to
what he is best informed of, by his skill, and from his conscience. Sacrilegii
instar est dubitare an is Dignus sit, quem Imperator elegerit; That persons
merit and integrity is not to be doubted of, whom his Princes will has
appointed to any public Office and Employment, say the Emperors Great. Valent.
and Theod. in Leg. Tertia. C. de crimine Sacrilegii. Now it is not to be
rationally supposed, that any one exercising the Office of a Judge, will
designedly and purposely hold Plea of such a cause, which he either knows to
be, or is propounded to him as, belonging to Temporal cognizance: But it may so
happen, that by nearness and coherence of one cause with another, that which
indeed is a Temporal, may be supposed to be an Ecclesiastical cause; and if an
Ecclesiastical Judge, minding to do his duty, as the nature of his office does
require, do yet by resemblance, and near coherence of one cause with another,
proceed in that which is Temporal, shall this presently cast him under a
Praemunire? That is, shall the exceeding some bounds and limits that the Prince
(under whom he exercises Jurisdiction) has prescribed to him, bring him under
such punishments, as the very enemies and underminers of his State are to
endure? This certainly were very harsh and rigorous. I know nothing more to be
declined, than such an Office, where the exercise of it puts a man into that
ticklish and tottering condition, That he is ready every day (without that
exact circumspection, as is morally impossible, for the carefullest man alive
always to have) to fall into the greatest penalties and dangers. It has been
said, That a corrivality betwixt the Ecclesiastical and common Lawyer, has
still made the one seek his own elevation, by the depression of the other: But
here, the common Lawyer has got an insuperable advantage over the other; for
let him but hold to this Opinion, and by his Authority make it good, That the
bare holding Plea of a Temporal cause in an Ecclesiastical Court, makes liable
to the penalties of Pr^^munire, and the contest is at end: There will then be
few, that will care to study the Ecclesiastical Laws; fewer, that will dare to
execute any Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction.

A grave and sober person delivers his mind touching this matter, with a great
deal of ingenuous freedom and truth: Hoc Austerum supplicium (speaking of
Braemunire) aliqui Jurisperiti nostri, Lucri and Ambitionis aestu accensi,
verborum, quae in uno Statuto, observant generalitatem, ad quemvis levem
Judicum lapsum, praesertim Ecclesiasticorum, nimis violenter extendunt, sed hic
little candorem desideramus, aliquorum etiam inscitiam lugemus. Dr. Cowell
Instit. de Publicis Judicis. Sect. 43.

King James, a wise and discerning Prince, easily discovered the Grievances
that this profession labored under, and was pleased earnestly to concern
himself in redressing of them. This great King speaking of the usefulness of
the Civil and Canon Law among His own Subjects in matters of Pyracy, Wills,
Marriages, and things of like nature, proceeds thus -- And this Law has been so
much encroached upon, sithence my coming to the Crown, and so had in contempt,
that young men are discouraged from studying it, and the rest weary of their
lives that do profess it, and would be glad to seek any other craft K. James's
Speech in the Star. Chamber to the Judges, about the 14th year of His Reign.
And some pages after in the same speech, when He comes to give His particular
charge to the Judges, he has these words, What greater misery can there be to
the Law, than contempt of the Law; and what readier way to contempt, then when
questions come, what shall be determined in this Court, and what in that?
whereupon two Evils do arise, the one, that men come not now to Courts of
Justice to hear matters of right pleaded, and Decrees given accordingly: But
only out of a curiosity to hear questions of the Jurisdictions of Courts
disputed, and to see the event, which Court is like to prevail above the other;
and the other evil that does arise, is this, That Plea's are turned from Court
to Court, in an endless circular motion, as upon Ixions wheel; and this was the
reason why I found just fault with that multitude of prohibitions. And then
having given a notable instance relating to what He had before spoken of in the
concern of Ecclesiastical causes, and their being turned off, and tossed from
Court to Court, He gives this direction to the Judges -- Therefore the only way
to avoid this, is, for you to keep your own bounds, and nourish not the people
in contempt of other Courts, but teach them Reverence to Courts, in your
public Speeches, both in your Benches, and in your Circuits: Such was the rare
providence of that wise King, to keep up the Esteem of the Ecclesiastical
Courts, and with fair countenance, and good encouragement, to cherish the
Professors of the Ecclesiastical Laws; for the Ecclesiastical Laws are such,
that, as Himself is pleased to testify in another place of the same Speech, in
many cases cannot be wanting in his Kingdom: Not permitting any encroachments
to be made thereon; much less, that the Professors and Judges thereof should be
terrified at every turn, and awed with the heaviest poenal inflictions, upon
the least irregular motion, and undue proceeding; especially since other
milder, yet as effectual means are provided to rectify such irregularities,
and reduce them to the right course again.

For the wisdom of our Princes, has by express provision of Law, so well
ordered both Jurisdictions, that as both flow from them, so both shall be kept
(to prevent confusion in either) within their proper bounds; and therefore if
the Ecclesiastical Judge intermeddles with any thing that appertains not to his
Jurisdiction, the same Royal Hand that gave forth other things to him,
restrains him in that. And thus by Writs of Prohibition, the Ecclesiastical
Judge is stopped from proceeding in that which is reserved for another
Tribunal. And if it were not thus, to what end would Prohibitions serve?
wherefore were they invented? why should so solemn a proceeding be, before they
are granted? why so long debating and consulting, before they cease and lose
their force? Lastly, why not laid aside as superfluous and needless things,
after Praemunire was established?

In the third year of King James, certain Articles of Complaint were Exhibited
by Archbishop Bancroft, before the Kings Majesty, and His most Honorable Privy
Council, touching Abuses in granting Prohibitions. The matter mainly canvassed
betwixt the Judges of both Jurisdictions, was, touching the right stating and
settling the reasons and grounds of granting Prohibitions: All along which
contest, there is not any the least mention made of Prohibitions granted with
respect to the persons who were impleaded, but only on the Account of the
incompetency of the matter or cause which they were impleaded upon; whereas it
is acknowledged on both sides, that where a matter truly appertaining to the
Temporal Jurisdiction, is brought into Plea before the Ecclesiastical Judge,
there any further proceeding in the same, is, and ought to be restrained by the
Writ of Prohibition; but it is not said at all, that the penalty of Praemunire
is incurred thereby.

And here let me entreat the Reader to fix his eye and understanding a little
more intensely upon that which now follows. In the twenty fifth and last of
those Articles, it is thus set down Vid. Sir Ed. Coke, second part of the
Institutes of the Laws of England, p. 617.
: -- Whereas for the better preserving of His Majesty's two Supreme
Jurisdictions before mentioned, viz. the Ecclesiastical and the Temporal; that
the one might not usurp upon the other, two means heretofore have been of
ancient time ordained, that is to say, the censure of Excommunication, and the
Writ of Prohibition; the one to restrain the encroachment of the Temporal
Jurisdiction upon the Ecclesiastical, the other of the Ecclesiastical upon the
Temporal: We most humbly desire your Lordships, that by your means, the Judges
may be induced to resolve us, why Excommunications may not as freely be put in
ure for the preservation of the Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, as Prohibitions
are under pretense to defend the Temporal, especially against such contentious
persons, as do uittingly and willingly, upon false and frivolous suggestions,
to the delay of Justice, vexation of the Subjects, and great scandal of
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, daily procure, without fear either of God or me^,
such undue Prohibitions as we have heretofore mentioned.

At the reading of this Article, I was in great expectation what Answer would
be given thereto, considering that the business of restraining either
Jurisdictions encroaching on the other, was thus brought to a short and plain
issue; for so it seems, that if either the Ecclesiastical Court encroached on
the Temporal, or the Temporal Court encroached on the Ecclesiastical, the
coercive means applyable for the restraint of either, were respectively these
two; viz. the censure of Excommunication, and the Writ of Prohibition; but
Praemunire is not mentioned at all.

But come we to the Answer it self, and therein we find a full and ample
concession of all that is set down in the Article, and so, as it is set down
there; what the Ecclesiastical Judges had desired to be resolved in, is granted
to them according to the very stating thereof proposed by them; Take the Answer
in the very words thereof set down by the same Author -- The Excommunication
cannot be gainfaid, neither may the Prohibition he denied upon surmise made,
that the matter pursued in the Ecclesiastical Court, is of Temporal cognizance;
but as soon as that shall appear unto us judicially to be false, we grant the
consultation.

A thrifty improver of Advantages, would find this concession useful to him, in
making and urging many inferences from thence to serve well his purpose; but
the intelligent Reader cannot but have his thoughts full of them, and I shall
therefore forbear the proposing of any; only this I say, That by what was set
down in the Article, and by what is declared in the Answer to it, there appears
plai^ly, That Encroachers on the Spiritual Jurisdiction, ^re as subject to
Excommunication, as Encroachers on the Temporal Jurisdiction are subject to
Prohibitions. That which my present design leads me to, is to conclude from
hence, That since Prohibitions are by Law the means of restraining any
Encroachments on the Temporal Jurisdiction, therefore Praemunire does not lie
in that case. And indeed how should it? for is not every Ecclesiastical Court,
the Kings Ecclesiastical Court? and the Laws Ecclesiastical, are they not the
Kings Ecclesiastical Laws? And if in execution of these Laws by the Kings
Ecclesiastical Judges, there should happen any exceeding of due limits in those
Courts (as who can say of any Court that it never exceeds?) yet Praemunire
cannot lie thereupon; for, as I may very well apply that which King James said
(in that Speech of His which I mentioned before) when some busy Sticklers were
active and forward in fixing a Praemunire upon the Officers of the Chancery) No
Praemunire, says He, can be granted, but at the Kings Suit; and how can the
King grant a Praemunire against Himself?

In the Court of Admiralty, many more Prohibitions are brought, than in the
Ecclesiastical Courts. There is a greater vicinity and likeness betwixt the
matters tryable in that Court, and those tryable at common Law, and
consequently greater occasion and probability of mistaking: Now certainly such
frequency of Prohibitions, with the consequences of them, would be very
dilatory and tedious, if the more compendious way of Praemunire were effectual;
and why not Praemunire lie here, as well as in the Court Christian? This is
another Court, or a Court under the large meaning of [Alibi] proceedings are
diverse therein from those of the common Law; and I do not remember to have read
any Praemunire brought for suing in the Admiralty, excepting in two cases, the
one 38 Hen. 6. the other in 9 Hen. 7. Nevertheless, says Dr. Zouch, although
it be said that two Praemunires were brought upon such occasions, yet it does
not appear, that any judgment was given upon them: See more to this purpose, in
his Jurisdiction of the Admiralty asserted.

But never to mince the matter, Is it not here that the Shoe wrings? It is the
Ecclesiastical Court, and that is become the great Eyesore; a thing that will
not be looked upon as an offense in another Court, is beheld by men through a
magnifying Glass in this: There are too many that cannot away at any hand with
a Bishops Jurisdiction, and what they do not like, they easily quarrel at;
hence are all the prejudices, that upon very little occasions are taken up, and
yet, though good reasons be given, are hardly laid down again. The Spiritual
Court shall be sure to have all the opprobrious, and all the scurrilous
imputations fastened to it. Men love those sins too dearly, that are punishable
there; and they love to hold too tenaciously those rights from others, that are
recoverable there: Now no Delinquent loves that Judge who co^rects him for the
sin he loves to c^ntinue in; or will force from him the rights of others, which
he has no mind to part withal. I wish it have not been from these, or any
other such gr^unds, that the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction has had so many
opposites; and that there has been such lying at catch, and waiting for
advantages against it, so as to terrify with the name of Praemunire,
whenever men have a mind to say there is (or that there is indeed) some real
miscarriage therein.

Thus far I have enlarged, in making good the second Proposition; I shall
collect together under one view, what has been delivered thereon. It was not
the matter of any civil contract, but a cause indisputably of Ecclesiastical
cognizance, that was the ground of these proceedings, and therefore no
Praemunire imputable on that Account; and admitting the contract had been the
ground of these proceedings, yet for the reasons before showed, no Praemunire
could have been incurred hereby; and therefore the Bishop of Waterford's
Jurisdiction in the case before laid down, was legally founded in respect of
the cause proceeded upon.

PROP. III. The Bishops Jurisdiction was legally managed in this cause, against
these persons, in respect of the manner observed and followed therein. It was
in favor to the Mayor and Sheriffs, that a civil intimation was given to them
from the Bishop, desiring their meeting with him. This civil intimation was (I
will not say despised) but not answered with a correspondent civility in them;
for they did not give the meeting to the Bishop, which he desired they would.
And yet the end of this desired meeting, was in order to a fair accompting for
Moneys received by them for the Churches use, and for making good the
reparation of the Body of the Cathedral Church: They not giving (I say) the
Bishop this desired meeting, some competent time afterward (I think a weeks
space intervening) Process was caused to issue forth, to call them to appear
before the Bishop in his Consistory, on a certain day after following.

I cannot go forward to the sequel of this proceeding thus begun, without
making some little animadversion on these persons (I shall forbear giving it
any worse term) disingenuous carriage, in their Petition of Complaint Exhibited
to the Lord Deputy and Council: In the first Section of which, they say, That
they the Petitioners about Ten of the Clock in the Forenoon, on the twentieth
of July last, received a Verbal Summons from the Apparator of the Diocese of
Waterford, to Appear at the Consistory Court of the said Diocese, before the
Lord Bishop of Waterford at Two of the clock the same day --

The disingenuity that I observe herein, is most notorious; for first, they
speak of a Verbal Summons from an Apparator; than which, nothing can be more
ridiculous (shall I say) or more false. It Is both contrary to practice for any
Verbal Summons to be given, by an Apparator to any person; and it is of no
force, nor validity, if any such were given; and it is contrary to Truth, that
any such was given. The Bishop of Waterford better understands both what is the
ordinary practice, and what will hold good, and is justifiable in practice;
than to order his Apparator, to call any of his Diocese before him, (without a
formal Process) by Verbal Summons only.

Next, it is said, That this Verbal Summons was given at Ten of the clock in
the Forenoon, to appear at Two of the clock in the Afternoon of the same day.
Here is disingenuity again: There being no Accord betwixt what is thus
alleged, and the Acts of Court that have been expedited in this proceeding; I
have made it my endeavor carefully to consult these, and find, that an
Original Citation issued out of the Registry against these persons, to appear
on Wednesday, the 22d of July, betwixt the hours of Eight and Ten in the
Forenoon of the same day: And I find, that this Citation was executed on the
persons of these men, by one Michael Curren, the usual Mandatary of the Court
(according as he declared upon Oath) on the 21 day of the Month of July, which
was Tuesday. This is the first Act of proceedings in this cause, and if we will
credit that (as it is attested by the Register, a Sworn Officer, and Notary
Public) then the first Section of the Petition, as it relates to these
proceedings, contains nothing of Truth in it.

And as little there is in the first part of the second Section; for, whereas
the Petitioners say, That on the Two and twentieth of the said Month, they were
Summoned to Appear at Ten of the clock at the said Court the same day. -- The
falsity of this appears plainly, by what the aforesaid Mandatary upon Oath
declared, namely, That he had Summoned them on the Tuesday; which Tuesday, was
the One and twentieth, not the Two and twentieth of July. And the ground of
complaint had been tolerable indeed, if the time of their Summoning, and time
of their Appearance had jump't together at one and the same hour.

I now go on further, in drawing out the course and series of this Judicial
proceeding. The day being come, that is to say, Wednesday the 22d of July, at
which time the forementioned Process was returnable, and the Bishop sitting in
his Consistory, the persons Summoned were called upon, who not Appearing, their
Contumacy was accordingly accused, and upon the Accusation, by Decree of Court,
they were pronounced contumacious.

The Legality of this manner of proceeding thus far, is sufficiently known by
common practice; and Lindwood gives this Rule (Constitut. Provincial. Item
omnes: de Judiciis. ad literam F.) ubi aliquis apprehensus est personali
citatione, si sic citatus personaliter non compareat efficitur vere contumax.
And the 70th Canon of the Church of Ireland, allows a Contumacy to be affixed
to that person who neglects to appear upon citation.

I have heard, that there was afterward something alleged on their behalf,
why they could not appear upon that Summons; and something they say in the
second Section of their Petition to this purpose: As, that a Council of the
City had been appointed against that time to consult about an Answer to a
Letter sent by the Lord Deputy. But two things come here into observation,
whence it seems probable, that this matter was made use of at a pinch, and so
to serve as a little evasive shift, when there was nothing else that could
seemingly help them; for as they mentioned in the first Section of their
Petition, this Letter was delivered to them from the Lord Deputy the Monday
before, now the answering of that, would not, I suppose, be delayed until
Wednesday; and that very hour of Wednesday, when upon due Summons before
personally served, they were to appear at the Bishops Consistory. But, indeed,
it is more then to be presumed, that the appointment of their Council (if any
such were appointed) then upon Wednesday, and at that hour was designed as a
color wherewith they might be helped to elude their appearance upon the said
Summens.

Moreover, had they been really engaged in so necessary and earnest a business,
yet that could give no hindrance; but they might hay sent some creditable
person to make Affidavit of their being so employed, which thing, in all
probability, would have caused a respiting of their Appearance at that time:
Yes, but they did send a Messenger (says the Petition) who acquainted the
Bishop with the reason of their not appearing: But if any such Messenger were
sent, he stood there incognito, and was as a Mute in the company; for no one
did, nor offered to make Affidavit theteof.

Add further, Wednesday morning at Ten of the clock was the time they were
called to appear at (says the very Petition it self) but the tenor of the
Citation, is betwixt the hours of Eight and Ten: They were busy at Ten of the
Clock to dispatch their return, yet the Post is usually gone at that time. They
were not busy at Eight, or between Eight and Nine, and then too, their
Appearance had been good. What shall we think hereof? Truly by all that I can
conceive hereof, there could be no sufficient Allegation grounded hereon, to
free them from being in contempt for Nonappearance upon Legal Summons.

But allow they had been really aggrieved by this proceeding, and that there
being declared contumacious, had been illegal; Remedy there was for this; a
regular course might have been taken, which if applied to, would have given
redress herein: An Appeal to the Archbishop of the Province, would have done
both these. This the Bishop would not, nay, could not deny them: And if the
ground of their Appeal were justifiable, they would by that means have been
rescued from the Bishops, and protected under the Archbishops, Jurisdiction.
This course, I have been told, was suggested to them; but the Truth is, it
relished too much of condescension, to give any show of submission to
Ecclesiastical power: High spirits will rather want, than be beholden for,
help, to that hand which they do not like of. Perhaps these persons, lifted up
with an Opinion of their Office, as they thought themselves a degree above the
being proceeded against by a Bishop, so it would be beneath them, to supplicate
for any relief from an Archbishop.

Well, upon this, a second Process issues out, to call them to Appear, and show
cause, if they had any, why for their former contempt, they ought not to
undergo the penalty of a censure. Upon this Summons they appear, yet not a
ledging any material, or rationally conclusive Plea, for purging their former
contempt, they are upon the account thereof enjoined an easy penance: This
only; to make an acknowledgment of their contempt and disobedience, and to
promise future Obedience.

The Heats before conceived in these men's breasts, and hitherto suppressed, now
break out with some violence: They fume and chafe at this imposition, and
disdain, That Men in their Dignity, being the Kings Lieutenants (so they styled
themselves) should be brought to make a public acknowledgment and submission.

I am verily persuaded, that if any reasonable application had been made to the
Bishop by these persons, and some private acknowledgment and submission
tendered, an easy composure of what had passed, would have followed: But the
doing of this was so far from their Resolves, that a friendly advice, and
proposal thereof, was with scorn rejected. The time appointed for making this
Acknowledgment comes; and as it came, so it passed away without any observance
of what was enjoined.

This repeated contempt might have disordered a well composed temper, but it
had no power upon the Bishop; alter him a little it might (how could it well be
otherwise) but not so as to exasperate that spirit of Lenity, which (as he
ought, so) he always moderated himself by, in matters of censures, and other
parts of corrective Discipline. It directed him indeed to reflect on the
Authority he was invested withal, and how scandalously it was despised; and
that the Rod was to be taken in hand, and something at least to be done in a
way of correction, that men might not be disobedient and refractory, and then
think they had done well in being so; Authority contemned, and passing with
impunity, ushers in both Atheism and confusion.

Wherefore that more severe and dreadful censure of Excommunication being laid
aside, it may be (as for other reasons) so upon this consideration likewise,
that they might not be discapacitated in the execution of their Offices. This
great censure, I say, being laid aside, another is made use of, that with
ingenuous Christians might probably attain the end intended, being tempered
with more mildness and lenity. The censure was this: The persons so offending
were suspended ab ingressu in Ecclesiam, till such time as they had made
public satisfaction for the scandal given, by their contempt and disobedience.

If it should be here said, That the censure of suspension ab ingressu in
Ecclesiam (though it be a milder censure far than the other) was improperly
inflicted in this case, because Excommunication is the poenal coercion
appropriated to this crime of contempt; and if that contempt were really so
scandalous, and notorious, why was not the penalty inflicted, pro rata culpae?
Besides, there is seldom mention of this kind of censure, but in one case, and
that set down in the Statute Law, viz. 6 Edvard. sexti. cap. 4. imposed on such
as are Brawlers in Churches and Churchyards; but of Excommunication it is said
-- Aliarum censurarum Ecclesiasticarum una, viz. Excommunicatio infligitur pro
contumacia sola, vel non comparendo in judicio, vel non parendo mandatis
Ecclesiae. Dr. Cosen. Polit. Eccles. Anglic. Tab. 5. A. Which being so, and not
applied in the case where it ought, thence the proceedings in this cause become
irregular and illegal.

To all this it may be returned, first, That lenity is there unhappily placed,
where they that have benefit by it, would turn it to the prejudice of those
that bestow it. Besides, Admit that the censure of Excommunication might justly
have been inflicted in this case, on these persons (which most certainly might
have been) yet the not imposing that, does not vitiate the proceedings, and
make them become irregular and illegal; for this suspension is a kind of
Excommunication: and although by the Statute, it seem peculiarly appropriated
to the crime of brawling and quarrelling in Church, or Churchyards; yet that,
I conceive, is to be understood in this sense, That no other censure shall be
inflicted upon that crime, but the same censure may be inflicted on other
crimes besides, and so consequently on this, which it was inflicted on here.
Suspension I said was a kind of Excommunication, some call it Minor
Excommunicatio (Cowell, word. Suspension) it is a degree below that which is
usually called by that name; for a man being deprived of a liberty of coming to
Church, he is thereby deprived of all publickcommunion with the rest of Gods
faithful people, in partaking of the Word and Sacraments, and all other divine
Offices. It is called by some Interdictio divinorum illata in personas, to
distinguish from that which is the interdiction of a place. Zouch. de Jure
Ecclesiastico. part. 2. sect. 8.

There are two things wherein this censure of Suspension differs from
Excommunication properly so called (I speak here only as to things in foro
externo, in respect of outward practice and proceeding thereupon) 1. Because
the Secular Arm cannot be implored, or called upon for it. 2. Because it does
not render a person, on whom it was imposed, so incapable in sundry respects of
Secular matters, as the other does. Nor indeed does the Rule laid down before,
so precisely bind the Ecclesiastical Judge to a literal observance of it, that
no other censure in such a case may be used instead thereof: But it is within
the latitude of his Authority, That if there be hopes of attaining the ends of
this greater censure (as the reducing of refractory and contumacious persons)
by inflicting the lesser: And if there be a concurrency of other peculiar
respects, besides, inducing the Judge to use that lesser, then surely the
greater may be abstained from, and the course and manner of proceedings, still
be good and justifiable.

I have been the longer in removing this Objection that might be made against
the Bishops proceedings, as to the manner of them, in this particular; because
I have heard something debated touching the same, and I have had some doubtings
thereof in my self; but as this censure was (I verily believe) with great
deliberation, and prudent resolve inflicted by the Bishop; so I am now fully
satisfied therewith, both in respect of the nature of it, and manner of
proceeding to the inflicting of it.

For the coming of things to this head (we must know) was not precipitous, and
hudled up all on a sudden; five several Court-dayes were employed in this
Transaction: betwixt every of which, fair and competent intervals of time were
allowed; although, I must needs say, considering all circumstances, lesser time
might have served, Canonically enough, to dispatch a matter of as great
concernment as this In the Isle of Man, the Ecclesiastical Judge makes much
shorter w^^k; In hac insala Judex Ecclesiasticus, citat, d^fi it, and infra
octo Dies parent, aut carceri intruduntur. Lord Coke, 4 part. Instit. c. 69.
: But the Bishop resolved (I suppose) to move circumspectly and deliberatively
in what he Decreed, and therefore took time enough for it; and he desired, that
they whom he had to deal withal, would be tractable, regular and advised, in
what they ought to have done, and so he gave them time enough likewise.

So then, to the inflicting this censure was this matter brought. The passing
of which, the publication of it in the forementioned Cathedral, at due time,
and in due manner. The particular intimation thereof given to the persons
themselves, the grave admonition following to obey the same, and retract their
former contempts and refractoriness. All these notwithstanding, the Mayor and
Sheriffs the next Sunday following come to Church, in an unwonted, strange and
tumultuous manner, attended with a confused and numerous Rabble of such as had
not used to visit the Church at all; nor would then have done it, but that they
were countenanced, nay, commanded, indeed t^ attend the Kings Sword (such a
phrase they used) but such a concourse, proved a disorderly and heady meeting
together.

Thus was the Church censure contemned, baffled, trampled upon. Thus was
Episcopal power exposed to derision and mockery. Thus was the Kings Authority
in His Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, debased and made vile, by those that gave
themselves out to be the great upholders of it, in matters of civil
Jurisdiction; and after all, to make a show of innocence in this whole
proceeding, they speed in all haste to complain first, and would have it
thought an argument of their being injuriously dealt withal (so destitute were
they of any other) because they have got the start, and cry out loudest that
they are so. They represent themselves as persons (above any example) the most
unjustly dealt withal, and aggrieved, by strange, arbitrary, and unheard of
proceedings. Their Address was made to His Majesty's most Honorable Privy
Council in this Kingdom, there they Exhibit their Complaint, thence they expect
relief: The Bishop owns the Kings Authority wheresoever, and in whomsoever it
is represented, but especially in that High and most Honorable Assembly; and
so submits him self and proceedings to the determination, that by their
Lordships should be made thereof.

I must not omit that to make sure work, besides this Address, the pretending
Complainants, become Appellants; for they interpose an Appeal in Scriptis, from
the Bishop, immediately to the King; that if one course they had taken failed,
the other, at least might be helpful to them. I cannot pass by (although I do
but touch at them) the many Errors concurring in this latter Essay: As that
first the time of Appealing, from that which they pretended themselves
aggrieved with, was lapsed, when this Appeal was interposed. Moreover, that one
and the same cause, by the same persons, at the same time, was thus brought to
trial before two distinct Judicatories, which is vexatious, at least, in those
that procure the same to be done so.

That the intermediate Jurisdiction was passed by, contrary to the ancient
liberties and customs in such cases observed; and which was among other matters
digested into Articles and Chapters, confirmed in the Parliament held at
Clarendon, in the Reign of King Henry 2d, Anno Domini 1164. namely, That all
Appeals in England must proceed regularly, from the Archdeacon to the Bishop,
from the Bishop to the Archbishop; and if the Archbishop failed to do justice,
the last complaint must be to the King to give order for redress; that is
(says my Lord Primate Bramhall, Vindication of the Church of England, p. 75.)
by fit Delegates. See to this purpose, The Statute of Appeals, 24 Hen. 8. cap.
12. And this contrary to the 56 Canon of this Church, Whereby the pain of
Nullity is inflicted on all Acts, which are sped in Appeals, where the
Jurisdiction intermediate is passed by; for although it is true, That the Kings
Authority ought not to be disputed, or disobeyed by any Subject, where it does
appear to be; yet that must ever be esteemed a true and regular obedience,
which the King himself by Law has prescribed, it should be.

And lastly, supposing the Appeal entered by them to have been antecedently
good, that is, good in respect of time and manner observed in interposing the
same; yet it is not good nor valid in its consequents, because the time
appointed for these pretended Appellants to receive their Apostles (that is,
dimissory Letters from the Bishop or Judge Aquo, intimating his deferring and
yielding to the said Appeal, and assigning of time for prosecution of the same)
is long since passed away without doing either: And besides this slipping the
Terminus Hominis, that is, the Term limited and appointed by the Judge, from
whom the Appeal is. Moreover, the primum fatale juris, for prosecuting and
ending of Appeals, is likewise lapsed; and no impediment can be warrantably
alleged in favor, and on behalf of the Appellants, so as to enjoy benefit of
restitution into, and being allowed their secundum fatale, or second year for
prosecuting their former Appeal.

No impediment, I say, can warrantably be alleged by these Appellants, to
capacitate them for this restitution; for although the matter, and pretended
Grievance complained of against the Bishop (at the hearing thereof) before the
most Honorable Council, was refer^d to two Honorable Members of the same; and
in the issue thereof, from those Hononrable Referrees something like the nature
of a compromise was made between both parties (which might seem sufficient to
stop the running on of these Fatalia Juris) namely, in respect of the
Complainants, their engaging to perform what belonged to them to do; and had
been required from them by the Bishop, as, to give account of the Money
received for the Churches use, and making good the Reparation of the Body of
the Cathedral, and other particular matters before mentioned, and in respect of
the Bishop his promising to withdraw his proceedings against them thereupon:
Although, I say, this seeming compromise might appear as a sufficient ground of
granting admission to the secundum fatale, supposing the first to be
irrecoverably past: Nevertheless it is not at all sufficient thereto; the
reason is, because conditions were not performed on which this respite, and
seeming compromise was grounded, and this nonperformance of conditions was on
the Appellants own part. The Bishop performed more than his part in desisting
hitherto from any further proceeding against them: And they not performing the
conditions required on their parts, not then, nor since, nor to this very day
(which yet they ought to have done forthwith) the benefit therefore of the
other fatale is not allowable to them; but being incapable of any restitution
thereunto, they are really in the lapse, and the said Appeal, may be pronounced
pro deserta, and no advantage on the Appellants part to be expected therefrom:
And if the Bishop should thus pronounce, and resume into his cognizance the
whole proceeding again, as there would be both Law and Right enough to justify
his so doing; so there would be a want of both these, and of every thing else,
that might be needful to make up a safe and warrantable defense for the
Complainants. It is a noted and approved Maxim in poenal proceedings, That
Contempts of all crimes are least capable of favor or lenity.

Upon the whole view, it sufficiently appears how little of truth or reason
this exception against the manner of proceedings, has to bear its self up
withal. Look we upon the crimes censured, they were deeply scandalous and
provoking. Look we upon the censure inflicted, 'twas comparatively to the
crime, and a greater censure that might have been inflicted, moderate and
easy. Look we to the manner of proceeding, it was proper, and without the
omission of any one requisite or formality that of right ought to be used
therein. Look we to the Order observed, It was not loose and confused, but
grave and regular. Look we upon the whole cognizance it self, This was not
hasty and precipitous, but prudentially guided, and proceeding with good
maturity and deliberation; convenient intervals of time dividing seasonably
every Court throughout the whole Transaction, and preventing any thing of
surprise that might be suspected therein. I pretend not much skill to these
Affairs; yet being upon the design of searching (as well as I was able) into
the whole state of this matter, I have viewed and reviewed the whole series of
these proceedings, with the several Acts of Court, Decrees, and other matters
incident thereunto: And according to the best of what I am able to judge, I
cannot find in the same, where to fasten any Error, no not in the very niceties
and punctualities of practice, much less in any material point, and essential
matter thereof.

And now after all, If Offenders complaints against the forms and prescriptions
of Courts, may pass for just Exceptions, and fair Vindications of themselves,
we shall have many crimes, but few criminals; many that will be bold to offend,
but few that will ever acknowledge their being legally convicted for their
Offenses: It Is high time for persons invested with judiciary power, to look
about them, and provide some new ways of securing the Authority of their
judicial proceedings, if every bold attempt to question the legality of them,
may pass for a justifiable Plea of not obeying them, or imprint a nullity upon
them. When such Offenders, so justly and mildly censured, shall dare openly, to
tell my Lord, the Kings Deputy, and my Lords of His Majesty's Council (as these
men did) That a Bishop, the Kings principal Ecclesiastical Judge, within his
own Diocese, has put the Inhabitants of a City into very much disorder by such
arbitrary, and unheard of manner of proceedings (when all the disorder
proceeded from themselves, and no other, but legal proceedings have been used
herein) this comes very near the saying, That they are wronged in spite of any
thing that can be said against it; and that if they to whom they make their
Application, will not believe and redress them (as they would have it
themselves) they will venture to speak as hardly of them too: They will commit
faults, and then complain, and be pettish and froward, if they be not stroak't
and soothed up in their complaints. He that charges any in subordinate power,
with arbitrariness of proceedings, and may escape so, will at the next turn
charge as bad upon those that are in superior Authority, if he have but any
matter of concern then at stake, and may think to be secure when he does so.

This begins in the Ecclesiastical Courts, but will it end there? it is to be
feared, it will not. Success, impunity and hopes of being countenanced therein,
will embolden such men to go further, even to pronounce the like upon all
judiciary proceedings in Civil Courts, where their persons or interests are
concerned, and where they may be heard with freedom and safety of popular
approbation; it might pass, for a pretty smooth contrivance, for a Criminal to
avoid the force of a judiciary sentence, by first traducing it, and to get free
from the Obligation of submitting to what is decreed, by affirming confidently,
and standing to it, That the proceedings were illegal, and therefore not to be
obeyed. If this would serve the turn, who would be such a Fool, as ever to be
guilty? or so careless of his own ease, as ever to undergo any punishment? But
it is worth the wonder of a sober man, to think that any one should show himself
(and believe others ought to think him) serious herein. But in truth, what has
preceded, so much out-does this, that all our wonder may be well spent upon it.
That men called to answer in Law, should question the known and approved course
and proceedings thereof, carries something extraordinary with it; but here is
much more, That they themselves should against Law so plainly fore-judge their
own cause, and their own persons, as to exempt, both, from what, and to confine
them to what Jurisdiction, they themselves best liked of.

The Enquiry into the absurdity, unreasonableness and ill consequences of
which, and the evincing the Right of Episcopal Jurisdiction in the case in
hand, against any such illegal pretensions and attempts: The putting a new
mound about that ancient, and established Jurisdiction, which every
pragmatical, pettish, and conceited Novelist is now seeking either by
detraction in his speech, or other crafty Machinations in his practice, first
to retrench a little, and by and by utterly to abolish; has hitherto employed
my Thoughts, and my Pen. In prosecution of which design (it is now no more than
time, I should tell the Reader so much) I have promiscuously made use of
English Statutes, since the time of King Henry the seventh, and some memorable
passages of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction done in England, as well, as what
peculiarly relates to this Kingdom. And I cannot altogether deny, but that I
have done this for the Nonce; for (setting aside some particular Statutes,
relating to the peculiar state and condition of this Kingdom) As to
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, we here conform in the practice and exercise of
it, and in the Rules and Laws it is exercised by, to the same, that are used in
England. If I be blamed for this, I protect my self with what a Learned person
has collected from Sir John Davys Reports, in Case de commendam -- Ex quibus
constat Hibernos sese accomodare, non ad jura Anglicana tantum, sed ad Leges
Caesareas etiam, and jus Canonicum quatenus ea inter Leges Anglicanas
admittuntur. Dr. Duck, de Authoritate Juris Civilis. in Regno Hiberniae, Sect
8. To whom I may add the Authority of that greatly Learned Prelate, Primate
Usher; for to this Chapter of the said Book, as he did to all the rest, he gave
his particular Attestation under his own hand. I mentioned at first two ends,
which I proposed to my self in this undertaking; these I have had all along in
my eye: The one was, that by the best reason I had, and was able to improve,
and by the best authority I could find and was able to pr^duce, I might
justify the Right (and in the present case the right proceedings) of
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and so give my self a true satisfaction therein:
The other end is, to give a satisfaction to others also; for what concerns my
self, I have sufficiently attained it; for what concerns others, I have at
least endeavored to do something in Order thereto.

FINIS.
Some mistakings or omissions in Pointing, the intelligent Reader may easily
observe and correct; And that he may please to do the like in such Lapses, as
are either Literal, or tend to vitiate the Sense, they are here in one view set
down before him.
ERRATA.
PAge 17, line 7, for Jurisdictions, read Jurisdiction: ibid. line 8, for
cognizances, read cognizance: page 24, margent, line 2, for Statutis read
Statute: page 25, line 29, for in, read is: ibid. line 32, for paenes read
penes: ibid. line 34, for sine, read five: page 26, line 4, for vir, read viz.
ibid. line 8, for tali, read rati: ibid. line 27, for sanctis, read sanctio:
page 29, margent, Sect. 2, for amplytude, read amplitude: page 30, margent,
line 32, for without, read without: page 32, line 16, instead of propper cause,
read a proper cause: page 34, line 13, for Clerii, read Cleri: page 41, line
20, for Regie, read Regiae: ibid. line 32, for Prerogativa, read Praerogativa:
page 44, line 34, for King, read King: page 56, line 26, for beee, read been:
page 68, line 15, for cognizanced, read cognizance: page 73, line 12, for
powers, read power: page 82, line 4, for has, read had: page 103, line 26, for
diversi, read diversae.

FINIS.

