A VINDICATION OF THE Divine Perfections, Illustrating the Glory of God In
Them, By Reason and Revelation: Methodically Digested into several MEDITATIONS.

By a Person of Honor.

LONDON, Printed by J. D. for Brabazon Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons in
Cornhill. M DC XC V.

The PREFACE.
THE essential and absolute Perfections of which the Deity is possessed for ever,
are the Object of our supreme Reverence and Adoration, Love and Joy, Affiance
and Trust. The comprehensive Knowledge of them infinitely exceeds our finite
Faculties: but their Discovery is of God, which is of gradual Accomplishment
according to our Conceptions and Capacities, and in order to our transforming
Contemplation of him in his imitable Excellencies. The Light of Reason (like
the early Morning when the Shadows of the Night are mixed with the Light of the
Day) affords some glimmering Notices, and scattered Glances of the Divine
Essence and Attributes. The Light of Faith (like the ascending Light of the Sun
that dispels the Mists in the Air) gives a more clear and extensive Discovery.
The Light of Glory (like the Sun in its full Luster) reveals them in the most
resplendent manner.

In the whole Frame of Nature, in the Variety and Union of its Parts, in their
Order and Efficacy, the Wisdom, Power and Goodness of the Divine Maker appear,
or rather shine: his Attributes and Excellencies are visibly signed and
engraven on his Works. But since the Revolt and Ruin of Man, the Understanding
is strangely darkened and disordered in its Operations. Of this there is sad
Evidence in the numberless Errors that swarmed in the World concerning God: The
Heathen Notions of him were in such a degree of Deformity, as infinitely
blasphemed his Nature. It will be sufficient to mention one fundamental Error.
To the enlightened Mind the Divine Perfections carry their Evidence in a Circle,
one Attribute illustrates and strongly infers another: yet they could not
conceive the absolute Perfection of God's Nature, but fancied every Attribute
to be a singular Deity. These portentous Mistakes did not proceed from the
Defect of Visibility in the Object, but of Sight in the Eye of Reason, so
weakened and vitiated in our lapsed State.

It pleased therefore the Father of Lights in his admirable Mercy, to afford a
new Revelation of himself to the Minds of Men. The same Heavenly Inspiration
from whence the reasonable Soul proceeds, was requisite to renew the true
Knowledge of God in it. The sacred Scripture is the Medium of this Revelation,
wherein are such Characters of the Deity, that none but a perverse Mind can
suspect it not to be the Word of God. In that Glass his most Divine Perfections
are revealed: Wisdom, Goodness, Holiness, Justice, that are principally
exercised in the Moral Government of the World. The external Revelation of
God's Nature and compassionate Counsels in the Gospel, when productive of an
inward Revelation to the Mind, so powerful as to regulate the Will and
Affections, is of saving Efficacy. The wise Men with the Direction of a
miraculous Star had internal Illumination, that discovered the Incarnate Son of
God and Savior of the World to them.

The Light of Faith is as much below the Light of Glory, as it is above the
Light of Nature. Now the Manifestation of God is tempered to our frail
Faculties: if his transcendent Excellencies were displayed to us, we should be
swallowed up in Ecstasy and Astonishment. But in the future State where the
Natural Body shall be spiritualized, we shall know as we are known. In Heaven
God shines by direct Beams; the clear and uninterrupted Vision of his Glory, is
the Cause and Consummation of the Felicity of Angels and Saints for ever. We
begin our Heaven here, by the attentive and transforming Contemplation of the
Deity.

The Noble Author of the following Discourses, has obliged the wise and
inquiring Christians by communicating his Treasures. The Clearness and Vigor of
his Spirit, are illustriously visible in managing a Subject so deep and
difficult. And as in the blessed God there is a Union of all glorious and
amiable Excellencies as are perfective of our Minds, and attractive of our
Wills; so in our Author's unfolding them, there is joined with the strength of
Argument, that Beauty of Persuasion, as may enlighten and engage all under
standing Readers to be happy in the entire Choice of God for their everlasting
Portion.

We have here an imitable and instructive Example to Great Men, the Dignity of
whose Stations in the World too commonly seems to plead an Exemption from a
more sedulous Intention and Application of Mind to the Affairs of Religion,
that have final Reference to another World. This Performance of the Noble
Author shows it to be a thing not impracticable, as it is most Praiseworthy,
amidst the greatest secular Employments to find Vacancy and a Disposition of
Spirit to look with a very inquisitive Eye into the deep Things of God: Which
(if it were the Author's Pleasure to be known) would let it be seen the
Statesman and the Divine are not Inconsistencies to a great and comprebensive
Mind; so as to consider them with Distinction, and without confounding them, or
making the two Spheres intersect one another; so as that in so large a
Theological Work, here is no mixture of Political Matters, except wherein the
Nature of the things themselves they are contiguous. And were it not so, or if
this Work concerned Policies and Governments by Men, it were without our
Compass to recommend it to the World. Which having had some Taste of it, we
make so much haste to do, as not to allow our selves the Pleasure of engrossing
it, or of perusing it alone, till we have imparted it and made it possible to
others to partake with us therein.

W. BATES. J. HOW.


THE CONTENTS.
Meditation I. INtroductory. 1 II. Upon God's being a Spirit. 19 III. Upon the
Self-existence and Eternity of God. 28 IV. Upon God's Omniscience. 36 V. Upon
the Will and Pleasure of God. 67 VI. Upon the Power of God. 78 VII. Upon the
Oneness of God. 89 VIII. Upon God's Freedom. 140 IX. Upon the Blessedness of
God, implying his Self-sufficiency, Self-comprehension, his infinite Love to,
and Delight in Himself. 118 X. Upon God's Holiness or Godlikeness. 126 Page XI.
Upon the Unchangeableness of God. 141 XII. Upon the Goodness of God. 150 XIII.
Upon the Truth of God. 168 XIV. Upon the Justice of God. 179 XV. Upon the Mercy
of God. 200 XVI. Upon the Faithfulness of God. 213 XVII. Upon the Wisdom of
God. 224 XVIII. Upon the Dominion of God, and his Dispensations thereof toward
his Rational Creatures, especially by the Covenant of Works, and the Covenant
of Grace. 257
MEDITATION I. Introductory.
The greatest Duty of Man toward God is to delight in God as in the most
excellent and most amiable Object: It is also the highest Accomplishment of
Man's Happiness; for by delighting in God he does enjoy him. Delight can only
arise from the Knowledge of the lovely Object in the Perfections thereof: And
according to the measure of the Distinctness of the Object, is the Degree of
the Delight in it. It will not be sufficient to rest in the general Knowledge of
God, that he is endowed with all possible consistent Perfections, but there
ought to be a diligent Search of the several Divine Perfections, in that Order
that the Mind of Man can best apprehend them: For who can search the Almighty
to Perfection?

IT is the most common and uncontroverted Sentiment of Mankind, that every Man
feels in himself an earnest and steadfast Inclination to promote his own
Well-being to his full Satisfaction, which alone can justly be called his
Happiness, and must comprehend not only the having of all things that might do
him good, but the Certainty that they shall not be taken from him. This natural
Inclination is a perpetual Monitor to put him in mind to consider what things
may be for his Good, and in what way he may retain or attain them; and though
Men be frequently mistaken in the Application, in the Matter or Manner of their
own Good, yet they do ever desire, and (if there be a Probability of
Attainment) endeavor after that which they apprehend to be for their own
Happiness; which is excellently set forth by the Psalmist, There be many that
say, Who will show us any Good? Lord, lift thou up the Light of thy Countenance
upon us: Thou have put Gladness in my Heart more than in the time that their
Corn and their Wine increased: Insinuating, that the most common Apprehension
of Happiness is the Increase of Corn and Wine, and the Joy arising from the
Accommodations of an animal Life, expressed by Corn and Wine, which are the
prime Means of that Enjoyment.

2. But declaring, also, his own Sentiment, which is true Happiness, the Joy
arising from the shining of God's Countenance, that is, the evident Favor of
God: for Favor is chiefly indicated by the Countenance, as well as Aversion by
Discountenance; and the shining of God's Countenance signisies the highest
Favor, which is the Fountain of Happiness and all Goodness requisite thereto,
absolutely secured by God's Unchangcableness. The Countenance of Man is the
chief Seat of his Beauty and Loveliness, and therefore sit to represent the
Amiableness of God, arising from the clear Perception and Attention of his
infinite Perfections, exciting an unparallelable Delight: So then Man's
Happiness is the Joy arising from such a State as can never want the shining of
God's Countenance: but the Means to attain that State are not so obvious; the
finding them requires the most serious and diligent Meditations; for therein
the greatest Wits of the World, though not seduced with the Biass of
Self-Interest (that State being the greatest Self-Interest) have yet grosliest
erred herein; so that there are hundreds of opposite Opinions of Philosophers
wherein Happiness does consist.

3. The Favor and shining of the Countenance of God cannot be upon any other
State of Man than that which is pleasing and acceptable to God, which cannot be
without a sufficient measure of the Knowledge of God: For he that comes to
God, must believe that he is, and that he is a Rewarder of them that diligently
seek him. Which seeking him must be an Endeavor to know his Divine
Perfections, more than by knowing that he is, by knowing what he is, wherein
the believing that he is a Rewarder of those that believe in him is specially
expressed, as of the chiefest Moment; as it is immediately subjoined, Without
Faith it is impossible to please God. Which Faith is not only that
contemplative Faith whereby the Faithfulness of God is known, that is, that
excellent Perfection of his Nature, that he will not disappoint the Hope or
Trust of a Creature created after his own Image, in what is worthy of him to
give, and is fit for them to have, but that actual Trust and Hope for Pardon,
Reconciliation and Glory, in that way which is suitable to God, which cannot be
to those that hate him, contemn or neglect him, or that cleave to their Sins,
which he does abhor, or to those who do not love him above all things, and from
Love have not only a tender Fear and Reverence to do nothing that may offend
him, but an earnest Desire and Endeavor to do all things for his Glory; which
is the Manifestation of his Divine Perfections, devoting the Soul unto him, in
endeavoring to do all things that are pleasant and acceptable in his Sight:
This is that true Holiness, without which it is impossible to see God; which by
equivalent Terms is called Godliness, Piety and Devotion.

4. That Favor of God which is manifested by the shining of his Countenance,
is not in his Love of Benevolence or good Will, which he had in Election, and
still has before Conversion, but in that Love of Beneplacence or Delight,
which he has not till Conversion; nor does his Countenance always shine after
it, but he frowns upon the commission of presumptuous Sins, until they be
repented of and pardoned.

5. The Scripture makes a clear Distinction and Difference between Godliness
and Honesty, which in equivalent Terms is made betwixt Piety and Probity; the
same may be an Act of either, or of both, or of neither: whereof the Scripture
gives a clear Instance, in giving Alms to the Poor, which some may give upon
the Interest of Mankind, in compassion of the Miserable, without considering it
as pleasing to God; and then it is an Act of Honesty and Probity, but no Act of
Godliness or Piety. Others may give it, because it is acceptable to God,
without considering the Interest of Man, and then it is an Act of Piety only.
Others may give it upon both Accounts in their due Subordination, and then it
is an Act both of Godliness and Honesty. And others may give it out of
Vainglory to be seen of Men, and then it is an Act of neither.

Piety is called Religion a religando, from tying or binding again the Soul to
God; and is also called Devotion a devovendo, from vowing or consecrating the
Soul from common Use to God; and so all things consecrated are said to be holy,
being separated from common Use as to their chief Use, without excluding
consisting subordinate Uses.

6. The necessary and chief Acts of Religion and Devotion, are Confidence in
God, and Love to God. Faith and Love are the Fountain-Graces from whence the
rest flow; neither of them are attainable without the Knowledge and
Consideration of their proper Objects, so qualified as may excite these
Affections, which must be by the Perfections in the Object on which these
Affections lay hold, and by which they are moved.

7. Faith is described, (...), which is best rendered, the Subsistence of things
hoped for; and so the same Act is Faith, as the Promise or Faithfulness of God
is present, and Hope as the Performance is expected: The proper Object of both
is Faithfulness of the Person trusted, upon knowledge that he is able and
willing, at least by the Generosity of his Nature, whereby he will not
disappoint a suitable Expectation, and the Degree thereof is according to these
Qualities. None but a Fool can trust upon other Terms, nor further trust than
he knows them: The very having of Trust is a powerful Motive to a generous
Mind, no less effectual than the strongest Engagement of another.

Love, or Complacence, cannot be excited but by the Advertence and
Consideration of an amiable Object, nor further than the Perfections of that
Object can bear. There is indeed a natural Affection that results from the
Knowledge of Relations, of Parents and Children, Brothers and Sisters, given by
God, like to natural Instincts abstracted from the Nature of the Object: But
there is a different Love even in those, in relation, and in proportion to the
Perfections of the Object.

These Affections of Hope and Love are not directly in our Power, but
indirectly, by the attending and considering proper Objects thereof: Neither is
Delight or Pleasure directly in our Power, but by Attention of the Perfections
that move the same: Neither yet Grief, which is opposite to Pleasure, without
adverting and attending the Qualities in the Object from whence Grief arises.

Any Man of common Capacity, who will take leisure to use ordinary Diligence in
observing and reflecting upon the Workings of his own Soul, will be convinced
that he cannot excite Joy at his Desire, but only by the Perception of
particular Objects, adverting these things in them, which his Judgment cannot
but acknowledge to be good, whence he will find Pleasure to result; and thence
there will follow an Inclination of his Will, wishing the Improvement of that
Good toward the Object it self, or toward another. None but a Sot or a Fool
would at any time want the greatest Pleasure, if the willing or wishing it
could afford it; for it is as easy to wish the greatest as the least: but he
can no more attain Pleasure by willing it, than he can in the Dark attain Light
by wishing it. There must be an Object fit to raise Pleasure, perceived by the
Sense or Imagination, which thence is called sensible Pleasure; or if morally,
evil sensual Pleasure; or perceived by the Understanding, which thence is
called intellectual Pleasure, more proper to Man. In like manner Grief is never
excited but by application of a hurtful Object to the Sense, Fancy, Judgment,
or Memory. And thence follows Aversion.

8. The chief Difference between Men and Brutes in these is, that Brutes act by
Instinct without Freedom in their Appetites or Aversions, but Man can turn an
Object from his Sense, or his Sense from an Object, as he would shun hurtful
Pleasure or Grief; or if he cannot so do, he can apply his Mind to think upon
an Object fit to excite Joy or Grief, and avert his Thought from the former
Object, and so either extinguish or abate the Pleasure or Grief arising from
it, or may shun the perception of it, or thinking upon it, wherein chiefly the
Freedom of Man does consist.

Joy and Grief are contrary, and therefore according to the common Nature of
Contraries, the one expels the other, and they cannot both be together in the
Soul in the highest Degree, but in lower Degrees they may consist; and tho they
do not totally expel one another, yet they do it in part, and so abate one
another. It is evident by common Experience, that an intellectual Pleasure may
consist with a sensible Pain: He who causes a Leg or Arm to be cut of, or a
Wound to be lanced, feels a great Pain; yet if he be so wise as to keep his
Thought firm upon the great Benefit he receives thereby, there will arise an
intellectual Pleasure, that will abate and may mitigate the Pain: as if a
wounded Man were out of hope of Cure because no Physician could be found, and
by surprise there comes one who gives Assurance of Life, and lances the Wound.
With how much Pleasure will one endure the Pain by setting right and binding up
a broken Leg by the Thought of avoiding Lameness, and having the Use of so
necessary a Member? The most eminent Example of this, the Scripture shows of
our Savior, who for the Joy was set before him, endured the Cross, despising
the Shame. How have some noble Greeks and Romans gloried to become a Sacrifice
for the Safety of their Country? The Apostles, who were unjustly scourged, and
thereby had the Grief of Pain and Shame, yet rejoiced to be counted worthy to
suffer for the Name of Christ. Even many Martyrs have triumphed and joyfully
sung in the midst of the Flames, consuming their Bodies. It is an Evidence of a
weak or vitiated Mind, that by frequent application of the Thoughts to one main
Object, does acquire such an habitual Pleasure therein, that it cannot direct
its Thoughts toward another more noble Object.

If God had not endued Man with this Liberty, he would not have commanded that
special and signal Love of married Persons, which oftentimes could be no other
way performed but by frequent Meditation upon their Perfections, and diverting
the Thoughts from thinking upon their Imperfections, or from thinking of the
Perfections of others that might excite Desire after them. Thus Job said, I
have made a Covenant with my Eyes, why then should I look upon a Maid? Yea, God
would not have commanded Man to love God with all his Soul, and with all his
Strength, if he did not give him Capacity to know and meditate upon his
infinite Perfections; much less would he punish Man for failing in these.

It may be objected, that the Objects of Thought are innumerable, no Creature
can retain them all in its Mind, nor can determine it self to think on every
Object at Pleasure, but is ordinarily determined by some Impression upon the
Mind; how then can the Mind turn to the fitted Object to shun hurtful Pleasure
or Grief? Certainly a great part of the governing of Man is by determining his
Thoughts to particular Objects: the Mind's reflecting on its own Working and
Experience, will solve this Difficulty, and will find that some things will
frequently and almost continually recur to the Thoughts: and above all, the
Mind can always recur to the Thoughts of God, wherein if it be not perverted to
shun the continuance of these Thoughts, it cannot miss some measure of Cure
against any hurtful Pleasure or Grief: A hurtful Pleasure may be shunned, by
exciting a more noble Pleasure in another Object, or by exciting Grief from
thinking upon the Consequences of that hurtful Pleasure.

I needed think no more to convince me of the excellent Usefulness for
Devotion, arising from the distinct and frequent meditating upon the Divine
Perfections, which would continually excite Joy, and will never want Matter of
new Discoveries of Perfection, in Kind or Degree, Power or Act; and so give
new, fresh and increased Pleasure: that though in the State of Mortality Man
knows God both darkly and as in a Glass, that is, by Reflection from his
Creatures; yet at his right Hand there is Fullness of Joy, and Pleasures for
evermore, that is, in the State of Glory. But there may be, even here, so much
Joy from meditating upon God, which all other Objects cannot parallel, much
less exceed or extinguish.

9. The Scripture does frequently inculcate the Benefit of knowing God, of
remembering him, of meditating upon his Perfections, his Laws and Dispensations;
and gives it as the Character of the Wicked, that they know not God, that they
remember not God, that they have him not before their Eyes, whom to know is
Life everlasting: This is Life eternal, to know God, and Jesus Christ whom he
has sent. The Knowledge of God cannot formally be Life eternal, but it is the
Mean necessary to attain it, because it does excite that Joy in which it does
chiefly consist. It is said of the Wicked, that God is not in all their
Thoughts; that is, so far as they can shun, and that they will have no Thoughts
of the most High; the Thoughts of God crush their sinful Inclinations and
Pleasures, which fall before them, as Dagon did before the Ark of God. Job
gives it as a discriminating Test, between the Godly and the Hypocrite, only
knowable by every Man of himself, when he says of the Hypocrite, Will he
delight himself in the Almighty? Will he always call upon God?

10. There is a Knowledge of God by the Light of Nature, by Acquisition, in
Improvement of the Light of Nature and Experience, by Revelation of that which
has no Principle in the Light of Nature, by spiritual Illumination, whereby
spiritual things are discernable, which the natural Man cannot know, because
they are spiritually discerned; and his Notions of them are but as those of a
Country from a Map: and according to these several kinds of Knowledge must the
different kinds of Meditation, and the different Degrees of Joy, Love,
Reverence, Obsequiousness and Confidence in God arise, and the true Humility of
the Soul of Man, not so much by debasing it below its true Value, but by
exalting God, and perceiving the Infinite Distance of Perfection betwixt the
two, which may equally be between two Objects, by heightning the one, or by
depressing the other.

The Monkish Humility is much in disgracing humane Nature, which is not without
reflecting upon its Author, and does not only loath humane Nature in so far as
sinful. The Stoics fall into the like Fault, by looking upon all Affections as
vicious Perturbations, not endeavoring to rule and use them, but to root them
out: as if a Horse should not be made use of, because some ill-managed Horse
will kick off his Master, or break his Bridle and run away; or, as if a Sail
should not be used, because sometimes it oversets a Ship. Indeed, weak or
vitiated Minds were better if they wanted all Affections to be their Servants,
than having them to be their Masters.

11. The natural Knowledge of God improved by Industry and Experience, goes a
great way even in Religion: for the Light of the natural Conscience convinces
a Man that there is one, and only one God, who is the just Judge of all rational
Creatures, and knows their most secret Thoughts, and that he rules them and
the whole World; and that they find in their Souls a Rule of their Life, a
Quiet and Pleasure in their Conscience when they keep it, and a Terror when
they break it; yea, they have the natural Notion of the Mercy and Forgiveness
of God to penitent Sinners, and they think that every Man can repent if he
please: but they are utterly confounded, and at a loss, when they consider the
Consistency of the Justice and Mercy of God, how all might repent, and all be
forgiven, and yet that God is entirely just, and fully abhors Sin. The Entry of
Revealed Religion discovering a Messiah or Mediator, delivering his People from
their Sins by his Sufferings, is no small Confirmation of the Truth of that
Religion, inducing a strong Probability of it, though nothing but the Divine
Illumination can breed a full Persuasion of it, nor give Warrant to force the
embracing and professing it, as may be done for the Light and Law of Nature, as
well for Religion, as far as it goes, as for other Ends.

Something of Religion will arise from the Notion of a Deity, convincing that
God is to be adored by Acknowledgment of his Power, Bounty, Justice and Mercy;
by Supplication for his Favor, and the Requisites of Life; by Deprecations of
his Displeasure, Justice and Wrath; Praise and Thanksgiving for Benefits
received or hoped. Much more will result from the improved Knowledge of God by
the Light of Nature, and yet more by the Probability of his revealed Will.
Whereby it cannot but be acknowledged, that if these things be true which are
contained in Scripture, God's Bounty and Mercy to Mankind is far greater than
what could be dreamed of from the Light of Nature.

But all this is far short of the Knowledge arising from the Illumination of the
Holy Spirit, in the Souls of the Regenerate, by which they are capable of a far
more glorious and firm Apprehension of the Divine Perfections and
Dispensations, and a quite other and far greater Joy therein, and in the
Persuasion of Peace and Reconciliation with God, and in the Hope of that Glory
which is greater than Ear has heard, or Eye has seen, or has entered into the
Heart of Man to consider.

12. The Knowledge of God, even in the Renewed, has great Variety of Degrees;
and it is both the Interest and Duty of all of them, to extend it so far as
their Capacity and Opportunities do enable them, that they may increase their
Comfort, and strengthen their Faith against the Suggestions of Satan, and the
Seductions of weak or wicked Men misrepresenting God, not so much in his Power
and Wisdom as in his Goodness and Purity, whereby they do exceedingly incroach
upon that Infinite Loveliness whereby he draws and ravishes the Souls of Men,
and does not only drive them by the Power of his Sovereignty.

Some represent God as if his Sovereignty were his highest Perfection, and his
greatest Interest, as despotick Sovereigns represent themselves to be above all
Law, and to be indifferent whom to save, or whom to destroy, without any
consideration of their Actings, but to show their absolute and arbitrary Power,
and that they neither love their Subjects, nor care for the Love of their
Subjects, but for their Fear, that may make them obey without Reserve. How
strange is it that so many eminent Divines should represent God, as if the
Order of his Decrees were not only to glorify some, and not for their foreseen
Performances by their own Power, but to eternally torment the greatest part of
his rational Creatures, without the consideration of their Sin, as coming in
not as a Motive from the Foresight thereof, but as a Mean to that End. Others
are amazed when they consider the Goodness of God, why infinite Duration passed
before he created any Creature, why he created not more Individuals, more
Kinds, more excellent Perfections; why he suffered Sin to come into the World;
why he saved so few; and permits the Devils to tempt. And therefore upon
pretense to vindicate the Purity, and magnify the Goodness of God, they
represent him as having done all that was possible for him to do, especially in
relation to his rational Creatures, who could not possibly be created with
Reason and free Choice; so that he could in all Cases effectually overruled
them, by hindering them to do Evil, or make them to do Good; but that he could
only persuade them, and bring into their Thoughts and Remembrance the best
Motives; yet so as they could reject them all, and choose the contrary; at
least that he had decreed to have no farther Influence on them but by
Persuasion, wherein they fortify themselves by God's Entreaties and
Expostulations, and by his express Declaration, What could I have done more for
my Vineyard that I have not done? This does no less derogate from the Power and
Wisdom of God, than the former does from his Goodness and Justice. There are
innumerable other Mistakes, yea and pernicious Errors, prejudicial to the
Amiableness and Perfection of God.

It is not proper here to vindicate the Divine Perfections against these
Errors, but in the Explication of the particular Perfections on which they
incroach. I shall only in general observe how these Opinions can subsist with
the common Conception of God, unto which all that use unprejudicate Reason do
agree, that he is a Being absolutely perfect; that the Mind of Man could not
conceive him more perfect than he is, and consequently more amiable, if that he
acted by absolute Necessity. It were easy to conceive him more perfect, if in
his Intentions, Purposes and Performances, he acted freely. It is an inbred
Principle in the Soul of Man, that nothing can be morally good, virtuous or
praiseworthy, that is done of necessity, and not freely; and therefore the
Light of Nature, as well as Revelation, do represent the Divine Intentions and
Actings as free, not by the Freedom of Indifference, but that there was
Sufficiency of Power and Strength in God to have done otherways, or to do any
thing that does not import Inconsistency with it self, which only is absolutely
impossible. But there is another kind of Impossibility, not absolute by
Inconsistency, but eventually impossible: For Example, that all Mankind should
be of one Opinion: Suppose a Man to aim and shoot at a Mark, and hit it at a
great Distance, it has no Inconsistency that the same Man with the same
Instruments should ever hit that Mark, and yet eventually it is impossible. So
it is said, that it is impossible for God to lie; and that he has done all
that he could do for his Vineyard. The Meaning whereof is not because of his
Decree and Immutability, for so all things are impossible to be otherwise than
they are, but because God will never do any thing not worthy of, and becoming
his infinitely glorious natural Perfections.

It was in the Power of God, and not inconsistent, that he should have given
his rational Creatures such Inclinations as they could not possibly act
contrary thereto: wherein he has convinced us that it is impossible for
rational Creatures to choose but under the Notion of some kind of Goodness; and
that it is impossible for them to desire that which they conceive would be
their own Misery, or not to desire their own Happiness when they think upon it:
but he has never proposed a Reward for such Acts, because they proceed like
the Instincts of Brutes, which may do things naturally good as well as
naturally evil, but are not capable of Punishment or of Reward, because they
have not Freedom.

God has also given to Mankind the natural Affection to love their Children,
distinct from that Love which arises from their Perfections: This Inclination
is very strong, yet some do counteract it, and thereby their Crimes are most
horrid, but their Rewards are least in the Sight of God or of Men. These
Actions are most praiseworthy, whereby the contrary strong Inclinations are
overcome, as to hazard Life without rational Hope of Escape, for the Good of a
Country or City to lay it down, when Escape is impossible, and yet a contrary
Word would save it; upon Love and Obedience to God, as the Martyrs have
suffered the most cruel Death, when a contrary Acknowledgment would both have
given Life and Reward.

13. When therefore I consider and compare these two Ways that were both
possible and good, that God should have created all his rational Creatures with
such Inclinations that they could not counteract, and thereby were neither
capable of Punishment nor Reward, not having any Freedom: or that he should
create them with sufficient inbred Principles and Inclinations to Good, not of
necessity but of free Choice, and which they could counteract, and so did
govern them by Rewards and Punishments. I am convinced as clearly as of the
Light, that in this way Creatures were more like to their Creator, and that his
Choice was more suitable, worthy of, and becoming his infinitely glorious
Nature, than the former way. Nor do I think that the confirmed Angels or
glorious Saints are in an absolute Impossibility to counteract their
Inclinations: God so assists them in all their Choices, that it is only
eventually impossible; as our Savior encouraged his Apostles, not to be
anxious what to say when they were brought before Judges, for it should be
given them what to say in that Hour: Therefore both Angels and Men were at
first created in a State of Innocence and Holiness, but mutable, for
after-Proof of their Faithfulness and Diligence. God did confirm the elect
Angels by greater Grace than tho rest; and the first Man and Woman did fall
freely, and by no Necessity imposed either by the Decree or Dispensation of
God. How foolish then is it to imagine, that God who stood in need of no
Creature, would create such Creatures, as either by the Necessity of their
Nature, or by his Decree he could not govern, but only persuade, request and
expostulate. A Supposition little agreeable to that of his Fore-knowledg, or
the Use he might make of it. I see no Difficulty that he could foresee what
they would do, if left to themselves: But seeing he could hinder and prevent
whatever he foresaw that were inconsistent with his Glory, and that he could
enable and excite them to whatever he pleased that were good, I see no more
necessary for governing them, and for glorifying himself.

It is more foolish and faulty to murmur that God has thus created his
rational Creatures, and so not excluded Sin from entering into the World; or
that he designed and performed the Creation and Providence of the World as he
did, without making more Kinds or Individuals, or sooner: But as he put to
Silence the clamorous Laborers in the Vineyard, that he had given as much to
those that labored but one Hour as to those that labored a whole Day, saying,
Why are you evil, because I am good? Is it not free for me to do with my own
what I please? But the Folly of this Pretense I see further cleared, that it
was not possible to evade it: for though he should have made a Million of
Worlds, and far more perfect than this; yet still he could have made more, and
more perfect, otherwise his Omnipotence had been exhausted, and his Power as
well as his Freedom behooved to cease. Besides that, Revelation shows the Design
of glorifying Man by the Mediator Christ. It had been exceedingly unsuitable to
his Merit, that a Part of glorified Men should have owed nothing to him; and so
he ought either to have suffered in every Habitation of Mankind, or they ought
all to be in one Habitation, and of one Nature and Blood, of both which he was
Partaker.

My Design is to clear up to my self the Divine Perfections, and thence to
exalt the Loveliness of God, and to vindicate the same against these and other
Errors and Mistakes, by methodical Meditations thereupon, according to the
natural Order of the Divine Perfections, which Order does very much contribute
to distinct Conceptions of them all.

The Divine Perfections are either natural and absolutely necessary, or
voluntary, free, and moral: And though they be without all Composition in the
fullest Simplicity, yet they must necessarily be conceived by Creatures, as
some being prior and others being posterior in order of Nature; the Divine
Dispensations must be posterior even in time to his Purposes or Decrees; his
Decrees being free, must presuppose his Freedom, and his Will; and these must
presuppose his Understanding and Wisdom, and all must be conceived as into, or
from a Subject, to which they are relative. His moral Perfections must relate
to his natural Perfections, as being prior in order of Nature, that he intends
and acts all things suitable to, worthy of, and becoming such natural
Perfections, and therefore the best Method in meditating upon them, is by
following their natural Order.

MEDITATION II. Upon God's being a Spirit.
1. GOD's being a Spirit is the only Attribute of God, that presupposes
nothing anterior. Being a Spirit is the Subject of all the Divine Attributes;
for the being God does essentially comprehend all. God's Self-existence
imports something that is Self-existent, which is his being a Spirit, so does
his Independance, his Knowledge, his Will, his Freedom: All run up to bring us
to consider him as a Spirit. We must not consider the Divine Attributes as
different Parts of the Divine Nature, which were inconsistent with a Spirit,
which is without all Parts, Extension or Composition; so that God is altogether
Immaterial, has none of the Properties of a Body, in whom there is neither
Matter nor Form, Parts essential or integral, which is an incommunicable
Property of God. It is also incommunicable, that there are no Accidents in him,
he acts all Things immediately without a superadded Power or Capacity, of
which no Creature is capable. For it is inconceivable that one Creature should
act one way, and another another way, without superadded Powers freely given of
God: for if any Creature acted, in that it is a Creature, or as a Creature,
then all Creatures behoved so to act; or if it act as a Substance, a Spirit, or
a Body, then all Spirits, all Bodies, behoved so to act.

2. God's acting without a superadded Power, without any accession to his
Substance, is his incommunicable Perfection, implied in all his Divine
Perfections; neither does it follow that other Spirits must so act, as Angels,
or the Souls of Men, for they are only analogous Spirits, by resemblance, there
is no synonymous degree of Nature common to Finite and Infinite, God and
Creatures, othertherwise that Inference were inevitable: Substance and Ens are
but abstracted metaphysical Notions, and there are no Individuals immediate to
these, as there are in Man and to the several Species of Brutes.

Some to avoid this difficulty, have supposed the Angels not to be pure
Spirits, Zanchius.
but to have aerial or aetherial Bodies, so thin as to be insensible, and that
pass through the Pores of all solid Bodies, which the Air cannot do: but then
the separate Souls of Men should be pure Spirits; yet some have thought that
even then they have aerial or aetherial Bodies: More.
but certainly the Angels and Souls of Men by the Power of God were separable
from such Bodies, and yet active, and so the immediate actings of God as a
Spirit, should be competent to these Spirits.

I know no other way to extricate that Difficulty, but that there is nothing
purely Spirit but God; and therefore Angels and Souls, tho they have not
Extension and Bulk, as Bodies, yet they have not that Property that they can
co-exist with any other created Substance in the same space; so that the
Essence of a Body consists not in Impenetrability, but in Extension, and God
alone can co-exist with all created Substances.

This is much confirmed by the chief and most express place in Seripture, where
God is said to be a Spirit, John 4. 24. (...), which tho it be rendered, God is
a Spirit, the Words are, a Spirit the God: And in Scripture Indefinits are
equivalent to Universals. This way of expression is not to be supposed an
accidental Conversion, without a very convincing Reason, neither is there in it
a Copulative, but the words are placed as two Synonyma, a Spirit, and God,
being one thing: The Article (...) does not import that God is the Subject, and
a Spirit is the Attribute; but a true Spirit is the God, excluding all false
Gods, and others, that are by participation called Gods; as in the
demonstration of the true God by Elijah, the People being fully convinced, cry
out, Jehovah is the God; that is, the only God. The Name of God is
comprehensive of all his Perfections, from which that conception or Idea does
arise, so that it would not be eminently significant to say, that Being that
has all possible Perfection is a Spirit, but rather a true Spirit must have in
it all Perfections; and there is nothing in the Attributes of God presupposed
to being a Spirit, of which a Spirit should be an Attribute; but a Spirit is
that which in our Conception does only represent a Substance, and therefore the
natural Order of this highest Expression is (as in the Original) a Spirit the
God. The same is confirmed, 2 Cor. 3. 17. (...), the Lord is the Spirit;
importing not only that God is a Spirit, but that he is the Spirit, that is,
the only Spirit.

In this I am further confirmed, considering that all Philosophers are at a
loss to give any rational Account how a Spirit moves Matter, or how Matter
acts upon a Spirit, seeing all agree that the efficacious Fiat is proper to
God alone; and therefore a Spirit cannot move Matter by willing it to move: So
that they are forced to say, that God has made such a Connection between
certain Thoughts of Spirits, and certain Motions of Matter. Whence all that are
ingenuous come also to confess, that Creatures have no Activity at all, but
that God alone moves Matter, as the Spirit wills it to be moved; and yet that
Will is universally effectual; so that the Motion was never hindered but by
extrinsick Force. There can nothing more evidently make God pedissequous and
dependent, not only upon Angels and Men, but also upon Devils, and even in the
worst of all their Actions.

But if created Spirits be but so called in resemblance to God as well as the
Air, or the animal Spirits, yet cannot coexist with another Spirit or Body,
then they can thrust upon Matter, or Matter upon them; and so a Spirit in the
Juncture of the Nerves can act the Body, in all the ways that we perceive it to
move, though it had no innate Inclination never to part with that Station of
the Body while it could serve it, which is the only intelligible Account of the
Union of the Soul and Body. So that an assistent Spirit possessing the same
Place can act an entire Body, as an informing Spirit does these who are
possessed, speak and move, not only without their Will, but against their Will.

4. I consider then what a truly immaterial Spirit does imply. And, (1) A
Spirit must necessarily have Cogitation, not that it is Cogitation, which no
Man can conceive without presupposing something that thinks; but it needs not
be said that a Spirit presupposes any thing, but that it is absolute. Modern
Philosophers glory much in sinding a clear Distinction betwixt a Body and a
Spirit; that a Spirit thinks, and a Body is extended: and there is nothing
common to these two, which indeed is very clear and not improbable. But they
throw all down, by making a Spirit only a Thought: for then pure Matter may
think, inasmuch as there is nothing within the whole Universe of Beings that
can be supposed capable of thinking but either Spirit or Matter: not Spirit, if
Spirit be but a Thought; for a Thought does not think, therefore it would be
consequent that either Matter does think, or nothing does; and yet the Idea of
a Thought is as distinct from the Idea of Matter as can be; and so an Act shall
serve for a separable Substance, and it shall be an Act without an Agent, and
shall act it self.

But it is a bolder Attempt to hold God to be but a Thought, and yet it agrees
well with their Opinion, that say, God is the Cause of himself, and by his Will
preserves his Being. And one has lately too consequently said, that God by his
Will could annihilate himself, which is blasphemous enough: But I wish the
Train of these Consequences would open Men's Eyes to speak more becomingly of
God.

5. (2.) If a Spirit by its Essence must think, then it must necessarily be
without Parts and indivisible; for if it has Parts, the Cogitation must either
be in the whole, or in more Parts, or in one Part only: If in the whole, then
the Separation of any Part loses the Cogitation, and so the Spirit is
annihilated. Nor is it conceivable how a Thought can be in many Subjects; Parts
are many, though they cohere in one Body: If in more Parts severally, then
there are as many Spirits as Parts, in which the Cogitation is: If Cogitation
be but in one, the rest were superfluous Matter.

6. (3.) A pure self-existent Spirit must be Omniscient; for there can be no
imaginable Reason why it knows one thing more than another.

(4.) A self-existent thinking Spirit cannot want Capacity to determine it
self, and to choose.

7. (5.) A self-existent thinking Spirit, determining it self, cannot otherwise
act upon Matter, but by the Determination of the Will, and therefore it must
either be able to act nothing upon Matter, or any thing, and so all extrinsick
Action must cease; for a dependent Spirit must have far less Activity than a
self-existent and independent Spirit. If then it must have Capacity to act, and
act of it self, there can be no Reason rendered why the Action should be more of
one kind than of another; and therefore such a Spirit must be Omnipotent: but
created Spirits act nothing but by Activities freely given of God, and no
further.

8. They are not excusable, though far more subtle, who apprehend a Substance
without Proportion, far more pure than the purest Air, which is beyond this
sensible World, so far, that it is impossible to conceive how far, and
therefore is truly infinite in Extension, which they do erroneously apprehend
to be a true Body or Substance; and that it is not possible but that without
this sensible World there should be a real Substance, seeing it is capable of
real Attributes, because there is found all the Dimensions of a Body, when yet
these also are found in a Centaur, made up of a Man and a Beast, which they
acknowledge to have no true Existence, but to be impossible, and of a Shadow,
which we conceive to have Dimensions, beside the Dimensions of that Body in
which the dark Shadow is imagined to be subjected; yea, it has clear Figure
like unto the Body which intercepts the Light, of which there may be true and
certain Propositions; as that the Shadow of the Head is distant from the Shadow
of the Feet, and that the Shadow of the Bulk is larger than either, where there
is a true Connection or Consequence, that as the one is, so is the other, true,
supposed, or imagined. There is no more Reality in these imagined Spaces, or of
their Dimensions, yet the Deception they are in does more easily seduce their
Thoughts to apprehend God, under the Notion of this immense Substance, which is
but the Birth of the Brain.

They are more foolish and hateful that apprehend God under the determined
bounded Figure of a Man, or of any other Creature; as there were a Sect of Men
that not by Resemblance but in Reality did believe that God had a Body like to
the Body of a Man, and were therefore called Anthropomorphitae: They are next
unto those, who though they believe not that God is corporeal, or has a Body,
yet will make bodily Figures to represent him, as the Rays of Light in a round
or triangular Figure, or in such Shape of a Man as he was represented to the
Apostle John in the Revelation: but it is clear it was not a Representation of
God simply, but of the Mediator Christ, who lived then, and was dead; and his
being called the first and the last, is an evident Demonstration of his Deity.
But all Men's quibbling may cease when they have had so ancient an Advertisement
to beware to conceive or represent God under the Shape of any thing, who says,
Take ye therefore good heed unto your selves (for ye saw no manner of
Similitude on the Day that the Lord spoke to you in Horeb out of the midst of
the Fire) lest ye corrupt your selves, and make you a graven Image, the
Similitude of any Figure. What a pitiful Evasion is it, that a graven Image is
only forbidden? when also is expressly forbidden the Similitude of any Figure;
and the Reason added is general, For ye saw no manner of Similitude. The Fire,
out of the midst of which God spoke, is there expressed to be no Similitude or
Figure of God, or the Sun, for which there might be the greatest Pretense; yea,
it is made one of the ten Words of the Decalogue. After all this, shall we
imagine that God has changed this Precept, which was not Ceremonial, but
opposite to Ceremonies? Is it not an horrid and impious Boldness to leave that
Command out of the Decalogue, rather than to forbear the worshipping of or by
Images, as the Church of Rome does avow and practice?

I adore Thee, the only pure Spirit, that thou have not left me to my
Imagination to apprehend Thee as being any way like a Body, or Matter, by
Extension or Diffusion of Substance, or being excluded where any other
Substance is, or can be, whether a Body or created Spirit, it being so incident
to Man that is born of a Woman to have all his first Thoughts by Imagination of
Bodies and their Resemblances, except the Son of God alone; for it was the
Pleasure of the Father that in him all Fullness should dwell. I lament and pity
their Weakness that frame a Conception of the infinitely glorious God, as a
Body, or any thing like a Body, though it were the most pure Air or Ether that
Reason convinces to be every where in this World, as the mean of Communication
throughout the World, without which no Creature at distance could communicate
its Thoughts or Actings to another; which scarce can the Imagination apprehend,
but only the purer Reason; and which is conceived so pure, that it is
invisible, impalpable, unperceivable by any Sense, in resomblance to which Men
conceive Angels or their own Souls as Substances, like some part of the purest
Air, that can pass without Stop through all Bodies, though of never so close
Contexture; and are apt to apprehend God by the like Resemblance, because God
is invisible, and can fall under no Sense, yet is far more clearly conceivable,
purely by the Mind. I pray God it be not imputed to those who through Weakness
have so low and unsuitable Thoughts of the ever blessed God.

MEDITATION III. Upon the Self-Existence and Eternity of God.
BY Self-Existence I understand the Existence of a Being, which has no Cause
of the Existence thereof, and which has its Existence in it self; for if it
had an efficient Cause, it behoved to derive its Being from that Cause, as the
Author thereof.

A self-existent Being can have no constituent or component Parts, whether they
be essential Parts or integral Parts, or of whatsoever Composition can be
supposed: for then it behoved to owe its Original to these component Parts; for
such Parts, though they be not the efficient Cause of that Compound, yet they
are the material, formal or essential Causes thereof.

A self-existent Being can have no final Cause, or any End ulteriour to it
self, but the Design thereof must necessarily be it self, as the ultimate and
last End, and cannot be a Mean or Mids toward any other End; but all things
designed and acted thereby must necessarily be designed for, and terminate upon
it self, as the last End.

A self-existent Being has been acknowledged by all Sects who have pretended
to any Learning in the World. Those whose Minds could not be so far elevated as
to apprehend a Possibility of Creation, or any thing that could be so powerful
as to give Existence to a Substance which had no Existence before, and yet were
not Atheists, did acknowledge a Deity, knowing and capable to do all things
possible, which did necessarily suppose a self-existent active Cause as the
first Cause, and a self-existent passive or material Cause, of and upon which
the first Cause made all Productions and Alterations, whether that Cause were
one similar Substance, which most of them did with the greater Probability
suppose to be Water or Air, or whether it were an Heterogenious Mass or Chaos,
whereby the active Cause could only segregate the immutable Particles of that
Chaos, and unite them in Compounds of diverse Shapes, but none of them could
ever distinctly propose whence Life and Perception arose; and therefore were
necessitated to suppose that there had preceded eternal Trains of all Animals,
and that there was no self-existent percipient Cause but these first active
Causes only. Yea, all the Atheistical Philosophers who did not acknowledge a
Deity, yet did acknowledge a self-existent Being both active and passive, and
yet attributing no Knowledge to the active Cause, and so working without Choice
by fatal Necessity; but they did acknowledge no percipient Being to be
self-existent, but either by eternal Generation, or by Production from the
Earth, not only Plants but Animals: These things first arising, which are less
perfect, and need less Elaboration; so that Mankind was esteemed to be the last
Birth of the Earth.

I rejoice that all these fantastic Suppositions are evanished, and that not
only Revelation but Reason also have concurred that Creation is not only
possible but true; and I do admire and resent that even some Christian
Philosophers, and many of them by Profession Divines, maintain the impossiblity
of Vacuity, without any Body, or any real Extension, because such a Vacuity is
inconceivable, without conceiving Longitude, Latitude and Profundity; which are
the necessary intrinsic Properties of a Body, and therefore must be from
Eternity. And therefore God could not annihilate the whole, or any part of
Matter, leaving nothing where it was, nor could give existence to any Body,
where nothing was before: And therefore the Universe must necessarily be so far
extended, that there could be no further extension thereof. By these Opinions,
there is supposed an eternal passive Cause from Eternity to Eternity, and there
cannot be imagined an Evasion that this passive Cause must be Self-existent, or
that God from Eternity did give it Existence; and yet it cannot be truly said,
that he gave it Existence, if it proceeded from him by Emanation, without
Choice. Nor is there any ground to suppose, that by Choice he gave it Existence
from Eternity, much less that he gave it an independent Existence, that he
could not annihilate it, in the whole, or any part of it.

It exceeds my Capacity to imagine how these things are consistent with the
Wisdom of God, and with his relation of the World's Creation.

I have elsewhere cleared my own Judgment, that there is no Solidity in that
Consequence, that Vacuity could not be imagined to be without Longitude,
Latitude and Profundity; and that all the Demonstrations thereupon were as
true, as upon any Body. I shall only say here, that the truth of attribution of
Properties and Consequences does not import the real existence of the Subject:
For instance, tho there never had been a Triangle in the World, it ever was an
unquestionable Verity, that every Triangle has three Angles, for the Verity
consists only in the Consequence, and is an hypothetical Verity, no ways
inferring the existence of the Triangle, or any of these Angles, but only if
the Subject be existent, the Attributes must likewise be existent; and
therefore that in Vacuity there must be conceived Longitude, Latitude and
Profundity: and all the Demonstrations founded thereupon, do only prove the
truth of the Consequence and Connection, but neither the existence of the
Subject, nor of these Attributes.

The Implications of a Self-existent Being, having been thus explicated, I am
fully persuaded that God, and God alone, is Self-existent, having his Existence
originally in himself, and deriving the same from no efficient Cause, from no
constituent or component Cause, and that he himself is his own last End, and is
not a subordinate End to any other.

No Creature is capable of these Qualifications jointly; for tho a Creature may
be without composition of Parts, no Creature can be without an efficient Cause,
neither can any Creature have its Existence in it self, and of it self.

Nothing but God can have it Self for its last End, tho many Creatures do
desire and imagine themselves to be their last End, and do obey and serve God,
not for himself, as the last End of that Service, but for shunning Evil and
procuring Good from him, as their last End; tho they may have that desire as a
subordinate End, yet they cannot attain it if they make it their last End; and
so can neither justly nor effectually design it.

Selfishness in Creatures is a capital Vice, and the original of very many
Vices: for God has printed a Principle upon every Soul, that they should not
prefer their own Interest to the common Interest of Mankind, much less to the
Honor and Pleasure of God; and therefore selfish Love in Creatures is Vicious.

Self-Love in God is suitable and congruous to his Glorious Natural Perfections:
There is nothing more Excellent, nor is there any thing having any Proportion
of Excellency to him.

The Scripture has clearly expressed, that he has made all things for Himself,
and that of him, and for him are all things.

I do very much dislike the Opinion of these modern Philosophers, who say that
God's Existence is from Himself, and his Preservation is from his own Will:
which do import that he is the cause of his own Being and Preservation, and
that by his own Will; for thereby he should not be without a Cause of his
Existence and Preservation.

In this Meditation I have joined the Eternity of God with his Self-existence,
not only as consequent from it, but rather as implied in it; for whatsoever is
existent without a Cause of its Existence, must necessarily have been ever
existent, and had never a beginning of Existence: it is necessarily consequent
that no other thing could have Capacity to annihilate the Self-existent Being
of God; and therefore his Existence must necessarily continue to Eternity.

The Notions and Subtilties of Schoolmen, suppose and contemplate an abstract
Endurance common to God and Creatures, as a real Perfection, which they derive
from the continued successive Mutations, such as they perceive in Plants and
Animals, which from the first appearance of their Existence, have constant
Mutations, whereby they grow up to their Perfection gradually, and decline from
it until they die: Though that every Mutation is not sensibly different from
the former, yet they imagine it is really different, which yet is not always
true; for there may be continuance in one Condition without Alteration, and
there may be unequal Advances and Recesses, yet there are still notable
Periods, as Infancy, Pupillarity, Minority, Majority, perfect Age, declining
Age, and old Age; and their Imagination makes this Endurance as if it did
consist of so many points of Time, as the Body consists of so many of its most
minute parts or points, albeit there be not the like Reality in both.

In this way the Calculation of Time might have been by the Periods in the
Lives of Adam's Posterity, and for the most part is so calculated in the
Scripture; for thereby it is known who were prior, concomitant, and posterior
of the Fathers in the Line of Scripture: And therein not only their beginning
to have Children at their perfect Age, but their continuance of their begetting
Sons and Daughters is expressed, although the continuance of their Lives be more
accurately expressed by the Years; that is, by the Revolutions of the Sun in its
proper Course. So the Scriptures express in what Years of the Life of the
Fathers their Posterity were born, and in what Year after the birth of the
Predecessors they died.

By the Chronology of Scripture there is a clear account from the Creation of
Adam to Abram, and an exact Era from the Creation of the World by the
Revolutions of the Sun in the Zodiac, having no other Difficulty, but in what
State the Earth was where Adam was created, which is far more probable to have
been when the Fruits of the Trees were ripe, seeing God did allow Adam to make
use of all the Fruits of Herbs and Trees, except the Forbidden Tree: So the
Harvest Equinoctial is the most proper Commencement of Time.

But after the time of Abraham and his Sons, there was no more Lineal Deduction
of the Time from Fathers to Sons; and so the exact Calculation of the number of
Years from the Creation was no more certain, but the several Nations calculated
the Time from some notable Occurrence, which had been most observed where they
lived, and so there became many different AEra's, from which the Calculation of
the Number of Years commenceth: So the Romans calculated Time from the building
of Rome, and Christians from the birth of Christ, and the Mahometans from the
flight of Mahomet.

The Annual Revolution of the Sun is the most evident Succession of Motion, and
therefore has been commonly made the Standard and Rule of Successive
Alterations, by which it is known when they did occur; yet some Nations did
calculate by the Monthly Revolutions of the Moon, especially the Egyptians, who
had a vast number of Years during the Reigns of their Dynasties, which
therefore must either be fabulous, or calculated by the Revolutions of the
Moon: Albeit the constant and regular successive Motion of the Sun be properly
the endurance of the Time of the Sun, and so is the rule of the Time of all
other regular successive Alterations; yet nothing can properly be said to have
the Duration of Time but what has these Regular Vicissitudes, such as Plants
and Animals, whose successive Alterations are calculated by the common Motion
of the Sun; yet only as by an extrinsick Denomination, by comparing these
Vicissitudes with the Motion of the Sun: but their proper intrinsic Alteration
is that whereby they have an endurance in Time, because they have a Beginning,
a Progress, and a Period of their Existence.

Other Things which have not successive regular Alterations, have not an
endurance of Time, and yet the Fiction of Imagination attributes the extrinsick
Denomination of the Motion of Time even to these; and so the Earth, or a
Mountain created in the beginning, can only be said to endure so many Years,
because they have co-existed with the Motion of the Sun so long, but have no
intrinsic Time by any regular successive Alteration of their own.

Angels and other Spirits are likewise by coexistence with the motion of the
Sun imagined to have an intrinsic Time of their own, though they have none,
for they have no regular successive Alterations; though they have variety of
successive Thoughts, yet there is no regular succession of these Alterations.

The Schoolmen are so wedded to abstract Notions, that they hold that Duration
is of three kinds, Eternity, Eveternity, and Time: Eternity they attribute only
to God, yet they imagine it as a Duration equivalent to the Revolutions of the
Sun, as if they had ever been, and never had a Beginning: But Angels and other
Spirits having a Beginning of their Existence, but no Termination thereof, for
distinction sake they call their Endurance Eveternity.

Imagination may prompt Men to think that God, as a Preserver and Ruler of the
World, has continued so many Thousand Years; but it is too bold an Imagination
to attribute any such thing to God Almighty, in whose Being there is no shadow
of changing.

It is an Imagination without all reality to fancy the Eternity of God, as if
it had been by infinite Revolutions of the Sun, or of the like Endurance.

It is yet a farther extension of Imagination, that all Things are eternally
present with God; for then all Things must have existed e're they were created,
which is an evident Inconsistency; though figuratively all Things may be said
to be ever present with God, that is, that he knows all Things as clearly as if
they were present and existent from Eternity.

MEDITATION IV. Upon God's Omniscience.
THE Natural Order of the Divine Perfections leads me now to meditate upon
his Knowledge; having in my former Meditations cleared my self, that the first
Divine Attribute implied in the Deity, is to be a Spirit Self-existent, which
essentially implies Knowledge: For neither the want of Extension, or the having
of Penetrability, that is, a Capacity to co-exist in the same Space with
another Substance, make a Spirit.

It is the common Sentiment of all considering Persons, that an Inscient or
blind God, which acts not by Knowledge and Choice, implies an Inconsistency;
and therefore the making Chance or Fortune a Deity, is entirely Atheism.

The common Conception of the being a God, is a Being so perfect, that could
neither be made more perfect, nor become less perfect, but is endued with all
possible Perfection. The Heathens who believed many Gods that were Eternal,
besides Spirits of Men, did believe them all to be as perfect as that
Supposition could admit: Yet it is evident that they could neither be
Omniscient, that each of them did know all the Thoughts of the rest; or
Omnipotent, that they could do all that implied not Inconsistency or
Imperfection; and therefore they were but Idols, and not Gods: But the Light of
Nature evincing sufficiently that there can be but one God, he must necessarily
be Omniscient, knowing all things that can be known. And Revelation determines
the extent of the Divine Knowledge, when the Scripture says, That his
Understanding is Infinite; if any thing possible, past, present, or future,
were not perfectly known by God, that which he knew not, behoved to limit his
Knowledge, that it could not be infinite.

Seeing God's Knowledge is Infinite, it cannot be comprehended by any Finite
Capacity: Who can search the Almighty to Perfection? Yet it may well be
apprehended, and not only believed by the Divine Testimony, but may in a great
measure be known by Natural Principles, more clearly by knowing what is not
consistent, than what positively is implied in it. And therefore,

1. No part of the Divine Knowledge can be temporary or successive, or have
different degrees; for thereby it could be more perfect, and yet could not be
said at all times that God knew all things: And consequently God's Knowledge
cannot be by Inference or Deduction, inferring an unknown thing from a known,
or knowing the one more than the other; and yet God knows the Implications,
Causes and Consequences of all things, and what thence is deducible by
Creatures. Therefore also God must know with equal Clearness and Certainty all
Things past, present and to come, as well as all Things possible or impossible.
Though there be a variety in the Objects, whereby God foreknew all that was to
exist before any did exist, and knew that nothing did then exist; and knew also
when Things began to exist, that they did not before exist, and that many of
them that did once exist, did cease, and no more exist: Yet here the Change is
not in him, but in the Objects, which he did equally know in all Conditions and
Circumstances.

Thence also it necessarily follows, that God's Knowledge of all Things must be
eternal.

2. No part of God's Knowledge can be potential, or habitual, as the most
perfect Knowledge of Creatures must be; for they cannot possibly at once keep in
their Thoughts a great Variety, much less all the Thoughts that ever they had,
and least of all the Thoughts whereof they only had the Power or Habit, that
they could exert them when the Objects occurred to their Thoughts: But the
infinite Understanding of God does ever actually comprehend all that is
apprehensible.

3. The Knowledge of God cannot arise from any outward Impression made upon him,
because he is altogether impassible, and can admit of no alteration made in him
from without; in this his Knowledge differs from the Knowledge of all
Creatures, that their Knowledge has its rise for the most part from the
impressions of outward Objects, wherein they are passive, and feel some
alteration in themselves. The most Glorious Angel cannot know the present
Thoughts of others, but by some Sign making impression and alteration in him;
nor their Actings, but by such Impression: But God's Knowledge cannot be in that
way.

Hence it follows that there is no more difficulty to apprehend the
Fore-knowledg of God of things to come, than his Knowledge of things present;
seeing neither of them arise from impressions of the Objects.

God knows all the future Choices and Acts of the most free Creatures, where
they act most indifferently, with as much Clearness and Certainty as he knows
the Acts of Inscient Creatures, wherein they cannot alter or determine
themselves, but are only altered or determined by extrinsick Force. The
Scripture makes it a discriminating Test of God, the foretelling of things to
come, which cannot be of things which are necessary, but of those things that
are free; and the Predictions in Scripture of the most free actings of Men many
Ages before they came to pass, evidently prove his Fore-knowledg of Men's most
indifferent Choices; as Daniel's Prophecies of the Monarchies, the Prophecies
of Cyrus and of Josiah by Name, and of their Circumstantiate Actings. What can
be more Arbitrary than what Name a Father will give his Child, which himself
seldom knows many Days before he give it? Cyrus's Father was a Heathen, who
neither knew nor believed this Prophecy; nor did many Kings call their Sons
Cyrus, that they might be capable of these Predictions.

There is little Controversy concerning the extent of the Divine Knowledge,
though some eminent among the Arminians doubted that God knew the individual
Persons that would believe and be saved: And some have been so absurd, as to
hold that God either could not or would not know the number of all the
Individuals, or the different Accidents, but only their Kinds and common
Accidents.

If Men had rested in the Universality of God's Knowledge, and had not been too
inquisitive in the manner of it, tho God had shown them that it was impossible
fully to reach it, by that strong Negation implied in that Question, Who can
search the Almighty to perfection? his Wisdom is unsearchable, and his Ways
past finding out: And thereby had not raised Intricacies interfering the Divine
Perfections, making less evident the Purity and Amiableness of God. It had not
only been a Folly, but a Fault, to concur with the Atheist or the Ungodly in
that Question; How does God know? And is there Knowledge in the most High? But
seeing so much has been said concerning the manner of God's Foreknowledg of
the Choices and Actings of free Creatures, amongst good, learned, and for the
main Orthodox Divines, not only in different but in the same Communion; I
thought it my Duty to improve what Capacity God had given me, with all the
Reverence and Humility I could attain, to extricate my Thoughts, and to clear
up the immaculate Purity and infinite Loveliness of God, which might most
powerfully excite me to delight in him: To which end I thought it necessary to
consider the prevalent Opinions of Philosophers and Divines, concerning the
manner of God's Knowledge.

That old exploded and now revived Opinion of some Philosophers, is, That
Second Causes had no Activity but God, at the presence of such things as were
not the Causes, but the Tokens of what would follow; so that Fire did not heat
or burn, or Water cool or quench, but the First Cause alone, at the presence of
Fire and of Water: That there neither is nor can be any intrinsic Principle of
Motion or Activity in Matter, that it cannot attempt or thrust when it does not
prevail; That Men do not move any of their Members, but only God moves them as
Man wills, and that God makes such Thoughts in the Mind to result from such
Motions of Matter, without any extrinsick Impression or Activity of the
Objects: So that neither the Motions of Matter, nor the Thoughts of the
Spirits, are from the Activity of Creatures, but from God alone. On this ground
it is easy to infer that God must know all the Actings which seem to be from
Creatures, being indeed only from himself. These grounds cannot take with any
that truly acknowledge Creation; for it God could give Existence to Matter which
before had none, how can it be doubted that he could give it an attempt or
pressure to move such an uniform course of Motion, which it would ever follow
if it were not hindered, and would always be effectual when the Impediment were
removed; much more, that as he created a Spirit of nothing, he might give it
its proper Activities, as well as to Matter, and that upon real Impressions and
Changes made in it from other Creatures. Suppose then he could do all things by
himself alone, or many things by Second Causes; it cannot be doubted that it is
more consonant to his Wisdom and Revelation, that he has given such
Activities. The Scripture says, That on the Seventh day God rested from his
Labors. Shall we then think that he acts now in the same way that he did the
first six Days? If these grounds hold, there can be no Distinction between
God's Permission and his Operation, Excitation or Concurrence with the
Creatures.

5. The more common Opinion, How God knows all future Actions, is, That though
God has given Activities to Creatures, and that they have a true Operation,
yet they cannot exert these Activities without a distinct Excitation, and such
a Concurrence of God, as every Act is as well immediately his Act as the
Creature's; yea every Act must be totally his Act, and totally the Creature's:
For if there be one Act of the Creator, and a several Act of the Creature, by
which they concur, then that several Act of the Creature is immediately its own
alone; tho God be also the cause of it, as preserving the Creature and its
Activity in vigor: But certainly it is less conceiveable how one Act can be
from two Actors immediately and totally, than how God can know all future Acts
of free Creatures. These Men think they magnify the Power of God in this way,
and therefore extend it not only to free Actions, but even to the Actions of
Brutes and inanimate Creatures; that Fire cannot burn, nor any thing move
without an excitation beside its natural Power given by Creation, which
improperly enough they call a Premotion; as if Creatures were moved before they
moved; and a Predetermination of free Creatures, as if they were determined
before they were determined; which indeed might be properly said of God's
Decree to determine them in Time, and of his Preparation, when he added or
altered their pre-existing Powers, unless the Order of Nature or Dignity, not
of Time, be understood, which is most improper.

Hence these Men do hold, That God knows all Things by the Inspection of his
own Decree to excite and stir up his Creatures to act them; and that he can
foreknow nothing that Creatures would act of themselves without such
Excitation, or which they would choose or incline to act, and that not only in
Actions good and indifferent, but in those evil Acts, where the whole is evil,
and no separable part could be good or indifferent.

I acknowledge that Creatures can do nothing unless God preserve them, and the
Activities he has given them, by Nature or Grace, in vigor; removing by his
Providence those things that would hinder them to work; and that he oft-times
increases or diminishes the Activities he has given them: He made the
Diurnal Motion to cease when Joshua prosecuted his Victory; he made it
retrograde ten Degrees in the Dial of Achaz, which was not by hinderance of a
natural Cause, which could be no other than an Angel: And there is no ground to
infer, that the Angels either do move or stopped the Diurnal Motion; but as God
freely gave that power of Motion in the former, he withdrew it, and in the
latter he gave a power of contrary Motion, and did of new restore the Powers of
both.

I do also acknowledge, That without giving a new intrinsic Power, no gracious
Act can be exerted by sinful Creatures; and that God does ofttimes increase
that Power constantly, or for certain Occasions; and that he can, and does give
an intrinsic Inclination for one Act only, or for the whole Acts of one kind;
that he frequently brings to the remembrance of his free Creatures those
Thoughts that have been in their Mind, which may induce them to Actions good or
indifferent: That he can, and oft-times has made the same Impressions upon the
Minds or Imaginations of free Creatures that outward Objects could have done,
whereby at first view they conceive these outward Objects present: That he can
and frequently does hinder the recurring to the memory of these Objects or
Thoughts that were in their Mind or Imagination before, and would have recurred
if they had not been hindered. All these things are intelligible, consistent
and consonant to Scripture, Reason and Experience.

But as to that general Excitation or Premotion, none of these Men did ever
distinctly explain wherein it does consist, and so they do nothing to clear
themselves, or others, of the way of God's working upon and with his Creatures;
nor can it give them any distinct knowledge, how in that way God can foreknow
all things: So that they can only say that God does foreknow all the actings of
his Creatures, but they do not distinctly know how; unless in every Act he and
his Creatures must immediately and totally act, which not only clears not, but
choaks Humane Reason.

I do also acknowledge that God knows all things, by reflecting upon himself; he
knows what is possible, though without all Existence and Reality, by the
knowledge of his own Infinite Power, which could give Existence to all
imaginable things, but gives no Reality to the conceived or imagined Object,
but only an extrinsick Denomination from the Power of God.

It is amongst the Fancies of most Philosophers, that the Essences of Things
are Eternal, and that all we now see to be common to every kind, is either
implied in their Essence, or inseparably connected with it, or consequent from
it; that even the Divine Power cannot change it but by annihilation of the
whole: And that thence there are infinite numbers of Eternal Verities, all
which are no more but entia rationis, Births of the Brain without any reality
in the Object.

It is true there are Eternal Verities, not only of God, but Hypothetick
Eternal Verities of Creatures, which cannot possibly be false; as that nothing
can exist and not exist at once; or that a Triangle must have three Angles, and
that none of the three Sides can be so long as the other two, that the longest
straight Side must have the widest Angle; which imports no reality of the
Subject or the Attributes, but imports only that a Triangle cannot be but must
imply these things.

The Schoolmen also make a great Business of the Transition of Things, from the
state of Possibility to the state of Futurition; as if Futurition at least gave
some reality to the thing future before it existed, whereas it is only an
extrinsick Denomination, not only from the Power but from the Purpose of God.

The Decrees of God are not only his Determination of what is Just, but his
Determination of his Freedom in what he intends to come to pass; and so are his
Purposes or Intentions to act, or to enable his Creatures to act, where their
natural Capacities, or their acquired or infused Capacities are not sufficient:
For what he intends without addition of a farther Capacity, or where he intends
to admit and allow Creatures Actings by their Capacities, or to permit them to
act, where he does not allow their Actings, but designs to bring good out of
their Aberration, or whereby he hinders the Activities of his Creatures, by
withdrawing or abating them, or provides the hindrance of other Creatures to
oppose them, or increases the Activities of those he allows and admits to act
by their own preserved Strength.

By these means only God can bring all things to pass which he purposes;
therefore it were in vain to suppose any further, especially that which would
not well quadrate with his Word, and with his immaculate Purity and Holiness,
nor with the Freedom of his Creatures, or with his Justice in rewarding and
punishing them. If God's Decrees were all operative, he behoved to act in the
worst as much as in the best Actions of his Creatures; and that distinction of
his operative and permissive Decrees, (which has been generally received by
all Protestants) should be utterly laid aside; and God behoved to be the
immediate and total actor of the Hatred of himself, as well as of the Love of
himself.

Nothing can come to pass but that wherein the last requisite is a Divine
Decree for acting it, promoting it, permitting it, or hindering it: If I could
foreknow what Creatures of themselves would do or incline to, I could not
thence conclude the Event, unless I also knew whether God would hinder or
further their Capacities and Inclinations, or the counter-acting of others; and
therefore every thing that comes to pass is attributed to God, in respect of
his Decrees, one of these ways: So he is said to harden Pharaoh's Heart,
because he suffered Pharaoh (against all his Persuasions, Expostulations and
Miracles) to harden his own Heart against God's Command; yet it is also said
that Pharaoh hardened his own Heart: And God is said to blind the Eyes of the
Wicked, that they should not see no otherwise but by Permission. I do not like
of that Position, that God is active in causing Sin, as the punishment of Sin;
but the Scripture expresses it well, that he gives the Wicked (after means of
reclaiming them rejected) up to their own ways. By Permission is not only
understood the not hindering, but the admitting Creatures to work, by the
Faculties of Nature and Grace given them, by the Preservation thereof without
farther help, whether it be in things indifferent or morally good.

There is a great difference between evil Acts, which have several separable
parts, whereof the one might be good or indifferent, if it were not
contaminated by the other, as commonly it is in the doing of an Act, and the
directing of it to an End; the Act may be good, directed to another End: As the
giving of Alms to be seen of Men; the doing of Justice to shun Importunity. The
End also may be good, but the Act is bad directing to that End; as those who
killed the Apostles designed thereby to do God good Service. But there are
other evil Acts which have no separable parts, as the hatred of God; for that
singular Act is inseparable from the Object. Hatred in general is but an
abstract Notion, but the singular Act is the Hatred of God, where there is no
separable individual parts; as in the giving of Alms to be seen of Men: These
Acts therefore are called intrinsically evil. God may excite these Acts where
the Intention or Direction only is evil, God's Intention being quite different;
so he may excite the giving of Alms, intending thereby the relief of the Poor,
but the directing of the Alms to be seen of Men, is a distinct separate Act.
There is no ground inferring that God excites to that end, much less that he
excites to Acts intrinsically evil, which no Intention can make good, and where
there are not different Parts, or different Acts: Therefore God does not
foreknow Acts intrinsically evil, or the evil Intention of Acts that otherwise
might be good or indifferent in his Decree to excite them, but only in his
permissive Decree, not to hinder the free Creatures in acting them, wherein I
am convinced by many pregnant Reasons.

First, God's foreseeing such Acts in his purpose to excite the Creature to
them, and his being an immediate and total Actor of them, appears to me
inconsistent with his immaculate Purity, but thereby he behoved to be the
Author of Sin. I know many good Men perceive not this Consequence, and are far
from acknowledging it, and are forced to harsh Concessions to shun it; as that
God is the immediate Cause of the Act, but not of the Vitiosity of the Act,
which is only Privative, and requires no Cause nor any Efficiency, but
Deficiency, which imports nothing as to evil Intention, or Acts intrinsically
Evil, but only as to Acts that would be Good, if right directed; and is well
illustrated by riding of a Lame Horse, where the Rider is the cause of the
Riding, but the Lameness of the Horse is the cause of the Halting; but this
cannot be applicable to an indivisible Act, whence Sin necessarily results, and
so the whole Act or the Act of Intention is totally Evil: And thereby there
cannot be one part attributed to God and another to the Creature, if God be not
the immediate and total Actor, but that the Creature has a different Act; the
forefight of that Act could not be by the Decree of God to act it, and so all
free Acts could not be foreseen that way. The more Ingenuous are forced to
recur to this Evasion, that God is under no Law, and so the same Act may be Sin
in the Creature and no Sin in God; but this overturns the Being of Acts morally
Good or Evil, in congruity to the Nature of God, which are not so, because God
wills them to be or not to be, but he so wills them, because they are
absolutely and immutably Good, and not alone by the Will or Decree of God: God
is above his positive Law, but he is neither above nor under his moral Law, but
is a Law to himself, else God could make Virtue Vice, and Vice Virtue; for
whatever depends upon Acts of the Will, can be altered by another Act of the
same Will: So God has altered many of his positive Laws and Precepts, because
they are only Good in that they are willed and commanded.

Secondly, God has expressly declared that he has hindered many Acts of his
Creatures, which must necessarily import that they would have been acted, if
they had not been hindered; for it is inconsistent to say that God decreed to
be an Actor with the Creature, and yet decreed to hinder that same Act: Thus
God declares that he had hindered Abimelech to touch Sarah, whom he had taken
on design to make her his Concubine, but God disabled him that he could neither
meddle with her nor any other.

Thirdly, There are many Sins of Omission, wherein the Sinner does not resolve
to omit, but by Carelessness and Inconsideration omits; here there is no Act of
the Creature: And if God hinder the Creature to consider, he must be sole Actor
in these Sins; and if not, there is no positive Act or Excitation in them, and
so no Decree for such Acts; and therefore they cannot be foreseen in that
Decree, and yet they are certainly foreseen.

Fourthly, If it were sufficient to clear the Divine Purity, that Sin is only a
Privation, requiring no Efficiency but Deficiency, that could not but also
vindicate the Creature, albeit a total Actor of the same Act.

Fifthly, If God decree, without foresight of what the Creature, using its
proper Power, would act, then he behoved to decree the torment of his
Creatures, without consideration of their future Sins, voluntarily to be acted
by them; which is very inconsistent with his Justice, and forces the Authors of
this Opinion to acknowledge, That God might eternally torment his innocent
Creatures, and that it is greater Goodness to give them a miserable Being, than
no Being at all; which is neither consistent with his Justice nor his Goodness,
and gives a most unlovely Representation of him.

Sixthly, There is nothing more inculcated in Scripture than the Efficacy of
Prayer, for it is said, That the fervent Prayer of the Righteous avails much.
But if God did determine all future things without Foresight and Consideration
of the Prayers of his People, Prayer were of no value. but a mere Formality
without any Efficacy: For to what purpose should any pray to an unchangeable
God, who had already determined all things without consideration of Prayer? I
know no Evasion can be made, but that God has determined not only the Matter
but the Manner of what was to come to pass, and so determined many things to be
after antecedent Prayer; but then Prayer were a mere antecedent Formality, and
no efficacious Mean availing much. But if God did determine many things upon
the foresight and consideration of the earnest Prayer of his People, they might
with as much Confidence pray as if he were undetermined when they prayed.

I know there are many specious Reasons accustomed to be brought for God's
being the immediate total Actor, in all the Acts of his Creatures; which I
consider as Objections.

1st. It is objected, If God decreed any thing upon Foresight, and
Consideration of any thing in his Creatures, he were not altogether
independent, but behoved to depend upon such Considerations, and be
pedissequous to his Creatures: This Reason can conclude nothing against God's
Foresight and Consideration of what he foresaw in the Creature, as given by
himself, above their natural Strength; for thereby he depended on nothing but
on his own Supernatural Grace. It is true, that if God's Election were upon the
foresight of the Creatures Faith, or good Works, by that common. Power all Men
had by their Birth, they might glory in themselves, and the Election could not
be said to be of Free Grace, and God might be thought pedissequous to the
Creatures; and therefore that Opinion of Papists and Arminians is justly
rejected. But God cannot be said to be pedissequous to the Creatures he
foresees would maliciously or obstinately and finally reject the offer of
Grace, because he decrees to let them follow their own Ways, and in Justice to
punish them whom he does not follow but crosses: And though God does not
decree to damn the Reprobate, without a meritorious Cause deserving Damnation;
it does no way follow that he does save and glorify the Elect upon foresight of
a meritorious Cause in them. God's Independence cannot exclude the
consideration of the Object of his Decree, as it must be considered in his
Decree: He cannot decree to give Mercy, but to a Creature that is in some
measure miserable: He cannot decree to relieve a Creature, unless he consider
it as distressed. He has clearly declared, and consequently decreed, that he
would never pardon the Sin against the Holy Ghost: Therefore he behoved to
foresee who would commit that Sin, for he does nothing in vain, and would never
decree any thing relating to a Case that were never to exist; he could not
decree to elect any Creature, but upon Foresight and Consideration that he was
to create that Creature, and that he was never to suffer it to have Hatred and
Despite against him. In that Golden Chain, Whom he did foreknow, them he did
predestinate to be conform to the Image of his Son; and whom he did
predestinate, them he also called; and whom he called, them he also justified;
and whom he justified, them he also glorified: The first Link is Foreknowledg
of the Object to be predestined, which with congruity to the Divine Natural
Perfections were predestinable, prior in order of Nature to Predestination: Yet
in none of these is the Independence of God incroached on. Could a miserable or
distressed Creature, be so impudent as to pretend that its Misery or Distress
were the cause of God's Mercy or Relief, but only the Object or Occasion
thereof, the true Cause being God's Mercy and Goodness; and so God's Decree to
inflict eternal Punishment upon his rational Creature, that he foresaw would
hate him or be obstinate in Sin, is his own Justice and Purity.

2dly. It is said, In God we live, we move, and have our being. And therefore
all the Motions of our Minds and Bodies, must be his Motions, acted by him;
which Inference is no better than this, in him we have our Being, therefore our
Being is his Being: but the true meaning is cleared by those Things which are
frequently said of Christ, That they are in him, and yet are the Creatures,
importing no more but that they are by Virtue and Power derived from Christ;
and so we move in God, that is, by Virtue and Power derived from him.

3dly. It is objected, That if in the worst of Actions God were not Actor, he
could not be the first and universal Cause; but thence it will not follow, that
the first and universal Cause must still be the immediate and total Cause,
which is necessary to an universal Predetermination.

4thly. The main Reason against universal Predetermination, is to vindicate the
Purity of God, which it does not; for whosoever permits Evil that he could
hinder, is accessory thereto, and guilty thereof: And so God judges his
Creatures, which will not conclude against God, because Creatures are not only
subject to the moral and unchangeable Laws of God, but to his positive Laws;
neither are Creatures universally obliged to hinder all evil Acts that they
were able to hinder: For God having set up Civil Authority, thereby obliges
Subjects to suffer the Legal Executions thereof, though unjust, albeit they
have sufficient Strength to hinder the same. This Reason has been the chief
Inducement of the Error of those, who, to maintain the Purity of God, incroach
upon his Power and Wisdom, holding that the Will of a free Creature is
essentially undeterminable by any other than by it self; and therefore God can
do no more but persuade and bring Motives into the Mind, and so is blameless,
having done all he could do to hinder Sin. For certainly God could have been so
powerful a Perswader, as to make Prophets and Preachers go to all Nations,
which he has not done; and this Ground encroacheth on God's Omnipotence, that
he cannot effectually overruled his Free Creatures, and encroacheth on his
Wisdom, who having no need of any Creature, created such which he could not
govern, but behoved only to supplicate and persuade.

The 5th Reason assigned for universal Predetermination, is brought from the
accurate arguing of that Case, by the Apostle Paul, in the 9th of the Romans,
where it is said of Esau and Jacob, That the Children being not yet born,
neither having done any good or evil, that the Purpose (or Decree) of God
according to Election might stand, not of Works, but of him that calls: Jacob
have I loved, but Esau have I hated. Against which he brings this Objection, Is
there Unrighteousness with God? To which he answers with a strong Denial, God
forbid. For be says to Moses, I will have Mercy on whom I will have Mercy: And
thence concludes, That it is not of him that runs, or of him that wills,
but of God that shows Mercy. Whence he does conclude, Therefore has he Mercy
on whom he will have Mercy, and whom he will he hardens. Against which
Conclusion he brings a new Objection thus, Thou will say then unto me, Why does
he yet find fault? For who has resisted his Will? To which he answers thus,
Nay, but, O Man, Who art thou that replies against God? Shall the thing formed
say to him that formed it, Why have thou made me thus? Has not the Potter
Power over the Clay, of the same Lump, to make one Vessel unto Honor, and
another unto Dishonor? Thence the Authors of universal Predetermination, or
Excitation of God to the worst Acts, think they have unanswerable Grounds to
infer, That God is not only the Permitter, but the Actor of Hardening, as well
as of Mercy: Yea, that he has no more Consideration of what the Creatures were
to act in Reprobation and Damnation, than in Election and Glorification; but
that of the same Lump or Mass of Mankind, he does as indifferently make the
Vessels of Dishonor, that is, the Reprobate, as the Vessels of Honor, that
is, the Elect. But the Context sufficiently clears the Mistakes of these
Inferences; for it infers nothing as to Reprobation, that the Children being
not yet born, had done nothing of Good or Evil; the Inference is only that
Election might not be of foreseen Works. But where it is said, that God loved
Jacob, and hated Esau, tho they had yet done nothing, it does not infer, That
as there is no foreseen Merit, or cause of Love of the Elect, fo that God hates
the Damned without a meritorious Cause deserving his Hatred; there is no
Consequence from the Freedom of God's Election and Love, which are Acts of
Bounty, to infer the Freedom of his Hatred and Reprobation, which are Acts of
Justice; for Bounty and Mercy are absolutely free, but so is not Justice. But
the main Mistake is, that the Vessels of Dishonor are supposed to be the
Reprobate, and the Vessels of Honor the Elect: As if God as indifferently
reprobates and elects, as the Potter does of the same Lump, make one Vessel to
Honor, and another to Dishonor: Whereas it is demonstrably clear by the
Context, that by the Vessels of Dishonor are meant the hardened obstinate
Sinners, and by the Vessels of Honor the Elect, whose Heart God softneth,
which appears clearly: First, From the words preceding, Why does he yet find
fault? For who has resisted his Will? that is, no Man can resist his Will if
he please to soften him: And therefore why does God complain that so many are
hardened? The meaning cannot be, Why does God find fault that so many are
reprobated? For God cannot complain of his own Act of Reprobation, which is an
Act of his Justice: Yea, tho it were an Act of his Sovereignty only, it is
still his own Act; but he complains of their hardening, and therefore it
cannot be by his Act, but by his Permission; which is yet more clear by the
words following, God willing to show his Wrath, and to make his Power known,
endured with much Long-suffering the Vessels of Wrath fitted to Destruction,
and that he might make known the Riches of his Glory on the Vessels of Mercy,
which he had before prepared unto Glory. Where I do remark, That God ascribes
unto himself the preparing the Vessels of Mercy unto Glory, but that he did not
prepare the Vessels of Wrath for Destruction, but with much long-suffering
Patience endured them; which is a clear Evidence, that he did only permit them
to harden their Hearts, and was no way active in it: So then the Vessels of
Honor are far better said to be the regenerate and softened, and the Vessels of
Dishonor to be those who have hardened their own Hearts. So it is as free for
God to have Mercy and soften whom he will, and to endure and permit others to
harden themselves, as it is to the Potter, of one Lump to make one Vessel to
Honor, and another to Dishonor.

The 6th Reason brought for universal Predetermination is, That seeing Freedom
is by both Parties acknowledged to be a Power to do, or not to do all things
requisite for doing, being in readiness; therefore if God did not determine
that Freedom in all Cases, it were impossible for him to know how the Creature
would determine it self.

All the Strength of this Reason is, That we must deny God's universal
Knowledge, unless we can show how he knows, wherein there is no shadow of
Consequence; for many things certainly we know that they are, and yet it is as
certain, that we know not how they are. Shall we therefore, because God has
said, Who can search the Almighty to Perfection? (that is, none can so search
him) conclude that he cannot so search himself?

Yet tho I be far from the Presumption to give a full account, how God does
foreknow the Actings of all his Creatures, I shall endeavor to clear my self
therein, so far as my Reach goes, by applying what general Thoughts I have
formerly shown, more particularly.

First then; I do perceive that of the Actings of Creatures, some only may be,
others must be, and a third sort shall be, which is more than may be, and less
than must be. These three kinds are evidently distinct and different; and
seeing God is Omniscient, he must not only know what may be, and what must be,
but what shall be, tho not necessarily, and all the three with equal Clearness
and Certainty: For there is a great difference between Necessity and Certainty;
it is true, wherever there is Certainty, there is a necessity of Consequence,
that is, that that Knowledge is infallible, but not a necessity of Causality;
that the Cause of that thing certainly known, must act necessarily, and not
freely. God knows all his own future free Acts certainly, and yet he knows many
of them to be by the Freedom of Indifference, and not to flow from Necessity,
that he must have so acted.

The Acts of Creatures that only may be, are known to God by the Faculties and
Capacities he has given to his several Creatures; many Acts whereof might be,
and yet never come to exist. As to this Point of God's Knowledge there can be no
doubt.

Secondly; The Acts of Creatures which must be, are, first, the Acts of
inscient Matter, which cannot alter its own Actings, because it cannot
perceive, or know, when and where to alter; and therefore all these Alterations
are from extrinsick Force, either from other inscient Matter, or from the Force
of free Actors. So all the Actings and Alterations of inanimate Bodies in the
Universe, tho they seem to us contingent and accidental, yet are all necessary,
and so may be known by God, not only as certain, but as necessary, except in so
far as they are altered by free Actors, which come to be considered among free
Acts.

Thirdly; The Acts of Brutes, tho they determine themselves by the Perception
of Objects, yet they do it not freely, nor can they act variously, all the
Circumstances being the same; and therefore their Acts are also necessary,
supposing the Objects which they perceive: So that seeing God knows the Objects
perceived, he must know what Acts will thereupon follow.

Fourthly; There are Acts of free Creatures, which are not free, but do proceed
as the Instincts of Brutes, that upon Perception of their proper Objects, they
will certainly follow: Such is the Desire of Well-being or Happiness, which
Rational Creatures thinking upon it, can neither counteract, nor suspend. These
may be known in their Causes no less than the Actings of Brutes; and as God
has freely given these useful Propensions, he can give the like, either as to
a singular Act, or as to a whole kind of Acts.

Fifthly; The only Difficulty remains as to God's Knowledge, or Fore-knowledg of
the free Acts of the free Creatures. As to which I perceive, that I (and it is
like many others) have been much mistaken in apprehending the way of the acting
of free Creatures, supposing that their Appetites and Aversions were altogether
free as to most Objects, and were directly in their own Power; and that
Pleasure was a kind of Appetite, and Grief, of Aversion, which were in our
Power as other Appetites: But upon more accurate Consideration, I find that
Pleasure and Pain, or Grief, are neither Acts of our Understanding, nor of our
Will, or Appetite, but of a different Faculty given us by God, not by necessary
Connection with, or Consequence from Human Nature, but freely at his Option.
There may be a general Pain or Grief from the tearing of the tender Parts of
the Organs of Sense, and a common Pleasure from the easy Access of Objects to
these Senses. But tho all Animals have five Senses, these could not make the
Diversity of the Pleasures and Pains they find, arising from the Perception of
Objects: One kind of Animals have Pleasure from the Perception of one Object,
and another kind of Animals have Grief from the Perception of the same, tho
both have the same Senses, and Complexion; that such Objects give such variety
of Tastes and Smells to the same Senses of different Animals; that Men have so
great Pleasure of the Proportion of Shapes and Colors in Beauty, and yet
Brutes of the perfectest Sense have not the same; that the Touch of such
Objects to such Organs excites so excessive Pleasure, or so much Grief; that
the Concourse of such Sounds in Harmony should give so great Pleasure, and
others in Discord so much Displeasure; whereof most Brutes, which have more
perceiving Ears, are incapable; bring me to conclude, That Pleasure and Pain in
most things are by particular Faculties freely given of God, that thereby he
may rule his Creatures.

I perceive also, that Pleasure and Pain can be no Acts of Understanding; and
tho the Understanding has reflexive Acts upon it self, or its own Acts, yet it
never reflects upon Pleasure as its own Act, but as the Act of that Object that
excites it; and upon Grief, as the Act of the Object that grieves, it does not
think that it grieves it self.

Pleasure and Grief are not Acts of the Will or Appetite, but are the Objects
and Motives thereof; and therefore Joy and Grief are not directly in our Power,
that we can have them by willing them: Accurate Advertence will show, that e're
we can excite them, we must bring into thought their proper Objects most
powerfully by Application to our Senses, and more faintly, by bringing them
into our Imagination or Memory; and no further than these Objects are proper to
raise Joy or Grief. If we could take Pleasure by willing or desiring it, it
were as easy to will the greatest as the least Pleasure, and none but Fools
would ever want it; but we can as easily make Light in the Darkness by willing
it, as we can take Pleasure by willing it; the Will has no reflexive Acts, and
therefore the Object of the Will cannot be the Act of it.

Our Freedom by which we differ from Beasts, consists mainly in that we can
divert our Thoughts from thinking upon the Objects of Grief, or Pleasure, by
applying them to other Objects exciting the contrary, which may either abate or
extinguish the former: if we cannot remove the Objects of sensible Grief or
Pain, yet by thinking upon other pleasing Objects, we may be insensible of the
Pain, yea have Joy in it; as in an extatick Pleasure of the Mind, the greatest
Pain of the Sense is not felt. A Woman in Childbirth has Pleasure in the
Continuance of her Pain, and Grief in the ceasing of it. The Pain of cutting
off a Member, is overcome by the Pleasure of preserving Life. The Pleasure of
obeying God may abate or overcome the greatest Pain sustained for him, which
has made Martyrs sing in the midst of the Flames which were consuming their
Bodies: Yea, of the far greater Sufferings of Christ it is said, that for the
Joy set before him, he suffered the Cross, despising the Shame.

I do also perceive that the greatest Extent of my Freedom is, That I can do
what I please, and that I can choose or will nothing but that wherein I find
some Pleasure: and therefore in Cases of Deliberation, where I can find no
Pleasure on the one part more than on the other, I do suspend my Choice, and
oft-times I can make no Choice, but the Deliberation cease without any
positive suspending Act of the Will. I find Grief in dubious Cases, that I
cannot perceive a preferable Pleasure, and would be glad that the Opinion of
any would cast the Balance of Indifferency, and do often cast it my self upon
very inconsiderable, or fancied Preference. All which evidences, that I am not
so much Master of my Actions as I imagined.

Seeing then God knows certainly what is pleasant or displeasant to every
free Creature, and where the Prevalence is, and knows all the Objects that
make Impressions, and especially knows his own Purpose to give occasional
Inclinations, and to bring former Objects to Remembrance, and others into the
Mind; and that he can and does make Impressions without Objects, the same which
could be by them; there arises to me a great Light, how he knows the free
Actings of his Rational Creatures, and how he moves them, and rules them,
without Violation of the Faculties he gave them: And I see no necessity that he
should give an Excitation to all the Acts of his Creatures, much less, that he
should excite them to the worst Acts, or be immediate total Actor therein, to
the effect that he may certainly know them; yet has he still a Decree about
all that shall come to pass, either operative or permissive: So it is said,
That by the determinate Counsel of God Christ suffered by wicked Hands.

There is far less Difficulty about God's Knowledge, or Foresight of the
contemplative Thoughts of Creatures, which have always a Connection by which
they can trace them back, unless a new extrinsick Impression occur, the
Thoughts thence arising having the like Dependence.

Some learned Men, to extricate the Difficulties of this matter, endeavor to
cut the Knot they cannot loose, by saying, all things were eternally present to
God: whioh can neither be true, that things future were present, where by they
behoved at once to be existent, and not existent; nor tho it were true, does it
ease the Difficulty, for God knows not things by their Impressions, as
Creatures do; and therefore it is as difficult to know how he knows the
present as the future Acts of Creatures. Others dony a Predetermination, or
Premotion in evil Acts, but acknowledge a simultaneous or consequent Concourse
therein, whereby God is the immediate and total Actor, as well as the Creature,
which does no whit more vindicate the Purity of God than the Opinion of the
Predeterminants, but supposes and acknowledges God's Fore-knowledg of the
Inclination and Choice of the Creature, and therefore does concur therewith;
nor can it vindicate his Purity, as if he who knows the wicked Resolution of
any Creature, should think he could warrantably concur and promote it.

My Omniscient God! I adore thy immaculate Purity and infinite Wisdom, whereby
thou have so ordered thy Dispensations, and the Actings of thy Creatures, that
their Liberty is preserved, tho thou certainly know what freely they will
do, without exciting them to that which is morally evil; whereby thou art free
of all Accession to their Sin, and have bounded their Appetites, that they can
will nothing but under the apprehension of some Good wherein they have
Pleasure; and that thou have freely given special Pleasures and Griefs arising
from the Perception of several Objects, whereby as from Eternity, thou did
clearly foreknow all the Circumstances they were to be in: So what Pleasure or
Grief would thence arise, or be prevalent, and what Appetite or Aversion would
thence, and from thy own special Influence follow; and that thou have given to
thy Creatures not only Propensions working necessarily, and Powers sufficient
to work that which they do not, but also Inclinations efficacious, which shall
ever work what thou have purposed; yet not of necessity, but freely, and
thereby be capable of Praise and Reward. And I bless thee, that thou have
helped me to see the Consistency and Congruity of the Freedom of Creatures with
thy Prescience, and Providence ruling all their Inclinations and Actions.

To conclude this intricate but important Controversy, Whether God knows all
things in his Decree, to excite his Creatures in all their Actions, good, bad
and indifferent: Or, that he foreseeth in his Decrees partly operative, partly
permissive, foreseeing what Creatures would do of their proper Inclinations,
and allowing them so to do, where their acting would be congruous to his total
Decrees, and exhorting or dissuading them from ill or incongruous Acts, by
bringing into their Minds effectual Motives, or diverting their Minds, by
turning their Thoughts to other Objects, or enduing them with supernatural
Inclinations for one or more Acts, and increasing the same to be effectual; by
which all Acts, morally good or indifferent, might be brought to pass, and
where he decreed to permit Acts morally evil, neither to exhort, incite, or
bring Thoughts into Mind conducing thereto, but leaving Creatures to their own
Capacities and Inclinations therein, as he knows Pleasure or Aversion would
prevail. I shall pursue my Thoughts no further thereon at this time; but thus
far, that to me it appears evident, that tho Difficulties might occur on both
sides that human Frailty could not fully extricate, it is more safe to stand on
that side where the Purity, Justice and Loveliness of God is most refulgent,
than where any of his natural Perfections is less evident; for we are much more
obliged to know his moral, than his natural Perfections.

Having solved the Difficulty appearing to arise from the 9th of the Romans, I
found no necessity to enlarge upon other places of Scripture, which seem to
import God's operative Influence in very wicked Actions, and his Decree or
Intention to effect the same; such as his Commission to Isaiah to exhort the
People of Israel to Repentance and Obedience, and yet showing him that they
would not obey, and ordering him to make their Ears dull that they might not
hear, and their Hearts hard that they might not understand, and be saved, which
does not infer God's Cooperation in Sin, as a Punishment of preceding Sin; as
if God had been active in hardening their Hearts, because they refused to
hearken to the Prophet's former Exhortations, which could neither consist with
the Purity or Prudence of God. His Purity did not admit such Cooperation, nor
could his Prudence allow the same; seeing their rejecting his Offers and
Exhortations, was matter enough for his Justice; so that it was in vain to add
farther Fuel to that Fire: But the true meaning of the Place is, that here, as
in many other places, God speaks not of the desired End of his Divine
Dispensations, but of the Event or Issue thereof, which he did foresee, and
decreed to permit, but did neither desire nor approve that Event. So Christ
says, that he came not into the World to bring Peace, but a Sword, and to
raise Hatred amongst the nearest Relations, as being the foreseen Event, but
not the desired or approved End of his Coming, which is clear from the
Annunciation of his Birth by the Angels, Glory to God in the highest, Peace on
Earth, and good Will toward Men, which was the proper and designed End of his
Coming; and therefore his bringing a Sword and Hatred, could only be the Issue
or eventual End of his Coming.

MEDITATION V. Upon the Will and Pleasure of God.
THE next Divine Perfection to the Understanding and Knowledge of God, is His
Will: Concerning which, I perceive, that there are no less Mistakes than
concerning his Knowledge; some making no difference between God's Power and his
Will; as if there were nothing possible to exist which he does not will to
exist, which in sensu composito is true; that is, it is impossible any thing
could exist, unless God willed it to exist, which would serve only to amuse and
amaze ordinary Capacities; as if God's Power were exhausted and terminate, so
that he could do no more than what he did decree to come to pass, tho he would:
but certainly, tho it be impossible that any thing should come to pass but
according to the Will of God effecting or permitting; yet it is not impossible
that God could have willed otherwise than he has willed, else he were in
nothing free by the Freedom of Indifferency; so that he could not have made the
World sooner or later than he has done, neither more nor fewer Kinds, nor
Individuals of the Creatures; which falls in with that old abominable Opinion,
That the World was brought forth by Emanation from God, and so was eternal. Of
which Opinion they come little short, who hold, that it is impossible to
annihilate any part of Matter, for there would still remain the Dimensions of a
Body, which are inseparable from a Body; and therefore Matter must be infinite
in Extension, and must either be self-existent and uncreated, or must proceed
from God, not freely, but by necessary Emanation, as Light is supposed to do
from the Sun: So that God has done, or can do nothing concerning Matter, but
to set Parts of it in Motion, whereby they must have different Figures, all
which I do abhor.

It is beyond doubt, That God's Will to have a present Effect, cannot possibly
want that Effect, as says Isaiah; The Lord of Hosts has purposed, and who
shall disannul it? and his Hand is stretched out, and who shall turn it back?
Where God's Purpose is distinguished from the stretching out of his Hand or
Power, that is, his Intention of a thing to come is distinct from acting at the
time of its Existence, as is clear by the Apostle Paul, affirming, That he
works all Things after the Counsel of his own Will.

It is also certain, That it is an incommunicable Perfection of God, that his
Will is ever effectual. No Creature can produce any Effect by willing it to be,
but there must be an Executive Power distinct from the Will; as if a Creature
will for bear to think upon any particular Object, the Execution is by the
Understanding's possessing it self with another Object, hindering the Thoughts
of the former. If a Creature resolve to move, it cannot thereby move unless it
have a distinct Locomotive Power: For God will not give that his Glory to
another, that his Will cannot possibly be ineffectual as it is willed.

Schoolmen, to extricate the Difficulties concerning God's Will, have made
several Distinctions of it, in a decreeing Will, a promising Will, a permissive
Will, a commanding or prohibiting Will, an approving and accepting Will, and
that which is called voluntas signi and voluntas beneplaciti: This last has
been, and is very apt to be much abused; as if God by Signs did express a Will
which he did not please should take Effect, which is inconsistent with his
Veracity and Sincerity; and tho it may receive a safe Interpretation, by
straining the words, it ought not to be used. The safe meaning can only be,
that that which may innocently be presumed to be the Will of God, isnot always
truly his Will: As when God commanded Abraham to sacrifice his Son Isaac,
Abraham did sincerely intend to do it, as innocently conceiving it to be the
Will of God, consistent with his Promise, That in Isaac should all Nations be
blessed, knowing that God could, and believing that he would restore sacrificed
Isaac to Life again; in which Belief he did not sin, tho he erred by an
innocent Mistake, supposing that to be sure which was not: for when he lifted
up his Hand with the Knife to give the deadly Blow, he had little ground to
doubt of the Effect, and consequently of the Will of God; yet by God's stopping
him even in that Posture, he knew he was mistaken of the Will of God. But from
such rare Cases it is not safe to conclude upon the Will of God, as did Jonah
upon the Command given him to preach to Nineveh, that within forty days it
would be destroyed; which being a Threatening designed for Repentance, and not
for a mere Prediction, had both by Reason and Revelation implied the Mercy of
God upon Repentance, though it was not Repentance unto Life, nor universal; and
which if it had been expressed, Jonah would have had no pretense for his Anger,
that the repenting Ninevites were not destroyed.

This Distinction of the Will of God is also extended by some to his commanding
or forbidding Will, because his Will is not always that that which he commands
should take effect, which is more incongruous to the Sincerity of God than the
former; as if it were not always pleasing and acceptable unto God that his Will
should be obeyed, even then when he permits it to be disobeyed, because by
his Wisdom he saw it congruous to his own Nature, and for his Glory, to create
his Rational Creatures with Reason and free Choice, that they should not act by
mere Instinct as Brutes, but be governed by Rewards and Punishments; which
necessarily imports that sometimes they should be permitted to make wrong use
of that Freedom, being always overruled for his Glory: Yet without doubt, that
in which they miscarry is unacceptable to God, and justly punishable by him;
and so he cannot exert an Act of his Will to effect what he abhors and
punishes; but he exerteth only a permissive Act, which terminates in himself,
and has no outward Operation, but is immanent, and not transient; by which he
wills to forbear the exerting of his Will to hinder these Acts, in so far as
Evil does necessarily thence result, whether it be in the Essence of the Act,
or in the evil Intention of that which otherwise might be good; so that his
Command does not import his Will to operate or effect these things presently,
or his Intention so to do for the future, but his Pleasure in what he commands,
which is evident by what Paul says. For this is good and acceptable in the
sight of God our Savior, who will have all Men to be saved, and to come to the
knowledge of the Truth: where his Will is expressed to be his Acceptance and his
Pleasure; but Pleasure is not properly an Act of the Will.

That Pleasure is no Act of the Will (albeit it be very little adverted, but on
the contrary, Pleasure is reckoned among the Appetites or Affections.) Upon
accurate Consideration it will easily appear, that Pleasure is neither an Act
of the Understanding nor of the Will, but of a Power distinct from both; for it
is a chief Object both of the Understanding and of the Will. I do by my
Understanding perceive Pleasure when I have it, and I know when I have it not,
albeit I have no Grief or Pain for want of it, but am in a middle indifferent
State, without either Pleasure, Pain or Grief. And tho this Act of the
Understanding may in some sense be said to be a reflexive Act, as when I
advert, and think that I have a Faculty of Understanding, or an Act of that
Faculty, yet I do more reflect upon my Understanding by perceiving Pleasure,
than by thinking upon my Will, or my Locomotive Power: if then the Perception
of Pleasure be not a reflex Act of the Understanding upon its own Act, but by a
direct Act perceiving another thing than its own Act, it can only be the Object
of Understanding, and so cannot be the Act of it. Pleasure can less be an Act
of the Will, because it is the chief Object of the Will; for we have both
Appetite and Desire to have Pleasure when we have it not, and to have it
continued when we have it: and therefore being the Object of the Will, it
cannot be the Act thereof; for the Will does less reflect upon it self or its
own Acts, than the Understanding. If Pleasure were an Act of the Will, it
behoved to be in our Power by a sole Act of the Will, for Pleasure is no such
Perfection as the Will of a natural Man cannot reach: If then by willing
Pleasure without other Assistance we could have Pleasure, who would be so
stupid as to want it at any time? But I do evidently perceive, that I can no
more bring forth Pleasure by willing it, than I can bring forth Light in
Darkness by willing it to be; but Pleasure results from the Perception of the
pleasing Object by a kind of necessary Emanation, which I cannot directly
hinder, but by diverting my Mind from that Object, and applying it to another
that can impede the Thoughts of the former. I perceive my self to be in the
like condition as to Grief or Pain, which is a kind of Grief which I can
neither make nor mar by willing it, without applying my Mind to another Object,
diverting it from that Object that was the cause of Grief, and applying it to
another Object strong enough to exclude the former, and which can excite an
opposite Passion, as Admiration, which will sometimes wholly take away the most
violent Grief or Pain, or Pleasure in, or desire of another Object: And there
are but few so Masculine Minds, as can by this indirect way take away great
Pain or Sorrow, tho many may allay or lessen it. Therefore Pleasure and Sorrow
are not Acts of the Will or Affections, nor are to be numbered among Affections,
but are common Results arising from them, and from other Objects, and are the
Means of Reward and Punishment, Happiness and Misery, without which Creatures
could be capable of neither.

I may thus safely reason by Inspection in my own Mind, and from the specific
Equality of other Men, conclude the like of them: But I ought with much more
tenderness and trembling to make Inferences of the Will of God, and yet I know
no other Mean to apprehend God's Will, but by his own revealing it, or by
resemblance of Man's Will, whom he has declared to be made after his own
Image, removing all Imperfection in the Will of Man. So then I conceive God's
Pleasure neither to be an Act of his Understanding, nor of his Will, but a
distinct Act resulting from his Knowledge of himself in his Divine Perfections,
Decrees and Dispensations, and in the Effects of them: And seeing this Knowledge
is unchangeable, so must his Pleasure be, and so must his Will be of the
continuance of that Pleasure, as it results from the natural or moral
Perfection of his Creatures, in which his Pleasure differs from the Pleasure of
Creatures, who cannot necessarily have the Objects of Pleasure. His Pleasure
also is infinite, and can be no greater, nor no less, intensively, tho it may
be extensively; for he delights not only in the Idea of his Creatures when they
exist not, but he does also delight in the Works of his Hands when they do
exist, yet does no more fully delight, nor is more happy when they do exist,
than before.

The infinite Perfections of God, and the infinite Pleasure thence resulting,
admit of no Grief; in which also his Pleasure differs from the Pleasure of
Creatures: and we can no otherwise understand Expressions ascribing Grief to
God, than as we understand those which ascribe to him a Face, a Heart, Eyes or
Hands, that is, by Resemblance or Similitude. Yet it is truly and properly
said, that God takes no Pleasure in the Evil of Sin, and yet he has no Grief
arising thence, but Displeasure; and it is the Divine Prerogative, that he does
take Pleasure in good Things when they are, but has no Grief or abatement of
his Pleasure when they are not; whereof great Souls have some shadow of
Resemblance, they can take Pleasure in all things so far as is congruous to
their Principles, inbred or infused, and yet have no Grief for wanting of them:
and therefore have more noble Minds than the Stoics, who do endeavor to
eradicate all Pleasures, that they might not be grieved by the wanting of them,
which is only fit for weaker Minds who find in themselves that Effect.

I have great aversion from the Thoughts that any Will of God should be
ineffectual, which I cannot see consistent with his Infinite Perfections; and
therefore I do not apprehend that his Commands, Prohibitions, Institutions or
Laws, are Acts of his Will, but of his Pleasure or Acceptance, which is his
Pleasure in those things that are offered to him, which he does not reject:
Otherwise they could not be without effecting the thing commanded or ordained,
but being Acts of his Plasure, they do oblige the Creature to be obsequious,
and by the annexed Penalties and Rewards according to his Pleasure they become
Divine Laws, and they are the Ground of his rewarding and punishing Justice,
whereby his Will may be exercised about them to apply Rewards, Punishments or
Remission, which are ever effectual. Tho the Will of Creatures is not
productive of Natural Effects, yet it is productive of Moral Effects, not only
by Promises, whence there arises a Right or Power of Exaction, but in Dominion
and Property, which by the Law of Nature is transmitted by the Will alone, but
the Will of God must have the intended Effect; and therefore it is not God's
Will, but his Pleasure that is implied in his Commands and Laws; so that there
is never a Discrepancy between what is expressed and what is meant.

These Thoughts are very suitable to those two eminent places in Scripture. For
I have no Pleasure in the Death of him that dies, says the Lord. And again,
As I live, says the Lord, I have no Pleasure in the Death of the wicked, but
that the wicked turn from his way, and live. Turn ye, turn ye from your evil
Ways; for why will ye die, O House of Israel? Here is a Command to turn
expressly attributed to God's Pleasure, not to his operant Will, which could not
have failed in the Effect to make them to turn; but their turning and their
living were both pleasing, and their not turning and dying were also both
displeasing unto God. There can be no doubt concerning their turning or not
turning, but it may be more doubtful, how God should have no Pleasure in the
Death of the Wicked, or that it should not be by his Will, seeing it is the
Execution of his Justice; and I am satisfied that it is his Will, as it is an
Act of Justice, but not simply and in it self. There is no Difficulty that a
just Judge may at once, not only have Pleasure in, but may will the Death of a
Malefactor, but would be very far from taking Pleasure in, or willing his
Death, if it were not by a necessary Act of Justice; but on the contrary, would
have Pleasure in the continuance of his Life: tho it be said, God will have all
Men to be saved, the former Texts clear it to be only God's approbative Will or
Pleasure.

I am convinced, that it must be a dangerous Error to conceive, that God
wills the Death of his Rational Creatures, as being in the order of Nature
prior to the permission of Sin, or that he has Pleasure in it without
consideration of Sin, in the order of Nature antecedent; which I can conceive
no way reconcilable with these Texts: For if it should be said, that God has
Pleasure in the Misery of a Creature, as an Act of his Sovereignty or Freedom;
if any can please themselves, in that there is no Contradiction they cannot
reconcile, yet that were no way consistent with the Sincerity, Bounty or
Goodness of God, and far from representing him as infinitely amiable.

I think it far from giving Satisfaction, or from making a difficult Objection
from that Metaphysical Maxim, That which is last in Execution, is first in
Intention: which is very improper to be applied to God, whose Intentions are
all together, and has its Exceptions even as to Creatures. For a Lawgiver does
not first intend the Death of his Subjects by a Capital Law, neither at all
intend their Death simply, nor can he so take Pleasure in it, if he be not a
Tyrant, and yet is pleased in the Execution after the Capital Crime deserving
it. But the blessed and benign God does never intend the Misery of his Creature
abstractly and simply; for his last End is his own Glory, whereunto the Misery
of the Creature is no Mean, but his Act of Justice upon the sinning Creature;
neither is Sin willed or intended by God, who exercises no other Act in it,
but Permission, which is immanent, having no positive extrinsick Effect but
Restraint, and overruling of it, and upon the occasion of it, doing holy Acts
for his Glory; so that all the Joints of that Objection are enervated.

There is another eminent Difference between the Will of God and our Will; we
do oft-times wish that which is impossible, as that that which is past were
recalled, or that we might enjoy all sinful Pleasures, and also the Favor of
God and Blessedness. There is properly no Wish to be attributed to God; for tho
sometimes he does express himself as wishing or wondering, that is only to
speak to Children in their own Language, signifying what is pleasing or
displeasing to him.

It is our Imperfection, that because our narrow Minds cannot comprehend many
things at once, we form abstract Notions of things, having all the Attributes
in which many Individuals do agree, and having none in which they do differ:
And as these Notions are in our Understanding, so are there general Desires in
our Will, which cannot agree to the Omniscient God, and yet he oft-times speaks
to us in our own Language, as if he made use of such Notions or general
Desires, whereas he conceives or wills only Individuals.

We do also frequently exert conditional Acts of Will, or those Acts which
Schoolmen call Velleities, whereby we do not absolutely will, but only in such
contingent and uncertain Cases; for if these Cases were certain, and to us
certainly known, it were no more a conditional Will, but an absolute, not to
take a present Effect, but when that Case occurred. This Imperfection must also
be removed from the Will of God, to whom no Case can be uncertain, and yet he
often speaks to our Capacity in Expressions conditionally conceived; and
therefore these appearing Conditions are truly Terms, tho they may be as
Conditions to us, to whom they are uncertain.

I pity those who make so evil use of God's Condescendence to speak after the
manner of Men, as to represent God as wishing a thing past had not been, or
having general or conditional Acts of his Will or Decree, which yet the
Authority of Men and Prepossession make many to cleave unto.

The Decrees of God are commonly attributed to his Will; I shall endeavor to
extricate my Thoughts concerning these, as may most agree with the Infinite
Perfection of God, when I shall meditate upon God's Dominion exercised in the
Election and Salvation of some of his Creatures, and his just Rejection and
Punishment of others.

MEDITATION VI. Upon the Power of God.
OMniscience, Choice and Intention would come far short of the glorious Idea or
Image of God: He must also be a powerful, yea an Allpowerful, Almighty, or
Omnipotent Spirit, whereby he has Strength and Ability to bring every thing to
pass that is possible; therefore it is said God has spoken once, twice have I
heard this, That Power belongs unto God. The Reduplication imports a strong
Asseveration, and of God alone it may be said, that Power belongs unto Him;
the Creatures have it only by Gift, and in measure: and tho it be their own as
to other Creatures, not as to God; for as to Him it is but as the Peculium of
Servants, which their Master can take from them at all times without Wrong.

Power is the Principle of Action or Operation, as these are distinguished from
Thought and Intention; which tho they be Acts of the Understanding and Will,
yet they have no transient Operation, of which Power is the Principle. These
Operations may be in the same Subject, but not in the same Faculty; the
Understanding operates on the Will, and the Will on the Understanding of the
same Person, and both Understanding and Will, Pleasure and Grief, are Acts that
have their own Activities, that may be called Powers, but for distinction are
better called Faculties; but Powers strictly taken as distinct from these
Powers, may be either necessary, which can never be out of act, or free, which
can exist when they operate not; and it may either be immanent in the same
Subject, or transient, terminate on another Subject; and may be either natural,
that is in the Nature received by Creation of its Subject, or adventitious, as
an Habit acquired or infused; and in some cases it is absolute, in others it is
limited, that is, does not fully exercise it self, by resistance of another
Power, or by the free choice of the Person that has it; such is a moral Power,
which will operate no further than is congruous to the Operant's other
Perfections or Pleasure.

The most perfect Power is that which can work all that it can will, but does
work no more than which it does will; and this only is the Omnipotent Power of
God, it does not only extend to what he actually wills, but what he could
will; and therefore the Power of God does far exceed that which he actually
wills or intends, that is, his absolute Power which has no Bounds: for tho
he limits the Acts of his Power by all his Moral Perfections, and by his
liberty of Indifferency, yet the Power it self is ever the same, abstract from
Good or Evil; he does not abstain from doing Evil for want of Power or Might to
do it, but because it is unworthy of, and unbecoming his glorious Nature: and
tho his Power could counteract it self, his Wisdom would not admit it; yet the
Exercise of his Power is as certainly regulate by his Holiness as if he had no
Power to do otherwise: And therefore when it is said, that it is impossible for
God to lie, the meaning is, that it is not simply, but eventually impossible,
that is, it is as certain he will not do it, as if he could not do it.

God's Power is to be considered as it is in the Faculty, or in Act; in Act it
is exerted by his Will to have present Effect, as in the Faculty it is exerted
in his Purpose or Intention of that which is to be, and the Complex of all
these is his Omnipotence. For thou have created all things, and by thy Will
they are and were created, where (...) is better termed Will than Pleasure.

The Perfection of God's Power imports that it must be inexhaustible, or then
it behoved to cease and fail, which holds both as to Quantity and Quality. If
God should create a Body so great that he could add nothing to it, then his
extensive Power were exhausted, and would cease, so that he had no extensive
Power: Or if God gave an infinite Strength, Pressure or Motion, his Power of
giving that Strength were exhausted, and should cease: Therefore God cannot do
all that he can do, that is, he cannot actually do all that is in his absolute
Power, because he cannot will it, thereby to terminate his own Perfection,
whereby his Power is regulated by his Wisdom.

I know the Notions of the Schoolmen endeavoring to clear the Power of God,
have much obscured it, supposing real Beings eternal and necessary, and
imputing to their Nature the Cause of Impossibility, by reason of their
Incapacity; they are not satisfied that these Entities be but entia rationis,
the Fiction of Man's Brain by Resemblance, being as when Darkness is
apprehended as a color like to Blackness, but they will have them real
Entities; and their Imagination which has a kind of Omnipotence in these
Notions, proceeds to make a whole Frame and Scheme of their own coining,
giving to a multitude of such Entities their different Attributes, and thence
deducing innumerable Conclusions, all which must be eternal Verities. So that
God by Creation gives only the Existence of Things, whose Essence was eternal,
and so are the Essences of all things that are not inconsistent, tho they were
never to have Existence: And of late some have asserted, that the real
Existence of Matter, and all its Properties are eternal. For supposing this
World had never been, or were destroyed, yet it is impossible to conceive but
there behoved to be Longitude, Latitude and Profundity, which are inseparable
from a Body.

All these are but the Births of Man's Brain, inconsistent with the Infinite
Perfections of God, incroaching upon his Power, his Freedom, his Wisdom. On his
Power, that he could not annihilate any thing beside himself; on his Freedom,
and the dependence of all things upon him: For if these eternal Entities were
freely from God, he could have forborne to create them; if not, then they
behoved to flow from him by Emanation, and so their Being did not depend upon
him; if they were freely from God, yet they were not by Creation, for that
gives Existence, and they have found no Term to express how they were from God,
but the Wisdom of God is exerted according to his Decrees of Creation and
Providence.

It is sufficiently clear, that Possibility is only an extrinsick Denomination
from the Power of God, having no extrinsick real Object, more than the
Imagination can give to its Object; or that the sight of an Object can operate
something real in it. As to the eternal Verities that are not concerning the
Eternal God, they import only an identick Implication in the Terms whereby the
Subject is supposed to be of such a nature in which the Attributes are
necessarily implied; as that every Triangle has three Angles, which is no more
than that every Triangle is a Triangle, or that every Triangle has an Angle,
which is an identick Proposition to each of its Angles, but inadequate to the
whole: which imports no Reality, or absolute Entity; but only that whenever
there is a Triangle, it must have Angles, but does not import that the Triangle
or Angles have a Being, or are real, neither is there any more Reality. That
our Fancy cannot apprehend a non ens, but by resemblance of an Entity, and so
it apprehends Vacuity, as a Body, having Dimensions, which imports no more
Reality, than when it apprehends Darkness as Blackness.

Therefore God's Power is not circumscribed by Possibility or Consistency, as
by the Narrowness or Incapacity of the Object, but because the Divine
Perfections cannot jar or counteract one another.

There is another no less groundless and inconsistent Imagination, That God by
his Power preserves himself, and that he is the Cause of his own Being; whereas
God neither has nor can have a Cause, and Preservation is never competent but
to that which had a Cause, and is a dependent Being.

The regulated Power of God abates nothing of its Infiniteness, because the
Exercise of that Power is only limited by his Will and Choice, not by the Power
it self, which still remains when it acts not. God's Power is regulated by
all his active Perfections, as by Will, by the unchangeableness of his Decree,
by his Purity and Holiness, by his Bounty and Mercy, by his Justice and
Fidelity, and by his Truth. And as it is said, it is impossible for God to lie,
not by his absolute, but by his regulate Power; so it is no less impossible he
should change his Purpose, or his Works according to it, or that he should not
be good, just, faithful and true.

God's Power is exerted not only according to his Will, but (for any thing I
can perceive by Reason or Revelation) by the sole Acts of his Will, whereby he
wills any thing presently to be, which the Scripture expresses by the Word
of his Power, and that he commanded, and it came to pass; not by such Commands
as he gives to the Rational Creatures, which do but express his Pleasure and
their Duty: But a Command to Things to exist must import his present Will, and
therefore the Word of his Power must be such a Word of Command, as when Christ
said to the Leper, I will, be thou clean, and immediately his Leprosy was
cleansed. He both proved that the Divine Power is exercised by sole Will, and
that himself was God.

God's regulate Power by his Wisdom operates by the easiest and most
accommodate way, and does nothing in vain, that is, not requisite for the End
proposed; but if the End proposed be not only the Production of such an Effect,
but with it the manifestation of the Greatness of his Power, he would choose
the way fit for that End, and not for the Effect only; as when he increased the
Oil that sustained Elijah, and the Widow of Sareptah: but he followed a more
natural way when he fed him by the Raven, whose swift Wings could soon reach
places where the Famine had not reached. Christ in preserving Lazarus might
have prevented his Death, but he shows that he did it to glorify God. So he did
feed the five thousand and the four thousand, by multiplying the Loaves and
Fishes, tho he could have sustained their Strength a more accommodate, but a
less evidently miraculous way: Yet God will not alter the ordinary course of
Nature, tho thereby some Inconveniences arise to his own; he works by the
Powers of Nature, without Creation or Miracle, by preserving the Vigor of the
Powers he gave; and he does overruled the voluntary Powers, whose Effects he
ordinarily alters, by giving Inclination to do those things they would not
otherwise do, whether as to a single Act, or to a kind of Acts, by stopping and
diverting them toward other Objects, or by permitting them to misapply their
natural Powers in that which is evil.

I know no Warrant to pray for the change of Weather, but in extraordinary
cases, or to exercise Faith about these, any further than concerns the Mind to
make a good use of them.

Many have stumbled at God's Power of Creation, and therefore that God behoved
to have a Subject to work upon which were eternal, which the more propagated
the Opinion of the impossibility of Vacuity, and the infinite Extension of
Matter, tho the Authors of it do no less stiffly maintain Creation than others
do; That God is not the Author of Sin, tho he be the principal Actor of it: but
that eases not the Difficulty, unless they suppose also that Angels and Souls
are but the Motions of Matter, which some are so grossly absurd as to affirm; or
that they are eternal, which others more famous have professed; or that they
are Particles of the Divine Nature, which is yet more absurd than any of the
rest, supposing an extended and divisible Deity. Is there any Inconsistency,
that that which once existed not, should after exist? How much must they
derogate from the Power and Glory of God, that would attribute nothing to him,
but to give Matter, Figure and Motion, and that not by an intrinsic Principle,
but in the same way that he operated the first six days? These Men had better
quit their Grounds than keep them with such Consequences, and yet it is from
Consequences that they take them up, which might be better misbelieved than
these, tho they had far more probability both from Sense and Reason; but if
there be Incomprehensibility in either case, it ought least to be applied with
so great Derogation to the Power of God.

This Power working immediately by the Act of the Will, is an incommunicable
Perfection of God, and a part of that Glory which he will give to no other; and
therefore it is impossible that any Creature could create, and no more
consistent, than that God should make more Gods. Whatsoever is effectuate by
sole Will, is an Act of Creation, whether it be the Production of a Substance,
of a Power, yea, or of a Mode or Accident, or any thing above the Powers of
Nature or Grace.

Therefore no Creature can be any more than the Instrument of working a
Miracle, and that only when God wills the individual Act; and no Creature can
have a Power to work Miracles of any kind, as the Creature wills, or that God
should work a Miracle at the choice of the Creature, which were a Dependence
unbecoming his Majesty. We must not think that the Faith of Miracles was an
Arbitrary Habit, as when Christ said to his Disciples, If ye had Faith as a
grain of Mustard Seed, ye should say to this Mountain, Be removed hence, and
cast into the Sea: it imports no more, than that God at that time, for
Confirmation of the Gospel, would make them Instruments of some particular Acts
of supernatural Power, as he moved them, yet not at their Desire, but his own.

There is a groundless Imagination that has much spread it self, That God has
given a Power to all Men, or to all Christians, to produce Effects in
Creatures, by their firm and full Persuasion and Desire that these Effects
should be; and that they are not such Effects, is, because few or none attain
to that Persuasion; and so the very Power vanishes and were frustraneous, and
inconsistent with the Wisdom of God, that does nothing in vain, as well as with
the incommunicable Power of God.

I pray God Men would advert and consider, what ground there is to believe that
God has given a Power to a Priest or Minister, that at his Desire, so often as
he pleases to express the words of Consecration of Bread and Wine in the
Eucharist, the most stupendous Miracles should then arise of course; or that by
their Consecration the Elements should have a Power or Efficacy to confer
Grace, or otherwise to confirm it, than that by the solemn Preparation of the
Heart, and the earnest Prayer of the Creature, God would more readily grant
their Desire than at other times, or how by applying the Water in Baptism, at
Desire Original Sin should be forgiven, or Grace should be given; which
incroacheth not only upon the incommunicable Power of God, but upon his Wisdom,
that he should give Grace to all that were baptized, which in the most part
would prove frustraneous by being lost.

They do not a little derogate from the Omnipotence of God, who imagine that
the very Nature and Essence of a created Will does inseparably imply, that God
cannot otherwise determine it but by persuading; yet no Persuasion can be so
strong but it can reject it, and choose the contrary, whereby they fancy that
they can clear God from any Accession to Sin, even by Permission; as if his
Purity could not be preserved, but by the loss of his Omnipotence: So that God
has done all that is in his absolute Power to make every Rational Creature holy
and happy. Yet the Pretext is vain: for it cannot be imagined, that God should
be so mean an Orator, that he could not persuade Men to go to all Nations to
preach and spread Books, persuading them to embrace the true Religion, which
yet he has not done; and yet he has done all that he could do, not by his
absolute Power, but by his regulate Power, by his most wise and holy Decrees.
They might with more Pretext have said, that God in his Freedom and Wisdom, had
decreed that he would make no farther use of his Power, but by Persuasion; yet
that would have incorached upon his Wisdom and Sovereignty, that he has made
Creatures which he could not effectually govern; so that it is without all
ground in Reason or Revelation, that he has so decreed.

It is a very brutish Pretense, that it were a brute Power, and not rational,
to infuse Habits or Inclinations in Rational Creatures; seeing these infused
Powers act at the Judgment and Choice of Reason, though in some cases without
Hesitation or Deliberation, are Creatures persuaded to desire their own
Well-being, or Parents persuaded to love their own Children, or any to pity the
injured miserable.

MEDITATION VII. Upon the Oneness of God.
IT is impossible and inconsistent, that there could be more Gods than one,
both for the Omniscience and the Omnipotence of God; for God is capable of no
Imperfection, and therefore is impassible: He knows not by any outward
Impression or Manifestation, but from Reflection upon his own Nature and
Decrees, by which he knows what will be the Effects of the Capacities he has
decreed to give to Creatures, and by his own overruling them for his Glory.
Therefore there can be no more Decrees but those which are in that Omniscient
view; if there were any other, they could only be known by extrinsick
Manifestations, wherein God behoved to be Passive: So neither are such Decrees
possible, nor the Actings of them, nor could they be known in a way consistent
with the Divine Perfection.

It is as evidently inconsistent there could be more Omnipotents than one; for
if they were equal in Power, none of them could be Omnipotent, for they could
resist one another, and so have no effectual Power; and if they were unequal in
Power, the weaker could not be Omnipotent.

The Omniscience and Omnipotence of God are his most evident Perfections, even
by the Light of Nature; and his Oneness is fully and frequently asserted in
Scripture.

Scripture has also revealed the Trinity in the Divine Nature, which is the
Foundation of the Salvation of the Elect, carried along through the whole
Current and Economy of the Divine Decrees and Dispensations relating to
Mankind, from the Beginning revealing that the Seed of the Woman should bruise
the Head of the Serpent, and by all that is said of the Messiah in the Old
Testament, and of Christ in both Testaments. But it is declared to be a
Mystery, and the greatest Mystery, ushered in with an unparalled note of
Attention, (...), Great is the Mystery of Gidliness, God manifested in the
Flesh.

Therefore the Trinity of Persons must be consistent with the Oneness of God;
and it must be a nearer Oneness than that of Individuals of one kind, yet not
such an Oneness as if there were but one Divine Person, Hypostasis, or
Subsistence of the Divine Nature.

It is too great Presumption for any in the State of Mortality to determine the
manner of the Oneness of the Father, Son and Eternal Spirit, which is so
clearly declared a Mystery near the close of the Canon of Scripture, never
unfolded after in it.

The Trinity has been asserted and owned with the greatest Firmness and
Forwardness in the purest State of the ancient Christian Church; and the least
Derogation attempted against it, by the Arians, has been condemned with
Abhorrence, by the most Eminent and Orthodox Fathers, and by the Determination
and Solemn Confession of Faith by the Council of Nice; and it is amongst the
most incontestably Catholic Doctrines of the Universal Church, owned by all
National Societies of Christians in the World above the course of a thousand
Years.

Augustine and some others of the Fathers have attempted to give some
Resemblances of the Trinity in Unity, though he still acknowledges it to be a
Mystery they could not fully comprehend.

So Augustine, in his 15th Book of that Treatise he wrote upon the Trinity,
says, That we have a Representation of the Generation of the Son, by the
Father, in that he is called the Word of God; as all Idea's are conceived by
Words of the Mind, so God's Idea of himself and his Decrees, is his Word
essential and substantial: For all that is in God, is God. The Son is also the
Character of his Person, his Image; the Brightness of his Glory, his Wisdom
that was with him from Eternity. He says also, That the Procession of the Holy
Ghost is his Love to Himself, by his Idea of Himself with his whole Decrees;
and that all the Persons of the Trinity are Wise and Powerful, by the same
Power and Wisdom, because they have but one Godhead.

The Generation of a Son does not import an Imperfection or Inequality of the
Nature of the Son more than of the Father; much less does the Generation of the
Eternal Son imply an Inequality of the Son with the Father, or a dependence of
his Being from the Father, as if he needed Preservation like Creatures: Yea all
the Persons are increated, without any Cause, and so Self-existent and
Coeternal.

The Errors of Socinians are much more abominable than those of the Arians; the
Socinians acknowledge nothing of the Son before he was conceived in the Womb of
the Virgin.

The Light of Nature was ever sufficient to confute the Multiplicity of Gods,
and to convince that there could only be one God. Albeit the Multiplicity of
Gods did far prevail in the World, it was long before it did prevail, and not
until God had given Men up to their own Ways, because of their Wickedness
against the clear Light of Nature: for they were given up to believe Lies,
because they did not receive the Truth (which by the Light of Nature they knew)
in Love, to live according to it. The knowledge of one God was not alone among
the Hebrew or Jewish Nation, as the Scripture makes evident in Job and his
Friends, among whom there was so much clear Knowledge of the Divine Perfections,
and even of a Savior, and of a Resurrection, which are not deducible from any
inbred Principle by the Light of Nature, and therefore they could not want
Revelation; yet we have no ground to know any Communication between the Hebrews
and them: Neither were there a few Persons endued with that Light, but a City
and Commonwealth, having Judges and Counselors that sat at their Gates.

Balaam also knew and acknowledged the only true God, not by Communication with
the Israelites, there being a vast distance and no Communication between Aram
and Egypt. The three Wise Men of the East, that were led by a Star to come to
Bethlehem when Christ was born, could not possibly by Astrology have discovered
the Birth of the Mediator; and therefore did neither want Revelation nor a
miraculous Sign: Neither is there any ground to believe that they were
Idolaters, but that they knew and worshipped the true God; and it is highly
probable that they were not the only Persons of their Country that did so: Yet
they did not desire (for ought I know) to become Proselytes of the Jews.
Neither is there ground to doubt that Moab or Ammon, the Sons of Lot, or
Ishmael and Abraham's other Sons by Keturah, or Esau, their nearest Posterity
were convinced that there was but one God; nor could their Posterity be soon
brought to believe a Plurality of Gods: So that we have no ground to doubt that
the Knowledge of the one God did long and largely propagate it self in the
World, though through defect of History the Particulars be little known. I do
not hear of Idolatry before the Flood, the cause of it in God's just Judgment
is attributed to Men's corrupting of their Ways, and the wickedness of their
Works.

After the Flood, the Notion of one God did long remain, as appears by the
common Name of Baal, or Lord, which was long almost universal; and the several
Nations that worshipped Baal gave him different Epithets, according to their
apprehension of his Attributes, of which there is frequent mention in the
Scripture: So the Moabites God was Baal, without addition; the Sidonians also
called their God Baal, so did the Canaanites. Some Nations called their God
Baal Berith, that is, cursing Baal; others, Baal Gad, Baal Hamon, Baal Meon,
Baal Peor, Baal Hanan, Baal Hazor, Baal Hermon, Baal Perazin, Baal Zebub, the
God of Ekron. Places also were denominated from Baal, as Baal Perazin, Baal
Shalisha, Baal Zebub, Baal Zephon; and Bell of the Babylonians is but a
different Dialect of Baal: but that which was the Name of one God with
different Epithets, did easily come to be apprehended as so many Gods, yet the
several Nations did not worship many Gods but their own. So after the Captivity
of the ten Tribes, those that were planted in their places being plagued,
conceived it was by the Anger of the God of that Place, and therefore sent for
the Jewish Priests to appease him. The Greeks were the first that worshipped
many Gods, and after them the Romans; for then the Souls of Men eminent upon
Earth were supposed to be cooptated among the Gods in different Orders; and as
the Nations and Places had Interest in them, they had Confidence in them, and
became forgetful of the true God. After arose Images, and the relative Honor
and Worship attributed to them, not only to the Images and Pictures of these
Deified Men, but also to those Bodies, wherein the Gods were supposed to
delight, and to reside. It is not imaginable, that so many Men of Discretion
and Spirit, could with direct Worship adore inanimate Creatures, or the meanest
Brutes or Plants, but that they thought they were delightful to, and resided in
by Deities; and so the Sun, the Moon, Planets, came to be worshipped, even by
those who did not believe that they had Life, or Understanding, or were Bodies
informed by a Deity, but that they were the Residences thereof; yet the
ignorant Vulgar gave direct Worship thereto. The Earth also was worshipped, and
particular Mountains, Valleys, Rivers, Islands, where evil Spirits had
appeared; but where they had fixed Oracles, they liked better to have the
Worship immediate to themselves, as more congruous to Human Reason, and more
difficult to be dissuaded. The Vulgar did not so soon give direct Worship to
Pictures, as to Statues representing these imagined Deities to the Life, not
only in the shape of Man, but in other terrible Shapes, in which the Devils did
appear, as has lately been evident among the Savage People in America, who
have their evil Gods, who appear in Bodies of terrible Aspect, and oft-times
severely beat them, and therefore they worship them with howling and great
Terror. Other evil Spirits transformed themselves into Angels of Light, and
appeared benign and favorable both to attain their Adoration and Trust; and
both pretended an Omniscience, and gave Responses of the most uncertain and
important Events of which they had most probable Conjectures, knowing the
Interests and Inclinations of those Persons who had Rule in public Affairs,
and on whom they had Influence; and in other things, giving dark or dubious
Responses which might be applied to any Event.

The Insolence also of some powerful Men made them affect to be adored, and
esteemed Gods, which the Heathen Roman Emperors frequently did; and some of the
most flagitious of them were so impudent, as to be adored when alive, and at
distance, and had Temples and Altars consecrated to them. The misapplied
Gratitude to the Inventers of those things that are of great and common use to
Mankind, or those who were admired for their Dexterity in Government, or
Gallantry in War, gave their Ghosts the Esteem to be accounted Gods, Demigods,
or Heroes, unto which evil Spirits were very concurring so to seduce.

The Poets with their Poetical Fictions, and the Pleasantness of their Verses,
did powerfully work upon the Imaginations of People, and thereby radicate and
increase the Belief of these Absurdities; yet they kept still a Distinction and
Subordination to the great God, whom they called Zeus, as the Fountain of Life.
They did also attribute to their Gods the greatest Vices and Infirmities of
Men, as Sleeping, Recreation, Consultation, Faction, Intrigues, Quarrels, and
not only upon their own Interest, but as they partied different Nations and
Persons: The more judicious counted these but Fables; and though few durst
express their Mind of the only true God, for danger of the seduced Rabble, yet
many of the Philosophers did. There were few of these false Gods that had the
Dedication of Temples, but were worshipped at Rivers, Mountains or other
places, from which Voices or some extraordinary Signs were heard or seen there;
at last it came to that height of Absurdity, that all believed that wheresoever
they would make up an Image, or a Statute, a Deity would take up Residence
there, and be their Protector, and answer their Prayers. Yea the ruder sort
adored Stocks and Stones, and the vilest of Creatures, as Deities, without the
Opinion of any resident Spirit; so that not only every Nation, but every City
and Family had their different Gods.

These Abominations came to that height, that the World became ashamed and
wearied of them, and would have quit them, if their Priests, who had Honor and
Profit by them, had not co-operated with evil Spirits to support them. The
Romans made it an Interest of State to acknowledge the Deities of all the
Nations that they subdued, the better to keep them under Obedience. It was not
Reason, but Interest that supported the Plurality of Gods. The Silver-smiths of
Ephesus did with Tumult and Fury cry up Diana of the Ephesians, but their
Leader did more ingenuously tell those of his Trade, than the rest of the
Multitude, that by making the Shrines of Diana they had their Wealth.

In this Condition was the World (except among the Jews, where Religion was
turned to a mere Formality, and corrupted with Man's Inventions, pretended to
be Divine Traditions) when Christ came to bring Life and Immortality to light,
which did hardlier obtain with the Jews than with the Gentiles, who were become
so irrational in their Worship; and therefore the great Apostle of the Gentiles
does not make use of Signs and Miracles, but of Reason and the Light of Nature,
to convince them to know the only true God: For they sought Wisdom, but the
Jews could not be convinced without Miracles, to forsake their Ceremonial
Worship, which they became grossly to mistake, as if it had been a perpetual
Institution, sufficient of it self to purge away Sin. So the Light of Nature
concerning the only true God revived and made way for the Gospel, whereby the
Multiplicity of Gods is no where to be found but among the barbarous Nations,
who kept no Correspondence or Commerce with the rest of the World, such as the
wildest Tartars, the Chinese, Japoneses and Americans.

The clearing up of the true meaning of the Old Testament from the Jews fond
Mistake of the Prophecies of the Messia, convinced many even by the Light of
Nature, that God behoved to be just; but if, without Satisfaction to his
Justice, he could have pardoned one Sin, he might have also pardoned all Sin,
and so have been without Punitive Justice: therefore there was necessity that
the Messiah ought to suffer for Sinners. The Antiquity and the Reasonableness
of the Christian Religion, broke much of the Obstinacy both of the Jews and
Gentiles; and the Grace of God so far prevailed, that a great part of the World
embraced and cleaved unto the Christian Religion upon its own account, not only
without, but against all Worldly Interest, in that they did even exceed in the
desire of Martyrdom.

But when the Roman Emperors accepted of, and established the Christian
Religion, whereby worldly Interests did attend it; in a short time the Roman
Empire (which then did extend it self to the far greatest part of what was
known to be habitable of the World) in a great part received it more as the Law
of the Empire, than as the Law of Christ, and were instrumental to make it look
as like the Pagan Superstition as they could, whereby great Corruption both in
Opinion and Practice did ensue. In place of the Heathenish Sacrifices the
Eucharist was made the Sacrament of the Altar, the Presbyters were made
Priests; and in place of the Heathens Demigods, came the Canonized Saints, and
not only their Ghosts in Heaven, but the Relics of their Bodies upon Earth
were brought in to share with God in Adoration, without any other but a verbal
Distinction; for both Prayers and Praises were plentifully performed to them,
and multitudes of Temples dedicated to them. Albeit Peter even when present
would not suffer Cornelius to kneel before him, nor Paul and Barnabas those who
offered to sacrifice to them, convincing them with that one Reason, That they
were Men: Nor would the glorious Angels accept of such Service, as being
Fellow Servants. None of these did insist with a Distinguo, that they were not
worshipping them with (...), but with (...); neither is there any Precept, or
one Example in all the Scripture, of praying to an absent Creature. I know
nothing can be pretended, but that when the Scripture was published there was
no canonizing of Saints; and it is very far from evidence, that all who were
canonized, were truly Saints, much less that their supposed Relics were true;
if then Men be worshipping some damned Spirits, if that be not Idolatry I know
what can be; but there is no ground of Confidence that no Pope has erred in
canonizing, which being a matter of Fact, they do not pretend Infallibility in
it. I wish these Men would seriously consider, how it is possible to shun the
attributing of the incommunicable Perfections of God to Creatures, the same
Hours of public Devotion being common through that whole Saint-worshipping
Church. If some Millions be at once praying to the same Saint, can mere Human
Nature be raised to that height to hear all those at once? when there is not
the least ground to believe that they can hear any one of them: And suppose
their groundless Invention, that they see all in speculo Trinitatis, yet they
cease not to be such a Multitude reflected to their Knowledge at once; so that
they must make them Gods, or else they must acknowledge themselves Idolaters.
And on their own Grounds it is yet more strange, that they wholly neglect
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, Job, Samuel and Daniel, whom God has singled out as
the strongest Intercessors, and Moses and Aaron, whom God has canonized, the
Scripture calling him the Saint of God. If any Creature were to be worshipped
in absence, there were most to be said for worshipping Angels, which yet is
expressly forbidden, and with the same Breath all Worship which God has not
required. As the Heathens divided among their Gods the several Offices by which
they might be useful to Men; so they do exceed them in attributing to
particular Saints their several Offices, not only to Men, but to Beasts, to all
the parts of Men, and all their Diseases, without the least Pretext of Reason:
they do not pretend (even by their unwritten Traditions) that God has declared
any such thing, or that these Saints have so declared; so that they must not
only order all the Saints upon Earth, but all the Saints in Heaven. If the
Saints be adorable, how comes it that every one adores what Saint he pleases,
and neglects the rest? And by what Warrant do they assign them their Tasks, if
it were their Duty to worship all, as they do some? The Burden of the Jewish
Ceremonies were a small matter to theirs.

The Singularity of the Deity is not incroached upon by the blessed Trinity,
being in Unity in one individual God, as the Word of God has fully expressed
it. It is indeed a Mystery, for the Knowledge of which we have no inbred
Principle, but it is a proper Object of our Faith: In many Points of the
Christian Religion, the Light of Nature goes a great length in the way of
Science, by a rational Deduction from self-evident Principles; and the exact
Harmony between the Light of Nature and the Scripture, gives a mutual
Confirmation of the truth of both, yet both are rather Science than Faith,
until God by his free Grace endue Men with a sense of Spiritual Things, which
the natural Man cannot discern, because by Nature he has not that Sense by
which they are perceivable.

There might have been other Objects of Sense, and other Senses of these
Objects, and therefore we need not think it strange, that God gives a new
inward Sense to the Regenerate only, by which they believe the Trinity in
Unity, and the Incarnation of the Son of God, the Covenant of Redemption and
Grace, the Mediator's willing and free Submission of himself to suffering in
his Human Nature even to Death for Man, that God's Justice might so be
satisfied, and his Purity and Abhorrence of Sin vindicated; that free electing
Love might take place, in which the Elect could attribute nothing to
themselves, but all unto the free Grace of God. The Light of Nature does or may
persuade all Men, that God is merciful to penitent Sinners, and yet that he is
also essentially just; and if it could have consisted with his Justice, without
Satisfaction thereto, to pardon one Sin, there could be no reason why to pardon
one more than another, and therefore God might have been without Punitive
Justice. Justice also differs from Benignity, that it keeps a just Proportion
between the Sin and the Punishment; and therefore if all Sinners deserved
Exclusion from God's Favor, none of them could satisfy for himself, much less
could any one receive Pardon and Reconciliation by the Sufferings of all the
rest: but here the sharpest Natural Reason is confounded and left in the dark
till Revelation and Faith step in, discovering the Mediator (...), whose
Humanity made him capable to suffer, and the Dignity of his Person gave his
Suffering an infinite Value, and the outward Revelation of it might induce a
strong Persuasion, that supposing God had so done, the Consequence were good,
and that it were likely that he had so done; but to have a true Faith and full
Persuasion of it upon Tradition written or unwritten, requires more than
Reasoning can infer.

Hence it is, that Compulsion is adhibited for Religion so far as the clear
Light of Nature goes, because there is the strongest Evidence beyond any other
natural Duty, in which none are spared from Coaction and Punishment, but they
are rather heightened by pretending the want of Persuasion, because the Light
of Nature is full and clear; and the diverting the Thoughts, or shutting the
Eyes of the Understanding can no more excuse, than if a Man should deny that
there were Light at Midday, because he would not open his Eyes to let it
enter. But we are not in that Capacity as to supernatural Light; and therefore
it is both against Religion and Humanity, to compel Men to supernatural and
institute Religion, where they believe not these revealed Principles, from
which ordinary Capacities cannot refuse clear Inferences which require not long
Deductions.

Those who pretend the Unity against the Trinity of the Deity, because they
cannot comprehend it, must deny the Incomprehensibility of God, which his Word
so often asserts, yea the whole Tenor of the Word: And their pitiful Evasions
do too strongly evidence, that they only own the Scriptures lest they should be
odious, and that they have no more than Natural Religion, but not the Christian
Religion, because they imagine God can forgive Sin without all Satisfaction to
his Justice; which is against the Light of Nature, which can neither admit of
an injurious God, nor of a Justiceless God.

Those who from the Trinity wave all Reasons against a carnal Presence in the
Eucharist, as if they were resolved either to keep both, or quit both, do too
much strike at the Foundation of Christianity, there being no Parity,
Consequence, or Connection betwixt the two. The Trinity is the Fountain of the
only true and saving Religion, whose Branches and Streams run through the whole
Scripture; Can the literal Interpretation of one Expression, never re-iterated,
never inculcated in all the Scripture, pretend like Evidence? where the
contrary Sense is evident, That whosoever eats the Flesh, and drinks the
Blood of Christ, shall never perish; therefore it cannot be a carnal eating or
drinking of the Body and Blood of Christ, which is to be understood in that
Sacrament, which wicked Men are capable of, as they acknowledge.

MEDITATION VIII. Upon God's Freedom.
I Have no doubt that God must be free; but the many subtle Contests among the
Learned concerning Freedom or Liberty, have made so many Distinctions of
Liberty, that I must consider them before I can distinctly know the Freedom of
God.

Freedom is a Relative Term, and does imply something from which, and something
to which a Being is free: As, 1. From Constraint, whereby I understand a Force
or Power, making any thing act contrary to its free Choice or Inclination. 2.
From Restraint, whereby any thing is hindered to do that which by Choice or
natural Inclination it might do; both these relate either to Acts, or to the
Power of Acting: that which is under no present Force, is so actually free, but
is not absolutely free, because it may be forced; but Opposition or Resistance
does not abate Freedom, unless at least it can diminish the Effect of the Power
of that which is free.

Thus God must be absolutely free, because there neither is nor can be any
thing that could abate the full Effect of his Power.

The second Distinction of Freedom, is not in respect of extrinsick Force, but
of intrinsic Propension, whereby any thing cannot alter its own Power, or the
Effect of it, either because it is void of Perception, and so cannot know when
and where to alter its Activity; thus all Creatures which have any Activity
act, except those which are sensible; so Fire cannot determine its own
Activity, tho it may be restrained: or constrained, and in this sense Brutes
have some kind of Freedom, because they act variously, tho they be neither
restrained nor constrained, and so they determine their own Power, according to
the Impressions on their Sense, Memory, or Imagination: Albeit (according to
their Opinion that think they have no Perception) they act as inanimate
Creatures; yea some deny all Activity to Creatures, but commonly Liberty is
opposed to natural Necessity.

The third Distinction of Freedom, is in respect of voluntary Necessity,
whereby Rational Beings are free from absolute Necessity, by which they act not
as Brutes, but upon comparing the things eligible, they can only choose or act
one way. Thus I perceive in my self, and believe that all others so do, that I
can choose nothing but under the Appearance of some Goodness: I cannot choose
my own Misery; or if it fall in my Consideration, I cannot but desire my own
Happiness; and I am sure I am not in these so free as in other things, to which
I have a natural habitual Propension, that will ordinarily prevail tho not
always, and which may be eradicate, as the other cannot; as the Goodwill to
Children, the Reverence of the eminently Excellent, the Compassion of the
Oppressed.

The fourth Distinction of Freedom, is from the Prepossession of those strong
Propensions, which are like the Instincts of Brutes; but these do not exclude
Freedom, but diminish and burden it: for there are sometimes Acts contrary to
these Propensions, and therefore there is no singular Act but might also be
contrary; yet while these Propensions remain, the whole Acts can never be
contrary, and therefore as to the Prevalence the Creature is not free: for
there is a kind of Impossibility to do that always which sometimes can be done:
As he who shooting at a Mark, and hits it once, has the same Powers by which
he may at any time hit it again, and yet it is impossible that he should so do
a thousand times on end; and therefore it is necessary that he should not so hit
it, at least it is certain by a moral Certainty, because God could so influence
him as ever to hit it. Thus it is said, Can the Leopard change his Spots? no
more can ye who are accustomed to do evil, learn to do well.

Liberty then must be a Power to determine and choose, which cannot be hindered
by extrinsick Force, or intrinsic Necessity, which may be three ways. First,
When there is a mere Indifferency, and the Chooser is in aequilibrio compared
to a Balance, wherein neither Scale does decline, but both are in the level,
and this is called the Liberty of Indifferency, when there is no Reason or
Motive for the one part of the Question to be determined more than for the
other: As when one has a Choice of two things so like, that he can find no
difference, and therefore his Liberty in choosing is a Liberty of Indifferency:
As if two Pounds of the same Mass of purified Gold or Silver of the same Shape
be set before a Man at equal distance, with Power to choose either, he will be
troubled with his Freedom, and would be glad any other might determine him, or
that a Lot might determine him, and he will endeavor to pretend some Motive of
Preference; as if he thinks the one nearer, to choose the nearer, or that which
is on the Right Hand, as nearer the working Hand, or that on which the Acies
Oculi first falls. The second Freedom is, where the Scales are not level, but
the one preponderates, yet so that he who chooses has Strength to bring the
Scales to the level; for if he cannot, there is no Freedom, as in the choice of
Good or Happiness: If the declining Balance be superable, there is a
difference if any Inequality be in the Scales; for then that Inequality will be
constant, tho the Weights put in the Scales be equal, which represents the
Choice where there is Prepossession by natural Propension or Habit; if the
superable Inequality be in the Weights put in the Scales, the choice of the
weightier will be with some more pleasure than the choice of the other; and
thence arises a Freedom with Inclination, and a Freedom against Inclination,
and a Freedom without either, which is the Freedom of Indifferency. To
illustrate this Distinction of Freedom, I consider Adam in his Innocence,
choosing the Fruit of the same allowed Tree in Paradise, he could not find a
Difference among them all, and so his Choice was free by Indifferency. But
suppose the Fruit of the forbidden Tree did more provoke the Appetite than any
other, as it is like it did, both from Eve's words, and because it imports
little Devotion to God when there is a mere Indifferency: Therefore at the
first view, the natural Affection would incline to the forbidden Fruit, tho it
might easily have been overcome, by minding Gratitude to God who did forbid it,
and the Penalty of the Breach of that Command: Therefore the Choice of eating
the forbidden Fruit was with Inclination, but the Choice of forbearing it, had
been against the Inclination of the sensible, but with the Inclination of the
rational Appetite. Before the Fall, Adam had the Scales of Good and Evil
superable, but after the Weight of Sin made it insuperable to him, and to all
his sinful Posterity, till they were restored by Grace, then the Inclination
became superable, but the Choice of Good is ordinary contrary Inclination; yet
there is still in things merely indifferent, a Liberty of Indifferency, but in
the State of Glory there shall be always a Choice of Inclination, which through
the Grace and Power of God shall never alter.

There is no small Contention among different Persuasions concerning the
Freedom of Men, whether in Mortality they have any Freedom, and in what Subject
it resides, whether in the Understanding, the Will, or the Affections: Some
will have Man to have a Freedom in all things, and that it is essential to the
Will, that God cannot determine it by infusing any Habit or Inclination, but by
Persuasion, which it may effectually resist and reject. Others attribute a
Freedom to Man in indifferent things, and in the choice of one Sin rather than
another, and in the forbearing or not forbearing a particular Act of Sin; but
that before Grace supervening, there is a moral Impossibility of doing any good
and holy Work, and never a Freedom against the Divine Influence, which may be
sufficiently proved by Reason and Revelation, but it is not proper here to be
debated. All do agree that a Man is not fully free as to his outward Acts,
which are liable to Restraint and Constraint, and there is thence no small
Influence on the inward Acts; for thereby Self-love excludes the thoughts of
these Motives which are opposite to Force in doubtful things; but in things
evident and certain, no extrinsick Force can alter or hinder the inward
Impressions or Acts, but the more a Man is constrained or restrained, the
opposite Desire is the stronger, tho outward Dissimulation be procured.

Then comes the Question, In what inward Faculty or Power Liberty resides? Some
place it in the Affections, when they become pliable to the Will; some in the
Will only without Dependence on the Understanding, but that the Will commands
the Understanding, if not what to judge, at least when to judge, or think: Others
place it in the Will with Subordination to the last Judgment, determining that
it is now fit to act or forbear. But where there can be no real or imaginable
Difference, the Mind does not by a positive Act suspend its Choice, but
privatively cannot choose, because there can be no Judgment of Preference; but
that which appears indifferent, may with more Attention and Meditation appear
not indifferent. Some also place Liberty all in the Understanding; yea some
apprehend the Will to be nothing different from the last Act of the
Understanding, determining what is fit to be chosen, done, or forborne at the
time of the Resolution.

I need not now insist in discussing these, but I conceive the Enumeration is
not full; for there are some Acts which are neither from a Power in the
Understanding, Will, or sensible Appetite, but are immediately subjected in the
Soul or Spirit, as Pleasure, Grief or Pain, which result from the Perception of
certain Objects, and are not the Acts but the Objects of the Understanding,
Will and Appetites, yet certainly are Acts of the Soul; such are all the Acts
which the Schoolmen call actus suppositi: and therefore a Man is only simply
free, when he is neither outwardly nor inwardly overpowered; and yet that
Freedom can neither be an Act of his Understanding or Appetite, for these being
unchanged, outward Force may hinder his Freedom. The Understanding is a
contemplative, but not an active Power: The Will or Appetite cannot compare,
and so cannot prefer one thing to another; but the Spirit by the Understanding
perceives and compares, and the Spirit chooses by the Will; for it understands
by the Understanding, and wills by the Will. The Will of Creatures has no
Activity without it self, and cannot suspend the Judgment, unless the Judgment
be unclear and suspend it self, in not concluding what is best to do or
forbear; yet may it determine what is best to profess, or to prosecute by
Meditation, or by Action.

I shall now return to the Freedom of God, which can no otherwise be known but
by Revelation, or by Reason from his Works: Hence it is evident, that God does
not act all that he could by his absolute and infinite Power; for then there
should be continual and infinite Alterations of all Creatures, new Worlds
should be every moment created, and those that were created annihilated; new
Kinds, new Individuals, new Perfections should be continually multiplied and
destroyed: Therefore God does not act by an intrinsic Necessity, but
determines the Effects of his own Omnipotence.

This may confute their vain Curiosity, who enquire, why God did not sooner
create the World? Why he created but one World? Why no more Kinds? no more
Individuals? no more Perfections? And thence are brought to conjecture, that
there must be more Men than are upon this little Clod of Earth, not descending
from Adam, and it may be not by Generation, yet in other things like to us,
which may be without Sin, as the Angels, and live upon the Moon, or other dark
Planets, like the Earth; yet still Millions of these would have no Proportion
to the Infinite Power of God: therefore Creation must be an Act of God's
Freedom of Indifferency, and so must be the Life and Endurance of the brute and
inanimate Creatures; and there is no Parity in God's acting in these, and in
the Acts of his Justice, and of his other Moral Perfections. They are more
brutish that imagine any Creature to have had its Being from God by Necessity
or Emanation, as many have thought the World to have so been eternally from
God, which would also import that God has not Power to create more than he
has created, or less than he has created, which some have been so absurd as
to imagine; besides those that quibble upon the Impossibility of any other
thing in respect of the Decrees. Seeing God executes all his Decrees by his
sole Will, his Will must be necessarily distinct from his Omniscience, or any
Act of his Judgment in which he differs from all Creatures, whose Will alone
has no extrinsick Operation.

God's Freedom in the Acts of his Moral Perfections, are not by Indifferency,
but commonly by Inclination, and yet are free from absolute Necessity, albeit
not from conditional Necessity, or necessary Consequence; for so whatsoever is
acted while it is acting is necessarily acted, not simply, but conditionally,
because it cannot be both acted and not acted at once. So also all the Acts of
God's Moral Perfections become conditionally necessary, by his immutable Decree
or Promise, and some others are necessary by the Congruity with his Natural
Perfections: Therefore he has said that he cannot deny himself, not in
relation to his Existence, but to his Perfections; and therefore tho he has
Strength and Force sufficient for the contrary Acts, yet he will certainly and
unchangeably ever act as is becoming and worthy of his natural Divine
Perfections, and therefore he has said, that it is impossible for God to lie.
Revelation gives us Evidence, that some of God's Actings are not so with his
Inclinations as others; so it is said of his Punitive Justice, That it is his
strange Work, and that he delights not in the Death of a Sinner, and that he
delights in Mercy above all his Works.

There is an evident difference between the Acts of God's Justice and his
Truth, and between his Bounty and Mercy; his Truth is precise without all
Latitude, his Justice holds exact Proportion with deserving; but his Bounty
and Mercy have no Bounds, nor any respect to deserving: And therefore his Grace
is free by way of Eminence, as being more free than his Justice and Truth.

I know some make no difference between Liberty and Spontaneousness, and make
it consist with absolute Necessity, and that such is the desire of Happiness,
which some think the freest Act, but without ground: for then the brute
Creatures should yet be more free than the rational, and the inanimate than
these; and the Difficulty is not loosed by adding a rational Spontaneousness,
that is, which follows an antecedent Judgment, for then there were no place for
Justice, Rewards or Punishments, and yet Rewards are greatest when the good
Acts are most against Inclination: There is no Reward or Punishment for
indifferent Choices, scarce any Reward for the desire of Happiness, little for
the Compassion of the miserable, less for the Love of Children, Self-love, and
others, as they are nearer or further from Necessity. The Martyrs that would
not deny God before Men to save their Lives from Torture, have the greatest
Glory in Heaven.

I know Liberty uses commonly to be defined, a Power (all things requisite to
act being ready) to do or not to do, which can only extend to that plenary
Liberty of outward Acts, but not to the inward Acts, Choice, Desire, or
Intention, which come not under the Term of doing: and suppose the Term might
be stretched even to these, the chief Requisite is the Act of the Judgment,
determining it fit to do, or to intend, desire, or to attempt to do. If we
suppose these to proceed without an antecedent Judgment, determining it fit
that they should proceed, then it could only be a brute Appetite, and not a
rational, which implies an antecedent Judgment, which yet may be so prompt
without Hesitation or Deliberation, as if the Will acted without an antecedent
Judgment, preferring one side of the Contrariety, or Contradiction.

I conceive Liberty may be better defined the Hability of Self-determination
upon a rational Motive. This will agree both to the Liberty of God and of
Rational Creatures, and to the plenary Power both of the outward and of the
inward Acts, or to the Liberty of the inward Acts only, wherein Liberty does
chiefly reside, and which are exempted from Force and Necessity. I call it an
Hability, which imports more than a Power, which sometimes is not in a present
Capacity to act, and in the Schools is called a Power in actu signato, or in
actu primo, as a sick Man has a Power to walk: The Rule by which the Power is
determined, is the last practical Act of the Judgment about that which is in
Consideration, whether it be the doing, attempting, desiring, intending, or
choosing of something that is in the natural Power, whether it be in the lawful
Power or not; which therefore I understand to be a Judgment, not of what is
judged to be just, but what is judged to be fit in the present Circumstances,
or to be either good, as just, prositable, or pleasant. Liberty consists not
by one single Act, but by different Acts, upon different Occasions or Objects.
There is also a Freedom preferring one thing to another in choosing it, and
rejecting the other, or the rest, if more than two be in the Thought; and this
the Learned call a Liberty ad contraria, as the former is called a Liberty ad
contradictoria, the acting as is judged fit comprehends both. And it is always
even in the most inconsiderate Acts; for tho there be no Deliberation or
Hesitation, yet there must be a Judgment, that the thing is fit to be chosen or
done, which differenceth these Acts from the Acts of Brutes, whose Appetites
follow immediately upon their Perceptions, without any Deliberation or Judgment.

God alone is entirely free, against whose Choice there can be no Resistance;
but he can always hinder Creatures not only to effectuate their Choice, but
even to choose, diverting their Thoughts from any particular Object; and as he
is free from all Force, so from all Necessity, in reference to Creatures: for
an Hypothetick Necessity to choose or act suitable to himself, or as he has
decreed or promised, is not a Necessity more than every thing is necessary
while it is: But he has given Creatures Inclinations importing an absolute
Necessity, and he can, and often does so incline them to any particular Act.

God's Freedom is ever determined by his Moral Perfections, fo that he will
never do any thing which is not suitable to, and becoming his Natural
Perfections, which thereby is called worthy of him, not by the worthiness of
Demerit, but by the worthiness of Congruity or Condignity.

God's Freedom in timing the doing that which is suitable to his Divine
Perfections, is nearer to his Freedom of Indifferency, than his for bearing
things unsuitable to his Divine Perfections; for all his Workings relative to
his Creatures are congruous to his Natural Perfections, yet he did not work the
same from Eternity, nor till the Time determined by his Decrees. He was
eternally blessed in himself before any thing was created, and would have so
been tho nothing had ever been created: Yet the time of Creation, the number of
the Kinds or Individuals, the Kinds and Degrees of their Perfections, Powers,
Faculties and Inclinations, or the Extent and Endurance of his Creatures, are
all from his Liberty of Indifferency.

Such a Freedom was incommunicable to Creatures: for if God had created Angels
and Men with such Propensions, as thereby all their Actions had been necessary,
as are the Acts of inscient Matter, and of Brutes; tho all their Actions had
been good, yet they were neither capable of Virtue, Praise, nor Reward, nor had
they been sitted Objects upon which the Divine Perfections might have been
displayed and glorified; nor had they had natural Powers to have acted
otherwise, and therefore their Freedom had not been like to the Freedom of God.

God did create Man and Angels with Principles and Capacities to act acceptably
to God, and sutably to their own natural Perfections, yet having natural Power
to do Evil by Omission or Commission; but they were not capable of
Infallibility, that they could never act unsutably to the Divine Perfections,
or their own Natural Perfections, whereby they would have been wholly
independent in their actings on Divine Assistance, which had been inconsistent
with the Infinite Perfection of God, which could be no greater: Therefore in
neither case were Rational Creatures capable of such a Freedom as that of God's.

Tho no Rational Creature could be thus infallible by its own intrinsic
Perfections, God in his free Bounty has manifested that he did decree, that
many of his Rational Creatures having a Freedom to do Good or Evil, should
never do Evil, and that only by his own assistant Bounty, whereby he increases
their Propensions to Good, and their Aversions to Evil, in every Circumstance
wherein they were in hazard to have erred after they were glorified, or
confirmed.

The glorified Angels and Saints are in themselves yet fallible, and if they
did fall, were punishable; for the Obligation to Duty is not abolished or
abated, nor the Punishment due for Transgression thereof. It is justly and
truly said, If the righteous Man depart from his Righteousness; his former
Righteousness shall not be remembered, which does not import that he shall
depart: For it is still as true, that if it were possible, even the Elect would
be deceived and fall from Grace, which imports that it is not possible.
Therefore the Impossibility of the Elects falling from Grace, is but an
Impossibility by the Event, and not by the proper Capacities of the Creatures,
not by simple Impossibility from their intrinsic Perfections, but from the
Goodness of God exerted by his Omniscience, that he knows all the Circumstances
in which they were in hazard to fail, and by his Omnipotence, that in these
Circumstances he could so increase their Propension to Holiness and Aversion to
Sin, that they would not fail, and that freely, and not by a natural Necessity.

These things appear to me very clear, and consonant to Reason and Revelation,
and inconsistent with that perverse, but too prevalent Error, that the Freedom
of Creatures does essentially imply, that they can only determine themselves,
and may counteract all Persuasion; these Men admit of no intrinsic Alteration,
which, in opposition to Persuasion, is called a Physical Influence of God.

Hence also it is further evident, that there is a manifest Difference between
things that must be by an intrinsic Necessity, and things that shall be by
Divine Bounty and Providence, and things that only may be; and that all these
are clearly and distinctly known and foreseen by God.

MEDITATION IX. Upon the Blessedness of God, implying his Self-sufficiency,
Self-comprehension, his infinite Love to, and Delight in Himself.
THE Divine Perfections which I have hitherto contemplated, fall all under
single Apprehension, without implying different Considerations, and there is
nothing voluntary in them, but they are absolutely necessary, and do import no
Act of the Will or Pleasure of God. But there are many other Divine Perfections
immediately flowing from his Will or Pleasure relative to himself, or to other
Beings designed to exist by his Purposes or Decrees. All these Perfections, in
distinction from the former, are called Moral Perfections, and are morally
good, as being the Perfections of God in all his Acts flowing from his Will or
Pleasure.

The first and chief of these voluntary Perfections, is God's Love to himself,
comprehending both his Good Will to himself, and his Delight in himself;
supposing the Comprehension of his Nature, and all his Divine Perfections
natural and moral, and all his Decrees and Dispensations.

Albeit there be no real Difference of the Divine Attributes or Perfections,
yet there is that kind of Distinction which is called formal, which is not from
mere Imagination, or alone from the Act of our Understanding, but has a true
Foundation; yea Revelation has manifested a personal Distinction of the
Trinity in Unity, of one only God, and of the Actings of these Persons with and
toward one another, and of the order of their acting in Decrees or
Dispensations toward Creatures, which God has revealed not by single
Expressions, but by the whole Context and Current of the Scripture.

There are three Divine Attributes frequently mentioned in Scripture, the
Blessedness, the Glory, and the Honor of God; all these import more than what
can fall under one single Apprehension. The Blessedness of God must imply God's
Love to, and infinite Delight in himself; his Glory must import his Divine
Perfections as they are manifested to knowing Creatures, who give him Glory in
acknowledging his Divine Perfections; his Honor also must imply the high
Esteem of knowing Creatures of his Divine Perfections, Decrees and
Dispensations. God's Glory and Honor need not several Meditations distinct
from the Divine Perfections in himself, and the Duty of his Creatures in
acknowledging and magnifying the same: But the Blessedness of God ought to have
a more clear and full Consideration, and is proposed as the Subject of this
Meditation, that it may be more clearly apprehended wherein the Blessedness of
God does consist.

Blessedness or Happiness has become a Subject of much Doubt and Disputation
in relation to Rational Creatures, which has mainly arisen from not adverting
the Difference between a complete State of Blessedness wanting nothing
requisite thereto, and between the chief and ultimate Ingredient thereof.
Nothing can be called Blessedness which wants any thing that might breed
Dissatisfaction or Grief to the Subject of it: For even tho that which is
apprehended to be wanting be impossible, and not reasonably to be expected or
endeavored, yet the very apprehension of its being requisite, and the desire
and endeavor to have it, marreth full Satisfaction and Blessedness. There be
many things, the having of which gives Pleasure, but the want thereof does not
raise Grief, and therefore cannot mar Happiness; and the more generous Minds
are more easily happy than others, because they value less minute Pleasures,
and so are happy by enjoying the greater.

The last Accomplishment of Happiness cannot consist in the Delight in, or
Enjoyment of any thing that is not certain, either in its Existence or in its
Perception. The most glorious Angels could not be happy by all their present or
preterit Enjoyments, if they knew not surely that their Enjoyment would never
be altered, which they could not know from their own intrinsic Perfections,
but only from the Promise or declared Purpose of God perpetually to preserve
that happy State.

It is very like that at the first Creation of Angels, God did not assure any
of them to preserve them from falling, until they had given proof of their
Faithfulness, which might have been the first rise to the Fall of those Angels
who were not content with their Station, but thence became murmuring and
malicious against their Creator.

Happiness may rationally be ascribed to many things because of their Connection
with others, from the Complex of which, Happiness does result. As our Savior
in his solemn Sermon declares many to be happy upon different accounts, which
cannot be meant in Consideration of every one of them severally, but of their
Connection with others.

None of the Attributes of Creatures implying Imperfection, are to be conceived
in God, as having Parts capable of Union and Separation, or as having Quantity
by multiplying or diminishing these Parts, without which Bodies cannot be
extended, or their Quantity augmented or diminished, their Parts continuing the
same: All which Parts are impenetrable, not by any positive Power or Quality
resisting Penetration, but by Incapacity to admit the Penetration of any
created Substance, which can only be in the Interstices of Substances, but not
in their Parts: yet God is Omnipresent and everywhere; but whether by his
Infinite Power only, whereby he can create and preserve Creatures without
bounding that Power, or whether by another kind of Expansion different from the
Extension of Bodies, is a great Depth, which has never had a general
Determination amongst Christians, tho there be a strong Inclination in the Mind
of such an Expansion, which has given the rise to that Imagination of the
Immensity of a Body, not only in the visible World, but without it.

I dare not be positive to determine my self in it, yet I am clear, that tho it
were, it could not infer a Difficulty to apprehend the Thoughts of God: For tho
a created Substance having Parts, could not think, but only a Substance having
no Parts; the Divine Immensity would not therefore exclude the Infinite
Knowledge of God; seeing God has no Parts, and is neither capable of Division,
or Union of Parts, nor of any Motion; for being every where, excludes Motion
from one place to another.

The Blessedness of God does imply, First, His infinite Perfections, which
could not possibly be greater: for all Addition of Pleasure from the Existence
of Creatures, is to God, like to the small Dust that casts not the exactest
Balance, and is amongst these smaller Pleasures which do not make Happiness,
nor does the absence thereof raise Grief; for if it were not so, God could not
have been blessed before the Creation: Yea, albeit God has great Pleasure in
his Decrees relating to Creatures, yet these Decrees are voluntary Acts of
God's Purpose, and therefore God might have been blessed abstract from them.

Secondly; The Blessedness of God implies his Self-sufficiency, that is, that
he had all in himself requisite to make him happy, without Dependence upon any
Creatrue, or any Act relating to Creatures; and therefore his Blessedness is
altogether independent upon Creatures.

Some learned Men in the Reformed Church, hold God's Independence to be his
first and most eminent Attribute: But when it is considered, that Independence
is an Attribute still presupposing something that is independent, as the
Subject to which it is attributed, which can be no other than being a Spirit;
for the Apprehension of God comprehends all his Perfections, and all that
rightly can be conceived of him, and therefore must comprehend something which
is as a Subject presupposing nothing, which is his being a Spirit. And
therefore,

Thirdly; The Blessedness of God does not only imply his Independence, that he
has no need of any thing beside himself to make him happy; but it must imply
his infinite Love to himself, that he will never communicate his Divine
Perfections to a mere Creature, as he has often declared, that he will not give
his Glory to another.

God's Love to himself is infinite, and could be no greater, no mere Creature
is capable of such Love; for no Creature is made so perfect, but it might have
been made more perfect, which required greater Love.

God's Love to himself is Self-love, which does justly exceed the Love of all
things else; he has given Self-love to his Rational Creatures, which kept in
its Bounds, is not only lawful, but a requisite Perfection for the Happiness of
those Creatures. But the Self-love of Creatures must not diminish the general
Love to those of the kind, and must be inferior and subordinate unto the Love
of God; and when it exceeds these Bounds, it is no Perfection, but a Vice: and
because it frequently exceeds its Bounds, the Name of Self-love simply expressed,
is taken for a Vice, odious both to God and Mankind; but God can have no Object
more excellent and lovely than himself, and therefore his Self-love is good
without Limit or Bounds.

Fourthly; The Blessedness of God implies God's full Comprehension of all his
Divine Perfections; for tho he had them all, if he did not by a reflexive Act
in order to his own Blessedness, consider them all, he could not be infinitely
blessed.

Fifthly; The last Accomplishment of the Blessedness of God, is his infinite
Delight in himself, and in his own Divine Perfections and Decrees.

This View of all the Divine Perfections and Decrees together, is that
Beatifick Vision, whence is that infinite Delight of God in himself, in which
he is perfectly, eternally, and unchangeably blessed.

God in his Wisdom and Bounty bestows on his glorified Creatures a Blessedness,
having some resemblance of his own, perfected in those Pleasures which are at
his Right Hand for evermore; which must presuppose a State of these Creatures,
having such Perfections that afford them full Satisfaction, that they do not
desire any more, especially when Time is ended, after which there is no more
Alteration to be.

This is that Beatisick Vision of Creatures, whereby they have a much clearer
Idea of God than they are capable of in the State of Mortality: For here we see
darkly as through a Glass, but there we shall see Face to Face. The Face of God
is his Countenance, the shining whereof upon Creatures is the height of their
Happiness, when there is no more fear of his frowning, nor of these Creatures
failing.

These perpetual Pleasures at God's Right Hand, must presuppose the Creatures
knowing by God's declared Decree, that he will never suffer them to offend him,
or to fall from that glorious State: But it chiefly arises from their view of
the Divinc Perfections and Decrees, being then manifested, not only by
Revelation, but by attaining their Effects.

Albeit the Happiness of glorified Creatures have some resemblance with the
Blessedness of God, there is still an infinite difference and distance between
the highest Happiness Creatures are capable of, and the Blessedness of their
Creator. For,

First; No Creature is capable of a perfect view of the Divine Perfections and
Decrees, for these are incomprehensible by Creatures, so that they cannot be in
their View or Thought together distinctly, but only in a general Apprehension
of entire and infinite Perfection, which cannot descend to the Specialities
implied therein; whereas God's View of his own Perfections is distinctly of the
whole, Creatures may in a great measure conceive in their Mind, or apprehend
the Perfections of God, but God alone can comprehend them distinctly altogether.

Therefore it is that glorified Creatures will have an excellent and eternal
Exercise of their Minds, by apprehending distinctly the several Perfections of
God, and his manifold Decrees and Dispensations, which will yield fresh and
renewed Pleasures for ever. We find by Experience that our Thoughts turning
upon a few delightful Objects, give a fresh continuance of Pleasure, albeit the
Perfection of the Objects be but low; How fresh then, and how great must that
Pleasure be, that has the Variety of God's Existence and Nature in being a
pure immaterial Spirit, and all his Divine Perfections natural and moral, and
all his Decrees and Dispensations brought to an unalterable Condition?

Secondly; The Delight and Pleasure of God in himself is infinite, and is
capable of no higher Degree, but Creatures are incapable of any infinite
Perfection; therefore their Delight might by the Power of God be made still
greater, yet it is fully satisfactory in the degree that God freely gives it;
and tho there be different degrees of glorified Angels and Saints, yet all of
them are satisfied without Envy, Emulation, or desire of more than what they do
receive, after the Resurrection and Union of the Souls of Men and their
glorified Bodies.

Thirdly; The Delight of glorified Creatures is not upon Grounds from
themselves, but from the free Gift of God; nor from Perfections wholly in
themselves, but in the Power and Love of God, preserving them from falling in
all occasions of Danger.

MEDITATION X. Upon God's Holiness or Godlikeness.
HAving meditated upon the glorious Divine Perfections of God, which are
natural, necessary and immanent, so far as my narrow Capacity does reach and
apprehend, and in that natural Order, whereby the Antecedent does always make
way for the distinct apprehension of the Subsequent, the first and absolute
Attribute being a Spirit, all the rest being relative, supposing a Subject to
which they relate, of which the nearest to the purely immaterial Spirit of God
is Omniscience, and next thereto Activity by his Will, choosing and
effectuating according to his Pleasure, and then his Omnipotence, extending not
only to what he chooses or wills, but to all that is possible and
consistent, all which are in himself without any Caufe, whereby he is
self-existent and eternal, self-sufficient, infinitely delighting in himself,
and thereby blessed; and as to all transient Acts absolutely free, and fully
independent in his Being, Power, Choice or Operations: I come now to apply my
most serious and humble Thoughts to his voluntary Perfections, the Effects
whereof are terminate upon Creatures; and I have earnestly endeavored to find
the natural Order of these as of the former, which I perceive not only to be
antecedent and consequent, but that they are as Causes and Effects, which does
not import that any thing in God has an extrinsick Cause, or a real
Multiplicity or Difference. I do conceive that God alone does act immediately
by his Being; some have extended that to Creatures, but if without Injury, I
think not without Error. Supposing (for instance) that the Soul of Man
perceives, judges, reasons, chooses by its own Substance, as it is a
Spirit, and that it is but Men's Fancy, that imagine superadded Powers, such as
the Understanding or Will, wherein they seem as much to err in the Defect, as
the common course of the Schoolmen do in the Excess, multiplying real Entities,
as they imagine, as the eternal Essences and Attributes of these things that
have existed, or do exist, and of the real being of things possible, that do
not, never did, nor never shall exist. And supposing a multitude of Accidents
really distinct from any-Substance, and that the same individual Accidents are
separable from one individual Substance, in which they are subjected unto
another, and which consequently could subsist without any Substance, and so not
differ from a Substance by subsisting without a Subject, but are differenced by
having a fitness to perfect a Subject by actual inhering in it, and differing
also from Modes, that these imply an individual Subject from which they are
inseparable; yet they durst not be so gross as to attribute such Accidents to
God, which indeed cannot escape to infer a Composition of separable things.

It seems inconsistent with a created Substance, to act by its Substance, or
immediately. It is true, that if we suppose all the multitude of Species to
differ by Substantials, and consequently by separably subsistent Parts, and so
should conceive the Intellect and the Will to be such; then the Soul would
substantially comprehend the Intellect and the Will, and must act immediately:
but tho the Capacity to Reason and Choice be no substantial Parts, separable
from the Soul, they may still be essential tho not substantial Differences, and
then the Soul acts not immediately, but by the addition of these: and I
conceive it an abusive Speech, and if properly taken, derogatory to God, that
he could not withdraw the Power of Reasoning or free Choice from the Soul of
Man, without annihilating its Substance, but only changing it unto another
kind, which yet might essentially differ from a Brute, which cannot judge nor
compare, no more than reason, but only perceive by Sense, and act by Instinct.
It does much more quadrate to the Glory of God, that he freely gave these
Powers, by which the Soul has the special Nature of Man, and not of Necessity.

That such Powers must be freely superadded to the Substance of Creatures, I
satisfy my self with this Reason, that there are no Substances but Spirits and
Matter, that all the Species of Creatures are by superadded Powers or Modes,
which are not separable Beings; and therefore if a Spirit by its Substance can
reason, choose, worship, or adore, then all Spirits behoved necessarily so to
do; or if Matter, as such, could move or act, all Bodies behoved so to do:
therefore something must be superadded to make the difference, which is neither
Body nor Spirit; therefore it is the incommunicable Property of God to act
immediately.

That the transient Acts of God's Perfections are Causes and Effects, it does
sufficiently satisfy me, that I do not unsutably think of God, when I enquire,
Why does God punish Sin? and resolve that it is because he is just: And if I
yet further inquire, Why is God unchangeably just? I cannot but think it is
either because it is congruous to his glorious Nature to be unchangeably just,
or that he is unchangeably just, only because he will be so. I see no reason
for any third Ground or Rise, whence all God's Decrees and Dispensations do
flow.

I know there be some who think that it would be derogatory to the Freedom and
Absoluteness of God, if all his Dispensations did not arise only from his Will;
but that very Reason infers the contrary Conclusion, because it brings a Reason
why all must flow from God's Will, to wit his Freedom and Absoluteness, which
yet are not his Will, nor from his Will, nor are they moral, but natural
Perfections; and it is evident from Scripture, and acknowledged by all
Christians, that there is a difference between God's Moral Commands, which are
unchangeable, and his positive Commands, which he has changed; and
consequently that there is a difference betwixt the Moral and Positive Law of
God. So that in the Positive Laws or Commands, the Matter is indifferent, and
becomes only morally good by and during the Command; as the Command to forbear
the eating of the forbidden Fruit, he instituted Circumcision, and all the
Ceremonies of the Levitical Law, and many of the Judicial Laws: therefore in
the Moral Commands, there must be something more in the Matter commanded than
in the other, and more than the Command it self.

When the Scripture says, that God cannot deny himself, it cannot be
restrained unto his Will, nor that he cannot deny that he does exist, but that
he cannot deny his essential Natural Perfections, by commanding or doing any
thing unsuitable to them.

The Scripture says expressly, that it is impossible for God to lie; if this
Impossibility were only because of his Will and Decree, then it should be
impossible that God should not do all the Acts of Creation and Providence which
he has decreed: Yea, it would lead to that blasphemous Opinion, That God has
decreed, and has or will do all that is possible for him to do, and that his
Power is no larger than his Will; therefore the Impossibility of God's lying
must not alone be because he has willed or decreed not to lie.

Whatsoever depends upon mere Will, is ambulatory and changeable, by an
opposite Act of the same Will, and both Acts would be equally good. So it is in
the Divine Positive Laws and Precepts which are changed, without Changeableness
in God, because the Change is suitable to his Divine Perfections, especially to
his Freedom of Indifferency; and if he might so change his Promises, his
Faithfulness, and the truth of his Expressions, no Creature could have any
ground of Trust, which would overturn the Faith.

Were it not horrid to imagine, that God who has freely from Eternity decreed,
being considered as prior in the Order of Nature, tho not of Time, to these
Decrees, or as abstract from these Decrees, were indifferent as to Truth and
Falsehood, Justice and Injustice, as he was to the creating of Creatures, or to
the Manner, Kinds and Individuals of them? which some have rather inclined to,
than to suppose that in the Direction of the wickedest Acts, God should not be
an Actor, to maintain a Metaphysical Extension of his being the first Cause.

Some have thought that God is not capable of any Obligation, or Debt to his
Creatures, nor of any other Justice, but that which is called distributive in
Rewards and Punishments, because he cannot be obliged to give or perform to his
Creature, and so not by commutative Justice: but tho that kind of Justice be
commonly called commutative, because it is frequently exerted in exchanging of
one thing for another, yet we must not measure things merely by Names; for the
Obedience of Children, and the Performance of every gratuitous Promise, is not
by distributive, but by commutative Justice. The Apostle Paul accurately
discussing that great Question, Whether Salvation be by Grace or by Works? does
clearly oppose God's giving any thing by Grace, to his giving on the account of
Works, and says in express Terms, To him that works is the Reward not
reckoned of Grace, but of Debt: here the Reckoner and the Rewarder is God, who
accounts himself Debtor of a Reward to him that works Good perfectly
without failing.

I know it sounds yet more harshly to some pious and well-meaning Souls, to say
that God governs his Actions by a Law, supposing it to import, that he is under
a Law, which it does not import; for God is neither under nor above his own
Moral Law, for he is a Law unto himself: And in the narrow Sense that Law is
sometimes taken, as it requires a Sanction by a Penalty, in case of
Transgression, a Law cannot be attributed to God, but that is not essential to
a Law; for many Laws even of Men, have only a Reward annexed and no Punishment,
and others have neither Reward nor Punishment, but the Deeds otherwise done are
only annulled, and made void or ineffectual.

A Debt or Obligation cannot be without a Law, for Law is the Reason or Cause
of an Obligation, by which the Person obliged is determined, and rules
himself, and therefore it is called a Tie metaphorically, whereby one is tied
to walk only as agrees with that Tie; so that unless we should say that a Debt
or Obligation is without a Reason or Cause, we must acknowledge that where a
Debt is, there must be a Reason of it, which is the Law.

It would sound harsher to these tender Souls, to say they worshipped a Lawless
God. It breeds Horror to think how like these Mistakes would render God to
Tyrants, who cannot hear of any other Rule of their Subjects Obedience, but
such is our Pleasure, and who would have themselves thought to be above all
Law, and to be tied by no Obligation to their Subjects.

I know it is like to be thought a bold and useless Curiosity, to enquire into
the Cause of God's Decrees and Dispensations, who does all that he will, and
who may say, What do thou? and who gives account of none of his Matters. But
God's not giving an account of his Matters, is not concerning the Rules of his
Holiness, of which he gives frequently an account, but concerning the
particular Means and Expedients by which he brings his Purposes to pass:
neither is it the question, that he does nothing but what he will do; yea
whatsoever he does, he does it by his Will: but the Question is, Whether he
wills and does upon an anterior Motive, not from the Creature, but from
himself? I mean anterior in the order of Nature. Nor do I think that it is
required of all that are saved to search so high, but of those only to whom God
has given Capacities and Opportunities; for to whom much is given, of them
much shall be required: And tho the simple Ignorance of these things will not
be imputed as an Offense, Errors in these Matters are very dangerous; and
therefore seeing they are so frequently vented in the World, it is not only
profitable but necessary to prevent or cure Errors concerning the
Representation and Character of God, Reason being given in Scripture so often
from such Grounds, and not from mere Will.

And beside, it is of excellent use to understand the Divine Nature, which
raises and increases the Admiration and Adoration of God, and the highest,
purest, and least selfish Love to him, and the greatest Reverence and
Obsequiousness to his Pleasure: the meanest Capacity may love God, because he
has promised them Happiness by Repentance and Faith; and much more the Love of
Gratitude may arise from the sense of his giving of these Graces, yet there is
a small Proportion between the glorious Excellency of God in relation to a
particular Creature, and his Glory shining forth to the whole Creation, and
must produce a far greater measure of Love and Reverence, which are much
weakened by attributing any thing to him unworthy of him. However none can
justly blame me to clear my own Thoughts, and raise them as high as I can; and
I do bless God for the increase of Love and Reverence he gives me thereby.

I am persuaded that the rise of most of God's Decrees and Dispensations are
from the Congruity thereof to his natural Perfections, as becoming and being
worthy of such a Being: I say it is a Congruity to his natural, not to his
moral Perfections; for he is not just because he is true, nor true because he
is just, nor gracious or merciful because he is just or true. But when I
consider what is congruous to, worthy and becoming a Spirit omniscient,
omnipotent, self-existent, all-sufficient, infinitely blessed, free and
independent, and then put the Question to my self, Must not such a Being be
just, exactly fulfilling all his Promises, encouraging and rewarding the Good,
discouraging and punishing the Evil according to their Merit? I am fully
persuaded he must be such, not by a fatal Necessity, nor by mere Indifferency,
but by a voluntary and free Choice.

And when I further pose my self, whether such a Being will only perform his
Promises, reward and punish according to Merit? I am convinced it is congruous
to him to be good, bountiful, gracious and merciful beyond what his Justice
requires, and that without any Bounds, as in his Justice, which precisely
follows his Promise, or what is congruous for him to do upon occasion of the
good or evil Actions of his Creatures.

When I consider, Whether such a Being will always express his Mind truly, and
never deceive? I can have no doubt of it.

If again I consider, Whether such a Being will ever choose fitted Means for
all his Purposes, and do nothing in vain? I am assured that he is infinite in
Wisdom, and will do nothing in vain.

And lastly, when I consider, Whether such a Being will ever be constant in his
Purpose, and be unchangeable therein, and in his Justice, Bounty, Truth and
Wisdom? I know he cannot change in these, because they are all congruous to his
unchangeable Nature.

By this Congruity I understand God's Holiness or Godlikeness, that is, that
God acts always like himself.

There is nothing more frequently inculcated in Scripture, than Godliness and
Holiness, which are originally and principally attributed to God, and in
Analogy to his Rational Creatures: it shall be the eternal Exclamation of all
God's happy Creatures, Holy! Holy! Holy Lord God Almighty.

I do not take Holiness to be as a Metaphysical Abstract from all God's Moral
Perfections, but that it is the precise and formal Reason, why they are morally
good.

Holiness in the Creature (or Godlikeness which is the same) consists chiefly
in the Creatures being Godlike, that is, imitating the Divine Moral
Perfections, in being just, being true, prudent and constant; but in other
Duties of Holiness, the Likeness to God is more analogical, and less proper:
The Analogy consists in this, that as God acts always congruously to the
Divine Nature, so the Rational Creatures ought to act congruously to that
Nature, and those Principles that God has freely imprinted in their Minds; so
they ought to adore God, to obey him in all his Commands, to trust in him, and
to be temperate in every thing, and to subordinate Self-love to the Love of God.

Holiness is also taken for the Destination of things to the Service of God,
and separated from common Use, which therefore is called Consecration.

I know the immediate Rule of the Creatures is the Will of God, obliging them
to obey, not only what is congruous to the Divine Nature, or to their own
Nature, but whatsoever positive Law or Precept God does command: tho the Matter
be indifferent, and that they may sufficiently be assured that he will never
command any thing incongruous to himself; yet it is of great use to know the
difference between Moral and Positive Commands; for the Glory and Amiableness
of God appears far more in the one than in the other, albeit the Positive
Commands of God do indispensibly require full Obedience, which is from an
inbred Principle in the Mind of all Rational Creatures.

I am not troubled that it may be said, that the Scripture Phrase is most of
the Perfection of God, and of his Justice, Goodness, Mercy and Truth; for all
is still mentioned as his Holiness and Godlikeness, and many Cases do and may
occur, that we cannot so clearly refer to these particular Terms, as we can
know whether it be congruous for God so to do or not; neither does the
Scripture express and define wherein Holiness consists, but by the Expression
of Godliness, or Likeness to God: And although Perfection be frequently attributed
to God, yet Godliness is a more distinct Term; for we must not explicate
Godliness by Perfection or Goodness, lest we should fall in the Apprehension
that has misled many, that God would have shown more Goodness to have
prevented all Sin, and that there must be more Worlds than this, at least more
Species of Creatures than upon the Earth: but we must explain God's Goodness
with Congruity to his Nature, which comprehends his Freedom, whereby it is not
congruous to him to communicate all the Good he can, which would never
terminate nor be stable, but that he acts freely, and that it were impossible
for us to know what Good he has done or will do, if he had not revealed it.
Some of the Fathers, and many since, have fallen into that Error, that God's
Goodness does not admit that he should punish any Creature eternally; and tho
the Scripture says the contrary expressly, they produce other places to prove
that Eternity is sometimes taken for a very long Time.

Becomingness or Decency is vulgarly attributed to the Modes or Forms of
Behavior, and so it is said by the Apostle, Let all things be done decently,
and in order; which does neither declare nor constitute that Decency as a kind
of a Christian Virtue, but as a Recommendation of what is expedient. The
Scripture makes an express Distinction between that which is unlawful, and
that which is inexpedient; so that kind of Decency is a part of Civility. No
serious Man can imagine that every undecent Gesture or Expression is a Sin.
Hence it may seem that the precise Nature of Holiness cannot consist in
Becomingness or Congruity to the Nature of God, or of Creatures, which could
only amuse the Vulgar, who lay too much weight upon Words and Terms; as if the
appropriating the Name of Decency or Comeliness to the least of Civil Virtues,
in which there is no Speciality, did import that there were not an higher
degree of Decency; but if Words import, those of the Learned must be of the
most Importance. The Greeks, which were the learned of Nations, have no other
word to express Virtue, but (...), that which is comely and becoming; and
therefore the Divine Virtues cannot be fitlier expressed than by (...), and the
Human Virtues by (...). By the Reasonings in Scripture from what is becoming,
God does assure his unchangeable Justice, Shall the Judge of all the Earth do
unjustly? And when the Apostle to the Hebrews gives the Reason why God did
require the Suffering of his Son to expiate Sin, he says, For it became him,
for whom are all things, and by whom are all things, in bringing many Sons to
Glory, to make the Captain of their Salvation perfect through Sufferings. I
stumble not that it may be objected, that it is an unwarrantable Boldness to be
positive what is becoming the glorious Nature of God, and no less unwarrantable
to make Conjectures thereupon; for such Objections (if true) would eradicate
all the inbred and self-evident Conceptions of God, that he is benign, just and
true, as to which the Mind seeks for a Reason; that seeing these are free Acts,
Why is God unchangeable in them? Nor does the Mind acquiesce, that he is so
unchangeable because he will be so; for it still urges that his Will is the
most rational Inclination, and therefore the Question returns, Why does he
unchangeably will so? when this Return is made, that these are congruous to,
and suitable or becoming such a Nature, that is rested in as a self-evident
Proposition: For as God has imprinted on the Soul of Man by Sense a
self-evident Apprehension of Proportion, Symmetry and Beauty, of which no Man
craveth, nor can any Man give an anterior Reason; so there is more Reason, and
no less Clearness, that he has given the like Evidence to the Mind in the
Apprehension of what is congruous, suitable and becoming an infinitely blessed,
and all-sufficient Being, which does also appear in most other Objects, of
which none do require a Reason, which does best appear in Negatives, as that it
is not becoming a Man to be fearful, or bashful, which yet is not unbecoming a
Woman: Or that it is unbecoming an old Man to be delighted in Toys like a
Child, or a Divine to be in a Warlike Posture with a Military Batton, or
Plumashes; or a Judge to be partial, or unjust: as it is said of God, Shall the
Judge of the whole World do unjustly? the Reason is implied, that the highest
Judge cannot possibly do unjustly, not for want of Power, but because he is the
highest Judge. May it not as well be said, that it is a Boldness for Creatures
to be positive in determining what are God's Perfections, as what is suitable to
a self-existent, self-sufficient, free and fully blessed Being to do toward
Creatures? which do arise in the Minds of all that consider, tho they reach not
all God's Perfections in particular, or never thought upon many of them, but on
the comprehensive Conception of God.

That the Holiness of God and of Creatures consists in the Congruity of their
voluntary Actions to their Natures; that they do such things as are worthy of
their Natural Perfections, not by the worthiness of Merit; but of Symmetry and
extension of the Usefulness of their Natural Perfections, is further confirmed
by many Sentences of Scripture, persuading them to act from that ground; as
Paul to the Romans says, Let us walk honestly, as in the Day. The word
translated honestly is (...), that is, becomingly: And several Christian Duties
are persuaded to be done as (...) or (...), that is, pertinent, or worthy of
the Actor. As also Paul to the Colossians says, We do not cease to pray for
you, and to desire that ye might be filled with the Knowledge of his Will in all
Wisdom, and spiritual Knowledge, that ye might walk worthy of the Lord, unto all
pleasing. And the same Apostle to the Thessalonians says, That ye would walk
worthy of God, who has called you to his Kingdom. And to the Philippians, Only
let your Conversation be such as becomes the Gospel of Christ. And to the
Ephesians, I therefore the Prisoner of the Lord, beseech you that ye walk
worthy of the Vocation wherewith ye are called. And thereafter, But
Fornication, and all Uncleanness, nor Covetousness, let it not be once named
among you as becomes Saints. In all which, both the Knowledge of that Dignity,
Decency and Congruity, is supposed rather than revealed, and is persuaded
thence, and not merely from the Command. The Scripture attributes to God the
Beauty of Holiness, and to the Mediator, that he is altogether lovely; and
there is nothing it inculcates more than the Glory of God and his Majesty, all
which are several degrees of Comeliness: for nothing can be nearer Comeliness
than Beauty, which stands most in a Symmetry or Congruity, whereby the Eye of
the Body or Mind is affected; and the proper Nature of Glory is shining or
resplendent Beauty, and therefore in the highest degree is proper to God alone.
Majesty is the Beauty or Comeliness of the Appearance and Deportment,
manifesting Magnanimity and Magnificence, Stateliness and Prudence, and is only
to be attributed to Sovereign Princes, and in the highest degree to God alone;
and yet is wholly in Symmetry and Sutableness to what becomes that Greatness:
and therefore Holiness or Godlikeness must needs comprehend the most
transcendent Glory and Majesty in the Divine Deportment of God by his voluntary
Actings, suitable to his Divine Natural Perfection.

MEDITATION XI. Upon the Unchangeableness of God.
HAving cleared my self concerning the Holiness of God, by the distinctest
Conception thereof I can reach, I am fully satisfied that it is the source of
all the Divine Decrees and Dispensations, and that thereby God does ever aim
and act like himself.

I do thence by immediate and necessary Consequence perceive, that God never
has, nor never will design or do any thing that is not like himself. That were
incongruous to, and unworthy of, and unbecoming the infinite Glory and Beauty
of his Holiness, wherein he must be unchangeable, not by any fatal Necessity,
but by his free Choice.

I know the Unchangeableness or Immutability of God may and uses to be further
extended, and to be taken not only actively for the Unchangeableness of his
Decrees and Dispensations, but passively for the Unchangeableness of his Being
and Natural Perfections, whereby he is altogether impassible; because no
Creature can have any Activity, which could have a Physical Operation upon God:
Yea if we should suppose (that which is impossible) that there could be another
of infinite Power, as in all things it would be inconsistent with the Deity, so
evidently and eminently in this, that it could never be more powerful than God,
and therefore he behoved to be able to resist all Impressions and Alterations
from it. But Unchangeableness in this sense differs nothing from the
Omnipotence, and other natural Perfections of God. The Unchangeableness I now
think on is God's active Unchangeableness, whereby all his Decrees are suitable
to himself, and all his Actings are unchangeably conform to his Decrees.

I know that in the right Apprehension of this, as in all other the Divine
Perfections, there is great need of Wariness and Caution, lest one of them
should be conceived to be inconsistent with, or incroach upon another; and
therefore I might be apt to mistake (as others have done) the Unchangeableness
of God, as if it were inconsistent with his Unchangeableness, that upon
different occasions he should act differently. I have seen of late, and not
without Abhorrence and Admiration published in Print, by one that pretends to
be a great Divine in the Roman Communion, that God is only a common Cause,
working like the Sun, Moon, or Stars, without Consideration of any particular
Circumstances, but that all Specialities are acted by Christ, whose
Understanding being finite, as Man, cannot comprehend all things at once, and
therefore the Specialities arise as things fall in his Thoughts.

It is another strange enough Misapprehension of the Unchangeableness of God,
as if it did import, that he could not have Consideration of the Actings of his
free Creatures in any of his Decrees, but behoved with as little Consideration
of deserving to design the Rejection and eternal Misery of some, as of the
giving of Grace and eternal Glory and Blessedness unto others. It were
injurious to imagine, that Learned and even Pious, and for the main Orthodox
Divines could have admitted so harsh a Character of the blessed and infinitely
amiable God, if their Mistake of the precise Import of God's Unchangeableness
had not carried them unto that Supralapsarian Way.

Others apprehend it must imply a Changeableness in God, if his Divine
Perfections had any Effect at one time that they had not at another, and when
they see Scripture and Providence full of the contrary. For instance, that the
Power of God was not always exerting it self in Creation, or in the punishing
of some, and pardoning, accepting and glorifying of others; yet to maintain
their Misapprehension of God's Unchangeableness, they strain their Invention to
find a Reconciliation, and say, that there was not any other Act of the Divine
Will, Power or Perception, but his eternal Decree, from which alone all these
Effects followed; so that the Act of Creation was only that Decree as breaking
forth in its Effect: yea to exclude Changeableness in Knowledge, they must also
allow, that in the beginning God knew not that he was creating, or that
Creatures were brought forth, and not till then, which did import no alteration
of the Perfection of God's Knowledge, because he did as clearly know all things
that were to come to pass from Eternity, as when they did come to pass; yea,
and knew no more as to the Matter, but as to the Being, future, present, or
preterit: No Invention can avoid that God knows that the World was once to
come, and now is, and that the Flood was to be, and is now past; Could they
also give an account how the same Decree could take Effect by one Act of the
Divine Will, and yet at so immense distance of Time? Certainly there was no Act
of God's Power different from his Will in the Decree; and if there was a Power
different from the Will, it did not then begin to exert it self, how then
should that Act of the Will be efficacious, that from Eternity had no Effect
till the beginning of Time? And how should the Will of the ending of Time be so
long after the beginning, which could not be by the mere Negation of willing,
but behoved to be by a positive Act of the Divine Will, that such Acts of the
same Will should be longer without Effect than others? So that one Act of his
Will should suspend the Effect of another; whereas the Scripture does always
distinguish God's Decrees from his Dispensations, and Working. Our Savior
says expressly, Hitherto my Father works, and I work. Must we thence say,
Hitherto my Father decrees, and I decree? And tho it be said, that all God's
Purposes take Effect, it is also said, that all things come to pass according
to God's Purpose, which explaineth the manner of their taking Effect, not by
his Purpose, but by the Performance of it, in working according to it.

The genuine and proper Subject of Changeableness or Unchangeableness, as to
Acting, originally is in the Purpose, or Intention; for no rational Being can
operate rationally, but by an Intention to work, whether the Intention be
before, or with the Operation, and therefore is changed by the change of the
Intention: Therefore God's Unchangeableness does precisely consist in this,
that his eternal Purpose or Intention, being fully suitable to his Divine
Nature, could therefore never be changed, and by his Omnipotence it could never
fail of the intended Effect: So that his Unchangeableness is not that he acts
ever the same thing, but that he acts ever sutably to his glorious Nature,
and does unchangeably perform what he purposes. No Creature could know God's
eternal Purposes, Decrees or Intentions, or what his Will were, without
Revelation, but by knowing what were congruous and suitable to the Divine
Nature. Our innate Conceptions of the Divine Actings are chiefly in our
Apprehension of what is suitable to the Divine Nature; from whence we infer his
Unchangeableness, Justice, Benignity, Mercy, Faithfulness and Truth, which we
do not perceive so soon, or so clearly as the other. We may and do often doubt
concerning several Dispensations, whether they flow from God's Justice,
Benignity or Mercy, being yet very clear that they are congruous to his
glorious and blessed Nature.

God's Unchangeableness does not import, that he has always the same Love of
Beneplacence and Beneficence to his Elect, before they were converted as after,
and when they fall in presumptuous Sins, for which he withdraws his
Countenance, their Peace and Joy, and does correct them, as when they consider
their Ways and repent, and he cherishes and comfort them, albeit his Love
of Benevolence to them is ever the same, because in all these he acts sutably
to himself.

I abhor their Folly who think, that Sin is no more Sin, nor no more to be
sorrowed for in the Regenerate, or that God has relaxed his Justice, in making
that which was Sin against his Moral Law to become no more Sin, which would
indeed import a Mutability in him.

It is also a groundless and empty Notion, to infer from God's
Unchangeableness, that there can be no more nor no less Motion in the World,
than at the Creation, or that there shall be no more or fewer saved of Mankind,
than fell of the Angels.

I do also admire and abhor their Error, who hold that God's Love of
Benevolence to the same Creature can change, seeing it flows from his mere
Grace, and from no good thing in the Object; Whence then should the occasion of
the Change arise? This Imagination not only incroaches upon the
Unchangeableness of God, but upon the Omniscience of God; for if he did
foreknow all that every Creature would do, tho his Benevolence did arise from
their Actings, yet it could not be from the singular Acts, but from the
Prevalence. Were it then possible that from Eternity he should have Good Will
and Hatred to the same Person? much less that he should have so many Changes of
it? If he did foreknow that after the attainment of Grace, that Creature would
finally forsake him, could it consist that he should have the Love of
Benevolence to that Creature? The Lord has said, I am God and change not, and
therefore the Sons of Jacob are not consumed: And whom he loves, he loves to
the end; which can only be understood of his Love of Benevolence, not of his
Complacence: The Reason of the Difference is manifest, because his Benevolence
is anterior in the Order of Nature, to any moral Goodness in the Creature,
which are the Effects of it, but his Beneplacence presupposes Goodness given
by God to the Creature.

This Unchangeableness of God is further illustrated by his Omniscience; for
from Eternity knowing all things that were to come to pass, there could no
unexpected Case arise that might give occasion to him to change, and therefore
this Unchangeableness is an incommunicable Perfection of God. Creatures could
not act sutably to their Natures, and to their Duty, if in many of their
Purposes they should not change, if Matters of moment that they expected not
should occur: their Constancy reaches no further, than that upon small and
light Occasions which they might neglect or contemn, they would not change
their professed Resolutions in Matters of moment.

The Unchangeableness of God imports not that he is inexorable, and that it
is in vain to pray to him, because he has from Eternity immutably decreed all
things that were to come to pass; and indeed it were a too hard Objection, if
God did not determine with Foresight and Consideration of the earnest Desire
and fervent Supplication of his Creatures, as the Object of his Decree, and not
as the mere Antecedents of it: But seeing he does so decree, we may with as
good Warrant and Confidence supplicate, as if he were undetermined when we
pray; whence only there can a rational Account be given why we should pray with
Divine Approbation, even in relation to the Change of inscient Nature, as
against Drought, Barrenness, Inundations, etc. Are we thereby allowed to
implore of God a Miracle, that by his Omnipotence he should alter the course of
Nature? No, but because he has so ordered the course of Nature, upon his
foresight of the Necessity, and of the earnest Desire and Supplication of his
Creatures, so that it should be correspondent to their Desire.

It does not import a Changeableness in God, that he does not inflict the
Judgment he denounces against Sinners, generally or particularly: And when he
said to Adam of the forbidden Fruit, In the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall
surely die: Or when Isaiah from the Lord, said to Hezekiah, Set thy House in
order, for thou shall die and not live; And yet by the same Prophet he says, I
have heard thy Prayer, I have seen thy Tears, behold I will heal thee, and thou
shall go up to the House of the Lord on the third day, and I will add unto thy
Days fifteen Years: And when by Jonah he prophesied to the Ninevites, Yet forty
Days and Nineveh shall be overthrown; which doubtless has been upon a
particular atrocious Sin, for which they humbled themselves with Fasting and
Mourning in Sackcloth; and tho their Mourning was not Repentance unto Eternal
Life, yet thereupon God forgave their Overthrow which he had threatened. These
and like places signify not God's Will, which is never without Effect, but the
Sanction of his Justice, intimating what is deserved, or to be observed as his
Pleasure.

I know some Men have considered the Intimation of Hezekiah's Death, and
Nineveh's Overthrow, as Predictions; wherein not only the Unchangeableness, but
the Veracity of God is concerned: And there is a whole Treatise written on that
Subject, whether the Term of Life be determined and fixed, and different
Judgments thereon, which I think strange, that any thing should be supposed
undetermined by the eternal Decree of God, to do or permit any thing that was
to come to pass, seeing it is expressly said, Known unto God are all his Works
from the beginning. But the Addition to Hezekiah's Life, imports no more than
God's not inflicting his threatened Judgment against Hezekiah for his Confidence
in his own Strength, by his Armor and Treasury, which he show to the
Messengers of Babylon: Nor is it congruous to say, that the Prophet's Design
was to show when Hezekiah by the course of his Nature would die; for it is
evidently a threatening for his Pride and Self-confidence, which appeared more
after his Recovery, but it was lurking before: For before his Sickness it is
said, that he was magnified in the sight of all Nations. There is no Example
where God did ever use such Expression, but in the way of threatening for Sin:
Neither do I like that Interpretation of Jonah's Denunciation, that there was
ever a secret Exception of Repentance in the Denunciation of all Judgments,
which the Ninevites by the Light of Nature knew, seeing Jonah did not know it,
but was angry that God spared Nineveh, lest he might be thought a false
Prophet. But it is certain and frequent in Scripture, that when God denounces
Evil for Sin, it is no Prediction, but a Threatening, importing no more, but
that it is just to be inflicted, if there be no Redress.

MEDITATION XII. Upon the Goodness of God.
I Do conceive that the first Divine Perfection in the natural Order arising
from God's Unchangeableness, Godlikeness or Holiness in relation to Creatures,
is his Goodness; for the Acts of his Goodness behoved to be before the Acts of
his Justice, Mercy and Faithfulness, all which presuppose the Existence of
Creatures, but the giving or designing to give them Existence: and such a
Nature as God gave them, are Acts of mere Goodness which no Meritmonger can
pretend to arise from any thing in the Creature; and therefore the clearest way
to a distinct Apprehension of the Divine Perfections, is to follow their
natural Order.

Goodness is in ordinary use of very different Significations, sometimes it
comprehends all Perfections natural and moral: For all that is morally good,
or that is profitable and pleasant, are comprehended in that kind of Goodness,
to which all the Acts of Reason are bounded, and it is not within the Latitude
of the largest Freedom to choose any thing but what in some of these ways is,
or appears to be good. But Goodness in this Latitude is not to be attributed to
God, who never acts upon mere Appearance; but all his Actings toward
Creatures are morally good, even then when the Effect is naturally evil, as it
is said, There is no Evil in the City, which the Lord has not done.

The Goodness of God is also taken as comprehending all his Moral Perfections,
by which it is said, that he is good, and does Good, and that there is none
good but one, that is God, who only is absolutely and infinitely good: but the
Goodness of God here proposed is distinct from his Justice, Mercy and Truth,
and is more exactly expressed by his Bountifulness or Benignity.

The Goodness of God is likewise taken as it comprehends his Faithfulness and
Mercy, which are his most eminent Goodness and Benignity; but here it is
understood for that Goodness of God to his Rational Creatures, which is without
Consideration or Connotation of any thing in these Creatures, and is so
distinguished from Faithfulness, which presupposes Trust, or Expectation in
the Creature of some Good, which is suitable to his excellent Nature to give to
those that do depend, trust or wait on him for it, and yet is not as an Act of
Reward in Justice. Mercy imports Compassion to a Miserable Creature, chiefly in
and for Sin, and Forgiveness of the Sin, and Restitution from the Misery: But
the Goodness which I now consider, is that which is freely bestowed upon the
Creature, presupposing nothing in it, of which there are exceeding many
degrees, whereof some are anterior to Sin and Misery, and some are posterior,
and yet are not the Acts of Mercy. For when Adam had fallen from his Innocence,
and from the Favor of God, it was an Act of Mercy by the Mediator to pardon
him, and to restore him unto the Favor of God; but it was not an Act of Mercy
to raise him to an higher degree of Happiness than he had when he fell, by
which he could never fall again from the Favor of God.

The first Act of God's Goodness and Bounty was in the creating of Rational
Creatures, which in their Essence did necessarily imply Understanding, by which
they could perceive their Creator, themselves, and other Objects, and could
judge of the Attributes of these Objects, and deduce Consequences from these
Judgments, and determine their own Choice of what they thought best, with a
Power to act the same: all which is implied in the Essence and Being of a
Rational Creature, and there can nothing be imagined more free and abstract,
than God's Goodness, in giving this Existence to Rational Creatures, which were
of two kinds, Angels and Men; Angels exerting all their Faculties with outward
Objects, having Communication with them either immediately, or by Impressions
upon them by a Medium: For unless Angels knew the Thoughts of God, Angels and
Men, and the distant Actings of extrinsick Objects, without intervention of a
Medium, which I am far from believing (and which is an incommunicable
Perfection of God, who can be passive in nothing, but knows all things actually
in his own Decrees) I must believe that Angels communicate their Thoughts by
some Signs in a Medium, and do so perceive the Thoughts and Actings of other
Objects: tho it was not necessary the manner of the Knowledge of Angels should
be revealed, yet I may safely remove from them what God appropriates to
himself, to know Thoughts without any outward Sign; yet God communicates to
Angels by a Medium, or immediately.

I do sufficiently know by Revelation that some Angels were created with far
greater Perfection of Knowledge and Strength than Man; one Angel did in one
Night kill fourscore and five thousand Men.

I doubt nothing that by the Goodness of God there were inbred Principles of
Knowledge and Inclination in Angels, as well as in Men, by which they were
innocent and holy, while they did follow them, but changeable, when so great a
Multitude of them fell from their Innocence, and the Favor of God: And tho the
elect Angels who persevered have the same changeable Nature, they could not be
justly called happy, if God had not added a farther degree of Goodness,
confirming them against all danger of falling, whence he calls them in his Word
Elect Angels, which I do not think to be an Act of God's Primitive Justice,
being so high a Perfection, that they could never merit it by being innocent
during the time of their Trial, but that it was by the free and undeserved
Goodness and Bounty of God.

The Angels by their Nature had no Power of Propagation of their Kind, but for
any thing appears they were created all together, and none of them depended
upon another, but in so far as some might have greater Knowledge and Strength
than others, and so Beelzebub is called the Prince of Devils, and it is like he
has been the Author of the Fall of the rest, as it is certain he was the
Seducer of Man.

The Nature of Man (as the Scripture tells us) was lower than the Angels, and
his Soul was incorporate with a Body fitted with Instruments apt for exerting
all his Capacities by the receiving the Impression of outward Objects through
the Senses, all having Communication to the Brain by the Nerves and Spirits, by
which the Soul is passive, and by the same Nerves, Spirits and other
Instruments are fitted to exercise Motion, and act upon outward Objects, and
upon the Parts of their own Bodies. These Specialities are in the specific
Nature of Angels and Men, and therefore I reckon each of them but as Gifts of
the Bounty of God.

All other Creatures were created in farther Manifestation of the Perfections
of God, which is his Glory, and for the use of Angels and Men. I think it too
great Partiality in those who make all the inferior Creatures to be designed
for Man's use only, and not for Angels, who have greater Pleasure in the
knowledge of them, and of the Glory of the Divine Perfections shining in them,
than Man; and tho Man has more need of them, and Benefit by them, yet the
Angels are not without both, in making use of them as Instruments, in
Communication outwardly by them, and inwardly in them.

The free Bounty of God did imprint upon the Soul of Man the first Principles
of his Knowledge of Things that fall not under Sense, without which he could
never have had firm and clear Knowledge, albeit he had the Capacity to discern
Implications and Consequences, downward from Causes to Effects, and upwards
from Effects to Causes; for if there were not some Principles self-evident, the
Chain of Consequences might run without end.

The Bounty of God did also give to Man the Capacity to know Consequences,
which makes a great addition to his Perfection.

God did likewise in his Bounty give Man the distinguishing Acts of Joy and
Sorrow, the one arising from Objects congruous to his Nature, and useful for
him; the other from Objects unsuitable, and hurtful to him, that he might
approach the one and fly from the other: So that Joy and Grief are not at Man's
Discretion, but have their peculiar Objects, by the Impression whereof on the
Sense, Imagination, or Memory, they are excited, and not otherwise. I know no
sufficient Reason why such Sounds should be harmonious and sweet to the Ear,
and others harsh, than this free Gift of God: For tho some Difference might
arise from the grating of the Ear, or the easy insinuating in it, I see not how
that could go the length of the Pleasure of Harmony, or Displeasure of Discord;
nor can there another sufficient Reason be given of the Pleasure arising from
certain Figures and Colors, and of the Displeasure from others, nor of that
great variety of Smells and Tastes, or of the Pleasure that arises from the
Touch, beside that Smoothness or Ruggedness, of any pungent Impression.

It is a farther degree of God's Bounty, that he gave Man so many Senses, by
which he might perceive the Impression of all bodily Objects, and receive
Pleasure and Profit by them, and shun Displeasure and Hurt. Food being
necessary for the Subsistence of Man, God has placed three Senses as Sentinels
at different distances, warning what Food is convenient or inconvenient for
him. The Eye sees ordinarily at the farthest distance, by which at the view his
Appetite is moved, the very Brutes at view discern their Food and Physic more
exactly than Man, because he has the use of Reason and Experience; but many
things which cannot be discerned by the Sight, being brought near the Nose will
be discerned by the Smell; and what cannot be so distinguished, will be
discerned by the Taste.

The Bounty of God has yet further gratified Man, by variety of Creatures,
affecting all his Senses, not only for his Necessity, but for an innumerable
variety of Pleasures.

There is a several kind of Perfection by the Goodness of God given to Man, in
the wonderful Structure of his Body, wherein there is such variety and
multitude of Instruments serving for the use of the Soul, that there is nothing
in it or of it, but what is befitted to be an Instrument of the Soul, that all
the Industry of Physicians till of late, made a very small Progress, by
Inference from the sensible Effects of the Body of Man, or by Anatomical
Inspection; and every day there are new Discoveries made, wherein the late
Invention of Microscopes helps much, discovering these minute Vessels, which
are impossible otherwise to be seen; so that the Psalmist cries out with
Admiration, I am fearfully and wonderfully made! No Man has yet given any
probable account of the Formation of the Body of Man, or other Animals, nor how
the Bones do grow in the Womb of her that is with Child. Whence there is a
great Check to Man's Presumption, who is so slow in acknowledging a Being
superior to himself, and so apt to admire his own Knowledge, as if there were
nothing he could not reach, when yet he knows so very little of his own Body.

The Comeliness and Beauty of Man's Body is a farther degree of the Bounty of
God, which tho it be much marred, has in some so much remaining, whence it may
be considered, how great the Beauty of Man was before the Fall, and shall be
yet much more after the Resurrection of the Elect; for they shall be like unto
Christ's glorious Body. It were but a vain Curiosity to inquire what Alteration
in Man's Body would be congruous unto that State.

The Bounty of God is signally seen in the admirable Union of the Soul and
Body, which are two diverse Substances, which can and do subsist apart, and are
of the most different Natures, and yet are so firmly united, that the Soul will
never desert the Body, were it never so unfirm and crazy, while it can exercise
its Faculties by it, and does so love it, that it feels all things that make
Impression upon it, it has Pleasure in all that befits the Body to be its
Instrument, and Grief or Pain on the perception of all that is hurtful to the
Body: Yea it apprehends not only that the Grief and Pain, but that the Hurt
that causes it is subjected in the Soul it self, the Excess and Abuse of which
makes Men reflecting upon themselves to apprehend themselves much more as a
Body, than as a Spirit; as if the Soul were subordinate to the Rody, and its
chief Use were only to enliven and preserve it: And therefore in the sharp
Pains, confounding Terrors, or excessive Joys, arising from Sense or
Imagination, the Soul can hardly admit of another Thought, by still reflecting
upon these; and therefore sensible Pleasures do divert and seduce the Soul from
Objects and Delights which are more spiritual, and suitable to it self, more
noble and sublime, the increase or continuance whereof will never breed
loathing or lessening of their Pleasure thence arising, as sensible Pleasures
do: yet this is not to be imputed to, nor does it blemish the Goodness of God,
in giving sensible Pleasures, which cherish and befit the Mind when rightly
used. The Stoical Severity does not a little reflect upon the Wisdom and
Goodness of God.

There is no small Debate among the Learned about the Cause of the Union of the
Soul and Body, which I am not now to prosecute; but I cannot so well satisfy my
self, as by apprehending that this Union is by an Instinct freely given of God
to the Soul, by which it does so cleave to the Body, and delight in it, that it
can never leave it while it is able to serve it, which is not in the Essence of
the Soul, tho it be comprehended in the Essence of Man, implying more than a
Soul and an organized Body, by which it can receive Impressions, and act
accordingly, which an Angelical Spirit can do; and Experience has shown that
they oft-times have done, acting by a fresh and incorrupted Body, whence the
Soul was departed, that it was not discernable from a Man. Yea evil Spirits
have frequently possessed living Bodies, and have overacted the Soul contrary
to its Inclinations and Attempts, as being a stronger Spirit. When I consider
the Strength of Self-love, that is another inavoidable Instinct, or even the
fresh and tender Affection of Parents to their Children, having nothing in them
to breed Aversion, which no reasoning can overpower; I have no Hesitation that
the Soul is capable of this Instinct, and that it cease not to have a desire
to be reunited to the Body, even in its glorious State of Separation; else the
Resurrection should not be a farther Perfection of Glory. Neither do I like the
excessive Expressions of the Soul's being in the Body as in a Prison; for tho
the Soul be more happy when out of the Body, when it is in a sinful State,
because a great part of Men's Sins arise from their bodily Affections, whereof
Angelical Spirits are not capable, yet that is from Man's Corruption through
Sin, and does nothing derogate the Goodness of God: I do not believe that these
Spirits acting a Body have Pleasure or Pain, as Souls have, by the Impressions
or Actings through that Body. If it were not for this inavoidable Instinct,
would not the Soul prevent the Pains of Torture and Death? Oft-times with
Ignominy and Cruelty, to prevent which, many, not the meanest and ignoblest of
Men, have wilfully made their Bodies incapable to serve their Souls, that they
might escape it; and how many more would, if without that Pain they could flee
out of their Bodies? few would suffer Misery in them, but those who knew and
did acknowledge the Trust and Command to preserve them given by God, under an
higher Pain than they could suffer by abiding in them.

A farther degree of the Goodness of God, is manifested in the other inbred
Inclinations, which God has freely given to the Soul, beside that of cleaving
to the Body, which is not by fatal Necessity, seeing the Soul is a separable
Substance, and might easily escape from the Body if it could please so to do.
Such Principles are the Love to God above all, as being the Sovereign Good, and
incomparably most amiable Object; the Love to Mankind, preferring the Interest
of Manking to the Interest of any part of Men, and in most things to
Self-interest. Self-love also is a Gift of God, and good in it self when kept
within its Bounds, tho by the Corruption of Sin, it is become the Cause of most
Evils: Men do either wholly exclude the Love of God and of Mankind, or do
exceedingly abate them, and subordinate them to Self-love: For these Affections
cannot arise before or without the Perception of their proper Objects.
Therefore it is (that because it is long before the Perception of the Deity or
of the common Interest arise in the Soul, during which time Self-love does
wholly and solely possess the Soul, and all its Affections are exercised
without Restraint, except what arises by the Fear of Chastisement, or the
natural or industrious Perception of the Uncomeliness of some extravagant Acts)
that Self-love becomes habitual, and so strong, that when the Perception of
God, or the common Interest of Mankind, by the natural Conscience or
Instruction is excited, Self-love makes the Soul have a powerful Aversion from
these Objects, which would low or restrain it; so that it can never be kept
within Bounds, especially in Subordination to God, without supernatural Grace
given by him: It will sooner yield to the Love of a Family, of a Society, of a
Country, than to the Love of the common Interest of Mankind; yet even Heathens
have come a great length as to that, but came never to any suitable Proportion
of the Love to God, as all their Writings and Actings do manifestly show.

There is another general inbred Principle and Inclination in Man, to do that
which is congruous to and becoming his Nature, not only to what is essential to
him, but to what is superadded by the Divine Benignity, which is more sensibly
felt in the Aversion of things which are unbecoming Man, and which all judge to
be vicious and vile, except in so far as they have eradicated their inbred
Principles, and debauched their Natural Inclinations: so even natural Men love
Temperance, Sobriety, Modesty, Meekness, Sincerity, Constancy, Courage and
Comeliness; and those whose Depravation make them love and practice the
contrary in themselves, do frequently hate them in others, and never cherish
them but when it is to lessen or abolish their own Shame, by making their Vice
more common, or that they require the Concourse of others to practice them.

Beside these general Principles which require Attention and Ratiocination, God
by his Bounty has imprinted on the Soul of Man special Principles for eminent
Cases, which operate like Instincts without necessity of reasoning, as the
desire of Happiness, the care to preserve Life, the abhorrence of Cruelty, the
desire to relieve the Innocent oppressed, Gratitude to Benefactors, Faithfulness
to those that do rationally rely and trust, Love to those in Society and
Friendship, that especially which is most entire and absolute by Marriage, and
the mutual natural Affection of Parents and Children, and of those which are of
one Kindred and Blood.

The Institution of Marriage was a farther degree of the Bounty of God,
appointed in Innocence, that betwixt one Man and one Woman, by the free Choice
of both, there should be so intimate a Society and Friendship, as could be no
greater, having all their Interests common, perpetual, and most part
incommunicable; that each of them had more Right to, and Enjoyment of all, than
when they had them alone, excluding the other: tho the unsuitable Choice of some
has marred this Blessing, it diminishes not the Bounty of God, being by the
fault of the Parties, at least is a Judgment for their other Faults, and it was
their Interest that this Society was indissolvable even by the Consent of both,
but only by Adultery or Desertion, which gave a strong Inducement to compose
their Humors, tho naturally discrepant, rather than to be in a continual
Disquiet. It was a great Addition to the Happiness of this Conjugal Estate,
that there was given them so strong an Inclination of these Embraces necessary
for Posterity, which otherwise have nothing of Comeliness in them; and Women
would never have endured the Trouble and Pain of Childbearing, if this
Affection, and the natural desire of having Children did not over-master them.
How great Addition to Adam's Pleasure behoved it to be, when awakening from his
Sleep God presented him Eve, the only Creature like to himself, which was the
first Glass in which he did behold the Beauty of his own Body as well as hers,
who was fitted for him in all things that he could desire, not only
passionately loved, but even more passionately loving; both being endued with
the same Principles and Inclinations, and requiring no need of farther
Acquaintance than the first View; both being innocent and void of all Vice, and
able to communicate their Thoughts by that Language with which God did endue
them without their own Industry, by which they might communicate their Knowledge
of God, their Admiration, Confidence and Delight in him, their Love and
Reverence to him, and Obsequiousness to his Pleasure in all things, which they
knew by the Moral Law written in their Hearts, and which (it is like) he did
explain and declare unto them, as he did his positive Command of the forbidden
Fruit to be a Test of their Obedience, by restraining their Appetite from so
pleasant a Fruit; for which Restraint they had no inbred Inclination, as they
had to the Moral Duties, but rather contrary, except his Pleasure and
Prohibition: for if he had willed that they should not eat of it, it would
certainly have been effectual; but he did only declare what they might eat, and
what they might not eat, and denounced the Punishment if they did eat what was
forbidden; which sufficiently shows, that their forbearing would have been
acceptable to him, which was sufficient to lay the strongest Obligation upon
them, and yet he expressed the heaviest Penalty if they trangressed, which was
implied by their knowledge of his Justice, tho it had not been expressed; which
could not consist with his moving, exciting, or necessitating them to it. Adam
whose Knowledge was so great, would not have omitted to plead, that when he
pleaded fo weak a ground as the Invitation of his Wife, not that he spared the
Sovereignty of God; for he insinuates a too harsh Reflection against God, not
only blaming the Woman, but that she was given of God.

It was a farther degree of the Bounty of God, that he had given a mutual
Affection between Angels and Men, that their Converse was both profitable and
pleasant.

By these Principles that God gave Man, he was not only innocent without Vice
or Sin, but he was holy, and morally good, till he fell from his Integrity, by
disobeying God, and brought Sin into the World: if he then being innocent
became sinful, tho he was ripe in his Capacities so soon as he was created, and
had the Love of God awakned in him, in so high a degree, having freshly
received so great and so high Favors of God, how much more capable behoved his
Posterity to be of Defection that were to be born, and live so long an animal
Life, unless God had given him a Promise, or declared unto him a Purpose to
confirm him and his Posterity, if he had continued to give Proof of his
Obedience in his innocent fallible State, as it is commonly believed that the
elect Angels were confirmed?

The Bounty of God does yet further manifest it self, in giving Man the
Dominion of all the Creatures in this inferior World, not peculiarly to Adam,
as if all Right of the Creatures had been to be derived from him; but God gave
Right to subdue and possess them, which could not be done by Adam, but by
Mankind; and therefore the first Title of Right was the Possession of that
which was void and possessed by none, and the Fruits thereof, not only the
Profit but the Pleasure of the Creatures, was given chiefly to Man. The variety
of Shapes and Colors of Animals, Trees, Herbs, and Fruits, the beautiful
Verdure of Trees and Herbs, the various Painture of the Fruits of Trees, of the
Flowers and Blossoms of Plants, and of the Feathers of Birds, were of little
use to themselves, but of much use to Man, by an innocent Pleasure arising from
the Sight of them, leading to the Admiration of the Power, Wisdom and Goodness
of God their Author. In which I doubt not that the Angels are Sharers, so that
it was not in vain that the Earth brought forth all these things, tho for a
long time Man possessed but a small part of it; for the Wisdom of God could
have so ordered, that the Seeds disseminate in Earth and Waters should only
spring as Man had use of them. It does not diminish the Bounty of God, that
there is a great Inequality in the Perfections of these Creatures, and that
some of them bred Horror and Hurt unto Man, because they set off the Luster of
the rest, which otherwise would be less valued; if we never had Darkness, we
would little value Light. The hurtful Creatures are Instruments of God's
Justice, and none of them want their peculiar Virtues.

It is also the Goodness of God, that the Discovery of the Natures of the
Creatures, and all experimental Knowledge has proceeded from the beginning, and
shall to the end increase, that there might never be wanting a suitable
Exercise, Diversion and Delight, to the more ingenious and inquiring Men.

The Sun, the Moon and Stars, and all their Courses and Motions, are designed
to manifest to Angels, but chiefly to Men, the Majesty and Glory of the
Omnipotent Creator, and for the Pleasure and Profit of Men.

It is a general Effect of the Bounty of God, that he preserves all these
things in their Existence, Power, Vigor and Action; but more particularly he
preserves Man and Beast, in overruling their Inclinations, whereby they shun
those things that might destroy them, and attain those that may preserve them.
Without God's Preservation no Creature could subsist, nor have any Activity;
For in him we live, and move, and have our Being. God needs no positive Act to
destroy any Creature; if he withdraw his Support, they would return into
nothing, out of which they came: Yet I do not think, that Preservation is a
continual Creation; otherwise God should create the Souls of the wicked full of
actual Wickedness, and even the damned Spirits in all their Malice: I know not
how this Difficulty could be shunned by any, but those who think that Accidents
can subsist being separate from Subjects, or transmitted from one Subject to
another: Nor could the same Individual be continued, but as every moment one is
created, another behoved to be annihilated; so that all Creatures were deceived
of themselves and all others, thinking they were the same, and yet they were an
innumerable Multitude of in-coexisting Individuals. Preservation is more
properly expressed by a continued Support; as Creation is an Elevation to
Existence from nothing, Preservation is the Support from receding into nothing;
a thing supported will certainly fall if the Support be removed.

The Bounty of God is crowned by God's Government of the World, especially of
Angels and Men: How unhappy should Man be if they had an Epicurean God, that
were not concerned in the Actings of Men, leaving them wholly to themselves?

The Goodness of God extends it self, not only to the Natural Capacities of
Men, but to supernatural Powers, as the Gift of Prophecy, of Language not
learned, and the Interpretation thereof, and of other miraculous Works, which,
in distinction from saving Graces, are called Gifts: These are the Graces
whereby God gives the supernatural Faculties of the Regenerate in Conversion,
or does increase the same thereafter; yet that Term is otherwise taken, and is
extended to a graceful Countenance or Deportment, making the Person having it,
to have a special kind of Amiableness: for it is not every Beauty or Comeliness
that is esteemed Gracefulness, but that which shows a Nobleness or Excellency
of Mind, which therefore is very suitable to Princes, and is frequently
attributed to them without sufficient Ground. The highest degree of this
Gracefulness is called Majesty, appropriated to Kings; yea every signal Favor
having eminent Effects, is called Grace: whence arises the distinction of
Gratia gratis data, and Gratia gratum faciens; upon both accounts the
Capacities given in Conversion are called Graces, being freely given, of the
greatest Import, and making the Receivers acceptable and lovely to God; and it
is chiefly in respect of these that he takes the Title of Most Gracious God,
and thereby also the Converted are called Gracious.

MEDITATION XIII. Upon the Truth of God.
NExt unto the Goodness of God is his Truth. Nothing can be more evident, than
that it is most congruous to, and becoming the Divine Nature to be true; nor
could any thing more inconsistent be imagined, than lying or deceiving in God.
The Truth of God is the first Ground-stone of his Creatures Happiness, and if
it were not sure, it were impossible to know that they were not in all things
deluded, even in the concurring Testimonies of Sense and Reason. No Man could
know there were any real thing existent beside himself, nor what or whence
himself were. Atheists are come to that height of Impudence, as to pretend that
they are the Wits of the World, who will believe nothing but what is certain
and evident, and will not believe that there is a God, because they see it not
evident, in which they are evidently the grossest Ignorants as well as the most
imprudent Fools. Ignorant they are, because they found all their Interest upon
an inconsistent Lie, supposing certainty of Knowledge from themselves, when yet
they find themselves often deceived; yea supposing themselves undeceiveable,
whereas it is impossible to attain to any certain Rule of Man's Life, without
supposing a Deity, abounding in Truth, and which cannot lie or deceive: How
could any be sure of any outward Impression of Sense? for the same Impression
may be in the Sense or Brain, not from an extrinsick, but from an intrinsic
Cause. Those whose Eyes are vitiated with any unnatural Tincture, think they
see all Objects painted with certain Colors, but falsely: Yea the
Hypochondriack think they see not only false Colors, but even Bodies and
Shapes without any extrinsick Impression. What strange Sounds does the
disordered Ear represent? Taste and Smell may not only be depraved, but
deprived; how then could Certainty be inferred from Sense, if it were not
presupposed, that the Author of Sense were true, and would not deceive, and
therefore has given his reasonable Creatures Understanding distinct from
Sense, which can reflect upon its own Apprehensions, and perceive the Condition
of the Organs and Medium of Sense, and make use of the concurring Testimonies
of other Senses, and the natural self-evident Principles in the Mind, and
thereby rest in perfect assurance? which must explicitly or implicitly rest
upon this ground, that God the Author of these Faculties is true, and cannot
deceive, and therefore the Creature may securely rest in the Concurrence of
them. This is yet more evident in the inbred first Principles of Knowledge,
contemplative or practical: How could any certainly believe that these were
true, if he did not believe the Truth of God that gave them? The concurring
Testimony of Men through the World could not suffice; for that Testimony is
known by Sense, by Word or Writing: yea, tho one Man could travel through the
whole World, and speak with all the Persons in it, that were yet by Sense,
which needs those inbred Principles of Reason to secure it against Error, there
could no more be firmly concluded, than that these Notions being common among
People that keep no Intercouse, they cannot be from Men, but from a superior
Cause, which yet would not conclude if that Cause were not infallible, which
could neither be deceived nor deceive.

As the Truth of God is a necessary Foundation of the Certainty of natural
Knowledge, it must be no less necessary for the Certainty of revealed Knowledge:
For if God could lie or deceive, how were it possible to know the truth of
Revelations, and distinguish them from the Illusions of Devils or Men? not from
Miracles, which might be from God's Omnipotence, and could not conclude without
his Veracity; not from the Assertion of the greatest Apostle, and most glorious
Angel: For Paul says, If we, or an Angel from Heaven shall preach another
Gospel to you, let him be accursed: which necessarily implies, that if a
contrary Doctrine were preached from God, it behoved to overturn his Veracity;
for otherwise the posterior Testimony of Paul, or of an Angel, would be
derogatory and preferable to the prior. It were not possible to know that God
were Holy, Benign, Just, Merciful, Faithful, Wise and Sovereign, if he were not
absolutely true; for it is clear that these could not be believed, because God
said it, if he were not unchangeably true: nor could any part of his Holiness
or Godlikeness be believed without believing that he is true, there being
nothing more suitable to the Deity than Truth, which being surely believed, all
his other Perfections must be believed, because God that cannot lie, has
declared them by Reason and Revelation.

I am not moved with that Objection against the Apostle's Assertion, that God
altered the Constitution and Order of the Jewish Church, and why might be not
then without incroaching upon his Veracity alter the Christian Church? The
Reason is clear, because in the Christian Religion it is a chief part, that
there is no Name given under Heaven by which Salvation can come, but by the
Name of Jesus, and that there is never another way to be accepted or expected,
tho by the Annunciation of an Angel from Heaven; this was never said of the
Jewish Economy.

The Truth of God being so fundamentally necessary to be believed, God in his
Wisdom and Goodness has given the strongest Evidences of it. There can be
nothing more contrary to the Principles of natural Light, than to imagine a
lying or deceiving God. There is nothing so powerfully and peremptorily
asserted in the Scripture as the Truth of God, who is called the God of Truth,
and Christ calls himself the Truth in abstracto. In the Character and
Description God gives of himself to Moses, he declares himself merciful and
gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in Goodness and Truth; and he is a God
full of Compassion, and gracious, long-suffering and plenteous in Mercy and
Truth; his Mercy is everlasting, and his Truth endures to all Generations.
Seldom is the Truth of God mentioned but with his Mercy; for Mercy could be of
no moment if God's Truth were not absolutely sure: By Mercy and Truth Iniquity
is purged, says Solomon; and Mercy and Truth preserve the King. God's Word is
frequently called the Word of Truth.

But that which is most signal to convince us of the Truth of God, is that he
declares, it is impossible for God to lie.

Truth does import, 1. The Conformity between the Signs instituted to express
Thoughts, and the Thoughts whether these Signs be by Word or Writ, or by other
Signs, as beckning with the Hand or the Head, or the raising a pleasant Aspect
in the Countenance to signify Assent, Approbation, or Acceptance, which is more
properly called Sincerity, and Truth by such Signs is called Veracity. Truth
does also extend to the Conformity between the Thoughts and the Objects
thereof, and so Truth is said to be in the Heart; and to the Conformity of
Words spoken or written, or other Signs unto things signified, tho not conform
to the Thoughts or Judgment of him that expresses them; so there may be
Veracity without Verity, when Words are conform to the Judgment of him that
speaks, but not to the thing signified, yet both may concur with design to
seduce, or lead into Error, or evil Practice, when the Premises are expressed,
and the Conclusion is left to the Hearer, whose Principles or Opinions are
known, that thence they would infer a wrong and inconsequent Conclusion; which
when done with design to seduce is no less Deceit, than when a consequent
Conclusion is inferred from false Grounds: But it is no deceit to express Truth
for good Ends, tho the Speaker may know that the Hearers will make bad use of
it, unless the Speaker be obliged not to suffer the Hearer to make that use.
Deception also may be without Words or Signs signifying Thoughts, as when a
tempting Object is brought unto the Sense, Mind or Memory, with design to tempt
or seduce.

In all these ways God is perfectly true, he never expresses Words or Signs
but such as are both conform to his Thoughts, and the thing signified; he never
designs to deceive by any Words or Signs, nor does he tempt by these or any
other Objects represented: for God can neither tempt, nor be tempted to Evil;
he may represent Objects to prove the Firmness and Faithfulness of his
Creatures, but with the Temptation he gives always Strength, either effectual,
or at least sufficient to escape: He made the forbidden Fruit very pleasant to
the Eye, and it is like to the Smell also, which being appointed a Badg of
Man's Obedience to God's Will alone, it could not reach the End, if it were
altogether indifferent; but it was just and fit that it should have a contrary
Excitation in the Sense, which might be overruled by a more powerful
Inclination of the Mind, but requiring Attention and Diligence to keep that
Principle of the Mind in remembrance, thereby to overruled the Incitation of
the Sense. Therefore it may warrantably be thought, that the forbidden Fruit
was more pleasant than any other in the Garden; for it was an unsuitable sign of
Affection and Obedience unto God, if God had forbidden the eating of the Fruit
upon the one side of the Tree, and allowed the eating of it on the other.
Circumcision and the most of the Jewish Rites were of the like nature, and had
all a great Contrariety to the Pleasure of Sense: Yea, tho God permitted Satan
to tempt to the eating of the Fruit, not only from the Pleasure of Sense, but
from a false Expectation of greater Wisdom, there was a Principle in the Mind
fully sufficient to resist both, that God could not be envious, and that there
could be no Advantage to transgress his Command; and therefore tho God foreknew
the Event, he was not nccessory to the Transgression, nor put any necessity
upon the Man or Woman to commit it, and therefore did justly and severely
punish them both; nor did they even by their after-thoughts plead, that the
Temptation was insuperable, and that they had not sufficiency of Strength to
resist it, tho they omitted not very insufficient Excuses.

There is no ground to stumble at the Prophet Jeremiah's Saying, Thou have
deceived me, and I was deceived; nor the words of the same Prophet saying, Ah!
Lord God! surely thou have greatly deceived this People, and Jerusalem, saying,
Ye shall have Peace, whereas the Sword reaches unto the Soul; which are no
more than the weak Rovings of Saints in the Ecstasy of Trouble. Such as were
many of Job's Expressions, and David's saying, That in vain had be washed his
Hands in Innocence, when he saw the Prosperity of the wicked. It is evident,
that God never said to Jerusalem, Ye shall have Peace, simply, but if ye follow
the Paths of Peace; and so there was no Inconsistency with the Event, that the
Sword reached unto the Soul, seeing they followed not the ways of Peace.
Neither does the Parabolical Representation of Micah the Prophet, That the Lord
said, Who shall entice Ahab, that he may go up and fall at Ramoth Gilead? And
when a Spirit said, He would go out and be a lying Spirit in the Mouth of
Ahab's Prophets; and the Lord said, thou shall entice him, and thou shall also
prevail: Now therefore behold the Lord has put a lying Spirit in the Mouth of
Ahab's Prophets. These and the like Expressions, such as God's hardening Men's
Hearts, must be understood according to the Analogy of Faith, in Consistency
with the infinite Perfections of God; and they are elsewhere explicated in
Scripture, that the wicked harden their own Hearts, and that God gives Men up
(who have refused the Offer and Means of Grace) to follow their own Ways, and
unto strong Delusions, to believe Lies, because they received not the Truth in
Love: and therefore they can be attributed no other way to God, than that they
cannot be without his Permission, and his permissive Will and Decree, and his
overruling Providence, bringing Good out of Evil.

Some very learned have held Truth not to be distinct from Goodness or Bounty,
but a Branch of it; and where that is not to be used, Lies may be used, as well
as Stratagems against Enemies: If this were true, it were not impossible for
God to lie, but Truth is a Perfection wholly distinct from Bounty and from
Justice, and is rather a Point of Decency. How unbecoming were it and
incongruous to the infinitely blessed and glorious God to express a Lie? For
Creatures may be blameless in expressing Words not conformed to the thing
signified, which is not a Lie, because not disconform to their own Judgment;
but the Omniscient God can never use Expressions disconform to the things
signified, but they must also be disconform to his own Thoughts.

I know there are too many, who to uphold their Philosophic Notions, do
suppose that God in the Scripture speaks many things according to the vulgar
Errors of Men, and not according to the Truth of the things signified; which is
a gross Error, derogatory to the Truth of God, and to be abhorred, tho there
were no other evil Consequence, but there be many: For instance, a way is
thence opened to innumerable Errors, which when redargued by Expressions in
Scripture, though they be proper and plain, yet there is still an Evasion, that
these are but spoken according to the vulgar Error and Prepossession of Men;
which in some things they think evident, and take the Authority to extend to
the like, so far as they please, neither is there any Evidence or Rule in
Scripture where to stop. God uses figurative and parabolical Speeches, but
never any Falsehood is spoken by the Motion of his Spirit. I admired and
abhorred to see a Professor of Divinity in a Treatise heap up so many places of
Scripture, and of so great moment, as spoken by erroneous Prepossession of Men,
but not true and conform to the things signified, which yet may easily be
answered. God speaks often to Man's Capacity as to the Manner, but never
untrue the Matter. Kings and States may infer Good from the false
Prepossessions of People, which they presuppose, but do not assent to, or
approve, at least should not, tho they may suppress their Disapprobation: Who
should then imagine that God would approve false Opinions, to infer true,
unless they were related, not as his Opinions, but expressed as theirs?

It may be doubted, whether God's Truth be wholly his Moral Perfection, or if
partly Natural, which I do not inquire out of Curiosity, but thereby to know
what is the Moral Duty of Men as to Truth, which is a part of God's Image, and
to be regulated according to the Divine Pattern. The Conformity of God's
Thoughts to things extrinsick, is rather to be understood a Conformity of these
things to God's Thoughts, than of his Thoughts to these things, as the
Impression is conform to the Seal, not the Seal to the Impression. A Conformity
to any thing imports a Priority and Preference of that to which the other is
conform, yet there is a likeness betwixt both; and therefore the Truth of God's
Thoughts is better expressed by a Conformity with things, than to things: Yet
God's Thoughts are conform to his Natural Perfections, which in the Order of
Nature are prior to his Thoughts of them; but his voluntary or moral
Perfections are in the Order of Nature posterior to his Thoughts, for he
chooses them because he knows them to be congruous to his Natural Perfections,
as being comprehended in his Godlikeness or Holiness. The Truth of God's
Thoughts is incommunicable to Creatures, whose Thoughts are only true, because
conform to the things thought of. Therefore the Truth of God's Thoughts as to
the things signified, is Natural, not a Moral Perfection, more than is his
Knowledge or his Will.

Whence I conceive the Conformity of Creatures Thoughts to Things is a Natural
not a Moral Perfection, and therefore Errors in them are not simply by that
Disconformity Sins: For I know no ground to believe that the Angels are not
capable of Mistakes of Things not necessary to be known or believed; but
erroneous Thoughts are only sinful by a supervening Command, to have such
Thoughts as are necessary for Holiness; and so Men's Thoughts contrary to the
Divine Perfections, and contrary to the Dependence and Duty of Creatures, are
not only false, but injurious.

Inadvertance or Mistake in this Point, has bred many sharp Debates and
Divisions among the more Judicious, and much Disquiet to the Godly of lesser
Capacity, apprehending every Error in their Judgment to be a Sin, wherein they
have stumbled much upon the frequent Expressions in Scripture containing so
high Elogies of the Truth, for which wear bidden to contend, not adverting
that by the Truth is not meant every Truth, but the Truth (...), or by way of
Excellency, the Truth, which makes us free, which surely is not every Truth,
but the Truths requisite for Holiness and Happiness. I am persuaded there are
no Errors so pernicious as those which give an unamiable Aspect of God, and his
Divine Perfections, hindering or abating the Admiration, Delight and Trust in
him, and Obsequiousness to his Pleasure.

The Truth of God is oft-times attributed to the Performances of his Promises,
as it is also unto the Promises of Creatures; but the Obligement to Performance
does not depend upon the Truth of the Promise, but from Justice arising from
the Promise made, which obliges; tho there were not a Purpose to perform, yet
there is a Truth in Promises when they are conform to the Thoughts, and Purpose
to do, as they say who make them.

I adore and bless thee, O God of Truth! whose Expressions can never be
disconform to thy Thoughts, or to the things expressed, who never can delude
or deceive thy Rational Creatures, not by any fatal Necessity, but because with
unalterable Certainty, as sure as the strongest Necessity, thou will ever be
true and sincere; and fore I may safely and securely rest upon all that thou
have proposed, purposed, or promised; for Heaven and Earth may pass away, but
one Iota of thy blessed Will shall never pass unfulfilled.

I know there have been great Thoughts of Heart upon God's general Commands,
Persuasions, and Expostulations to Faith and Holiness, how these could be
sincere, when God knew that they would not be effectual; and that it was not in
the Creatures Power to make them effectual: which is not proper to be cleared
here, but will be clear by the right understanding of the Economy of God's
Dispensations toward Men. I shall only now say, that a Physician may sincerely
entreat and expostulate with a Patient to admit of a Cure for a Wound otherwise
incurable, which he wilfully refuses to admit, tho he knew that the Patient
himself is not able to cure himself, and that no other Physician can come in
time to do it: Nor do I think that ever God did send his Gospel to a People,
where he knew that all would be absolute Rejecters of it, or of the Offers made
in it.

MEDITATION XIV. Upon the Justice of God.
BEside that Goodness of God, which is absolute and boundless, presupposing
nothing in Creatures, as the Consideration or special Occasion of it, I
perceive there is a Goodness of God which has a special occasion in his
Creatures, and keeps an exact Proportion with the Actings of Rational
Creatures; which is the Goodness of Remuneration or Reward, which is
essentially different from the former, and is remunerative Justice, which
cannot be distinctly understood alone without considering the punitive Justice
of God; and therefore I apply my Thoughts to the Justice of God, which in the
natural Order falls nearest to his Goodness and Truth: For Mercy presupposes
Misery incurred by Justice, and Faithfulness is the ultimate Attribute relative
to Rational Creatures: Wisdom and Dominion reach all Creatures. Nothing is more
necessary to Rational Creatures than the distinct Knowledge of God's Justice,
which is the Pattern of their own Justice, and is necessary to have right
Affections toward God. I may doubt or be ignorant of some Acts of the Divine
Dispensations that have natural Evil in them, whether they be Acts of Goodness
or not, or whether Acts of Sovereignty or not, without Blame; but I am sure
they cannot be without Justice. I doubt not but the damned Spirits are
convinced of God's Justice in their own Damnation; their Temptation was not
about the Justice, but the Goodness of God; they were not content with, nor
abode in the Station wherein God placed them: Satan did on the same ground
tempt Adam, as if God envied Man's Good, by hindering him to eat that Fruit
that would make him wise like God. I know not whether the inbred Principle of
God's Mercy was in Man before the Fall, but I doubt nothing that it was in all
Mankind after. There is a greater Indifferency in God, in giving Mercy, than in
doing Justice; He has Mercy on whom he will have Mercy: he never said so of
Justice, he has acknowledged himself Debtor, and obliged by Justice. Mercy is
of the most eminent Bounty, which not only punishes not where Punishment is
deserved, but provides a Mediator to satisfy Justice.

Justice is diversely understood, sometimes for all the Acts of Godliness and
Morality, even for some Acts indifferent; as when any exact that which is due
to them, they are said to do justly, tho more properly that they do not
unjustly, for they are not always obliged to exact what is due, they may
forbear it, they may forgive it. That Justice which comprehends Godliness and
Morality, is therefore called universal Justice; but the Justice here proposed
is not of that Extent, but is called particular or special Justice.

I know the Justice of God by the Light of Nature, from an inbred Principle of
the natural Conscience, showing me that I ought to be just: Justice is implied
in the Conception of a Deity. It would be an evident Inconsistency to apprehend
an unjust God. I may fortify my Persuasion of God's Justice, because he has
given me a natural Evidence that I ought to be just, and therefore it must be
pleasing to him, therefore it must be in himself; but I do not think that the
Knowledge of the Justice of God, or God's other positive Perfections, are to be
inferred from the infinite Extension of ours; for Truth is precise, and has no
degrees: Justice implies Proportion, and it cannot be said that God's Rewards
are infinite in the way of Justice; and his vindictive Justice is only infinite
in time, by Accident, because the Creature is never able to expiate the
infinite Aversion God has against Sin; yet the Mediator did expiate it in a
short Life, by the Value more than by the Weight of his Sufferings; for Weight
can no more be infinite than Bulk. Tho all the Damned be eternally punished,
yet not equally, because there is not equal Strength to bear, and more
atrocious Guilt to punish; It shall be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah,
than for Capernaum. Nothing is more evident to Man than Justice, that is of so
universal use to Man: His earliest rational Thoughts are not to do Wrong, or to
hurt any innocent Rational Creature; the opposite of which he accounts Right,
and Justice is called Righteousness. The first Apprehension of God is, that
there is an universal Terror in the Mind of Man upon account of evil
Resolutions, or evil Deeds, tho it were impossible for any Creature to know
them; so that it is not from the Fear of Man, nor is it a groundless childish
Terror, for the wiser that Men grow, it does the more increase; from whence
there is an inevitable and immediate Consequence, that there is some Power
superior to Man, that can and will punish wicked Deeds and Purposes. Man could
not live in the World, or converse with Man, if he had not the natural knowledge
of Justice; he could neither know what he ought to give, nor what he ought to
crave, what he should encourage, nor what he should discourage. But I bless
God, that to the Twilight of Nature he has given to his Church the Meridian
Light of Revelation. The Biass of Selflove would easily pervert the natural
Principle of Justice, if God did not hem it in, and set its Bounds by
Revelation, yet habitual Perverseness breaks over all.

There are three kinds of Justice, Attributive, Distributive and Contributive,
or Judicial. Attributive Justice is the giving to every rational Being that
which is their own, by allowing them to enjoy whatsoever they have that is
their own, by giving them that which is their own, but is not enjoyed and
possessed by them; under which are comprehended all Obligations to do or
perform, whether by Paction or Promise, or by Law of a superior Power. So
Justice requires that we should deliver to the Owner that which is his own, and
in our Power, tho we neither had it from him nor had promised so to do; much
more ought we to restore that which we had from him, the same Individual if we
can, at least the equivalent, whether it were by Injury we took it from him, or
otherwise. This kind of Justice is commonly called Commutative Justice, because
it is chiefly exercised in exchanging of Deeds and Things; but the Term is too
narrow to express the Thing, therefore it is better called Attributive Justice,
a chief Branch whereof is the allowing others to enjoy their own without
Molestation; which is properly expressed by Innocence, that is, doing them no
Hurt, neither in this nor in the performance of Promises, when there is no
other Cause; or even in restoring the Goods of others, is there any thing of
Commutation. The second kind of Justice is called Distributive, consisting in
the Distribution of Rewards or Punishments, proportioned to deserving Good or
Evil; here it cannot be said that there is given to any that which is their
own, but that which they merit or deserve; this consists with Attributive
Justice, but is not performed by it: He that injures by taking away, or
troubling a Man in the Enjoyment of his own, is not thereby freed by
Restitution, or Reparation, but he deserves also Punishment: Restitution or
Reparation is the only Interest of the Injured; but Punishment is only by God,
immediately, or by his Warrant and Command; Vengeance is mine, and I will
repay, says the Lord. Distributive Justice is in some way the Duty of all Men,
tho they be not invested with any Judicial Authority, as Fathers of Families,
or Rulers of Civil Societies: there is a Debt in it, but not always to the
Party on whom it is exercised, tho oft-times it be so; a Reward may be claimed
in Justice by the Person meriting, a Punishment may also be claimed. We may
warrantably pray that God would not cease to be a Corrector, as well as an
Instructor, and that he would not give us up to our selves: Children may desire
the like of Parents, Servants of Masters, People of Rulers, tho the particular
manner and the measure be frequently shunned by Self-love: Nor are Men to
demand Justice against themselves, as to Life and Fame, which they are obliged
to preserve, and not to reveal against them that which God has left secret;
but there is always a Debt to God in Distributive Justice, for Men are not so
obliged in Acts of Benignity, as in Acts of Justice: Liberality in giving or
forgiving that which is not due to the Party, is not so obliging even as to
God, as his Justice.

The third kind of Justice is Judicial, that is only to be performed by those
who have not only Power to judge, but do proceed in the way of Judgment, whereby
it is distinguished from Distributive Justice strictly taken: Judges do
distribute Punishments according to Merit, and Rewards also, as they are able,
according to the Merit of the Parties; and in most Cases of Distributive
Justice, private Persons are relieved, and are liable to no Debt even to God,
in so far as he has devolved the sole Power upon Civil Judges: Before these
were constituted, every Man was obliged to reward and punish as he had Ability
and Opportunity. The Command of God immediately after the Deluge, Whosoever
sheds Man's Blood, by Man shall his Blood be shed, is not a Prediction, for
then it had not been true, but is a Precept, not directed to Civil Judges, for
then there were none, nor to Fathers, tho they were; but Man is as large in the
one part of the Precept as in the other: It is not said, whosoever sheds Man's
Blood, by that Man or his Relation his Blood shall be shed; for he that is
killed or disabled cannot shed his Blood who did it; nor ought he to be Judge or
Avenger of it, where another can be had, which is the Prerogative of God alone.
Men may defend themselves against Injury, which is not by Distributive or
Judicial Justice, but by the Obligation they owe to God to preserve these Lives
whereof he alone is Master; but they may not avenge themselves without a Judge,
knowing the Evidence of the Fact, tho he be not a Civil Judge, having an
Authoritative Superiority, Kings and States ought not to be both Judges and
Parties where others can be had; but before they enter in War, they ought to
demand Satisfaction, and give sufficient Evidence of the Fact, and not decline
Arbitriment, where an indifferent Judge can be found; nor do they judge their own
Cause against their Subjects, but by Judges, tho constituted by themselves, yet
sworn to do Justice between them and their Subjects without respect of Parties,
not only in their Civil Rights, but in Crimes and Injuries against themselves.
It is by this kind of Justice that Princes and States interpose between their
Neighbors entering in War, where no Arbitration has preceded, and they cannot
justly concur with the injured without a preceding Judgment; for it would choke
Humanity, to think that they might kill Men by implicit Faith or Report, much
less by Kindness or Contract. By this Justice Men are not only obliged to act
as Judges, but as Witnesses, by giving their own Testimonies, or any Evidence
they have, or can cause any in their Power to give: Avenge not your selves is
not with a Restriction to private Persons; Vengeance is God's, and can only be
done by himself, or by his Warrant. I know the Perverseness and even
Inadvertance of Men, make them run upon their Adversary, to give themselves
that great, but inhuman Pleasure of Revenge, not so much delighting in Justice,
as in the Misery of the Injurer; yet the Mighty God has not only said, but
sworn, That he delights not in the Death of a Sinner.

When I consider these Branches of Justice, as they are in God, I perceive
great Difference in them as they are in Men, who by Attributive Justice may
take nothing from any Man that is his own, except in the way of Punishment for
a just Cause: but as to God all Men's Goods, Honor, Freedom, and even their
Lives, are but precarious during God's Pleasure, and as the Peculia of Children
or Servants; and therefore it is no Injustice in God to take them away, or to
transfer the Right of them to any other. The Israulites not restoring those
things that they had borrowed from the Egyptians at their Departure, was no
Stealth or Injury, because they did it by God's Warrant.

It is more questionable whether it was congruous to God to have taken away the
Life of his innocent Rational Creatures, by Annihilation, or by Death; wherein
I do incline to the Negative: For I see not how it can consist with the
Happiness of any Creature, if it have not Certainty of its blessed State: But I
think also that the assurance of the Continuance thereof, is not from God's
Justice, but from his Bounty, especially from his Faithfulness. There is
nothing revealed of any Promise made to the Angels, and yet there is no doubt
of their full assurance not to be annihilated, and it is hard to conceive how
their Life can be otherwise taken away; nor do I know whether there was such a
Promise made to Man in Innocence; for tho Death was threatened upon his
Disobedience, the assurance of the perpetuity of Life did not thence
necessarily follow: But innocent Angels and Men had sufficient ground to have
full Trust in God, that if they offended him not, he would never destroy them,
tho not from his Promise, for that had been by his Justice; but I am far
clearer that God's Justice could not permit that he should torment his innocent
Creatures, or make them miserable. I know some think that by his Sovereignty he
might torment his innocent Rational Creatures, as having more Power over them
than the Potter over his Clay, to make Vessels of Honor or Dishonor of them;
but I have cleared my Mind as to that Point, that by the Vessels of Honor or
Dishonor, are not meant the happy and miserable, but his free giving of Grace,
by which they become honorable, or his permitting them to harden their Hearts,
by which they become dishonorable; for that is said in Answer to an Objection,
Why does God find fault with Men that their Hearts are hardened, for who has
resisted his Will? Finding of fault cannot relate to innocent Misery.

I know some are puzzled to extricate themselves as to God's Command to Abraham
to sacrifice his Son Isaac: I see no Difficulty in the Case as to God's
Justice; for tho Isaac had been sacrificed, God could have restored him to
Life, and so fulfilled his Promise, That in Isaac all Nations should be
blessed. I conceive the Difficulty lies as to God's Unchangeableness, who has
never changed any Law of Nature that he wrote in Man's Heart; but Abraham's
killing and sacrificing his own Son without a deserving Crime, is inconsistent
with the Law of Man's Nature: But there was no certain ground for Abraham to
conclude that his Son would be sacrificed, but only that God did prove his
Obedience, who by an implicit Faith (which is only due to God) was obliged to
proceed till he was stopped; tho he could not know how that Act could consist
with the Law of Nature, yet he might still hope for a Reprieve, even when he
lifted the Knife to give the fatal Blow, as the Event showed: and I take this
to be the best Instance of God's voluntas signi, where there is not voluntas
beneplaciti; for here there was a presumed Will, or rather a Presumption of the
Will of God from his Command, but it admitted a contrary Probation, the Voice
from Heaven having warranted him to hold his Hand: This is also a clear
Evidence that God does not always will to operate what he does command; for his
Will can never want its Effect, tho often his Command does, the Intent whereof is
to oblige the Creature, and show it its Duty.

I know some think they cannot enough exalt God's Sovereignty, if they admit
any thing right but by his Will; but they should remember that he is so
Sovereign, as he is also Just, Bountiful and Faithful. They do too much detract
from the Loveliness of God, that plead for him, as Courtiers for their Masters,
who love not to hear, or give another Cause of their Commands, but Such is our
Pleasure.

God's Promises do certainly infer his Attributive Justice to perform, and yet
what he performs may well be accounted a free Gift, because before his Promise
he was not only free, but indifferent; but having promised, he is not
indifferent as to Performance. The Performance of God's Promise is attributed
oft-times to his Faithfulness, or to his Bounty; but to speak accurately, it is
only to be referred to his Justice: For after the manner of Men it is said,
That God is faithful who has promised; where both Faithfulness and a Promise
are joined: So God may promise that which his Justice would require without a
Promise, as he does also to confirm Men, not only promise, but sometimes swear
to perform.

Commutative Justice is not competent to God; For who has given to him that he
should repay? Yet such is his gracious Condescension to Men, that he has
frequently entered with them in Covenant, the most excellent of which is the
Covenant of Grace, which yet cannot be called commutative, as if God's part and
Man's part were the mutual Causes; every converted Man enters in the Covenant
of Grace by his Consent to God's offer of Grace. But the freest Grant requires
Acceptance, when by way of Offer, in which it differs from an absolute Gift,
which is effectual, if it be not rejected, but Man's Acceptance or Consent is
also by the Gift and Grace of God.

The Distributive Justice of God consists in the distribution of Rewards and
Punishments, and hence it is divided into Premiative and Punitive Justice, both
are exactly proportioned to the occasion to which God's Holiness directs it
self, which is called the deserving or meritorious Cause, no other way than as
an occasion comes in among Causes, when a merciful Man sees a miserable, lie
has Compassion and helps him: Could this Miser boast that his Misery is the
cause of the Mercy? No, it was indeed the occasion of it, but the Man's
Mercifulness was the Cause: So it is in God's Justice, tho Mankind were like
the Beasts of the Field, and the Fish of the Sea, devouring each other, it
could not reach God, but it is the Congruity of his glorious Nature, which is
the cause why he rewards the Good, and punishes the Evil.

All Christians agree, that God's Punitive Justice is adjusted to desert or
merit, but some have been so impudent, as to claim eternal Happiness by their
own Merit, and that God could not be just, if he did not give it, not by his
Promise, nor for Christ's Merit alone, as only taking away Punishment, but they
think the Reward is from their own Merit. Others have so much abhorred this
that they have run to the other Extreme, holding that all Rewards are
absolutely, free without any thing of Justice; so that God should only have
Punitive, and not Premiative Justice, as Man's Condition now stands after the
Fall: And that if Man had not fallen he had by his Merit been translated into
the Heavenly Estate, not by God's Promise, or by his Bounty, but by his
Premiative Justice; but that now Man having fallen, nothing belongs to him by
the Premiative Justice of God. There are many and great Authorities of Learned
Men on all hands in this matter; but when I look up to God, and make use of the
Light of Scripture and Reason he has given me, I cannot assent to either of
these Extremes, when I consider that God has with so strong an Asseveration
declared, Verily there is a Reward for the Righteous; to whom he faith also,
That it is just with God to give Tribulation to them that trouble you, and to
give to you that are troubled Peace with us, and that God is not unrighteous to
forget their Labor of Love; yet these Righteous were not Innocents. I am not
moved with that Argument, That all sinful Men even when regenerated do deserve
eternal Damnation, tho for Christ's sake it be forgiven; and therefore if any
thing they could do could deserve Good from God, they forfeit that by their
deserving Death; for one may as well withhold from an Enemy that which was due,
as take from him that which was his own: But when I consider that Christ has
by his Merit through the Covenant of Grace procured a full Pardon of all the
Sins of the Regenerate through Repentance and Faith, both the Similitude and
the Reason of it fail; for he has taken away the Enmity, and has made
Reconciliation, whereby the Justified become not only Servants, but Sons, Heirs
and Coheirs with Christ of Glory.

I am far from fancying that any mere Creature does, or could deserve the Glory
of Heaven, no not Adam, tho he had continued innocent, nor the most glorious
Seraphim. The Angels were created in the state of Celestial Glory, which was by
God's free Bounty; they could pretend no Merit for deserving that Glory that
they had at the first instant of their Being; nor do I believe that their
Consirmation and Assurance is an Act granted by God of rewarding Justice, but
of free Bounty, it being so high an Advancement from a fallible to an
infallible State, which the best of their Service could not deserve. It was
congruous to the Freedom of God, and the Dependence of his Creatures, and his
Dominion and Government of them, that they should all be capable of Rewards and
Punishments, and be ruled by the righteous Laws of God, and that therefore they
should be in a labile Estate; and even in that Estate God did reward the
Improvement of their Natural Capacities, by adding farther degrees to them of
their Love to him and Joy in him, which crowns their Happiness: but his
Promise, or the Manifestation of his Purpose, that if during their Trial they
were faithful in that fallible Estate, he would never suffer them to fall. I do
not doubt that they acknowledge it as his free Bounty, and even in that
confirmed Estate their Perfections can never be so great but they can be
increased, and therefore there is still place for God's Premiative Justice.

If then the Angels have the Celestial Glory without Merit, by mere Bounty, and
yet God by his Premiative Justice is still adding to their Perfections, which
is clearly revealed by the Fall of the evil Angels, and that these that stood
are declared to be the elect Angels, (whence all I have said will follow) could
Man, tho innocent, pretend by Merit and Justice, to arrogate more to himself
than the Angels? He was created innocent, able to have so continued, but in all
Perfections far inferior to the Angels. In his fallible Estate he was capable
of God's rewarding Justice, as were the Angels in the like Estate before
Confirmation: But could he have deserved Confirmation and Exaltation, from an
Animal to an Angelical, from an Earthly to an Heavenly State? At Man's Creation
God had promised him Immortality, not by his Nature, for his Body was fragile,
and might by second Causes have been rendered unserviceable to his Soul, but
only by God's Providence, he behoved to eat, drink, sleep, roast. We have no
ground to believe that his Children so soon as they were born needed not his
Care and Trouble, tho they had been as perfect as Christ in the State of his
Infancy: Can it be thought that Man by his Merit could deserve Celestial Glory
and Confirmation, freeing him from the hazard of falling in Sin, or losing that
blessed State by Mortality or Annihilation? and yet there is no ground to
doubt, that as the Angels were confirmed after their Trial, so would Men have
been, which with the Immortality God had promised, he lost, and became mortal
and miserable by eating the forbidden Fruit. Whence there is enough to satisfy
the Consciences of Men, of God's Dispensation in suffering Adam to fall,
whereby neither he nor any of his Posterity, could ever by themselves recover
that blessed Estate which he had lost to himself and them by his Fall; albeit
they could not conceive how God could eternally torment all his Posterity for
his Sin, tho they had none of their own: But blessed be God that Christ was
separate from Sin unto the end, and became the second Adam, expiating Sin, and
procuring for the Elect that Blessedness which through Adam's Fall they had
lost.

How unreasonable then and odious must the Meritmongers of Rome be, who not
only hold that sinful Men acquire Heaven by their Merits, but that they have so
great store of Works of Supererrogation, to which they were forced to flee,
when the horrid Grossness of the Pope's setting to Sale Indulgences for Money,
through most of the Dominions of his Obedience, had awakened a great part of
the World, to see that it was impossible he could be Christ's Vicar on Earth,
but rather the Antichrist? There was no Evasion with any pretense, but that
there was a Treasure of the Supererrogatory Merits of the Saints, whereof the
Pope was the sole Dispenser; and yet tho that Treasure was not pretended to be
infinite and inexhaustable, the Popes neither knew what was the measure of it,
nor how much was exhausted, and how much remained, or if any thing at all; for
there was no Record kept of what Indulgences were given out, or how much they
needed that got them, nor could there be, seeing the Indulgences were not given
by the Popes immediately and upon trial, but were gifted and farmed to his
Emissaries, who were the vilest of Men, who rendered that Religion absolutely
ridiculous. I pity the deceived Multitude of that Synagogue, but I abhor their
chief Leaders, and without the breach of Charity, I think I may safely say,
that many of them must be convinced of gross Errors in that Church, but cannot
acknowledge them because of the Canons already made, unless therewith they quit
Infallibilty, which is the Pillar and Ground of their Faith.

God's Punitive Justice has not escaped dangerous Errors, not only from those
who make all God's Laws to be only obliging by his Will, so that he may not
only dispense with them without any Punishment, but may abrogate them, (of
which I have cleared my self before in meditating upon his Holiness) but from
those that think his Justice requires no exact Proportion between the Crime and
the Punishment, but that it is merely Arbitrary, that God might have accepted
the Sacrifice of a Lamb for the greatest Sin, or the Penance that Men inflict
upon themselves; and that the Mosaical Sacrifices did expiate Sin of
themselves, not as Types of the only one satisfying Sacrifice of Christ.

I am convinced that the very Nature of the Justice of God imports an exact
Proportion of Rewards and Punishments to the Objects of them, and that therein
God's Justice differs from the Justice of Man, who neither can know the exact
Proportion, nor can adjust a Punishment to expiate any Sin. Men's Justice in
Punishments are not to satisfy Justice, or to expiate Crimes past, but to
prevent and suppress them for time to come; and therefore they become unjust
and cruel, by applying Arbitrary Punishments more than are needful to suppress
the Crimes: but God perfectly knows the just Proportion of Rewards and
Punishments, and he has not that Indifferency in applying them as he has in
his Acts of Bounty: Sin is so opposite and so odious to God, that his Aversion
to it is infinite, and therefore it cannot be expiated but by a Punishment
infinite in Value; and therefore in the Damned, Punishment is only eternal,
because in no Time the finite Natures of Creatures can bear an infinite
Punishment. The Sins of the Elect are expiated by the Sufferings of Christ,
which were short in Time, but infinite in Value, because of the Dignity of the
Person that suffered; yet God having denounced the Wages of Sin to be Death,
both by the Separation of the Soul and Body, and by the Separation of both from
the Joy arising from God's Countenance, Justice required that the Mediator
should suffer both, tho but for a short time, in his Agony in the Garden, and
on the Cross, when innocent Nature made him cry out in the one, that if it were
possible that Cup might be removed, yet with voluntary Submission; and in the
other when he said, My God! My God! why have thou forsaken me? They must be
strangely deluded, that attribute that Cry to the Pains or Sense of Death; for
therein he should have been exceeded by innumerable Martyrs, none of which
cried that they were forsaken of God; and many have triumphed over their
Tormentors, and have sung in the midst of the Flames.

I think they are both bold and ignorant, who presume to assert, that any
Suffering of Christ without Death had been sufficient to expiate the Sins of
the Elect: None but God can know the just Punishment of Sin. Common Reason may
assure that God would not afflict his innocent Son in vain, but Revelation
puts it beyond doubt by the Apostle's arguing against the Possibility of
Salvation by Works of the Law, saying, If Righteousness come by the Law, then
Christ is dead in vain. It is necessarily understood, as in all such Arguments,
but that is impossible, that Christ should have died in vain; nor would it
conclude if by dying in vain were understood dying to no purpose: For tho it
had been indifferent to God to have brought Salvation by the Law, or by the
Death of Christ; yet neither of the ways had been in vain, that is, to no
purpose, which soever of the two God had chosen: But then it would not have
concluded, that Righteousness could not have come by the Law, therefore in vain
must be understood, as ordinarily it is, that which is needless or unnecessary,
and then the Argument is clear and convincing, thus: If Righteousness had been
by the Law, then Christ's dying had been needless, because the Law alone could
have brought Righteousness; but it is impossible that Christ should have died
when there was no necessity for it, therefore the Law nor no other way could do
it.

There is another dangerous Mistake about God's Punitive Justice, as if the
Consideration of his Punishment were to compense the Displeasure he had from
Sin, by his Pleasure in the suffering of his Creature, as Men commonly do; but
the true Consideration is the Manifestation of his Glory, in his Aversion from
Sin: for, As I live, says the Lord, I delight not in the Death of a Sinner. He
has no Pleasure in the Misery of his Creature. It is another Mistake of Guilt
and Punishment, that it is a Debt, whereby the Sinner is obliged to undergo the
Punishment. It may be called a Debt, as it is called a Prison or a Bondage;
neither is the Satisfaction for Sin properly a Payment: For if it were a Debt,
a Criminal should be obliged in Justice to offer himself to pay that Debt,
which yet not only he ought not, but he may not do: Neither does a Judge proceed
to Punishment, as receiving a Debt from the Criminal, but by his own Authority.
If Christ's Satisfaction for Sin were a Payment, it would follow that no Man
should mourn for Sin, because Christ having satisfied, there remained no more
Debt or Guilt of Sin: which has driven many into that pernicious Error, whence
they are called Antinomians; and it would highly derogate from the Goodness of
God, if he did only take that Payment from the Cautioner, that was due by the
principal Debtor. But if the Satisfaction be by manifesting God's Abhorrence of
Sin, it gives great Light to Christ's Satisfaction interceding for Sinners, and
offering that the Father should manifest as much of his Abhorrence of Sin upon
him, as if all Mankind had been made eternally miserable, that as the second
Adam he might make them all capable of Salvation, and the Elect secured in it.

The Judicial Justice of God is that which he exercises as Judge of all the
World, which stands not only in Rewards and Punishments, but also in giving
every rational Creature its Right, or its own, whether it be by retaining the
Rights they have without Molestation, or by attaining these which they possess
not. God would never suffer any rational Creature to want its Right, to give it
to any other Creature, if it were not for Sin. Judicial Justice calling the
Party that he may be heard, if he have any thing can be said, and that the Fact
must be proved, is implied in the Nature of it, and morally necessary, which
the great Judge of the World observes by himself, or by his Deputies. By himself
he called Adam and Eve, and asked first Adam, Have thou eaten of the Tree
whereof I commanded thee thou should not eat? and he heard his weak Plea; and
the Man said, The Woman whom thou gave to be with me, she gave me of the
Tree, and I did eat. Then he called the Woman, and said to her, What is this
that thou have done? and he heard also her Plea, who said, The Serpent beguiled
me, and I did eat. In these Accusations there was both the Law adduced and
applied to the Fact violating it, and the Proof by their own judicial
Confession; both their Pleas were rejected, and just Judgment pronounced
against them, but immediately a Mediator was intimated, and thereby hope of
Mercy. When Cain killed his Brother Abel, before God pronounced Sentence
against him, he calls him, saying, What have thou done? The Voice of thy
Brother's Blood cries unto me from the Ground. There is the Proof, the Blood
being yet fresh upon the Ground; Cain makes no Defense, therefore God
pronounces this Sentence, Thou art accursed, a Fugitive and a Vagabond shall
thou be on the Earth: yet even to Cain there was something of Favor admixed;
for God spared the Temporal Judgment by Death, by his sole Prerogative, and
therefore he set a Mark upon Cain, to prohibit all to execute the just Sentence
of Death against him; the Justice whereof Cain acknowledged, saying, that every
one that finds me shall slay me, which could not import an unwarrantable
Revenge, as if all Men would be wicked to multiply Slaughter without Warrant.

God's Judicial Justice by his Deputies is chiefly by Man's own Conscience,
which both accuses them, proves against them, and condemns them for all their
Faults, until it be seduced or seared; and then often God delays his Judgment
till the Soul's appearing before him after Death, but sometimes he executes his
Judgment by Men without Warrant, sometimes by other Accidents, and frequently
by Judges deriving Authority from him, who therefore ought to follow the Rule
and Pattern he has given them, condemning no Man till they had called him to
answer for himself, and giving him time and freedom to offer all his Defenses,
and adducing sufficient Proof of the Fact charged against him.

MEDITATION XV. Upon the Mercy of God.
MY Thoughts in my last Meditation upon the Punitive Justice of God, and the
Miseries thence arising, lead me to consider the Mercy of God, which
presupposes Misery as the Object of it. The Mercy of God is a part and kind of
his Goodness, but is a special kind of Goodness presupposing Misery; therefore
I could not distinctly consider it, till I considered the Misery arising from
God's Justice. The Goodness of God which presupposes not Misery, is more
properly called his Bounty or Benignity, in Benevolence or Beneficence. If Adam
had not fallen, God's advancing him from an Animal to an Angelical Estate, had
been an Act of free Beneficence and Bounty; but no Act of Mercy, for then Adam
had never been miserable: Yet Mercy does not always consider Misery as
preexistent, or as seen, present, or past, but as foreseen, which would come to
pass if it were not prevented by Mercy; and this is properly called Preventing
Mercy, in contradiction to that which is called Healing or Curing Mercy. As
Physicians use preventing Medicines, when they foresee the latent Causes of the
Disease, that would come if these Causes were not removed, as well as healing
Medicines to remove the Disease incumbent, the preventing Medicines are more
useful, tho less sensible than the other: So are God's preventing Mercies; God
foresaw Adam's Fall, and the ensuing Misery to himself and his Posterity; and
on the Foresight and Consideration thereof, decreed to send his Son into the
World, to assume the Nature of Man, and in it to suffer Death, and expiate his
Justice, and to satisfy his Abhorrency of Sin: This Decree was preventing
Mercy, not designed to prevent the Existence of Sin, but to prevent the
Incurableness of it when it should exist, and to prevent the Evil of Punishment
which would befall the Sinner, and to prevent the height and eternal Continuance
of it; whereby Infants and Idiots never commit Sin, and those who are saved, do
never commit Sin after the State of Mortality. God does also cure Sin after its
Existence, not only absolutely in Glory, but in part in Mortality, removing the
Rage and reigning Power of it.

Mercy is one of the natural innate Principles in Man, common to all Men, who
so far arrive to Discretion, as that they can discern the Misery of a Rational
Creature, which works like an Instinct upon the view of the Object, without
reasoning, and with such Propension, that tho oftentimes they would, they
cannot forbear. Those who burn with Revenge or Envy, do relent when they see
the Misery of that Creature to which they wished the worst of Evils, and their
Misery may become so great, that there arises thence a Compassion and
suffering with the miserable Creature, with a desire to relieve it.

Mercy therefore implies a Displeasure, or Grief for a Miserable Creature, and
a desire to relieve it, whether from Misery incumbent or imminent; so a
merciful Man shelters a Creature from the Avenger. This natural Inclination of
Mercy may be, and often is much abated and eradicated by contrary evil
Inclinations and Custom; as those that murder for Gain, and too many become not
only void of Compassion, but cruel, contrary to Mercy, delighting to behold the
Misery of others: but then they are reckoned to put off Humanity, and that Pain
that is felt in the Heart and Bowels upon the sight of Misery.

Misery is not every Evil of Suffering and Want, but the Prevalence of them, to
which alone Mercy is applicable, which being an innate Inclination given to us
of God, cannot but be pleasant to God the Giver, and is a Remainder of his
Image in the Natural Conscience; he delights much in the Mercifulness of his
Creatures, and it is an eminent Sign of those that are in his Favor, which
appears by that Article of the Lord's Prayer, Forgive us our Sins, as we
forgive them that sin against us; intimating that none can with hope ask Mercy
of God who are not merciful. The Mercy of Creatures may often be exercised in
Fellow-feeling or Compassion, when they are not able to help, but still there
is a desire to help.

Mercy when effectual, consists in giving and forgiving, which is a giving of
Remission or Pardon of that which may be exacted or inflicted by the Forgiver,
in so far as it is in his Power; as when a Creditor forgives his poor Debtor,
whom he might throw and detain in Prison, which is the Forgiveness of a Debt;
or when an injured Person forbeareth to insist against the Injurer for
Punishment, or absolutely passes from him; which may be where there is a Debt
of Reparation beside the Punishment, and may be also without these. Punishment
is not properly a Debt, as I have cleared my self in the preceding Meditation;
and therefore Mercy in Forgiveness of Punishment, is Forgiveness of a Crime or
Fault, which God has allowed the Injured to forgive to the Penitent, even to
seventy and seven times: But there be Crimes which do more concern the
Commonwealth than a particular Interest, whereunto the Example is pernicious;
these cannot be forgiven by private Persons, and ought only to be forgiven by
the Commonwealth, when the Punishment would give more Inconvenience to the
Commonwealth than the Forbearance.

Mercy even in Creatures is not of Justice, as a Debt, but of Benignity: for
tho it be very necessary for Mankind, and therefore God has given a strong
natural Propension to it before it be perverted, yet he has not imposed it as
a Debt to be punishable for the Omission, but rewarded for the Performance; and
therefore it is said, to the Merciful he will be merciful; for all that is due
by Justice, stateth a Power to claim or exact in the Person to which it is due.
It is an eminent Office of Humanity to relieve the Distressed, to give Alms to
the Poor, yet they have no Power to claim or exact it.

By the Divine Vestige of Mercy in the Creature, I am helped to the more
distinct Knowledge of the infinite Mercy of the Creator, wherein the Difference
will easily appear both by Reason and Revelation; I shall therefore compare the
two in what they agree, and in what they disagree.

The Mercy of God and the Mercy of the Creature agree in this, that both
respect a miserable Object, yet not so that it must be infinite and eternal
Misery: For God has Mercy on many of his Creatures, to whom he does not
forgive their Sins; for he has Mercy upon Nations and Communities, who are not
capable of that kind of Pardon. How often has he recorded his Mercy to
Idolatrous Israel, when they cried to him in their Misery, and perhaps had
Sorrow for that particular Sin, whereby they did nationally provoke, but it was
not a Repentance unto Life, for that must be of all Sin, tho of some more
eminently than of others? God had Mercy on wicked Ahab, and said to the
Prophet, Do thou not see how Ahab humbles himself? yet Ahab was far from
saving general Repentance. God has Mercy on the Wicked generally in delaying
the inflicting of his Judgments against them, sometimes during the course of a
long Life: and many think that he has Mercy on the Devils till the Day of
Judgment.

It has puzzled many eminent Divines, how it can consist with God's Justice to
show any Mercy to the Reprobate: for if without Satisfaction to his Justice he
might be merciful, he might have forborne for ever to punish any Sin, much more
to punish the Sin of the Elect; and if he might forbear Punishment of Sin for
an hundred Years, no Man can determine when he behoved to begin, so that he
might delay for a Million of Millions of Years.

The Difficulty is increased, because many good Men through the hatred of the
Socinian, Popish and Arminian Opinion, that Christ died equally for all Men,
and procured them universal Grace, that they might repent or not repent at
their Option, run into the other Extreme, that Christ purchased nothing but to
the Elect; and therefore endeavor to loose the Knot by the resemblance of
Civil Powers, whom Justice obliges to punish, but leaves the Time to their
Discretion. This Solution imports nothing, for the Justice of Civil Powers is
not to expiate, but to suppress Crimes: That which deserves eternal Punishment,
can never be expiated by all that they are able to do; but God's Justice is for
Expiation. I doubt not that the Mediator has procured Temporal Mercies even
for the Reprobate, and that tho by his Purchase there is no Grace given them,
yet that it is sincerely offered to all that come to Discretion, and that it
was the Reprobates fault that they did reject it, and will be their eternal
Accusation against themselves, else how could it be said, Turn ye, turn ye, Why
will ye die? Nor could it be complained by God, That they would have none of
him, that they hardened their Hearts, and stiffned their Necks against him. Nor
on the contrary, That his longsuffering Patience leads unto Repentance. Tho
this may be said only for the Elect, it is also said, I gave them time to
repent, and they repented not; which could only be meant of the Reprobate, who
are frequently said to be inexcusable, that is, they have no Excuse that they
have thrown themselves into Misery; yea their own Natural Conscience shall not
suffer them to think that they were inevitably miserable. It is not enough to
say, that the Reprobate are inexcusable, because there are many Sins that they
might have omitted, and did not, if the Remainder were inevitably effectual for
their Damnation.

I do not think that the outward Privileges of the Church, and the Tastes of
the Powers of the World to come, and that Illumination that even Reprobates
attain who never had true and saving Grace, in which they exceed the finest
Heathens, are otherwise accountable than by the Purchase of Christ: Nay, I do
not believe that the damned Spirits having liberty of going to and fro in the
Earth, is from Mercy, as if their Damnation were allayed or abated till the
general Judgment; but that they are sent out as the Executioners of God's
Justice, being still in that Torment of Conscience wherein Hell does consist,
tho it be allayed by accidental Consequences, being by their acting somewhat
diverted from the full poring on their Misery. God only knows the exact
Proportion of Punishment and Sin, according to Merit; and as the Damned always
continue and increase in their Hatred against God, so their Misery may be
increased.

There is also a Resemblance between the Mercy of the Creator and the Creature,
that neither is extended to every kind of Evil; some Punishments may be so
great that will not breed Pity in the most merciful, because of the Atrocity of
the Crimes: so the Mercy of God extends not to the Sin against the Holy Ghost,
which must imply a high measure of Knowledge of the Divine Perfections, and yet
by the Exorbitancy of Self-love, a Hatred and Despite against God, as not
bestowing so much as these malicious Wretches think he should. And I think that
was a main Difference in the Fall of the damned Spirits, and Adam's Fall, tho
he was innocent, and had a great measure of Knowledge and Happiness, yet far
short of theirs, they abode not in that Station God placed them in; for by
their Sin they desired to rise higher, and therefore in God's Justice they were
brought exceeding much lower. How far they have lost of their Natural
Perfections I know not, but sure they have lost their Moral Perfections, and
that Joy wherewith once they were blessed: they tempted Man by the same Bait,
by which they deceived themselves, inducing them to be discontent with what God
had given, and that he had forbidden to eat of that Fruit, not as a Badg of
their Obedience in an indifferent thing, as to which they had no inbred
Principle to prompt them on either side, but because he envied the Happiness
they would attain to by eating that Fruit which would make them wise, to know
both Good and Evil: therefore the Devils seem to have sinned against the Holy
Ghost, which Man being of a less Capacity, did not; and none but those Men that
attained to the Gifts of Illumination, and the Taste of the Powers of the World
to come, and yet do despite against God, cannot be restored, nor are not to be
prayed for, in whom no doubt Hell is begun by the tormenting of their
Conscience: and therefore God's Way is equal, both as to Angels and Men; yet in
Justice he was not obliged to have Mercy upon any Sinner, but it was not
congruous to his glorious Nature to receive into Favor such horrid Sinners.

There is another Resemblance of the Mercy of the Creator and the Creature,
that it is not equally to be applied to those who have the Offer of a
Reconciliation upon Repentance, and do obstinately reject that Offer, and will
continue to insist in, and approve the Injuries done. By Reflection on our own
Mind we find it to be so in Men, and yet it is evident to be no part of our
Essence or Nature; and therefore it must be an inbred Principle freely given of
God, and a part of his Image. God has incited us to forgive those that offend
us to seventy and seven times, yet still it is upon their Return. Mercy may
take place by Forgiveness simply given, without an Offer of Reconciliation, but
it exceeds Humanity to forgive so far as not only not to endeavor Punishment,
but to offer Reconciliation when it is obstinately refused.

There is yet another Resemblance of the Mercy of God and Man, that there is no
Right in the Injurer to claim it, tho he may implore it, but it is an Act of
Benignity and Goodness: God has injured no Creature if he had never received
into Favor any Sinner; But he will have Mercy on whom he will have Mercy, and
whom he will he hardens: that is, he gives the Offer of Mercy and
Reconciliation, and permits the Wicked to reject the Offer, whereby they
become more hardened in their Sin and Impenitence.

But infinite is the Distance and the Difference between the Mercy of God, and
the Mercy of Men. For;

1. Man's Mercy may by contrary Custom be eradicated, and Cruelty succeed in
its place; Man's Mercy may be overcome with the frequency of Injuries: nothing
like these can befall in the Mercy of God, which is unchangeable, and no
multitude of Sins can be so great as should give Despair.

2. Man's Mercy if it be obtained and violated in the same kind is hardly
renewed, but where God has once given Pardon, no new Breach does exclude it;
yea he gives Repentance, exciting the Sinner thereto, that he may forgive
sutably to his Nature, and often accepts general Repentance of inadverted Sins,
and even habitual Repentance, where actual cannot be exerted, as in those that
die before they have time to have an elicite Act of Repentance for Sins
committed immediately before Death.

3. Man's Mercy does often go no further than Compassion, and desire to help
without Ability. God's Omnipotence does ever make his Mercy effectual and
complete.

4. Man does often forgive one Fault, and retain others; God's Forgiveness of
Sin is ever entire and universal, where it is: for all Sins preceding are ever
forgiven, where there is Repentance for all Sin; but where some Temporal
Punishment is only forgiven, the Sin is not forgiven simply.

5. Man may repent that he did forgive, whether by the mutability of his
Nature, or by the discovery of aggravating Circumstances unknown when he
forgave; nothing of this can occur to the Omniscient God.

6. Injuries may be so atrocious that exceed Man's Mercy (without supernatural
Grace) in which he will never offer Reconciliation. No Sin can be so heinous,
but that the Merit of Christ is sufficient for remitting it, not excepting the
Sin against the Holy Ghost, which is not unpardonable by the Insufficiency of
Christ's Merit, neither yet because there is less Power in Man to repent for
that Sin than others, because he is utterly incapable to repent for any Sin
till God give him the Grace of Repentance, but because it is incongruous to the
Divine Nature, and to the Glory of God, to receive into favor such Sinners:
But in all others, tho they were as Crimson, God offers Pardon and
Reconciliation, and will effectually give them, if the Offer be not obstinately
rejected; yea the height of God's pardoning Mercy reaches so far, that he has
even had Mercy upon frequent and long Rejecters, pulling them as Firebrands out
of the Fire, whose Souls did cleave to their Abominations; and he continues
many such Sinners in Life without kindling Hell in their Consciences, with
design to magnify his Mercy upon them; wherein Consideration may be had of the
Kindness he had to their Ancestors, or of their extraordinary Temptations, or
simply by his absolutely free and unbounded Grace: but these Firebrands are but
some and few, and ought not to encourage Sinners to cleave to their Sins, and
reject the Offer of Mercy and Reconciliation. We have one clear Example of
Pardon to the Thief on the Cross at the point of Death, that none might
despair, and but one, that none might presume.

God's long-suffering Patience and Forbearance of Sinners, are Acts of his
Mercy, whereby the Effect of his Justice is delayed, which are never in vain;
for either forgiving Mercy does at last take place, or at least the Glory of
God's Goodness is manifested upon obstinate, inexcusable, and self-condemned
Sinners, not that he delights or designs to make them such, but to manifest the
superabundance of his Grace, in giving them a sincere and true Offer of
Reconciliation, and not by causing them to reject it, but by not causing them
to entertain it, when his Glory did not require it.

The Mercy of God is a most eminent and most amiable Moral Perfection; his
other Goodness does either presuppose something in the Object, not as a Merit,
but as a Mean. His Faithfulness supposes the Faith of his Creatures, trusting
or hoping for that Good which he has not promised, nor shown that he has
purposed it. His Goodness in Creation, supposes nothing in the Object for it,
yet nothing against it; but his forgiving Mercy and Reconciliation presuppose
those things which are extremely opposite, sometimes the most irrational Injury
and Enmity, actually in some, and habitually in all by natural or acquired
Inclinations.

Mercy is the most amiable Divine Perfection that provokes the most fervent
Love to God; as Christ said to the Woman who washed his Feet with her Tears,
and wiped them with her Hair, Her Sins which are many, are forgiven, for she
loved much; but to whom little is forgiven, the same love little.

There is more of Mercy expressed in the whole course of Scripture, than of all
the other Divine Perfections, the main Scope thereof being to show the Mercy of
God toward Mankind, which he foresaw lapsed in a miserable Condition, and of
his inconceivable Mercy: he designed the way of their escape from Misery, and
their becoming Heirs of Glory through the Satisfaction of his Son Christ Jesus;
whereby he might give Mercy and Forgiveness, without incroaching upon his
Justice, and so made both Mercy and Justice to meet together, and attain both
their Effects.

When God manifested himself to his beloved Moses, and proclaimed his Name
before him, by which he would be designed as his most proper Character, he
said, The Lord, the Lord God, merciful and gracious, long-suffering and
abundant in Goodness and Truth, keeping Mercy for thousands, forgiving
Iniquity, Transgression and Sin, and that will in no way clear the Gulilty.
Mercy is the leading and inculcate Attribute, thrice repeated, Justice is last.
The Paths of the Lord are not only said to be merciful, but Mercy in abstracto;
and his Mercy is plenteous, he is full of Mercy, his Mercy is multiplied, Mercy
belongs to him, he desires Mercy rather than Sacrifice, his Mercy is tender,
he is rich in Mercy, his Mercy is everlasting, it is his Saints Joy who sing of
his Mercy.

MEDITATION XVI. Upon the Faithfulness of God.
FAithfulness is that Perfection whereof Faith or Trust does immediately lay
hold, and rest. The Term is diversely taken, there is not another proper Word
but it to signify both the being worthy of Trust and Faith, and the having
Faith: But when it is applied to God, it imports not the Subject, but the
fitted Object of the Faith, which does import an Inclination to do that Good
which is believed or hoped for, sutably to the Giver and Receiver, freely,
without Right to claim it; wherever there is a Right to claim, there is an
Obligement or Tie to perform, and the Performance is an Act of Justice, not of
Benignity, or mere Decency.

The moral Perfections of Men are of three sorts, Justice, Benignity and
Decency; Justice implies an Obligement or Tie to perform, and a Right or Power
to claim and exact. Benignity is an Inclination to do good to another, freely,
without Necessity, or Obligement to do it, or Right to claim it; which
sometimes respects its Object under no other Consideration than that it is
capable of that Good, and this is specially called Goodness: Such is God's
Goodness in Creation, Preservation, and giving those good things which are not
believed or expected, such as Acts of mere Liberality; but other Acts of
Benignity are upon special Considerations, beside the Capacity to receive, as
Mercy to the Miserable, tho they do not trust or expect it; but Faithfulness
considers the Object, as trusting or hoping, not simply; for one may trust or
hope for that that is not suitable for him to receive, or for the Person trusted
to give, and so it is an unwarrantable Expectation, and not Faith, but
Presumption: Such was the desire of the Mother of Zebedee's Children to Christ,
That the one might sit on his Right Hand, and the other on his Left Hand in his
Kingdom; and such is commonly the Hope of the Hypocrite, who trusts to obtain
Happiness without Holiness. But Faith must be a well-grounded Faith, hoping or
trusting for such things as are becoming the Person trusted to give, and the
Truster to receive, and that upon Consideration that trusts; for tho the Good
done were both suitable to the Giver and Receiver, yet were not given to the
Receiver as trusting and hoping to receive, it were an Act of Goodness, but not
an Act of Faithfulness. The third sort of Moral Perfections is Decency, which
respects the Actor only, and not any other, and is done alone, because it is
suitable and becoming that Person so to behave. Every Virtue or Moral Perfection
consists in a Congruity to the Actor, and so is Decency, whether the Act be
terminate on the Actor, or on another: But there is no special Name to signify
that Decency that terminates on the Actor, but it retains the common Name, and
so is Decency strictly taken.

As Man bears the Image of God, the Light of Nature shows, that all those
Perfections which he gave Man, are originally and eminently in God. He is just,
and acknowledges himself Debtor so to be, in the distribution of Rewards and
Punishments, in the performance of his Promises, whence there is a Right to
claim them, tho there be no Power to exact them: He is good, and does good in
some kind to all; he makes his Sun to shine, and his Rain to fall upon the Just
and Unjust; he opens his bountiful Hand, and bestows what is necessary for
every living thing, while he allows it Life: He is merciful and pitieth the
very Ravens when they cry for want of Food, and much more supplies the
Necessities of Men, even when they do not trust or expect it. All these
Perfections respect his Creatures, and it is evident that they are without
Obligation, and in that differ from his Justice, and so is also his Providence
and Government of the World: but his Truth and his Wisdom are Perfections
terminated on himself, as their peculiar End, they are free, for none can be
obliged to himself; yet they are more necessary than the Acts of Bounty, which
he might forbear, but they are comprehended under the Decency proper to God on
his own account, tho there had never been a Creature, he would ever have been
true, his Thoughts being ever conform to their Objects.

The Faithfulness of God then is comprehended in his Bounty or Benignity,
respecting his Creature as warrantably trusting in him.

As the Term Faithfulness is variously taken, so the thing is commonly very
indistinctly, and sometimes erroniously understood, confounding Faithfulness
with Justice and Truth; and supposing there is no Warrant for Faithfulness but
upon Promise, and upon the Truth of God in that Promise, which is a great
Mistake; for the Performance of a Promise is an Act of Justice, and Truth is
not an Object of Trust, but when Words or Signs to express it are emitted; but
Faith may warrantably be where God has made no Promise, nor expressed any
Word. When God created Angels and Men, before he made any Promise to them, they
did know from his excellent Nature, and firmly trust, that if they did not
offend him he would never make them miserable, and they might have trusted for
particular Favors, not in the way of Reward. I know no clear Evidence from
Scripture, that God promised to Adam that he should never be annihilated, only
I see that he threatens Death if he transgressed his Command in eating the
forbidden Fruit; whence it is collected that God promised him Eternal Life, and
even Immortality, and that he entered into Covenant with him, wherein Adam
willingly engaged himself to the Obedience of God, and God did promise Life and
Immortality to him, to his Wife, and their Posterity, and to raise them from an
Animal Life on Earth, to an Angelical Life in Heaven, without the Dissolution
of Soul and Body by Death; and (as it is commonly believed) the good Angels
after they had given proof of their Obedience, were confirmed, that they should
never fall. There is no less ground to believe that the like Favor would have
been granted to Man not only for himself, that he should not fall, but that a
greater measure of Perfection should be given to his Posterity, that they might
not be under the Necessity of falling; and it is evident and certain, that by
his Transgression in eating the forbidden Fruit, he lost these Benefits both to
himself and his Posterity; but by the infinite Mercy and Benignity of God,
Christ the second Adam perfected and performed what the first Adam had lost.

Can any Man pretend that the particular Favors that the Saints have always
prayed for from God, were all promised by God? or, did he express his Purpose
to give them? No certainly, and yet they did warrantably trust, and prayed in
Faith for them, and obtained that which they prayed for; whereof there are
innumerable Examples in Scripture and Experience: And therefore it is said,
that the fervent Prayer of the Godly avails much: If the Import of Men's
Prayers should only be, that God should be just in the performance of his
Promise, and be as good his Word, I see not how Prayer could be said to avail
much; for God would be true and just whether any Creature prayed or not: But
God grants many things upon the earnest Prayer of his People, which were
neither promised nor necessary, and had no other Convenience but to satisfy
their longing Desire, which if it be not incongruous for God to do, or them to
receive, as being hurtful to them, if Faith be not wanting, the Effect will not
fail. Was there either Necessity or Promise for the Prophet's stopping the
Clouds of Heaven for three Years and six Months? and for obtaining Rain when
there was no second Cause for it? Is it not warrantable to pray to be inclined
or directed in the Choice of a Calling, a Match, or any lawful Undertaking, or
for the Success of the Choice? Is there any Promise for these Particulars? Yea
tho it be said by Christ to the Apostles, That whatsoever ye shall ask the
Father in my Name, he will do it, I take it rather to be a Declaration of God's
Faithfulness, and of the Effect of faithful Prayer, not signifying an
Engagement, but a Resolution: And I think it were a very unbecoming manner of
praying, to say, Lord, Thou have promised that whatsoever I demand in Christ's
Name, thou will grant it; this I demand, and therefore I claim it as due by thy
Justice and Truth, which thou can not refuse. With God's Grace that never
shall be my strain, God has declared that he will give Salvation and Glory to
all that shall have saving Faith, trusting to obtain these with Sutableness,
which cannot be toward those who resolve to cleave to and pursue their Sins.
Suppose this were not only a Declaration, but a proper Promise, and that the
Performance were an Act of God's Justice and Truth, yet where has he promised
that he will give Faith to this or that Man that believes? And should he that
believes claim Salvation, as an Act of Truth and Justice, and not as a free
Act of God's Mercy and Benevolence, and specially as an Act of God's
Faithfulness, that he will not disappoint the becoming Hope or Trust of his
Creature?

Trust among Men is not accounted when they obtain a clear Obligation, tho it
had been granted freely, because the Obliged can be compelled to perform; but
it is accounted a Trust when there is no Promise, but that from the Nature of
the Deed it is to be presumed not to be a Donation in favor of the Person
trusted, but with Intention and Expectation that he would restore to the
Truster, or those who derive Right from him, upon demand. God of his Benignity
to further the Faith of his Creatures, does not only promise where no Promise
was necessary, but gives Seals and Oaths, not so much to secure the Effect, as
to produce Faith, and therefore the Effect should ever be attributed to God's
Faithfulness, and to the Creature's Faith, resting on that Faithfulness.

I know that God's Justice, Truth and Faithfulness have been oftentimes joined,
as Man's also may. When a Man obtains a written valid Obligation, suppose it
were for a valuable Consideration, there concurs the Justice of that Person,
who may be compelled to perform his Truth; that as he expressed his Purpose to
perform, so truly he so intended, his Faithfulness also in so far only as that
it is expected he will punctually and readily perform without Compulsion, and
he were unfaithful if he did not so perform, untrue if he did not intend to
perform when he engaged, as well as unjust by not performing. These may all
concur in God, but his Justice in performing his Promise, and his Truth in
intending to perform it, can never be separated; yet his Faithfulness may be
without them in particular Acts, so may his Justice in Rewards and Punishments
be without any Word, and consequently without Truth in that Word, and both may
be without exerting Faithfulness.

The Ground and Warrant of Faith is the excellent Disposition of the Person
trusted, whereby it were incongruous to him to disappoint the Expectation and
Confidence which he knew were placed in him, and were not rejected by him: The
Psalmist says, They that know thy Name, will put their Trust in thee; for thou
Lord have not forsaken them that seek thee. Here the Knowledge of God's Name,
which signifies his excellent Nature, is the ground of Trust, and specially
that Divine Perfection that he will not forsake them that seek him. Here is no
relation to a Promise, the Psalmist founds his Prayer both on God's
Faithfulness and on his Justice in performing his Promise, and not on this
alone, when he says, Hear my Prayer, O Lord, give Ear to my Supplications; in
thy Faithfulness answer me, and in thy Righteousness; where these are clearly
distinguished. The same Psalmist says in another place, Thy Mercy, O Lord, is
in the Heavens, and thy Faithfulness reaches unto the Clouds; Thy Righteousness
is like the great Mountains: where God's Faithfulness and his Righteousness are
clearly diversified. If one should trust in a powerful virtuous Person, if he
did not make his Trust known to that Person, he could not be said to disappoint
him, or to fail in Faithfulness; yet the Manifestation of Confidence may be
without Words, and sometimes it is unfit to be by Words, and it may be abstract
from Particulars, and be left to the Discretion of the Person trusted: So the
Attendance, the Dependence, the humble and kindly Countenance may better
express Confidence than Words, which are more frequently false. Courtiers do
manifest their Confidence in Princes, Soldiers in their Generals, and
Creatures may so express their Considence in God; but it is more proper to pray
to God in Faith for particular Favors, as being more the Homage and Dependence
of his Creature, than the urging his Justice on general Promises.

It is not Faith, but Folly, to trust in any but those that are endued with
Virtue and moral Perfections, or in these for things that the Person trusted
has not, or which were unbecoming for him to bestow; therefore there is no
Creature on which there can be laid entire and absolute Faith, because the
Inconveniency may occur, that they cannot satisfy. In this Sense God may be
said to be only Faithful, as well as only Wise and Good; one may trust when he
is not wise in trusting, yet he may become unfaithful that admitted the Trust:
they were very unwise that would trust a Secret to a Liar, or the managing of
an Affair to an imprudent Person, or Money to a Prodigal; yet if they did admit
of the Trust, they were unfaithful if they failed.

It is very evident, that it is highly congruous, and worthy of the Divine
Perfections to be faithful, and it were inconsistent with these, to disappoint
the Faith of his Creatures, trusting in him for things fit for him to give, and
them to receive, without consideration of any Promise, or Declaration of his
purpose so to do. It is fully evident, that it were unsuitable to him to give
Happiness to them that love not Holiness, or to pardon Sin to those whose Souls
cleave to it, or to give the highest Favor to such, or Glory to any in the
next Life, to whom he never gave Grace in this, in Act or Inclination, which by
the very Light of Nature do appear; but by Revelation God has clearly declared
in what Things he will not allow of Trust or Faith in him, or Hope from him,
especially for obtaining Reconciliation, Forgiveness and Happiness, and has
expressly declared when Faith is saving. God bestows many good Things out of
Commiseration, or mere Goodness upon those that have not saving Faith; nor can
I say, that he does not bestow some good Things upon such, even upon
consideration of their trusting in him for them; as by the Faith of Miracles,
upon whose Confidence he exerted his supernatural Power, though at the great
Day he rejects them who had that Faith. Those who do not by Word or Sign
signify that they allow not the Confidence or Hope of these who pertinently
signify it, do fail in their Faithfulness, if they disappoint them.

My Thoughts upon God's Faithfulness do exceedingly clear me in that eminent
Point, that Faith is the only Consideration on which God gives Pardon,
Reconciliation and Happiness, and not upon Love, or any other good Work, as
never to be claimed upon rewarding Justice or Merit, but of free Favor and
Grace alone. Albeit Love to God, or Reverence and Obsequiousness to him, be
more excellent Perfections than Faith, for in Faith the Creature has
Consideration of the return to it self, and much more in Fear, but Love is
terminated alone upon God himself, and upon no return from God, which would
make it defective. The Love of Gratitude is for what is already received, but
the Love of God, purely on consideration of his infinite Perfections, is the
highest moral Perfection of Creatures. If Happiness had been by the Creatures
Love, Reverence or Obedience, it would have been by Justice and Debt, not by
Grace; as the Apostle says, to him that works, the Reward is not reckoned of
Grace, but of Debt; but being by Faith, there can be no pretense of Debt or
Justice. There is no more ground for him that hopes or trusts, to attribute the
Effect to himself, as deserving it by his Faith, than if the Miserable should
imagine his Misery were the Cause of Mercy shown him. I never find a Reward
attributed to Faith; for tho it be said, cast not away your Confidence, which
has great Recompense of Reward, Confidence there is not Faith, but Forwardness
and Boldness, for in the Original it is not (...), but (...). Though Faith were
in the Power of fallen Man, he could have little more ground to boast of
Happiness on occasion of it, than the Beggar of his Poverty, which is the
occasion of Alms, or the Oppressed of Oppression, as the Cause of his Relief,
or than the Infant or Idiot of his Salvation. God could have given all good
Things without either Prayer or Faith, as he does to Infants; but it is a far
greater Measure of Benignity, to give that which is longed for, and desired by
Prayer, and which is hoped and trusted by Faith; but saving Faith it self is
not in Man's Power by Nature, or by universal Grace, but is given to the Elect
in Conversion.

God has frequently assumed the Title of faithful in the Scripture, as the
faithful God, the faithful Creator, the faithful Witness, the faithful Lord,
and he that calls is Faithful. God can no more deny his Faithfulness, than he
can deny himself; as it is said, if you believe not, yet he abides faithful,
he cannot deny himself.

Mercy takes away Misery, but Faithfulness freely gives eternal Glory, and
withholdeth no good thing; rewarding Justice keeping proportion with Merit,
Faithfulness has no Bound.

Faithfulness is a most eminent Perfection, and moral Virtue; for the Breach of
it is Treachery and Treason, much more abhorred by God and Man, than the
failing in Performance of natural Obligations or Engagements, and therefore
Treachery has the most atrocious Punishment.

I adore and bless thee O God, who have exceeded all thy Goodness to Creatures
in thy Faithfulness, which exceeds the Goodness of Creation, Preservation and
Providence, rewarding Justice, and even Mercy it self, which only extends to
Relief and Necessity, but Faith to all good Things, which are becoming thee to
give, and thy believing Creatures to have.

MEDITATION XVII. Upon the Wisdom of God.
WISDOM is the Divine Attribute nearest God's Decrees and Dispensations,
whereby he contriveth all his Purposes and Decrees toward his Creatures, as is
worthy of, and becoming his glorious Majesty, according to which all things do
unchangeably and certainly come to pass; therefore I have resolved to meditate
upon it immediately before his Dominion.

Wisdom is diversely taken, more extensively it comprehends all eminent
Knowledge, contemplative or practical, and even the Skill of Arts, but more
strictly it excludes that Skill; but the most proper Signification of Wisdom
relates only to Practice, and it is of the same Import with Prudence or
Discretion, tho these are seldom attributed to God, but to Creatures; yet
Wisdom is more strictly taken for sublime and universal Prudence, as to the
whole Course of Life. One may be prudent in a comely and discreet Behavior,
carrying himself becomingly to every Person in common Converse, who may be
faulty in his main Project, and so is not to be esteemed Wise, but he only who
has a right Design for his whole Life, and who chooses fit Means for that
Design. God has given an unalterable Inclination to all his rational
Creatures, to desire their own Happiness, which does ever bring it self in
remembrance, and is ordinarily their last End, tho God gave them a higher
Principle, to make Him their last End; and they alone are wise who have the
Glory and Pleasure of God for their last End, to which all their other Designs
and Purposes are subordinate: that is the Wisdom which is from above, which the
Apostle James does excellently describe, that it is first pure, then peaceable,
gentle, and easily to be entreated, full of Mercy and good Fruits, without
Partiality or Hypocrisy.

Wisdom uses to be taken as a part of Knowledge; yet tho Knowledge be in Wisdom,
it is distinct from it, and consists more in the Will and Inclination to choose
and follow only that which is morally good and fit. So it is said, to one is
given by the Spirit the Word of Wisdom, to another the Word of Knowledge by the
same Spirit. There may be Means to effectuate good Ends, which yet if chosen it
would be no Act of Wisdom. We must not do Evil that Good may come; Fraud and
Deceit are not only distinct from, but opposite to true Wisdom, no less than
Force when used for that which it cannot, or ought not to be effectuated: And
therefore the same Apostle says, the Wisdom that descends not from above is
earthly, sensual and devilish, which is but abusively called Wisdom, and is
well expressed by three Terms, signifying three Kinds, the Wisdom of the
Malicious is devilish, of the Voluptuous is fleshly, and that which is used to
promote unwarrantable Profit, is worldly.

The Wisdom of God is excellent, it is infinite; tho it be certain and
evidently appprehensible, yet is it incomprehensible and unsearchable: so says
the Psalmist, Thy Thougbts are very deep; and the A postle says, O the depth
of the Riches both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his
Judgments, and his Way past finding out? Nothing can be added to, or abated
from the Wisdom of God. It requires no less Wisdom than his, fully to know his
Wisdom: in Wisdom has he made all his Works; and therefore we owe an implicit
Faith unto his Wisdom. Tho we cannot perceive the reason of what he does, we
may innocently doubt whether some of his Acts be Acts of Justice or of Mercy,
but we may never doubt but they are Acts of Wisdom; yea the Apostle to the
Romans concludes well, To God only wise through Jesus Christ, be Glory for
ever, Amen. For he finds Folly in his Angels, even the most glorious
Seraphim. There have been many Things which they could never comprehend nor
contrive, and there might be infinitely more. They are neither free of
Ignorance, nor of innocent Error. There is no proportion between their Wisdom
and God's; and therefore it is as nothing in his Sight. So that as there is
none absolutely Good but He, so there is not any other absolutely Wise.

It were a Task never to be ended to pursue the Wisdom of God in all his
Decrees and Dispensations, of which little can be reached in the State of
Mortality; yea it will be the exercise of the Mind to Eternity, in the State of
Glory, yielding and increasing a continual Delight. The innumerable variety of
God's Creatures, their Parts, their Powers, their Preservation and Productions,
afford matter of search and delight to the most glorious Angels: Therefore God
says to Job, Where wast thou when I laid the Foundations of the Earth? declare
if tbou bast understanding, when the morning-Stars sang together, and all the
Sons of God shouted for Joy. Where the Sons of God must signify the Angels, who
were created before the terrestrial Globe was framed and invested with all its
Ornaments, when as yet Man was not created. I shall therefore only endeavor to
excite my Admiration, by some few eminent Instances of the Wisdom of God, in
which I cannot see so good a Method, as the Order God followed in his
Dispensations, from whence his Decrees are inferred.

1. Then it was the Wisdom of God that he did not create the World so soon as
he did decree it, whereby he showed that to his Perfection and Blessedness he
had no need of it.

2. It was both the Wisdom and Goodness of God, that he did not with one Act of
his Omnipotent Fiat, bring at once the whole Creation out of the barren Womb of
nothing, but proceeded by Parts, that his Creatures might the more distinctly
know it: therefore the first Act of Creation was that To-hou-vo-bohou, which is
commonly rendered the Chaos; as if all the Kinds and Parts of Creatures had been
created in a jumbled confused Mass, and that the After-work as to Matter, had
only been the uniting and ordering of them, which I conceive to be a very
unsuitable Thought to the Wisdom of God, but rather that the first Matter was
the same that is yet the pure Ether, being next to nothing, having neither
Figure, Cohaesion, Pression or Motion; and yet was and is the necessary Mean of
Communication among all the Species that were to be created. The Angels might
exist in Vacuity, but they could not communicate their Thoughts at distance
without a Medium: It is a groundless Fancy of some dreaming Monks, that the
Angels communicate their Thoughts by their Will only, as if their Thoughts
should be known to the rest when they would have them known, and secret when
they would not. It is the incomunicable Property of God to work by the Will
only; they make Impressions upon the Ether, which by the Rays thereof, may be
communicated at whatever distance, yet these Impressions may be imperceivable
by Men; for some Men's Ears are so perfect that they can hear a Whisper at
distance, which no other does perceive, therefore it is more than probable that
the pure Ether was created before the Angels, and so they were but six Days of
older standing than Man. It does noways quadrate to the Wisdom of God that
these Days should be understood Years, it being sufficient distance by one Day
for Creatures to observe the stately Steps of the Divine Procedure.

3. The Wisdom of God appears in the variety of the Creation of rational
Creatures, capable to know him, and bearing his Image. The Angels were all
created together: it became the infinite Majesty to have that glorious Chorus
and Host of innumerable Angels about his Throne, admiring him, and ready to
obey all his Commands; and therefore it was not fit that any of them should
propagate their kind, which he reserved for Mankind, which were all to arise as
Branches from one Stock.

4. It was by the Wisdom of God that he created the Angels wholly depending on
himself, by an undispensible Obedience, whereby it was impossible that they
could have been left wholly to themselves, or to have placed themselves or
their Order as their last end. An Epicurean God unconcerned in the Actings of
his Creatures, is but an inconsistent Chimera, and an Idol: Therefore the
Angels could not be made with that Latitude of Liberty, that they should have
been in all things indifferent, but that they should have inbred Principles,
inclining them to choose and act sutably to the Divine Nature and their own.

5. It could not consist with the Divine Wisdom, that any Creature should have
been created so perfect, that there could be no place by Premiative Justice to
increase their Perfection, or that God should forgive their Transgressions
without manifesting his infinite Abhorrence of Sin by a perpetual Exclusion
from his Favor and Face, unless they had an infinite Mediator to satisfy his
Justice for them.

6. The infinite Wisdom of God did require that he would never create a
Creature which he could not govern, and make them effectually do whatsoever
were his Pleasure: For tho it had been essential to Freedom, that it could not
be effectually and certainly governed by another; yet seeing God had no need of
such Creatures, he would then not have created them. Government does
necessarily require Rewards and Punishments, therefore his Wisdom required that
his Rational Creatures should be created fallible: for if they could not fall
and trangress, they were not capable of Punishment; and if all their Natural
Principles and Inclinations had been given them in as much Strength as their
desire of their own Happiness, wherein they cannot possibly transgress by
contrary Desire, they had been capable of no Rewards by God's Premiative
Justice.

Hence the Folly of Man might be cured, when he thinks, Why did God suffer Sin
to come into the World? Could he not have prevented the Sin of the Angels who
fell, by making them impeccable, as he has made the persevering Angels, whom
he calls his Elect Angels? I see no reason that God has made their
Inclinations against all Sin, as strong as their Aversion to Misery, but that
he has given them Inclinations effectual for all their Duties, and much
stronger than at first; and thereby they are certain not to fall, but not
necessarily, necessitate Consequentis, but that they may be still meriting and
getting greater Perfections.

7. It is by the Divine Wisdom, as well as by his Goodness, that albeit all his
Rational Creatures were at first fallible, they should not still continue so;
for it were a very low degree of Happiness to be in a perpetual danger and
terror of falling: Therefore after some time of trial he confirmed the
persevering Angels, and made them without hazard of falling.

8. The Wisdom of God is seen as well as his Freedom, in that he provided no
Remedy for fallen Angels as he did for Man, they being of much more Perfection
than Man, and free from all carnal Appetites, and yet after partaking Celestial
Joy, they hated God that gave it, and perverted Man.

9. The Wisdom of God is seen in that he would make his Rational Creatures
obliged to be devoted to him, and that their Obedience should not be in Trifles
or indifferent Things, but in such Things as require Diligence and Attention;
and therefore the Principle of Self-love was so given both to Men and Angels,
which by their Inadvertence did exceed, and was the Cause of the Fall of both.

10. By the Wisdom of God we are sure that he does nothing in vain: that is in
vain which has no good End or Use; it is also in vain to do more than what is
convenient for the End designed.

The next Act of Creation, was the Creation of Light in the Celestial Fire, by
such a Motion that when not impeded, does perpetually vibrate and agitate the
Ether, which was at first in one Hemisphere of the Ether, before it was
collected and formed into the Sun and fixed Stars.

11. The Wisdom of God does eminently appear in so excellent a Contrivance of
the Propagation of Light by the rotation and interfering of the little
Particles of Fire, whereby the Ether is continually and necessarily agitated
and vibrated by straight Lines, unless they be reflected, the fullness of the
Ether without any Vacuity holding all the Rays straight, and so the least
Force can vibrate these Rays to any possible Distance, with as little Force as
at the nearest Distance, because the Ether has no Resistance; so that the
Rays of Light from a Candle can go as far as the Rays of the Sun, tho it cannot
be seen by Men at a great distance; seeing they cannot perceive Light but by
many Rays falling on their Eyes, and the Rays of a little Object do so soon
become distant from one another from a small Fountain, that more of them cannot
fall upon so little an Object as the Eye. The Particles of Fire severally have
so small Force that their rolling can easily be stopped, by which Men can so
easily be master of raising and quenching Fire: In all which the wonderful
Wisdom of the Divine Contrivance is resplendent.

The Work of the second Day of the Creation, was the creating of that Power of
Motion, or Pression of the several Parts of the Ether, whereby one Sphere of
it moved about, completing its Motion in twenty four hours, and thereby the
Light that was created in the one Hemisphere of the Ether illuminating one
side of the Earth, was carried about, and made Day and Night in the same way
that the Sun now does, and so made Day and Night before the Sun was created:
That Ether is called in the English Translation the Firmament, but by the
Dutch and Latin Translation is more accurately called the Expansum, or the
Bulk, having Parts stretched out, and is called the Waters, but more accurately
the Fluid, which comprehends both Water and Ether: for the same Word was used
before that the Spirit moved upon the Waters, there being nothing then but the
Chaos or pure Ether, and thereafter it is called Heaven which is that part of
Heaven in which the Sun and the Planets were after created; for that Heaven is
said to divide the Waters above from the Waters beneath, that is, the Ether in
which the fixed Stars are, above the Planetary Ether, and the Ether in which
the Terraqueous Globe is, being the Waters under the Planetary Sphere.

In the third Day of the Creation, that part of the Fluid which is now more
strictly and properly called the Water, and which surrounded the whole Face of
the Earth, was gathered together; God having made the Surface of the Earth
which at first was round, unequal by Mountains, Valleys and Plains, and by that
great and hollow Receptacle in which the Sea is contained, and thereby the dry
Land appeared, and the Waters of the Sea could never return to cover the Face
of it, tho by the miraculous Deluge not only all the Clouds, which are but
rarefied Water, fell down in Showers upon the Earth, but much more of the
Ether was turned into Water: the Clouds were but raised after the Separation
of Sea and Land; for it is said, There went up a Mist from the Earth, and
watered the whole Face of the Ground, the Return whereof could not have covered
the Mountains. After the Separtion, in the same day the creating Will of God
said, Let the Earth bring forth Grass, Herbs, and Trees, which did immediately
take Effect, and it was so.

In the Works of this Day the wonderful Wisdom of God does gloriously appear;

1. In the Structure of the Terraqueous Globe, being of a round Globular
Figure, most capable of the Vicissitudes of Day and Night, and of the several
Seasons, balanced by its own Weight in the midst of the World, and tho it be a
very small part of the World; yet the whole visible World has its Perfections
directed toward it, not upon its own account, but as it is the Habitation
fitted and destinated for Mankind, Its Figure makes it fit for Man's Habitation
upon all the sides and parts of it, being so contrived, that near both the
Poles there is nothing but the vast Ocean, where if there had been dry Land it
had been altogether uninhabitable.

2. The Figure of the Earth in its Inequalities shows the Wisdom of God, that
thereby the Sea is hemmed in, which is majestickly expressed by God in his
humbling Job, saying, Who shut up the Sea with Doors, when it brake forth, as
if it had issued out of the Womb, and brake up, for it is my decreed place, and
set Bars and Doors, and said, Hitherto shall thou come, but no further, and
here shall thy proud Waves be stayed. By the Mountains also there are Valleys,
whence the Rain that falls on the Mountains runs down into Valleys, and
makes them fruitful; and in the Mountains there are Fountains perpetually
flowing, whence arise Rivulets, and by their Concourse Rivers running down into
the Sea, and making a perpetual Circulation of Water from the Sea into these
Fountains, and from the Fountains back into the Sea, so making perpetual
Motion, which God only has immediately made. By these Rivers there is not only
Fruitfulness in the Valleys, by the reciprocal Vapors arising from them, and
returning to them, and the Lands about them by an unending Intercourse; they
are the Marches of Countries, and give much retardment and stop to the Invasion
of the Inhabitants on either side in time of War, but in time of Peace make an
easy Intercourse and Commerce among Men where they are navigable, which in many
is continued for many hundred Miles. If the Earth had been exactly round, the
Surface of it had been much less, and there could have been no Rivers, because
there could have been no Descent. The Mountains also serve to give shelter
against the Excess of the Sun, and shelter against the Tempest of the Wind.

3. In the Mountains all sorts of Metals are found, which were partly created,
and partly gathered, so that they have a kind of Growth like Trees.

4. The Mountains also are like Eliopils, the Wind springing from their
Caverns, from some of them so constantly and strongly, that from diverse sides
of the same Mountains there are Anniversary Winds, keeping their fixed Periods,
whereby Men know to sail from one Country to another, and to return by the vast
Ocean; but the nearer Distances where Men must pass in short time, the Winds
are variable that may serve them both to come and go; and the wonderful
Providence of God is seen in them, that Men are furthered or stopped in their
Designs according to his Purpose, and may warrantably trust and pray to be
served by these Winds without tempting God by desiring a Miracle: Tho the Winds
be the necessary Products of inscient Matter; yet God foresaw both the
Exigence, Faith, and Prayers of all his Creatures, and made the course of
Nature to answer them, as well as sometimes on their Prayers he changes the
course of Nature. If God in his Wisdom had not provided both these fixed and
variable Winds, the Intercourse and Communion of Mankind had been very small,
expensive and troublesome; it had been an unpleasant and dangerous undertaking
of a Voyage of many Months, if it had always been liable to contrary Winds; and
no less inconvenient in short Voyages, if Men could not go and return for many
Months together, until the turning of these stated Winds; and if there were no
Winds there were little Benefit by Rivers, and none at all by the vast Ocean.

It makes no Exception from the Wisdom of God, that all the Earth is not
equally fertile; for if it were it would be little noticed or valued; and
beside, God has balanced well the Advantages of the fertile and barren, warm
and cold Regions. In the cold Regions there is long Life, much Health, great
Strength and Courage, little Provocation to Luxury; so that in the fertile and
warm Countries where there is much of Plenty and Luxury, much of Idleness and
Thoughtfulness, more nimble Spirits, yet hardly has their Wit been able to
hold Balance with the Strength and Courage of the other. In Countries which
can scarcely sustain their Inhabitants, Necessity makes Invention, Diligence,
and Improvement: What strange height of Glory and Riches have the Venetians
come to, who had nothing at first but a few barren bare Rocks, where the
overflowing of barbarous Nations forced them to settle their Habitation? What
Riches and Strength have the Hollanders arisen to, who at first had but Spots
of Ground in the midst of vast Marshes?

Neither affords it any Exception that the most of the Terraqueous Globe is
Sea, seeing there is much more Land than is like ever to be fully improved and
inhabited by Mankind, Revelation having discovered the Residence of Mankind to
be but short upon Earth.

5. The Wisdom of God appears eminently in the Sea; for the Intercouse,
Commerce and Converse of Mankind, especially after the discovery of the
Direction of the Loadstone, whereby Mankind is now become like one great
Society, and thereby both the Requisites of Nature and Art are communicated
through the whole World, which could not effectually be attained by Rivers; for
we see how many Impositions and Impediments are made in the Passages of these,
and even in the narrow Channels of the Sea, which cannot be in the vast Ocean.

6. The stupendous Wisdom of God is seen in the Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea,
which has given a great Check to, and Abasement of the Pride of Man, who for
so many thousand of Years have never arrived at any satisfying Discovery of the
Causes thereof: In this also that the proudest Monarchs could never pretend the
Dominion of the Sea, nor of any of that vast Multitude of Creatures therein,
because it is capable of no Bounds, and so the least Fish in it can belong to
no Man; and therefore of God alone it can be said, that he has his Dominion in
the Sea.

7. In this Day's Work is that glorious Garment of the Earth, which at first
Creation was all clothed with Herbs, Grass and Trees of innumerable variety of
Kinds, in which the Wisdom of God shines forth sensibly.

(1.) In the Grass which is universally upon the whole Earth, and has that
singular in it, that it grows continually. All other Herbs and Plants have
their fixed times of rising, growing, decaying and falling, and there is no
other Herb that springs up of the same Root, but if the Herb be cut off,
neither it nor the Root can be made further to grow: In which the wise Design
of the Creator is, that the pleasant Verdure of the Earth may ever continue in
all Seasons of the Year, and that it may be the Food of the Beasts of the
Earth, great and small, though in the diverse Seasons Grass be in the diverse
Degrees of Perfection; hence Grass is not comprehended under the general Term
of Herbs, which yield Seed after their several Kinds, to wit sensible Seeds
framed by the Herbs, in which Seeds there are innumerable impalpable Seeds of
the same kind, which arise from the Earth, enterr'd as by the Roots in the
Earth, and are collected into these sensible Seeds on the Top of the Plants;
which is evident, because in one of the most minute sensible Seeds a great many
Herbs will arise, which must have their different Seeds so minute that no Sense
can reach; but tho Grass has also such sensible Seeds, it is seldom permitted
to come to the Seed, but does ever grow by the Root.

(2.) The Herbs are not universal over the whole Earth, nor everywhere under
the same Climate and Degree, but are wisely ordered to the several Places of
the Earth, where they may be most useful for the peculiar Uses of Men and
Beasts of that Place; and therefore many of them will not thrive and continue
in other Places, tho there be no difference between the Sun and Soil of both,
some of which will not continue in Verdure, others will not come to the
maturity of a Flower, and most will not come to have perfect Seed or Fruit; or
if the minute Seeds that were in their Bodies when transplanted come to a
sensible Seed, they will not reciprocate and continue.

(3.) On this Day were the Trees created, which do comprehend the Shrubs, and
the bulbous Plants, which are propagated not by the Seed, but by the Root,
sensibly divided in diverse Slips, whence the Blade tho cut off does grow again,
are rather to be referred to the Trees to which that is common, than to the
Herbs. This also is peculiar to Trees, that they have a different Fruit from
their Seed, which Fruit serves both to preserve, and to be the first Food of
their Seeds; and also have a several use for Animals, for their Food or
Physic; but other Trees have no Fruit beside their Seed, which is not so
tender, whence is the division of Trees into Fruit Trees and Barren-trees.

(4.) The wonderful Wisdom of God appears in that innumerable variety not
only of the same Kind, but of different kinds of Seeds, Herbs and Trees, their
Roots, Flowers and Fruits; all which have an innumerable variety of the Uses to
Man and Beasts, for Food and Physic, and yield Pleasure to Man by their Shape,
Proportions, Colors, Smells and Tastes.

(5.) The unsearchable Wisdom of God is seen in the inward Frame of the Plants
and Seeds by which their Aliment does enter and pass to all their Parts whereby
they grow, and new Parts sprout out, as Branches, Leaves, Flowers, Fruit in a
most orderly Course, which must be by regular Passages and Conduits, like the
Veins of Animals; some of these Passages are perceivable by the Eye or by
Microscopes, but some of them are so exile, that no Sense by the assistance of
any Instrument yet found can reach; the least sensible Seed, yea even the
insensible, cannot grow till its Aliment be thrust into these Passages, and
having no animal Motion, as the Passages of Animals have, the Aliment cannot
proceed through these Passages, but as it is protruded by extrinsick Force: How
wonderful then must that contrivance be, which is so orderly sending out first
Sprouts, then Leaves, then Flowers, then Fruits? And the Passages must be so
various and curious, that they will only admit the proper Parts of their
Aliment; and by recent Experiments it is found, that in these Passages there
are Valvulae, like to those in the Veins of Animals, which give way to the
Parts of the Aliment, but after it is entered, lest it recede, are closed, and
suffer it not to repass. That part of the Aliment which makes the Flower, must
be more fine and subtle than that which makes the Leaves, and the Sprouts and
Passages thereof must require a greater Heat to expand them, that the several
Parts of the Aliment may pass, which therefore succeed in their several
Seasons. The Industry of Man has not been able to discover whether the Leaves,
Flowers and Fruits of Plants, be Parts of the Plants on which they grow, or
whether they be different Plants having their own Seeds, which can only pass by
the peculiar Passages of the several Plants, and grow from their own Seeds,
seeing after they are complete they fall off without Violence; and it is hard
to apprehend how the grosser Passages of the principal Plants can by straining
the Aliment through them, figure it in so admirable a Variety, whence such rare
Colors and Proportions do arise: however it be, there must be the Contrivance
of so much Wisdom as has given and shall give all the Generations of Mankind a
pleasant Exercise to discover more and more, yet leaving ever more
undiscovered. This might and ought to check the Pride of Man in his Knowledge,
and make him admire and adore the Wisdom of God in this so low a Step of his
Works of Nature.

(6.) It is said, Let the Earth bring forth Grass, etc. as if it were a Command
to the stupid and unsensible Earth to work all these wonderful Things far
exceeding its own Perfection, tho all the Efficacy of the Sun, of the Stars,
and of Fire were adjoined, which has puzzled the most piercing Wits how these
things could come to pass, and many have been forced to attribute all to the
omnipotent Power of God alone, wherein they derogate highly from the Wisdom of
his Contrivance, and are contrary to Revelation: Why should he say to the
Earth, Bring forth Grass, Herbs and Trees, if nothing of the Earth had a
casuality in them? How could it be said that on the seventh Day God ended that
which he had made, and he rested from all his Works, if there be no Efficacy in
Creatures, but only that he creates not new Matter? It might as well be said,
the first Minute when he created the Chaos, that he had rested from all his
Works, as that he rested on the seventh Day, if that were the meaning. But I am
persuaded that on this third Day God created the Seeds of all Plants, with all
their Parts and Passages, and disseminated them near the Surface of the whole
Earth, as they might be most useful for his Ends, and that they do alwise
necessarily grow, when and where their proper Aliment enters in their
Passages, and proceeds by them.

(7.) The wonderful Wisdom and Goodness of God appears not only in the
Pleasure, but in the Profit of all these Plants, as the several Kinds of them
are the Food of the different Species of Animals, for which the several Animals
have their Instincts by which they have Pleasure in them, Appetite to them, and
Aversion to others, and yet more as they are the Physic of Animals, by their
several Parts, solid or fluid, chiefly by their Juices and Spirits. The Brutes
have their Instincts to know their Physic, which are not given to Man, that he
might not be idle, but improve Sense, Reason and Experience, to know what parts
or preparations of Plants served to prevent or cure all the Diseases that his
Irregularity has brought upon himself, or even upon the Beasts, which Virtues
were discovered to Adam, whereby he was enabled to give Names to Beasts, fitted
to express their peculiar and prime Perfections, which has been communicated
by Tradition, and increased by Experience; without such Tradition there can
hardly be any rational Account given of the Medicinal Skill, which has been so
much propagated in the World, tho the Causes thereof be very little known, so
that they could not be known by general Principles, and none were ever so
industrious, as by hap-hazard to apply to every Disease all things applicable,
to find out what would work, which might not warrantably be practiced upon Man,
lest thereby more might be killed than cured. Botanists have ranked Plants as
they are congenerous by their agreeing in Shape, Color, Taste and Smell; and
of late they have observed Marks in them, as different Signatures, more exactly
to show their physical Operations, all which comes far short of the Virtues of
Plants which are already discovered, much more of all the Virtues which are in
them.

Upon the fourth Day of the Creation, God created the Sun, the Moon and the
Stars, the Sun to rule the Day and the Moon to rule the Night, for Signs and
Seasons, and for Days and Years, which do not only give light through the whole
visible World, but do also much enlighten the Minds of rational Creatures with
the Knowledge of the Wisdom and Glory of the great Creator.

1. In the Sun, which is nothing else but a vast Globe of Fire, which was first
dispersed in the one Hemisphere of Heaven, whereby Light and Darkness, Day and
Night were divided, by equal Durations, for the first three Days, the Sun
having been created but the fourth Day, yet it was an Act of Creation, by the
sole Power of God, and not a Production by a natural Cause: there was also then
formed a Globe of Ether, rolling continually about the Sun, to keep it
perpetually in a globular Figure, shunning that irregular Shape, which
necessarily follows the interfering of the Particles of Fire. Recent
Observations of Astronomers have demonstrated, that the Sun is rolled about its
own Center, in the same time that the Moon is moved about the Earth, which they
observe from the Motion of some more regular Spots in the Sun.

The Sun is the far most glorious Creature in this visible World, as the
Agitation of Fire gives Light by the continual Vibration of its Parts, so this
glorious Globe of Fire, which no natural Cause can ever dissipate, suppress or
extinguish, by the interfering of its Particles outward, it thrusts upon and
darts out the Rays of the Ether, by straight Lines, so far as ever these can
reach, till the Rays be stopped, reverberated, and reflected back into it self
again, by the Earth, the Moon, or other dark Planets which have no Light of
their own, but do reflect the Sunbeams, a great Part whereof fall upon the
Earth and illuminate it. The Sun illuminates more than one Hemisphere of the
Earth, because it is a far greater Body than the Earth.

The Sun has its Motion about the Earth in a Year from West to East, under
twelve Constellations commonly known, which are called the twelve Signs of the
Zodiac, still moving obliquely, whereby it crosses the diurnal Motion from
South-West to North-East in one half of its Course, and from North-East to
South-West in the other, whereby the whole Earth has equal length of Light and
Darkness every Year, when the Days are reckoned together: those Parts of the
Earth that are equally distant from the North and South Poles, have their Days
and Nights always equal, and those Parts of the Earth that are near both Poles,
have but one Day and one Night in the Year, each being an half Year in length.
The remanent Parts have their Days and Nights unequal except in the two
Equinoctial Days and Nights, all which is performed by two uniform circular
Motions of the Ether, the one by the Zodiac, and the other by the Equator.
The Sun does so far exceed in Light all the other Stars, as to the illumination
of the Earth, that when it shines bright, their shining, tho it ceases not, is
yet unperceivable.

The Sun is not only the chief Luminary and Fountain of Light, but likewise of
Heat, which increases and decreaseth, not only every Day, as the Sun comes
nearer to, or goes farthest from the Meridian or Southermost Places of the
Earth, but also as it proceeds toward the North and the South; and so the
Heat is always equal about the middle of the Earth, but elsewhere unequal,
whereby it makes the different Seasons of the Spring, when all Plants do
sprout, and become green; of the Summer when the Flowers appear, and the Fruits
begin; of the Harvest, when the Fruits come to Maturity, and of Winter, when
the Fruits, Leaves and Herbs fall, whereby in the Wisdom and Prudence of God
there is a Balance of Enjoyment through the whole Earth, the variety of the
Seasons where the Days are unequal, compensing the Pleasure where the Days are
equal, because what is ordinary and does not change is little noticed. We would
be little sensible of the glorious Light of the Day, if we had not the
Vicissitude of the Darkness of the Night; and albeit the Places near both Poles
be far short of the Enjoyment of the rest, yet most part there is Sea, and not
Land. There is also great convenience of the Night for Man in the State of
Mortality, whereby the Curtains of Heaven are drawn that he may sleep: The
Earth also does require a perpetual Vicissitude of the rising and falling of
the Vapors, by which the Dews and Rains do water the Earth. Another Sun
opposite to this would have made a perpetual Day, but with great Detriment to
the Earth. The Wisdom of God is also seen in the Instincts of the ravenous
Creatures, whereby they have no Inclination to go abroad in the Daytime, but
in the Night; thereby Men and the tame and harmless Creatures are free of their
Trouble, for which the Psalmist praises the Wisdom and Goodness of God; Thou
make Darkness and it is Night, wherein all the Beasts of the Forest do creep
forth; the Sun arises, they gather themselves together, and lay them down in
their Dens: Man goes forth to his Work, and to his Labor until the evening. O
Lord how manifold are thy Works? in Wisdom dom have thou made them all. The
Glory of the Sun is also well expressed by the Psalmist, which is as a
Bridegroom coming out of his Chamber, rejoiceth as a strong Man to run a Race;
his going out is from the End of the Heaven, and his Circuit unto the Ends of
it, and there is nothing hid from the Heat thereof.

The Wisdom of God is also seen in the usefulness of the Moon, which was
appointed to rule over the Night, and to give a faint Light, for those that
might have necessity to travel in the Night: but God having ordained the Night
for Man to rest in, he has not given the Light of the Moon to be so constant as
the Light of Sun; and therefore it does not derogate from his Wisdom and
Goodness, that he did not make more Moons by which there might always have been
Light in the Night; and besides the brightest Glory and Majesty of God, is in
this visible World the starry Heaven, which in number and variety of the Stars
exceed the comprehension of Men and Angels, they are the Lamps and Flame-beaus
making some resemblance of the Magnificence of the Palace of the King of Glory,
and yet they are no more than the Ornaments of his Outter-Court, or the
enamelling of the Pavement of his Inner-Court, the third Heaven or the Heaven
of Heavens. When God does most favorably condescend to Abraham, he bids him
look unto the starry Sky, and asks if he could number them, and does the like
with Job, when he was first to humble him for his boldness, and then to exalt
him for his faithfulness. The starry Heaven is never so glorious as when
neither Sun nor Moon does appear, therefore it was fit that the Light of the
Moon should have Intervals.

Little is known of the Influence of the Stars, tho many Astrologers make
unsolid and unwarrantable Conclusions, on pretense of their Experience. It is
true God said to Job, Know thou the Ordinance of Heaven, can thou set the
Dominions thereof in the Earth, can thou bind the Influences of Pleiades, or
loose the Bonds of Orion? Which imports a great Influence of the Stars upon the
Earth; but the Astrologers infer most from the Planets and their Aspects, which
are opake and unactive Bodies: doubtless the Sun and Moon have great Influence
on the Earth, not only by their Light and Heat, but that correspondence betwixt
the Tides of the Sea; and the Course of the Moon gives strong ground to infer
that the Moon has much Influence thereon. I cannot certainly know whether the
sweet Influence of the Pleiades does import any more than that when the Sun is
under the Pleiades or seven Stars, the Spring is in its Prime, when all things
revive, and it is called the Time of Life; or whether the Bonds of Orion being
near to the North Pole, implies more than the Rigor of Cold and Frost, when
the Sun is nearest them, and farthest Northward.

God in his Wisdom has said little of the dark Planets, Saturn, Jupiter and
Mars, Venus and Mercury, but has left them to Man's Exercise and Industry, who
has found by their Eclipses, that they have no Light of their own, but do only
reflect the Light of the Sun, as does the Moon: and tho of old they were
thought to be wandering Stars, yet now their regular and certain Courses are
found and known; and more little Planets moving about Saturn and Jupiter, since
the Invention of Telescopes, whereby their Courses are also known and
calculated, and the Usefulness thereof, for finding out the Longitude, is
known, which is of so great Use for Navigation, and it is very probable that
more will yet be found.

The Comets or blazing Stars, are yet looked upon as prodigious or irregular;
yet it is not without Hope, that their regular Course may be also found.

The Eclipses of the Sun and Moon gave great Astonishment and Terror at first
to all, and still to the less knowing Nations; but they give still Matter of
Admiration, and incite us to consider the wonderful Works of God: Their
Recourses are now certainly known and calculated for many Years to come; for
the Predictions of these that have past, have always held, since the Course of
the Planets have been exactly known, from whence the Eclipses do necessarily
follow. The Eclipses have also great Use for the Calculation of Time; for in
diverse Nations, and at diverse Times, the Periods from which they begin their
Calculations are different, and the Length of their Years, the Equation and
Conciliation whereof have been very difficult, but much helped by the Eclipses
observed by Astronomers in several Ages, which being sure, the Priority or
Posteriority of great Occurrences are thereby adjusted.

So far has God expressed of the Creation of things inanimate, being all
visible and obvious to Man at the first, without expressing any thing,
specially concerning the five dark Planets, or the little Planets which move
about them, neither of the variety of these things which were contained in the
Bowels of the Earth, as Stones, Minerals and Metals; neither is there any thing
revealed concerning that variety of Motions that are in inanimate Creatures,
such as the circular Motion of the Ether, and therewith of the Sun, Moon and
Stars, which do so exactly keep their Course, nor of the Motion of Fire, nor
Weight nor Lightness, whereby things move downward to and upward from the
Earth, nor the peculiar Virtues and Efficacies of the Stars, of the Elements,
and their Concretes, of Plants, Stones, Minerals, Metals, or of the Causes
thereof: all which in the Wisdom and Goodness of God were reserved for the
Exercise and Industry of Man, whom God would not have idle, tho he had
continued in Innocence; for he put innocent Adam in the Paradise to dress it.
Much of the stupendous and unsearchable Wisdom of God has been in every
Generation discovered since the beginning of the World, and thence great Profit
and Pleasure have arisen to Mankind, and matter of Admiration and Adoration of
the inscrutable Wisdom and Goodness of God, who has also given Man a great
Pleasure in the search of all hidden things, and of the Causes of these which
appear, and a great Delight in them when they are found out, above all other to
the Inventers, for their Encouragement, and as a Reward of their Industry. For
instance, How great Profit and Pleasure has arisen to Mankind by the Invention
of Writing? God infused in our first Parents the Knowledge of Speaking, whereby
without their own Invention or Agreement, they did express their Thoughts and
Things: But we have no ground to infer that he taught them writing, that not
only by the Ear, but by the Eye, they could communicate Thoughts and Things,
not only to those who were present and near them, but to the absent, whereby
Men spoke after their Death to many Generations, and their more noble
Conceptions and Inventions have been collected, and continued and communicated
through the World for many thousands of Years. By Writing we have preserved and
propagated that infinite Treasure of Wisdom and Righteousness, the Holy
Scriptures. How great Addition to Writing has been by the recent Invention of
Printing?

How much Profit and Pleasure has arisen to Mankind by the Invention of Glass,
and how strange Improvements have been made of it? Before Men could not have
the access of Light unto their Houses but by open Windows, which behoved also
to give access to Moisture and Cold: What variety of Vessels of Glass
containing and conserving all Liquors without Effusion or Evaporation, and
without any Tincture, so pleasantly, that they are seen, as if they were
pendent in the open Air? God has blessed these last Times with new and strange
Inventions of Glass: for whereas before old People losed the benefit of Writing
and Printing, and of the distinct sight of minute Objects, whereby they were
exceedingly hindered to communicate their Thoughts in that Age when they were
most fit to do it by their long Experience, by the allaying of their Passions,
by the increases of their Graces and Virtues: Yea by Magnifying Glasses in this
searching Century, there is a whole new World discovered of innumerable
Creatures which were never so much as dreamed of, or imagined before: By
Microscropes, whereby the Parts, Shapes and Colors of the little Animals,
Plants and Seeds which were seen before; but these Shapes and Colors were
unperceiveable by the sharpest Eye. Now the wonderful Wisdom of God is seen in
the Beauty and Variety of both the Vessels and Conduits in Plants and Animals,
which were known to be necessary from their Effects, are now distinctly and
clearly seen by the Eye, whence the Anatomick Skill is so much improved in this
Century. By Telescopes the Sun, the Moon, the Planets, the Comets, the Stars
and their several and variable Parts are so distinctly seen, as if they were
near the Ends of these Tubes: Whereby Men have made a Selenography of the Moon
like to the Geography of the Earth, and have observed fixed Signatures and
Varieties in Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus and Mercury, and more lasting Spots
in the Sun, whereby they clearly see that all of them are turned about their
own Centers, and have calculated their exact Revolutions. They have also found
four little Planets which move about Jupiter, as the Moon does about the Earth,
and make variety of little Eclipses; they have also found the Periods of their
several Revolutions, and that the nearer they are the sooner are their
Revolutions perfected; and two such about Saturn with a Belt or Ring, which
makes a continual Variety in the view of that Planet: thence there are few but
great Bodies discovered, and there is no doubt there will be many more; but by
the Microscopes there are innumerable Kinds as well as Individuals of Animals,
Plants and Seeds discovered, of which neither whole nor part was ever known
before.

I shall but add the Invention of Trigonometry, by Quadrants, Astronomers
Cross-staffs and other Instruments, and even by the Shadow, the exact Distance
and Dimensions of Bodies, the Height, the Breadth, the Length, the Depth of
Bodies are exactly measured at distance, and all by the Proportions of a large
and little Triangle, whose Angles are homologous, that is, intercept equal
Degrees of a Circle whose Center is in their Angles, whereby there is the same
Proportion of Length between the Sides and Basis of any of the Angles of the
little Triangle, and between the Sides and Basis of the Angles of the large
Triangle about the Angles of the same Capacity and Wideness.

It might multiply many more such, but I shall content my self with the mention
of the Loadstone, its attractive and directive Motions not long since
discovered: by the directive Motions of that Stone, whereby it is always turned
toward the North and South Poles, Men are enabled to direct their Course by
Navigation through the vast Ocean to any Coast of the Earth. Navigation before
was but Coasting, no Man durst enter upon the vast Ocean, tho some without
their Intention were forced by Storms and Winds whither they would not, and so
fell upon undiscovered Countries. But now by the Mariner's Compass or Needle
Commerce is so increased, that all things are communicated from place to place
through the whole Earth, that if it were not for their Perverseness tho whole
Race of Mankind might become one great Commonwealth, God having given an
inbred Principle to Mankind, to prefer the common Interest of the whole to that
of any part.

On the fifth Day God perfected the Creation of inanimate Creatures, by an
orderly Procedure, according to the degrees of their Perfections: 1. The Chaos,
which, before it had Figure or Motion was the most imperfect Substance. 2.
Adding Perfections to that part of the Chaos, he made Fire to give Light and
Heat by its Motion. 3. Giving an uniform circular Motion to those Particles of
the Chaos that made up the Spheres of Ether, by whose Revolution the
Vicissitudes of Day and Night began. 4. Adding Cohesion of Parts of the Chaos
about the Earth; whence arose the Figures of the Particles of Water, which at
first covered the whole Face of the Earth, being then exactly round. 5.
Separating the Earth and the Water by making the Mountains and Valleys; the
Earth having been also made of the Chaos, by Cohesion of its Parts, whereby a
far more variable Figure of its Particles arose, in which were comprehended
Metals, Minerals, Stones, saline and sulphurous Bodies, the Seeds of Plants,
and the Terrestrial Fire. 6. The Plants are formed, whether they sprung of
these Seeds by the immediate creative Power of God, or whether beside the
Seeds, the Plants were formed fit to receive them, it is uncertain; it might
appear rather that they sprung of the Seeds, because it is said, Let the Earth
bring forth, etc. yet that may be understood of the subsequent Growth of
Plants. And last, the Stars were created, being the most perfect and glorious
of all inanimate Creatures: Then followed the Creation of living Creatures in
the same order, proceeding from the least perfect Kinds to the more perfect,
until the last Termination in the Creation of Man. The other living Creatures
are stated in three Orders, the Fish in the Waters, the Fowl to fly in the Air,
and the Beasts on the Earth; all which have their variable Motions, which some
imagine to be without Perception or Sense, and that they be only passive in
their Motions from the Impression of outward Objects, for which I see no solid
Reason; for they having Senses so like unto Men, if all their Motions were by
Impressions on their Senses, it could not be doubted but such Motions would be
also in Men, (seeing their Senses are operative without their Will, or any
intrinsic active Power) which is contrary to the common Sense and Experience
of all Mankind. However it be, there is great Evidence of the wonderful
Contrivance of the Wisdom of God in brute Creatures, especially in the peculiar
Instincts of the several Species, which do all act necessarily upon their
proper Objects, without Hesitation or Deliberation. They have their Pleasures
and Griefs, their Appetites and Aversions, in which they cannot divert from one
Object to another, nor can they compare Objects, Means or Ends; and yet by the
wonderful Wisdom of God, they do most things necessary for their Preservation,
their Promotion and Propagation, by mere Instincts, more exactly than Men can
in the same things that are common to both. Besides the wonderful and various
Structure of their Bodies, there are Depths concerning them that the most
knowing Men have never been able to reach, as what their Souls are, how they
are produced, how their Bodies are framed by Generation; wherein certainly
there is a difference from the Generation of Men. God does not command the
Earth to bring forth Man, as he does to bring forth the brute Creatures,
therefore it seems their Seeds were created in the Beginning as well as the
Seeds of the Plants. Some late Experiments by Microscopes have shown an
infinite number of Animalcula in the Sperme of the Brutes, but their Souls are
not endued with that Perfection to have any Perception but by the Impression of
Objects; so their Bodies being marred, their Souls can never more have any
Animal Operation, as the separate Souls of Men have.

The first and lowest Degree of Animals is of Fish, which live in the Water,
whereof there are innumerable kinds and degrees of Perfection, from the Oister
(that has no other Motion but the opening its Shell to receive its Aliment) to
the Whale. This also is strange in Fishes, that Concourse of the Seeds of Male
and Female do but in few of them appear, nor have they that Pairing which the
Fowls and other Brutes have when left to their natural Course, nor any Knowledge
of, or Affection to their Birth. The more perfect Fish are furnished with
Instruments for their Progress, especially with Fins.

The next Degree in Perfection of Brutes, are the Fowls, who are adorned with
their beautiful Feathers, and instructed with their Wings by which they fly.
Their several Kinds have their distinct Voices, by which they express their
Affections; the variety of which, and of their Shapes and Colors, and their
Instincts, by which they know their Food and Physic, and what is hurtful to
them, and the melodious Songs of many of them, do all manifest the wonderful
Wisdom of their Creator.

The Water is empowered and commanded to bring forth both Fish and Fowl, which
does import that their Seeds are lubrick and not firm, as that of Plants, and
therefore are dispersed in that soluble Element.

On the sixth Day were created the Terrestrial Beasts; for God said, Let the
Earth bring forth the living Creatures after his kind, which are three, beside
the various Species of every Kind, to wit Cattle, creeping Things on the Earth,
and the Beasts; these seem to be the wild and ravenous Beasts that live not in
Herds or Flocks, which are the Cattle, but both walk with Legs, and so are
different from the creeping Things, as Worms and Serpents. I shall not need to
speak any thing of the Variety of these, and of the Wisdom of God shining in
them, seeing they differ not much from what has been said of the Fish and the
Fowls, but that they come nearer to the Perfection of Man than they.

God has given eminent Instances of his Wisdom in the Perfections of the
Horse, and the Leviathan, whose Scales do clearly distinguish it from the
Whale, so that it is a Terrestrial Animal, and in the Unicorn.

All the Creation, tho it be very wonderful, holds a small Proportion with the
Wisdom of God, in the creating and governing of Man, which is incomprehensible.
Some part of it will appear in the Dominion of God, which I shall leave to the
next Meditation, and only remark upon the whole Creation, that wonderful Beauty
of all its Parts, their Correspondence and mutual Usefulness, and the
Termination of all their Perfections on Mankind.

MEDITAT. XVIII. Upon the Dominion of God, and his Dispensations thereupon
toward his Rational Creatures, especially by the Covenant of Works and
Covenant of Grace.
I Have as distinctly and orderly as I could, cleared and quieted my Thoughts
concerning the Divine Perfections, Natural and Moral, severally: I come now to
consider them jointly in the glorious and gracious Dominion of God over the
World, in which all his Perfections are displayed and manifested. It is
Omniscience and infinite Wisdom in the Contrivance of the World, and of all
that was to occur in it unto Eternity: His Omnipotence in bringing all his
Purposes to pass: His Goodness, that all he did and was to do is very good, and
nothing he made is without some Perfection for it self, and Usefulness for some
other Creature; and that even from the evil Actions of Men he takes occasion
to increase the Exercise of his Goodness, Bounty and Mercy. His Justice, Truth
and Faithfulness are exercised upon all his Rational Creatures, who only are
capable of them, and his most eminent Goodness in that Resemblance he gave them
of his own Perfections, and in those Principles wherewith he has endued them,
beside his Image, congruous to their Natures, but not perfectly correspondent
to his own, to whom none of his Creatures can be like, but with infinite
Unlikeness: Yet with that real (tho imperfect) Likeness of him his Reasonable
Creatures were originally formed, whereby he made them all capable of
Blessedness, and by Resemblance thereof to conceive Thoughts of his own
Blessedness, in being the only pure Spirit, self-existent, everlasting,
self-sufficient, independent, free, unchangeable in all his Perfections,
Purposes and Performance of them, fully delighting in himself, and thereby
infinitely blessed.

The Dominion of God comprehends his Dominion of Property, and his Dominion of
Sovereignty. By the former he is Lord of all his Creatures, by the latter he is
Sovereign Ruler of all his Rational Creatures, and so is King, Lawgiver and
Ruler of the whole World. There is a clear and known difference between
Dominion of Things, and a Dominion over Persons. The Dominion of Things is a
Right and Power to dispose of them at Pleasure without any Restraint: This
Right is founded in their Creation and Preservation; for he that gave Being,
and that freely, might give it with what Perfections he pleased, and might at
full Arbitrament annihilate or alter whatever he gave; and in that
Consideration even his Rational Creatures are part of his Property, more at his
disposal than the Clay is at the disposal of the Potter, who can but mould and
varnish his Clay, and may mar it at his Pleasure, but could neither give it its
Being and Capacities, nor can take them from it. In this Relation there can be
no Obligement or Debt from God to any Creature; and it is by this Dominion that
he has stated all his Rational Creatures in their different Degrees, not only
of the Kinds but of the Individuals. No other account ought to be inquired of
the different degrees of Knowledge, Wisdom, Power, Beauty, Health, Dexterity,
Length of Days, Riches, Pleasure or Honor: tho these may be used as Means of
Justice, Truth, Faithfulness and Mercy, and as the Means of Government, yet may
they be absolutely without respect to these, and it can hardly be discerned
when they are otherwise; and therefore in them all things befall alike to all,
and no Man can judge Love or Hatred of God from any thing that is so before him.

Some Men have thought they magnified God, by magnifying this as the only
Dominion of God, and that there is no other distinct Dominion of Persons, which
would altogether make void the Justice, Truth and Faithfulness of God, which
are no less essential to God, and much more glorious than his Right of
Disposal, or Property: A Proprietor in making use of his Goods does not govern
them, no not in the ordering of his Beasts; but wherever Government is, there
must be Law, Liberty, Rewards and Punishments: by the Government of Persons
only can there be a Kingdom. He that had the Property of a whole Country could
be Lord of it, tho there were not a Man on it but himself, but he could not be
King of it. God takes to himself the Title of King in a more proper Sense, and
it is so acknowledged by all his holy Creatures: He is called the King of the
whole Earth, of all the World; The Lord has prepared his Throne in the Heavens,
and his Kingdom rules over all. He is the Prince of the Kings of the Earth,
they are but his Deputies and Vicegerents; Yea the greatest of them are but as
Grashopers in his Sight: The Scepter of his Kingdom is a Scepter of
Righteousness; he sits on a Throne of Holiness, he is a great King and he is
King of Glory, his Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, of his Dominion there is
no End: Yea he is the only Potentate, He does what he will in Heaven and in
Earth, and who can say, what do thou? David at the Dedication of the Temple,
says to God, Thine, O Lord, is the Greatness, and the Power, and the Glory,
and the Victory, and the Majesty: Thine is the Kingdom O God, and thou art
exalted as Head above all. And Jeremiah says, Who would not fear thee, O King
of Nations? For to thee does it appertain. The Psalmist says, The Lord is a
great King above all Gods: The Sea is his, and he made it. The Sea is mentioned
as his Property only, because the vast Ocean is capable of no humane Dominion.
None can, or ever did claim a local Sovereignty over the whole Sea, nor a
Property in it. The Psalmist says, The Heavens are thine, the Earth also is
thine; as for the World and Fullness thereof, thou have founded them. For his
Pleasure all things are and were created. Is there any other Sovereign can
pretend these Titles? He rules in the Kingdom of Men, and gives it to
whomsoever he will, even unto the vilest of Men, who can neither pretend worth
nor deserving.

If then Gods's Dominion over Persons be not arbitrary, as over things, what
impudent Presumption must it be for Creatures tho they were Angels, much more
for Men of like Infirmities with others, and of more impetuous Passions, to
give no other reason for their Commands, than Such is our Pleasure?

There are three common innate Principles written in the Heart of Man, the Love
of God, the Love of Mankind, and Self-love, which in their due Subordination,
and in their proper Limits are all Good: as Christ has said, Thou shall love
the Lord thy God with all thy Heart, with all thy Mind, with all thy Strength,
and thy Neighbor as thy Self. These are the chief Means of the Divine
Government, by which Mankind might be happy in all Conditions, Stations and
Relations; as Men, as Married, as Parents or Children, as Masters and Servants,
as Sovereigns and Subjects, as Fellow-Citizens, as Neighbors and Friends; who
have all their special Principles and Rules, by Reason and Revelation, which
when they forsake, and follow the swing of their own Lusts and Passions, God in
his Justice might give them up to their own Counsels, to follow their own Ways,
and oftentimes does so, as he declares by his Word, as to their eternal
Interest: yet so great is his Goodness as he does rarely utterly abandon them,
but as to their outward Condition in this present Life, he continues to
overrule them, by his Providence, in all these Relations; for in some Measure,
he is good to all in this Life.

The Providence of God uses to be handled apart by Divines, as it does not
only comprehend his Dominion and Government of his rational Creatures, but his
Wisdom and Goodness in his Preservation, Provision and Direction of every
Creature toward the End which he designed. I have chosen rather to consider
the Wisdom and Dominion of God apart, as being thereby the more able to
apprehend them distinctly and clearly.

The Dominion of God reaches unto all his rational Creatures, even unto the
damned Spirits, not only as they are Executioners of his Justice against Men,
as he sends them out, wherein tho their End be always wicked, the Act it self
is ever just and good; so an evil Spirit from the Lord vexed King Saul, when he
had forsaken the Rules of his Government: but these Spirits are only permitted
while they tempt to Acts which no Intention can make good, or indifferent; but
most of all, God does overrule these Spirits by restraining their Malice from
tempting or troubling Men, and even in the Permission of their Temptations, he
puts no Man under an inevitable Necessity of being overcome, but those that
voluntarily or habitually have rendered themselves weak, whether by positive
Choice, or by Neglect and Inadvertence. It is a needless Curiosity to enquire
how God does overrule damned Spirits, who are scarce capable of farther
Punishments, being already condemned, and in a continual Torment of Mind, nor
can they expect Rewards: It would be no Punishment to them to annihilate them,
yet they have some Diversion by compassing the Earth, going to and fro therein,
and endeavoring to bring Men unto the like Condition with themselves; and they
are still capable of greater Torment, and therefore they tremble.

Men are much more governable in this Life, being far more passable than
Spirits, and being seldom in absolute Despair, but ever capable of Rewards and
Punishments; and the greater they are, the more are they capable. Single
Persons that have no near Relations, are far less liable to Shame or Suffering
than the Masters of Families, or Rulers of States; and the Noble, than the
Ignoble, who are liable to Shame, Affront and Disgrace, which they regard more
than their Lives.

There are three sorts of Men, the Godly, the Honest, and the Profane; the
Godly are governed by the Love of God, which is the Principle of true Piety and
Religion, reaching not only to Divine Worship, but even to the Acts of Honesty
and their own Happiness. In all which the chief Reason and Motive is the Love
of God, whereby they determine themselves in every thing toward his Glory and
Pleasure. These are governed by eternal Rewards and Punishments after this
Life, and by internal Rewards in the Peace of a good Conscience, and Joy in the
Holy Ghost, and internal Punishments in the Doubts and Disquiets of their
Souls, beside the other ways of Rewards and Punishments common to the rest.

Those that are only Honest, are governed by the Love to Mankind, which for
that very End God has placed in the Nature of Man, whereby till they be
depraved, they are inclinable in every Case to do that, which if it were done
by all Men, they would live happily: And therefore the Wicked are ashamed to
profess that in things in their Power, they would prefer the Interest of a
single Person to the Interest of their Family, or the Interest of a Family to
the Interest of a Nation, or any of these Interests to the common Interest of
Mankind. Those that are profane and wicked, God overrules even by their
Self-love; for tho they would subordinate all things to their Selfinterest, if
securely they could, and when with probability they can, yet supposing others
to be of the same Inclination, their own Interest obliges them to profess, if
not Piety in Hypocrisy, at least common Honesty, wherein God's Wisdom and
Goodness is eminently seen; for otherwise most Men would be as malicious and
openly wicked as the damned Spirits.

God has Rewards and Punishments sufficient and suited to the Condition of all
Men, tho their Rewards be not by exact Justice: Prosperity and Peace are the
common Encouragements to Good. Trouble and Affliction are the common outward
Punishments, and more particularly Disquiet and Anguish of Spirit, when the
special Cause thereof is not known. These are dispensed to particular Persons,
but the Punishments of Societies use not to be inflicted, but upon atrocious,
common and avowed Vices, for which God sends common Calamities, as Plague,
Famine, Inundation, Sterility, Shipwreck; and the Destruction by ravenous
Beasts, which was more frequent when the World was less planted. The Scripture
does frequently mention God's four sore Judgments. God exciteth War, about
which there is no doubt, when it is for just Causes, and overrules it when upon
unjust, but rather uses the other Plagues.

God exercises his Dominion partly by the Law of Nature written in Man's Heart,
partly by Diyine Institutions revealed to Men. By the Law of Nature is the
Government of Parents over their Children, by the natural Affection of the
Parents to the Children, whereby they take Pleasure to preserve, direct, and
provide for them; and by the natural Affection of the Children to reverence and
obey their Parents: which Affections arise in both from their belief of these
Relations, even where they are mistaken; and by the Law of Nature the Contracts
and Pactions of Parties to govern and to obey, as between Masters and Servants,
between Rulers and Subjects: for the Force of these Pactions, is by the Law
written in Man's Heart, by which his Conscience convinces him that he is
obliged to perform.

God exercises his Dominion not only by the Laws of Nature, but by positive
Laws and Institutions, which are not known by the Light of Nature, but by
Revelation; such is the Government of the Husband over the Wife, by the Divine
Institution of Marriage, and the Government of Common Wealths, by God's
Institution of a public Judgment, to order and determine all Controversies,
concerning such as should unite themselves in Civil Societies. The former was
propagated by an universal Tradition to all Nations, from Adam till the Flood,
and from Noab and his Posterity after the Flood: But Civil Government was only
instituted after the Flood, when Men's Lives became short, God allowed the
Fathers of Families to unite themselves and their Families into Civil
Societies, and to transmit the Power and Burden of the Government of their
Families in most things upon the Governors of those Societies: So that tho
there be mutual Pactions in Marriage and Government, yet the Essentials of both
are by Divine Institution, which cannot lawfully be altered. Persons may choose
whether they will marry or not, and with whom, but the Degrees within which
they may marry are instituted: The Power of the Husband, and the Indurance and
Dissolution of the Marriage are instituted by God, and unalterable by Man; but
in other things their Pactions are effectual, as in other Cases: So also in
Civil Government, the Form of Government, the Persons governing, the Extensions
of their Power, more than what is requsite for Order and Determination of
Controversies, are by the express and tacit Pactions of the Parties, except
what God did immediately determine in the Government of Israel.

God did also institute a distinct Government for his own Worship, and
separated it from the Paternal and Civil Authority, both among the Jews in the
Levitical Priesthood, which was propagated by imitation to most other Nations;
and among Christians, a Church became a distinct Society from a State, and has
its proper Ecclesiastic Government, tho both Societies may concur in the same
Persons. The Civil Government is for the outward State of their Society, and
the Means of their Government is outward, by extrinsick Rewards and forcible
Punishments. The Ecclesiastic Government is about the inward State of those of
their Society, in so far as Man's Knowledge can reach, to promote Holiness, and
internal and eternal Happiness, and about their outward Acts only, as they
signify their inward Condition; and their Rewards and Punishments are only by
application of the Divine Ordinances, in exciting Joy or Grief, Fear or Hope,
as is conducible for the inward State, but without temporal Rewards, and
forcible Punishments.

But there is yet a more inward and secret Dominion of God, exercised by the
Conscience, which is his Deputy, by which he distributes the most powerful and
important Rewards and Punishments, not only in this Life, but chiefly after
Death.

The most eminent and important Dispensations of God's Dominion is by the
Covenants he made with Men, which therefore require a particular Consideration,
especially the general Covenants relating to all Mankind.

It was a high Honor put upon Men that God was pleased to enter into mutual
Engagements with them, by way of Covenant, whereby God promised some Favors to
them besides those which arose from their Creation, which Favors they could
not warrantably believe, nor expect by his Justice, Bounty, Mercy, or even by
his Faithfulness, but only by his Promise in these Covenants. And on the other
part there was not ground to expect them even from the Promises, unless there
were a voluntary Engagement on Man's part by entering into these Covenants.
God's Dispensations might have been without any Covenant, either by commanding
Men to do that which he proposed to them to do, whereby the not Performance
became a Transgression of his Command, and Sin; or he might have made Promises
conditional, without requiring Men's Engagements.

I see very many Covenants between God and Man in Scripture, but the purely
Celestial and Eternal Covenants are only two, the Covenant of Works, and the
Covenant of Grace. The Covenant of Grace is the chief Concern of Mankind, and
it runs through the whole Current of Scripture: It was published to our first
Parents immediately after their Fall; and tho the Record of it in Scripture at
first be no more, but [that the Seed of the Woman shall bruise the Head of the
Serpent,] I doubt not but it was more fully manifested to, and understood by
the first Parents. It was more fully manifested to Abraham, to whom it was
said, That in thy Seed shall all the Nations of the Earth be blessed. It was
continued in the Church in the Revelation and Expectation of the Messiah, who
was to deliver his People from their Sins, and was represented by the
Sacrifices instituted by God from the beginning, and by the Sacraments and
Ceremonies instituted thereafter, tho the Jews in their latter times were
wholly perverted, believing their Messiah to be a Temporal Monarch, to raise
their Nation to great Glory; wherein Christ the Messiah himself did fully
confute them from the Old Testament, and brought Life and Immortality to light
in a clear Discovery of the Covenant of Grace, as it remains recorded in the
Gospel.

The Covenant of Works being broken and become void, there is but little of it
expressed in Scripture, in which that Name of the Covenant is no where
mentioned; and tho it may seem a needless Curiosity to enquire into the Terms
of it, I conceive it is not unprofitable, but very useful, to manifest the
Glory and Goodness of God in all his Dispensations with Mankind, and for the
understanding the Covenant of Grace that came in its place, which will appear
by that excellent Parallel of the Apostle Paul betwixt the first and second
Adam.

It has been the common Opinion of Christians, that there was a Covenant
between God and Adam upon solid Grounds. It is certainly a great Condescension
and Kindness in God to enter into Covenant with Creatures; but seeing it is
certain that he has so often admitted sinful Creatures to covenant with him,
there is no ground to doubt that he entered into Covenant with innocent Adam,
which is yet more clear from the Parallel of the first and second Adam, whereby
both are acknowledged to represent and undertake for the whole, or a great part
of the Race of Mankind; that through Adam's Failure Sin entered in the World,
and that Christ had obtained a better Covenant. It is therefore inferred that
there was a prior Covenant.

As to the Terms of the first Covenant, it is clear that God promised Adam
Immortality, seeing the Penalty expressed by Moses for the Breach in eating the
forbidden Fruit is Death, not only Temporal, by the Separation of the Soul and
Body, and the Corruption of the Body, but Eternal, by the Separation from the
Favor of God; therefore Life and Immortality is implied, which tho it was
possible to have been preserved in Adam and his Posterity, by the continuance
of Adam and his Posterity upon Earth, living an Animal Life; but this Earth
could not have sufficed for all the Posterity of Adam, if none had died, or
been removed; yea Immortality could not have been continued in that State
wherein the Body was perpetually wearing with its Food and Exercise, if there
had not been extraordinary Means to have preserved or restored it. Therefore I
do not conceive that Immortality was competent to innocent Man by his Nature,
and was taken from him as his Punishment against his Nature; but that it was
only promised to be given as a part of that Covenant, the loss of which was a
great Penalty. It is true, the Soul was naturally immortal, and could not cease
to exist but by taking away that which was given in its Nature; but it will not
follow that Man, the Complex of Soul and Body, was so immortal.

The Parallel does also give ground to infer, that it was a part of God's
Promise in the first Covenant, that Adam and his Posterity should be exalted
from an Animal Life on Earth, to an Angelical Life in Heaven, which is
evidently a part of the Covenant of Grace, and is frequently expressed by
Restitution and Redemption, importing that it belonged to Mankind before, but
was lost; and seeing the Preference of the Benefit by the second Adam is
expressed in the Parallel, if that Exaltation had been wholly new, it would not
have been omitted.

The Parallel also imports, that the Promise of Immortality was not only to
Adam, but to his Posterity.

It could not consist with the Wisdom and Goodness of God, that the first
Covenant should have been impracticable, and therefore it must have been a part
of God's Promise, that if Adam continued faithful for such time as God had
appointed for his Trial, that God would confirm him by more powerful and
efficacious Grace, as it is commonly believed that he has confirmed the Elect
Angels, that they should never fall, but be happy. I see not how it could be
called an happy State, that were still under the fear of being lost.

There is no ground to think, that by the first Covenant Adam's Posterity
should have been in a better Condition than himself, but that they also should
have had a time of Trial as he had, and such as should persevere should also be
confirmed; yet there was necessity that they should be endued with more
Strength from the Womb, thereby to be put in equal Capacity to stand as he was:
For seeing Adam was created in the Ripeness of Disscretion, and in the clear
Knowledge of God, and yet so soon fell, upon so small Temptation, it had been
impossible for any of his Posterity, being to be born Infants, without any
Principle vigent in them, but the Pleasure of Sense till they attained to
Discretion, and by long Exercise of these sensible Pleasures, strong habitual
Pleasures supervening, that any one of them could have persevered, unless God
had promised, that if Adam had stood out his Trial, he would have given farther
Perfection to his Posterity.

This first Covenant between God and Adam is commonly called the Covenant of
Works, to distinguish it from the Covenant of Grace, and therefore there
behoved to be something in it of Merit: And that God's part of that Covenant
was not only of Grace or free Favor, but partly by Premiative Justice and
Debt, in Remuneration of the Holiness of the Creature, as the Apostle says, To
him that works, the Reward is not reckoned of Grace, but of Debt. Yet it
cannot be thence inferred that the Reward promised by God to Adam in his
Perseverance, was wholly and only a Reward of Debt by Justice, but that it
might be partly a Reward of Debt, and partly a Reward of Grace, freely given
and not deserved.

Those who arrogate Salvation by the Merit of their Works fortify themselves in
their Error, by holding that Salvation by the Covenant of Works would have been
wholly by Merit; and therefore Christ having expiated the Sins of the Elect,
their good Works must merit Heaven, which is clearly confuted, seeing God's
Dispensations are by Covenant, importing Engagements, which did not arise from
the Creatures Interest by Creation, but only by God's Promise, which was free
by the Freedom of Indiffrency.

I am fully persuaded that a great part of God's Promises in the Govenant of
Works was by his free Favor, and could not have been claimed by Adam, or his
Posterity, as due in Justice to their Perseverance: For there was an exceeding
great difference between the Value of Adam's part, and God's part of that
Covenant; Adam's part was only Obedience to God. There is nothing mentioned in
Scripture, or consequent from the Nature of that Covenant, that God's Promises
were for Adam's improving and increasing those Moral perfections God had given
him by his Creation; but on the contrary, that which is expressly mentioned, is
only forbearance to eat of the forbidden Fruit, which could not be the only
Obedience, but likewise the Obedience to all the Moral Law written in his
Heart, and also to the positive Law of Marriage instituted in Innocence; yet
Innocence in all was Man's part: and Improvement, tho it was no Work of
Supererrogation even in him, because he was obliged to love God with all his
Might, yet it did deserve and merit by God's Remunerative Justice, but it
cannot be pretended that it was a proportionable Remuneration to Adam's
Innocence, that he should not only become Immortal, and be exalted to Celestial
and Eternal Glory, and that he should be confirmed and made free of the hazard
of falling; but that also all his Posterity should have additional Perfections
created with their Souls, enabling them against the Prepossessions of Youth, to
remain innocent, and all as a just Proportion by Premiative Justice: no
certainly.

The Nature of a Covenant which is a mutual Contract, implies mutual
Prestations to be performed by the Parties Contracters, as the mutual Causes
and Conditions of each to other; and that the engaging to these Performances be
voluntary, even tho the Matter engaged were necessary, and have an anterior
Obligation, distinct from that Obligation which arises by the Contract. For as
it is well said by Lawyers, the same thing may be due by several Obligations,
and may be exacted by any of them; but the Property of a thing cannot be by
more Rights, for none can acquire that which is already his own. Therefore
before the Covenant of Works the Man was obliged to a full Observance of God's
Commands without any Engagement of his own, because God who gave him his Being,
might justly qualify his own Gift at his Pleasure; so he had given Man his
Being by Creation, with sufficient Intimation of his Pleasure and Command, by
the Laws written in his Heart, none of which did oblige him to enter into a
Covenant with his Creator, nor did God command him so to do, but offered it to
his free Choice, inducing him thereto by the great Benefits he offered him by
it, which he had not Right to, nor any ground of Confidence of it, but through
that Covenant.

The Covenant of Works had no Sanction by a Penalty added to it: For the
Dissolution of it upon Man's Failure in his part arose from the Nature of all
Contracts, whereby it the one Party fail, the other may either urge
Performance, or declare himself free. After Adam's Fall, Performance became
impossible, and he was not punishable by that Covenant, but by the antecedent
Divine Law; neither could Man's Consent or Engagement to be liable to the
Punishment of Death have any Effect, because his Life is not in his own Power:
Therefore he was only punishable by the antecedent Law of God, which was before
any Covenant, and remained the same during the Covenant, and after the Breach
of it. The Pain of Death expressed for eating the forbidden Fruit was no part
of the Covenant, and it does appear to have been anterior to the Covenant
intimated to Man immediately after his Creation, before Eve was created,
otherwise Adam might have eaten of that Fruit, which doubtless was most
pleasant before the Prohibition; but Eve's Creation is related after that
Prohibition, and there is no ground to doubt but the Covenant was made both
with Adam and Eve. Death was the due Punishment of the Breach of that
Prohibition, tho it had not been expressed; for the Obedience of a Rational
Creature to the Creator is indispensible, not only by the Immutability of the
Divine Decree not to dispense, but simply by the nature of the Thing. It could
not consist with God's infinite Love to himself, to make a Rational Creature
that owed him no Obedience; and if he could renounce Obedience in one thing, he
might in all. But tho the Prohibition had been after the Covenant, yet it was
no part of it, nor did God by it restrain his own Freedom to command what he
pleased, for which he had given an Ability to perform: For it was a chief Law
written in Man's Heart to obey all God's Commands. The Institution of Marriage
was also before the Fall, and even before the Covenant of Works, and the Breach
of it, or any of God's Moral Laws, would have annulled that Covenant. God did
both in Wisdom and Goodness express the Sanction of Death to the eating of that
Fruit, as that which Man might be most readily deceived in, the Matter being in
it self indifferent, and of small moment, abstract from the Command; and
therefore the Devil tempted to break it rather than any other.

God made the Covenant of Works with Adam, and when Adam had broke that
Covenant, and made it ineffectual, God did publish to him the new Covenant of
Grace. There is but little of either expressly related by Moses, yet doubless
both were largely revealed and made known to Adam; and now when the Canon of
Scripture is full, the Analogy of Faith may thence sufficiently be collected,
both as to the Tenor of the Covenant of Works, and of the Covenant of Grace. It
were a vast Task to gather in order all that might be deduced from Scripture
concerning these Covenants: But that which I find necessary for my
Satisfaction, and for clearing to me the beautiful Representation of the Divine
Decrees and Dispensations toward Mankind, by Grace and Glory to the Elect, and
just Judgment against the malicious and obstinately wicked, I will digest my
Thoughts of both these Covenants between God and Adam, that the Parallel may
the more clearly appear, by expressing the Terms of both in the Form of a free
Offer made by God, and accepted by Adam for himself and all his, in the way
Covenants used to be entered in, as if God had said to the Protoplasts; I have
made you after my own Image, Innocent and Holy, and have endued you with
Understanding, whereby you can judge and reason; and have written my Laws in
your Hearts, in the Principles of Knowledge, to which you cannot but give
assent, and the Knowledge of necessary Consequences, which you may thence
certainly deduce. I have also endued you with Capacities of Pleasure and Grief,
whereby upon the Preception of these Objects, which may most concern your
Well-being, Pleasure or Grief will result, and from Pleasure Appetite, and from
Grief Aversion, and have made the purest and powerfulest Joy to arise from the
Perception of my glorious Perfections, and next from these things which conduce
to the Well-being of your Kind, and then the Pleasure that is peculiar to every
one: All which are good, when kept within their Limits, and in due Order. I
have given you that capacity of Freedom, that you need not be under the Power
of the Pleasure or Grief arising from perception of any Creature, but that you
may avoid or abate them, by the Application of other Objects to your Senses or
Mind, by the Pleasure or Grief thence resulting, especially by perceiving and
considering my own Perfections, whereby you may govern your selves, and your
Choices, Appetites or Aversions, as may be allowed and accepted by me, and as
may conduce for my Glory, showing my Divine Perfections, in creating,
preserving and ruling such Creatures; whereby as I have been the first Author,
so indispensibly I must be the last End of your Being, to which you must
subordinate and direct all your considerate Actions, even the desire and
endeavor of your own Happiness, that thereby you may be in the fuller capacity
to please and glorify me, wherein if you transgress, you must be punished by
perpetual Exclusion from my Favor, which neither you nor any Creature can ever
be able to expiate and restore you, my Aversion from Sin being infinite, as my
self. If you improve the Capacities I have given you, I will also reward you
with greater Perfections, as you shall deserve: Your Obedience and Devotion to
me, must not be in trivial things, but in such things as require Attention and
Diligence, yet such as by these shall still be in your Power, while you remain
innocent. By careful Inspection of your own Minds, you may find my Laws written
therein; most of them are evident to you without reasoning, and I have endued
you with this Principle to know all things that are congruous to, and becoming
my glorious Nature, and yours, as you bear my Image, and as is congruous to,
and becoming that part of your Nature peculiar to your selves.

I am now pleased to enter with you into a Covenant, by your willing
Engagement, in the Terms that I offer you, wherein your part is no more than
persevering in your Innocence during that time of Trial which I appoint you, to
which you are obliged by your natural Duty to which I propose the Accession of
your voluntary Engagement; and my part shall be to put you thenceforth out of
hazard ever to offend, or to lose that Happiness that I give you, and to put
all your Posterity in the like Condition that now you are in, that each of them
that shall continue innocent during his Trial shall be likewise confirmed, and
because they are to be born Infants, carried only by sensible Pleasures before
Discretion, which will become habitual and strong, and much more ready to
exceed than you who were created in ripeness of Judgment. I will enable them to
be in like Capacity to stand as you are, and I will exalt you and them from an
animal Life on Earth, to an Angelical Life in Heaven, so that you shall be
Immortal, without any Separation of your Souls and Bodies. I will put you in no
Necessity to fall by my Decree, or any Circumstances in which you shall be
placed; I will now add nothing to your Obedience by the Laws of your Nature,
but the For bearance to eat of the Fruit of one Tree in the midst of the
Paradise, that it may be an Evidence of your Obedience for my Command alone, in
a Thing in it self indifferent, wherein you must take heed that you yield not
to the Pleasure which will arise from that Fruit. Are you now content to enter
into this Covenant for your selves and your Posterity, wherein if you fail on
your Part, you lose all the Benefit of it? To which Adam and Eve with Joy,
Acclamation and Blessing, did engage and assent; and God exhorted them to take
good and diligent heed to keep all his Goodness and all his Perfections ever in
remembrance, left they should be perverted by Satan, Self-love, and Sensual
Pleasure.

The Terms of the Covenant of Grace are much more fully represented in the
Scripture, than was the Covenant of Works. The Covenant of Grace was first
published to Adam and Eve after their Fall, in these Words; The Seed of the
Woman shall bruise the Head of the Serpent: Where by the Serpent is understood
Satan, who under the appearance of a Serpent, deluded them; and by the Seed of
the Woman is meant the Mediator of the Covenant of Grace, who is to bruise that
Serpent's Head, and to deliver from the Power thereof, such as should obtain
the Benefit of the Covenant of Grace; which for my more distinct understanding,
I do conceive as if it had been more fully expressed, and as if God after the
Fall had said to our first Parents thus.

I made a Covenant with you, for your selves and your Posterity, that if you
continued innocent during the time of your Trial, I would have given you
supernatural Grace, whereby you should never sin, but should be eternally
Happy: I gave you sufficient natural Capacity to fulfill that Covenant, but you
have distrusted my Kindness, and have believed an Apostate Spirit, and
therefore have lost to your selves and your Posterity, the Benefit of that
Covenant, without being in any necessity to break it; by my Decrees or
Dispensations, I might justly cut you off without having any Posterity, or
might leave you and them to follow your own ways: and I will no more make a
Covenant with you for them, but I will raise up a second Adam, who shall take
upon him your Nature, and be like you in all things (Sin only excepted) who
will be for ever Innocent and Holy, and so not only perform that which by the
former Covenant you might have performed, but will submit himself to Sufferings
for you and your Posterity, of greater value than if you had all suffered
eternally the just Reward of your Sins. And for his Sake I do offer you, and
will offer to all your Posterity who shall be capable to know an offer of Mercy
and Grace, that I will make you new Creatures, enduing you with supernatural
Powers and Inclinations, making you Holy and Happy, and will not suffer you to
continue in Sin, if you be not so addicted to your Sins, as to reject my Offer
to make you Holy; and therefore I will continue with you and your Posterity the
Light and Law of Nature written in your Hearts, whereby you may know Sin the
Transgression of it, and that you may know that there is Mercy for the
Penitent, and none for the malicious while obstinate Sinner; whereby you may
also know that if you repent and betrust your selves to my Mercy and Conduct,
that I will make you Holy and Happy: And albeit neither you have, nor will they
have Ability to repent and trust; yet with the Offer I will give Strength to
perform these Acts, if the Offer be not rejected, and will bring them to the
Means of Grace to follow out the same. This Offer becomes a Covenant by
acceptance thereof, the Accepters betrusting themselves to God's Grace and
Direction by his Word and Spirit, trusting to obtain Pardon of all Sin, and of
Excitation to Repentance for obtaining of it, and for obtaining eternal
Happiness by infusing the Habits of Grace here, and perfecting them in Glory
hereafter, in the beatifick Visions of God's Perfections, and the shining of
his Face for ever, without fear of Sin or falling from that happy State.

I do conceive that in this Representation, all the Requisites of a Covenant
are comprehended: For the Difference between a Covenant and any other Favor
done or promised, whether absolute or conditional, is no Covenant, albeit there
may be therein mutual Prestations required; but this is special in an Offer
that it has no Obligation till it be accepted, whereby the Accepters become
obliged to perform the mutual Prestations on their Part. God making the general
Offer of Mercy and Reconciliation to Sinners if they repent, and betrust
themselves to him for all things necessary for their Happiness; for even the
natural Conscience of all Men of Discretion is capable to know, and represent
to them that God is Just, and will punish obstinate Sinners, and yet is
merciful to penitent Sinners, throwing themselves upon him, tho without
Revelation they cannot know how a just God can pardon Sin, without Satisfaction
to his Justice, but the same is manifested by the Gospel: as by the first Adam,
all his Posterity were capable of Happiness, if they sinned not; so now by the
second Adam, all are again capable of Happiness, upon far easier Terms of
Repentance and Faith, and even these performed by supernatural Grace.

If Adam or his Posterity had the making of the Covenants of Grace, they could
not without Impudence make them larger, for there could be no more added, but
that even all the obstinately Wicked and Impenitent should enjoy the Pleasure
of their Lusts on Earth, and thereafter the Joys of Heaven; so that I do, and
all considering Persons might cry out with the Apostle, O the Height, the
Breadth, the Length, the Depth of the Love of God! And yet his electing Love is
even larger than this Offer: for albeit it be inconsistent with his immaculate
Holiness, to make any happy, whom he does not first make holy; yet some
Rejecters he makes holy and happy, pulling them as Firebrands out of the Fire,
which makes none of the obstinate and rejecting Sinners excusable who continue
to refuse to be made holy; and tho they may deceive themselves, thinking they
would be willing to be holy, yet while they are addicted to their Sins, in
reality their Will is not to quit them.

In my most serious Thoughts, I can perceive nothing in this Conception of
God's Covenants with Men, that is impossible, inconsistent with, or incongruous
to any of the Divine Perfections; but highly illustrating them all, and
becoming the Majesty and Glory of God, as the King and Ruler of his rational
Creatures, as to their eternal State. Thereby he shows himself to be the most
excellent King, not only in a just Distribution of Rewards and Punishments, but
in great Goodness providing all things requisite that might have made them all
happy, without making any one miserable, but by their own particular Fault.
Thereby also his great Wisdom is manifested, designing, or doing nothing in
vain, but ever choosing fit Means for the best Ends; whereby his Mercy does
eminently appear, that even against Merit he gives Grace and Glory to those
Creatures of whom he had no need, and who had willingly and ungratefully
offended and injured him, that he has left nothing undone, that could consist
with his Domion, his Wisdom, his Purity and Holiness, to extend his Goodness to
his rational Creatures. He does not only govern the Elect toward their
Happiness, after their Conversion, but even before it; he waits upon their
Repentance, and gives time to repent to those that do never make use of it. He
gives them his Vicegerents to rule them in Civil States, he provides
Necessaries for their convenient living in that State; he does not punish these
Societies but for gross, common and national Sins, which by the ordinary Power
of Nature they might forbear, and which are atrociously odious by the very
Light of Nature to all but these, the Gratification of whose evil Affections
perverts them to think them pleasant. So that none of his Creatures ever had,
or ever shall have reason to complain of his Dispensations, but he has just
reason to complain against every lost Sinner that they have hardened their own
Hearts from his Fear. Could there be a greater Evidence of the Goodness of God
to Mankind, than that after so just and reasonable a Covenant he entered into
with them at first, and which they so soon, so unnecessarily, and so
ungratefully violated, that he did immediately publish to them the new Covenant
of Grace to make all capable of Happiness, through the Incarnation, Suffering
and Satisfaction of his Son, and even pulling some as Firebrands out of the
Fire, when they were raging in their Sin, and rejecting the Offers of Grace,
and resolutely cleaving to their Abominations, and saying in their Hearts, that
they would have none of him?

In this way the Errors and Mistakes of Men about the Divine Dispensations may
be prevented or cured. As,

1. It was the first, and is yet the most general Error, Why did God suffer Sin
to enter into the World? Might he not have made all his Rational Creatures to
be infallible? that had been more Goodness than what appears in either
Covenant. This was the Devil's Temptation, murmuring that God had made them
fallible, and under the necessity of a diligent Attention and Guard, giving
them Trouble. Satan did deceive Man, representing God as envious, hindering the
Happiness he might attain by eating the forbidden Fruit. But let it be
remembered, that God was free to give what measure of Goodness he pleased: it is
impossible that he should communicate so much Perfection to Creatures that they
were not capable of more, for then his Goodness should be exhausted. Christ
said to the Laborers of the Vineyard who murmured, That he had given as much
to him that served but one Hour, as to them that had endured the Heat of the
Day: Is it not free for me to dispose of my own as I please? If God had created
his Rational Creatures that they could not shun Sin and Misery by irresistible
Temptations, or by an operative Decree, they might have complained; but when
they might be happy and would not, what Impudence is it to complain? But
likewise as God is bountiful, so he is wise, and will not divest himself of the
Government of the World, or manage Men by Instincts, as he does the Brutes;
therefore his Wisdom did require that his Rational Creatures should be capable
of Rewards and Punishments, and be governed by them and not by fatal Necessity.

2. The Voluptuous think, Why did God give us Pleasure in such Objects, which
results from them so powerfully, that we are not Masters of them? Eve
insinuated this, that the forbidden Fruit was pleasant, good to eat, and fit to
make the Eater wise. Thence also wicked Men do deceive themselves, that these
Pleasures to which they have so strong a Propension, cannot be evil, at least
the cause of eternal Misery: But they consider not the Goodness of God to Man
in giving these Pleasures of Sense; Life and Health may be continued when Smell
is lost, and even when Taste is lost, as Barzillai said to David. If God
provided no Remedy, there might be pretense of Complaint; but tho Pleasure or
Grief be not directly in Man's Power, yet God has endued him with Reason, that
he can manage them by applying other Objects to his Sense, or Thought, which
will keep them from Excess. If Eve upon the Sight or Smell of the forbidden
Fruit, and the Pleasure arising from it, and the Desire to it, had remembered
God, and the Pleasure arising from the clear Thoughts of him, she had never
proceeded to eat. Beside that it was rational and congruous to the Divine
Perfections, that the Obedience of his Creatures should require Attention and
Diligence, and should not consist in such Trifles as were wholly indifferent,
without Pleasure or Pain, Appetite or Aversion.

I conceive they stretch too far that make the first Motions of Pleasure or
Appetite thereof to be Sin; Covetousness is the voluntary continuing of these
against the Command. Our Savior had an Aversion from the Cup of his Suffering,
and wished it could have been delayed, which was but the Effort of innocent
Nature, which he did not voluntarily continue, for immediately he says to the
Father, Not mine, but thy Will be done. The Heathens and many Christians in
their Ignorance, reckon nothing to be Sin but where the evil Inclination takes
effect; and the Apostle says, That without the knowledge of the Law, he knew not
that Covetousness was Sin: which will not infer, that the first Motions of the
Affections are Sin, until the Will concur to continue or proceed in these
Affections contrary to the Law; for it is said, When Lust is conceived it
brings forth Sin. Where Lust must signify the natural Affection of Pleasure,
which is not Sin, but the rise of it. The Aversion from Persecution or
Martyrdom not yielded to, is not Sin; but it is the greater Duty of Holiness,
willingly to undergo it, notwithstanding that natural Aversion: So the first
Motion or Desire of the Pleasure of the forbidden Fruit, if it had been
immediately avoided by diverting the Mind to God, and Gratitude to him, it had
not produced the doleful Effects that followed. These first Motions make many
Men doubt of their Regeneration, tho they did not continue in the same in their
most secret Thoughts; yet Sin is more in the Will when it does continue these
than in the outward Act, which is rather an Evidence of the strength of the
Concupiscence, than a part of the Sin.

The distinct knowledge of the Terms of the Covenant of Grace, has been much
perplexed, by apprehending Sin as if it were a Debt obliging the Sinner to
Punishment, especially from that, that Sin is called (...) in the Lord's
Prayer, and elsewhere, which is translated, Forgive us our Debts, as we forgive
our Debtors: But the Greek Word (...) does not only signify debeo, but also
obnoxious sum, I am liable; and so (...) signifies not only debitum, but noxa,
that is, Injury or Wrong, and cannot otherways be properly understood in that
place; for God has not required us to discharge the Debts owing to us by our
Debtors, but the Resentment of Wrong done to us by them. The Punishment or
penal part belongs to God, and so cannot be forgiven by the Person injured; and
if there be any thing of Reparation due by the Wrong, it may be lawfully
prosecuted: but the Aversion and Resentment arising from the Injury is that
which Men are required to forgive and obliterate. There was indeed a Debt of
that holy Action that by Sin was transgressed, but every Debt is not a Debt of
Payment; for Payment imports the delivery of some Fungible, as Money or Grain,
but other Debts consist not in Payment, but in Prestation or performance of
some Deed, as the doing any Work, putting one in Possession, giving Honor or
Obedience: And so Creatures Obligements to God are not Debts of Payment, but of
Prestation or Performance; much less can the Guiltiness of Sin import a Debt of
Payment, but it does not even import a Debt of Performance. A Criminal is not
obliged to offer himself to the Justice of the Magistrate, who therein is the
Minister of God, no not to confess his Crime when accused by another, unless it
can be otherwise proved: Nor does the Judge punishing take Payment, but uses
his Authority in the way of Vindication, as an Act of Punitive Justice done by
him on the Criminal, and not done to him by the Criminal. Prestation of Facts
being omitted, especially to God, can never be repayed: that which is past
cannot be recalled, nor is it compensable by any Liquid Payment, but only the
Damage done by it; and if there be no other Damage, the Grief arising by the
Injury may be compensed with Joy arising from the Application of some of the
Injurer's Goods to the Injured; and oftentimes Men count it a Satisfaction by
taking Pleasure in the suffering of the Injurer, but that is it which Men are
required to forgive: How can it then be imagined that God requires Payment for
the failure in Duty by the Committer of Sin? He is not capable of Grief or
Damage; and he has not only said, but sworn, that he takes no Pleasure in the
Torment of his Creature, As I live, says the Lord, I delight not in the Death
of a Sinner. If Sin inferred a Debt of Payment, it might be forgiven without
any Satisfaction; for scarce is any Creditor obliged to exact the Debt due to
him, but he may freely forbear it or forgive it. And therefore if Sin did
properly infer a Debt, God might forgive it without Satisfaction; therefore God
punishes not Sin as a Creditor exacting his Debt, but as he is the King, Ruler
and Judge of the World, he vindicates the Injury against his Law, and manifests
his infinite Aversion and Abhorrence of Sin, not his Delight in the Misery of
his Creature.

3. I consider the part of the Son in the Decree and Dispensation of the
Covenant of Grace, not as a making Payment for the Debt of Sinners, but a
submitting to these Sufferings, which do as much manifest God's Abhorrence of
Sin, and Delight in his indispensable Law, as if the whole Race of Mankind had
been eternally in Hell; and thereby he made way to God's Mercy to fallen Man,
so far as it was congruous to the Divine Perfections. If Christ's Satisfaction
had been the Payment of the Sinner's Debt, the Forgiveness of Sin would not be
by free Grace. A Cautioner or any interposed Person paying a Debt, the Creditor
cannot be said to give a free Discharge to the principal Debtor, for he has
gotten all he could demand. Law does not suffer a Creditor to refuse Payment
from any that shall please to interpose, which therefore would be far from
exalting the free Goodness of God in pardoning Sin, as the Scripture sets it
forth; beside that all interposed Persons acquire Right to the Debt, and have
Recourse against the principal Debtor for whom they pay: But Scripture makes no
mention of Sinners becoming Debtors to Christ for Punishment.

If Sin had been undertaken by, and transferred on Christ, the Sinner being so
liberated, how could the Sinner beg Pardon of the Sin that was already paid?
Thence some have imagined, that it was a fault to mourn for Sin, and that so
they were no way under the Law, but under Grace. And those who are a little
more modest say, that they do not observe the Law as a Debt by Justice, but as
a free Gratification, mistaking grossly that place that the Regenerate are not
under the Law, but under Grace; that is, that the Law is no more the
Counterpart of the Covenant between God and them, as it was in the Covenant of
Works, but is still a Law obliging them to Performance, without Abrogation,
Derogation, Indulgence, or Pardon of Sin before it were committed, anterior in
its Obligation to any Covenant of and with Man. The reason of the severe
Punishment of Sin is commonly given, because it is committed against the
infinite Majesty of God; to which I think it may be well added, that as the
Aversion of God from Sin, and as his Purity is infinite, so his Justice
requires an infinite Punishment, which because a Creature cannot bear in a
finite Duration, it becomes an infinite Punishment.

Thence also it is evident that Christ's Satisfaction could not be infinite in
Weight, for Weight can no more be infinite than Bulk, but it becomes infinite
in Value by the Dignity of the Person that suffered it.

4. All that deserve the Name of Christians do agree, that God's Justice could
not be satisfied, nor Sin expiated, without the suffering of Christ of infinite
Value, but they do exceedingly disagree in the Terms of the Covenant betwixt
the Father and the Son, and betwixt God and Man. All do agree, that in every
Covenant there must be mutual Prestations by either Party; but the Question is,
what these Prestations were in the Terms of the Covenant of Grace, what is
God's part, and what is Man's part in it? There be many Errors not only
perilous, but pernicious, especially when they are wilfully maintained. That
Infallibility the Church of Rome pretends, makes all her Errors to become
wilful and sinful, if once they have been owned in that way they count
infallible. All others may and oftentimes do retract their Mistakes. It were
highly uncharitable to imagine, that any of these had wilfully or willingly
taken up an Error in this matter, which is the greatest Interest of Men; but at
first they behoved to be mistaken. I do therefore think it worth my utmost
Endeavor, for my own clearing, to consider how they have fallen into these
Mistakes, and by what way they might come cut of them.

(1.) The Pelagians held, That the natural Powers God had given Men by
Creation, were sufficient for Regeneration; and that which seems to have led
them into that Error was, that it could not consist with the Goodness, and even
with the Justice of God, to damn Men for that which was never in their Power to
avoid: Seeing nothing can be a Crime but what is voluntary, and where the Will
might have actually chosen or followed the contrary, and so at least it was in
their natural Power to repent of Sin, and trust in God for Mercy, through the
Merits of Christ. And when they were told that Adam was once free, and was the
common Root of Mankind, covenanting with God in their Name; and therefore as
they would have obtained Happiness if he had stood, so they must be content
with Misery seeing he fell. He that takes the benefit of a Bargain, must take
it with the hazard of the Loss. The Sins of an habitual Sinner are more
atrocious than his first Sins of that kind, and yet less free. It was hard to
convince them thus, that they were in the case of Freedom as to Repentance; for
while Adam did represent Mankind he could not repent, which behoved to
presuppose Sin; and after Adam had sinned, that Covenant was lost, and no other
Sin of Adam reached all his Posterity: but if they had considered that Christ
the second Adam had supplied and exceeded the first Adam, whereby no Man should
be lost, but he that refused the Covenant of Grace in the first Motions of it,
whereby his natural Conscience at least did witness to him that he was a
Sinner, and thereby deserved to be excluded from God's Favor, and yet that God
was merciful and gracious to a repenting Sinner, but that it could not consist
with his Holiness and Purity to reconcile with a Sinner cleaving to his Sin and
that God would never suffer him to perish, who upon such Motions did not cleave
to his Sin. It did not thence follow, that this Man by the Power of Nature
could repent, but it was sufficient to convince the Peldgian, that God would
give him a new supernatural Power to repent and believe. All that the Pelagian
could reply was, that there was no need of a supernatural Power, and therefore
the Wisdom of God would not choose a superfluous way, but would make use of the
Powers of Nature. Yet the Scripture says expressly, and inculcateth, That the
Natural Man cannot understand Spiritual Things, that are by the Covenant of
Grace; for which God gave no Capacity to the first Man by his Creation, and so
none of his Posterity can pretend it by those Powers communicated to Mankind by
Creation, and Propagation. Pelagians did as highly speak of Grace as others,
but they meant by it only the Powers of Nature.

(2.) There is a new Mistake like to that of the Pelagians, taken up by some of
the Protestant Church in France, and takes with others, which if it be
followed will end in Pelagianism, but they should not be yet so treated. They
do not suppose Repentance and Faith to be in the Power of Man, but that they
are given by God at the time of Conversion, yet not by any inward Habit or
Power created by God, and infused into the Will or Soul of Man, but by the Word
and other Means of God's Prowidence; as when God by Correction lays low a Man's
Passions and Lusts, which hindered him to give due Attention to the Word of
God, and then by managing the Word of God, and bringing such parts of it to his
Thought as is fitted for his Capacity and Circumstances, so that he cannot
resist it; for the Word of God is called the Sword of the Spirit, and that it
converts the Soul, and that the various Expressions in Scripture, Line upon
Line, and Precept upon Precept, is contrived to take with several Capacities
and Inclinations; and that Man being a Rational Creature, is always acted by
God rationally, but infused Habits would be a brute way. The Wisdom of God
would take the most adapted way, the holiest Acts are done by Acts of Reason
and Will, infused Grace would lead to Enthusiasm, and make the Word
unnecessary; but when the Word prevails, it is said to be the ingrafted Word.
This they think not to be the moral Swasion of the Arminians wherewith Man
could prevail, but no Angel could so manage the Word, it must be the Hand of
God alone; and seeing Conversion can be that way, it were superfluous to add to
it other inward Operations of the Spirit. In all this there is nothing but the
Powers of Nature more subtily managed: The whole couse of Scripture is always
inculcating the Difference of Grace from Nature. If the Pelagians said not the
same thing, certainly they might have said it; but the Scripture says
expressly, That the Natural Man cannot know the Things of God, because they are
spiritually discerned. Therefore Man by Nature wants that Sense to discern
with; Grace is the new Creature, and Regeneration the new Birth, therefore in
Regeneration God must give a new Sense. By Nature he has given five Senses,
and fitted the Objects with sensible Qualities suited to them all: These were
not essential to Man, God might have given fewer, or added more, and fitted
Qualities for them. May he not then give a new Sense for spiritual Things? his
Word shows he does so, which derogates nothing from the Word, wherein are the
Qualities fitted for that Sense; it does not derogate from the Excellency of
the natural Light, that it cannot work upon a blind Man, or that it does
require the Sense of Sight. The Word of God does not only excite and promote
Grace after Conversion, but is a chief Mean to prepare the way for Conversion,
containing not only supernatural Light by Revelation, but reviving and
perfecting natural Light, manifesting the Divine Perfections, the Celestial
Glory, the way to attain to it, the Beauty of Holiness, the Deformity of Sin,
and the dreadful Consequences thereof; and so loses the Mind from that
cleaving to Sin, that makes the Offer of Grace and Mercy to be despised and
rejected: But it is not sufficient to turn the Soul to God by Conversion. A
virtuous Heathen by the Light of Nature may see the Deformity of, and may hate
gross Vice, and may turn from it to that which is comely and convenient for
Mankind, but can never turn to God to make him the last End. The Scripture may
much more easily convince, but not convert by it self, but as it has the
Qualities suitable to make Impressions upon that supernatural Sense and Relish
of spiritual Things. It discovers not only the Pollutions of the World, but
those more subtle Sins that Heathens never perceive, such as fetting the
common Interest of Mankind above the Interest of God, the want of the Love and
Delight in God, and of the Dependence upon him, and attributing all good things
to him: So the ingrafted Word must be in its proper Stock, in its own spiritual
Sense. No Man can refuse that God has frequently insused Habits in the Soul of
Man without the use of any Sense, or any Principle in Reason. Did not God give
the knowledge of Words to Adam and Eve whereby he spoke to them, and they to one
another? yet there was no natural Connection between the Sounds of the first
Language and the Thoughts and Things they signified. He gave also the Knowledge
of many several Languages after Christ's Resurrection, not only to the
Apostles, but to others; Was either Reason or Will made use of, in the
producing of these? or was it a brute Way, unbeseeming God? Are not the
Principles of reasoning inbred in Nature, and freely given of God? Is therefore
Man's reasoning a brute Way? Nothing can be more express against this Opinion,
than that of Ezekiel; A new Heart also will I give you, and a new Spirit will I
put within you, and I will take away the stony Heart out of your Flesh, and
give you a Heart of Flesh; and I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you
to walk in my Statutes, and you shall keep my Judgments and do them.

(3.) There is a great Inclination in Man to put Works upon Man's Part of the
Covenant of Grace, and that as deserving by Justice the Performance of God's
Part. The Semi-Pelagians after the Pelagians were baffled and exploded, that
they durst no more profess the Powers of Nature to be sufficient for Salvation,
said, there behoved to be supernatural Grace given of God at Conversion, yet
there were preparatory Works, such as the Sense of Sin, and of its deserving
the Spirit of Bondage, the use of Ordinances, which they thought deserved
Grace, which God in Justice could not but give; these were also exploded, and
were called Semi-Pelagians. All the Apostle Paul's Arguments against
Righteousness by the Law, strike as fully against these as against any Merits
or Works on Man's Part in the Covenant of Grace, and he is accurately positive,
That by Faith only we are saved, without any thing on our part in which we
might glory, or attribute our Salvation to our selves, in whole, or in part.

(4.) There is of late an Opinion vented in England, that tho the Covenant of
Works is now become impossible, which required perfect Obedience; yet God in
his Goodness has entered into the new Covenant or Covenant of Grace, in which
Man's Part is not a legal and full Obedience, but through Christ's Mediation he
has accepted an Evangelical Obedience, being a sincere Endeavor to fulfill all
God's Commandments, and a Course of Life, without continuing in any kind of
known Sin. Their main Ground is, that it cannot be thought that God entering
with Men in the Covenant of Grace, would not have Men as a Part of their
Engagement to resolve and promise to have respect to all God's Commandments,
and to endeavor so far as humane Frailty could allow, to fulfill them all: if
it were not so that Holiness were Man's Part of the Covenant, we behoved to
take the Antinomian's Interpretation, that we were no more under the Law, but
under Grace; that the Law had no more Obligation on Believers, therefore the
new Obedience must be Man's Part.

This Opinion has been held by some Pious and otherwise Orthodox Divines, and
therefore it ought rather to be cleared as a Mistake, than prosecuted as a
stated Profession. It must therefore be adverted, that God's Moral Law is
indispensable, and behoved to be binding tho there had never been a Covenant,
as has been shown before. God's Dispensation might have been without taking
Man's Consent by way of Covenant, but by the Law written in his Heart, obliging
him to Obedience, under the just and proportioned Punishment of eternal
exclusion from God's Favor; the breach or loss of no Covenant could take away
that, it became indeed Man's Part of the Covenant of Works; but that Covenant
is broken, yet the Obligation of the Law which was anterior to that Covenant,
stands. In theCovenaut of Works there was partly Merit, partly Favor, but the
Covenant of Grace excludes all Merit, and Man's Part is by Faith only; so that
Faith is not considered in its moral Goodness, for in that Consideration Love
is a far more excellent and disinterested Virtue than Faith, but Holiness is on
God's Part of the Covenant of Grace, as in the former Conception is expressed,
he infuses the Habits of all the Christian Virtues in Conversion. Man's
Engagement to endeavor to keep God's Law were of no Import, unless he did keep
it, and so God's Part should not be at the time of Conversion, but at the time
of Death, after the Course of Man's Life did appear. The Scripture makes no
mention or moment of Man's Resolution, which is as the early Cloud, or Morning
Dew, which quickly passes away. Neither would the Terms of the Covenant of
Grace be equal to all, the Endeavor of some would go much further than the
Endeavor of others.

(5.) Some Divines in England have made Man's Part of the Covenant to be Faith,
as it is a good Work, because it is said, Abraham believed in God, and it was
imputed to him for Righteousness. That is, it was held sufficient, as if all
Righteousness had been performed. But this had been still a Covenant of Works,
accepting one Work in place of entire Obedience; but Abraham's believing in
that Place, was not the Act of Faith, as it is Man's Part of the Covenant, for
it relates to a former Place of Scriptnre, as the Scripture says, Abraham
believed, which was concerning his Son Isaac, who was promised to him in his
Old Age; and therefore he staggered not at the Promise of God, through
Unbelief, which was a particular Act of Belief of that Promise, and was
properly an Act of Holiness, and was so imputed or reputed as an Act of
Righteousness; but the Act of Faith in which Abraham entered in the Covenant of
Grace, was believing in God through the Messiah, to be justified, sanctified
and glorified.

(6.) Some Reformed Divines in France and England bring good Works on Man's
Part of the Covenant of Grace, as perfecting and completing Faith, for only a
lively Faith working by Love is saving, for there is a Faith that works not
by Love; The Devils believe and tremble, and Faith without Works is dead.
Abraham was justified by Works, when he offered Isaac. See thou how Faith
wrought with his Works? And Abraham believed, and it was imputed to him for
Righteousness; by Works a Man is justified and not by Faith only: Yet Paul's
reasoning is much more full and accurate, discussing the Point of Justification
by Faith only, without the Works of the Law, which could not consist if James
spoke of Faith as Justifying; whereas James takes off an Error of those that
thought they might be saved by believing the Gospel without Holiness, which he
redargues as a wrong Consequence from Paul, and shows that not to be true
Faith, but such a Faith as the Devils have, which cannot be that Act of Faith,
whereby Man enters in the Covenant of Grace, which is not believing the Truth
of the Gospel, but relying on God for Salvation through Christ, according to
the Gospel; and on the contrary, Abraham's Faith is brought in as true Faith,
which yet was not the justifying Act: nor is the Justification there meant, the
Justification in Conversion, which makes a Man just, but that which manifests
his Justification to himself and other Men: For Paul says, If Abraham were
justified by Works, he has whereof to glory, but not before God; as if it were
any thing whereof he could glory in himself, for all Glorying and Boasting is
excluded; but Abraham's glorying is in God, who freely justified him: and he
rejoiced from that Act of Faith concerning his Son, evidencing the Soundness of
the saving Faith, and the Manifestation of his Justification thereby, both to
himself and other Men, whereby he glories before Men and not before God. And
whereas it is said, That Faith works by Love, it cannot be understood that
Acts of Love are Acts of Faith, for they are Graces essentially distinct; but
that Faith is Man's Part of the Covenant whereby Love is given upon God's Part:
nor does it follow that because Faith is perfected by Love, therefore its
Essence is not distinct from Love; Man is perfected by Love, yet it is no part
of his Being.

That Historical Faith, believing the Truth of the Gospel, is specifically
different from saving Faith, and yet it is said, That whosoever believes
Christ is come in the Flesh, is born of God, for no Man can call Jesus Lord but
by the Spirit of God; which imports no more than a Sign of saving Faith, at
that time when there was so general an Opposition against Christ, when no Man
did avow or own Christ hypocritically.

(7.) The Church of Rome has more exceeded, in bringing Works as Man's Part of
the Covenant of Grace, than any other Society of Christians; for they have made
Works the whole and only Part of Man in the Covenant of Grace, and have given
no Pre-eminence to Faith, but to Charity or Love, consequently enough to that
Principle. As it is said of the three eminent Christian Virtues, that of these
the greatest is Charity; so that if Faith did save as a good Work, Love would
much more save. They acknowledge no Justification distinct from Sanctification;
they do not require good Works as the Condition of Salvation, but as the
meritorious Cause of Salvation; that God in Justice could not deny Celestial
Glory to those that live holily, and (which is yet more extravagant)
Supererrogation is the common Opinion publicly preached in that Church: and
when the Council of Trent was called on purpose to amend Errors in Doctrine and
Manners, that had crept into that Church, not one Word in any of their Canons
disapproving Works of Supererrogation, and the Treasure thereof, out of which
the Pope by Assignment of the superfluous Merits of the Saints, may supply the
Merits of others, and bring them to Heaven, either immediately upon Death, or
shortning their purging by the purgatorial Fire, as soon as he thinks fit; and
yet they dispute vehemently against the Imputation of the Holiness of Christ.
They do acknowledge that Christ's Sufferings have satisfied the Justice of God,
that without encroaching thereupon, he may give Pardon of Sin, and they do not
ascribe the Pardon of Sin to the Merit of their Holiness, but only to the
Expiation by Christ's Sufferings; and inconsistently enough they require
purging by the purgatorial Fire, which cannot be thought Correction to amend
them, and therefore could only be to cleanse and expiate, in which they
derogate even from the Sufferings of Christ. But (to give them the most benign
Interpretation) they think the Forgiveness of Sin could not exalt Men to
heavenly Blessedness, but that as in the Covenant of Works every one behoved to
merit that Exaltation by their Works, which could not be after the Fall,
because of Original Sin, whereby the eating of forbidden Fruit did condemn all
Mankind, descending from Adam by Ordinary Generation, until Christ's Suffering
had satisfied that Debt, and even the actual Transgressions of those in the
Covenant of Grace: yet tho Men be still sinful, their Sins being pardoned as
satisfied by Christ's Sufferings, Men's good Works lose not their Effect to
merit Heaven, as well as Adam's, which is the only Difference they make between
the Covenant of Grace, and the Covenant of Works.

Nothing can be more contrary to the Covenant of Grace, and to the Way of
Salvation inculcated in the Gospel; wherein (1.) All Glorying or Boasting of
the Creature attributing any Part of its Salvation to it self, is excluded.
Where is boasting then? It is excluded; by what Law? of Works? Nay, but by the
Law of Faith. Therefore we conclude (says the Apostle) That a Man is justified
by Faith without the Deeds of the Law. But God who is rich in Mercy, for his
great Love wherewith he loved us, even when we were dead in Sin, has quickened
us together with Christ; where it is twice repeated, by Grace you are saved,
through Faith, not of Works, lest any Man should boast. Yea Boasting is so far
excluded, that Man cannot boast of Faith, as it is his Part of the Covenant of
Grace, for it is said, By Grace you are saved, through Faith, and that not of
your selves, it is the Gift of God. What could be more said to exclude Works
from Man's Part of the Covenant of Grace, not only that there cannot be an
equivalent Cause deserving Glory, but not so much as the Terms upon which Glory
was to be freely given. For it is expressy said, that we are God's Workmanship
created in Christ to good Works, which God has before ordained or prepared,
that we should walk in them: and God has not predestined Men to Salvation
for their Works foreseen or performed; For whom he did foresee, them he did
predestinate to be conformed to the Image of his Son; which Image is Holiness,
which is not the Cause but the End and Effect of Predestination: Good Works
indeed are Via Regni, but not Gausa Regnandi, and they are the Evidences of
true and saving Faith, to be diligently followed, not only by reason of the
indispensible Law and Duty, anterior in order to any Covenant, but as the Means
to evidence true Grace, and give solid Peace; and therefore it is said, Strait
is the Gate and narrow is the Way that leads unto Life, and that the Kingdom
of God is taken by Violence, and the Violent enter it by Force, which does
import no more than the Way to the Kingdom: And where it is said, Blessed are
they that do his Commandments that they may have Right to the Tree of Life, it
does not import Right by Merit, the Word being (...); so that Works can no more
properly be called Right, than the Evidence of Lands or Inheritance are called
the Rights thereof, as sighifying the same; and therefore the explicatory Words
are subjoined, and may enter in through the Gates to the City.

All others but the Romanists that bring in Works to the Covenant of Grace,
bring them in as the Conditions of it, but not as a deserving meritorious
Cause, much less as a superfluous supererrogatory Merit, seeing Christ has
declared so clearly, that the first and great Command of God is, Thau shait
love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart, with all thy Soul, and with all thy
Mind; to which Luke adds, witth all thy Strength. Can any Creature do more than
this Command does require? which does not import that all are obliged to the
same measure, but according to their several Capacities; For to whom much is
given, of them much is required.

(3.) Nothing can be more apposite to take off that Pretense, that Remission of
Sins is not attributed to Works, but only the Exaltation of Man from an Animal
Life, such as Adam had in his Innocence, to an Angelical Life in Heaven, than
where it is said, Even when we were dead in Sin, has he quickened us in
Christ, and has raised us up together, and made us sit together in Heavenly
Places with Christ Jesus.

What a pitiful Pretense is it, that by the Works of the Law are only meant the
Mosaical Law, including Institutions and Ceremonies, when Faith is said to
justify without the Works of the Law, and thereafter Works are excluded,
without mention of any particular Law; all Negatives and Exclusives are
Universal.

It is also a groundless Pretense to bring in Works to the Covenant of Grace,
to make Men more diligent in Holiness, seeing it is the Evidence of true Faith,
ever joined with it in Existence, tho not in Concurrence as the Terms of the
Covenant on Man's part; for the habitual Grace of Holiness is God's part given
in Regeneration, which even Infants must have.

I do not think it a convincing Reason against Merit, as it is against
Supererrogation, or Super-Merit, that no Creature can merit except it did that
which it was not obliged to do, seeing all Creatures are indispensably obliged
to love God with all their Strength, and so to do all that is acceptable in his
Sight: For then God should only have Punitive Justice, and not Premiative
Justice, by proportionable Rewards, which yet certainly is as congruous to the
Divine Perfections as the other. To him that has shall it be given. Well done
thou good and faithful Servant, thou have been faithful in a few things, I will
make thee Ruler over many things.

There are indeed two kinds of Rewards, and there is but one word commonly used
to signify both. The one is a Reward proportioned to deserving, of which it is
said, To him that works, the Reward is not reckoned of Grace, but of Debt.
Whence it is clear that there is one Reward of Debt, and another of Grace,
which is more properly to be called a Prize, or a Gratification. I doubt not
that the Exaltation of Adam, if he had persisted in Integrity, from an Animal
to an Angelical Life, and the Confirmation of him and his Posterity against the
hazard of falling, was a Prize far above the Proportion of his Merit, and so a
Reward not of Debt, but of Grace; for it was annexed to Perseverance in his
Innocence, not to any high degree of his Seize, and was lost by losing
his Innocence, not by coming short of such a degree of Holiness. How impudently
insolent is it then for any sinful Mortal to claim Celestial Glory, and to be
out of hazard of Misery by their own Merit? which were the ground of the most
excessive boasting; for then they might say that God had given them nothing
that he could have withholden.

These are all the ways I know that Men pretend to ascribe any part of
Salvation to their own good Works, or Holiness, whereof the last is the worst;
and it is a wonder that such a Multitude of People, after so great Discoveries
of its Falsehood, should not be ashamed to own and urge it: Many of them at
their Death durst not adventure on that ground, but betook themselves to the
Merits of Christ alone; even their greatest Champion Bellarmine, to whose
Merits more is ascribed in the Support of that Church, than to the greatest
Merits of the most mortified Monks: but they are necessitated to own it,
because their Church has defined it as an Article of Faith; so that without
Shipwreck of Infallibility, which is the Ground and Pillar of their Church,
they cannot part from it. There are other Mistakes and Errors about the Terms
of the Covenant of Grace, and the way of Man's Salvation, even of those that
admit nothing of their Works, but who ascribe all to Faith, and acknowledge that
Faith is not by the Power of Human Nature, but that it is the supernatural Gift
of God. Those of the Augustan Confession, and the Arminians, hold that Christ
has purchased to all Mankind a Renovation of Nature, concreated with their
Souls, whereby it becomes in their Power to repent, believe and be holy, or
not, as they please and choose: And that these Graces are not given to every
Individual at the time of their Conversion, but that their Election is by God's
Fore-knowledg, that they will make use of that Power aright, which God has
given them, and will repent, believe and be holy at their Death: tho during
their Life they may oftentimes fall from all these Graces; yet God who foresaw
these would not fall away finally, did elect them to Glory. In this they think
they do not boast, because this Power was the Gift of God, but given to all
alike, which therefore they call universal Grace; thereby they think they fall
neither in with Pelagians, who attribute these Powers to Human Nature, nor with
Papists, that attribute their Salvation to their own good Works: Yet these
Opinions are abundantly inconsistent with Revelation of the way of God's
dealing with Man, and even with Reason. They are very clearly inconsistent with
the Wisdom of God, who does nothing in vain: Were it not in vain to give Grace
to the greatest part of Mankind, whom God knew would never make use of it, or
at least would not continue in it, but finally fall from him? Is it not
evidently more consonant to the Wisdom of God, to give Grace only to the Elect
at the time of Conversion? Could it be consistent with the Wisdom of God, that
he should reconcile with, and accept into Favor those whom he knew would
apostatize and desert him? I know nothing they can pretend to extricate the
Wisdom of God in such a course, but that it could not consist with God's
Justice, to require of Creatures that which were impossible for them to
perform, much less to condemn them to eternal Punishment for that which was
impossible; and therefore both the Wisdom and Goodness of God required that
even the Damned should be inexcusable, and so all Mankind behoved to be put in
a Capacity of Salvation, if not by the natural Powers of Man in Creation, at
least by superadded Powers after the Fall. But there is no necessity to infer
that kind of universal Grace to render all Mankind capable of Salvation, and to
make the Damned inexcusable. It is sufficient, and consonant to the Word of
God, that Christ's Merits should be in Value sufficient to purge away the Sins
of the whole World, and that Grace should be effectual to all of them, who when
it was offered to them did not reject the Offer and cleave to their Sins.

These Men ought to be satisfied, that through Christ there is an universal
Grace purchased, given or offered, and refused, which sufficiently satisfies
the many Expressions in Scripture, of Christ's dying for all Men, yea for every
Man, and for the Sins of the World. That pretended insoluble Argument of the
Arminians, That must be true which every Man is bound to believe, but every Man
is bound to believe that Christ died for him, because God commands him to
believe in Christ, which therefore obliges him to believe; therefore it is
true that Christ died for every Man. This Argument has been a great Bugbear
which has puzzled many, and there are several Answers made to it; and I think
there is yet a better Answer than I have hitherto met with, that the Fallacy
lies in this, that there is not a Difference made between a Command and an
Invitation or Exhortation, to do that to which the Party exhorted is not
obliged, but whereby a great Benefit may arise upon the Performance. Such is
the Expression of Christ, Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden,
and I will give you Rest to your Souls; which is only an Invitation to enter
into the Covenant of Grace: For the Nature of all Covenants is, that the
Engagements of either Party must be voluntary and free, yea even in the
Covenant of Works, (as has been said before) albeit Innocence by Obedience to
all God's Commands was an indispensible Duty, yet Adam's Engagement superadded
thereto was voluntary; and therefore God will not condemn Sinners because they
have not embraced the Offer of Grace, by believing, as the Penalty of not
believing, but will only exclude them from the Benefit of that Covenant,
because they did not assent unto it, and will punish them for the
Transgressions of his Laws: and therefore it is not true that all Men are
obliged to believe; for then the Damned, and those who have sinned against the
Holy Ghost were obliged to believe, which were altogether in vain, neither
being capable of Pardon: So that not believing in God through Christ for
Salvation, is not the Cause efficient, but deficient of Damnation. It will
further appear hereafter, how Christ the second Adam has restored what the
first Adam lost, in putting every Man in a Capacity to be saved, and that no
Man should be damned but for his own fault, which is the Sentence of the Synod
of Dort, against the Rigor of which the Arminians do so much inveigh.

There is no necessity to recur to that Answer, that by all Men is meant not
singula generum, but genera singulorum, and by the World the World of the
Elect; which are not apt to convince these Men, that the whole World should
only be the World of the Elect, or that every Man should be every kind of Men,
or that this Interpretation will quadrate with that place of Scripture, Will thou by thy Meat destroy him for whom Christ died? And the Wicked that hear and
contemn the Gospel are said to trample under foot the Son of God. When Christ
says, I came not to the World to judge the World, but to save the World; by the
World cannot be meant the World of the Elect; for Christ's coming into the
World was by conversing with all the World, Elect or Reprobate, and he came to
judge all the World, both Elect and Reprobate, tho it was not his chief End in
coming: Therefore the World he came to save must be so also understood of all,
relating to the World he came into, which is solidly and sharply prosecuted by
the eminently learned Monsieur Claud in his Posthumous Works upon the Priestly
Office of Christ. It cannot be thought that the strongest Asseveration of God,
As I live I delight not in the Death of a Sinner, but rather that he should
repent and be saved, were only to be restrained to the Elect, or genera
singulorum; or that it is the Will of God that all Men should be saved, which
is not meant properly of the Will of God, which can never be ineffectual, but
of the Pleasure of God: for it is not said actively it is the Will of God to
save all Men, but that it is the Will of God they should be saved; that is, it
would be pleasing to him if they were all and every one saved, by their
accepting the Offer of Grace, or not rejecting it. But that way is only
distinguishable from Pelagianism by a Notion not warranted by the Word of God:
For if the Pelagians have not said, I am sure they might say, that by the
Powers of Nature they meant nothing else, but that Power which every Man has
by his Creation and his Birth; and might say that those Powers Adam had were by
the free Gift of God, so that there were no more ground to glory in the one way
than in the other. I do not doubt but many of these Men abhor Pelagianism,
which makes me always hope that there may be a Reconciliation between these and
other Protestants, which are commonly called Reformed.

If all Mankind had a Power to believe, as much as they have a Power to reason
or choose, What ground is there to distinguish the one Power from the other?
But if Men cannot believe when they will, but when the Spirit of God has in
their Conversion given them new Powers or Faculties, or at least sincerely
offered them, and would put them in their Power if they will not reject them.
There is a clear and manifest Difference between natural and supernatural Acts,
or between Nature and Grace, that Grace must have a new Power given freely at
Conversion, whereby the converted are enabled to repent, and believe: in
respect of this Power Christ says, Without me ye can do notbing, which is not
spoken as to natural Powers; and by this Power the Apostle says, I can do all
things by him that strengthens me; for of bim we have both to will and to do.

That way does not only derogate from the Grace of God, but from the Happiness
of Creatures; for thereby it is impossible that any Creature can be certain of
their continuance in their Integrity, or in the Favor of God, not only in this
Life, but even in Heaven. For if their free Will can bring them into God's
Favor when they please, or lose it when they please in this Life, (as they do
acknowledge) what have they to secure them against the like in the next Life?
Will they be more glorious than the Devils were before they fell? Yet their
free Will carried them from that Estate. But if God do confirm the Elect Angels
and Saints that they shall never fall, certainly it is not only possible, but
suitable for him so to do toward those that in this Life he receives into his
Favor by the Covenant of Grace. What then can induce them to deny themselves,
and all others one of the most glorious Pearls of the Christian Crown, the
Perseverance of Saints? when Christ has said, That no Man can pluck his Sheep
out of his Hand; and God has said, That whom he loves, he loves unto the end.
Or, why are we bidden to make sure our own Salvation? Why is a Plerophory, or
full assurance of Salvation held forth in Scripture, if these be unattainable
in this Life? It is a pitiful Evasion, that Men may be sure they have Grace,
but not sure they will keep it; for the Assurance relates not to Grace, but to
Glory and Salvation. It is true, If the righteous Man depart from his
Righteousness, it shall be remembered no more. But it is as true, that the
gracious God who freely gave Righteousness, will not suffer the Righteous to
depart from it, either in this Life or that which is to come.

There is another way of universal Grace maintained by some of those of the
Augustan Confession, and it seems to be so held in the Liturgy of the Church of
England, that Grace is given to all who are baptized at the time of their
Baptism. The Church of Rome excludes all from Mercy and Glory, that are not
actually baptized, tho they give them a more easy Quarter, which they call
Limbus Infantum, than those of riper Age; and certainly they must place Idiots
there as well as Infants: yet they are more cruel that condemn these Infants
and Idiots to eternal Torment. No Protestant excludes Salvation by the want of
Baptism, and none of them do include Salvation by Baptism, but only
Regeneration; nor do they hold that that Regeneration does always, or for the
most part continue, but that these Infant-Saints may fall away; yet all that
die in Infancy must be saved, for they cannot fall away. The Liturgy says, we
do not doubt that all that are baptized are truly regenerate, which I would
rather interpret as a Presumption in the Judgment of Charity than as a positive
Assertion in the Judgment of Verity: As if one saw a Man of Age giving Signs of
his Belief baptized, said, I doubt not this Man is regenerate; yet some of the
Learned understand it otherwise, who yet are not for amissible Grace, and
therefore perplex themselves, endeavoring to invent a Sacramental Grace of
Regeneration, being conditional upon Faith at the time of Discretion. The
Papists are more puzzled to clear how the Water of Baptism regenerates; for they
think it not enough that God has promised to regenerate all at that time, but
they hold that the Water sacramentally used does it, opere operato, by a Power
given it by God.

I know no reason to confirm this Opinion: it is true, Christ says, Except a
Man be born of Water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of
God. This would exclude all that were not baptized from Heaven, if there the
Kingdom of God signified Heaven, which none hold but Papists: And therefore
many by the Kingdom of Heaven understand the Christian Church, as it must be
understood in several other places; so that the meaning will be, no Man can be
a Member of the visible Church, but he that is, or is rationally supposed to be
regenerated by the Spirit of God, and likewise consecrated to God by Baptism:
So that it is of the same import with these words, Whosoever shall believe and
be baptized, shall be saved. The joining of Water to the Spirit, can no more
infer the necessity of Water, than of Fire, which is elsewhere joined to the
Spirit. It is from this Opinion (tho without Warrant) that Baptism is called
the Laver of Regeneration, because a Laver imports Washing, but Regeneration is
to be attributed to the sanctifying of the Spirit; the Baptized are consecrated
by the Water of Baptism, not as antecedent to Regeneration, but more frequently
consequent thereto.

I see no reason to prove Baptism to be a converting Ordinance, but the quite
contrary in the very Institution of it. He that believes and is baptized,
shall be saved: So that there is no warrant to baptize any but such as in the
Judgment of Charity may be accounted Believers, either by actual or habitual
Faith: Therefore Baptism does not confer the Grace of believing, nor has God
shown that he will ordinarily confer that Grace at Baptism. This is much
confirmed by Circumcision, which was the Seal of the Covenant, which could not
be meant of the actual sealing and confirming, which was in every circumcised
Person; for it were inconsistent with the Wisdom of God to have designed a Seal
for that use which were only applicable to Men, and not to Women: But it was a
Seal confirming that Society in which it was used, to be the Society wherein
ordinarily the Covenant of Grace was to be found; as it was also the solemn
Inauguration and Entry into the Church, so is Baptism, which is now the solemn
Entry into the Christian Church, and is in place of Circumcision; and therefore
the Anabaptists have no just ground to scruple at the baptizing of Infants born
to be Members of the Church, which have not only a presumptive inward Holiness,
but a federal Holiness, or such a Holiness as all things consecrated to God
have; much more Children consecrated by the Members of the Church, and
dedicated to God by their Parents, or in case of their Death or Incapacity, by
their nearest Relations, or even by others, from the presumptive Will of their
Parents. I see no Warrant for any under the pretense of being Godfathers or
Godmothers, to baptize the Children of Infidels, tho they were in their Power.

All these ways of general and amissible Grace do much incroach upon the Wisdom
of God: Why should he give Grace to so many who he knew would not make use of
it, were not that Grace in vain? But if Grace be given always and effectually
at the time of Conversion, it is both sufficient and quadrant with the Wisdom
of God, who does nothing in vain. It will breed no Difficulty, that God calls
many whom he does not choose, because that is necessary to put them in a
possibility of Salvation, and to render those inexcusable that do refuse it:
But to give actual Grace to those who would throw it away, were to cast Pearls
before Swines.

All these ways of conceiving the Covenant of Grace, and the Divine
Dispensations of Election and Reprobation, show, that generally Christians
agree, that it is an eminent part of the amiable Aspect of God, that he has
put no Rational Creature under the Necessity of Damnation; tho most Part do
overdo, holding more than what is necessary or convenient for that Effect.

There can be nothing more clear, and there is nothing more inculcated in
Scripture, than that the Way of Salvation is by the way of Covenant, which
implies in its Nature mutual Prestations of the Parties covenanting toward
each other, but does not imply that these Prestations must be of equal Value,
or of any Merit, but that the Force of the Covenant is from the Engagement of
the Covenanters, by their Choice and Consent, both as to the Matter and Manner.
There be Covenants where the Performances are of equivalent Value, deserving
each other: but it were Arrogance enough for Adam to have thought the Covenant
of Works were such; and it were Insolence to imagine the Covenant of Grace to
be such.

As in the Covenant of Works there were two Branches. a Covenant between God
and Adam, for himself and his Posterity, and if he had stood, there behoved to
have been a Covenant between God and each of his Elect Posterity, particularly
for himself: The Word makes it appear to be so in the Covenant of Grace, the
Father did covenant with the Son (foreknowing Adam's Fall) to become the second
Adam, to restore and exceed that which was known the first would lose, by
assuming the Nature of the first Adam, and with it not only performing that, in
which Adam failed, by not continuing in Integrity, performing the whole Will of
God, and thereby putting all Mankind in a nearer Capacity to Blessedness, than
Adam had done, tho he had stood; for there is no ground to think his Posterity
would have been confirmed without their own Trial, more than he; but the second
Adam put not only all Mankind out of the Necessity of Misery, but it became
effectual unto all, so far as it was congruous to the Divine Perfections, which
could not admit of Reconciliation with Sinners cleaving to their Sin, or of
those who partaking of Divine Illumination, and of the Tastes of the Powers of
the World to come, should despightfully hate the Spirit, the Worker of these.
All the rest of Mankind (as the Father foreknew them, and predestined them to
be conformed to the Son, so) the Son undertook effectually to redeem them, and
glorify them, and the Holy Ghost to call them, sanctify and preserve them. The
second Adam did undertake yet much more than the First, to satisfy the Justice,
and manifest the Purity of God, more than if all Mankind had perished. This
Branch of the Covenant of Grace is complete as to the Elect, that could not
through Incapacity covenant for themselves; but those that could, were to have
the Offer of the Covenant of Grace made to them by their Vocation, tho not to
all, in equal Fullness and Clearness. It was not suitable to the Wisdom of God,
that those who rejected the first Operations of the Spirit, intimating to them
that they were Sinners, deserving Exclusion from God's Favor, and yet that God
was merciful to Penitents, and would make them Holy and Happy, if they did not
obstinately cleave to their Sins, and reject that Motion; but in the rest, and
even in some of these Rejecters God carries on the Work of Sanctification and
Salvation in his own Way, bringing such to the Light of the Gospel, or the
Light of the Gospel to them, and opening their Eyes to see the Wonders of his
Law, and to discern spiritual Things, and giving them the Inclination to accept
of the Offer of the Covenant of Grace, and to enter in it for themselves, by
that saving Act of Faith, which is all their Part in the Covenant of Grace.

Of this we have two eminent Examples in Scripture, the one Personal, the other
National, by Miracles manifested to the two great Apostles Peter and Paul. That
of Peter was from Cornelius, who neither was a Jew nor a Proselyte, but was
come the Length of natural Religion, to worship only the one God, to whom an
Angel was sent from God, to show him how he should worship the true God aright.
The other was by a Vision to the Apostle Paul, of a Man of Macedonia,
beseeching him to go to that People to help them, who (for ought does appear)
were then Heathens. It does not suffice to a distinct Knowledge of the Covenant
of Grace, to know that by Faith we are saved: but those who have Capacity,
ought to enquire what that Faith is; whether it be the Habit of Faith, or an
Act of Faith; whether it be a special Act of Faith, and what that is; whether
it be one single Act only, or if to be renewed; and whether it be saving by any
thing in itself, and if we may perceive any Consideration why God made that Act
of Faith Man's Part of the Covenant, rather than any other.

As to the first Point, to have Faith, and to believe, are used as equivalent
Terms, both in common Use and in the Scripture, but in a great Latitude; for to
believe does oftentimes signify a Judgment of the Truth of any Proposition: Men
do believe, that is they think likely or probable, whatever the Ground of their
Opinion be; but more strictly, Belief is taken for a Judgment, which has for
its Motive the Perfections of some Person expressing it, endued with such
Perfections as may warrant an Assent, without any other Reason. That Person
must be a virtuous Person, from whose Actings it appears, that he does own the
Principles of Morality, and has no Tentation to fail in the Application of
them in that Point; so not only a Liar, but a vicious Person, or one in
Necessity, or biassed by Favor or Hatred, in Prudence is not a credible
Person: or if the Matter be that which is not the particular Object of that
Sense, which he has in Vigor, it is but a Matter of Opinion. Faith upon
account of credibility is to be attributed to God alone absolutely, who can
neither be ignorant, err, be biassed, mistaken or deceived; and is Infinite in
moral Perfection. Creatures may also be trusted in defferent Degrees, according
to the Moment of the Matter: But no Man ought to trust any Creature, as to the
Necessaries of his Salvation, but God alone immediately, or by Mediation of
those that have his evident Credentials. This kind of Faith is a Prerequisite
to the Covenant of Grace, but no Part of it. For the Devils do thus believe and
tremble, they know God to be certainly true, and that all he expresses is
true, whatever improbability might arise against it. There is yet a stricter
Sense of Believing, or Faith whereby one expects good from another, when it is
suitable to him to give or do it, and to the other to receive it: In this Sense
we do not say, one believes another, but he believes in him, he trusts to
him, he leans, relies and rests upon him. The Object of this Faith is
Faithfulness. It does not arise alone upon the Veracity or Truth of the Person
trusted, but requires many other Perfections, that he be Benign and Gracious,
that he be Powerful and Plentiful, as to that wherein he is trusted. It does
not require his Promise, which would make the thing expected an Act of Justice,
but the Excellency of his Nature; so Creatures may and do trust to Creatures
according to their Perfections. A Secret may be trusted to a faithful Person,
tho neither Powerful nor Rich; and if Experience has shown him to be trusty,
it will be a Confidence without all doubt, he is plentiful in Capacity to
forbear to reveal a Secret, he loses nothing by keeping it. To another a Man
may trust his Money without Writ or Witness, if he know him to be Virtuous, tho
he were Poor, much more if he be Rich, and so under no Tentation to abuse his
Trust. And it were but a Folly to require a Promise to restore, for there being
no Means of Proof, he might as safely violate his Promise as his Faithfulness,
and would think himself less trusted or obliged. It is Indiscretion first to
relate a Matter, and then to say it is a Secret, or to require Secrecy, because
he that accepts the Trust should do it freely: his Promise may oblige him to
keep it close, but not his Faithfulness, unless it be first told him that there
is to be revealed a Secret to him, which he may lawfully keep close, that he
may forbid the discovery if he will not lie under that Obligation of trust. He
that is pursued or searched after for his Life, if he be not able to defend
himself, tho he have no Relation or Confident near him, he will run for shelter
to the most virtuous and fit Person, that without Fault may cover him. In all
these there is Trust, but without any Promise or Paction. There are some things
which no Man with prudence can believe in any Creature, because no Creature can
have Power to give all things that another may need. God alone is absolutely
Faithful, for he is Alsufficient, he is boundlesly Benign, he cannot have any
thing less by whatever he can give; yet his Faithfulness does not require, that
he should give, or do any thing to any, but what is congruous for him to give
and them to receive. It were very incongruous for him to give Grace or Glory to
one, who knowing him, or tasting of his heavenly Power, did hate him with
Despite. He does much Good by his Bounty, respecting nothing in the Object, but
its Capacity to receive; much more by his Mercy and Compassion upon the
Miserable; but most of all to those that trust in him, and expect from him.
This is by his Faithfulness, the others are by his Mercy and Benignity. The
Weakness of Creatures has made him not only Promise but Swear, yet it is
Indiscretion to urge him upon his Oath, or even upon his Promise, where his
Faithfulness were sufficient. No other can give Grace or Glory but he, and
those may be trusted for, by all that did not hate him, or did cleave to their
Sins, and refuse to become Holy, and there is no Foundation of Distinction of
one Man from another. In this Case he needs not enquire whether he be elected
and contained in the Covenant between the Persons of the Trinity. It were
impossible for him to know that immediately, but only by consequence from a
true and lively Faith working by Love, purifying the Heart, tho then Considence
and Assurance that it was true and saving Faith, not Presumption, may be
inferred from a Holy Life.

Faith in this Sense is the Christian Virtue next in Excellency to Love; and as
Love makes the Pleasure and Glory of God the last End, so Faith gives the
Resolution for pursuing all the Means toward that End, and toward the next
subordinate End, the Tranquillity of the Mind, trusting in God for Direction in
all the Means toward these Ends; that as the natural Man trusts to, and rests
on natural Means for obtaining his Ends, so the spiritual Man trusts to, and
depends upon the Conduct of the Holy Ghost, by supernatural Means especially.
Therefore the Apostle Paul says, and gives warrant to all who walk Christianly
to say, The Life that I now live, is by the Faith in the Son of God; who loved
me, and gave himself for me.

The second Point proposed, is whether that Faith which is Man's Part in the
Covenant of Grace, be the Habit of Faith, or any one or more Acts of that
Habit, In which I conceive it is very clear, that a Covenant cannot be entered
and continued by an Habit, but it does necessarily require an Act of the Will;
tho it is true, that the Habit of Faith is more universally necessary to
Salvation, than that Act of Faith, by which Men come into the Covenant of
Grace: For Infants come into that Covenant by Regeneration, when the Habits of
Grace are infused in their Souls, as they and all the Elect were undertaken for
in that Branch of the Covenant of Grace, which from Eternity was among the
Persons of the Blessed Trinity. Yet they could not be said to be actually in
the Covenant, till they were not only made Creatures, but also new Creatures by
Regeneration, and Sanctification of the Spirit. It is a needless Curiosity to
enquire whether they exert any Acts of that Habit in this Life. It is said that
at the Salutation of the Blessed Virgin to Elizabeth, the Child in her Womb did
spring for Joy; but whether the Springing of the Child was from his or her Joy,
is not necessary to determine. I doubt not but the Soul of an Infant is capable
to act its imbred Principles, if it could perceive the Objects thereof; but it
is so delighted in that tender Case to which it is wedded, that it can think of
nothing else, as Experience shows of all Men when in extreme Passions, their
Souls can think of nothing but of the Object of these Passions: Nor do I doubt,
but God may so far manifest himself to an Infant's Soul, as to give it great
Joy; but as there is no Necessity, so there is no Probability that such Souls
should enter in Covenant, tho it be most congruous to the Divine Perfections,
and to the Way God has chosen, that all that are capable should actually enter
into a Covenant with God at their Conversion. When it is said, Without Faith it
is impossible to please God, I do rather think that by Faith Acts are meant,
rather than the Habit; albeit the new Creature by the Habit be pleasant to God,
yet not as an Act, but as a Quality: whereas to please, signifies an Act
pleasing, and so it must relate to those that are capable to covenant with God,
in relation to whom all Directions and Instructions in the World, are to be
understood. I am not moved by this Objection, that if the Covenant of Grace be
entered by an Act of Faith, Children and Idiots must either be excluded from
the Covenant of Grace, or there must be a different Way of saving Children, and
Men of Discretion, and a different Covenant of Grace for Children: For it is
beyond question, that God's Way with Children and Idiots is different from his
Way with others, and that the Rules and Directions revealed in Scripture,
relate only to those of Discretion, capable of them. So the Apostle in
determining Man's Part of the Covenant of Grace, opposes the hearing of Faith
unto Works, and says likewise, How can they believe, unless they hear? Which
neither relates to, nor is exclusive of Children from the Covenant of Grace,
yet the Covenant of Grace is one for all, the Son having covenanted from
Eternity for all the Elect, to bring them into the Covenant of Grace by
Regeneration, exerted according to their Capacity, by actual believing of
those, who are capable so to act, which also is an Evidence that the Act of
Faith is not saving by any thing absolutely necessary in it self, but by the
free Choice and Institution of God.

The third Point proposed, is what Act of Faith that is, by which Men enter
into the Covenant of Grace, and which is their Part of the Covenant. Many hold
it to be a Persuasion of the covenanting Person, that Christ died for him,
whereby it must be an Act of the Understanding: but I see not how that can
hold, for covenanting must be by an Act of the Will, promising or otherwise
performing the Covenanter's Part, which is oftentimes in the one Party no more
than an Acceptance; as in a Trust or Commission, the one Party gives the Trust
or Commission, which does make no Covenant, but an Offer; but when the other
Party accepts, then the Contract is complete, and the Accepter is thereby bound
to follow the Trust and Commission, and make an Account, and the Giver is
obliged to refund the Expenses. Albeit Contracts be by mutual Consent, and that
Consent signifies to have the same Thought, yet? Agreement in one Mind makes no
more a Covenant, than when two are of one Opinion in Contemplation; but a
Covenant is ever somewhat practicable, and therefore tho Acts of Understanding
precede, the Covenant it self is by Acts of the Will.

The Description of saving Faith by Persuasion, is but by a Consequent, which
ought to be endeavored by all, yet is not attained by all; for many are in the
Covenant of Grace, that come not the Length of Persuasion that Christ died
effectually for them, and that thereby they are reconciled to God, and shall be
saved; for tho they were persuaded that Christ died for all and every Man, that
would import nothing to saving Faith; for it were much more evident that the
Effect of Christ's Death for all Men were not the same, seeing so many trample
under Foot the Blood of the Covenant, and so few are saved. Therefore no Man
has just Ground to be persuaded that Christ died effectually for him, or with
Intention to make him holy and happy, or any further than to put him in a
Condition to be holy and happy, if he himself did not hinder it. Therefore tho
believing in Christ were not only proposed to all, but imposed on all as a
Duty, yet it is only a Duty in the Order God has imposed it; to wit, that all
Men should consider their sinful natural Estate, and that the just Reward of
Sin would be eternal Death without Repentance, which none could escape who
cleaved to any kind of Sin, and hated to be reformed; and that therefore they
should be willing and endeavor to be reformed, and use the Means appointed by
God for that End, and should throw themselves upon God's Mercy through Christ's
Merit, if thereby they found that the delighting in Sin, (in those Kinds
especially which did most easily beset them) did cease, and that the Love to,
and Delight in God, did in some measure take Place: But to think to reach the
highest Step of the Scale per Saltum, were altogether without warrant, unless
it were extraordinary, as in Paul's Conversion. Paul to the Romans gives the
true Warrants of that Persuasion; As many as are led by the Spirit are the Sons
of God. The Spirit it self bears Witness with our Spirit, that we are the
Children of God; and if children, then Heirs, Heirs of God, and Joint-Heirs
with Christ. Hence it is evident, how little Moment is in that Arminian Quibble
so much magnified by them, that Christ must have died for all Men, because all
Men are bound to believe he died for them.

We must therefore yet enquire the particular Convenanting Act of Faith, which
being so necessary, is many Ways expressed and set forth in Scripture, that it
may be reached by several Capacities; it is called a Looking to Christ for
Salvation, Look unto me all ye Ends of the Earth, and be saved. A turning to
God; Turn ye, turn ye, for why will you die O House of Israel? A coming to
Christ; Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy ladened, and I will give
you rest to your Souls. And to the Refractory it is said; Ye will not come to
me that ye may have Life. A drawing near to God; Draw near unto God, and he
will draw near unto you. An answering of God's Call; Thou said, Seek ye my
Face; my Heart answered, Thy Face Lord will I seek, hide not thy Face from me.
A receiving of Christ; He came to his own, but his own received him not, but to
all that did receive him he gave Power to become the Sons of God. So then the
saving Act of Faith must imply all these, not that he who enters in the
Covenant, must have expressly all these Acts, but that the Act he must have,
must imply and import them all, and be virtually as much as they all.

The Spirit of God in this Branch of the Covenant of Grace, does not proceed in
one way with all the Elect: As the Wind moves whither it lists, and no Man
knows whence it comes, or whither it goes, so is the Spirit of God. Some
are chased in by the Thundrings and Terrors of the Law, running as a pursued
Man to a Rock, a Fortress, a Tower, or a Strength, or as in the hazard of
Shipwreck running into an Harbor. As those, who by Peter's Sermon convincing
the Jews that they had denied the Holy One, and the Just, and had killed the
Prince of Life: Let all the House of Israel know assuredly, that God has made
that same Jesus whom ye have crucified, both Lord and Christ. Now when they
heard this they were pricked in their Hearts, and said unto Peter, and the rest
of the Apostles, Men and Brethren, what shall we do? And God opened their Ears
and their Hearts to receive Instruction. But God gains others by the sweet
and still Voice of the Gospel, alluring their Hearts to trust in his Mercy and
Faithfulness, as being so gracious, that he delights not in the Death of a
Sinner, but rather that they should repent and live; that he will not
disappoint those who becomingly trust in him. He sometimes begins with the
Light of Nature to lead in the revealed Light of the Gospel, as Paul dealt with
the Athenians, and says to Timothy, God has not given us the Spirit of Fear,
but of Power, and of Love, and of a sound Mind. With some the Spirit proceeds
by degrees, giving a Spirit of Bondage to fear before the Spirit of Adoption,
as Paul says, We have not received the Spirit of Bondage again to fear, but we
received the Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry Abba Father. These are the
ordinary ways of the Spirit, in which the saving Act of Faith is always in the
order of Nature anterior to God's part of this particular Covenant of Grace,
whereby he regenerates Believers, begetting in their Souls the Habits of Grace
and Holiness, which is a new Creation, which these and they that receive them
are called new Creatures: and ordinarily both parts of the Covenant go
together, Believing and Regeneration, yet some are sanctified from the Womb,
who come afterward actually to believe.

The ordinary Procedure of the Spirit held forth, in the Scripture, has some
Operations of the Spirit anterior to the entering into the Covenant of Grace,
which are called Preparatory Works. And first, the Spirit convinces every Man
that comes to have the use of Reason, that he is a Sinner, by comparing his
Life with the Light and Law of Nature written in his Heart, that he has broken
that Law, that thereby he deserves Punishment, tho his Transgression were
never so secret; which neeessarily imports that there is an invisible Judge that
can inflict it, and who certainly knows it, and will not pardon it while it
is approved; and the same Light of Nature shows that there is hope of Pardon to
those that do not approve their Transgressions, and are grieved for them. I
doubt not but all this is wrought upon the most barbarous and ignorant Savage;
for tho by Prepossession and Custom, many of the Laws of Nature are never
adverted, yet ever so much arises in the Mind as makes the Natural Conscience
perceive the Transgression of them, and a Difference between those who continue
and delight in the Transgressions of them, and those who grieve for them upon
account of Punishment, tho they have no distinct Perceptions of that invisible
Power, from which they fear Punishment, or tho their mistaken Interest, and the
Opinion of their Neighbors seduce them to believe, that that fear of
Punishment of secret Transgressions is but from a groundless Fancy, such as
they have in the Darkness and not in the Light.

That which persuades me of this general Operation of the Spirit of God is,
that otherwise tho greater part of the World were in inevitable necessity of
eternal Misery, and could never accuse themselves even when awakened in Hell,
and made clearly to know that through their own fault they were in that Misery,
which they might escaped if they had followed these Motions by their Natural
Conscience to repent. I have before cleared my Mind, that the blessed and
benign Conception of God does import so much, that he condemns none to
eternal Torment, but for that Sin which they might have escaped as to the
Punishment of it.

Tho there be no necessity that the Spirit should further follow those who hate
to be reformed; yet to magnify the Justice and Benignity of God, the Spirit
proceeds frequently further, even with Rejecters, clearing up in them the Light
of Nature, bringing them to know the Word of God, in which not only the Light
of Nature is revived, but much revealed that has no Foundation in the Light of
Nature; whence there arises a Persuasion of the Truth of that Word, and all
revealed in it. He gives also frequently the Perception of the hazard and
horror of Sin, the forbearing of the outward Acts of some Sins, and the inward
Inclination to some others; a natural Pleasure in some Virtues, and thence
oft-times follows an unwarrantable Persuasion of having obtained Grace and
Right to Glory: If these, or some of them were not, the Reprobate would become
without all hope of Mercy, and as malicious as the Devils; yet these are given
not for their own sakes, but for the common good of Mankind, and the special
good of the Elect, but by none of these is the Covenant of Grace entered.

The Act of Faith by which Men enter into the Covenant of Grace, is not in
their own Power, nor can they exert it at any time they please, even when they
hear or meditate upon the Word of God, or when they hear, read and meditate
upon the most convincing and persuading Preaching, or when they do most
earnestly pray to be pardoned and accepted. All these are but the Ordinances of
God, with which he does ordinarily confer Regeneration, and which are therefore
Men's Duty to use them; and it were to tempt God to desire or expect Convorsion
in another way: Neither are these mere Formalities or Solemnities, but have
their proper Effects, especially in loosning the Soul from its Addictedness to
Sin; for it is said expressly, By Grace ye are saved through Faith, and not of
your selves, it is the Gift of God. There must therefore be a present inward
Vocation, Motion or Excitation of the Spirit, offering to the Soul to turn it
from cleaving to Sin unto God, and to give Pardon, Reconciliation, Holiness and
Happiness, but not conferring these until the Soul be willing to accept them.
There will be little difficulty to embrace that Offer, as to the Pardon of Sin,
nor to have the general Notion of Happiness, tho if the particular way of
Happiness were explicated to be the Delight in God and Spiritual Things, and
not in Carnal Delights. The prepossessed Soul by sensible Pleasures might
readily loath that as light Food, yet the greatest Difficulty would be in being
willing to be made holy, that is, consecrated and devoted to the Love of, and
to the Delight in God above all things, with an Opposition to all known Sin.
This therefore must be the Gift of God, freely given at the time of that Motion
of the Spirit, to such only as are elected, whether they be such as are not
positively resolved to cleave to Sin, or reject such Motions, or such whom God
even against that Reluctance will overcome, and makes willing to embrace and
accept the Offer and Motion of the Spirit. This is that inward Call which is
one of the Links of the Golden Chain of Salvation; for whom he predestined,
them he also called, justified and glorified, and which therefore is called
effectual Calling, to which there is never made effectual Resistance, it being
ever stronger than any Resistance, yet not so that the Soul could not possibly
resist, but that God had made the Call so strong, that though it was willingly
embraced, not necessarily, but freely, yet always effectually. Albeit God might
give such an Inclination to accept Holiness, as he gives to desire Happiness,
yet there is no ground to think that he does so; for such Acts which are
absolutely necessary deserve not so much as Praise, being but as the Instincts
of Brutes. It is a great Mistake to think that God's inward Call cannot be
effectual, unless it gave as strong an Inclination as is the desire of
Happiness: For he knows certainly the Effect of every Condition by Nature or
Grace; and by his Wisdom he does no more than what is requisite for his
Purposes. They highly derogate from the Glory of God, that imagine his Call to
the Elect is only sufficient, but inefficacious, and that its Efficacy must be
by the Creature.

I do conceive that the entering into the Covenant of Grace may be in the way of
Adoration thus. My God, I do believe that thou delightest not in the Death of
Sinners, but rather that they should repent and live in thy Favor eternally,
who feel Sin to be a Burden, and do not cleave to any known Sin, but betake
themselves to thee to be delivered from it, and to become thy Servants,
trusting in thee for all things necessary for Holiness and Happiness. I am
sensible of the Bondage of my Sin, and that I am not able to free my self from
that Bondage; yet I believe thou have offered to enable me, and do humbly
accept thy Offer purchased through Christ the Mediator, and do resign my self
to be directed by thy holy Spirit in the way of Holiness to Happiness.

Here are all the Essentials of a Covenant, God's Offer manifested to the
Conscience, believed and accepted, wherewith the Believer, as by the Offer he
was called, so the Call is made effectual by Justification, Reconciliation,
Pardon, Conversion, Regeneration, Adoption, and by giving the Habits of
Holiness never to be eradicated.

This Act of Faith is by the Apostle Paul to the Romans called the embracing
the Atonement, and to the Hebrews, the embracing the Promises; by the Apostle
John, the coming to Christ to be saved.

All the Terms of God's Offer, and his enabling the Sinner to accept, are at
once and together; and tho there be many Expressions thereof in Scripture, they
are not all different, nor is there necessity of an express Thought of them in
entering the Covenant of Grace; neither is this exclusive of what other way God
may take to glorify those who cannot expressly thus believe: for it is not
necessary for us to know it, seeing the Scripture is all directed to Hearers
and Believers, and does not specially reveal God's other ways of Salvation, tho
what was said of Children in Scripture is all to their Advantage, yet nothing
is specially expressed of the manner or measure of it.

I know not any Conception possible which could so much exalt the Justice, the
Mercy, and the Faithfulness of God, leaving nothing to the Creature to
attribute any part of its Happiness to it self, which could be consistent with
a Covenant between God and the saved Soul, which is confirmed by the whole
stream of Scripture. In this Act all the former Expressions in Scripture of
Conversion and Regeneration are implied. Yet this Objection arises, that this
Conception makes the saving Act of Faith to consist without the Habit of Faith,
and makes the Habit of Faith to be on God's part of the Covenant of Grace: This
will easily be cleared, by considering, that God works in and by Creatures, by
giving and preserving in them Inclinations, which are the Principles of their
Actings. No considerate Man dare say, that God cannot give an operative
Inclination for one single Act, as well as for one Species of Acts, without
which it were impossible to explicate his Dominion; and therefore he may well
give the effectual Inclination to embrace the Offer of Conversion, without
giving the Habit for exerting all the Acts of Faith, which is no less a
Christian Virtue or Grace than Love, or any other; and there is nothing can
more clearly difference the saving Act of Faith from being an Act of Holiness,
or a Work of the Law; yea, if any require the Accuracy of the Schools, they
will find there is a Disposition differenced from an Habit.

This Objection does also occur, that Acceptance of an Offer is no Act of
believing, for which there is no ground. For the Acceptance must imply the
sense of a Motion to repent or return, or to admit of Conversion, which is an
Act of the Understanding, and is such an Act of Faith as is the believing the
Scripture to be the Word of God; but the Acceptance implies also a Trust or
relying upon God, that he will make good his Offer to the Person trusting.

This Difficulty did also offer it self to me, that this way of Salvation and
of the Covenant of Grace, makes too much to depend upon the Creature. If all
that do not reject the Offer of Conversion and Holiness be elected, Election is
not so free as the Scripture holds it forth, and one Creature makes it self
to differ from another; whereas the Scripture says, Who has made thee to
differ? There is a necessity either to refuse or to choose; and if there can be
a middle Condition between refusing and choosing, there is no Warrant to make
such Difference between refusing and not refusing. I thank God that has fully
cleared me in all these: for as to God's Freedom in Election it is not
incroached upon by his acting like himself, he was under no Obligation or
Necessity to have elected or recovered any of the Race of fallen Adam; but to
manifest the exceeding abundance of the Riches of his Grace, he did freely
elect all that with Congruity to his Nature were eligible, rejecting none but
those that would refuse his Offer, and not all those, but prevailing by the
superabundance of his Grace against the Resistance of some of those, especially
upon his Kindness to their Fathers. How often does he show Mercy to rebellious
Israel, remembering Abraham, Isaac and Jacob his Servants, tho by many
Generations distant from them? How much more the nearer Seed of his eminently
faithful Servants, and yet freely: for these Fathers could not merit Happiness
for themselves, much less for their Children; and the saying, Who has made
thee to differ? cannot be opposed to a Difference in a greater degree of Evil:
For certainly he that sins against the Holy Ghost, makes himself so to
differ from another obstinate Sinner; so that it can only be meant of doing any
good and holy Deed in order to Salvation. That there is a middle State between
accepting and rejecting any Offer, is without question: First, Negatively, by
not noticing or considering it, which requires no positive Act. 2. By a
positive Act, resolving to take it into Consideration presently, or at a
convenient time; when there shall be most opportunity without Diversion to
ponder it. 3. By inventing, collecting and comparing the Reasons and Motives on
both parts, which in the most weighty Cases may require long Time, and much
Deliberation. 4. By Irresolution, vacillating and doubting what is to be
preferred. And lastly, by suspending the Resolution, or Choice, when yet there
appears Reasons of Preference; and therefore God says to the Church of
Thiatira of Jezebel, That he gave her space to repent of her Fornications, and
she repented not. There is nothing more clear and frequently inculcated in
Scripture, than the attributing of the Misery and perishing of the Wicked to
their refusing the Offer of Grace, or equivalent Expressions. And, (1.) There
can nothing signify more Aversion to a motioned Offer, than not so much as to
hear it; for those who see no probability of embracing, may yet hear Communing
and Reasons: So it is said, This evil People which refuses to hear my Words,
tho I have caused to cleave unto me the whole House of Israel, and the whole
House of Judah, says the Lord, that they might be unto me for a People, and
for a Praise, and for a Glory; but they would not hear. They are turned back to
the Iniquity of their Forefathers, who refused to hear my Words: They refused
to hearken, and pulled away their Shoulder, and stopped their Ear that they
should not hear. Yea, they made their Hearts as an Adamant Stone, lest they
should hear the Law; therefore as I cried and they would not hear, so they
cried and I will not hear, says the Lord of Hosts. If they escaped not who
refused him who spoke on Earth, much more shall we not escape, if we turn away
from him that speaks from Heaven. And as they rejected to hear the Word of
God, so they rejected the Counsel of God, and they rejected his Statutes and
Covenants that he made with their Fathers. Behold I will bring Evil upon this
People, even the fruit of their Thoughts, because they have not hearkened unto
my Words, nor to my Law, but rejected it. They have refused my Judgments and my
Statutes; Therefore thus says the Lord God, Behold I, even I am against thee,
and will execute Judgment in the midst of thee. And the Lord said unto Moses,
How long refuse ye to keep my Commandments, and my Laws? As they refused to
hear, so they refused to know, through Deceit they refused to know me, says
the Lord. They refused to obey, neither were they mindful of thy Wonders that
thou did among them, but hardened their Necks. They do also refuse to come to
God to be saved; Ye will not come, says Christ, to me, that ye may be saved:
Which is more than a mere Negative, for it is not a willing to come, but a
willing not to come. They hold fast Deceit, they refuse to return; no Man
repented him of his Wickedness, saying, What have I done? Every one turns
into his Course as the Horse rusheth into the Battle. Ye stiff-necked and
uncircumcised in Heart and Ears, ye do always resist the Holy Ghost; as Jannes
and Jambres withstood Moses, so do these also resist the Truth. Wherefore bath
the Lord done this unto this great City? then they shall answer, because they
have forsaken the Covenants of the Lord their God; they and our Fathers dealt
proudly, hardened their Necks, and hearkened not to thy Commandments. They
hardened their Necks, they did worse than their Fathers. This is a Nation that
obeys not the Voice of the Lord their God, nor receives Correction. Behold I
will bring upon this City, and upon all her Towns all the Evil that I have
pronounced against it, because they have hardened their Necks that they might
not hear my Words. Exhort one another while it is called to day, lest any of
you be hardened through the Deceitfulness of Sin. To day if you will hear his
Voice barden not your Hearts. By these it is sufficiently evident that God's
hardening Men's Hearts, is but by permission: Yea God says of Israel, That they
would have none of me. But there is no place more apposite and clear than that
of the Psalmist; unto the wicked God says, What have thou to do to declare my
Statutes, or that thou should take my Covenant in thy Mouth, seeing thou
hate Instruction, and castest my Word behind thee? They hated to be reformed.
The Soul of the wicked cleaves to his abominable Things; and it is said of
Jehoram that he cleaved to the Sins of Jeroboam the Son of Nebat. And Job says
of himself, If my Blot has cleaved to my Hands, then let me sow and let
another reap. And it is said of Ephraim, He is joined to Idols, let him alone.
By which, and by all the former places, and many more, the not being brought
into the Covenant is attributed to the positive Acts of Sinners against the
Offer of Grace, and Means of it, whether by neglecting so great a Salvation, by
refusing, or rejecting the Offer of it, but chiefly by contemning and despising
of it: therefore it is said, Behold you Despisers, and wonder and perish!
Christ explaining the Parable of the Sower, and why it is so much ineffectual,
shows the Cause to be, That their Eyes have they closed, lest at any time they
should see with their Eyes, and hear with their Ears, and should understand
with their Hearts, and should be converted, and I should heal them. Where they
are active in closing their Eyes, but not in converting themselves, but therein
they are passive that they should be converted, and Christ active, that I
should heal them. God Almighty convincing Job's Mistakes by a lively Voice,
vindicateth not only his Power, but his Bounty and Justice, saying, He strikes
them as wicked Men in the open sight of others, because they turned back from
him, and would not consider any of his Ways.

The fourth Point proposed was, Whether the saving Act of Faith be only one
individual Act, or if it require a Course or Continuation of the same, or the
like Acts, or a Reiteration thereof? as to which I am persuaded it must be one
single Act, receiving, embracing, accepting, or assenting to the Spirit's
inward Call to be willing to be converted from the Bondage of Sin, and from the
Power of Satan, unto the Life and Liberty of the Children of God, which are the
express Terms of the Commission to the Ministers of the Gospel, who can only
give an outward Call, and there may be also an inward Call by the Conscience,
both which may be resisted and refused; and in relation to these Calls, many
are called but few are chosen. If the saving Act of Faith required a long
Continuance or Reiteration, the Covenant of Grace could never be complete till
all these were performed: So that it behoved either to be but a conditional
Covenant, which cannot consist with the Omniscience of God, the very nature of
a Condition requiring Uncertainty, or otherways no Man could be in the Covenant
of Grace till his last Breath. It is true, through the Ignorance or
Doubtfulness of Believers, they frequently renew their Desire and Trust to be
converted, thinking that they are but then to enter into the Covenant of Grace:
But if they knew they were in it, it were not only a Folly, but a Fault, to
desire that to be which already is. When the Soul says, Draw me and I will run
after thee, Convert me and I shall be converted, it does import that it is not
able to convert it self, but that God is able; nor does it imply that as yet it
is willing to be converted, which is indeed the converting Act, (unless by
Conversion Regeneration be meant.) Common Experience teaches that Men may be
sensible of the Hardness of their Heart, and their unwillingness to part from
their beloved Sins, and yet do know that God can make them willing in the Day
of his Power.

Conversion and Regeneration, when accurately considered, are distinct, for
Conversion is wrought by that Inclination given of God to accept the Offer of
Grace, for thereby the Soul is no more addicted to Sin; but Regeneration is the
Infusion of the Habits of Grace, the Pardon of Sin, Justification or holding of
the Believer as Just, and thereby reconciling with him, and adopting him as a
Son, which are God's Part of the Covenant of Grace, and are always done
together; and the future Blessings of the Covenant, for increasing Grace,
giving Perseverance, exciting Repentance, and renewing Pardon, Direction,
Protection and Glory, are not Parts but Effects of the Covenant of Grace
proceeding from God's Bounty and Faithfulness, and from his Engagement in the
Covenant of Grace to give these things; which Promise is a Part of the New
Covenant.

There is a great deal of Debate and Noise between diverse Churches, and those
of the same Church, in what Justification does consist. And it is clear from
comparing Paul and James, that there is a Justification before Men, and a
Justification before God: The former is but the Manifestation of Justification,
the latter is the being of it, and this only is in God's Part of the Covenant
of Grace; so that the Question is in what Justification before God consists.
Some make it anterior to the Covenant of Grace with the Believer, and so no
Part of it, but rather of that Covenant between the Persons of the Trinity,
accounting the Elect as just Persons. Others hold Justification never to be
till all Sin be purged, and so not before Death. Neither of these do agree with
the golden Chain of Salvation, the Order of which is not without great Moment,
wherein Foreknowledg is first, Predestination second, Vocation third,
Justification fourth, and Glorification last. So that Justification is after
Vocation, and before Glorification; and so it is one of the two Links in Time,
Foreknowledg and Predestination being before Time, and Glorification being
after every particular Believer's Time, when they are entered into Eternity. Yet
even those who hold Justification to be in Time, and a Part of the Covenant of
Grace, differ in their Conceptions of the Nature of it. Some hold it to differ
nothing from the Forgiveness of Sin, to which I cannot agree; for then there
behoved to be an Act of Justification whenever there is forgiveness of Sin,
which is often to be repeated, and is a chief Article in the Lord's Prayer,
which bearing Give us this Day our daily Bread, and forgive us our Sins, must
at least import a Prayer for these every Day. By entering into the Covenant of
Grace, future Sins are not forgiven before they be committed, which would be an
Indulgence to Sin. The Church of Rome makes Justification to be nothing else
but Sanctification, which does not consist with that golden Chain, where
Sanctification is put as the End or Effect of Predestination: For whom he
foreknew, them he did predestinate to be conform to the Image of his Son. That
Conformity is Sanctity or Holiness, not only in conformity to the Holiness of
God, which would not reach many Duties of Man's Holiness, but conformity to his
Son God-Man, which comprehends them all. Others make Justification a judicial
Act, whether before Time, after Time, or in Time; supposing God to charge a Man
as a Criminal with the Guilt of his Sin, and that Christ for the Sinner, or he
for himself pleaded Christ's Satisfaction, and thereupon God does absolve: But
I conceive there is no such pleading by Man at the Entrance of the Covenant of
Grace, tho virtually that Absolution be implied, but only his assenting to be
converted, and to be made holy and happy. Therefore I conceive Justification to
be God's holding and reputing the Believer to be as if he were entirely Just,
notwithstanding the Remainders of Sin, seeing he is become an Adversary to Sin,
and so may say with Paul, Not I, but Sin that dwells in me. In which Sense
only it can be said, That God sees no Iniquity in Jacob, nor Sin in Israel;
and that he that is born of God cannot Sin: Seeing the indelible Habits of
Grace do ever continue in him, which is called the Seed of God. Tho forgiveness
of Sins past at Regeneration purge him, and make him innocent, yet thereby
alone he cannot be accounted Just, because the sinful Inclinations remain, yet
may he be reputed as Just, seeing it is expressly said, Happy is the Man to whom
the Lord imputes not Iniquity, and whose Sin is covered. It is an ordinary
Expression that the Righteousness of Christ is imputed to Believers, and that
their Justification consists in that Imputation, because Christ is said to be
our Righteousness, which is not a proper or accurate Expression, but improper
and metonymick, whereby the Cause is put for the Effect, as Christ is also our
Wisdom and our Peace, because he is the Cause of both. And likewise Faith is
said to be imputed for Righteousness, which gave the Rise to that Error, that
Faith as a good Work is accepted in place of entire Righteousness, and of all
the good Works required for the fulfilling the Law. Whereas the Apostle in the
Fourth of the Romans says, Abraham believed, and it was counted to him for
Righteousness: and Faith is counted for Righteousness to him that believes on
him that justifies the Ungodly, but is not imputed to him as Righteousness;
for the Original Word (...), now (...), signifies not to impute but to reckon,
account, esteem or repute: And therefore Christ's Righteousness can no more
properly be imputed as our Righteousness, than his Wisdom or his Peace can be
our Wisdom or Peace, of which he is the Cause not the Effect; for if his
fulfilling of the Law were our fulfilling of it, we needed not also fulfill the
same, and the Antinomians would have too much to say that Believers are not
obliged to fulfill the Law, which Christ fulfilled in their Place, and that all
their good Works are only free Gratifications. Christ's Rightousness is no
otherwise imputed to Believers than as a necessary Accomplishment of the second
Adam coming in the Place of the first Adam, who if he had continued Righteous,
would have made effectual the Covenant of Works which was lost by his Failure.

The fifth Point proposed will now easily be cleared, That the saving Act of
Faith is not ordained to be Man's part of the Covenant of Grace, upon
Consideration of its own Worth and Value, but as it relates to, and relieth on
the Mercy and Faithfulness of God, and the Merits and Satisfaction of Christ.
It uses to be called the Eye of Faith looking to these, the Hand of Faith
laying hold upon them, or the Instrument of the Soul, whereby it obtains
Salvation. There are sharp Disputes under which of these Considerations it
justifies; but I like it much better to be conceived only as the Manner which
God has freely chosen, whereby to communicate Grace and Glory to the Elect. I
like it not to be called properly an Instrument, which is an inferior Cause,
having some Influence with the principal Agent; whereas God and Christ are the
only Cause of Grace and Glory: Neither yet to be properly a Condition, upon
which God is to give Grace and Glory, seeing a Condition must be uncertain to
him who makes it a Condition. The being an Eye or Hand are certainly
Metaphorical; without doubt Causa, Conditio and Modus are different. There is
least to be attributed to the saving Act of Faith, as it is only the Manner how
God is pleased to save, which is not a necessary Manner; for God might have
exerted all his Dispensations with Creatures without giving them the Honor to
enter into Covenant with him, and therefore he freely chose the way of a
Covenant, and so the manner of it; and to magnify his free Grace, and to
exclude all glorying of Man in himself, he has chosen the manner of the
Covenant of Grace, wherein there could not be less of Man in a Covenant. If God
had proceeded only by Mercy to save Men, there could have been no place for a
Covenant, and Man had not been so much dealt with as a Rational Creature
proceeding by Reason, Deliberation and Choice, as by a Covenant.

Hence way is made to the last Point proposed, What may be thought the Reason
why God chose an Act of Faith, rather than any other Act of Man, to be Man's
part in the Covenant of Grace? wherein there needs no other Reason, but the
free Arbitrary Choice of God; yet tho the matter had been indifferent, his
Wisdom appears much in this Choice, and his Goodness also, that he would
honor Man to contract with him, and to take his Consent to that, and yet to
give him no Cause, and even no Pretext to glory in himself. If any Person did
obtain great things from another freely, which he knew he expected from him,
and were suitable to the one to give, and the other to get; Could he without the
highest Ingratitude and Impudence, attribute the Gift to his own Hope, and not
wholly to the Goodness and Faithfulness of the Giver? The Faithfulness of God
is the chief Perfection exerted in the Covenant of Grace. The Object of Mercy
is Misery, the Object of Faithfulness is a rational Hope or Trust, which is far
larger than Mercy, and is extended to innocent Creatures, who were never
miserable.

This way of the Explication of the Covenant of Grace, gives an easy Outgate to
that bitter Contest in the Protestant Church of France, and elsewhere, whether
only the active, or also the passive Obedience of Christ were imputed by the
Covenant of Grace. As the Controversy was stated, the Arguments on either side
were hardly solvable; for it was stated thus, Whether Christ in his Sufferings
stood in the place of Man; or, if he did also stand in his place in his Acts of
Holiness? The former was granted by both, the latter affirmed by the one, and
denied by the other. The main Reason for the Affirmative was, That suffering
could do no more than satisfy the Guilt of Sin, and so could only bring Man to
be free of Misery and Torment, in which case Adam was before the Fall, but
could not raise Man from that Animal State, being so much common with Brutes,
to an Angelical State in Heaven, and yet that is frequently attributed to
Christ. Therefore it behoved to be the Merit of Christ, not by his Sufferings,
but by his Holiness; as Adam would have merited Heaven for himself and his
Posterity, by his good Works, as of Debt, not of Grace; For to him that works
the Reward is not reckoned of Grace, but of Debt: so that Christ paid the Debt
of the Elect, and so advances them unto Glory. And on the other part, the
chief Reason was, that Christ by his Human Nature being a Creature, was under
an indispensable Obligation to the Creator, to love him with all his Soul, with
all his Heart, and with all his Strength, beyond which there could be nothing,
by which he did deserve all that Glory that no other was capable of; and
therefore they could not conceive a Supererrogation in Christ's active
Obedience, meriting the Heavenly Glory, which Merit was not only sufficient for
the Elect, but for the whole Race of Mankind: although it was free for the Son to
become Man, his becoming Man was a part of his Humiliation and Suffering; and
which is yet more pressing, if in that way the active Obedience and Holiness of
Christ were imputed to the Elect, they were thereby entirely holy, and their
own Holiness were but Works of Supererrogation, at least were not Works due by
Justice, but Works of Gratitude, and the failing in them could never require
Repentance, which would agree to the Principles of none but of the Antinomians.
Nor did it magnify the free Grace of God, if he gave nothing to the Elect in
advancing them to Glory, but that which in Recompense, at least in Premiative
Justice he was obliged to give: There being small ground in a Creditor to glory
that he had exacted all he could have required, tho not from his Debtor, but
from an interposed Person. I have already cleared my Thoughts, that tho
Christ's Satisfaction may by Resemblance be called the Payment of a Debt, yet
properly it is not: Nor does God crave Satisfaction as a Creditor, or is Sin
expiated by God's taking Pleasure in the Misery of his Creature, to compense
the Displeasure he had in their Sin, seeing he declares the contrary with so
solemn an Asseveration, As I live, says the Lord, I delight not in the Death
of a Sinner. But the Satisfaction he requires in Conformity to his Holiness,
is the Vindication of his Purity, and of his infinite Aversion from Sin, as by
his Justice he proportions the Suffering requisite for the Vindication, to the
Sins deserving. Therefore upon the foresight of Adam's Fall, and thereby not
only the loss of the Exaltation of himself and Posterity to Celestial Glory,
but falling into a sinful State which no Creature could expiate, the Son did
freely interpose to restore Mankind to what they had lost by Adam, and to
vindicate the Purity of God by Sufferings of as much Value, as if all Mankind
had been in eternal Misery; and by Christ's performing what Adam was obliged to
perform, by a full Implement of the whole Will and Law of God, and for that end
assuming the Nature of Man. I have also cleared my Mind, that tho Adam had
stood, he could not have merited that Exaltation which he and his Posterity
were to have had by the first Covenant; for he might have continued innocent
and sinless, without great Advances in Holiness: Can it then with any Reason be
thought, that his so continuing did in any way of Justice and Merit purchase
Glory for himself? and the Capacity of the like to all his Posterity, if they
continued sinless during the time of their Trial? But tho innocent Adam was
capable of Merit by improving the Holiness God gave him; yet so great a Reward
as God promised him upon his Persistance, was not a Reward of mere Debt, but of
Grace; so that only the Covenant of Grace is of mere Grace without any thing of
Merit in the Elect. Therefore as Faith in the Covenant of Grace is only the
Manner freely chosen of God; so Persistance in Obedience was the Manner freely
chosen of God in the Covenant of Works.

So then, the clearest way of taking up the Covenant of Grace is, that Christ
by his Humiliation and Suffering did so fully vindicate the Purity of God, and
his Justice, that thereupon God might have forgiven the Sins of the whole
World, and of every individual Man; and he did exclude none from Mercy, but
malicious and obstinate Sinners, that rejected the Motions of Conversion, and
the Offers of Grace, but did even include some of these; and that he advanced
the Elect to Celestial Glory, upon Christ's entire fulfilling of his Law, being
also as the Manner freely chosen for the Covenant of Grace, as Adam's
Performance was for the Covenant of Works: and so not only Christ's Passive
Obedience is imputed to Believers, but his Active Obedience as the Terms of the
Covenant; and so the exceeding superabundant Grace of the Goodness of God is
manifested, not only in accepting the Expiation of Sin by a Mediator, but in
giving to the Elect Glory freely, as a Reward by Grace and not of Debt, whereby
the Difficulties on both Hands in the forementioned Controversy do evanish. If
Christ's Sufferings had been properly a Payment of the Debt of Sin, it could
have had no effect in relation to the Reprobate, nor could they have been
restored to a possibility of Salvation, nor could God complain of the Hardness
of their Hearts: For if Christ had suffered as to pay the Debt of Sin, he could
not have paid the Debt of those that were to perish, or else God had exacted
that Debt of them which Christ had paid; nor should Christ have suffered more
than what were sufficient to pay the Debt of the Elect only: whereas all agree
that his Sufferings were sufficient for the Sins of the whole World; but being
conceived as the Vindication of God's Aversion from Sin, he not only saved the
Elect, but stopped the Mouths of the Reprobate and Damned, and made them
inexcusable; so that their own Conscience will condemn them, and be their
perpetual Tormentor, that they have thrown themselves into Hell when they might
have escaped, if it had not been their own deserving fault. This way does far
more illustrate to my Soul the infinitely amiable Representation of God both in
his Grace and his Justice, than any other way that I can apprehend, in which I
am exceedingly confirmed by that excellent Parallel of the first and second
Adam, held so clearly forth to the Romans by the blessed Apostle of the
Gentiles, saying, Death reigned from Adam to Moses, even in them that had not
sinned after the similitude of Adam's Transgression, who is the Figure (or
Type) of him that was to come, that is, of Christ. Where the similitude of
Adam's Transgression distinguishing it from others is, that by it the whole
Benefit of the Covenant was lost, not only to himself, but to all his
Posterity: For if through the Offense of one Man many be dead, much more the
Grace of God, and the Gift by Grace, which is by one Man Jesus Christ, bath
abounded unto many. If then Adam was a Type of Christ, certainly it was not in
that he sinned, and lost his Posterity, but in this that as if he had continued
obedient to God, he had brought himself and his Posterity to Glory; and as his
bringing them to Glory were not by Merit, but by fulfilling the Terms of the
Covenant of Works, so Christ's bringing the Elect to Glory, is by fulfilling
the whole Will of God, as his part of the Terms of the Covenant of Grace. The
same Apostle to the Corintbians makes the Type and Parallel yet more clear: For
since by Man came Death, by Man came also the Resurrection of the dead: And so
it is written, the first Man Adam was made a living Soul, the last Man Adam was
made a quickening Spirit. But seeing the second Adam not only performed the
Terms of Salvation by Obedience, but has expiated Sin by his Suffering;
therefore it is said, For this cause he is the Mediator of the New Testament,
that by the means of Death for the Redemption of the Transgressions that were
under the first Covenant, they which are called might receive the Promise of
Eternal Inheritance. Here the Transgressions that were under the first
Covenant, must be meant of the accumulated Sins in the Fall, which were
redeemed, repaired and restored by Christ the second Adam's fulfilling all
Righteousness, and purging the Sins of the Elect. And again it is said, Not as
the Offense, so also is the free Gift. Not as it was by one that sinned, so was
the Gift; for the Judgment was by one to Condemnation, but the free Gift is of
many Offenses to Justification: where the Gift to Adam is said to be to
Condemnation, not by the Intent, but by the Event, through his failing; whereas
the second Adam could not fail in performing his Undertaking.

By this Explication of the Covenant of Grace, I find my Mind cleared and eased
of these perplexing Difficulties about God's Decrees and Dispensations in the
Salvation and Reprobation of his Rational Creatures, and about the Terms and
Tenor both of the Covenant of Works, and of the Covenant of Grace.

The most learned and most accurate in all Churches and all Ways have been
perplexed, in thinking how God would decree to reject, damn and eternally
torment a great part of his Rational Creatures for that which was never in
their Power to perform, much more without any cause on the Creatures part, but
only by his mere Sovereignty, or that they were never in a possibility to have
escaped eternal Misery: Or, that Christ the second Adam had not so far exceeded
the first Adam, that as the first Adam might have preserved all his Posterity
in a Capacity to be saved, if he had not fallen; so the second Adam should not
at least have put all Manking in a Capacity to be saved, and escape eternal
Misery by the Covenant of Grace. And yet on the other hand, the Scripture is so
plain and positive, that it is not in Man's Power to believe by a saving Faith,
to be holy, or how it could consist with the Veracity and Sincerity of God to
exhort and expostulate with Men to repent, believe and be holy, tho it were
neither in the Power of the Elect or Reprobate to perform the same. Whereupon
some found no Outgate, but by recurring to that Freedom that once was in Adam,
and that a Creditor might press his Debtor to pay his Debt, tho the Debtor
were not able to pay it: Would ever a rational Creditor exhort his Debtor to
pay when he knew he were altogether insolent?

Hence it is that Pelagians, Semi-Pelagians, Lutherans, Arminians and Papists,
have all run to a Freedom in Man's Will to perform the saving Acts, and many of
them have held that Freedom essential to, and inseparable from the Will: And
others have held that Freedom as a Purchase of Christ, giving that Capacity to
all Mankind by their Birth, or to many of them by their Baptism. The Pelagians
and Semi-Pelagians thought the Powers of Nature were sufficient without any
Purchase of Christ as to that. The Lutherans and Arminians attribute it to a
general Purchase of Christ to all Mankind, that they were in a Capacity to
believe, to be holy, and to be saved by their Birth, or their Baptism; and the
Papists hold the same by Baptism administered in that Church, and do condemn all
others not so baptized.

What can be more useful, satisfying and quieting Men's Consciences in this
matter, or more illustrating the Wisdom and Justice of God, than to extricate
these Difficulties, and to show the true way of reconciling these apparent
Inconsistencies by the wonderful Wisdom of God? Showing that by the Covenant of
Grace, all Men were to be in a Capacity to be saved, and none under the
absolute necessity of inevitable Misery but through their own deserving fault,
whereby the Damned shall eternally accuse themselves as the only Authors of
their own Damnation; and the Glorified shall attribute it wholly to God that
they are saved; and that it may be well consistent with the Veracity and
Sincerity of God to exhort and expostulate with any, whether Elect or
Reprobate, to repent, believe and to be holy.

All which to me is convincingly cleared, in that God sincerely offers to all
that come to Discretion, by their natural Conscience, by his Word, or by the
Motions of his Spirit, to give them the Grace of Repentance, Faith and
Holiness, if they do not reject the Offer: And so he does by all Expressions
possible expostulate with them, why they will not hear and accept, but will
reject that Offer, and so die and perish, which is seldom or never ascribed to
any other Sin, but Misbelief, hardening the Heart, or rejecting the Counsel of
God. All which may well consist without any Power in the Person to whom the
Offer is made to perform these Duties by themselves, either by the Powers of
Nature, or any universal Grace given in their Birth or Baptism. This will
evidently appear, and the Consistency will be clear by several Examples.

First; If a King should make a Proclamation of Pardon to all his Rebellious
Subjects, if they did not reject it, might he not sincerely and warrantably
expostulate with them if they did reject it? might he not exhort them to accept
it? And yet nothing more evident than that they could not pardon themselves, or
escape Condemnation, being guilty of Death, without that general Pardon.

Secondly; If a Person had in Despair drunk down Poison, a Physician comes and
has in his Hand an Antidote which he offers, and which the Patient, continuing
in Despair, refuses to accept; May not this Physician, tho he knew the Patient
were inflexible, exhort him to accept the Antidote, wherein he performs a
virtuous Act congruous to his Nature? If this Patient continue obstinate, were
he not a Self-murderer? Could he excuse himself from being the Author of his
own Death? If he should desire the Physician to put the Antidote in his own
Hand, and in his Choice, that he might drink it, or throw it upon the ground,
were it Prudence or Kindness in the Physician so to do? Yet nothing is more
evident than that this Patient could not cure himself, and yet is inexcusable
that he was not cured: For tho it was not in his Power to cure himself, yet it
was in his Power not to hinder his Cure.

These Examples do abundantly show not only the Consistency, but the Wisdom of
Divine Dispensations toward Mankind. All Men are poisoned with Sin; yet God
convinces all that have the use of Reason, that they are Sinners, and yet he is
merciful to Penitents, which is the first step to the Covenant of Grace,
wherein God will make farther Progress, unless the first Motions be rejected,
which is much clearer as to those to whom the way of God's Dispensations is
revealed and inculcated, and the Offer of Regeneration, Repentance and Faith
sincerely made. Can any of these pretend that they have not Power to repent, or
believe, seeing the All-sufficient Power of God is offered, if it be not
rejected? and tho God foreknows that the Offer will be rejected, yet it is
congruous to his gracious and benign Nature to exhort the Acceptance of it, and
to expostulate for the wilful Rejection thereof; as he says, Turn ye, turn ye,
why will ye die, O House of Israel! As it were not becoming the Physician to
put the Antidote in the obstinate Patient's Hand, knowing that he would pour it
out and lose it: So it is not congruous to the Divine Wisdom to give universal
Grace, knowing that most that were to receive it would throw it away.

There is indeed this difference between the Offer God the Physician of Souls
makes, and the Offer of the Antidote by a Physician of the Body, that the Power
of God is insuperable, and can overcome the strongest Aversion, and the most
wilful Rejection of Sinners: And therefore even some of these are in the
Election of Grace, but that it is not congruous to his glorious Nature to
exercise his Power upon all. This is evident, because he applies it to none
who sin against the Holy Ghost, who having tasted of the Powers of the World to
come, do Despite unto the Spirit of God: Nor do any of his Divine Perfections
incline him to overcome the Resistance of all other obstinate Sinners; and
therefore God may justly say, Behold ye Rejecters, and wonder, and perish!

This way does well quadrate with, and is much confirmed by the signal Sentence
of the most universally applauded of all the Fathers, and the greatest
Antipelagian Augustine, saying, Deuteronomy neminem deserit nisi a quo prius
deseritur, God forsakes none but those that first forsake him. This must
import more than forgetting, neglecting, or not obeying God: It must imply an
Application to God, and Consideration whether to cleave to Sin, or endeavor to
return to him, with Consideration of a possibility of it, and an Offer of Mercy
upon Repentance, and after all a rejecting of the Offer, and resolving not to
repent, but to cleave to Sin, either absolutely, or for a time, as most do who
leave Repentance to old Age, or Deathbed, that in the mean time they may enjoy
their beloved Sins.

I shall conclude, with craving humble Pardon for what through the Weakness of
my Capacity I have thought or said unsutably to the Infinite Perfections of my
most glorious God; and with this Acknowledgment and Exaltation of the Bounty,
Mercy, and Faithfulness of God toward Mankind, in the most profound
Veneration, adore Him, saying,

Holy, Holy, Holy Lord God Almighty! Heaven and Earth are full of the Glory,
and of thy Grace, which thou freely and effectually give to all Men capable
of the Offer of Grace, who do not reject that Offer by sinning against the Holy
Ghost, or cleaving obstinately to their other known and predominant Sins, from
which they refuse to be reclaimed; yet thou savest some of these by thy
superabundant and insuperable Grace, pulling them as Firebrands out of the
Fire. And all by the Merits and Mediation of thy only Son, our Savior, the
Lord Jesus Christ. To the Father, Son and Eternal Spirit, consubstantial in
Personal Trinity, and individual Unity, be Glory eternally World without end.

Amen.
FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
NEwly printed, The Holy Bible, containing the Old Testament and the New: with
Annotations and Parallel Scriptures. To which is annexed the Harmony of the
Gospels: As also the Reduction of the Jewish Weights, Coins and Measures, to
our English Standards. And a Table of the Promises in Scripture. By Samuel
Clark, Minister of the Gospel. Printed in Folio of a very fair Letter, and
excellent Paper; the like never besore in one Volume.

The four Last Things, viz. Death, Judgment, Heaven, Hell, Practically
considered and applied in several Discourses. By William Bates, D. D.

Both printed for B. Aylmer.


