A SERMON Preached in the Cathedral Church OF St. Peter in York.

On the 6th. of February, 1685/6. Being the Day on which His MAJESTY began his
Happy Reign.

By WILLIAM STAINFORTH Residentiary Canon of YORK.

Imprimatur,

To. Altham, Rmo P. Dno. Johan. Archiep. Ebor. a sacris Domesticis.

YORK, Printed by Jo. White, for FRANCIS HILDYARD Bookseller, at the Bible in
Stonegate, Anno Dom. M. DC. LXXXVI.

To the Honorable SIR THOMAS SLINGSBY BARONET.
Sir,
I Humbly Present you with a Sermon, which when it was preached, met with such
a favorable reception and kind entertainment from some of the Loyal and
Judicious Auditors, that they looked upon the Printing it to be of public Use
and Advantage, because it might (as they thought) in some measure at least
contribute to the Reduction of such of His Majesty's Subjects as have been
misled into seditious Practices, and prevent others from falling into the
snares of the same accursed Seduction; and accordingly they importuned me to
make it as Public as now it appears. And though I took some time to consider
before I would yield to their Requests, yet when I had once resolved to comply
with them, I found no place for Deliberation to whom I should Dedicate it, or
whose Name I should borrow to give countenance and protection to it. For the
Design of this Sermon, being to promote an holy Fear of God, and a loyal Fear
of the King, no Person did, or indeed could occur to my thoughts, whose
Patronage could be more proper or useful to a Discourse of this nature, than
your own; because You, Sir, are so great an Example of those two necessary and
indispensible Duties which are here recommended. Your holy fear of God has been
made visible to all who know you, in your constant unalterable Perseverance in
the Communion of the Reformed Church of England, and in your zealous
Concernment, which upon all just Occasions you express, for its true Interests,
and unalienable Privileges, notwithstanding all the Temptations you may have
met with either at Home or Abroad, to corrupt your holy Faith and misguide your
devout Affections. Your loyal fear of the King has been as evident as the
former throughout the whole course of your Conversation, and most vigorously
exerted and discovered it self in suitable Effects and a Loyal Behavior under
the most frightful Posture, and discouraging Circumstances of public Affairs,
when some were driven from their Duty and Allegiance by dismal Stories, and
factious Amusements, and others were wheadl'd out of it by popular Addresses,
and smooth and crafty Insinuations. And therefore, you justly enjoy not only
the Estate and Honorable Titles which belonged to your Ancestors, but also all
that public Esteem and Reputation with your Prince and Country, which their
famed and celebrated Loyalty procured for them. I need go no higher for a Proof
of this than to your immediate Progenitor and Honorable Father Sir HENRY
SLINGSBY, who persever'd in his Allegiance to his Prince, to such a degree of
Faithfulness, as made him Resist even unto Blood (not in a Fanatical but
Christian sense) and lay down his Life for his Natural though banished Sovereign,
whom no Terrors or Allurements of a remorseless and crafty Usurper could
oblige him to renounce. So that Loyalty seems entailed upon your Family, and
looks as if it were your Inheritance as well as your Choice, conveyed in your
Blood as well as infused at your Baptism, and descended upon you by your
natural as well as spiritual Birth. But however, it is impossible that you
should ever depart from your self or your Duty, while you live in the Communion
of the Church of England, and make her Rules the Measures of your Subjection;
for she teaches a perfect, absolute, unlimited Subjection, by teaching all her
Members to Obey all the just and lawful Commands of their King, and with
patience and resignation to suffer his Censures and Punishments, where they
cannot obey. And I do not doubt, but one great Reason among all the rest, why
you value and live in the Church of England rather than in any other Christian
Society whatsover, is because her Doctrine and Practices, in point of civil
Subjection, are so conformable to those of our Blessed Savior, and his holy
Apostles, who died rather than they would resist those Sovereign Powers they
lived under, and who have forbidden all Resistance under the pain of eternal
Damnation. And may you long live in the Communion of this Holy Church, to do
Honor to God, and Service to your Prince upon Earth; and God out of his
infinite Mercy in his due time receive you into the Church Triumphant in Heaven.
This is and shall be the constant daily Prayer of

SIR, Your most obliged and most humble Servant WILLIAM STAINFORTH.

Prove. 24. 21. My son, fear thou the Lord and the King, and meddle not with them
that are given to change.


CIvil Government is the great Comprehensive Wordly blessing; for it is the
Foundation of Peace and Quiet, the Spring and Fountain of all those Inestimable
Advantages which adorn and felicitate Humane Societies. For without Government
there would be nothing but Wildnes and Confusion, Rapine and Violence, and all
the bloody Outrages of a barbarous and Merciles Inhumanity. And therefore God,
who designed the Happiness of man in his Creation, not only implanted in his
Nature strong and powerful Instincts after Society, but also took care that he
might Enjoy all the intended Blessings and designed advantages of Society by
instituting Government for its Support and preservation. This is plain from
that Authority and Dominion which God gave Adam over his Wife and all his
Natural Descendents, by virtue of which every man, who was born into the World
was born in a State of subjection, and Owed Duty and Obedience to him, from
whom under God he derived his Natural Being. So that Government began by the
Divine Ordination as soon as there were any capable Objects for its Exercise
and administration, it being founded in Paternal Authority, which as Families
increased and multiplied, grew up to the height and largenes of Imperial and
Political Power.

Now of all the Kinds and Forms of Government, Monarchy is not only the most
Primitive and Natural, but the most Complete and Perfect; for as it is most
Conformable to the Heavenly Pattern, and nearliest resembles the Government of
God, So it is most Conducive to all those Useful and Beneficial purposes, for
which men enter into Societies and for which Government was instituted. This
might be proved by showing, that Monarchy has all those real advantages, which
any other Forms of Government can pretend unto, without being subject to many
of those Numerous Inconveniences and Mischiefs which inseparably attend them.

And of Monarchies, that which is limited and Hereditary deserves the
preference for its singular Value and Usefulnes. Now by a Limited Monarchy I
mean such an One, where the Supreme and Unaccountable Power of the Prince, as
to its exercise and administration, is under the direction of stated and fixed
Rules (whether Positive Laws or Immemorial Customs) which by a long Train of
Experiences have been found to be Just and Equal, and advantageous to the
public welfare of the whole Community, and which the King is under all the
Obligations of Honor, Interest and Conscience to defend and maintain. In such
a Case the People know what they have to trust unto and depend upon, and as
they are thereby secured from all the servile fears of an abitrary Oppression,
so they have the most powerful Motives even of this World, to pay a cheerful
Obedience to the King, and to live peaceably and quietly under his Government.

By an Hereditary Monarchy I understand such an one, where the Right of
Succession is founded in Proximity of Blood, and derived by a Lineal-descent to
the next a Kin. And as there is usually more reason to think that Persons of
Royal Race and Extraction are more fitted by their Birth and Education, by
their Natural Endowments, and acquired Abilities for Empire and Government than
others of Ignoble Blood, and mean Breeding, so by such a continued and
uninterrupted way of Succession all Vacuums and Interregnums in the Government,
and all the Broils, and Mischiefs, and Confusions which arise from Factious
Competitions and strivings in popular Elections, are prevented. Now it is our
Happiness, that we live under a Government thus Qualified and constituted,
where the King never Dies, but is immortal in an hereditary Succession; and
where the People enjoy all the Property and Freedom which they can hope for, or
promise to themselves from any Government whatsoever.

And therefore with what Joy and Gratitude, with what Praises and Devotion
ought we to celebrate this Day, whereon God was pleased to advance our Gracious
Sovereign to the Throne of his Royal Ancestors, and notwithstanding the
popular Distempers of the Age, and the turbulent Designs of Factious Men, to
settle Him in a quiet and peaceful Possession of his Natural and Legal
Inheritance. This was an infinite Mercy, a Mercy to which we owe our lives, our
Peace and the Preservation of whatsoever is Dear and Valuable to us. May this
Mercy never slip our of our Minds! May we always remember it so as to be truly
and sincerely thankful for it! May we always express our unfeigned
Thankfulness by all the proper and just returns of an humble and faithful
Obedience, which we owe to God and his Vicegerent. And that we may be persuaded
to do this, I have made choice of these words of Solomen for the Subject of my
present Discourse, My Son, fear thou the Lord and the King, and meddle not with
them that are given to change.

In the former Part of this Text we have the Duties which we owe to God and the
King enjoined; and both these Duties are expressed by one and the same word
Fear: Fear thou the Lord and the King. In the latter part of it we have an
useful expedient, or a proper means recommended and prescribed for securing and
preserving us in our Duty, meddle not with them that are given to change.

1. We have the Duties which we owe God and the King enjoined us, and both of
them expressed by one and the same Word Fear. Now Fear strictly and
Philosophically taken, is that Passion or affection of mind, which is wrought
and stirred up in us through the apprehension of some Evil or Harm, which
Threatens us.

1st. And what can so reasonably excite and awaken this Passion in us, as a
serious and impartial Consideration of God, who in his Nature is infinitely
just, and infinitely powerful? for as he is infinitely just, we are thereby
assured that he is always disposed and inclined to punish all those, who
maliciously and wilfully offend against the Holy and righteous Laws of his
Government; and as He is infinitely powerful, we are thereby assured that
nothing can resist the Inflictions of his Wrath, or oppose the Executions of
his Vengeance, but He can punish and torment any or all his Creatures though
united in an universal Conspiracy and Rebellion against his Authority, in what
kind, and to what degree, and to what duration He pleases. So that these
things considered, we have infinitely more cause to fear God than all other
Beings, which make and fill the Universe; for how can any thing be such a
dreadful Being, or such an affecting Object of our Fear as God, when there is
nothing but Himself Almighty and Irresistible in Power? This plainly shows,
that God can as far out do all other Beings in the Ills and Mischiefs which He
can bring upon us, as He exceeds them in the measure and extent of that Power
with which He is invested. And alas! what proportion is there betwixt the Power
of God, and that of his Creatures? for the power of the Creature is limited and
confined, and as it is always under the Control of God, and subject to those
restraints, which He shall at any time please to put upon it, so in its freest
Exercise, it cannot go beyond those fixed Bounds, which are set to its Nature,
and determine the extent of it. But the Power of God is immeasurable and
irresistible, and nothing but his own Will can restrain the measure of its
Actings, or set any bounds to the Exercise and Operations of it. It extends it
self to all things possible, and beyond that nothing can be conceived as
nothing can be done.

Thus you see what grounds there are for our Fear of God and what Stupid and
Unthinking creatures we must be, if our minds are not affected with an awful
sense and dreadful apprehension of his infinite Power and Majesty. And certain
it is, that if the Fear of God was duly established and fixed in our hearts, It
would prove a pregnant and fruitful Principle of all manner of Piety and
goodness and would have an influence upon our external and visible Actions
proportionable to the reception and entertainment which it found in our minds:
It would render us infinitely Cautious and Watchful over our thoughts and words
and actions, and make us take all conceivable and possible Care that we might
do nothing which might be displeasing and offensive to God: It would pull down
Our haughty Spirits and bend our stiff necks, and make every thing in us Bow
and Stoop to the Divine Authority and readily comply with all the Known
Expresses and Declarations of it. It would make us approach the Divine Presence
with a becoming Reverence and behave our selves in it with such Seriousness and
Humility and Devotion, as is suitable to the Excellency and Majesty of that
Infinite Being to whom we make our addresses: It would make us Honor every
thing which has any peculiar relation to God, and put a difference betwixt what
is Sacred (whether Persons or Things) and what is common by such particular
Respects as are expressive of their Holy Singularity and appropriation. In a
word, If we really feared God and lived under an awful Sense of his Being, we
should no more dare to provoke his Almighty Justice by breaking any of his
Known Laws than we should be willing to be Eternally miserable. And for this
very reason the Fear of God is so frequently enjoined us in the Holy
Scriptures; and for this very reason the Fear of God is oftentimes put for the
whole Sum of Religion, and for all that Worship and Duty which we Ow to God;
for wheresoever it is truly grounded and deeply rooted, all the other parts of
Holiness and Righteousness will flow from it as from their Natural and proper
Principle. For it is impossible for any man to be affected with it, and not
feel the force and efficacy of its nature in a perfect subjection of his heart
and an entire resignation of his Will to the commands and disposal of God
Almighty.

2. As we are Comm^^ded to fear God, so also to fear the King, and tho there is
not an equal Reason, yet there is a sufficient one for so doing. For the King
is Gods Vicegerent and Representative, and is entrusted by him with the
Temporal Power and Material Sword for the support of his Authority and
Vindication of his Government. God, who has set him upon his Throne for the
Good of the whole Community, has furnished him with all those means which are
necessary for the attainment of such an excellent end. For He has not only
given him Authority to Enact and prescribe Laws for the Regulation of his
Subjects, but also Power to inflict Penalties upon such as dare to transgress
them. And indeed without such a Power of Coercion all his other Authority would
prove lame and defective and insufficient for all those purposes for which it
is Ordained. For the Generallity of Mankind are not so ingenuous as to be
wrought upon by rational arguments and wise discourses, nor to conform to the
most prudent and useful Rules upon the bare proposals of Authority; There must
be something to work upon their Fears as well as to Convince their
Understandings, before they will learn or practice the Duty of Subjection. And
though the great and inestible advantages of Order and Government are
sufficient Motives to engage any thoughtful and considering Person to Civil
Obedience and a regular Submission to public Authority, yet few men consider
what is their true Interest, or wherein their greatest Happiness consists, or
what are the best and most proper means to attain and secure it, but live
incogitantly and carelessly without any other thoughts or reflections, but what
their impotent Passions and unruly appetites inspire them with. And therefore
it is no wonder, that men generally are so turbulent and seditious in their
natures and Inclinations, and upon every provocation and disgust, nay upon
every foolish Caprice and Humor so ready to combine in factious designs and
engage in rebellious enterprises, and to pull Ruin upon themselves by offering
Violence to the Government. But as this shows the Folly and madness of such
People, and how little they understand either their Duty or their Happiness, So
it demonstratively proves the Necessity of a Right to punish offenders, and of
a Force sufficient to execute that Right, in all those who are invested with
Supreme Sovereign Authority. For though men will not be won to live dutifully and
Loyally by the charms of Peace and the Blessings of Obedience, yet they may be
constrained and forced to do so by the Dreads and Terrors of Public Authority,
and Fear of Punishment will have its effects upon such Obstinate and unruly
Tempers, whom the Hopes of rewards can make no impressions upon. For those men
who through stupidity and dullness, through Ignorance or Inconsideration have no
affecting and lively sense of true Happiness, and Consequently are not to be
moved by the proposals and assurances of it to Keep within the bounds and
limits of their Duty, yet cannot hinder themselves from being sensible of Pain
and Torment, nor so far harden and fortify their Natures against the
impressions of Fear, as not to feel the force and Power of that Passion, when
they lie under the apprehension of Impendent Ruin or approaching Misery. And
therefore as men naturally endeavor to avoid what they fear, so it is
necessary that the public Magistrate should be armed with such an Authority as
may create Fear in all those who otherwise might be disposed to resist and rise
up against Him, that so He may constrain those by the Terrors of His Justice,
whom the effects of His Love, Clemency and Bounty could not Oblige to be
Subject. And accordingly that men might want no Motives to be Subject to
Government, God has armed Kings with an Authority to Threaten Punishments and a
Power to inflict them.

So St. Paul teaches us, when he tells us that the Magistrate Romans 13. 4.
bears not the sword in vain, for He is the Minister of God, a Revenger to
execute wrath on them that do evil, And this shows, that as we have reason to
fear God, so also to fear the King, though not in the same degree and proportion.
Though the King cannot make us miserable to that degree which God can do, because
his Power is limited and cannot reach us beyond this Life, yet He has Power to
make us so far miserable as justly renders him an Object of Dread and Terror
to us. For if we are unruly and disobedient, and will not be kept within the
compass of our Duty, He has Power and Authority to do Justice upon us, and
inflict such Punishments as are proportionable to the Nature of our Guilts and
agreeable to the Prescription of the public Laws. In some Cases He can put
Marks of public Infamy and disgrace upon us: In others he can punish us in our
Estates by setting pecuniary mulcts upon us: In others he can add a further
punishment to that, and afflict us in our Bodies as well as in our Purses: In
others, where the Offense is capital, as all Treason and Rebellion is, He can
Taint our Blood, and Confiscate our Estates, and put us to Death.

So that, if we did but fear the King proportionably to the Evils which he can
bring upon us, we should not dare to provoke his wrath, by offending against
his Laws: we should not dare to combine and Conspire against his Royal
Authority, nor move one Step which has any apparent Tendency either to destroy
his Sacred Person, or endanger the dissolution of his Government. And I do not
doubt, if the stoutest and hardiest Rebel of them all (always excepting those
who are Rebels out of Principle and Conscience) did but frequently and
seriousl^ ^^^k upon the Ax and Gibbet, and that infamous and untimely Death,
which is always the desert, and commonly is the Fate of Rebels, (I say) I do
not doubt, but these Reflections would so awaken their Fears, as to Quell their
Seditious Purposes, and put a stop to their Factious Designs, and suggest unto
them such wise and prudent Counsels, as would keep them Peaceable and Loyal
under the best of Monarchies, and the best of Governments. And for this very
Reason the Fear of the King is commanded and enjoined us, as if it were the
whole of that Duty and Allegiance which we owe unto him.

Thus having Discourst in short upon those Duties of Fear which we owe to God
and the King, I proceed to make such Observations as may be gathered both from
the Connection of the Words, and the Order of them.

1. We may Observe, that Religion and Loyalty have such a close dependence, and
strict connection with each other, that the wise Man puts them both together and
injoyns them upon us in such a manner, as if they were but one single
indivisible Duty. And certain it is, that however some men may separate them in
their internal persuasions, or external professions, yet in truth and reality
they are always linked and conjoined, and inseparably accompany each other. And
this I shall make appear by showing

1. That no man can be truly Religious who is not a Loyal Subject. 2. That no
man can be stedily and immoveably Loyal, who is not truly and sincerely
Religious.
1. No man can be truly Religious who is not a Loyal Subject. For what Duty is
more clearly and strongly enforced upon us by the Laws of our holy Religion
than this of Obedience and Subjection to Kings and Princes? Government is God's
Ordinance, and Kings are his Vicegerents, deputed by his Authority, and Armed
with his Power to keep the World in Order, Peace and Quietness. And that they
may be secure in their Thrones and inviolable in their Persons, and
irresistible in their Administrations, God has plainly taught us by the Light
of Nature, and the Revelation of his Word, always to bear in our minds such
awful regards, and to express in our Carriage such dutiful Respects as are
suitable to the Excellency of their Character, the Dignity of their Office, and
the Usefulness of their Institution. How numerous are the Texts which might be
produced out of the Old and New Testaments to this purpose, wherein the Divine
Original of Kingly Power is clearly asserted, a willing Obedience to all their
just and lawful Commands is indispensibly enjoined, and all manner of Hostile
and Forcible Resistance either of their Persons, or their Authority, is
expressly forbidden, and severely threatened? so that if the Truth of Religion is
to be judged by those Rules of Duty which God himself has delivered, and if we
are not to be reckoned any further Religious than as we sincerely conform to
those Rules, it is plain, that a Religious Rebel is as gross and palpable a
Contradiction as a Sovereign Unaccountable Subject, and it is in effect to say,
that a man lives under the Directions of God's Commands whilst he affronts the
plainest Intimations, and violates the clearest Injunctions of the Divine Will.

It cannot be denied that many have rebelled out of conscience, and taken up
Arms against their Natural and Sovereign Prince from an accursed Persuasion,
that they were not only allowed but bound by the Laws of God to do so. But as
the Nature of things are stated and determined, fixed and permanent, and do not
alter and vary with men's Opinions and Apprehensions about them; so no Errors
and Mistakes of ours about Religion can either turn that into a real Truth
which is a certain falsehood, or convert that into a necessary Duty of
Christianity, which either in it self, or in its consequence is an effectual
Contradiction to any of its Precepts. Now all Resistance of the Supreme
Sovereign Power is plainly forbidden by the Laws of our common Christianity,
and therefore Resistance will ever be a sin, though we are never so strongly
persuaded of its being a Duty, and for the same reason we shall always be so
far Rebels against God, as we are Rebels against the King.

And though it be true, that a Conscientious Rebel is very much to be Pitied,
because what he does may be owing more to the Power of his Error, than to the
Malice of his Will, yet of all Rebels these are the most dangerous to the State
and Government: For he who is a Rebel out of Conscience is pushed on to his
wickedness, and encouraged to persevere in it by the most Powerful Motives,
which can influence and affect humane Nature. For he who is persuaded that his
Sin is his Duty, must needs look upon himself Obliged by the Authority of God
himself to Commit it, and has all those great and glorious rewards, which are
promised to any Christian and Virtuous undertaking, to encourage and animate
him to the practice of the Conscientious Villainy. And therefore the Supreme
Power can never be too watchful over the Motions, nor keep too strict a hand
over the Men of such Principles, whose Faith is Faction, whose Religion is
Rebellion, because nothing but a perfect Disability and want of Power in them
can ever restrain their Wild and furious Zeal from making Attempts upon the
Government and creating disorders in it. These are so many Snakes and Vipers in
the bosom of the State, which whilst they are cherished with its Warmth and
kindly influences are always endeavoring to Sting it to death, and to Eat out
the very heart and vitals of its Constitution, and no Trust or Confidence can
reasonably be reposed in them, until they abandon their factious Principles and
be Converted to the Truth and the Government by a full and sincere Conviction
of their Duty.

An Atheistical Rebel, may be held from pursuing his factious designs by the
Visible terrors of the Civil Magistrate, Or he may be won over to the
Government by those secular advantages which his peaceable Compliance with the
present establishment may procure for him. Or a Man who is a Rebel against his
Principle as well as against his Prince may consider his Folly and his Guilt and
repent of it. His Conscience may awaken and recover it self, and arrest him
with its dreadful convictions, and by showing him the black Impiety and
inevitable danger of his Seditious proceedings bring him back to himself and to
his Duty, and beget in him firm and invincible resolutions of being faithful to
his Conscience and to his Prince, and of never departing any more from the
Fidelity and Allegiance which is due to both of them. But there are no grounds
for conceiving any such hopes of a Conscientious Rebel; for he is under the
possession and Conduct of a Principle, which is too strong and powerful for any
Earthly Motives or Secular Considerations; and all those Engagements to Loyalty
and Civil Subjection which have relation to another Life, through the Malignity
of his Error and the Corruptions of his conscience are made to minister to his
Rebellious purposes, and to cherish and Encourage him in his most Furious and
Zealous executions of them. So that nothing but perfect despair and an absolute
Incapacity of Harming the Government, can ever withhold a Conscientious Rebel
from disturbing the Peace and endeavoring the Subversion of it. And therefore
nothing can be more Reasonable in it self, nor Useful to the Public, nor
Prudent in our Governors, then to take all due care, that those may never have
any means nor opportunities of Embroiling the Quiet and shaking the Foundation
of the Government, who look upon it as a point of Conscience and as a part of
Religion to be always prepared and always resolved to endeavor the Confusion
and Destruction of it.

But what Monstrous Illusions and Diabolical Infatuations must they ly under,
who think Resistance of Sovereign Power in any case or upon any account
whatsoever to be a Duty of Christianity, or the Dictate of an Enlightened
Conscience! Who persuade themselves that they are obedient to the Impulses of
Gods Spirit in resisting the Authority of His Vicegerent, and are promoting the
Honor of his Government in pulling down the Ordinances of his Providence! For
such are Kings, who are set upon their Thrones by Gods Authority and
appointment, and in an especial manner bear the Impress and Character of his
Divinity upon them, For God himself tells us, That by him Kings Reign, and St.
Paul says, There is no Power but of God, and the Powers that be, are Prove. 8.
15. Romans 13.
ordained of God, and that the Supreme Magistrate is the Minister of God; and
that no Resistance may be made to his Authority nor any Violence offered to his
Person, He tells us, That we must be Subject to him not only for wrath but
Conscience, and that they who resist, shall receive to themselves Damnation.
And the Example of Our Blessed Savior and the Behavior of his Holy Apostles,
and the Practice of the Primitive Christians were conformable to this Doctrine;
for they never disputed the Lawful Commands of their Governors, Nor denied
active Obedience to their Prince, when it was consistent with the indispensible
Duty which they Owed to God. And when the Commands of their Prince were
unreasonable and unjust, and could not be complied with, without violating
their Consciences, and offending God, they neither opened their Mouths in
derogation of his Honor, nor lifted up their hands in defiance of his
Authority, but with an admirable mixture of Meekness, and Patience, and
Charity, suffered when they could not obey, and bore the Punishment which was
inflicted. And they who give any other Accounts of the Doctrines of true
Christianity, or of the Practices of its Primitive and Orthodox Professors, do
foully misrepresent the one, and injuriously belly the other, and are as
malicious Enemies to the Honor and Interest of our common Christianity, as
they are to the civil Authority of Sovereign Princes. For Christianity is not
only the most Pure, but the most Peaceable and loyal Institution which ever was
set on foot in the World; It guards the Thrones, and secures the Persons, and
supports the Authority of Princes with such strong and powerful Defensatives,
that no man can break through them but at the utmost peril of his Immortal
Soul, nor without incurring the Penalty of eternal Damnation. And therefore
every man cease to be a Christian, when he commenceth Rebel, renounceth the
Cross of Christ when he sets up a Standard against his Prince, and has as
little of true Religion as he has of Christian Loyalty in him.

2. No man can be stedily and immoveably Loyal who is not truly Religious. And
this must needs be so, because no men but such as are truly Religious, are
governed by a Principle, which prompts them to a constant invariable Uniformity
of dutiful Respect and Loyal behavior toward their lawful Sovereign.

An Atheist who denies the Being of a God, and a Profane Person, who lives
without any fear of his Power, or regard to his Laws, are equally under the
Dominion of Sense, and the Government of its Appetites, and are only swai'd by
such Considerations as have respect to their temporal and Earthly Felicity.
Their Heaven is upon Earth, and they neither look nor wish for any other Joys
than what arise from the Indulgence and Gratification of their sensual
Affections. So that such men can have no other Motives to be Loyal, than what
the present Interests of this Life furnish them with. For the considerations of
God and Religion being laid aside there remains nothing but the good things of
this World to affect them with, and determine their Resolutions; and therefore
such men cannot be Loyal any further, than the Hopes and Fears of this World
will give them leave to be so. Indeed it cannot be denied because it is matter
of undoubted Experience, that many Profane and Immoral men have behaved
themselves with great Bravery of Spirit and Constancy of Resolution in the
Service of their Prince, Followed him in all the changes and revolutions of his
fortunes, stuck by him in his Extremest Necessities and worst Condition and
exposed their Lives and Fortunes to the Utmost hazards for the defense of his
Person and preservation of his Government. But what of all this? the Evidence
of this Experience and the certainty of this Fact does neither destroy the
truth of this Position, nor rebate the force of my reasoning about it. For if
all this Loyal behavior did not proceed from an affecting sense of that Duty
which we Owe to God, nor from a Conscientious regard which we ought to have for
all his Institutions, If it was not the effect of a virtuous choice, the result
of pious and Religious considerations, It can be ascribed to nothing but a
casual and contingent Principle, such a Principle as might indifferently have
made them false Traitors, or faithful Subjects, and consequently their Loyalty
was not so much their Virtue as their good Fortune. And therefore I think it no
wonder at all, that some men who gave great Proofs of an Unshaken Constancy,
and invincible Courage in the Cause of our late Royal Martyr, should desert
their former Professions, and in some late juncture of Affairs give shrewd
suspicions of a turbulent and seditious Spirit, of malicious and spightful
Designs against the Person and Authority of their Prince. For all this may be
easily supposed and accounted for, without supposing any change in the Men: The
men and their Principles may be the same that ever they were, and though they
exert and discover themselves in different and contrary Effects, yet this
contrariety of Appearance and Operation is consistent with the influence and
efficacy of the same Numerical Principle which works contrarily according to
the change of Seasons, and the Alteration of Affairs, and the Variation of
their secular Interests and the different Apprehensions, which they may have of
the most likely Means to promote and secure them. Formerly they might think it
their only Interest to uphold Monarchy and defend its Inseparable and undoubted
Rights, against all the Rebellious Invaders of it; and this Consideration might
reasonably enough engage them on the King's Side, and keep them close and Firm
to his Party. But of late they might alter their Thoughts as to the most
probable Methods, both of preserving and improving their secular Interests, and
persuade themselves, that there was no such likely way, both to save their own
Stakes, and win those of others, as by unsettling the Government and
overturning its fundamental Constitutions; and what difficulty can there be in
believing that the same Principle which formerly made them Loyal, should under
such Circumstances intoxicate them with the Spirit and Frenzy of Sedition, and
engage them in such licentious Courses as apparently tended to the Ruin of the
King, and the Destruction of his Government? Alas! nothing can be more clear
and evident from the Nature of the thing, than that a man, who is a mere
Politician, and whose only Principle is worldly Interest, and who governs all
his Actions by such Maxims and Rules, as that suggests unto him, can never be
faithful to any Party whatsoever any longer than he Judges it to make for his
Interest to be so; and therefore when he observes his Interest to lie another
way than in that in which he has already proceeded, the Principle by which he
is guided, will oblige him to take new Measures, and put on quite different
appearances, to change sides, and act directly contrary to his former
undertakings.

But now a Man who is inspired with the Spirit of true Christianity, who
understands his Duty to his Prince, as it is taught and laid down by his
Blessed Savior, and is resolved to practice according to those Measures and
Rules of Subjection, which the Gospel has Established; such a man can never be
any other thing than the most faithful and loyal Subject in the World. For as
the Rule by which he is guided, will not allow of any thing upon any account
whatsoever, which is either inconsistent with the true Honor, or destructive
of the just Authory of his Prince, so the Principle by which he is acted, will
not suffer him to decline from his Rule, but when all other Motives fail, which
are of an inferior and worldly Consideration, this alone will keep him firm and
close to his Duty. For as the Gospel is his Rule, so Conscience is his
Principle; and as the Obligations of His Rule do not rely upon any Humane
Authority, so the Force of his Principle does not depend upon any earthly
Respects, but derives its Power and Efficacy from the inviolable Authority of
God, and those infinite Motives of eternal Bliss, and eternal Misery, upon which
God has Established his Laws, and enforced their Observation. And therefore a
Man, who is loyal for Conscience sake, and upon Christian Principles, will
always be true and faithful to his Prince, however things go in the World: His
Loyalty is built upon a Rock, an immovable Foundation, which can neither be
undermined or shaken by any Accidents or Changes whatsoever.

2. We may observe from the Order of the Words, that tho we are to fear both
God and the King, yet we are in the first place to fear God, and then the King.
God is the prime and principal Object of our awful Regards, and after Him Kings
are to be reverenced by us. And indeed there is the same Reason why we should
fear God before Kings, that there is why we should fear him at all. And this
I shall make appear to you, whether

1. By Fear, we understand only the Natural Passion of Fear, as it has
something dreadful, whether Person or thing, for its Object.

2. Or whether by Fear we understand all that Duty and Obedience of which Fear
is a proper and efficacious Principle.

1. If by fear we understand that natural Passion, which has something dreadful
for its Object, even in this sense God is to be feared more than Kings. For the
Reason of all Fear is a Power to hurt and annoy, to aflict and torment us, and
our Fears of any Object increase proportionably to the Measures and Degrees of
Power, which we conceive to be in it. Now God upon this account must
necessarily be the Supreme Principal Object of our Fear, because He only is
Omnipotent and has Power to punish and undo us, not only beyond what Kings can
inflict, but infinitely beyond what the united force and strength of the whole
Creation can reach unto. And therefore Kings and Princes, who may think
themselves so secure as not to fear man, have yet reason in Common with all
their Subjects to fear God, because they are no less subject to his Power, nor
less accountable to his Justice than the meanest man upon Earth. And
accordingly it is the Psalmist's Advice unto them, Be wise now therefore O ye
King, be learned ye that are Judges of the Psalm. 2. 10, 11.
Earth, serve the Lord in fear, and Rejoice unto him with reverence. So that
God is terrible to those who are terrible to others, and justly expects that
even Kings, who are feared and honored by their own Subjects, should pay Him
the Homage of their Fear, and the Tribute of their Reverence, But there could
be no ground for this, except God exceeded Kings in Force and Power and had
Strength to subdue and chastise them, and to make them feel the Effects of his
Wrath whenever they should Violate the Laws of His Government.

And therefore, if ever it should fall out, that God and Kings should be
Competitors for our Fear, by requiring contrary and repugnant Duties, so that
in such Circumstances we could not fear the One, without despising the Other,
Our Blessed Savior has plainly resolved the Case by bidding us not to fear
those, who only can kill the Body but to fear Math. 10 18.
him who after he has Killed has power to destroy both body and Soul in Hell.
And the reason upon which our Blessed Savior determins the supposed Case, is
such as can never be answered; for it is taken from the vast difference and
infinite inequality, which is betwixt the respective Powers of God and man who
contend for our fear. For he shows Us that the greatest Kings and Potentates
can only destroy the frail perishing part of us, our Bodies; and when they have
done that, there is an end of their Power, they can do no more; but God can not
only do that, but infinirely more; He can kill our Bodies, and after that
destroy both Body and Soul in Hell.

Let the Consideration of this then awaken our fear of God and affect our Minds
with such a sensible dread of his Almighty Being, which no threatenings or
Persecutions of evil men for the cause of Our Holy Religion shall ever be able
to Obliterate or Extinguish. For as such fear is infinitely reasonable, so it
is infinitely necessary. For our Obedience will always follow our fears, and
we shall adhere to the Cause of God and persevere in our faithfulness to him
according to the awful conceits and apprehensions, which we bear in our minds
of his Infinite and Irresistible Power. For if we fear man more than God, it
will always be in the Power of man to make us Apostates, Idolaters and to
Bowdown to any thing which they shall set up for the Object of our Religious
Worship. But if we fear God above man, no human threatening, no worldly Terrors
will be able to make any sinful impressions upon us, nor ever prevail with us
to make shipwreck of Faith and a good Conscience, and both these we ought to
keep entire and inviolate in despite of all the allurements and terrors of
this World to the contrary. For,

2. If by Fear we understand all that Duty and Obedience, of which fear is a
proper and efficacious Principle, then in this sense also we ought to fear God
more then Kings. For Obedience has relation to Authority, and the Obligations
to its performance proceed entirely from their Commands, who have Authority to
determine and prescribe the Instances of it. And nothing can be more plain than
that the highest Authority must create the highest Obligations to Obedience,
which are impossible to be dissolved or weakened by any inferior and
subordinate Authority. Now God is the Supreme Sovereign Lord of the whole
Universe, the Fountain and Original of all that just and Lawful Authority which
is exercised in it. And therefore as Kings have no Authority but what they have
received from God, so they can have none against him, none but what is
subordinate to His, and which no further Obliges, than as the expresses of it
are consistent with those of the divine Will. So that all the Powers of the
World cannot abrogate or cancel the Laws of Heaven, nor discharge mankind from
that Duty and Service, to which they direct them. For to suppose otherwise is
to suppose, that Kings do not Reign by God, but that God Reigns by Kings, that
Kings are not Gods Ministers, the subordinate Instruments and Deputies of his
Providence but are Invested with a Paramount Power, with an Infinite, Boundless
Unacountable Jurisdiction not only in respect of their own Subjects, but also
of God himself. But what is this but to divest God of his Legislative Power, to
Pull him out of his Throne, and wrest his Scepter out of his hands, and to make
Kings Gods in the highest Sense and most absolute Notion of the Word? for this
must needs be so, If Gods Authority be so precarious as to depend upon the
wills of Princes for its Obliging Power and Virtue. But this is so foolish and
blasphemous a Conceit, that nothing but the mention of it is necessary for its
Confutation. And therefore though it is an Infinite Mercy when Kings are Nursing
Fathers and Queens Nursing Mothers to the Church, when the true Religion is
encouraged and protected by the Civil Powers of the World, and the Doctrine of
the Gospel are adopted and incorporated into the Laws of the Kingdom, yet if
ever it should happen that Kings should command what God has forbidden, or
forbid what God has Commanded and that under the severest Penalties which are
possible for them to contrive and inflict, it would be both our Duty and our
Interest to persist in our Christian profession, and to suffer all the
Torments, which Human Nature is capable of feeling, rather then Violate the
unalterable Laws of God by any sinful Compliances with the unlawful Impositions
of Man. For the Nature of saving Truth and the fixed Methods of Eternal
Salvation depend not upon the will of Man but of God, who only has Dominion
over our Consciences, and will bring us to Eternal Bliss only in the way of his
own appointment. And therefore whenever the Commands of Men shall thwart and
contradict the Laws of God, let us remember that in such cases (as we value
the Eternal happiness of our immortal Souls) we must obey God rather than Man:
But then we must remember too, that as in such Cases it is the Will of God,
that we should not obey the Commands of men, so it is also His Will that we
should not resist their Authority, nor rise up in Rebellion against them. For
the Power of the Sword, both by the Laws of God and Man, is the Sovereign's
peculiar Right, and no man can make use of it without His Command, or against
His Authority, without making himself Obnoxious both to Humane, and Divine
Vengeance. And therefore in all Cases where we cannot obey the Laws of Man,
without offending God, we must patiently suffer their Wrath, and meekly submit
to their Coercion.

This is the Doctrine of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and this is the Doctrine
of the Reformed Church of England, which She has reason to Glory in beyond all
other Churches of what Denomination soever, because none beside Her self (which
I know of) do Teach the Doctrine of Non-resistance, and Passive Obedience so
plainly and fully, so free from all Ambiguities and Reserves, from all
Exceptions and Limitations. May we all Adorn our excellent Church, by living
conformably to Her holy Doctrine in all things, and then I am sure we shall
Convince the World, that we both Fear God and the King, by giving unto God the
things that are Gods, and unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's.

FINIS.

