A Crown of Life, The Reward of FAITHFULNESS. BEING A SERMON Preached September.
12. 1661. At the Funerals of Mr. William Tailor, M. A. Minister of the Gospel,
at Saint Stephens Coleman-street. London.

By William Spurstowe, D. D. Minister of the Gospel at Hackney, near London.

Cum omnes virtutes current in stadio, sola perseverantia accipit bravium. Aug.
Non quaeruntur in Christianis intia sed finis. Hierom. LONDON, Printed for
Ralph Smith, at the Bible in Cornhil, near the Royal Exchange. 1662.

To the Right Honorable Lady, ANNE, Countess of Balcarres, etc.
Right Honorable,
THIS slender Sermon, I am fully sensible, is by its Publication, and by its
Dedication, made two things, for which it is very unmeet: By its Publication,
it becomes a kind of monument for a worthy friend, and faithful servant of
Christ, whose name deserves rather to be engraven in a lasting Pillar of
marble, than in this perishing Paper, which cannot add so much to him, as it
receives from him. By its Dedication, it is made a tender of my service to your
Honor, which should not have been done by so mean an address as this is, but
in a way more answerable to your worth and goodness; and therefore I had wholly
desisted from this work, had I not been animated thereunto by a double plea.

1. After its preaching, you were pleased to let fall some such expressions, as
that you hoped it might ere long come abroad, which words did sway the more
with me, in regard I might thereby take an occasion to testify my thankfulness
in the behalf of him, to whom you were pleased to show much kindness whilst he
lived, and now to continue your bounty unto his, in taking upon you the care
and education of one of his sons.

2. I was willing, among others, to express my unfeigned rejoicing, in your
hopeful recovery from a long and dangerous sickness, beseeching God to renew
and double your former strength, that you may long continue in the land of the
living, as an instrument of good, and an example of holiness; that great
Personages may see, that it is not only their duty, but their glory, to serve
God above others, who has made them to shine like Suns in the Firmament, when
others twinkle like Stars; and now I have no more to say in my own behalf, but
that I made some stay of its coming forth for a time, that I might the more
cheerfully present it to your Honors hands. All that I shall take leave to
speak to your self, is, That the practice of faithfulness is a most seasonable
duty for you to exercise; sickness is the time of making vows, and health the
time of paying them; and if what I here offer, may any way tend to the
strengthening of your hands in God, I shall rejoice, and make that my prayer for
you, which was the Apostles counsel to the elect Lady. That you may look to
your self, that you lose not those things which you have wrought, but that you
may receive a full reward. So I remain,

Madam, Your Honors, In all Christian service, WILLIAM SPURSTOWE.
Hackney, December. 4. 1661.
THE Crown of Life, THE REWARD of FAITHFVLNESSE.
REVEL. 2. 10. Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a Crown of
Life.


SOME parcels of holy Scripture may not unfitly be compared to the Libbet, or
end of a piece of Arras, in which, he that beholds only some particular part,
may happily conceive the hand or foot which he sees, to be very unskilfully
made; but unfolding the whole, soon finds, that it carries a due symetry and
proportion to the body. In the handling therefore of such Scriptures, it is
necessary, not only to unfold the Text, but the Context; that so by the joint
explication of both, those divine Truths that lie wrapped up in them may appear
in their full dimensions, which else by an incomplete and partial
representation must needs be disfigured, and lose much, both of their harmony
and beauty: But this Text, though it be a single sentence, excerped from the
body of the Epistle, and Verse also in which it stands, yet it is so entire in
its sense, so pregnant in its worth, as that the least stay, in pointing to
what goes before, or to what follows after, will rather hinder, than expedite
my Progress in what I design to speak unto.

These words then, are an heavenly counsel of our Savior to the Angel of the
Church of Smyrna, animating them to an unbended constancy in their Profession
amidst those extreme difficulties and sore tribulations which Christ foretells
should befall them, through Satan's rage, and the violence of bloody
Persecutors: They naturally branch themselves into two parts, a Precept, and a
Promise; the one containing man's Duty, and the other Gods Bounty.

1. A Precept, enjoining fidelity, Be thou faithful; A Duty so essential to the
being of Christianity, as that it is both the divisive and constitutive
difference of every true Believer, that which makes him really to be what he
is, and distinguishes him from others, who follow Religion, propter famam, non
propter conscientiam; for credit and reputes sake, not for conscience.

2. A free Promise annexed, the hope of which may be a reviving Cordial in
their sufferings, and the certain performance an ample Reward after their
sufferings; And I will give thee a Crown of Life.

In the Precept, we may consider:

First, The Person upon whom the Duty is incumbent, Be thou faithful: This
Pronoune Thou, is not restrictive, but extensive; not fixing the Duty upon one
individual, but indefinitely, charging it upon all; like an ingenuous and
well-made picture, it faceth every beholder; as a center in a circle, it
carries an equal respect to all the parts of the circumference; it is as a
Cock, that croweth to every man, and not to Peter only.

Secondly, The term and boundary of the Duty, Be thou faithful unto death;
which is not to be understood exclusively, but inclusively. Death must not
separate, but seal the fidelity of a Christian: Life, as well as other
accommodations must be little set by, in respect of Christ and his Truth, when
it comes in competition with it. The resolution of that rich and noble Virgin
in Basil, was truly masculine, who, when condemned to the fire for being a
Christian (but offered both life and estate upon compliance to the worship of
the Heathenish Idols) cried out, Valeat vita, pereat pecunia; let life go, let
money perish; and alike honorable is that Testimony given to those Worthies,
who overcame the great Dragon, that they loved not their lives unto the death,
Revel. 12. 11.

In the Promise, two particulars also are observable.

First, The Giver, Christ, expressed by way of Emphasis, I will give thee; I,
who am the first and the last, who was dead, and am alive, Revel. 2. 9. I, who
am the Amen, the faithful and true VVitness, Revel. 3. 14. I, to whom power is
given over all flesh, that I should give eternal life, John 17. 3. Oh! how
secure is the happiness of every Believer, who has the word of such a person
to reward all his services, and to crown all his labors? who is holy, and
cannot lie; who is immutable, and cannot repent; who is omnipotent and cannot
be hindered.

Secondly, The Gift or Reward, a Crown of life, in which are three remarkable
circumstances.

1. The Identity or oneness of the Gift: As the work is the same which is
required of all, so the wages are the same which are given unto all; not a
penny, as in the Vineyard, but a Crown, as in the Race; none that are faithful
shall be without a Crown, though there may be some accidental differences. The
glory of Heaven is not Gavelkind, in which every son or heir-male inherits an
equal portion of h^s Ancestors estate: We may (as I conceive) piously believe
that it is consonant to Scripture, as well as to the stream of Antiquity, that
there are degrees of glory; but not according to the Roman Scale, who have
hammered and beaten out certain little Crowns, which they ascribe only to
Virgins, to Martyrs, to Doctors, and are produced from their own extraordinary
merits, not from the immediate Rays of Christ's glory shed upon them; but sure
the metal must be Alchymy, and not Gold.

A second, is the dignity of the Gift: A Crown is the Emblem of Majesty, and
aptly notes that great honor to which the faithful are exalted in Christ, Luk
22. 10. I appoint unto you a Kingdom; What is eternal life, but a Coronation
day? Does not the Scripture in describing of it, set it forth by such a
solemnity in all its parts? The Robes which the faithful must be clothed with,
are the long white Robes of Righteousness; the Oil with which they must be
anointed, is the oil of gladness; the Scepter which must be put into their
hand, is a Scepter of power to bruise their enemies under their feet; the
Throne upon which they must sit, is a Throne of glory; the Feast at which they
must eat, is the great Supper of the Lamb; and the presence in which all must
be transacted, is the presence of the holy Angels.

A third, is the perpetuity of the Gift: It is a Crown of life, and so stands
in a direct opposition unto the Crowns of mortal Princes, which have neither
life, nor length: The gold and gems of which they consist, are both liveless
and corruptible; but they that wear them are far more transient and fading: How
inconsiderable oft-times is the distance between the joyful Coronation, and the
sad Funerals of the same Prince? How soon are the poudred Ermins exchanged for
a winding sheet? The stately Palace, for a small Urn? And the Royal Collar of
Esses sparkling with Diamonds, for the ignoble bonds of death and darkness? But
so it is not with Believers, their dignity and their persons have both an
endless life, as being wholly above all violence from without that may assault
it, and perfectly free from any principle of mortality from within which may
dissolve it; else could they not be perfectly happy, for it is Eternity alone
which makes a good to be infinitely better, and an evil infinitely worse.

I have now showed you that a rich Treasure may lie in a small compass, and
that a little spot of the land of Canaan may bring forth a plentiful Harvest,
when in this one promise are not only scattered ears of Corn, which like the
Disciples, we may rub in our hands, and eat in our journey; but laden wains of
heavenly grain, which like the rich man in the Gospel, we may treasure up, and
freely live upon, until we come to be truly above the use of means, and to
derive our happiness immediately from the fruition of God, both in respect of
presence, and of influence: But it cannot be expected that in one hour such an
ample harvest should be reaped, or that all the foregoing particulars should
be insisted upon by me; I shall therefore without breaking the order of the
words, begin with the Precept, Be thou faithful unto the death.

And in the Explication of it, propound three Queries.

First, What this faithfulness is, which is the Duty enjoined.

Secondly, Upon what grounds it is absolutely necessary.

Thirdly, Why it must be persevered in unto death.

First, What fidelity or faithfulness is. In Scripture it undergoes a various
and differing acceptance; sometimes it is put for the stedfastness and
assurance of belief, as it is opposed unto an absolute diffidence, such as was
in Thomas, who was resolved not to believe the Resurrection of his Lord, unless
he might both see the print of the Nails, and thrust his hand into his side,
that so his faith might have the security of the touch, as well as of the eye:
Now to him Christ says, (...). Be not faithless, but faithful, John 20. 27.
Sometimes it is taken for the profession of Christian Religion; If any faithful
man or woman have Widows, let them minister unto them, 1 Timothy 5. 16. Sometimes
it signifies the unquestionable verity of speech, This is a true and faithful
saying, 1 Timothy 4. 9. In other places it imports a careful and conscientious
discharge of ones trust, in that station and office to which he is called. Thus
Moses is said to have been faithful in all Gods house, as a servant, Hebr. 3.
5. And Christ to have been a merciful and faithful High Priest in things
concerning God: He left nothing undone that might reconcile man to God, and
expiate the sins of his people. Sometimes it is used for an unshaken and firm
continuance in the Truth, when faith in Christ is seconded with faithfulness
unto Christ: Thus Antipas is styled a faithful Martyr, Revel. 2. 13. And those
that are with Christ, are said to be called, chosen and faithful, Revel. 17.
14. I shall not need to reassume these several senses, and cause them to pass
before you, as Jesse did his sons before Samuel, that so you may the better see
what that faithfulness is to which this Crown of life is promised. It is
methinks clear to every eye, that the Duty both enjoined and rewarded, is the
holding fast of the Name and Truth of Christ, in the conscientious exercise of
those gifts and graces which he has betrusted us with for his glory; the
opposites unto which are, in the Scripture dialect, wavering, fainting,
weariness in well-doing, backsliding, denying the faith, and such like sins,
which we find in it to be often both reproved and condemned. How smartly does
Paul chide the Galathians for their fickleness and inconstancy in the Doctrine
of the Gospel? How severely does Christ threaten the Asian Churches
declensions, and wainings in their profession? How frequent is he in his
admonitions to them to do their first works, to repent, to remember from whence
they are fallen, to hold fast, that no man take their Crown? What are all these
expressions, but so many brief Commentaries to enlighten the Duty of
faithfulness? I shall not therefore make use of the Lawyers Maxim, Superflua
non nocent, that superfluous things ofttimes do no harm, to insist any further
in showing what it is; but hasten rather to evince the necessity of it by
considerations, which are pondere and numero pares, fully answerable in their
weight to their number, and this is the task of the second Query.

1. Faithfulness is necessary, in regard of that mutual and interchangeable
trust which passes between God and every Believer; God is not only their
Depositary to keep what they commit to him, but they are also his, to preserve
what he has committed unto them; as they trust God with their souls, so God
again trusts them with his Truth; both of them are things of an inestimable
worth, one soul, if laid in the balance, weighs down a World; but Truth exceeds
in value, Earth, Heaven, Saints, Angels, which must all perish and pass away,
rather than the least iota of Truth: This double deposite Paul expressly
mentions, and well nigh puts together; the one, in 2 Timothy 1. 12. I know whom I
have believed, and am persuaded that he is able to keep that which I have
committed to him against that day: The other, in ver. 14. That good thing which
is committed unto thee, keep by the Holy Ghost. The heart of every Believer is
the same to the Doctrines of Faith, and the Mysteries of the Gospel, that the
Ark, and the golden pot were to the Tables of the Covenant, and the Manna in
the time of the Law; it is the great repository into which God has put those
heavenly Treasures which were first hid in his bosom, and from hence conveyed
into ours, to be both preserved and manifested to the glory of his grace: Now
can any man rationally expect that God should keep his soul as the apple of the
eye, because he professes to have commended it unto him; and he not keep the
sacred pledge of Faith which God has deposited with him? Is it equal that Gods
promises should stand valid to tie him to a performance, when the compact on
man's part is wilfully broken or neglected? In Stipulations and Covenants
between man and man, in which the terms and agreements are on each side alike,
he that makes the first breach, dissolves the contract, and sets free the other
party; how much more then may God, whose promises of salvation are conditional,
without the least impeachment of his faithfulness, deny the fulfilling thereof
to such as lightly esteem and set by the obligations that he has put upon
them? And that he thus will do, himself has told us, Hebr. 8. 9. They
continued not in my Covenant, and I regarded them not, says the Lord: Let none
therefore flatter themselves of obtaining a Crown of life and salvation, upon
any cheaper rate than what God has declared, the holding fast of their
profession, the keeping the faith, the fighting the good fight; for were there
as many Gates to Heaven, as there is stars shining in it, or Saints and Angels
dwelling in it, yet they should all be shut against them, and they eternally be
disappointed of their expectation.

The second ground is drawn from the gifts and graces with which Believers are
endowed, and obliged also to faithfulness in the use and exercise of them, in a
double respect.

1. It is the intent of the Donor, that his gifts should be employed; he has
not given them any for show, but for use. When the Lord, in the Parable, went
into a far Country, he delivered to ten servants, ten pounds; but to all the
same command, Occupy till I come, Luke 19. 13. He fixes no time of his return,
but till then they must be trading: So 1 Cor. 12. 7. The manifestations of the
Spirit are given to profit withal. The Original word, is (...), which denotes
such a kind of profit, as redounds to a Community. Data sunt non ipsorum causa,
sed Ecclesiae: They are given (says Grotius) not for their sakes that possess
them, but for the good of the Church; they have them, as an estate, in trust,
which is not his to whom it is made over, but another rather, for whose
benefit he is to improve it. How much then must such Christians be without
excuse, that have received Talents from God in sundry kinds, and yet have hid
them in a Napkin, rather than put them into the Bank? How sad will be their
account, when he that can neither deceive, nor be deceived, must make up the
Audit? Think of this, O ye slothful ones, who are rich in knowledge and wisdom,
but yet have no heart to instruct and teach others. Think of this, ye, upon
whom wealth and treasure flows in like a River, and yet have an hand as
withered as Jeroboams, that cannot be stretched out to the least good. Think of
this, ye who have golden opportunities to become skilful in the Word of
righteousness, which is able to build up you, and others, to eternal life, and
yet blaze away a great part of the lamp of your time in fruitless speculations.

2. The nature and quality of Gods gifts and graces, call for a faithful use
and exercise of them, in regard of this peculiar property which they have in
them, to increase by their communication; like the Widows oil, that enriched
her by its pouring of it out; like the loaves in the Gospel, that were
multiplied by breaking; like Wells, that grow better by drawing; like Metals,
that grow brighter by using; but when they are not imparted, they are impaired;
when not employed, either lessened or extinguished. Appian tells a story of one
Geta, who in the time of the Civil Wars in Rome, did wear a glass before one of
his eyes, that so he might be unknown to them, who else happily would have
endangered his life; but when he took it away, though his eye remained, yet the
sight was lost, and the Historian makes the Reason to be, (...), for the ^ong
not using of it. Thus it is with the gifts and graces of God, they often wither,
and come to little or nothing, when they are not exercised. Now to what end
has God made them to be of such a nature and quality, differing from most
other things, which grow lesser and weaker by communication? Is it not, that he
might take away the pleas and excuses of men, which otherwise they would have
for their not imparting of their gifts unto others? Who would teach and
instruct another, if he should thereby have his knowledge diminished? Who would
make another partaker of his wisdom, if himself thereby should stand the more
in need of counsel? But here no such Arguments can be urged, but rather the
contrary; the using of them for others good, is like the Sareptans feeding the
Prophet, which makes the little Meal in the Barrel not to waste, and the Oil
in the Cruce not to fail, 1 Kings 17. 14. Like the perfecting of habits, which
are strengthened by the reiteration of acts, but lost by a neglect; let
therefore such whom God has made stewards of manifold gifts, consider how much
they are engaged to faithfulness and diligence, when without any dimunition of
what they have, others are enriched; as the seal stamps the wax, as the fire
heats the iron, or as the Sun enlightneth thousands of eyes; all without loss
of figure, heat, or light; yea, when in so doing, themselves are advantaged,
and have oft-times not an hair, but a cubit added to their spiritual stature.

A third ground to evince the necessity of fidelity, may be taken from the
nearness and multiplicity of those Relations which are between God and every
Believer: The Relations between one creature and another, as they are not so
firm as those which are between God and a Believer, so neither are they so
many; for all created beings which move and work in a narrow sphere, can never
branch and spread themselves into numerous stems: Who ever heard, that the same
person was a spouse, a son, a servant, a subject, a steward, a witness? And yet
by all these ties do Believers stand related unto God; but that which makes
them most deservedly remarkable, is not simply their number, but the property
of faithfulness, which is the character that the Scripture has stamped upon
them all, and is so essential to the existence of every one of them in
particular, as that without it they vanish and cease for to be. A wife must be
faithful in all things, 1 Timothy 3. 11. And without it, what is she but an
Harlot, and one that forgets the Covenant of her God? Children must be
faithful, Tit. 1. 6. else they are not their Fathers glory, but his shame and
reproach. A servant must be faithful, Matthew. 24. 45. or else he cannot be
reckoned among his Masters Treasures, but Burdens. A subject must be faithful,
Titus 3. 1. else he becomes a Rebel, and passes into the worst of Miscreants.
A steward, it is required that he be found faithful, 1 Cor. 4. 2. otherwise
what is he, but a Thief, like Judas, who bare the Bag to enrich himself? A
witness must be faithful, one who will not lie, Prove. 14. 5. or else he is (as
Solomon says) a Maul, a Sword, and a sharp Arrow, Prove. 25. 18. Look then, O
Christians, to your Relations, and tell me if faithfulness be not your Duty?
Must you not lay down the name of Christians, or assume those things which make
you so? Has God betrothed you to himself in mercy, righteousness and truth,
and may you break those golden ^ands, and be guiltless? Hos. 2. 19. Has he
made you sons by Adoption, joynt-heirs with Christ, Romans 8. 17. And may you be
Prodigals, and leave your Fathers house? Has he made you menial servants of
his family and household, Ephesians. 2. ^9. And may you be as those, qui magis saeculo
vacant; quam Deo; who (as Hierom speaks) spend more time in the Worlds service,
than in Gods? Has he dignified you to be stewards of the Oracles of God, 1
Pet. 3. 11. to give his servants their appointed food, and may you starve them
by neglect, or poison them with Error? Has he chosen you to be his Witnesses,
Isa. 43. 10. and will you be bribed to withold your Testimony for God? O that
my words were as sharp goads to prick and put forward the slothful; as a shrill
Trumpet to awaken the secure; as an heavenly Euge to strengthen the hands of
those that mind faithfulness in their Profession; that so the Gospel might be
adorned by all, and Believers so walk, Vt de illis male loqui nemo possit sine
mendacio; That none (according to Hieroms counsel) might be able to speak evil
of them without lying; surely there is no better way to do it, than by
considering the various Relations you stand in to God, which as on his part
they put marks of honor upon you; so on your part they challenge service and
duty to be returned to him with faithfulness.

A fourth ground, is from the great deformity which appears in the waverings
and inconstancy of such who change, who question, who let go the profession of
the Faith which they should hold fast, as I shall show in several particulars.

1. In Scripture it is called an halting, 1 Kings 18. 21. How long halt ye
between two opinions? Is Elijah his question to the Israelites, who walked in
their Religion after the manner of lame persons, that go one step down, and
another up; one while for Baal, and another while for God. In other places it
has the reproach of silliness set upon it, Hos. 7. 11. Ephraim is like a silly
Dove without heart: To want gall as a Dove is commendable; but to want heart
and understanding, so as to be made a prey to every seducer, is a brand of
infamy. Paul resembles it to childishness, which is an unsettled estate wherein
fancy rules, and not reason: Be no more children, tossed too and fro, and
carried about with every wind of Doctrine, Ephesians. 4. 14. To be a man in years,
and a child in stature is reputed monstrous; but it is far more to be a man in
stature, and a child in understanding. How opposite is such a condition to
faith, which is not (...) a faint supposition of Ifs and Ands; but (...) a firm
and sure ground that gives a subsistence to the things that are hoped for?
yea, how contrary is it to God, whose glory it is, to be the same to day,
yesterday, and for ever? Heb. 13. 8. Who is infinite in understanding, Psalm.
147. 5. Who is faithful in what he has promised. Will he who is unchangeable,
delight in professions of righteousness, which are like a morning dew? will he
who is only wise, be pleased in the sacrifice of fools? or will he whose
promises are Truth, take pleasure in double-minded persons, who are unstable in
all their ways?

2. Inconstancy and change, it is the guise of Heretics, who are always
affecting Novelties, not only in words, but in Doctrines. Pelagius, as Austin
reports, did four several times alter his opinion; and the Arrians had, as
Hillary calls it, Menstruam and annuam fidem, every month or year a new faith
al Such do, as those that paint their faces, who are often laying on new
complexion, else the defects which they strive to hide, would soon appear: But
how uncomely this is for those that profess the faith of Christ, which has
always continued as truly one, as the Sun in the Firmament (notwithstanding
any parelia that might make weak persons sometimes to conceive otherwise) we
may see by the chief of the Apostles, who to free himself from the least
umbrage or show of levity, does first expostulate with the Corinthians, Did I
use lightness? or the things that I purpose, do I purpose according to the
flesh, that with me there should be yea, yea, and nay, nay? And then solemnly
protests, As God is true, our word toward you, was not yea and nay, 2 Cor. 1.
17, 18. Surely inconstancy, in what Subject soever it is, casts a dark shadow;
but the more eminent the gifts and abilities of any person are, the more
remarkable is the blemish that comes by it: Who does not account the late
Grotius among the firstborn of the learned, in regard of his profound and
various knowledge? and yet like Reuben, he lost the double portion of honor
and respect that was due unto him, through that instability which was observed
in him. Hence Rivet relates this story of him in his Book against him, That
when he was a prisoner in his own Country, Prince Maurice being interceded
with for his liberty, denied the granting of it, and pointing to the
weathercock upon his house, said, En Grotii Caput, Behold there Grotius his
head. I speak not this to load the person, but the crime; and to show that a
Christian should not be as a Reed in the Wind, but as a Rock in the Sea, which
amidst all dashings of the waves, stands immovable.

3. Unstedfastness is vile in Gods sight, and carries more of a provocation in
it, than many other sins, as may appear by the wrath which it kindles in his
breast, and the judgments which he inflicts: How severely did God recompense
this sin upon Israel, who, Psalm. 78. 59. Had dealt unfaithfully like their
fathers and were turned aside like a broken Bow: In the next verse it is said,
He greatly abhorred Israel, he forsook the Tabernacle of Shiloh and delivered
his strength into captivity, and his glory into his enemies hand. So again, God
denounces a death upon offenders in this kind, which is made dreadful both by
the hand which inflicts it, and by the shame and reproach that attends it: The
men that have transgressed my Covenant, which have not performed the words of
the Covenant, which they made before me, etc. I will give them into the hand of
them that seek their life, and their dead bodies shall be meat unto the Fowls
of the Heaven, and to the Beasts of the Earth, Jer. 34. 18, 20. If then we may
take the magnitude and dimensions of a sin by the punishment which God does
proportion and meet forth unto it, as questionless we may, because God in all
his judgments aims at the clearing of his justice to the creature, and that he
does not without a cause, do any thing that he has done: We may conclude that
unstedfastness and falsness of heart in the matters of God, is a sin, magnae
infamiae and reatus, of great infamy and guilt, leaving in the very punishment
and indelible stain and blot upon the memory of the offender.

A fifth ground to evince the necessity of faithfulness, is from the
transactions and carriage of the great and last day, in which every man must
give an account for himself to God, Romans 14. 12. Then the sentence passes not
according to the greatness of place, or measure of gifts, but according to
fidelity. It is not said, well done, rich, learned, or wise, but faithful
servant: He only it is, who in the sight of men and Angels, is first commended,
and then bountifully rewarded, Enter thou into thy Masters joy, Mat. 25. 21. As
riches profit not in the day of wrath, so neither wisdom nor learning. If then
God should ask the Apostles question, 1 Cor. 1. 20. Where is the Scribe? where
is the wise? where is the Disputer of this World? How silent and amazed would
all stand! Alas! it is not videtur quod sic, probatur quod non, which will then
stand any man instead; that day is not a time of arguing, or of pleadings, but
of sentence, in which, as the faithful servant is rewarded, so the unfaithful
is condemned. First, he is openly reproached, Thou wicked and shothful servant,
thou ought to have put my money to the Exchangers, etc. Matthew. 25. ver. 26,
27. and then finally judged, Cast ye the unprofitable servant into outer
darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. ver. 30. O therefore,
if ever you would lie down comfortably in your Grave, and lift up your heads
joyfully when you shall arise out of it, be persuaded to practice this Duty of
fidelity, which has been discovered to be of such absolute importance, for the
obtaining of eternal blessedness, as that if any shall still be regardless of
it, what can we say, but as Lactantius once spoke, Qui in vitiis sibi placent,
nobis non credent, etiam si solemn manibus gestemus. Such who indulge themselves
in their sins, will not believe us, though we carry the Sun in our hands; and
so I pass to the third Query, which is to show, why faithfulness must be
persisted in unto death, and of this there are sundry grounds.

1. That our fidelity to Christ might parallel and answer the fidelity of
Christ unto us. Ibi tu Christian fige tui cursus profectusque metam, ubi
Christus posuit suam. Do thou, O Christian (says Bernard) there fix the bounds
of thy Race and Progress, where Christ set his. He fainted not, nor was
dismayed, until he became, not only the Author, but the Finisher of our
salvation. It was his love that held him upon the Cross, when death could not
hold him in the Grave, though provoked by his enemies to come down that they
might believe; but what would have become of our expected blessedness by him,
if he had not conflicted with shame and pain, until it terminated in death?
Would it not have been as a foundation and building without a top-stone, to
which none could have joyfully shouted grace, grace? And yet, what bitter
contradiction of sinners did he endure, in his effecting reconciliation for
sinners? In his Person, denied to be the Son of God; in his Office, not owned
to be the Messius; in his Doctrine, proclaimed to the people as a Deceiver; in
his Miracles, reproached as a Conjurer; in his Life, slandered as a Glutton and
Wine-bibber; in his Death, reputed the worst of Malefactors. What could men or
Devils have done more, to have made him to sink under the weight of his burden?
Is it not meet then, that we in Salvians phrase should be, Tam ingentis exempli
parvi imitatores, in some weak measure followers of so grand an example. If he
loved us to the end, John 13. 1. is it not fit that we should take up David's
resolution, to keep his statutes to the end? Psalm. 119. 33. If he became
obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross, Phil. 2. 8. Should we not
say, as Paul, That we are ready not to be bound only, but also to dye for the
Name of the Lord Jesus? Acts 21. 13. Certainly if we could repeat such a bloody
sacrifice a thousand times over, his love might challenge it from us, if we do
but thoroughly weigh his innocence, and our guilt; his worth, and our vileness.

2. The promise of reward is made only to perseverance, and that not by any
secret and tacit condition implied, but in open and express terms: He that
shall endure to the end, the same shall be saved, Matthew. 24. 13. So again, Luke
22. 28, 29. Ye are they which have continued with me in my temptations, and I
appoint unto you a Kingdom, as my Father has appointed unto me, that you may
eat and drink at my Table. This promise of a Kingdom, and of a Table in Heaven,
it is not to those that heard him, or to those that followed him, says St.
Chrysostom, but to them that continued with him. The same thing speaks the
Apostle, who had well learned his Masters Doctrine, Blessed is the man that
endures temptation, for when he is tried, he shall receive a Crown of life.
Jam. 1. 12. The Crown is not set at the beginning of the Race, that men should
run from it; nor in the middle, that they should run beyond it; but at the end,
that all might run to it. And in this sense the Apostle encourages Timothy, to
lay hold of eternal life, 1 Timothy 6. 12. alluding to those, who in pursuing the
prize, when they come near the Goal, stretch forth their hands to take hold of
it. It is not by a sudden snatching at it, which a stander by may do and yet
have no right unto it; but it is by striving lawfully, without which no man can
be crowned. O, how should this startle diary and dewy Christians, whose
goodness is soon scorched and dried up, and yet please themselves with hopes of
eternal happiness! But if Religion were only a Paroxism, or a few faint wishes,
who so wicked, but that he might be deemed a Christian? Balaam must be put in
the Calendar of Saints, and Jehu be ranked among the best of Kings. O that such
would conscientiously remember that there are no promises that speak the least
comfort to them; but there are threatenings that may turn their confidence into
an amazement: What says God, If any man draw back, my soul shall have no
pleasure in him? Hebr. 10. 38. Nay, it will go worse with them, than if they
had never begun; It had been better for them not to have known the way of
righteousness, than after they have known it, to turn from the holy
Commandment, 2 Pet. 2. 21. What can be spoken more to show the sad end of such
as begin in the Spirit, but end in the flesh; or to evince the absolute
necessity of fa^thfulness to the utmost period that it can be extended unto?
And yet if this be not enough, consider,

3. That persevering in faithfulness is the great discriminating character
between a true Believer, and a formal Professor; between one whose heart is
dyed in grain with a deep tincture of godliness, and him that is only dealbatus
nomine Christiani, whited superficially over with the name of a Christian, as
Austin expresses it. In their egress or setting out, they both seem to be
alike affected in their hope, joy, zeal, and resolution; but in their progress
and continuance, the difference is as great, as between a Star, and a Comet;
between a Spring, and a Torrent; or between a Reed, and a Cedar. The Hypocrites
hope, is like the web or house of the Spider, which every Besom can easily
destroy; his joy, is as the singing and chirping of the Grasshopper, which ends
with the Summer; his zeal, like flushings in the face, which go and come; like
breath on steel, as soon off, as on; his resolutions, like small trenches,
which any foot can both step over, and tread down: But the Believers hope, is
like an Anchor, that is sure and steadfast; his joy, is like the solace of the
Be^, which feeds upon honey and sweetness in the sharpest winter; his zeal, is
like the fire of the Sanctuary, which never goes out; his resolutions are like
a Bow of steel, which is not easily broken. Now tell me, Brethren, would you
willingly be numbered among those, who begin in the Spirit, but end in the
flesh? would you be at once reproached by your consciences, and condemned by
God, as mokers of God, Hypocrites, Deceivers of your own souls? would you want
the blessed testimony in your own breast of your integrity in spiritual and
holy services? If not, then keep up your faithfulness, and make it not the work
only of a day, or some small remnant of your time, but of your whole life; for
else you can never say with dying Hezekiah, Remember me, O Lord, I beseech
thee, how I have walked before thee in Truth, and with a perfect heart, and
have done that which was good in thy sight, Isa. 37. 3.

4. It is requisite that Christian fidelity hold out to the last, and terminate
only with life and being, in regard that God who promises, is eternal, and the
Reward also promised, is everlasting.

First, God is eternal, He inhabiteth eternity, Isa. 57. 15. He only has
immortality, 1 Timothy 6. 16. Now what communion can eternity have with a
desultory levity, which is every moment some other thing than what it was? But
constancy and perseverance (as Bernard says) prae se fert imaginem
aternitatis; it carries upon it an image and resemblance of eternity, because
it is opposite unto levity and change, which are utterly repugnant unto
eternity, and because also it does imply, that if the line of being were drawn
out unto millions of Ages, it also would run parallel to it, and be co-extended
with it; for should it in the least measure fall short of a Christians being,
it could not be called perseverance, but Apostasy, and thereby he should lose
the prize, which is given only to him that holds out to the end.

Secondly, The Reward promised, is everlasting, it is eternal life, an
inheritance incorruptible, a Kingdom that cannot be shaken. Now is it meet,
that he who takes Religion as a Farm, and not as a Freehold, who will be a
Tenant at his own will, and not at his Lords; who intends to hold it no longer
than himself pleases, and throw up all when he lists, that he should be made
partaker of the same blessedness with them, who by patient continuance in well
doing, seek for glory, honor, and immortality, Romans 2. 7. What advantage then
had David, by choosing Gods statutes as his inheritance? Psalm. 119. 111. What
the better should he be, who is willing to buy the Truth at any rate, but to
sell it at no rate? Prove. 23. 23. If such who make the World their fee simple,
and take only a lense of Gospelprofession for their own accommodations, should
be as sure of Heaven at the last, as the most diligent and persevering
Believer? But let no temporaries, whose faith and love are but for a time,
deceive themselves with such vain hopes. Heaven and endless glory, are not such
commodities that God will put off at such easy terms; it is a Kingdom that is
praeparatum, but yet is rapiendum, it is prepared from eternity, but yet must
be taken by violence, and holding to the end, that so in the end we may enjoy
life and glory without end.

I have now finished what I propounded for the explication of this great Duty
of Christian constancy and fidelity, in dispatching these three Queries, which
show what it is, why absolutely necessary, and why to be persisted in unto
death; in which I fear I have dwelt so long, as to prejudice those fruitful
applications, which like the sacrifices of the Law, should be entire, and
maimed in no part, in regard of their special usefulness, but I must through
straits of time be enforced to contract both their length and number.

1. Then, let me exhort you to make that your Duty, which Epaphras made his
earnest prayer for the Colossians, That they might stand perfect, and complete
in all the will of God, Colos. 4. 12. Three eminent blessings are comprised in
that pithy Petition; a true and perfect knowledge of the will of God, a sincere
and full obedience unto it, and a firm perseverance in both, as that which sets
the Crown upon each of the others head. Knowledge, is in order to practice and
obedience, as the sculpture in the Seal is made in respect to the stamping of
the wax; and an happy conjunction it is where these two meet; but yet no man is
made complete and perfect thereby, unless he stand fast, and continue therein
unto the end. Whatsoever therefore measure of gifts any of you are arrived
unto, or are enriched with from God; be persuaded to continue with all fidelity
in the doing of his will, that so you may like the good servants in the Gospel,
both give up a joyful account, and receive a blessed reward. But because in
Quintilians elegant comparison, men are as Bottles, which are more readily and
better filled, by taking them in hand one by one, and pouring water into them;
than by setting them together, and casting water upon them: Give me leave to
make my application particularly, according to those distinct capacities in
which you stand, and to speak unto you, as Ministers, as Christians, that so I
may the more effectually press this Duty upon you.

First, You who are Ministers, Guides and Leaders of the people of God, who
sound the silver Trumpet of the Gospel, as the Priests under the Law did
theirs, to animate Believers to fight the good fight, and to keep the faith;
take heed that levity and inconstancy be not found in your Doctrine, or in your
Example, which like a root of bitterness, will quickly spread to the defiling
of many. If you deliver sometimes one thing as the undoubted truth of God, and
another time, what is flatly contrary unto it, will not this breed Atheism,
rather than Religion? and make you, who build again the things you once
destroyed, to be Transgressors, Gal. 2. 28. Is not this the way to bring
reproach upon your persons, that Demetrius like, ye make rather a trade and
craft of your profession, than any conscience to God, by whom you are
betrusted? Is not this to be a stumbling block to the weak, and to overthrow
their faith, whom you should strengthen? Is not this to proclaim to the World,
that you care not what becomes of those souls for whom Christ dyed, and for
whom you must give an account? It is not a small sin in any, but in you it is a
signal crime; it is as a spot in an Ephod, as a crack in the golden Bells of
Aaron, as impure oil in the lamp of the Sanctuary. O therefore let not Christ,
for whom you ought to suffer reproach, be reproached by you! He can make up all
your sufferings, by turning your Thorns into Crowns, your shame into glory; but
what recompense can you make to him, for the injuries done by you to him, and
his Truth? If you should unsay all again, who would believe you? If you should
throw down your self at the Threshold of the Church, and bid them trample upon
you as unsavory salt, how few will either spare you, or pity you? If you do
recover the lost peace of your conscience, yet how hardly will you regain your
name? If Simon be once a Leper, the name will stick by him when the disease
has left him. Though he show himself to the Priest, and be pronounced clean;
though it be known to all that he is as free of it as themselves, yet he is
like to carry the name of Simon the Leper with him to his grave, Matthew. 26. 6.
Enemies who watch for your haltings, if they have nothing at present that they
can charge upon you, are apt upon all occasions to reproach you with former
failings. Let us then Brethren, practice faithfulness, as well as preach it,
and keep the mystery of the faith in a pure conscience, that so we may approve
our selves to be the servants of Christ, and such as seek not worldly
advantages, but to save both our selves and others.

Secondly, You who are Christians, As you have received Christ Jesus the Lord,
so walk in him, rooted and built up in him, and stablished in the faith, as you
have been taught, Col. 2. 6, 7. Be not Scepticks in Religion, so as to hold
nothing at all, which is utterly repugnant unto faith: Toll assertiones, and
Christianismum sustulisti: Take away (says Luther) principles to be asserted,
and you destroy Christianity; neither be you Changlings in your faith;
Christians only upon the light grounds of fancy, but upon the sure grounds of
knowledge and evidence; understand what you believe, and then cleave unto it,
as David's soul did unto Jonathan. O it is the glory of Christians, to keep that
good thing which is committed unto them, so as not to have it won from them by
flatteries, or extorted from them by threatenings, or to be disputed out of it
by Sophisms. And here, how might I take up a complaint, that this Crown of
glory is fallen from our head, where multitudes of Professors have made such
defections from the Truth, as former Ages cannot parallel! What Article of the
faith has not openly been questioned, but peremptorily denied? What monstrous
births have been cried up, as the genuine offspring of Gospel Light, when
Satan, without transforming himself into any such likeness, has been the
Parent of them? I shall not offend sober ears in mentioning the blasphemies
that some have uttered, but exhort you in the words of the Apostle, 2 Pet. 3.
17. Ye therefore Beloved, seeing you know these before, beware, lest ye also
being led away with the error of the wicked, fall from your own stedfastness;
which, that you may the better keep and preserve, I shall briefly suggest some
directions that may be useful to effect it, and some Arguments that may
persuade you to the practice of it.

1. If you would be faithful to Christ, be sincere in your profession of him,
make David's prayer and desire to be yours: Let my heart be found in thy
statutes, that I be not ashamed, Psalm. 110. 80. Religion which is begun in
Hypocrisy, will certainly end in Apostasy, which always carries with it
reproach and ignominy. The spring oft-times of a feigned profession promises
much, having in it a verdure and beauty that is fair to the eye, but yet
suddenly withers for want of a root to feed it; who would not have expected
an Harvest from the stony ground, where the seed sown came up so quickly? but
yet that which was the cause of its hasty growth, was the cause also of its
defection, it came up soon, because it had no depth of earth, and it withered
also away for the want of it. I have read a story of two Kings, the one
Matthias King of Hungary, the other, George, King of Bohemia, That upon
difference in a point of Religion, did commence a War that lasted ten years,
and then at length came to this strange agreement, That their two fools should
determine the controversy by fifty-cuffs; who would ever have thought that the
beginning of such an hot contention, could have had such an issue? By the War,
great was the zeal which was pretended to Truth and Religion; but the end
showed how little they valued it, or rather, how much they scorned it: And such
will always be the issue that those make, who take up spiritual duties upon
fleshly principles. Do I (says Paul) purpose according to the flesh, that with
me there should be yea, yea, and nay, nay? 2 Cor. 1. 17. If therefore you would
persevere to the end, let your aims be purely spiritual, and without any
mixture of carnal designs, not making God the object of your worship, and your
selves the end, but him both.

2. If you would hold out to the end, keep firm your union and communion with
Christ, who is the Fountain of all a Christians abilities; in him we can do
every thing, Philip. 4. 13. without him nothing, John 15. 6. Constancy and
fidelity is not (...), but (...); not a moral habit acquired by industry, but a
divine gift and grace communicated unto Believers by Christ, from whom there is
a continual efflux of life and power. A straw is not the stronger by lying upon
a Rock, because the strength of the Rock is inherent in its self, and not
transient; it is a dead, and not a living Rock: But Christ, as he has life and
strength in himself, so has he both for Believers: When therefore you find or
feel any aguish fits of inconstancy creeping upon you, whereby your faith is
shaken, and your love waxes cold; have recourse then forthwith to Christ, and
touch him by the hand of faith, and virtue will go forth from him to heal you,
as it did the woman with the bloody issue, who no sooner touched the hem of his
garment, but she felt in her body that she was healed of that plague, Mark 5.
29.

3. Arm your selves with courage and patience, both to do, and to suffer
whatsoever you may be called unto: Both the branches of Fortitude are necessary
for a Soldier, and they are no less useful for a Christian, who must have a
back of patience to endure all; all hardness, as well as an edge of valor to
set upon all difficulties, and to go through all dangers, not shrinking at
death it self. Those many colors that the Camelion turns it self into,
Aristotle ascribes to extreme fear, which, how true it is, I will not dispute;
but certain it is, That pusillanimity in a Christian, is the great cause of all
that inconstancy which is found in them: Did they fear God much, they would
fear men very little; the true fear of him, would swallow up all the vain fears
of men, as Moses his Rod, did the Rods of the Magitians What made some in the
Primitive Times, who were called Libellatici, to sign the denial of their faith
with their own hand, but fear? What made others, who were named Traditores, to
deliver up the Scriptures into their enemies hand, as a token of their
renouncing of them, but fear? What caused others, who were styled
Thurificantes, to throw incense into the fire, that they might redeem their
lives by such homage performed to the Idols, but fear? Let therefore courage
animated by faith take place in you, and you will readily overcome both frowns
and flatteries, saying, as that noble Martyr in Basil, They can threaten me
with no worse thing than Hell, nor promise me any better thing than Heaven.

4. Make use of the examples of the Prophets and Saints of God, according to
the counsel of the Apostle, James 5. 16. who have fulfilled the commands of
Christ with an undaunted courage, and born the Cross of Christ with an
invincible patience: Examples are oftentimes made use of, as pleas, to justify
the doing of evil, and have also a mortal influence to draw and win others to
practice the like sin. Paul attributes to Peter's dissimulation, a power of
cogency, in making others to do as he did: Why compellest thou the Gentiles to
live as do the Jews? Gal. 2. 14. May they not then be improved, as effectual
helps, in strengthening the hands of others in well-doing, while they behold the
courage and constancy of many, who have trodden the same paths before them? Do
we not read of some, who for Christ's Name have taken joyfully the spoiling of
their goods? Hebr. 10. 34. Of others, Who esteemed the reproach of Christ,
greater riches than the Treasures of Egypt? as Moses did, Hebr. 11. 26. Of
others again, Who were tortured, not accepting of deliverance! Hebr. 1^. 35.
Have we not read of others, who have kissed their chains, who have embraced the
stake at which they were to suffer? Now have not we the same cause to bear
witness unto with them? Have not we the same recompense of reward to encourage
us, which they had? Have not we the same God and Savior to honor, and to
love? Did he not suffer as much for us, as for them? Why then should not we
endeavor to follow them in their steps, and hold fast our confidence unto the
end? They have showed us that poverty, reproaches, sufferings, bonds, and death
it self, which have a ghastly aspect to the eye of the World, are no such
evils, but that a Believer may rejoice in them, and triumph over them; let us
therefore, that we be neither wearied, nor faint in our minds, set before us
the Armies of Saints and Martyrs, that in all Ages, by faith and patience have
inherited the promises.

I shall now make no other supplement to this Application, of persevering in
your fidelity to God, to which you have been both exhorted and directed; but
only a brief addition of two or three Arguments that may persuade to it, as the
Coroms of the whole.

First, God will kindly take, and faithfully remember your constant adherence
to him, and to his Truth; all that you have done, or suffered for him, shall be
registered in his Book, Malachi 3. 16. All your tears that you have shed before
him, shall be put into his Bottle, Psalm. 56. 8. Yea, those things that you have
forgotten, the Lord will remind, Mat. 25. 44. The Saints did not remember the
kindnesses that they had done to Christ, but he tells them how, and when they
did it. The sins of Judah which are written with a pen of Iron, and with the
point of a Diamond, Jer. 17. 1. are not so firmly written, as your services to
God; they are graven upon the Tables of their hearts, but you, and your works,
are writ in his breast; well might the Apostle say, God is not unrighteous,
that he should forget your work and labor of love which ye have showed to his
Name, Hebr. 6. 10. Who then would not serve faithfully such a God, who forgets
none of our services, and remembers none of our sins, Jer. 31. 14.

The second Argument, is that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15. 58. Be ye steadfast,
immovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as you know,
your labor is not in vain in the Lord. As he exactly records all you do, so he
will abundantly recompense every Duty and Act of obedience done by you. A cup
of cold water given to a Disciple, which costs nothing, unless it be the
drawing of it out of the Well, or the taking it up out of the Spring, shall not
want its reward, Matthew. 10. 42. If such mean works be regarded, never question
the greater; go into the Vineyard, and labor, but ask not what shall be thy
wages; it is enough God has said, your labor shall not be in vain; and yet if
you would know, who can tell you? Does not the Scripture say, Eye has not
seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things
which God has prepared for them that love him, 1 Cor. 2. 9. But yet if a weak
and imperfect glimpse of what is laid up for you, and shall certainly be given
to you, would add any strength unto your hands, or make you like Jacob, who
after his vision, went cheerfully on his journey, Genesis 29. 1. Hearken a little
to what I shall in a lisping and stammering way declare, You shall have God
himself to be your Reward, who is infinite in power, and can remove all things
that may hurt or offend; infinite in bounty, and can give all things that may
delight or satisfy; infinite in continuance, and can, and will perpetuate your
blessedness to Eternity, in the fruition of himself; cum quo solo, and de quo
solo, and in quo solo anima intellectualis vere beata est; with whom only, and
in whom only, and through whom only the understanding soul of man finds, and
everlastingly enjoys; as Austin pithily expresses it in his Confessions.

The third Argument to prevail upon you, is, That you serve the Lord Christ,
with whom there is no respect of persons, Coloss. 3. 25. It is Ambrose his
observation, and others of the Ancients also, that the Holy Ghost has
purposely placed Lazarus, that was so poor, in the bosom of Abraham that was
so rich, Luke 16. 22. To teach us, that rich and poor, if found faithful in the
Kingdom of Grace, have an equal interest in the Kingdom of Glory. Do not think,
that because your estate is low, your parts weak, your Talents few, that
therefore God will not regard your person, or accept of your services, as he
will of others, who have a greater measure of gifts and abilities: That which
God eyes, and that which he crowns in his servants, is Truth and Fidelity; the
gifts are his, but the improvement is yours; and if you show the same diligence
that others do, and hold out unto the end, your reward will be as certain, if
not as great as theirs, and your acceptance will be as much. The sacrifice of a
pair of Turtles in the Law, was a sweet savor unto the Lord, as well as the
Bullock, Levit. 1. 17.

A second Application that flows from this Duty of persevering faithful unto
the death, is, the refuting of that fond dotage of the Priscillianists, who
anciently taught, That they might say, or deny, swear, or forswear, so that
they did but adhere to the Truth with their hearts: An opinion it is, which in
difficult and doubtful times, will obtain happily its end, to save the skin from
danger, but will certainly destroy the soul; it makes Religion only a
Pleasure-boat, in which a man may put forth to Sea in a fair and calm season,
but if any gusts or stormy weather should arise, may again forthwith betake
himself to the shore, and not unnecessarily hazard either his person or Vessel:
But how many pieces of the Christian Armor does this effeminate Doctrine make
useless? What need the loins to be girt about with Truth, as opposite either to
Error or Hypocrisy, when the lips and heart may be so differing? Why should
any man put on the breast plate of righteousness in an holy Conversation, if an
external compliance with the worst of vanities, will stand him in better stead?
What cumber and toil must it be for a Believer to take to himself the Shield
of Faith, the Sword of the Spirit, the Helmet of salvation, and to have his
feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel of Peace, if he never need to
fight a stroke, or to make any resistance? What needed Peter to have wept
bitterly, when he denied his Master, as long as his heart and affection were
still toward him? O how unwise were the Martyrs, prodigally to shed their
blood, to expose themselves to the teeth of Beasts, to the flames of fires, to
Racks, to sharp Stakes and Precipices, when they might have gone such an easy
and fair way to Heaven? Euripides the Tragedian (as Aristotle reports) was
questioned for his life, for uttering this Verse in his Hippolytus, (...),
Jurata lingua est, animus injuratus est, The tongue is sworn, but the mind is
unsworn; and the Title of the Accusation was, That he taught the people to
forswear and perjure themselves. What then do such men deserve to suffer, who,
to save a little trouble to the flesh, durst invent such execrable blasphemies,
that carry a repugnancy to the light of nature, and put Christians upon the
doing of that, which men that have not rased out all the characters and
impressions of conscience, cannot but detest and abhor? I should not have
mentioned this old heresy, had it slept quietly in his Grave; but that there
are yet some specters and walking images of it, found in the principles and
practices of many, who can go to Mass for the Music sake, and sit bare out of
civility, because others are uncovered, and all the while reserve their faith
entire unto themselves; but if such fig leaves can hide their nakedness, that
themselves behold it not, yet surely God will find it out, and ask them what is
become of that glorious robe of faith and profession with which they were once
clothed? Let not those then who are followers of Christ, and would be owued by
him as such in the great day, suffer themselves so to be deluded by the arts or
practices of any, as to conceive, that they may cleave to his Truth with their
hearts, and yet dissemble it; yea, gainsay it with their mouths. Has a
Christian more latitude in this respect, than any other Religion whatever? Do
not all people walk every one in the Name of his God? Micah 4. 5. And may a
Christian walk in the name of any god? May he as freely bow in the Temple of
Rimmon, as in the Temple of Christ, and yet be only the servant of Christ? What
mean then those Scriptures, Be not unequally yoked together with unbelievers?
for what fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness? and what communion
has light with darkness? and what concord has Christ with Belial? 2 Cor. 6.
14, 15. So again, Depart ye, depart ye, go ye out from thence, touch no unclean
thing, go ye out of the midst of her, be ye clean, ye that bear the vessels of
the Lord, I^a. 52. 11. Surely these commands of God, must be as vacated and
repealed Statutes, or else they will one day stand as evidences against those,
who presume to take a liberty which God has not allowed, in being present at
Idolatrous Assemblies, and then think they can readily clear themselves from
guilt, by telling others that though they were present in body, they were
absent in spirit, not owning in the least that with their hearts, to which they
seemed to yield an outward compliance: But such shifts, which are more thin
than a Cobweb, are no better than the handkerchief of the adulterous woman,
with which, when she has eaten, she wipeth her mouth, and says, I have done
no wickedness, Prove. 30. 20.

I have now finished what I purposed to speak concerning the Duty enjoined, Be
thou faithful unto death; that which remains, is the promise annexed, And I
will give thee a Crown of life: And is it not pity, that through straits of
time they should be separated in the Sermon, which are coupled together in the
Text? It might happily put an edge upon your affections, and excite you to a
greater measure of diligence, to hear the bounty of Christ unfolded, who makes
all his servants to be no less than sons for love, heirs for birthright, and
crowned Kings for dignity; and yet when I assay to do it, I am, methinks, as a
man standing upon a Rock, and fathoming a deep and bottomless Sea, who after he
has let fall his sounding lead, forthwith calls for more line, and when a
second and third addition is made, still calls, more line, more line, and at
last falls from sounding, to admiring its unsearchable depth: And so must I,
after I have uttered all the conceptions that men and Angels can furnish me
with to express the riches of Christ's love, call still for more, and then end
in astonishment, and say with the Apostle, O the riches of God! yet if you will
see somewhat of it, I shall in a few particulars show you his bounty, by
comparing it with those services which he crowns.

1. The reward promised, is perfect blessedness; it is life that cannot end in
death; it is not like Adams in innocence, who was left free to stand, or to
fall; it is a Crown without, and above a Cross; it is a Canaan, not flowing
with milk, but with rivers of joy and pleasure, which are free from mixture
that may debase, and from vanity, which may make them naufeous: But alas! how
imperfect are all our services which are thus rewarded? when laid in the
balance, they are found too light; when tried by the touchstone, they are of a
course alloy. If Gospel sincerity did not stand for legal perfection, if
endeavors and desires did not pass for performances, what would become of the
best of Saints? Is it then not matter of just wonder, that such services which
the Law would not forgive, Christ should reward? If they were perfect, they
were but our Duty, and could not deserve the least degree of glory; no more
than a glowworm for its shining, could challenge to be turned into a star; and
yet now when spotted, they are crowned with life.

2. The reward promised is a manifold good: In the Proposition it appears as
some one particular thing, but in the enjoyment it is eminently a manifold,
yea, an infinite good, and comprehends blessings more for number, as well as
greater for worth, than the heart of man could wish to it self, if it should
spend an eternity in nothing else. What is it that a Crown of life does not
take in, and encircle within its compass? It contains all the thoughts of God
from everlasting to make his chosen happy; it includes all the good which
Christ by his blood and death has purchased, and which the Spirit by his
Office is to apply, and to assure us of: But how small is the number of our
services, when our Omissions exceed our Duties, when our ignorance of Gods will
is more than our knowledge, and our backwardness to do it more than our
diligence: We cannot say of our acts of obedience, as David speaks of the
thoughts of Gods love unto us, How great is the sum of them? If I should count
them, they are more in number than the sand, Psalm. 139. 17, 18. Alas! if our
prayers, tears, fastings, alms, mortifications of sin, acts of worship, were
all summed up, their number would be, like the few Trees of a Forest, which a
child may write, Isa. 10. 19. like two or three Berries in the top of the
uttermost Bough of the Olive Tree, and four or five in the outmost fruitful
branches thereof, Isa. 17. 6. like a thin Harvest, which fills not the arm of
the Reaper, much less the threshingfloor: Is it not then riches of mercy, which
rewards such persons, whose sins are numberless, and whose duties are few?

3. The promised reward is an endless good: Our work has an end, but our wages
has no end; the seed-time in which we sow is short, but the harvest which we
rep is eternal: We are faithful only to death, but we are blessed for ever; if
we lived as many years as Methuselah lived days, yea, as the World has stood
minutes, in an exact and perfect doing of the will of God, we could never
justly have asked, that our recompense should be eternal? And yet, what no
creature could ever plead, Christ has freely given unto us, for a few years,
shall I say, or a few days service? Oh how willingly would I expatiate my self
in this pleasing Theme to make you and my self sensible of this transcendent
goodness and bounty of Christ who rewards services, which are for their nature
imperfect, for their number few, and for their continuance short, with a Crown
of endless glory: But I must break off, and leave you to admire.

I come now (as it will be expected) to speak of our Reverend Brother, and
servant of Christ, whose death has occasioned this sad meeting; and I could
have wished, that this task might have been managed by some more able hand, he
being a Subject meet to exercise, both the tongue and pen of a skilful Workman:
And yet what need I to make such a wish? when he was never ambitious of a
Panegyric, being far more desirous to do well, than to hear well; and to have
his works to praise him in the Gate, than an Orator in the Desk; and to live
rather in the hearts of men, than in their mouths: A Crown of breath is a poor
and low end for any man to design to himself, in what he does; but far more in
a Minister, whose aim should be heavenly, as well as his work: I shall not
therefore make it my drift, so much to commend him, as to recommend to you some
things which were observable in him, so as to make him a real pattern to us all
for our imitation.

1. He was exemplary in faithfulness: I may say of him, as the Apostle does of
Gaeius, the second Epistle of John, ver. 5. Thou do faithfully whatsoever
thou do; as a friend he was faithful in his love, being such a friend (as
Solomon says) loves for ever, Prove. 17. 17. As a Minister, he was faithful and
persevering in the Truth, his Doctrine was not yea and nay, but in Christ yea;
and in his sickness, he more than once professed, that he was so fully
persuaded of those Gospel Truths which he had both preached and practiced, as
that he should willingly live and dye in the acknowledgment of them: As an
Husband and Parent he was faithful, being careful about their welfare, but not
distrustful. As a Subject he was faithful to his Prince, and was upon that
account a Sufferer as well as others, because he would neither mingle nor
meddle with those who were given to change, but did fear God and the King.

2. He was exemplary in his diligence in the work of his Ministry; in which, I
think, he exceeded many, but fell short of none; his work was pleasing to him,
and he had much rather sweat in the Vineyard, than stand idle in the Market
place; the constant labor and pains which he did therein undergo, were such,
as were beyond his strength, and laid the foundation of those distempers which
did first break, and then ruin that firm habitude of body, which he seemed to
have above many of his Brethren.

3. He was exemplary in an holy and blameless Conversation: It is the saving of
one, That if any men were born without original sin, they should be Ministers;
if any could live without actual sin, they should be Ministers; if there were
any venial sin, it should not be in Ministers; so exceedingly is purity
requisite to that Office: I do not speak this, as if I would thereby exempt him
from any infirmities of the flesh, which the best of Saints do both find and
feel: But yet I cannot but tell you, what I had from himself, That it was above
thirty years since it pleased God to bring him to the sight of his sins, and
his need of a Savior, and to bow his heart to the obedience of his will, and
that since that time (through the grace of God) his conscience did not accuse
him of any scandalous and gross sin, which might blemish his Profession, or
^^and Religion. I speak it not (says he) to boast of mine innocence, but
thankfully to bless God who has kept me, who else should have fallen as well
as others: And if it be an honor to be in Christ before others, as Paul makes
it to be, Romans 16. 7. So it is a great glory and comfort to a Believer, to be
Mnasons in the faith, and to be kept from those slips and falls which have
brought down the hoary heads of many Christians with sorrow unto the Grave.

In his sickness, which was at least nine or ten months, there were many things
worthy of our knowledge and remembrance.

1. That quiet and calm frame of heart which he enjoyed in that part of his
weakness, wherein his friends and himself were not without some hopes of his
recovery; he then told me, That he enjoyed more peace and serenity of
conscience, than ever he expected; and though he had no glorious comforts, yet
had he no sad and discouraging fears; he could willingly submit himself to the
hand of God, whatever the issues might be.

2. The increase both of his comforts and confidence, when the decays of his
strength were most sensible and visible; as the outward man perished, so the
inward man was renewed, and filled with joy and comfort; as those many
expressions which fell from him did abundantly testify: At one time, when
there was some speech about his weakness, he suddenly break forth in such
affectionate and vehement expressions, as still abide with me, and ring, as it
were, in my ears: I am going to eternity, I am going to eternity, unto the City
of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of
Angels, to the general Assembly and Church of the firstborn, which are written
in Heaven, and to the spirits of just men made perfect, and to God the Judge of
all. Some few days after coming again to visit him, he said, I had thought I
should never have seen you more, so near was I in my own, and others
apprehensions unto death, being not able for some space to discern or see any
body; but my comforts were such, as that I could not have born them, if they
continued in the height in which I then enjoyed them; desirous I was then to
have gone, but if it is Gods pleasure I should stay longer, I am content.

Lastly, His patience was remarkable under many wearisom days and nights, in
which he not only wanted rest, but was afflicted with faint sweats, with pains
in all parts, which drew groans and sighs often from him: These things (says
he) through the weakness of the flesh, will make me to groan, but I do not (I
bless God) repine or murmur: And when his weakness was such, as that he could
not speak much, when I told him I was glad to perceive, that death, though it
was near, was not yet dreadful to him; he forthwith replied, That Christ's death
stood between him and death: And now tell me Brethren, Is he not a fair Copy
for us to write after? May we not by him learn to live holily, and dye
comfortably? It is not meet, that these things mentioned, should (...) be
scattered, as flowers upon his Hearse, but to be as counsels and helps to us in
the like time, which must, and will come, and how soon, who knows! All that I
shall say more, is,

Sic mihi contingat vivere sicque (...). Let it be my lot, yea, all our lots,
Thus to live, and thus to dye. FINIS.

