Surely every Man walks in a vain show: Surely they are disquieted in vain:
He heapeth up riches and knows not who shall gather them, Psalm. 39. 6.
UPON my inward and most retired Thoughts, when I get out from the Hurry,
Business and Company of the World, there does Naturally recur and arise to me
this Subject of Meditation, of the Vanity of Man. What the holy Ghost here
speaks by the Mouth of David, is twice ^rought and ushered in by this Adverb
of Confirma^ion, surely, thereby intimating and giving us to understand, that
the more we know and consider of it; ^he more it does appear to be so, namely,
That Man ^s vain, he walks in a vain show, and he is disquieted ^n vain.

In the Margent, opposite to the Word, vain show; it is an Image. From whence
it may be truly thought, that as an Image now differs from the thing whereof it
is an Image or Representation, so Man in this present state of things differs
from what he will be in the future state of things. Yea, as much as a reality
does exceed and is more than only the Image, Figure, Show or Representation
thereof. So much will Man in the future state of things, exceed Man in this
present state of things. As it is written The holy places made with hands are
the figures of the true, Heb. 9. 24. So it may be believed, and so it will be
found, that the Heavens and the Earth which now are, yea, the whole visible
Creation and all things contained therein made by the Hands of God, his handy
work, Psalm. 19. 1. All these are the Figures of the True, even of which himself
says, The new Heavens and the new Earth which I will make, Isa. 66. 22. And
then all this present state of things, is but a Figure of that true future
state of things, which God will certainly bring in. So that Man at present is
but a Figure or show of what Man will be. Somewhat alike to this, the Scripture
faith, It does not yet appear what we shall be, but we know that when he shall
appear we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is.

If one had only seen the Figure or Show of a thing, and had never seen the
real thing whereof it is a Figure or Show, he would not then so perfectly
apprehend what the real thing it self was, although he might guess at, and
think concerning it. Hence it is that we are so puzzled and at a stand
concerning futurity. We know not what it is, and yet we have great thought and
searching of Heart concerning it. We see indeed some likeness thereof, but not
the thing it self. For we know in part, and we Prophecy in part: For now we
see through a Glass darkly. And so we have some faint and imperfect guesses
before hand concerning futurity, but as to the thing it self, It does not yet
appear what we shall be. But this we believe, that it will be better and more
real than the state we are now in. That I may cause those that love me to
inherit substance, Prove. 8. 21. And so, as much as Substance does exceed
Vanity, so much will the future state of things exceed the present state of
things.

After that Solomon, the Wisest of Men, had taken a survey of the whole lower
Creation, this is the Epiphonema and Burden of his Song, Vanity and Vexation of
Spirit, All is Vanity. And here in our Text, the Father of Solomon, or rather
the holy Ghost by the Mouth of David says, Surely every Man walks in a vain
show. Every Man, even the most Rich or Prosperous Man, as Solomon and David
were, for they speak of their own Experience, as well as from the truth as it
is in others. Although they heap up riches, according to the following words,
which is reckoned the Principal and most Substantial end of Life, yet still
they walk in a vain show.

The word Walk, denotes the constancy thereof, and that it is so for the most
part, even throughout the course of this Life. There is a parallel alike place
unto this, in Psalm. 62. 9. Surely Men of low degree are vanity, and Men of high
degree are a lie, to be laid in the balance they are altogether lighter than
vanity. Which is the most diminutive kind of expressing it.

Certain it is, as to the past time of our Life, It is all but vanity; for as
we consider thoroughly and look back upon it, then it all appears as a Dream
when one awaketh, and almost all one as if it had never been. Even the present
is but just perceived and hastes away. As to the outward Good or Evil,
Pleasure or Pain we have, it is soon over and we are gone. Our Bodies, like
brittle Glass or withering Hay, can be soon broken and dashed in pieces, and
are always Perishing and Dying. And we do all fade as a leaf, Isa. 64. 6. We
are as a Bubble, Shadow or Dream, or by whatever may be conceived the utmost
vanity of things.

By vanity is meant what either s^rves to no purpose, or else seems to serve to
no purpose, and in this latter sense, Man is vanity. For though he was Created
to Serve and Glorify God, which is a great and real end; yet many do neglect
this, and then they are vanity, and it is fulfilled in such what is written,
Nevertheless Man being in honor abides not, but is like the Beasts that
perish, And who do really answer that same good end. Yet through the hidden
Mystery of the Kingdom, and also because they are conversant about unseen
things, they also (for the Flesh is the same of a Saint as of a Sinner) seem as
vanity. Certain it is, that separated from God, Man is the meerest vanity that
ever was. Yet I had planted thee a noble Vine, wholly a right Seed, (that is,
in his relation and tendency unto God his Creator, but if he is one separated
from him) then he is turned into a degenerate Plant of a strange Vine, Jer. 2.
21. Now a degenerate Plant or a strange Vine, elsewhere called, wild Grapes,
Isa. 5. 4. A wild Olive Tree, Romans 11. 17. All these serve to no Goodness, and
bring forth no good Fruit. Even so where Man turns away from, and becomes
forgetful of God, he also serves to no Goodness or Fruit at all, but is a lump
of Flesh just enlivened. A breathing clod of Clay, a Sink and Receptacle of
Filth and Phlegm, a Seed plot of Stink and Corruption, a walking piece of Earth.
Our Text says, He walks in a vain show, or an Image. So he may be styled a
vain walking Statue of Earth.

How should the consideration of these things persuade Man to engage his heart
to approach unto me, says the Lord? Jer 30. 21. And for our Soul to follow
hard after him, and to cleave unto him. Unto him shall the gathering of the
People be, Genesis 49. 10. Even so our Spirits should be gathered up and United to
the Father of Spirits. This being the way to live for ever more, because he
lives we shall live also.

But on the other hand, if Man should be separated from and disowned by God, he
would thereupon become vile, abject and vain. But now the Lord says, Them that
honor me, I will honor, and they that despise me, shall le lightly esteemed,
1 Samuel 2. 30. The Men that have transgressed against me, shall be an abhorring
unto all flesh, Isa. 66. 24. For he knows our Frame, he remembers that we
are but dust. He has so made all Men that as himself says, All their
Excellency, (that is, above the other Creatures) is of me. The Righteous is
more excellent than his Neighbor. So contrariwise, that Man who is without God
in the World: There is not so pitiful and vile a Creature in the World, no not
the most ugly Toad, as he is: For whereas the Beasts perish, he shall after
Death, rise up to everlasting shame and contempt, Dan. 12. 2.

Our Text is chiefly to be understood of the Natural Man alienated from the
Life of God, and who has not the knowledge of God. But it cannot be so truly
said, that the Godly Man is disquieted in vain: For he can and also does cast
his Disquiet and Sorrow upon God. And he has that Faith and Consideration,
that if he heapeth up Riches he knows who shall gather them, that is to say,
that is, Besides providing for his own and those of his own house, 1 Timothy 5. 4.
The Poor shall gather them both in his Lifetime, and also after his Death.

Every Man walks in a vain show. This is to be understood of every Natural
and Ungodly Man, as he is busied only about Earthly things. Certain it is, that
the Natural and Ungodly Man does more walk in a vain show, than the Spiritual
and Godly Man does, for he has some certain proposed end, and is conversant
about real things, even the things pertaining to the Kingdom of God, whilst the
other is only employed about vain things, which cannot profit nor deliver, for
they are vain. All this World is but vanity; so that all they must necessarily
walk in a vain show, who do not terminate their thoughts and doings beyond this
World, who do not in Mind and Heart enter within the vail, where indeed and
only is the substance of things hoped for. For the Creature was made subject to
vanity, not willingly, but by reason of him who has subjected the same in
hope, Romans 8. 21. From hence it may be truly gathered, that the Creature which
is now made subject to vanity, is in hope to be translated, changed and
delivered into a more real and much better state of things. And then Man who
now on this Earth walks in a vain show, will abide (that is to say, such who
shall be accounted worthy, Luke 21. 36.) in a glorious and substantial State.
For so it stands according to the method and appointment of God, that Vanity is
in order to Reality, the Figure or Show goes before the thing Figured and
Showed. And Perfection is to succeed Imperfection, and Mortality will be
swallowed up of Life, and Incorruption is to follow after this state of
Corruption here: And so likewise Eternity is to succeed Time. Thus the Works of
God are worthy of himself: For as the Psalmist says, Remember how short my
time is, Wherefore have thou made all Men in vain? Now if God should have made
all Men and all things in vain, this would not have seemed (with reverence be
it spoken and conceived) so befitting an alwise God, for it is an essential
part of Wisdom, not to do things in vain. But when he does things first in a
vain state, in order to lead and raise them up from thence into a substantial
state, this raises the highest admiration of the Wisdom of the Agent, O Lord,
how glorious are thy works, in Wisdom have thou made them all.

It is now an usual thing with Artificers or Builders, first to draw the
Platform or Model of what they intend to build and make. In like manner it may
be conceived, that he who built all things (now he who built all things, is
God) did create the Heavens and the Earth and all the things that therein are,
as a Platform or Model of the new Heavens and the new Earth which he will make.

If we could now have such lively Thoughts and Apprehensions of the new Heavens
and new Earth and of the things contained therein, as we shall then have a
sense and feeling and open sight thereof in the future state, all one as we now
have of the things in this present state, then by reason of the so much
exceeding Greatness, Duration and Reality of those future things, we should be
otherwise affected and concerned as to them, then now we are. Even whilst our
Body is on this Earth, our Conversation would be in Heaven, and our Mind would
be always there. And like as Strangers and Pilgrims when they are from ^ome in
another Country, their mind runs still or for the most part on home, even
whilst they are in the strange and distant place. In like manner if we did
confess our selves to be Pilgrims and Strangers on the Earth, Heb. 11. 13. Our
Thoughts, Mind and Desire would be wholly taken up about Heaven and Futurity.
Who then much minds the Figure or Picture, when he has before him the thing
Figured or Pictured? Then it will appear, that the things which are now
visible, are as the Figure or Show; and only what things are now invisible,
they are the Realities: While we look not at the things which are seen, but at
the things which are not seen, for the things which are seen are Temporal, but
the things which are not seen, are Eternal. It may now be so brought to pass by
the Word of Faith which we Preach, which speaks of those things that be not
as though they were, and warns of things not seen as yet Heb. 11. 7. That the
things which now are not seen, might be rendered intelligible unto our Souls,
all one as the things now sensible are to our outward senses. But People are so
settled on the lees and sunk down and immersed into sensuality and the cares
and concernments of this Life, that they are not altogether so much and so
continually thoughtful about the other as they should be. Here again our Duty
to God and care for our Immortal Soul teaches, rather to renounce things
present as much as possible, that we may think and act more after the things to
come. It is Sin and Sensuality that do now eclipse, overshadow as with a Cloud
and darken the Soul, and hinders from the sight and light of the suture eternal
things. Although we do Daily, yea every Hour and Minute press nearer and nearer
unto them. The more we think of those suture eternal things, the more we are
convinced of the vanity and littleness of all present things. These are now
heightened in expectation and imagination, but when we know the utmost of them,
then they do clearly appear to be vain. They are not only vain, but also they
soon pass away; so that the vanity is also infolded in the transitoriness of
them. It they were real and substantial good things, yet they ought not to be
much esteemed or sought after, because they do soon pass away and come to
nothing.

Hence does appear forth the truth of the following words, Surely they are
disquieted in vain: For People are disquieted about things which properly
should not disquiet them at all; and also the matter and cause of their grief
so soon passes away, that upon this account it should not disquiet them. All
Sorrow and Disquiet should be indeed turned into Sorrow and Disquiet for Sin.
We should walk softly all the residue of our Years in the bitterness of our
Soul, because we have sinned against the Lord, the Habitation of Justice, the
Hope of our Fathers, and this only would not be to be disquieted in vain,
according to what is written, Now I rejoice, not that ye were made sorry but
that ye sorrowed to repentance: for ye were made sorry after a godly manner,
that ye might receive damage by us in nothing. For godly sorrow works
repentance to salvation not to be repented of: but the sorrow of the world
works death. For behold this self-same thing that ye sorrowed after a godly
sort, what carefulness it wrought in you, yea, what clearing of your selves,
yea, what indignation, yea, what fear, yea, what vehement desire, yea, what
zeal, yea, what revenge: in all things ye have approved your selves to be clear
in this matter, 2 Cor. 7. From all which it appears that Godly Sorrow, or such
Sorrow which arises toward God, because of having sinned against him, is not
Sorrow or Disquiet in vain; for it produces all these real good Effects
aforementioned. But the Apostle there says, The sorrow of the world works
death. So all Sorrow which arises merely from the things of this World, is to
be disquieted in vain. As it is elsewhere written, Notwithstanding in this
rejoice not, that the Spirits are subject unto you, but rather rejoice because
your names are written in Heaven. So this should be the standard and measure of
all our Sorrow and Vexation; to be sorry or vexed only for such things which
hinder our going and entrance into Heaven; and that is Sin committed, or Sin
remaining unpardoned, or the oppositions temptations and hindrances of Satan.
Hear what Jesus Christ says, Let not your heart be troubled, ye believe in
God; believe also in me. So let not thy Soul be vexed or disquieted within
thee; although thou art in Prison or Poverty, or in pining Sickness, or near to
Death it self: For all these put together cannot make thee utterly miserable,
unless God has forsaken thee, and withdrawn his Mercy and Loving Kindness from
thee. But be thou troubled and disquieted in good earnest, Weep and Howl for
your miseries that shall come upon you, If thou art in a state of Sin, and it
has dominion over thee; for this will really consign thee over and sink down
into everlasting Punishment. All our rejoicing and disquiet should hence be,
according as we apprehend from true signs and evidences whether God be in
favor or is displeased, Isa. 59. 15. with us. As aforementioned, Man and all
things separated from God, is the meerest and utmost vanity: So here if it was
not in Relation to God, there is nothing in all the World, worthy to be
disquieted about, no more than it becomes a Man to groan or cry for the
scratching of a Pin. In truth, considering the perpetual Flux of time, which is
always carrying and forcing us off from the Stage of this Earth, however we
take it in good or evil part, whether we are pleased or displeased thereat, yet
away we must: So that it is not much matter in which of the two tempers of
Mirth or Sorrow, Contentment or Vexation we are in. But this ought to be most
minded and cared for, whether we Sin or not, and how much good we do; for this
is not to be concerned or disquieted in vain, in that it does tend to realities
in the end. They that have done good, shall come forth to the Resurrection of
Life; and they that have done evil, to the Resurrection of Damnation.

Wherefore Brethren, give all diligence to make your Calling and Election sure.
Heaven is so exceeding and eternal a good, that it can never be made too sure
off. Here as Solomon says, In the multitude of counselors there is safety,
holds true in things pertaining to future and endless Life, all one as in
things of this present Life. In the multitude of Godly Books and Sermons there
is safety in order to instruct or exhort or put in mind of any thing to make
sure of that blessed Place. The Wisdom of God has said and ordained, For
precept must be upon precept, precept upon precept, line upon line, line upon
line, here a little and there a little, Isa. 28. 10. And as the Scriptures were
given by inspiration of God to make us Wise unto Salvation, so every thing
which is truly opened and alleged from thence (as I do this day in what I
write and publish unto the World) does also pertain and help to the same great
and good end.

But this is one difference between the formal Worshipper and the real
Christian. The first thinks it an easy thing to make sure of Heaven, and that
it is presently done; like Saul who did say to Samuel, Blessed art thou of the
Lord, I have performed^ the Commandment of the Lord, So such are apt to flatter
and deceive their own Souls, as if they were fit for Heaven. And like the Young
Man in the Gospel. All these have I kept from my youth up, what lack I yet? As
to both of which the answer of God by his Son and Prophet does point out
somewhat further and more to be done. What means then this bleating of the
Sheep in mine ears, and the lowing of the Oxen which I hear? What mean those
unmortified Sins and carnal Passions and Lustings after evil things? And so it
ye were indeed perfect and fit for Heaven, ye would sell all that ye had and
give to the poor: Ye would part with all the Guilt and Corruption that is in
your Nature, not only the actual breakings forth of Sin, but even the
inclinations and tendences to Sin or Evil; for as long as there remain any of
them in the Body, in the Sight and Acceptance of God, ye are not fit for
Heaven. For flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God; neither shall in
any wise enter into it any thing that defiles. As long as we are on this
Earth, which is the place of warfare and waiting, No people are absolutely fit
for Heaven; but still there is somewhat more and further to be done for it. As
long as we have time, so there is space given us for Repentance, Rev. 2. 21.
And to renit yet better and better, to perfect our works, Rev. 3. 2. Yet more
and more, that they may shine unto perfect Day, even till the breaking forth of
the Day of Immortality. As long as we are on this Corrupt Earth, and sinful
sinning Body, we are never holy enough to meet with and appear before the holy
God, but still as long as we have life and being, so ought we to be still a
doing according to the Exhortation which speaks on this wise, Having
therefore these promises (dearly beloved) let us cleanse our selves from all
filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God. Blessed
are the pure in heart for they shall see God. So we are still to be upon the
cleansing and purifying Work, according to what is commanded, Wash ye, Make ye
clean. So is the mind and endeavor of the true Servants of God, even of the
Elect and such that shall Obtain, Unto which promise our twelve Tribes
instantly serving God day and night hope to come, Acts 26. 7. Thy God whom thou
servest continually, Dan. 6. 16. Without more intermission or weariness than
what is necessary; such Service has the favor and acceptance of God. And so
the Apostle Paul says, Not as though I had already attained, either were
already perfect, I follow after, if that I may apprehend that for which also I
am apprehended of Christ Jesus. Brethren I count not my self to have
apprehended (and so he did not think himself fit for Heaven) but this one thing
I do, forgetting those things that are behind, and reaching forth unto those
things which are before. This Blessed Saint did take more pains for Heaven than
any Christians now a Days, and much less formal Worshippers can pretend unto.
He says thus of himself, That three Years he did not cease to warn every one
night and day with Tears. The consideration whereof is said to have made
Chrysostom (who was also a labourer and not a loyterer in God's Harvest as is
the manner of too many in these days) to tremble because of his own remisness
and negligence in the Work of the Ministry compared with that. The same Apostle
was in labors more abundant, in watchings, in fastings, in imprisonments and
tumults. Truly and in good earnest, all that ever a poor Mortal Creature can
do, putting forth all his strength, employing all his time, using and exerting
all that is within and without him, is little enough to obtain Heaven.

If it were not for this real and great end, all Men's doings are in vain: For
nothing remains in a Man but what he does in the Service of God, and for the
good of his own Soul. The world passes away and the lust thereof, but he that
does the will of God, abides for ever. All other Acts and Actions perish in
the using, and at length come to an utter end, and signify nothing at last. It
is to be disquieted in vain, and to be cumbred about many things in vain, and
for the people to labor in the very fire, and to weary thmeselves for very
vanity, Heb. 2. 13. And whereas the Prophet does before ask the question, Is it
not of the Lord of Hosts that people do thus? Thereby is imported forth, that
the Lord does leave them and withdraw himself from them, and then they do
labor in the very Fire, and weary themselves for very vanity: Which confirms
what was aforesaid; that although Man indeed is a noble Creature, wholly a
right Seed, considered in his Relation to God, yet separated from and forsaken
by God, he is the meerest vanity that can be. Surely every Man walks in a
vain show: Surely they are disquieted in vain: He heapeth up riches and knows
not who shall gather them.

As it is said in the Book of Job, that upon the Death of a Man, his Sons come
to honor and he knows it not. So we may give a guess how things will be
after our Decease, all one as we may of the time to come whilst we are in Life
(The like has been fulfilled in our Brethren of the same Condition,
Circumstances and Years) yet we know not exactly how it will be. As to our own
forecasts concerning futurity, most commonly it happens contrary, but always
otherwise than we think, or imagine before hand. Foreknowledge is the pecular
Attribute of God who knows all things: But it is not for us Creatures to know
the things to come. But we have heard with our Ears, and our Fathers have told
us, and we have read of several Examples of those who have heaped up Riches and
knew not who should gather them. For after that they have been Dead, it may be
their greatest Enemies, and those whom they whilst living would not speak a
good and kind word unto, nor give them so much as a Cup of cold Water; and yet
either by being next of Kin the right of Inheritance did devolve unto them, or
by the contention and decision of the Law, some way or other it has fallen
unto them. There is somewhat alike to this said in Luke 12. The ground of a
certain rich Man brought forth plentifully. And he thought within himself,
saying, What shall I do because I have no room where to bestow my fruits, And
he said, this will I do, I will pull down my barns and build greater, there
will I bestow all my fruits and my goods. And I will say to my Soul, Soul, thou
have much goods laid up for many years, Take thine ease, eat, drink, and be
merry. And God said unto him, thou fool, this night thy Soul shall be required
of thee: Then whose shall those things be which thou have provided? So is he
that lays up treasure for himself, and is not rich toward God. Whose shall
those things be which thou have provided? And so he heapeth up Riches and
knows not who shall gather them. They come near to the same sense and
signification. It is certain, that those things which he has provided, and the
Riches he has heaped up, are no longer his when once his Soul is required of
him; and then he knows not who shall gather them. And whereas that excellent
and useful Truth is afterward added, So is he that lays up treasure for
himself and is not rich toward God. From all this laid and considered
together, it appears that the heaping up riches (which signifies the abundance,
plenty and superfluities of them) is not the proper end of Life. Indeed every
one ought to be honest and diligent in his Calling, and to provide for his own
House. But says the Lord Jesus, Take heed and beware of Covetousness, for a
Man's life consists not in the abundance of the things which he possesses.
So if a Man can have the necessaries and comforts of Life, by doing that (and
that only) which is Lawful and Right, to such the promise is, His Soul shall
live. If he can bring the World about and pay every one his own. If he has
neither poverty nor riches, but is fed with food convenient for him, Such an
one whilst he fears and serves God and fulfils all righteousness, shall be more
happy and blessed in the end, than he that heapeth up Riches and knows not
who shall gather them, or than he that lays up goods for many Years and is not
rich toward God.

The reason and end of things is to be considered. Wherefore is it that any one
desires Riches? If he be one who loves God with all his Heart, and with all his
Strength, and with all his Soul, and with all his Mind and who understands
thoroughly the things pertaining to his Kingdom. Then it is, because he would
Honor the Lord with his Substance, because he would approve himself as a good
Steward of the manifold gifts of God. For so much as we have, so much we are
accountable for. Let him that stole, steal no more, but rather let him labor,
working with his hands the thing which is good, that he may have to give to him
that needs, Ephesians. 4. 28. Hence it appears, that even in the labor of our
Hands which is to subminister the necessaries of Life, somewhat out of that
should be afforded to Alms and good Works: Much more a larger Portion should be
expended toward the same end out of the Plenty and Superfluities of Life. Yea,
whatever is more than the necessity and conveniences of each Family, the same
belongs to the Poor, and is their due. Whereupon showing mercy to the Poor is
called Righteousness, Dan. 4. 27. The more Riches or Money any one has
committed unto him in this Life, proportionably a demand and account will be
required of him at the Day of Judgment, whether he has expended accordingly
for the relief of the Poor, and for the maintenance of good works, Titus 3. 8.
As it is written, Obey them that have the rule over you, for they watch for
your Souls, as they that must give an account. So it may be truly said to every
one who has, or to whom this Worlds Goods are committed, do thou so use,
expend and distribute them forth, as thou that must give account thereof. That
time will come, even upon the Death of each one, Give an account of thy
Stewardship, for thou may be no longer Steward. And it being afterward
commanded, And I say unto you, Make to your selves friends of the mammon of
unrighteousness, that when ye fail, they may receive you into everlasting
habitations. For we brought nothing into this World, and it is certain that we
can carry nothing out. So in the Day of our Death, and from thence forward
throughout all eternity, we shall have no benefit of our Money or the Riches we
had in this Life, but of what we gave to the Poor, or distributed toward the
maintenance of good Works.

For my part, as I have a God to serve and a Soul to have (which I desire as
much to have saved as any Man living) In that little Money which falls into my
hands, (for the World hates me, because I testify of it that the works
thereof are evil. If ye were of the World, the World would love his own)
Besides the necessaries of Life provided for, the same is the constant thought
of my Heart, and endeavor of my Hands, so to expend the greater part thereof,
as that I must give account thereof before God, and so that I may give up a
good account of my Stewardship, and that it may be most acceptable and pleasing
in the sight of the Lord, and that I may receive a full reward, 2. John 8. Even
the Reward of such who have done the best works.

Now of good Works there is a twofold sort, either outward Alms which is a
temporal kindness to the dying Body. And seeing that we have this treasure in
Earthen Uessels, and by the good health and temperament of our Body, we are
better enabled to serve God, and to follow the Duties of our respective
Callings. And they would Languish, Sicken and Die without necessary Food and
Raiment: So that the Subministring of these to the Person who really wants them
is a very great good, in that it does preserve Life. But yet as the Apstle
says, Covet earnestly the best gifts, and yet show I to you a more excellent
way, 1 Cor. 12. 31. As much as the Soul is better and a more enduring Substance
than the Body, so what does good immediately unto the Soul, is proportionably a
better Work, than what is a temporal kindness unto the dying Body. Hereupon the
words of eternal Life, are better than Money or Food, for the former are all
one necessary to the feeding and nourishing up of the Soul unto eternal Life,
all one as Meat and Drink are necessary unto temporal Life. According to what
David says by the Spirit, which same Spirit gave him the Faith and Knowledge
of the future and invisible things of God, The Law of thy mouth is better unto
me then thousands of Gold and Silver, Psalm. 119. 72. So that the making known
thy Truth, Isa. 38. 19. Or the words of eternal Life, and the multiplying the
Copies thereof, is consequently the Best of works, as much as the Soul is
better than the Body.

Indeed in this ignorant, but more especially Corrupt World (where we know in
part) things do appear differently unto Christians, although they all pretend
to walk by the same Rule of the Scriptures. Yet forasmuch as many called
Christians, (who seem to be Religious and to make a fair show in the Flesh)
have a secret inward enmity against Publishing the Word and Truth of God, for
the same and alike Reasons, as the Pharisees did take Counsel to put Christ to
Death, Because they perceived that he had spoken the Parable against them. Even
so such apprehend, that the Word Spoken or Published is against some of their
own sinful, Corrupt or Hypocritical doings; therefore they conceive beforehand
an enmity toward, and afterward an opposition or Persecution against it, and
They do not receive the Love of the Truth, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10. Nor will they do any
thing for it. But for my part though I cannot as yet so fully say as I could
wish for, that I have made my Heart clean, nor have all my doings as yet been
perfectly conformable to that great and complete Rule of Righteousness in
Scripture, For in many things we offend all. And the Scripture is against some
of my doings: which I desire to cease from once before I die, and to bring them
all, yea every Word and Thought in me unto a conformity and agreeableness unto
all the Words of God's Law; for I believe and tremble, that The Wrath of God is
revealed from Heaven against all un^ighteousness of Men. Which word
Unrighteousness signifies what is a variation from the great Rule of
Righteousness aforementioned. Yet nevertheless I am so far from conceiving an
Enmity, Opposition, or Persecution against that form of sound words in
Scripture or any of them, that I can do nothing against the Truth, but for the
Truth. And considering in my Mind the exceeding preciousness and necessity of
the Truth in order to bring others and my self unto eternal Life, (it being
equally necessary for that end, as Meat and Drink to keep and preserve temporal
Life; as eternal Life is much beyond and better than this present temporal
Life, yea more then Ten Thousand fold, here to allude unto those words of the
Apostle, Yet I had rather speak five words with my understanding, that by my
voice I might teach others also, than ten thousand words in an unknown tongue.
In like manner if I had so much Money, I had rather bestow five Pounds toward
the Publishing of God's eternal Truth, which is to feed up the Soul unto
eternal Life, then Ten Thousand Pounds to feed the Poor, that is, to feed their
Bodies only. Or suppose I had wherewithal and I did bestow five Pounds toward
the Publishing of God's eternal Truth, and also I did indeed bestow Ten
Thousand Pounds toward feeding of the Poor; yet I should have more expectation
of a better Reward from God for the five Pounds expended that way, than from
the Ten Thousand Pounds distributed the other way; because of the so much more
Excellency and Preciousness of Truth, which is for the saving of the Soul, over
outward Alms which is only for feeding of the Body.

It is the Command of God, Buy the Truth and sell it not, also Wisdom,
Instruction, and Understanding. For should not People lay out their Money to
help forwards the saving of their Souls as the Truth does? Yet contrariwise
People do day after day buy Meat and Drink to feed their Bodies, but they
grudge and will not lay out their Money for such Books wherein are contained
the Words of Truth, which are requisite and necessary to feed up the Soul unto
eternal Life, and to make it prepared for the Lord; all one as Meat and Drink
are necessary to nourish and keep the Body in Life. The reason why People do
not alike in one Case as in the other, is, besides that enmity against the
Truth, which is a Root of bitterness springing up and troubling them, and
thereby many are defiled, Heb. 12. 15. Because also they are not alike sensible
of the necessity of the Truth to the saving of the Soul, as they are sensible
of the necessity of Food in order to feed the Body. But when that time is come
which hasteneth upon all us living, when now Meat is for the Belly and the
Belly for Meats, but God shall destroy both it and them. The Grass withers,
The Flower fades (and so all material visible things come to an utter end, and
shall be no more at all) but the word of our God shall stand for ever; Then
shall ye return and discern of what necessity the knowledge of the Truth would
have been to the saving of your Souls, much more than ye can now discern in
these Days of your flesh; and ye will then be more sensible of that reproof of
the Spirit of God, Wherefore do you spend Money for that which is not Bread,
and your labor for that which satisfies not? Isa. 55. 2. Wherefore do People
spend all their Money for that Bread which was only for the support of this
dying Life; whereas it it is his requiring also that they should Consecrate
their gain unto the Lord, and their substance toward the Lord of the whole
Earth, Micah 4. 13. And toward the making known his Truth. Even then at the
very time of receiving, it might be perceived, that the outward Bread, though
indeed it did feed the Body, yet it did not satisfy the Soul, and so it was
not Bread to the Soul, as it was to the Body. Man does not live by Bread only,
but by every word that proceeds out of the Mouth of the Lord does Man live.
By the Word of God the Soul is to live eternally. This is that Bread which
comes down from Heaven, not as your Fathers did eat Manna and are Dead (and so
they that have what can be desired for Food and Raiment, must die) He that
eats of this Bread shall live for ever. Now we are taken up chiefly if not
wholly with things sensible, then we shall be let into things Spiritual; and
they will by their remaining always before us be then the whole of our
Thoughts, although perhaps now it be none or the least of all. It will be the
Question and Reproof in the state of Eternity, Why People did in the Days of
their Flesh bestow their labor for that which satisfies not. The Scene will
then change, things will then appear opposite and contrary to what they do now.
O thou that dwell upon many Waters, abundant in Treasures, thine end is come
and the measure of thy Covetousness, Jer. 51. 13. Then it will appear how
little it does sifnifie to have heaped up Riches and gotten Gain, or to have
been Cumbred about many things, when one thing was needful and we should have
chosen the better part which would not have been taken from us, now all other
things shall fail. Then also it will most eminently and clearly appear, how
that Man did throughout this Life on Earth walk in a vain show: And he
disquieted himself in vain: He heapeth up Riches and knows not who shall
gather them.

There is somewhat alike to this in Hab. 2 6. Woe to him that increases that
which is not his. How long? And to him that ladeth himself with thick clay. O
that such People would consider of this, who make it their main and principal
end of Life and consume almost all their time in getting of Money or Riches.
They know not, or are not sensible of as much, or at least they do not take
such warning so as to refrain, how that the Spirit of God does pronounce a Woe
against them. To Build and another shall Inhabit, or to Plant and another shall
eat the Fruit thereof, is according to the Curse of God in the Book of
Deuteronomy; as also it is a Discouragement, Vexation and Disquiet to the
Creature in its seeking and laboring thereafter. That increases that which is
not his. Ay, but says the Creature it is mine when I have it. To which the
Answer of God presently and immediately succeeds How long? That is, How long
will it be before it is taken from thee? Or how long will it be before thou
shall be taken from it? One Day will certainly come when it shall be no longer
his, when he shall be dislodged from this Tenement of Clay (that is, the Body)
and then he can no longer lade himself with thick Clay, that is, heap up Silver
or Gold. Let People be never so much Busied or Employed in heaping up Riches or
getting Estates, yet the Forty Ninth Psalm lies express against them, For when
he dies, he shall carry nothing away, his Glory shall not descend after him.
By reason that Death is to succeed and shut up all, Therefore Man walks in a
vain show: Surely they are disquieted in vain: He heapeth up Riches and knows
not who shall gather them.

Ask now the Generations that were before thee in the World, who are now
actually gone off from the Stage of this Earth: And does not their Life here
appear to be a vain show, and they seem to have been disquieted in vain. As
their condition is already, so will ours be in a very short time; for we shall
also die and be with them and like unto them. In one sense that is vain which
has an end; and when that end is come, it seems all one as if it had never
been. Exactly so is our Life here on Earth, for when it is ended (We bring our
Years to an end as a tale that is told) it does so seem upon the review or
looking back, and so it will be at the end of things.

Now to improve the whole foregoing Discourse in woe or three Practical Uses and
Inferences.

The First Shall be, that we know our selves. The fault and error of the
reasonable Creature is, that he studies and is employed about things which are
outward, but he does not come so home and near to himself as he should do. He
looks too much without, but not within himself. The Heathen did imagine that
this saying, Know thy self, did descend from Heaven, because of the excellency
of it, but chiefly because it is the Mind and Will of God our Creator, that we
should know our selves, and the more we know of our selves, the more we know of
our own vanity. It has been said, That all People will know themselves first
or last. But this is the Fault and error of the most, that they come to know
themselves when it is too late. Like the Foolish Virgins who whilst they went
to buy, the door was shut, Mat. 25. 10. I have heard of one who was of a sinful
Life and Conversation, but in the time of his last Sickness did cry out, Man is
vanity. But why did he not lay that to Heart in the midst of Life and Health,
when he was lusty and strong? For Man even in his best state is altogether
vanity. But the thing is by such perceived at the end, and not at the
beginning. Whereas if it were thoroughly understood at the beginning, it would
do good; but it only enhanses the Misery and fad Resentment when it is
reflected upon at the end, for then it is Remediless.

We should look much within the Glass of our selves, and when we know and
apprehend concerning our selves, we should consider much of it and remember it,
and not go away and straightway forgetting what manner of Men we are, James 1.
24. And when we look within our selves, and narrowly consider our selves, we
should give heed to what manner of thoughts do arise in our Minds. If any
thoughts of Pride should at any time start up, check them again with this
consideration and reasoning; Wherefore is Dust and Ashes Proud? If they be
concerning thine own Consumption and Withering away, Dying and Mortality, there
cherish them, and consider more and more thereupon; for so the holy Ghost
wishes and advises us Mortal Men, O that they were wise, that they understood
this, that they would consider their latter end. As we are always Dying, so we
should have the continued sense thereof: As we are indeed vain, so we should
have a knowledge of this our Vanity. Says Job in his Expostulation to God,
Will thou altogether look upon what is vanity, and pursue a Leaf that is driven
to and fro? Every puff of Wind does move a Leaf; and so Man is like a Reed
shaken with the Wind, of Sickness or sad Accident, and he is liable to danger
and hurt every Moment. Each thought does fluctuate and toss his Soul up and
down. If of good, then this is apt to lift him up. But if the thoughts be of
Pain, Vexation or Evil, then this does as much sink and cast him down.

The Lord knows the thoughts of Man, that they are vanity, Psalm. 94. 11. For
so they are in the esteem of the Alwise God. Even so there may be perceived in
our selves also, somewhat alike to this Knowledge of God. For when we consider
thoroughly upon what is called or supposed to be the greatest Wisdom of Nations,
or of what are reputed wise Men, or even of our own best and greatest Wisdom.
It does all seem and appear to us but as silly and foolish in the main, or at
the utmost it is truly vain. For the best Wisdom, Contrivance and Management
here is conversant only about vain things. As a Figure now differs from the
thing Figured, Vanity from Substance: So all the Wisdom that is now, differs
from and comes short of what Wisdom will be in the future state of things, as
it shall then reside in Angels and Men. For the Creature was made subject to
vanity, not willingly, but by reason of him that subjected the same in Hope. So
that though the Creature, (by which is signified what is now Created) is now
made subject to vanity; yet at this very same time wherein now it is under
vanity, yet it is in hope to be rendered and restored again into a substantial
and glorious state. The certain Truth whereof is confirmed by the words
immediately following, Because the Creature it self also shall be delivered
from the bondage of Corruption into the glorious Liberty of the Children of
God. And if the Creature shall be delivered from Bondage into Liberty, from
Corruption into Glory, as the Spirit here says expressly it shall, then also
the Creature which is now made subject to vanity, shall at length be delivered
into a substantial state and being. For we know that the whole Creation groneth
and travaileth in pain together until now, That is, by reason of the Vanity,
Corruption and Bondage which is at present upon it. And not only they, but our
selves also, which have the first fruits of the Spirit, even we our selves
groan within our selves waiting for the Adoption, to wit, the Redemption of our
Body. For we are saved by hope, but hope that is seen, is not hope, for what a
Man sees, why does he yet hope for? But if we hope for that we see not, then
do we with patience wait for it, Romans 8. 20. to Verse 24. 25. Now compare these
two last Verses with Heb. 11. 1. Where the Object of Faith is mentioned by that
Expression, Now Faith is the substance of things hoped for. This word,
Substance, whereby the future things are expressed, is in opposition and
contradistinction to that vanity, wherein all present things are: And not only
they, but our selves also are made subject to this vanity: For consider Man in
his Frame and Constitution, He is Dust, made up of Vileness, Weakness and
Mortality, walking up and down like a shadow, a little dependent being, a
breathing clod of Clay, a moving Sink of Phlegm and Excrements, a shapen lump of
Brittle and frail Flesh. Know thy self thoroughly and truly, which the more thou
do, the more readily thou will subscribe and inwardly assent unto the truth
of what the Spirit of God says by the Psalmist, Surely every Man walks in a
vain show: Surely they are disquieted in vain: He heapeth up Riches and knows
not who shall gather them.

Secondly, I would apply the foregoing Discourse as to my Publishing the Truths
of God unto the People of this my Generation and Country, and as to their
receiving of them. One principal Consideration which first brought me
acquainted with the Ways of God, was concerning the vanity of all things of
this World. And there was a desire in me, if I might somewhat take off from
this vanity of things by real and enduring actions. It is certain, that nothing
remains in a Man but what he does in the service of God and for the good of his
own Soul; and all his doings besides that great end are vain. Which
Consideration thoroughly weighed should instruct and exhort those, who shall
hear or read these words, to frame and bring all their doings toward this
great end of serving God, and saving their Souls, or for the good of them. For
whatever their Hand finds them to do besides, is vain. Even our week day Labor
in our several Callings and Occupations (which takes up most of our time) may
be all brought under this great end. And whatsoever ye do, do it heartily as to
the Lord, and not unto Men, knowing that of the Lord ye shall receive the
reward of the Inheritance, for ye serve the Lord Christ, Col. 3. 23, 24. Even
so in whatever we Labor or are Employed, Provided always, it be in things
Lawful and Right, and in compliance with, and obedience unto that primitive
Ordinance of God, In the sweat of thy Face shall thou eat Bread: It may be also
Spiritualized and referred up toward God, by having our heart fixed on the
invisible God at the very same time, According to what David says, My heart is
fixed, My heart is fixed: And so in our several Work and Business, in our Trade
and Employment we may serve God and Christ also. The Hu^band-man, whilst his
Hand is upon his Plow, may have his heart upon God at the very same time; and
then although the Plowing of the Wicked is Sin, yet all things are good to the
Godly, and this last Person even in his Plowing may and does serve God. So it
may be as to others; whilst each one is handling the Tools or Instruments of
his respective Trade or Employment, Let him lift up his heart unto God in the
Heavens, and have the desire of his Soul toward him, that he may please and
find Acceptance with him, and then all along he will in his Labor serve the
Lord; and so his Labor will not be in vain in the Lord: But after that he has
therein served God in his Generation, he shall at last enter into the Rest
which remains for the People of God. Although he did meet with weariness in
his Earthly Pilgrimage, yet abundant compensation will be made for all, When
the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord, Acts 3. 19.

The same wise Man, who says, All is Vanity, says also, All things are full
of labor. But thus it might be ordered, even by referring it up toward God,
who is the beginning and end of all things, that we may not labor in vain, but
labor in hope, to come and partake of those good things which the Lord God
has promised.

For all People will walk every one in the Name of his God, and we will walk in
the Name of the Lord our God for ever and ever, Micah. 4. 5. So it is seen,
that though we are in a World of vain things and in the very midst of them, yet
every one is for going on in his own ways. That expression is very observable,
And Samuel said into the People, Fear not, ye have done all this wickedness,
yet turn not aside from following the Lord, but serve the Lord with all your
heart, and turn ye not aside, for then should ye go after vain things which
cannot profit, nor deliver for they are vain, 1 Samuel 12. 20, 21. Here it is
expressly said, that if People turn aside from following the Lord, then they go
after vain things which cannot profit nor deliver, for they are vain. But
further, even in the things pertaining to God and Religion, if People Walk in a
way that was not good, after their own thoughts, Isa. 65. 2. And go according
to their own imaginations, and not according to the Rule and Direction of God's
written Word: Here also they go after vain things which cannot profit, that is,
not avail to the saving of their Souls, nor deliver from the Wrath to come, and
from the fierceness of the Wrath of Almighty God, For they are vain. And yet,
how many nevertheless do outwardly serve God and mind Religion only according
to the thoughts of their own Corrupt and Ignorant Heart, and they do content
themselves merely with the customary Worship and formal Religion of the
multitude; although Christ Jesus, who is The Way, the Truth, and the Life,
says expressly, Except your Righteousness shall exceed the Righteousness of the
Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. In
like manner it may be truly reasoned, Except your Religion shall exceed the
common, customary, and outside Religion of the multitude, ye shall in no case
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, and it will not be a Religion Unto the saving
of the Soul. How many do even on the Lord's Holy Day stand in the The doors of
their houses, Ezekiel. 33. 30. Or sit in the Chimny-corner, or walk in the Fields,
Finding their own Pleasure, and speaking their own words (both which are
reproved, Isa. 58. 13.) And talking of vain things, Which cannot profit nor
deliver, nor do them one jot of good as to their own Salvation, rather than
they will hear or read the good Word of God, Or meditate in his Law day and
night. They are like The deaf Adder that stops her ear, which will not
hearken to the voice of Charmers, Charming never so wisely, Psalm. 58. 4, 5.

Yea, even amongst the seemingly Religious also are found those who show forth
much Sin and Stubbornness against some part of what is in truth the Word God.
But unto Israel he says, (observe that word Israel, for it is not there said
unto the Heathen) All the day long have I stretched forth my hands unto a
disobedient and gainsaying People, Romans 10. 21. So it is unto the Named Israel,
(For all are not Israel, who are of Israel, Romans 9. 6.) Unto the Professors and
those who call themselves Christians, and not altogether to the profane and
ungodly sort he says, I have stretched forth my hands all the Day unto a
disobedient and gainsaying People, as truly such are the People of this my
Generation and Country, Who reject and receive not my Ministry of the Word, for
the same and alike Reasons, as the Jews did reject and not receive the Words of
Christ (Herein we shall have boldness in the Day of Judgment, which will be
fear and shame and confusion of face to them in this matter, Because as he was,
so are we in this present World) Namely, because that in my Preaching and
Writing, I have so learned from him my Lord and Example whose steps herein I
follow, I do also teach the way of God in truth, neither care I for any Man,
for I regard not the person of Men, Mat. 22. 16. For if I yet pleased Men, I
should not be the Servant of Christ. Wherefore holy Brethren, partakers of the
heavenly Calling, consider the Apostle and high Priest of our Profession,
Christ Jesus. Who was faithful to him that appointed him, as also Moses was
faithful in all his house, Heb. 3. 1, 2. And so I do make it my sincere and
actual endeavor to be faithful to that God who appointed me to the Ministry of
his Word, by his having enabled me, and given me a knowledge thereof, and by
putting words into my Mouth, and so I make it my endeavor to be faithful in
all the Ministration thereof. He that has my word, let him speak my word
faithfully, Jer. 23. 28. Moreover it is required in Stewards, that a Man be
found faithful, 1 Cor. 4. 2. And because I have not shunned to declare unto the
People of this my Generation and Country, all the the counsel of God: But in
the things I have written unto them, I have mentioned some Scriptures which
other Preachers and Scribes have omitted, Mat. 23. 23. Therefore they reject
and receive not that part of the Word of God which has been committed to my
Ministration, Speaking evil of me; Who for this their falsehood and Partiality,
Mal. 2. 9. Stubbornness and Rebellion, shall give account to him that is ready
to judge the quick and the dead.

Thirdly, Seeing that all things here on Earth are vain, and Man the chief
inhabitant thereof walks in a vain show, How should this Knit and Unite our
Hearts up unto God himself, and also toward the future state of things, for
all there is Reality and Substance. God himself is the most real and
substantial being that can be, for he created all things, and now upholds them
by the Word of his Power. If any thing is real, God himself is much more so;
and so likewise are all the things pertaining to his Kingdom in Heaven. The
Creature was made subject to vanity. God made all things on this Earth so vain,
to the intent to draw off our Desires and Affections yet more from the things
of this World, to fix and set them on himself and the things above, that in our
earnest continued seeking after Earthly things (they are Enemies to the Cross
of Christ, who mind Earthly things) we may meet with this kind of Check and
Reproof from our Creator, O ye Sons of Men, How long will ye turn my Glory into
shame, how long will ye love vanity and seek after leasing? Selah Psalm. 4. 2.
Importing, that whilst the Sons of Men do love vanity and seek after leasing,
So long they turn the glory of God into shame: In that hereby they do quite
pervert the very design and order of things. For whereas God designed his own
Glory in making Man a reasonable Creature, that is, one capable to seek after
himself, and the things of the other and better World; But by loving vanity and
seeking after leasing, Man does degenerate himself, And being made in Honor he
abides not. When it would be for the Honor and Glory of God if he did pursue
the right end, but by not doing or intending that, he does properly turn the
Glory of God into shame. For it would be a shame if an alwise God should make
reasonable Creatures for no better and higher an end than to love vanity and
seek after leasing: Whereas here the fault is in the Creatures themselves, and
in no wise in God who Created them. In like manner, every act of Sin does turn
the Glory of God into shame for the same Reason, because it is a perverting of
things from what he first made and designed them; for he Created Man to serve
God and do Good, and not that he should Corrupt himself by committing Sin and
Evil, or by loving vanity and seeking after leasing. Vanity is displeasing unto
the Lord as Sin and Evil is. For this is the Will of God, even your
Sanctification, that not so much as Vain thoughts should lodge within ye, Jer.
4. 14. And that People should not speak vanity, Psalm. 12. 2. nor trust in
vanity, Isa. 59. 4. Much less commit or do the same. But as we are commanded,
Not to touch the unclean thing, So we are to refrain from all vain things as
much as it is possible to do in this vain World which passes away. According
to the Exhortation which speaks on this wise, If ye then be risen in Christ,
seek those things which are above, where Christ sits on the Right hand of
God. Set your affection on things above, not on things on the Earth. For ye are
Dead, and your Life is hid with Christ in God: When Christ, who is our Life
shall appear, then shall ye also appear with him in Glory.

Beloved, when I gave all diligence to write unto you of the common Salvation,
it was needful for me to write unto you, and exhort you, and put you in mind of
the vanity of all things of this World, that People should not forsake God and
depart from the Faith once delivered to the Saints, nor go aside from the
Truth, out of Love to this present World, but that ye should Love God more and
the World not at all. For if any Man loves the World, the love of the Father
is not in him.

So Witnesses and Exhorts RICHARD STAFFORD, a Scribe instructed in the Law
of God, and in the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1700. And are to be Sold unto such who will
receive the love of Truth that they might be Saved.

Advertisement.
THese are to give notice, That I have several other Practical Sermons or
Discourses of mine own Composing lying by me in Manuscript: Which if they who
have the Plenty or Competency of this World's Goods, would (According to their
several Ability, Acts 11. 29.) Thus Consecrate some part of their gain and
substance unto the Lord, Micah 4. 13. So as to be ready to distribute, and
willing to Communicate toward the outward Labor and Charge of the Printing
and Publishing of them, it would be for the Glory of God (in making known his
Truth, Isa. 38. 19.) And for the Edification and Benefit of his Church and
People; and consequently it would be a Good work in such Persons who shall be
helpful and any ways assistant herein, for which they would be rewarded by God
in the Life that is to come.

And I say unto you, Make to your selves Friends of the Mammon of
unrighteousness; that when ye fail, they may receive you into Everlasting
Habitations, Luke 16. 9. Charge them that are rich in this World, that they do
Good, that they be Rich in Good Works, ready to Distribute, willing to
Communicate, laying up in Store for themselves a good Foundation against tbe
time to come, that they may lay hold on Eternal Life, 1 Timothy 6. 17. 18. 19.
This is a faithful saying, and these things I will that thou affirm constantly,
that they which have believed in God, might be careful to maintain Good Works;
these things are Good and Profitablsi unto Men, Titus 3. 8.


