THE SEA-MAN'S Obligations to Gratitude and a Good Life. A SERMON Preached in
the Parish Church of Deptford, in Kent, June 5. 1699. BEFORE THE Corporation of
the Trinity-House, At their Annual Meeting on Trinity-Monday.

By GEORGE STANHOPE, D.D. Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty.

Published at the Request of that Honorable Society.

LONDON: Printed for R. Sare, at Grays-Inn-Gate in Holborn, 1699.

Psalm CVII. Verse 23, 24. They that go down to the Sea in Ships, and do
business in great Waters:

These Men see the Works of the Lord, and his Wonders in the Deep.


THis Psalm has been interpreted by some, August. Enarr. in hunc Psalm.
as if it were one entire Allegory: The four Temporal Calamities mentioned
here, denoting so many Spiritual Punishments, or Troubles upon the Mind. The
Want and Wandering in the Wilderness, V. 3-8.
figuring Men's Errors and Ignorance of the right way to their Heavenly Country:
V. 10-15.
The Captivity and Exile, those Difficulties in doing well, with which long
offending does, as it were, V. 17-22.
clog and fetter hardened and habitual Sinners: the Sickness and want of
Appetite, resembling that general disrelish to Virtue, and the things of God
and Eternity, which attends a carnal Life, and worldly Disposition: V. 23-31.
And the Storms and Dangers at Sea made use of as a fit Emblem for the Trials
and Tossings of a boisterous World, particularly for the Persecutions of Good
Men and the Truth: And since from all these things too God in his Mercy
delivers Men upon their earnest Application to him, therefore David calls upon
all those for their Sacrifice of Thanks and Praise, who have at any time
received such valuable Blessings.

Others there are, Chrysostom. Hieronym.
who have thought this a Prophecy of the Gospel-Age; and, that by the Men in my
Text particularly, who go down to the Sea in Ships, and do business in great
Waters, are meant those Apostles of our Blessed Savior, who, from the Trade of
Fishermen, were chosen to be Preachers of the Christian Faith: That these Men
saw the Works of the Lord, and his Wonders in the Deep, when God revealed to
them the profound Mysteries of the New Covenant: Such as the Redemption of
Mankind by a crucified Jesus, the Trinity of Persons in the Divine Essence,
(which the Church, at this Season more especially, adores) and sundry other
Doctrines of our most Holy Religion, which no reach of humane Reasoning can
fathom, no Wit could have discovered, had not God's own Spirit led Men into the
Knowledge and Belief of them.

But, waving these more distant Constructions, I shall keep close to that most
obvious and natural one, which the Psalmist seems to have had first, if not
only, in his view: And that is, from a Consideration of the several Events of
humane Life, whether they be prosperous or adverse, whether private or public,
to awaken and stir Men up to a remembrance of God and their Duty. For, that
such was his Design, seems abundantly manifest from that remarkable Conclusion
of the Psalm (V. 43.) Whosoever is wise will observe these things, and they shall
understand the Loving Kindness of the Lord.

Now, though such a wise Observation be, no doubt, intended here, as, by
convincing Men, that all these things are ordered by the Providence of God,
might be a powerful Motive to the discharge of every part of their Duty; yet
the Effect of it principally aimed at, is Thanksgiving; Publishing the Praises
of that God for his Goodness, and declaring the Wonders that he does for the
Children of Men. V. 8 V. ^ V. 2 V. 3
This is the Exhortation so often repeated, and so earnestly inculcated here,
and urged from a Recollection of the many Afflictions and sore Distresses, out
of which the Great Governor of the World, who disposes our Fortunes of every
kind, rescues them, who in Extremity flee to Him for Refuge. This
Acknowledgment he calls upon all People to pay; because the Instances of the
Divine Goodness are so many, so conspicuous, that it must argue great
Inadvertency, not to see, and reflect upon them, when they happen to Others:
But this he requires in a peculiar manner from Them, who have had Experience of
that Goodness themselves. For, if the eminent Proofs of such a Providence
ought, and will naturally not fail, to move us, when we are mere Standers by,
and Spectators only; it must certainly betray a very wretched degree of
Stupidity, and a horrible Unworthiness, for Men to continue ungrateful and
insensible, who have personally felt and tasted that the Lord is gracious: For
such to retain no becoming Impressions, no religious Remembrances, of either
those amazing Dangers, or those seasonable and wonderful Preservations, which
have been brought home to them, and made their own Case.

Again, if barren Deserts, and dark Prisons; if Beds of Languishing and Storms
at Sea, do, by an almost irresistible Necessity, drive the profanest and most
profligate Wretches to their Prayers: and, if, V. 5.13, 19, 28.
when such as these cry unto the Lord in their trouble, he do not disdain to
hear, and deliver them out of their distress; What can excuse those Vagabonds
and Captives, those once sick, and just sinking Men, if they shall not be as
liberal and as loud in their Praises afterward, as formerly they were in their
Calls and Complaints; if they shall neglect to testify before all the World,
that they look upon God as their Savior and mighty. Deliverer, and own their
present Safety and Successes to be entirely the Work of a Wise, and Kind, and
Omnipotent Providence?

This is evidently the Sum of the Prophet's Argument in the Psalm before us:
The Force whereof might without great difficulty be illustrated from any of the
Cases specified in it; but from never a one of them, I think, to better
advantage, than that to which my Text, and the Quality of this Audience and
Solemnity, now determine me. For if there be any sort of People, who have not
only observed, but perpetually conversed with, invincible demonstrations of a
God and Providence; if any, whose Obligations to Religion and Thankfulness are
more sensible, more indispensable, than those of Common Men, where may we
reasonably expect to find these, rather than among them; who go down to the Sea
in Ships and do business in great Waters, who in so signal a manner see the
Works of the Lord, and his Wonders in the Deep?

The Persons spoken of in my Text, are not they who make Vorages or Pleasure or
Convenience, but such as make the Sea their Occupation, and constant way of
living. And to these I shall direct my Discourse at present, by treating of the
Words, and the thing intended by them, under the Two following Heads.

I. First, I shall endeavor, I will not say, to inform, (for who can fairly be
supposd ignorant of so obvious and evident a Truth?) but rather to put such in
remembrance, that the Dangers and Deliverances peculiar to this course of Life,
are the Effects of a Divine Providence. And then, Secondly,

II. I shall show what Influence this Consideration ought to have upon all, who
have had the Experience of such a watchful and powerful Providence over them.

I. First, I say, the Dangers and Deliverances proper to a Seafaring Life are
eminently the Effects of a Divine Providence. The same Reason, which convinces
every thinking Man, that this material World, and each part of it, must needs
have been framed by some Eternal and Infinite Being, will, when pursued through
its just Consequences, teach us to conclude also, that these things now can no
more govern and preserve themselves, than they could originally make
themselves. The wondrous Order and regular Process, observable in Natural
Causes and Effects, do indeed illustrate the Wisdom and Management; but they do
by no means weaken the Belief, or take away the Necessity, of a Higher and
Super-intending Power. For, that these lower Agents do in most Cases operate
alike, proves them to be confined to Rule and Method; but, that they do not
always produce the same Effects, is no less an Evidence, that they are under
the direction of a Supreme Cause, which checks, and limits, and overrules
their Influences, as he sees fit. Thus both the regular and the excepted Cases
conspire to prove the Being and Providence of God. Since there is in all the
Works of Nature so much Constancy, as argues the World to be governed by an
intelligent Being; and yet so much variety in Events, and so surprising Changes
too, as evidence that Being to be an Agent free in his Determinations, and
absolute in his Dominion; that none of the most uniform Productions are fixed
by a fatal Necessity; none of the most efficacious Means so sure of succeeding,
as never to be put by their ordinary Course; none, in a word, exempted from the
Countermand of his Disposal.

We shall do well then to conceive of Almighty God, as of a wise and watchful
Pilot, always at the Helm, and steering his own World, taking the advantage of
natural Instruments, and letting this great Vessel drive before them, so long
as these, like prosperous Gales and favorable Tides, make way for his good
Purposes: But when they bear down hard, and grow too violent, then interposing
his Skill and Strength, shifting the Course, or checking the Current, or by
some other Arts to us unknown, bringing the most furious, the most irresistible
Efforts of Created Nature in Subjection to the Counsel of his own Will.

And if this be, as certainly it is, the State of Providence, and the World in
general, then, where these Interpositions are most frequent and visible; where
such Agents and Causes, as seem most ungovernable, do yet submit to such
Restraints, and become flexible and useful; where Humane Measures, which can
only proceed upon regular and ordinary Operations, are most impotent, and
manifestly at a loss; there we cannot, with any fair and probable Reasoning,
but ascribe such Events, as are contrary to, or above the reach of, Matter and
Motion, to the marvelous Address and commanding Efficacy of that wise and
powerful Lord, Psalm. 103.19.
who (as this Psalmist says elsewhere) sits in the Heavens, and rules over
all from the beginning.

Upon this Account, we may very well imagine, it is, that the Scripture does,
upon all occasions, take such particular Care to assert and inculcate that
Government which God exercises over the Winds and the ^eas: For these are parts
of Nature, fierce and impetuous above the rest, various and uncertain in their
Motions; the most unaccountable, the most unmanageable, of all the Creatures in
this lower World; and, by consequence, the most pregnant Testimonies of an
overruling Providence, in all those astonishing and mighty Alterations, which
we so frequently perceive in them. Hence God is said to Jer. 5.22.
set bounds to the Sea, Hag. 2.7.
to shake it, Job 38.8.
to shut it up with doors; to Isai. 50.2
dry it up, to Nah. 1.4.
rebuke it, to still Psalm. 89.8.65.7.
its roarings, and silence the noise of its waves when they rebel; and that,
Psalm. 93.5.
though its waters be mad, and rage horribly, yet still the Lord who dwells
on high is mightier. So again, the Winds are very emphatically styled the Psalm.
148.8.
Winds of God, and the Job 37.9.10.
Breath of God; with these he is said to blow, and the waters swell; These
Psalm. ^35.7.
he brings out of his Treasures; with these he Psalm. 29. and 148.
rends the Mountains, scatters his Cold and Frost, Job 37.10.
straitens the Waters, and hardens them like solid Metal. And farther yet, for
these he is said to make Job 28.25
Weights and Measures, to Isa. 27.8.
stay their roughest and most tumultuous Insults, quell all their boisterous
Rage, and with a Peace be still, hush their Noise and Confusion into a profound
Calm. And, to go no farther than this Passage now before us; the Works and
Wonders here ascribed to God, are expressed (V. 25, etc.) by the Storm arising
at his Word, the Waves of the Sea rolling and foaming, tossing Men up to
Heaven, and sinking them down again to Hell; driving them to their Wits end,
and damping the very stoutest of them all; and yet, even then, when neither
Courage nor Conduct, neither Hearts nor Hands are of any longer Service, God
continues the same still: He is not deaf to Men's Prayers; nor are these rudest
and most rugged of all Elements deaf to his Reproofs, but even the Storms
fulfill his Word, and blow but by Commission: He finds no difficulty in
quieting the Tempest, and smoothing the Face of the Deep; but raises and
instantly fixes the hearts melted down with Anguish and Despair just before,
and makes them glad by setting them at rest, Ver. 30.
and bringing them to the Haven, where they would be. This gets him an
indisputable Title to such Men's Praises; The succouring them in an Extremity,
when humane helps could avail nothing, when even Hope it self was lost, when
any Power less than divine must have been defeated in the Attempt to deliver
them.

But in all Cases of this Nature, it is not enough to be satisfied that God is
the Doer and Disposer of them, unless we be likewise careful to observe with
what design he does them, and what those Purposes are, which he would have
served, by the hardships we sustain, the dangers we are threat'ned with, and
the surprising Rescues from, or Successes after them.

Now, though we are not allowed to judge of the Proportion of any Man's Virtue
or Guilt, or God's Love or Hatred toward him, by that measure of Good or Evil,
which befalls him in this present Life: Yet thus much in the general is true,
that all Afflictions are, and ought to be received, as Chastisements of Sin,
and all Deliverances acknowledged as Marks of God's Favor and Kindness.
Blessings, it is true, may by our own Mismanagement be converted into Curses and
Instruments of Ruin: And Sufferings, by a prudent Virtue, may be exalted into
the most valuable Mercies. The former may be plentifully imparted to the
Wicked, and the latter made the Portion of the Just: But still this hinders
not, why, speaking of these Dispensations at large, the Psalmist here, and we
by his Example, may not attribute Men's Calamities to their Faults which had
provoked God; and their better Successes to some behavior well-pleasing in his
sight. V. 9.10.
Thus we find Men's being bound in Affliction and Iron, charged upon their
rebelling against the Words of God, and contemning the Counsel of the most
High. And Fools are said, because of their Transgression to be plagued with
Sickness, V. 17, etc.
to abhor all manner of Meat, and to draw nigh to the Gates of Death.

It is confessed, that no such Cause is positively assigned here; but sure there
is nothing particular in the reason of the thing, which should forbid us
applying it to Storms and Shipwrecks, as well as to Imprisonment and Bodily
Diseases. But in the Mercies mentioned throughout this Psalm, there is no Place
for probable Conjectures; for in every one of these, express Notice is taken of
its being a Reward to them, who fled to God for Succor, and took Sanctuary in
Him, when other Helps and Comforts had forsaken them. And hence the Duty of
Praise is urged as a necessary Instance of Gratitude, for so ready an
Acceptance, so successful a Return, of such Prayers: For that you see is the
constant burden of this Holy Song; When they cried unto the Lord in their
Trouble, V. 8.13.15, 19, 21, 28, 31.
and he delivered them out of their Distress: O that Men would therefore praise
the Lord for his Goodness, and declare the Wonders that he does for the
Children of Men.

Without entering then into any Niceties concerning this Matter, or showing how
far temporal Good and Evil are from distinguishing Characters of the Divine
Affection and Displeasure, though at the same time the One be most truly the
Effect of God's Goodness, and the Other of Man's Sin; I shall take it for
granted, that all who consider the different Events of humane Life to be the
Work of God, do likewise allow them to be wrought with some wise Design; and
that each sort requires some Use and Improvement to be made of it, in
proportion to its Nature and Quality: And thus much is sufficient to ground my
other general Head upon, wherein I proposed to show,

II. Secondly, What Influence the Consideration of Men's Dangers and
Deliverances being all from God, ought to have upon Them, whose own Experience
has convinced them of such a watchful and powerful Providence; such, as is
over those particularly, who by going down to the Sea in Ships, and following
their business in great Waters, have seen the Works of the Lord, and his
Wonders in the Deep.

The only Fruit insisted on here is Thankfulness; nor had the Prophet occasion
to demand more; for this alone, when rightly grounded, and diligently
cultivated, is so noble a Product, and of so large Extent, that, as to be
reproached with Unthankfulness is a Character of universal Infamy; so to be
truly thankful for the Mercies of God, is, in the just Latitude of the Word,
but another Name for a Good Man, and a Good Christian. For

1. No Man doubts, but this implies never dying Remembrances, and very warm and
affectionate Resentments of the Benefits we have received. And, in regard that
out of such abundance of the Heart the Mouth will naturally speak, from hence
will follow,

2. Free and public Declarations of God's Love and Mercy upon all fit
Occasions. Nor yet only so, but

3. A constant Care not to displease or affront One, who has been so bountiful
to, and tender of Us. For to profess grateful Resentments, without attesting to
them by respectful Behavior, is manifest Insincerity; and to proclaim our
Obligations to a Person, whom we disoblige in return, is to reproach our selves
with the greatest Baseness, and to publish our Hypocrisy to all the World. Nay,

4. True Gratitude will think it self concerned to vindicate the Honor, and
promote the Advantage, of its Benefactor. And That which is so toward God, will
study to advance his Glory; and by Example, Persuasion, or such other Methods,
as the Person's Circumstances qualify him for, will labor to gain over others
to a reverent and just Opinion of Him, and of that Religion, which he is
pleased in condescension to call his Cause and Interest, and the doing him
Service.

5. A Man truly Thankful for Succors received heretofore, will, with great
Contentedness and a cheerful Faith, depend upon God in any Distresses for the
time to come. Even our Friends upon Earth take it ill to be distrusted, who yet
have little in their Power, and but seldom very much in their Will. But what
can be a greater Indignity, than to suspect the Care, or be uneasy under the
Conduct, of that Friend above, who cannot deceive, who will not forsake us;
especially after many sensible and surprising Experiments, both of his
Inclination, and his Ability, to do us good?

6. Lastly, They who are Thankful for past Deliverances, will be compassionate
to others in the like Danger and Distress. The Remembrance of their own Case
will dispose them to this Tenderness, as Men; and, as Christians, they will
need no other Incitement, than this single Reflection, That they who relieve
the least of their Lord's Members, do it to Himself. So that This is in effect
a paying back the Kindness; a Thing which true Gratitude eagerly takes all
Opportunities of doing. And, though the Return be not made, either in Kind, or
in Quantity, yet it is such as poor Mortals are capable of; such as argues
their Wishes and Readiness to do more; and such as He, whose Debtors they are,
is content to accept for good Payment.

These are all so genuine, so necessary Evidences of Thankfulness; and the
Reasonableness of them is so obvious, that I shall not hold my self obliged to
enlarge upon our Engagements to them. No Benefactor among Men looks upon
himself well treated upon other Terms; and he, who declines any of these upon
proper Occasions, all his dissembled Professions ought, and will be sure with
Wisemen, to go for nothing. And therefore all I shall do more, is only to apply
my self to this Assembly, with regard to each of the foregoing Particulars, and
so conclude.

1. First then: For the begetting in you becoming Resentments for the Mercies
of God in your Preservation, I shall not, I need not, attempt any artificial
Description of the infinite Hazards, or surprising Providence, peculiar to
that manner of Life, in which the Education and Affairs of so many now before
me have engaged them: The Wonders and the Works of Wisdom, which conversing
with remote Countries has made you Eyewitnesses of; nor the Difficulties and
sundry kinds of Death, which distant Climates, and especially your Passage to
and from them, have so often exposed you to. You know very well, that the
Terrors of a Storm, or a Wreck, are but feebly represented by Words; and that
Experience leaves behind it more lively and lasting Images of this kind, than
all the labored Rhetoric in the World. The Ancients seem to have so just a
Notion of this Matter, as to make it almost a Proverb, O fortuna te nescis
quantum periculi praeterieris, qui nunquan^ es ingressus Mare.
That He who has never been at Sea, can scarcely know what it is to be in
Danger. And then surely They who have known, and felt, and lived constantly in,
and often escaped from This; This, in comparison whereof nothing it seems was
esteemed dreadful enough to deserve the Name of Danger, these Men cannot easily
be supposed ever to forget it.

And yet it must be confessed, with regard to Your Case, that those Ancients
were but little, and the Age of David not at all, acquainted with the most
formidable part of that, which Your good God has carried You through. The only
Perils They had in view, were such as grow from Winds, and Waves, and warring
Elements: Nor were Men then aware of any other End of going down to the Sea in
Ships, but that of doing the Business of Traffic there. And, What is the
Fatigue, What the Hazard of This, when set against the very distant Uses which
later Times have found for these Great Waters, and the fatal Improvement since
made to the(...) Dangers? For, as if even the most merciless Parts of the
Creation had been too sparing and tender of our Safety, the Men industrious in
the Art of Killing, have brought the Two most cruel, the Two most distant
^lements in the World, to conspire together, and mutually to assist in the more
effectual Destruction of Mankind. They have contrived to burn one another in
the Water, to drown their Enemies in liquid Fire, to turn their Vessels into
floating Batteries, and make the Ocean itself a Field of Blood. It is in this
most frightful Form, that several of You have often met Death: And shall I
suppose it possible, that such complicated Horrors can ever slip out of your
Minds? That you should not frequently and seriously recollect, who made so
gracious a Distinction in the Day of Battle, when Thousands fell beside you,
and Ten thousand at your Right Hand, and yet the fatal Ball came not nigh you?
No, no. You stand here this Day so many living Monuments of Mercy, so many
undeniable Demonstrations of a wonderful Providence; and you must not, you
cannot forget God, while you continue to remember your selves.

2. If then this be, as I ought to presume it is, the inward Sense of your
Souls, your Obligations to the Second Thing are very apparent, That of making
your Thanks solemn and public. This the Prophet requires (Ver. 32.) that such
as have escaped the Perils of the Sea, would exalt God in the Congregation of
the People, and praise him in the Seat of the Elders. His meaning is, That
these open Acknowledgments are a Tribute due for Deliverances so eminent;
because they set forth the Glory of God, they put others upon observing, how
Wise, and Powerful, and Good he is, and encourage all that see and hear them,
to serve and depend upon One so Able, so Ready, to help them that seek him. But
there is yet another Reason, which should move Them to it, whose Lives have
been exposed upon the public Account: For it is no small Mercy, that God has
made Such, Instruments of a general Good to their Country. You therefore are
bound, above all Men, to praise God in the Congregation of the People, because
the whole Congregation will not fail to praise God, not only with you, but for
you. If Trade flourish, and Wealth increase, it is because Your Industry and
Courage transplant the Product of distant Countries hither, and make all their
Conveniences ours. If this Island enjoy the Benefits of its happy Situation,
it is because that Sea, which God has made our Rampart and Entrenchment, has
been stoutly defended by our Navies: Without these, the Nation must be so far
from rich and prosperous, that it could not so much as be safe. And that which
renders us so useful to our Friends, so formidable to our Enemies, and so
secure from Foreign Invasions, is not so much our Numbers, or our Home-growth,
or our Wall of Waters; as the Advantages of our Commerce Abroad, and the
invincible Valor of our Fleets at Home. This we justly esteem our proper
Strength, and to it, under God, ascribe our Glory and Protection: And therefore
They who do gallantly, and are successful upon these Occasions, are much to
blame, if They do not publish the Praises of God, because they are sure to meet
with so many disposed to join in those Praises with them. For such we pray and
fast when in Action and Danger; and, in so doing, we pray and fast for our
selves. And when such return with Victory or Peace, they engage us to come into
their Thanks, not only as Christians, but as Parties; not out of
Fellow-feeling, but Self-love. Their Interest and ours is one and the same; we
all find a vast account in their Safety; and, in their Conquests and
Deliverances, do in effect commemorate our own.

3. But, Thirdly, They who have proceeded thus far, ought to be put in mind,
that the most substantial Part of Thankfulness is still behind; that, I mean,
which consists in the Man's Actions and Behavior. For, as in such Benefactors
among Men, whose Condition sets them so much above us, that they do not need,
or we cannot repay what we have received from them, in kind, the only way left
us to testify our Gratitude, is by respecting, and pleasing, and doing them
Honor and Service; so, and much more is it, in the Benefits we receive from
the Great and most High God. We are therefore taught in our excellent Liturgy
to pray for such a due sense of his Mercies, as may make us unfeignedly
thankful, General Thansgiving.
and prove that we are so, by showing forth his Praise, not only with our Lips,
but in our Lives. Now, if the bestowing Life and Being at first do vest in him
a Title to our Obedience, then, so often as this Gift is repeated, so much the
more that Claim is strengthened. The very Design, in truth, of all his Blessings
is to invite, and encourage, and (by Engagements, the most forcible of any to
an ingenuous Temper) even to constrain us to Virtue and Goodness; to make us in
love with so kind a Master, and cheerful in doing our utmost for Him, who has
done so much for Us. And which way can We evade this Obligation, especially
when the most we can do for him is so much less than his due, and the least he
has done for us so much more than our desert? After a long Recital of the many
Miracles in behalf of the Israelites, God is said to have wrought them all for
this very purpose, Psalm. 15.14.
that they might keep his Statutes, and observe his Laws. And in another Place,
this is mentioned as the dreadfullest aggravation of that Peoples wickedness,
that they forgot, and rebelled against God, Psalm. 78.
who had done so great things for them. But what need I urge
Christian-Instances and Arguments, when nothing can be plainer from the very
Nature of Gratitude, than that each Person ought to make his diligence in
pleasing God hold proportion with the marks of his having been the peculiar
Care of his Providence, and be as signally religious, as he has been signally
blessed?

If then, as was before observed, the Affairs of so many here present have been
so full of hazard, and their Deliverances so full of wonder, it will lie upon
their Consciences very seriously to examine, what sort of requital they have
made for these Mercies. Most certain it is, God does not save Men from the Sea,
and the Sword, that when they come ashore they may give themselves up to the
Devil's Service, and walk before him without fear in Unholiness and
Unrighteousness all the days of their life. He expects to have his Name called
upon after another manner, than in Oaths, and Curses, and blasphemous Terms of
Defiance and Contempt. He will account severely with those Wretches, who dare
his Vengeance, and cry aloud to him to rot those Bodies, and to damn those
Souls, which he with so Fatherly a Tenderness has rescued from Destruction. My
Design herein is not to upbraid, or accuse, but seasonably to warn, the Men of
this Profession, that they wo^ld consider in time, how large an Article in
their last great Account the Good Providence of God over them in their Dangers
and Necessities will one day make; and that it were better, infinitely better
for them, to have fallen by the Enemies hand, or to have been drowned in the
depth of the Sea, than to have survived both to no other Effect, than that most
sad one of enflaming their Reckoning, and heating their Furnace seven times
hotter, by their horrible Ingratitude and Abuse of such marvelous Loving
Kindness.

4. But I said before, Fourthly, that a true Principle of Thankfulness will not
allow Men to be contented with their own private Virtue, but will render them
zealous Promoters of God's Glory, by winning over others to his Service. The
Methods and Opportunities for effecting this differ greatly, according to Men's
different Stations and Capacities in the World. But I esteem my self happy in
addressing this day to several worthy Persons, whose Authority and Posts of
Command may be exceeding useful in this Particular: Persons, whose good Example
may inspire, and whose Discipline may enforce, the Exercise of Religion; At
least these could not fail to discountenance Vice, and give a check to the
Insolence of open Immorality and Profaneness. You are, my Brethren, Men of
Honor; and that Character will not endure, that your Prince, or your Friend
should be ill treated in your Presence: Can it then consist with this Character
patiently to see and hear the King of kings, and your best Friend above,
affronted and reviled? Your Honorable Society derives its Name from the holy
and ever-blessed Trinity; and will not that Title reproach every Member of this
Body, who, without punishment or due rebuke, shall suffer the Majesty of the
Father to be despised, the Blood and Wounds of the Son to be invoked in sport
and derision, and contemptuous despite to be done to the Spirit of Grace? The
most glorious Improvement of Navigation would be to spread Christianity wider,
and enlighten the still dark Corners of the Earth with saving Knowledge; and
the readiest way of compassing this noble end would be, by making the Light of
those who already profess the Gospel, so to shine in barbarous Countries, that
our good Works might recommend, and demonstrate the Excellence of our Faith.

Live then, my Brethren, as becomes them whom the Lord has redeemed, and
delivered from Perils various, and Deaths often: Live so, that Strangers who are
not yet acquainted with the Doctrine of Jesus, may read it plainly in your
Conversations: Live so, that, having first reformed your selves, you may, with
boldness and a good grace, reprove, and set about reforming others. And let
those under your Conduct see, that you are in very good earnest; and that you
think the Honor of your Post concerned for no sort of Order and Discipline
more, than for that, which has respect to Virtue, and Religion. It has been
said formerly, Qui nescit orare, ascendat mare.
that he who would learn to be devout should go to Sea: And, I dare say, You
would be loath to have such an Infamy fall upon Your days, as that of reversing
the Observation, and having the Sea thought the ready Course for transforming
Men into Infidels and Brutes. As therefore you have done in the Cause of your
King and Country, so behave your selves valiantly in the Cause of your God.
Vice, it is true, has gathered strength, and with an unusual confidence seems
to bid all good Men Battle. But Vice is never so triumphant, that Resolution
may not bring it under. Let but that Gallantry appear in this Point, so
peculiar to the Fleets of England in others, that of bearing down upon the
Enemy again and again, and the day is certainly your own. Sin carries Shame and
Cowardice in its very Nature, and cannot rally often: And be assured, this is a
Conquest, which, when once thoroughly obtained, would bring more Comfort to your
selves, and more true Honor to your Memories, than those which, at the Expense
of so much Blood and Toil, transmit the Names of this Fraternity down to
succeeding Generations. Nor are you ever more properly in your Post, than when
encount'ring this Adversary; for the Sins of a People, and especially of that
part whose Duty it is to fight for the rest, are always the most destructive
Enemy that can make War upon any Nation.

5. When your Zeal for God and the Public has thus exerted it self, then are
you rightly prepared for the Fifth Branch of Thankfulness, that of Trust in
God, amidst any Dangers, which shall hereafter threaten or attack you. And,
however dismal these may appear, yet your former Experience of that Power and
Goodness, which has so signalized it self on your behalf, will be of mighty
use toward drawing down upon them with Bravery. For God is never weary of
doing good; but his past Blessings are so many Pledges of more and better,
provided we be careful not to stop the Current; nor by our Unworthiness, and
Abuse of those already received, put a Bar to his Intentions of future Favor
toward us. If then your own lawful Occasions, or your Country's Defense, shall
call you out again to the like hazardous Attempts, remember under the shadow of
whose VVings you were safe heretofore, and that he is the the same, yesterday,
and to day, Heb 13 8. Isai 63.1. Psalm. 37.
and forever, even the Lord, rich in Mercy, and mighty to save. He will not
forsake his that be godly, nor shall they be confounded in the perilous Time:
So says this Psalmist, and so infinite Passages of Holy Scripture besides.
Places, which deserve the rather to be considered, because, when Art and Nature
have done their utmost, still nothing goes so far toward inspiring Men with
true Courage, and undaunted Presence of Mind, as an Innocent Life, and a
steadfast Faith. These only can furnish Men with that threefold impenetrable
Defense, of which no Terrors can disarm them, A Good Cause, A Good Conscience,
and a Good God.

6. There is yet a Sixth Particular behind; and that is, Readiness to succor
all them, whom the like Dangers and Disasters have reduced to want your Relief.
For, how are you thankful, if the escaping these do not open your Bowels to
such of your Brethren, who actually suffer what you had also felt, if God in
Mercy had not put a difference between You and Them? I have already hinted,
that both Common Humanity and Christian Charity jointly plead in this Cause:
And plead they do, with Arguments, which, since too strong to be answered,
should be too powerful to be denied. And, in regard, where no Man's Abilities
extend to the supply of all that want, great Discretion is requisite in the
Choice of fit Objects for our Charity; I should not be just to the occasion of
our present Meeting, did I forbear to say, that no Poverty, sustained upon
Accounts purely secular, no Liberality, which proposes to it self Civil
Advantages only, has a better Title to our Gifts, than that, wherein disabled
Seamen and their necessitous Families are concerned. Their Claim in truth is
such, that I know not whether this Relief should not be rather called a Debt,
than a Gift. The Wealth of this Nation is in so great part imported by those in
the Merchants Service, and the quiet Possession of the whole so manifestly
secured by those in his Majesty's; that what we bestow in this way, is but some
small proportion of that which the Receivers have either helped to get us, or
have hind'red the Enemies taking away from us. And are we Men, if we can suffer
so vile a Reproach, as the seeing Those, whose Industry has filled our Stores,
whose Valor has fought our Battles, at the Expense of whose Sweat and Blood
it is that our Portion is grown fat and plenteous: If we can bear, I say, to
see These, or their Relicts perish, when Wounds, and loss of Limbs, when
Sickness, or Age, or an untimely Death, have rend'red Them or Theirs incapable
any longer, not only of serving the Public, but of supporting themselves? The
Rule of Equity, the Sense of our own Benefit, and the Common Interest, which
depends so much upon giving all due Encouragement (I had almost said in giving
all Honor and Respect) even to the meanest Subjects, who suffer in their
Countries Cause, require not only Compassion, but Generosity, from all in
Circumstances to extend it. But most of all from You, whom God has so
delivered, and so blessed, as to make that very Employment the Foundation of
Your better Fortunes, by which so many of your Brethren have ruined theirs.

And, Act for Registring, and encouraging of Seamen.
if such Reasons needed to be seconded by Examples, We in this juncture, God be
blessed, abound with them. The Great Council of the Nation have wisely found
their Honor and Safety concerned to make a lasting Provision for this purpose.
And the Glorious Preserver of our Rights and Liberties, accounts it no
Indignity to a Royal Palace, Greenwich Hospital.
to be converted into a comfortable Retreat for decayed, and a fruitful
Seminary for growing, Commanders and Mariners. He, who has been so liberal of
his own Blood for our Defense, could not but bear a just and very tender regard
to Them who shed Theirs in it. And You, who have so well imitated the Courage
of your Prince, will, I doubt not, be as powerfully provoked to Charity, by the
same Argument and Example. The weighty Trust already reposed in your hands, and
the careful and wise Management of it, do not only prove the Disposition of
faithful Stewards, but promise that of bountiful Benefactors.

Omitting therefore any farther Enlargement, upon a Subject, which speaks so
movingly for it self, I conclude all with hearty Prayers to God, That He, who
has showed you the Works and Wonders of his Goodness so plenteously, would
give you Grace to be unfeignedly thankful; That he would make you successful
Instruments of promoting his Glory, and the Public Good, by your Examples, by
your Authority, by reforming the Vicious, and suppressing Debauchery and
Profaneness in all under your Command; by doing valiantly for your Country, and
by showing Mercy to your Brethren in Distress: In one Word, that God would
grant us a Succession of Good and Gallant Men, to maintain the Safety and
Dignity of this Nation; thus continuing ever to make the Sea our impregnable
Bulwark, and our Fleets, what they so long have been, the Protection of our
Friends, and the Terror of our Enemies. And to these Prayers, I Am sure, not
only You, but every true Englishman will say: Amen.

FINIS.

