THE SPEECH OF William Howard, Late Lord Viscount Stafford; Upon the Scaffold
on Tower Hill, immediately before his Execution, Wednesday, Decemb'. 29. 1680.
BY the Permission of Almighty God, I am this day brought hither to suffer
Death, as if I were guilty of High Treason: I do most truly, in the Presence of
the Eternal, Omnipotent, and All-knowing GOD, protest upon my Salvation, That I
am as Innocent as it is possible for any man to be, so much as in a Thought, of
the Crimes laid to my Charge.

I acknowledge it to be a particular Grace and Favor of the Holy Trinity, to
have given me this long Time to prepare my self for Eternity: I have not made
so good use of that Grace as I ought to have done, partly by my not having
recollected my self as I might have done, and partly because, not only my
Friends, but my Wife and Children, have for several days been forbid to see
me, but in the presence of one of my Warders. This has been a great Trouble
and Distraction unto me: but I hope God of his Infinite Mercy will pardon my
Def^^^s, and accept of my good Intentions

Since my long Imprisonment, I have considered often what could be the Original
Cause of my being thus accused, since I knew my self not culpable, so much as
in a Thought; and I cannot believe it to be upon any other Account, than my
being of the Church of Rome. I have no Reason to be ashamed of my Religion; for
it teaches nothing but the Right Worship of God, Obedience to the King, and
due Subordination to the Temporal Laws of the Kingdom; And I do submit to the
Articles of Faith believed and taught in the Catholic Church, believing them
to be most consonant to the Word of God. And whereas it has so much and often
been objected, that the Church holds, That Sovereign Princes Excommunicated by
the Pope, may by their Subjects be Deposed and Murdered; as to the Murder of
princes, I have been Taught as a matter of Faith in the Catholic Faith, that
such Doctrine is diabolical, horrid and detestable, and contrary to the Law of
God, Nature and Nations; and as such, from my heart I renounce and abominate
it. As for the Doctrine of Deposing Princes, I know some Divines of the
Catholic Church hold it, but as able and learned as they have writ against it:
but it was not pretended to be the Doctrine of the Church, that is, any point
of Catholic Faith: wherefore I do here in my Conscience declare, That it is my
true and real Judgment, That the same Doctrine of Deposing Kings is contrary to
the Fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, injurious to Sovereign Power, and
consequently would be in me, or any other of his Majesty's Subjects, impious
and damnable. I believe and profess, that there is one God, one Savior one
Holy Catholic Church, of which, through the Mercy, Grace and Goodness of God,
I die a Member.

To my great and unspeakable Grief, I have offended God in many things, by many
great Offenses; But I give him most humble thanks, not in any of those Crimes
of which I was accused.

All the Members of either House having liberty to propose in the House what
they think fit for the good of the Kingdom, accordingly I proposed what I
thought fit: the House is judge of the fitness or unfitness of it, and I think
I never said any thing that was unfitting there, or contrary to the Law and use
of Parliament; for certainly if I had the Lords would, as they might, have some
way punished me: So I am not culpable before God or Man.

It is much reported of Indulgences, Dispensations, Pardons, to Murder, Rebel
Lie, Forswear, and commit such other Crimes held and given in the Church. I do
here profess in the presence of God, I never learned, believed, or practiced
any such things, but the contrary; and I speak this without any Equivocation or
Reservation whatsoever, And certainly were I guilty either my self, or knew of
any one that were guilty, whosoever that were (...), of any of those Crimes of
which I am accused, I were not only the greatest Fool imaginable, but a
perfect Madman, and as wicked as any of those that so falsely have accused me,
if I should not discover any ill design I knew in any kind, and so upon
discovery save my Life, I having so often had so fair occasions proposed unto
me, and so am guilty of Self-murder, which is a most grievous and heinous sin.
And though I was last impeached at the Lords Bar, yet I have great grounds to
believe that I was first brought to Trial on the belief that to save my Life I
would make some great Discovery; and truly so I would, had I known any such
thing of an ill design, or illegal dangerous Plot, either of my self, or any
other person whosoever, without exception. But had I a thousand Lives, I would
lose them all, rather than falsely accuse either my self, or any other
whosoever: And if I had known of any Treason, and should thus deny it, as I do
now upon my Salvation at this time, I should have no hope of Salvation, which
now I have through the Merits of Christ Jesus.

I do beseech God to bless his Majesty, who is my lawful King and Sovereign,
who I was always by all Laws Humane and Divine, bound to obey: and I am sure
that no Power upon Earth, either singly or all together can legally allow me or
any body else to lift a hand against him or his Legal Authority. I do hold that
the Constitution of the Government of this Kingdom is the only way to continue
Peace and quietness; which God long continue.

Next to Treason, I hold Murder in abhorrence, and have ever done, and do: and
I do sincerely profess, that if I could at this time free my self immediately,
and establish what Religion I would, and what Government I would, and make my
self as Great as I could wish, and all by the death of one of those Fellows
that by their Perjuries have brought me to the place where I am, I so much
abhor to be the cause of any man's Death, that I would not any way be the cause
of their Murder: How much loss would I endeavor the Assassination of his
Majesty, whom I hold to be as Gracious a King as ever this or any other Nation
had, and under whom the People may enjoy their Liberties as much as ever any
did: and if it please God to grant him Life and Happiness, according as I have
always wished and prayed for, I am morally persuaded that he and all his
Dominions will be as happy and prosperous as ever People were; which I beseech
God grant.

I do most humbly ask pardon of the Almighty and All-merciful God, for all the
great offenses I have committed against his Divine Majesty; and I know he would
not have the death and confusion of a sinner, but that he may repent and live:
in that assurance I hope, knowing he never despises a contrite Heart; and
though I have not so feeling a Contrition as I would, yet I have it as well as
I can, and I doubt not but that God will accept of the good will.

I do desire that all people will forgive me any injury that I have done them
in any thing either wilfully or by chance; and I do heartily forgive all people
in the world that have injured me; I forgive even those Perjured men that so
falsely have brought me hither by their Perjurie.

I do now upon my Death and Salvation aver, that I never spoke one word either
unto Oats or Turbervil, or to my knowledge ever saw them until my Trial; and
for Dugdale, I never spoke unto him of any thing but about a Footboy, or
Footman, or Foot-race; and never was then alone with him. All the punishment
that I wish them, is, that they may repent and acknowledge the wrong they have
done me; then it will appear how Innocent I am. God forgive them! I have a
great confidence that it will please Almighty God, and that he will in a short
time bring Truth to light; then you and all the world will see and know what
injury they have done me.

I hope I have made it appear that I have some Conscience: for if I had none,
certainly I would have saved my Life by acknowledging my self guilty. which I
could have done, tho I know I am not in the least Guilty. And I having some
Conscience, make very ill use of it; for I throw my self into eternal Pain by
thus plainly and constantly denying thus at my Death, the Knowledge of what I
am accused of in the least.

I have said thus much in discharge of my Conscience, and do aver upon my
Salvation, what I have said to be really true.

I shall say little of my Trial; and whether it were all according to the known
Law, I am too much a Party to say much of it: if it were not so, God forgive
him or them that were the cause of it.

My Judges were all Persons of Honor, who were all as much bound to judge
rightly, as if they had been upon Oath upon what was legally proved; and not to
Vote but according as in their Consciences they were satisfied; and if any of
them did otherwise upon any account whatsoever, I beseech God forgive them, I
do so heartily.

I shall end with my ^ea^ty Prayers for the happiness of his Majesty, that he
may enjoy all happiness in this world and the world to come, and govern his
People according to the Laws of God, and that the People may be sensible what a
Blessing God has so miraculously given them, and obey him as they ought. I ask
Pardon with a prostrate heart of Almighty God, for all the great Offenses that
I have committed against his Divine Majesty, and hope through the Merits and
Passion of Christ Jesus, to obtain everlasting Happiness; into whose hands I
commit my Spirit, asking Pardon of every person that I have done any wrong
unto: I do freely forgive all that have any ways wronged me; I do with all the
Devotion and Repentance that I can, humbly invoke the Mercy of our Blessed
Savior.

I beseech God not to revenge my Innocent Blood on the Nation, or on those that
were the Causers of it, with my last Breath. I do with my last Breath truly
assert my Innocence, and hope the Omnipotent Allseeing Just God will deal with
me accordingly.

FINIS.

