A Clear APOLOGY AND Just Defense OF Richard Stafford For Himself;

With a Rehearsal, and further Explanation of what he has done concerning
National Affairs.

But truly, I am full of Power by the Spirit of the Lord, and of Judgment, and
of Might, to declare unto Jacob his Transgression, and to Israel his Sin. Hear
this, I pray you, ye Heads of the House of Jacob, and Princes of the House of
Israel, that abhor Judgment, and pervert all Equity: They build up Zion with
Blood, and Jerusalem with Iniquity: The Heads thereof judge for Reward, and the
Priests thereof teach for Hire, and the Prophets thereof divine for Money; yet
will they lean upon the Lord, and say, Is not the Lord among us? none evil can
come upon us, Micah 3. 8, 9, 10, 11. But Judgment shall return unto
Righteousness, and all the Upright in heart shall follow it, Psalm. 94. 15. All
the Words of my Mouth are in Righteousness, there is nothing froward or
perverse in them: They are all plain to him that understands, and right to
them that find Knowledge, Prove. 8. 8, 9. Printed in the Year 1690.

TO THE READER.
A Preface may seem unusual and impertinent before an Apology; But it is
necessary to advertise the Reader somewhat before, lest, when he comes to see
such serious Truth applied so exceeding close and forceably, He be frightened
quite away, that he cannot endure to see what here is Published. And there will
arise a secret Prejudice why I should not seek out smooth Things and Soft Words
as do others; but the Land is not able to bear all these Words. Why then does
the Land act and commit such Things, which are here spoken of with more Peace
and Gentleness than they are done? Indeed I am naturally averse from tormenting
the Minds of Men; and also I do understand what becomes Education, Civility and
Custom of the world, as do others. But it being my Duty and Business (according
to the Grace and Knowledge entrusted with me) to endeavor to turn People from
Iniquity unto Righteousness, I ought (or otherwise I am not faithful in my
Office) to use the most cogent Arguments, and to press them with the utmost
force and power which I can. The Words of the Wise are like Nails fastened by
the Master of Assemblies; so whoever does not drive the Nail of Exhortation
home to the very head, and fasten it as much as he can on every side, He does
the Work of the Lord deceitfully.

It is gross Ignorance and foolish Imagination to be frightened at Words; for
they do express Things which have been, or are now transacting and passing on,
or shall be hereafter; and these (not the bare Picture and visible
Representation of them) we should indeed fear and endeaevour to avoid. We
think it better and more safe to read of a pitched Battle, a bloody Sea Fight, a
consuming Fire, Plague, or such like, than to be in the midst thereof; yea, We
would willingly know thereof, and be showed the way how we may keep out, escape
and prevent such evil things: So likewise, every one does desire to hear and
know of Good Things, and how themselves may obtain and partake thereof. It is
the same, yea, more Danger and Loss to be willingly Ignorant of what is
contained in the Word of God. For as sure as things were first made, are now
upheld, have their beginning and end, increase and decrease, and every Thing is
according to its Nature and Kind, and moves and goes on, as we now see with our
bodily Eyes, we look upon, and our Hands handle, and we conceive in our minds;
so the same Word will be to every tittle fulfilled, as we are warned and
foretold of. But the Heavens and the Earth, which are now, by the same Word are
kept in store, reserved unto Fire against the Day of Judgment, and Perdition of
Ungodly Men, 2 Pet. 3. 7. It is the worst sort of Ungodliness, not to like to
receive God into their knowledge. It is Rebellion which is as the Sin of
Witchcraft, and Stubbornness which is as Iniquity and Idolatry to reject the
Word of the Lord, 1 Samuel 15. 23. as was said to Saul the King; for even the
Kings and Judges of the Earth do commit Rebellion against God.

We will here assert the Government of God over all Nations and Rulers, come
what will of it to my weak and frail Person; as themselves must acknowledge,
and cannot gainsay the same. Nor yet do they well to be angry with one who is
a Worm, and no man; a Reproach of men, and despised of the People: for as they
are Reasonable Creatures, Themselves would not have destruction come upon them
at unawares; and notwithstanding the secret excuse they have now, every man in
the deep of his Heart, yet then they will think it hard (but just) to be
condemned for what they knew not, but might have known if they would. If they
will Still Despise, and Wonder and Perish, it is to themselves. If they think
such an one is mad, only because he would prevent their own Misery, then indeed
their Eyes are darkened that they see not. It happens here according to
Christ's Method and Prediction, that they which see not, might see; and they
which see, might be made Blind, John 9. 39. Poor and Ignorant People do discern
the Truth, when it is hidden from the Wise and Prudent whom it most concerns.
In the latter days they shall consider it perfectly, When for Despising will
be Anguish and sad Reflection; for Stubbornness, Pain and Misery.

Whatever kind of reception these Words shall meet with in the world, The
best Apology for them is their own Truth and Signification.

A Clear APOLOGY and Just Defense of Richard Stafford for himself, etc.
THe Word Apology in common apprehension, seems to presuppose fault or
inferiority; and does often come by way of Excuse, mitigation or begging
Pardon. Whereas the Compiler of these following Lines, is not conscious to
himself of any Crime or Offense he has done to his own Nation. And also as he
stands in the rank of Creatures, h^ will not acknowledge so much of the other,
as the Pride of Man, and Arrogance of Tongues would imagine and speak forth.

But to get out from the Perplexity and Labyrinth of Words and Persons, come we
to Things; and we would no otherwise consider the several Thoughts, Words and
Actions of mankind, but with relation to them. Indeed we cannot know as God
knows; for that we may take the more notice of it, it is thrice asserted and
repeated, The Lord looks from Heaven; He beholds all the Sons of Men, from
the place of his Habitation he looks upon all the Inhabitants of the Earth,
He fashioneth their Hearts alike: He considers all their Works Psalm. 33. 13,
14, 15. whether Good or Evil, to Reward or Punish: And give to every Man
according to his Ways, whose Heart thou know; for thou, even thou only
know the Hearts of all the Children of Men, 1 Kings 8. 39. This is the alone
Prerogative of God; for He knows all things, and searches the Heart, that
not the least Thing can be hid or concealed from him. Whereas we only perceive
a little according to the exact Truth; but much more in a false and imperfect
manner by doubtful Report and mistaken Observation. And then we cannot
thoroughly apprehend a thing wherein many are concerned; so we can give no
perfect Judgment and Determination.

God has taken the like method for the exercise and administration of his
Kingdom and Dominion over Men; as our Kings and Governors over their several
Countries. And he has a Book for his Government over all the Nations and
Families of the Earth (high and low, rich and poor together) as our Statute and
Common Law is for England; and their civil, canon or municipal Laws for other
Nations. His Word is given unto Mankind to be a Rule for their Actions, and a
Law for them to live and be governed by: and from that we are allowed and
commanded to Reprove all manner of Sin and Transgression; as any one now does
Lev. 19. 17.
take notice or speak of what is done contrary to the Government and Laws of
this Nation; which is esteemed no fault, but rather commendable, and a Duty.
The same is, and ought much more to be in things pertaining to God; and so
likewise would be, if there was amongst us the like Zeal for and Knowledge of
him that is invisible, who fills Heaven and Earth with his Presence; as now
there is regard for the Son of Man, whom we see to be little, and to fade as a
Leaf.

But this is to be understood for the Fear and Instruction of some, and for the
Comfort of others; That God is not confined to the Imaginations and Sayings of
Men: If some speak smooth things and prophecy Deceits; and others too hard
Speeches and mistaken Applications; The Judge himself will not ratify what
they say, but condemns whom man absolves, as again acquit whom man condemns.
For he comes, for he comes to judge the Earth: He shall judge the World with
Righteousness, and the People with his Truth, Psalm. 96. 13. And I saw the dead,
small and great, stand before God; and the Books were opened, and another Book
was opened, which is the Book of Life: and the dead were judged out of those
Things, which were written in the Books according to their Works, Rev. 20. 12.
This, according to the Decree of the Eternal and unchangeable God, is as
certain and True, as if it were already past and fulfilled. As Judges and
Justices of Gaol delivery do try Prisoners by the statute Book of this Realm at
those Assizes which are holden twice a year, so at this general Grave delivery
which is to be kept once for all, The dead Bodies of all People, of every Place
and Generation since Man was Created on the Earth, shall arise, and we shall
all be judged by Christ and his Saints according to those Words written in the
Bible: And this according to the plain and common sense and understanding of
the same Words.

Behold in this they are not just, I will answer all mine Accusers and Enemies
that God is greater than Man; and so much do his Laws exceed theirs. Wherefore
do I mention that God is greater than Man? In comparison of him the Nations are
as a drop of a Bucker, and are counted as the small dust of the Balance. It is
He that sits upon the circle of the Earth, and the Inhabitants thereof are
as Grasshoppers. We shall find and know that He brings the Princes to nothing;
He makes the Judges of the Earth as Vanity. Notwithstanding the People have
more regard to them because they are seen and their utmost Power is known; then
they have to Almighty God, who is not seen, and whose Punishment is threatened.
But though God is not seen, yet his Works are. And how Great must He be who
built this vast House of the World, and created all things therein? What is the
Wrath of a Worm of five or six foot long, to the Isa. 59. 15.
Displeasure of Him, who has Heaven for his Throne, and the Earth for his
Footstool? What is a single Individual or an Assembly of Men, who dwell in
Houses of Clay that they should (when met in Council) as yet exalt themselves
to do according to their own will, notwithstanding Gods Commandment to the
contrary? If not to speak Exodus 9. 17.
out, (because they profess that they know God, but in Works deny him) yet to
think and act Mavelous things against the God of Gods, Dan. 11. 36. And in
this they are worse then him here spoken of, or Pharaoh, for he knew not who
was the Lord that he should obey him. What is abomination of Heart, they
imagine to be bravery of mind; that they can, and are for doing things
otherwise, and as it were hinder that his will be not done here on Earth. Which
argues the exceeding sinfulness of sin, with the infinite guilt and demerit
thereof, and it shall be punished with proportionable Condemnation and Misery.
They are corrupt, and speak wickedly concerning oppression: They speak loftily:
They set their Mouth against the Heavens; and their Tongue walks through the
Earth, therefore his People return hither and Waters of a full Cup are wring
out to them. Psalm. 73. 8, 9, 10. By the height and breadth and depth of such
kind of Transgression, we may judge of the length of future Torments. Whose
Thoughts were thus exalted to Heaven, their Souls shall be thrust down to Hell.
Shall not God search this Luke 10. 15.
out? for He knows the secrets of the Heart, the innermost Thoughts and most
hidden Imaginations. Even now he looks down from the Habitation of his
Holiness, and is not far from every one of us; for at this very moment, He both
sees and hears all that we are talking of or doing in our Houses and several
places of abode. And so He has done all along of this Generation of Men now
living, as He did of those before we were born. We read of Him in his Word, for
the Lord your God is God of Gods, and Lord of Lords, a great God, a Mighty and
a Terrible, which regards not Persons nor takes Reward. Deuteronomy. 10. 17. We
have a sense, and aw, and dread of Him upon our minds; we may know and perceive
his Laws written in our Hearts and inward Parts; by laying open our Conscience
as in his sight, and by communing with our own spirit, when we are for a little
while silent in our Chamber, and somewhat freed and separated from the: Things
of this World. All these ways God does show and manifest himself unto Mankind;
so that they are without excuse.

This may be thought proper to instruct and convert Heathens, or the
neighboring Nations which do grovel in the darkness of Popish ignorance, but
does not seem so applicable to our own Country, where the Scriptures are read
and preached in a known Tongue, and they boast of their understanding thereof.
But yet the Prophet says peremptorily of his time, when they had the same
privileges, Therefore my People are gone into captivity because they have no
knowledge* Isa. 5. 13. He does elegantly hint of the sottish ignorance of
former, his own, a^^ ^^ccessive Generations, Have ye not krown? Have ye not
heard? Has it not been (...) you from the beginning? Have ye not understood
from the Foundations of the Earth? Isa. 40. 21. And then does as it were point
him out in the following verse, It is He etc. So it is said further down, There
is no knowledge of God in the Land, Hos. 4. 1. And what Paul witnesses of his
time, Some have not the knowledge of God, I speak this to your shame, 1 Cor.
15. 34. The same is affirmed at this very day, The chief, and who call
themselves the wise Men of this Nation, in this they are found wanting. They
have not the knowledge of God. This is the manner of the People of England that
dwell carelessly, that say in their Hearts, We are and none besides us. Here is
a secret disowning of God above. Or if they acknowledge him by a few acts of
outward Worship; yet they confine all to that. But they have not to do with him
in common actions, and general course of their Life. Here they conclude, they
are lest to themselves, who is Lord over us? some others will have respect unto
God in little trivial concerns; But for those of Greater Moment They do not
take counsel of him, that walk to go down into Egypt, and have not asked at my
Mouth, Isa. 30. 1, 2. They have first invaded this Nation, which occasioned and
raised Wars in the Neighboring Kingdoms: But they did not seek out of the Book
of the Lord, whether such enterprises at first were just and lawful. Why Ramoth
in Gilead was ours before? 1. Kings 22. 2. and under the subjection of the same
King of this Nation. And though now it be in danger to fall into the hands of
the King of Syria; yet they should have done well at the very beginning of all
to have enquired at the Word of the Lord. verse, 5. and then all this might
have been prevented at the very first rise. And now the Land is moved and
divided and by reason of the sores thereof, it shakes; yet it may be made up
and healed by our God. Now Vrim and Thummim are ceased; neither have we Warrant
for additional Immediate Revelation; But God has given us his standing Word in
the Bible, which was confirmed by Signs and Miracles, and diverse Giffts of the
Holy Ghost: whereby God himself did bear witness to it, and did enact and
confirm it as a Law and Direction to our Forefathers, and to us their
Children, and to our Posterity for evermore. He has showed thee O Man, what is
good; and what does the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and love Mercy?
Mic. 6. 8. By this way and method of Righteous and prudent accommodation Ireland
might be sooner recovered and utterly disentangled from out of the hands of the
French King, then by all the Multitude of Men and Horses, Ships and Carriages,
the several Instruments of Death and Cruelty: all which only make a mere noise
and outward show, but there is nothing more in it besides Destruction and
Mischief.

But our Go^erno^^^ate not Governed by the Law of the most High God and so they
do not walk Humbly with him; They do not consider that in the Thing wherein
they deal Proudly, he is above them; they do not consult aright for his Glory;
nor will they obey him so far that he may direct their work in Truth. They have
set up Kings, but not by me; They have made Princes, but I knew it not, Hos. 8.
4. which has been particularly showed with such Evidence and Demonstration of
Divine Truth; that the sinners resort only to their old accustomed method of
stubbornness, despising and bare contradiction; but still it remains firm and
unanswerable. And this has been already done in two distinct Sessions of
Parliament in two short Printed Festimonies of Truth; the first entitled a
Supplemental Tract of Government etc. bearing date Jan. 4. 1689, 90. The
second, Things Plain and Weighty referred to the consideration of both Houses
March, 25. 1690. That peace and Happiness, Truth and Justice, Religion and
Piety may be established among us for all Generations.

For themselves (...) ^ay in the same words in the place where they are
assembled every morning before their solemn consultations, and therefore it may
seem strange (unless an unseen Enemy did blind their Eyes and Hearts, or hinder
from discerning, or turn them aside from the Truth) that when God has showed
them a way in his Word and left the means in their Power; yet they did not go
the right way to preserve, make better and perpetuate the Government; nor to
Restore Peace, nor make Wars to cease: all which by the direction of Gods Word
will be done, to the end of time, and to the ends of the Earth, when they sball
fear the Name of the Lord from the West. Isa. 59. 19. and other Nations will
also do the same, as they have from this understanding People a right example.
And further, there is the Promise of God that future Generations shall Psalm.
102. 28. ^ct ^2. 5.
Continue what we have happily begun. It is only to order things and to
establish them with Judgment and with Justice, from hence forth even for ever.
To observe and do according to those Laws, Rules and Directions which the Lord
has showed and appointed in his Word; and then there would be continued peace
and firm settlement throughout these three Kingdoms, which are united one to
another; and the like might be successively esta^lished throughout the whole
Earth. Let us ^^^e come, and fix upon the sure Foundation of Righteousness.

But otherwise there will be confusion, disturbance and unsetledness of Times,
with the manifold evils and Inconveniences thereof now in this place, besides
the Wrath of God which hereafter comes upon the Children of Disobedience. If
People will go on still in their own Ways and according to their own Thoughts,
this is Sin, Iniquity and Transgression; all which the Lord God of Recompenses
shall surely requite. None calls for Justice, nor any pleads for Truth:
they trust in vanity and speak lies; They conceive mischief and bring forth
iniquity; they has Cockatrice Eggs, and See Isa. 59. throughout.
weave the Spiders Web. He that eats of their Eggs dies; and that which is
crashed breaks out into a Viper. What is done by way of Violence, Humor and
Stub^ornness, will recoyl with greater force and smart upon themselves;
notwithstanding they die as other men; and we see nothing as yet to befall
them. Again, sometimes it is here seen, that what they would suppress does rise
up with greater strength and danger against them. Or if with much subtlety and
contrivance, They weave the Spiders Web; yet these VVebs shall not become
Garments, neither shall they cover themselves with their Works. It may just
skin a thing over; which nevertheless will be seen through. And it does not
answer the ends of Government as to give real peace and assured Preservation.
Indeed it is a little better then nothing, for it is somewhat cast over, which
does neither hide nakedness nor keep warm. And then it is a long time in
transacting and making; but it is all suddenly swept away, and profits nothing
at all afterward.

We have an example and instance hereof in the late Reign; when the King not
observing the Rules of Mercy, Judgment and Righteousness, was not Established
in his Isa. 16. 5.
Throne, but has been since removed. It is observable of those arbitrary and
illegal Acts which he did, That he was two or three years in bringing them to
pass; but they were undone again in two or three days, or less than a week.
And he did offer to do all things for the future as became a Good King. God
knows the secrets and intents of his Heart; and whether it was not more out of
apprehension of danger than real Repentance; but that might have brought him to
a sight of his Sin and Error, and then it would have been real and unfeigned:
for affliction and fear are such a beginning of Repentance as God will accept
of, and therefore we may allow the same to one another in things that they have
trespassed against us. But it was not done according to Righteousness, Equity,
Truth or Christian Forgiveness. In the great National Revolution was that
fulfilled, They proceed from Evil to Evil, and they know not me, says the
Lord, Jer. 9. 3. One unlawful extreme does not excuse and justify another of
despising the Oath of God, breaking his Covenant, and transgressing the Laws of
Righteousness.

There are many Particulars and Circumstances of Sin and Evil of both sides,
which no man knows nor considers the utmost Evil and Abomination of. But
the Lord shall rehearse it, when he writes up his People. He has a Book of
all Nations, Families and single Persons, with an account of the Time and Place
they stand here on the Earth. As likewise he notes the things that they have
already done, and his all-knowing Spirit will bring out the very truth of all
things: Though he now keeps silence, yet he will reprove the several Persons
concerned herein, and set the things they have done before their Eyes: For
there is no respect of Persons with God; for as many as have sinned without
Law, shall also perish without Law, and as many as have sinned in the Law,
shall be judged by the Law Rom, 2. 11, 12. But he that does wrong, shall
receive for the wrong which he has done, and there is no respect of Persons,
Col. 3. 25.

But allege as much as you will of this, it is Scripture and Cant, and is not
minded; so may a common Thief or Murderer, or any Transgressor of man's Laws,
for a time despise, and not regard them: yet Justice will at length apprehend
and Zech. 1. 6.
overcome him. In like manner, the Words and Statutes of the Lord will take
hold of men of every Generation and Country; and as to each part of their Life
after they are come to the knowledge of good and evil. Some do imagine that
they shall escape, because they have the chief of the People, and the
Multitude, and the fashion and the Course of the World on their side. They have
Armies and Fleetes; and such an one is driven away and oppressed, and of
declining Years. He may be taken captive or Killed, or his day come to dye.
What then? We have to do with an Almighty and Everliving God. Our selves and
all the many Inhabitants of the Earth, are but a parcel of dying Men and Women,
and so take them altogether, notwithstanding their number, they are all
contemptible and of small Power. And those who in this time of Trial will
follow a Multitude to do Evil, or side with the course of the World in their
Transgression and Unrighteousness; As sure as God has given a Law to mankind,
and his Word is true, this is the ready way to be condemned with the World, Let
men in the mean while make what alterations they will, all is but as a company
of Worms of the Earth, who vainly think to change Times, Laws and Ordinances;
But they are all just like so many Ants, which are a long time bringing little
Sticks and Straws together; which is all suddenly blown away with one single
blast of Wind; much less will it stand until; or at that day when our God shall
come, and it shall be very tempestuous round about him, Psalm. 50. 3. There can
be no such thing as a Law, unless it be sounded on Divine Right and Eternal
Truth.

And therefore it was a foolish and wicked Imagination of such who know not
God, and did conclude it impertinent to bring Scripture to manifest that in the
late Revolution of putting down one King, and setting up another, the Nation of
England has not done Righteousness; for how could this be known otherwise than
by Scripture, the highest Law, which God himself has given to mankind of every
Nation, Country and Language, Every thing is to be tried and judged by this
supreme Rule of good and evil, truth and falsehood, right and wrong. We are to
be accountable to God for ^ll our Actions, and must receive according to what
we have done. It is God who establishes Kingdoms and Property; and his
Dominion over us is above all man's Government; for this is inferior, and ought
only to be in subordination under God; from whom men receive authority to make
National Laws, and to exercise their own Rule and Dominion: The great Lawgiver
has kept this in his own Power; for his Word and Commandment is left for
Admonition and Reproof, that the Kings and Judges of the Earth do only that
which is just and lawful; but if they do not, they are warned to amend,
otherwise they will be condemned.

God stands in the Congregation of the mighty; he judges among the Gods,
Psalm. 82. 1. There is an assertion of his own Government over all Kings and
Magistrates, unto whom he vouchsafes to give his own Name. And then comes in
afterward by way of Reproof, How long will ye judge unjustly, and accept the
Persons of the Wicked, selap, Verse. 2. Then succeeds his Command, Defend the
Poor and Fatherless, To Justice to the Afflicted and Needy: Deliver the Poor
and Needy; rid them out of the Hand of the Wicked, Verse. 3. 4. And as all
Scripture is profitable for Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness, so in
order to that, it does take notice of what is amiss, they know not neither will
They understand, they walk ^^ i^ darkness, all the Foundations of the Earth are
out of course, verse. 5. and throughout Gods Word and Law there are directions
and commands to set them in right order again. But that remains in a dead
letter, and it is not faithfully handled nor universally applied; for the
Priests have been partial in the Law. They have kept back some part of it, and
have not made known the whole counsel of God unto the People: And also
according to the marginal reading of Mal. 2. 9. They have accepted Faces, by
applying it superficially and favorably to the higher sort of People. As they
have done and do not cease to justify the Wicked for Reward, for some Place or
preferment either already bestowed, or in hope and expectation to be given, And
so it comes to pass that Gods faithful Messengers (who have appeared in their
several Generations as singular) are persecuted and prosecuted. Now God does
lie still and hide himself to see what the Children of Men will do. Though it
is the secret continued Prayer of his Elect and Servants, Arise O God, Judge
the Earth; for thou shall inherit all Nations, Psalm. 82. 8. Yet He will not
before the appointed time. But his Law is given in the mean while, and he does
prove the doings of the Children of Men.

There has been a long and continued controversy in the World throughout
former Generations, and in all Nations; and the same continues at this day, not
only amongst Heathens, Mahometans, Papists, but to our greater shame, even in
the more pure reformed Churches, and at this very instant is in the Land of our
own Nativity: the Substance whereof is to this following effect. Whether the
Laws of God or man shall have the superiority and take place. Whether his Light
is to be extinguished, and his Truth stifled which he would send out, Psalm. 43.
3. if it should reprove the Darkness and Wickedness that is in Palaces and
great Houses, or manifest the Error of their corrupt ways. But mention is made,
verse. 1. of an ungodly Nation, and a deceitful and unjust Man. They would ungod
him, if they could reach up and pull down the High and Lofty One, or lead away
captive (as has been done with dumb Idols) the living and Almighty God; But
because that is not in their Power; They will do as far as is suffered; They
act in opposition to the Father of Lights, James. 1. 17. and do what lies in
them to prevent the rising of the Sun of Righteousness; and afterward stop out
the shining Thereof. When he that dwells between the Cherubims would shine
forth Psalm. 80. 1. They will hinder it what they can; But God does suffer it so
far, for the next thing is, he will stir up his strength verse. 2. and then poor
Creatures, who now provoke the Lord to Jealousy, will find that they are not
stronger then he: in this their short time, they will not bear that word which
convinces of Sin and Unrighteousness; But how then will they endure his
Indignation and Punishment; which that was to warn them of, and put them in a
way how they might escape. Even thy Truth O my God. Psalm. 71. 22. is called a
false and feigned libel, if it does discover their own Falsehood and Hypocrisy.
And it must skulk about in Corners, or be conveyed in a secret place, though
there is stamped upon it the Image and superscription of the Great and Invisible
King; but they are fearful, Rev. 21. 8. to own and confess it before the World;
for they fear the Displeasure of Men more then the Displeasure of God. They
would have Gods service be brought down to Man's purposes, and be so modelled as
to be made consistent with the foolish policy and misapprehended welfare of a
Nation. These things are strange to mention, but themselves know, that their
inward Thought, Pride and Rebellion of Heart is, that though they will
acknowledge with their Tongue and Lips that the Most high rules over the
Kingdoms of Men, and his Dominion is above and over all; yet they would have it
so far come under theirs, That if Gods Laws are contrary, and not agreeable to
humane constitutions, They must not be spoken of Amos 7. 13.
nor laid before our Princes and our Priests, our Lords and Counselors for
fear of Punishment and being prosecuted as one against the Government; when
themselves in this very thing are against the Government of their God. Alas!
How do a small Number of Grasshoppers here on the Earth think of, and would do
toward the great Lord of the World? How do men that shall die, and must appear
before him in judgment, demean themselves toward him now they are but a little
while in the way? Arise O Lord, let not man prevail, let the Heathen be judged
in thy sight, Put them in fear O Lord, that the Nations may know themselves to
be but men. Psalm. 9. 19, 20. Again thus much is signified by what is written,
He rules by his Power for ever, his Eyes behold the Nations: let not the
Rebellious exalt themselves, Psalm. 66. 7. And though the Nations be never so
angry, yet now is the time come that God shall take to himself Psalm. ^^^^
Great Power and Reign. A little opening and appearance thereof does now begin
in this place and Nation, which will be likewise followed in the Habitable
parts of the Earth.

For the matter of contention is not so much between the two Kings, who are
both Pot-sherds of the Earth, and shall each of them several be brought down
to the bars of the Pit, although now they have their Armies and cause their
Terror in the Land of the Living. Cease ye from man whose Breath is in his
Nostrils, for wherein is he to be accounted of? We ought utterly to draw off
from the Persons of each, and not to have them in admiration, and not name them
more then needs must; for by so doing men do forget and lose the knowledge and
fear of the Lord; and are not so sensible of the Glory of his Majesty and
infinite Greatness. But the thing which the Lord does require of our Land is,
that she do not depart from and for sake his Eternal and Immutable Rules of
Judgment and Righteousness, and that his People be very courageous to keep and
to do all that is written in the Law of Moses, that ye turn not aside therefrom
to the right hand or to the left, Josh. 23. 6. So whatever is further commanded
in the Book of Psalms, the Writings of the Prophets, and the Gospel of Christ
declared by the Evangelists and Apostles. All things are to be done according
to his revealed Will, now a little before he arises to shake terribly the
Earth; for the Word of the Lord is right, and all his Works are done in truth,
he loves Righteousness and Judgment Psalm. 33. 4. 5. Righteousness shall go
before him, and shall set us in the way of his Steps. Psalm. 85. 13. Gods Work
ought to b^ done in his own prescribed method, according to what is written,
which is so plain and easy to be understood, that wayfaring men, though Fools,
shall not err therein, unless they run out of willing and set purpose.

Whereas heretofore we were disobedient; and did not all things according to
the Pattern showed us; we are to acknowledge our Iniquity and Transgression,
and from henceforth sorever, we and our Children are to promise unto the Lord
and keep it, to do according as he has said and commanded in his Word; which
we ought in like manner to obey, as if we heard his Voice from Heaven. As we
daily Pray, so we are likewise to do (lest we be found Mockers and Dissemblers
with God, and have our portion with Hypocrites and Unbelievers) his will on
Earth. Which again is not to be measured by what is acted on this stage of Sin
and Confusion, or publicly done in the place where Satan's Seat and Kingdom
is; but as it is clearly written and manifestly revealed by the Word and Spirit
of God, which came down from above, and knows what is God's will. And what is
done in Heaven, the fanie is expected here.

In the Mouth of two or three Witnesses every Word shall be established; and we
have three holy Men of God, who were moved by the holy Ghost, and give
attestation and confirmation to the same thing. He is the Rock, his work is
perfect, for all his ways are Judgment, a God of Truth, and without Iniquity,
just and right is be, Deuteronomy. 32. 4. The Works of his Hands are Verity and
Judgment, and all his Commandments are sure: They stand fast forever and ever,
and are done in Truth and Vprightness, Psalm. 111. 7, 8. By this it appears,
that our late Revolution is none of God's work, in which he is well pleased.
For I the Lord love Judgment, I hate Robbery for burnt Offering; and I will
direct their work in Truth, and I will make an Everlasting Covenant with them,
Isa. 61. 8. So that if People would do the work of God, and come to settlement
and stability of Times; they must only use such means all along as are good,
true, just and lawful, and none others. These are to be known by God's Law
only; for (as aforesaid) that is the supreme Rule of Good and Evil, Truth and
Falsehood, Right and Wrong.

And if thence it does appear, that this Nation has trespassed against their
God, Isa. 58. 2.
and have forsaken and resisted his Ordinance by putting down that Power (which
is asserted, Romans 13. 1. to be of God, though it was an Heathen at the very
time) If this be a Sin and Transgression, then there is no hope to avoid the
present Displeasure, and escape the future Punishment of God, otherwise than by
making a Covenant with our God, and by restoring the King to his right; and
henceforward to tremble at the Commandments of our God, and let it be done
according to his Law, Ezra. 10. 3. The Laws of God are to be set before People;
and they are to be exhorted to the Observance of them; but still men have their
Liberty and full Freedom of Action. If they will not do so out of Conscience
and Obedience to God, they may let it alone; Or (to speak plainly, deliberately
and truly in the Gentile dialect) choose and be damned, according to what they
have done, and involved themselves in from Romans 13. 2. It is at their own Peril
and Danger. The divine Promises and Threatenings are to be used only; but no
outward force and compulsion, for the right Christian Religion does not allow
of any. And here is a Threatening as true as Gospel, which lies expressly against
the Nation and People of England. Which I would not have against my own
particular Person for ten thousand Kingdoms, or the greatest Places of Honor
and Profit, and I would more fear it than to dye an hundred Temporal Deaths.
The Wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against all Unrighteousness of Men,
who hold the Truth in Unrighteousness, Romans 1. 18. It is only revealed and made
known here; but it is to be executed and felt in another Place. So though We
are in the true Reformed Religion; yet We are not (under the aforesaid
Penalty)* to continue and practice any Unrighteousness toward our King, who is
a Member of a false, superstitious and corrupted Church. Thou that abborrest
Idols, do thou commit Sacrilege? So they should not commit any Injustice,
Wrong, Sin or Evil. Thou that mak^st thy boast of the Law through breaking of
the Law, Dishonourest thou God? for the Name of God is blasphemed among the
Gentiles through you. In this National Corruption there have been no less than
five Laws of the second Table expressly violated, as by Dishonouring of and
Disobedience to Parents, Committing of Murder, Theft, bearing False Witness,
Coveting and taking possession of another Inheritance, who was greater than
Naboth, and his inferior did it. Again, if the solemn Oath has been despised,
and the Covenant broken (whereof God alone is to judge and determine of both
sides) then as sure as God is (which is as evident as the Heavens He created
and we see, or that he laid the Foundations of the Earth which we tread on) so
certainly will He recompense it upon their own Head.

Unless all this is prevented by true and unfeigned Repentance, in order to
which it is necessary not only to be sorry, or secretly to bewail, but further
to undo the Fault as much as it can be. And as God was dishonored publicly,
in like manner to regain his Favor. They should publicly acknowledge their
Iniquity to their God, that they have transgressed against him by forsaking his
Ordinance, despising his Oath, and breaking his Covenant. To speak after the
manner of men, That God should have repair for his hurt Majesty, which they
offended and despised, and also have Glory given unto him by confessing their
own shame; for we must do as much to reconcile our selves to an offended God,
as the Great Ones of the Earth require from all that displease them. And this
is the true design and end of Confession. Those Things done in Private, may be
there acknowledged; but in other Things, the acknowledgment should be
altogether as Public as the sin was, according to Lev. 26. 40. Josh. 7. 19.
Ezra 10. 2, 3, 10, 11. Mark 1. 5. Acts 19. 18. And where any thing has been
taken away from any man by False Accusation, He is to be restored to it again;
and the very Truth of all Things to be brought out, and to be known openly
before the World. It might be so ordered and consented unto, That They have
Deputies, faithful, courageous and learned, to implead one another before the
Great Council of the Nation, and Witnesses examined upon Oath of both sides.
Which would be a more Christian and Rational way, than to lead forth Armies to
push at and gore one another, like a Multitude of Bulls and Calves of the
People, Psalm. 68. 30. Man was born more naked and unarmed than those dull
Creatures; but they have found Instruments of Death to knock down and butcher
one another.

And though in these days of Wickedness and Ignorance there is such trusting in
the Arm of Flesh, and Children do rise up against their Parents, to cause them
to be put to Death, and sanctify it with a Fast, and then again after the
Turkish manner, conclude of the Righteousness of their Cause by the Success and
event thereof: Or think to escape because they fulfill the Scriptures, whereas
Judas did the same. But the same Word says, It would have been good for him if
he had never been born. We are not to be surprised or doubtful as to this; for
it was the Question of old time, Wherefore does the way of the wick^d Prosper?
wherefore are all they happy that deal very treacherously? Thou have planted
them, yea, they have taken root, they grow, yea, they bring forth fruit, Jer.
12. 1. 2. And they keep for a while what they obtain by lying Flatteries, (Dan.
11. 21.) Dissimulation, Carnal Policy and Wisdom. But if these were detected,
the other would not stand and endure. As may be gathered (let him that reads,
understand) from what is spoken of in the Prophet Daniel, It cast down the
Truth to the Ground, and it practiced and prospered, Dan. 8. 12. And then
indeed Transgression may prevail and spread abroad. But if Truth were not
fallen in the Street, and Equity could enter; if Truth might once maintain its
Ground, and Righteousness take place; if as soon as the Lord gave the Word,
great would be the company of those that published it, Psalm. 68. 11. The next
immediate consequence is, Kings of Armies did flee apace, Verse. 12. And in a
little process of Time it would be fulfilled all the World over; for lo, the
Kings were assembled, they passed by together, they saw it, and so they
marvelled; They were troubled and hasted away; Fear took hold upon them there,
and Pain as of a Woman in Travail, Psalm. 48. 4. 5. 6. And though now the Kings
set themselves, and the Rulers take counsel together against the Lord, and
against his anointed; yet his single Word and Truth, if it had a free course
and universal spreading, would scatter them all.

As of old Time, when the Lord looked into the Host of the Egytians, through
the Pillar of Fire and of the Cloud, he troubled the Host of the Egyptians; so
it is now at this very day. When he sends forth a Manifestation of his Word,
and displayes a Banner of Truth (which is always done by some outward
Instrument) it does cause Disturbance in the Minds of Men, and is thought to
break their Peace, because it does somewhat interrupt their security and
ignorance in Sin. It does fill their Souls with fear and doubt, and there is a
worse restlesness within then Swords and Staves do cause among the multitude.
And this is but a flight and transient forerunner of that Indignation and
Wrath, Tribulation and Anguish, which shall be upon those who are Contentious,
and do not obey the Truth, but obey Unrighteousness.

Indeed such may be mad, or foolish and inconsiderate, but they can never be
truly courageous, unless they are stupefied, and made blind by Drunkenness,
Pride, Unbelief, gross Ignorance: And when this last a little wears off, they
are furnished with strong Delusions that they should believe a Lie; They
receive in false and mistake Notions; or they are feared by the close hidden
acts of Hypocrisy. For they cannot endure to consider of thoroughly what is
commanded, That no man. (of whatever rank or degree) go beyond and defraud his
Brother (muchless a Father) in any matter, because that the Lord is the avenger
of all such; as we have also fore warned you and testified, 1 These. 4. 6. now
this third time. And they being upon the brink to appear before that God, and
(as we are here told) subject to Evils from the World to come; It is a
mavelous Policy and destructive Mischief so to beguile that they fall in
before they took any care to prevent, or were thoroughly put in mind, and truly
informed hereof. It must be barbarous, and a fiding with the Deceiver of
mankind, to contrive on set purpose to keep People ignorant; and as they think
for the better accomplishment of a present Design to suffer so many to fall
into the future misery, and to let them perish and be destroyed for want of the
right knowledge of things. A report and glimps of Eternity will more startle
than the flashing and noise of Guns, and the doubtful uncertainty of what kind
of endless Life they are just entering upon, will cause great Thought and
searching of Heart; which is more sensible than Wounds and Blows to the outward
Man: For it is at their Peril (without foolish Jesting, or mere outward
Laughter, or a proud contemptuous Smile) if the Kings of the Earth, and the
Great Men, and the Rich Men, and the Chief Captains, and the Mighty Men should
not obey the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ; for such will hide and fear as
much as they brave it out, and seem resolute now. But if they would indeed be
preserved from the Wrath of the Lamb, they must yield Obedience unto what He
has commanded in the Gospel. Therefore all things whatsoever ye would that Men
should do unto you, do ye even so to them, for this is the Law and the
Prophets, Mat. 7. 12. If it be possible, as much as lies in you, live
peaceably with all men, Romans 12. 18. Render therefore to all their Dues, Romans
13. 7. All fair and honest means ought to be used, first to prevent those
mischievous effects of Bloodshed, Poverty, Sickness, continual Fears, which may
terminate in temporal Desolation and eternal Destruction. And even now these
Wounds, and Bruises, and putrefying Sores are broke out, they may yet be
closed, and bound up and mollified with Ointment, instead of the long, severe
and destructive Remedies. And if men will not do according to the Will of God,
and of Christ, take heed lest that also come upon you, which is spoken of in
the following Verse, Your Country is desolate, your Cities are burnt with Fire;
your Land strangers devour it in your presence, and it is desolate as
overthrown by Strangers, Isa. 1. 7. When a Fire or Plague is begun, People do
endeavor to extinguish and stop it as soon as they can. The drawn Sword may be
put up in its Sheath, and the grievousness of War might cease; and (as
aforesaid) Things should be done by way of just Treaty, and prudent
Accommodation.

I am for Peace, but when I speak, they are for War: Nay, They will do
purposely, and more violently against what is here said, because These things
are laid together by a small and despicable Person, whose Spirit God has
stirred and raised him up as an Instrument to convey forth his Truth unto Men;
for I speak nothing of my self, but from his Word only. And therefore their
Murmuring, and Despising, and Rebellion are against the Lord. This ought to be
done by some one, yea, and by many. But whoever had first appeared to cry
aloud, and spare not; Lift up thy Voice like a Trumpet to show the People of
England their Transgressions and their Sins; The same Reproaches and false
Suggestions would have been against them also. For when People have no mind to
receive and obey the Message, it is easy to take exceptions at the Post or
Officer who brings it. But the all-knowing and all-wise God will not be trifled
with, nor deceived: The Great King of all the Earth will find and bring out
those his Enemies, who would not have him Reign over them, but do speak
against, and evil entreat the Messengers whom he has sent:

And now to manifest unto the World that I am sent, and to make evident my
C^mmission, I do declare (as I will answer it before him who is appointed Judge
of the quick and dead) that it is contained in the twenty third Chapter of
Matthew, and the thirty fourth Verse, where Christ promises to the several
Generations, Behold I send Acts 2. 39
unto you Prophets, and Wisemen, and Scribes. And I do affirm according to
Truth, without boasting of my self, that I do come under the last denomination
of a Scribe. I may just observe, that the Prophetical Office was chiefly to
reprove Sin and Transgression, and also they did foretell some future events
which were not presently fulfilled. The first has been done without Partiality
and Respect of Persons; and also some things have been spoken of, which are yet
to come. Moreover if there have been any Words of Knowledge and Wisdom
delivered, let others judge. But a Scribe is such an one who is instructed in,
and reasons out of the Law; which is the very same what I have done as to
National Affairs: For the several things which I have published to the World
are an opening, and alleging, and reasoning out of the Scriptures, the Law of
the Most high God.

I have been educated at the School of the Prophets; for I was six Years at
Magdalen Hall in Oxford, and took one degree: I was there twice sworn the Oath
of Allegiance and Supremacy. And now it comes to pass that the same Oath which
such a vast multitude of Priests and People have despised, has taken hold of
me, and has obliged me to act after this manner. For I did Swear twice in the
Reign of Charles the second, Him and them (innuendo his Heirs and Successors,
under which his Brother is comprised) will I defend, according to the utmost of
my Power. Now the Weapons of our Warfare are not Carnal, but Spiritual, and no
other ought to be used according to the right Christian Religion. For these
last six Years I have been at several times resident in and about the City of
London: I was entered into the Society of the Middle Temple, and observed the
Customs of the House for several successive Terms; and I did for a while study
the Statute and Common Laws of this Nation: So that I came all along in a
regular way, and was furnished from the Laws of God and Man, to have pleaded
the Cause of the Oppressed King. And for my part, being assured only of the
Protection of the invisible God, and trusting to that Promise, His Truth shall
be thy Shield and Buckler, Psalm. 91. 4. I was not afraid to speak openly and
boldly as I ought to speak. Though both Houses of Parliament, by reason of
contrary Practice (as may be understood from Jer. 2. 26. Mark 8. 38.) were
ashamed to hear such Words; which would have reproved, and set in order before
them their Sin and Transgression in the very same place where it was committed.
And so they may still, if they are willing to run the danger of rising up to
everlasting Shame and Contempt, and have the Son of man be ashamed of them,
when he comes in the Glory of his Father with the holy Ang^ls. says the Lord,
And it shall come to pass, that whosoever will not hearken to my Words which he
shall speak in my Name, I will require it of him, Deuteronomy. 18. 19. Now that
Prophet was Christ, who has conveyed down to others the same Authority and
Commission, He that hears you, hears me; and he that despises you,
despises me; and he that despises me, despises him that sent me, Luke 10.
16. For such would not hear Christ himself, if they had lived in the same
Generation with him; Neither would they be persuaded, if Christ should come
once again into the World after the same manner as he did; But his next coming
is unto Judgment.

Peradventure, our Lords and Counselors did go upon Error and Deceit of their
own Heart, and did therefore refuse to hear the Law of their God; because they
might think that if the Word was not proclaimed and spoken out viva voce, They
might then more safely contemn God's Word and Commandment, and have such a^
excuse for their Sin; not considering the God with whom we have to do: Who
understands our Thoughts afar off, Psalm. 139. 2. and knows that themselves only
hindered, and would not suffer his Word to be spoken out. For I delivered in
Printed Cases, and also sent a written Petition to the same purpose: And when I
could not have it delivered in and read, I ordered my Petition to be printed
and given to the Members severally (if perhaps any would move thereon) though I
knew before this was contrary to Custom and Usage, and therefore I was at first
unwilling so to do; but this kind of necessity and urgency did press me
forward. For my part I would leave no means undone to discharge my Conscience
fully toward God: But He knows that I was directed and put in mind long
before, That this is a rebellious People, lying Children, Children that will
not hear the Law of the Lord, Isa. 30. 9. And thereupon according to what is
said in the foregoing Verse, and also I was showed the same in the Light of
God's Spirit, Now go and get it printed in a Book; which I accordingly did, and
delivered to the several Members on April 2. 1690. for which I was committed to
Custody (it being by them called a Seditious Pamphlet) and so I remained under
confinement for four Weeks, and afterward was with great care sent down into
the Country, to be remote from London. I gave away about an hundred of those
stitcht Books, and would have more ready if I had been permitted; for I ordered
a thousand, which were more then sufficient for all the Representatives of the
whole Nation: But however, they had sufficient to notify it unto the residue
of the Members; and they may yet understand and be instructed aright, that the
Word (which God sends through a contemptible earthen Vessel) spoken (or
written, for that longer remains) is steadfast, and every Transgression and
Disobedience shall receive a just recompense of Reward.

As they do all profess themselves to be Members of the Church of England, so
they are to be advertised of somewhat out of her Liturgy in the Exhortation
before the Communion; Therefore if any of you be a Blasphemer of God, an
hinderer or slanderer of his Word, repent you of your Sins, or else come not to
that holy Table. But because ye have the outward Administration thereof in your
own Power; and your Bishops, Priests and Deacons are involved in, and carried
away with the same corruption; They will nevertheless dispense the Holy
Sacrament unto you, though ye do still continue in and practice the same Sins.
But yet be ye assured and forewarned from the truth and determination of God,
that notwithstanding ye do still partake of the outward part or sign, yet ye
will be deprived of the thing signified thereby: That is, now of the true Grace
and Spirit of God, and hereafter (to speak in plain terms) ye will be
excommunicated and shut out from Heaven. And ye can no more enter there against
his Decree and Will, than now ye can fly up, and of your own strength cause
the Heavens to be opened to receive you. God will not admit them there, who
would not suffer him to reign over them here on Earth by his Word, and the
Messengers appointed to publish and make it known; who are necessary for the
exercise and administration of his Kingdom and Dominion over Men. I speak to
our Rulers, judge ye in your selves. How would any earthly King receive it, to
have his Ambassadors and Officers, yea, an inferior Herald or Post disturbed,
and interrupt and stopped in the execution of his business? We are his Servants,
and must do according to what our great Lord and Master sends us; and if any
Injury is offered us, he takes it upon himself, and will punish according to
Mark 12. 4, 5, 9. And if my self should be killed or scourged, or persecuted
from place to place; whosoever shall presume to do it, either secretly or
openly, God knows it all one, they must also take what follows, That upon you
may come all the Righteous Blood shed upon the Earth, Mat. 23. 35. The greatest
Emperors, Kings, Princes and Potentates will find one higher than they. The
inferior Judges, Magistrates and Officers will meet with one, whom they were
as much bound to obey as their respective Masters. Great swelling Words will be
changed into doleful Cries and Lamentations: Instead of domineering and
insulting over those whom they had once Prisoners before them, will succeed
trembling at their presence; and such will be strangely abashed to see them
become their Judges. God will arise and maintain his own Cause, and the boldest
Persecutors of them all shall at length find, He that touches you, touches
the Apple of his Eye, Zech. 2. 8. He had better run his own Finger into his own
Eyes and bore them out, rather than do those things to be cast into Hellfire.
This harsh, but true expression may be further gathered from Mat. 18. 6, 7, 8,
9.

And though it is in a less degree of Reproach, Slander or Reviling, Curses or
hard Speeches against the Person of such an one: Surely men know not, nor
consider what they do herein: Because for thy sake I have born Reproach, Shame
has covered my Face: I am become a Stranger unto my Brethren, and an alient
unto my Mother's Children. For the Zeal of thine House has eaten me up: and
the Reproaches of them that reproached thee are fallen upon me, Psalm. 69. 7, 8,
9. To speak against, or evil of any one, who does not handle the Word of God
deceitfully, but by manifestation of the Truth, commending himself to every
man's Conscience in the fight of God, and to recriminate upon the Instrument
which conveys it forth, because the Word convinces of Sin, and of
Righteousness, and of Judgment: This does first manifest their own guilt and
contrary practice, and to reply against it, is to reply against God, Romans 9.
20. It is answering again and disputing, and a kind of blaspheming the Holy One
of Israel: For such are resolved not to do the thing, and are so far from
coming to Repentance, and turning from their Iniquities, that they harden and
confirm themselves yet more in their sinful ways. They will utter and speak
hard things, and the Workers of Iniquity boast themselves, Psalm. 94. 4. see
verse. 20. And these are the hard Speeches which Ungodly Sinners have spoken
against him, Jude 15. This shows the exceeding sinfulness of Reproach, which
has more or less aggravation, according to the particular kind, of Jer. 18. 18.
sayings; which were invented and promoted by the Father of Lies; who is
suffered to resist the Servants of God, and does it with an intent and purpose
to make them as Liars, and through them to derogate from God's Glory and Truth;
that, if possible, the Word which goes forth out of his Mouth should return to
him void, and not accomplish that which he pleases, nor prosper in the thing
whereto he sends it: for to this tend the Devices and Wickedness of Satan, the
adversary of God's Kingdom.

But let those who have any reverence or fear of God, take heed how they speak
of him and his Truth, which appears forth through his Servant: for that indeed,
and not so much the outward Person, is the Thing chiefly admired at. I am as a
Wonder (in the new Translation it is Monster) unto many; but thou art my strong
Refuge, Psalm 71. 7. For whether we be besides our selves, it is to God, 2 Cor.
5. 13. Christ himself had the imputation of Madness. And when his Friends (in
the Marginal Reading it is Kinsmen) heard of it, they went out to lay hold on
him; for they said, He is besides himself, Mark 3. 21. The Scribes who
understood a little more, did blaspheme against the Holy Ghost, because they
said, he has an unclean Spirit, Verse. 30. And to say, such an one is an But
busiast or Fanatic, in the plain and proper signification is to affirm, He is
possessed with the Spirit of the Devil, such as did reside amongst the Oracles of
Old, or in the Heathen Temples: And therefore though it be a gentile and hasty
Word, People should be exceeding cautious on whom they affix it. For we must
expunge many places out of Scripture, confirmed by experience, if we deny the
workings of God's Spirit in these days; but it is subject unto, and keeps
within the bounds of his Revelation. And then if this or that Person should
have the true Spirit of God and of Christ, it would be the very same Blasphemy.
But if they have called the Master of the Household Beelzebub; much more will
they call those of the Household. We read again, that Himself has the same
double Reproach cast on him: And many of them said, He has a Devil, and is
mad; why hear ye him? John 10. 20. If we go back to the Old Testament, we shall
find somewhat to the same purpose. The young man, the Prophet, was thus styled
by one of the Captains of the Host that were sitting, Wherefore came this mad
fellow to thee? 2 Kings 9. 11. A short question, and exactly agreeable to the
Language of the proud men of these days. Again, we read of one who sent
Letters unto all the People who are at Jerusalem, and to Zepheniah the Son of
Masaiah the Priest, and to all the Priests to put them in mind; whereas they
were Officers in the House of the Lord for every man that is mad, and makes
himself a Prophet; that thou should put him in Prison, and in the Stocks; Now
therefore why have thou not reproved Jeremiah, of An^thoth, which makes
himself a Prophet to you? Jer. 29. 25, 26, 27. But it may be afterward seen in
the following Verses what is pronounced on Shemaiah the Nehelamite, because he
thus taught Rebellion against the Lord. Again, it is written, The Prophet is a
fool, The Spiritual Man is mad, for the multitude of thine Iniquity, and the
great Hatred, Hos. 9. 7. Here is added the very reason of throwing out such a
false Reproach, viz. Multitude of Iniquity and Great Hatred; for sin, when it
is committed, does leave guilt behind: And when it comes to be reproved and
manifested, that is stirred up: And then there is Conviction, Shame, Fear and
Anguish of Spirit; all which are very troublesome and disquieting, and thence
does arise an hatred and enmity against such who do this Office. Says our Lord
and Savior, The World hates me, because I Testify of it that the Works
thereof are evil, Joh. 7. 7. But they deserve more to be hated who do the evil,
then Christ who Testifies of it. Blessed are ye when Men shall hate you, and
when they shall separate you from their Company, and shall reproach you, and
cast out your Name as evil, for the Son of Man's sake (for doing so, as we have
him and them for an Example) In the like manner did their Fathers unto the
Prophets, Luke 6. 22. 23. Blessed are they which are persecuted for
Righteousness sake: Blessed are ye when Men shall revile you, and persecute
you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely for my sake, Mat. 5.
10, 11. for being faithful in that Ministry to which he has called us. Here it
is most comprehensively expressed, and extends unto all manner of evil and
falsehood, which the utmost wit and malice of limited Creatures can invent and
speak forth. And therefore if such an one it of a sound mind and clear
understanding (I speak of my self, and of the Things which I have written
touching the King) It is a contradiction and abominable lie to say, he is non
compos Mentis; But yet a malicious and false imputation may be cast and
endeavored to be fastened on any one. And also, what is a little new or
unusual, or does somewhat exceed common apprehension, may seem to the vulgar
sort, yea, and be called by them madness; but this is so trivial, that it is
sufficient answer only to take notice of such an Ignorant Calumny.

I am liable to be represented, as one of different Notions, because of a
different shape by reason of my personal Deformity and Lameness; whereby I do
vary somewhat from the rest of mankind. But the Lord is the Maker of us all.
And he who fashioned me in the Womb, and took me out of my Mother's Bowels,
might have so formed them who either have already, or shall reproach me in this
wise. They are to remember, that themselves also are in the Body subject to
sickness from within, to Hurt and Casualty from without. I was not born so for
mine own Sin, nor for my Parents, but that the Works of God should be mad^
manifest. And it may be the more remembered (I hope not for a Witness and
Testimony against them) that such an one came down to the place of the whole
Assembly of this Nation, with the Truth which God bad showed unto his Servant,
and with his Staff in his Hand: He had no other Genesis 32. 10.
Weapon, and would not have had that, but he went Halting as did the Patriarch
whose words are here made use off. And this will be a further sign and token,
that they cannot pretend Ignorance of the man, or his business in the day of
Recapitulation of all things.

But the greater strangeness is imagined to be within me; I have written the
great things of thy Law, but they were counted as a strange thing, Hos. 8. 12.
said the Prophet in his time; and within the compass of this year, the like
imputation has been cast upon my particular Person, for what I have brought
out of the same Book of Scripture. But to cause the Reproach offered by them to
cease, and to turn their own reproach upon them, Dan. 11. 18. I will tell any
one that thinks so, where the strangeness of all lies, even in Man's
Transgression. Either the not observance of what is commanded, or doing those
things which are contrary to the Laws of God and Truth. In Transgressing and
Lying against the Lord, and departing away from our God, speaking oppression
and revolt, conceiving and uttering from the Heart words of falsehood. By not
doing of Righteousness, but forsaking the Ordinance of their God, nor taking
heed to the Ordinances of Justice. It is Men's strange kind of actions, which do
draw and necessitate from my Tongue and Pen what may seem strange kind of
expressions: For I do only speak of them according to their very nature, and as
they are done. But more especially when the Thoughts of their Heart come to be
revealed, and those secret imaginations are made known by that Word which is a
discernes of the Thoughts and intents of the Heart, there must be yet more
strange kind of expressions, odd pastages, uncouth, uncommon, they know not
what to make off or term them. If one should mention how they fret themselves,
and are apt to curse their God and their King, It would pass for an hard
saying; when all this is far worse in them that do it, then in those who only
take notice thereof in order to admonish them to stand in aw and Sin not. All
the strangeness is in themselves; and accordingly the Spirit who searches all
things and speaks the very Truth, calls them strange Children, Psalm. 144. 11.
For nothing can be more strange then that Man should be Disobedient to his God,
that the Children which the Lord has brought up should rebel against him. But
further they must be known, and also spoken forth in order to the casting down
Imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self against the knowledge
of God, and bringing into captivity every Thought to the Obedience of Christ.
When these Imaginations and Thoughts are clearly and truly brought out to
public view; they quite fall to the Ground, and never rise again.

I appeal to any one who knows Truth, and can apprehend common sense that in
the several things I have published to the World, I have all along delivered my
self in plain, common, obvious, familiar and intelligible Expressions. I have
spoken forth the Words of Truth and Soberness; though it is hard to express the
mad and foolish Actions of mankind to the very Life and Reality, and not to be
reputed so ones self. All those that fear God, and those that have known his
Testimonies, Psalm. 119. 79. can also judge of these things. And though what I
have more lately done, in opposing the High and Universal Corruption of this
present Time, has met with Strife and Contention, S^ubbornness and despising,
all kinds of Reproach and contrary Usage; yet the Reason of all is, because
People are Contentions, and do not obey the Truth, but obey Unrighteousness,
Romans 2. 8. They have made void God's Law, Psalm. 119. 126. and his Commandments
of none effect: Therefore the Law is slacked, and Judgment does never go forth;
for the Wicked does compass about the Righteous, therefore wrong Judgment
proceeds, Hab. 1. 4. For they have indeed acted contrary to what the Law
commands and requires. Nevertheless, all knowing People may yet judge of
whatever I have here said, or in the two forecited Treatises concerning our
Great National Sin and Transgression, by this certain and infallible Rule of
the Prophet, That we might turn from our Iniquities, and understand thy Truth,
Dan. 9. 13. Then it will appear unto them, as clear and evident, as the most
plain and simple proposition now does. If People will not do this, but go on
still with all deceiveableness of Unrighteousness, there is no Remedy, but they
shall perish. Because they received not the love of the Truth, that they might
be saved; and for this cause God shall send them strong Delusions, that they
should believe a Lie: That they all might be damned, who believed not the
Truth, but had Pleasure in Unrighteousness, 2 These. 2. 10, 11, 12. All which
Words are observable, and very terrible.

To unfold the Mystery of Iniquity a little, and somewhat to lay open the
working of Satan with all deceiveableness of Unrighteousness: It will be
necessary to observe with what kind of words he tempted our Parent in the first
Transgression; and has all along, and does yet continually set himself against
God's ways, to keep up the mist of Ignorance and Unbellef, to hold people in
their Perplexity and Confusion of Disobedience and Transgression; and he does
use all means to hinder men from coming to Repentance, and the Knowledge of the
Truth. And as God would accomplish that by right Words, so he does endeavor to
imitate in like things, by tempring Mankind to do after their own Thoughts, and
after the Imaginations of their own Evil and Corrupt Heart: And also his
Emissaries go about subverting People with false, corrupt and deceitful Words;
which are, and may be published with License and Authority. But the Inhabitants
of his Earth are ashamed, or afraid to receive the Truth of him, who is Lord
and Governor of the World, who fills all Places and all Things with his
presence. Poor Creatures! Your Hour will quickly be at an end, and the Power of
Darkness will be suddenly gone off; and then ye shall remember and discern,
which Master it was better to have served, God or the World.

As the Man of Sin does so mightily beat off People from the Scriptures,
because his own Ways and Corruption are so much condemned therein. So do others
at this day for the very same Reason, put an opprobrious term upon the Language
of the holy Ghost: or it is not so gentile and fashionable, nor agreeable with
the Humor of the Age. They cry it out for impertinent and foolish; yea, there
are an hundred kind of Surmises, and like sayings, whereby the Word of the Lord
is made a Reproach to me, and a Derision daily, Jer 20. 8. They reject and will
have none of it. But what says the answer of God unto them? Hear O Earth,
Behold I will bring Evil on this People, even the Fruit of their own Thoughts,
because they have not hearkened to my Words, nor to my Law, but rejected it,
Jer 6. 19. All their other Religion is vain; their Worship and Devotion is to
no purpose, for it does not please God. Your burnt-Offerings are not
acceptable, nor your Sacrifices sweet unto me, Verse. 20. He that turns away
his Ear from hearing the Law, even his Prayer shall be abomination, Prove. 28.
9. Even at this day, and in this Nation; The Wise Men are ashamed, they are
dismayed and taken; Lo, they have rejected the Word of the Lord, and what
Wisdom is in them? Jer. 8. 9. It would be Nonsense, and a Lie to say, if one
heard a Lawyer cite several express Acts of Parliament, according to the very
Sense, and the plain and common Understanding of the same Words, yet such an
one did not argue to the Purpose; for all is foreign and impertinent besides
what is thence alleged. And so our Great Lawmakers and Counselors are very
fond of the^^ own Constitutions, to do all things exactly according to the form
and direction thereof; But they did not attend, how in the late Revolution,
they did at once strike at all the Statute and common Laws of this Kingdom,
which are said to be vested in Scrinio Regis; and also they did unhinge those
very Laws, which do give and adjust to themselves their own respective Honors
and Estates, and establish Property; And therefore they should do well to lift
the right Door again upon the Hinges. This is Truth, though is may seem a kind
of Human Reasoning; but yet does show how Judgment is turned away backward, and
Justice stands afar off, and Equity cannot enter.

If our Proud Men think themselves too good to be Subjects and Jer. 13. 1^.
Servants unto God, yet, whether they will or not, they are his Creatures: He
is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. There is no removing the Government off
from his Shoulders, nor getting themselves from under it; as may, and has been
done to the Son of Man. And whosoever are so stout as not to mind Scripture,
God's revealed Law, are at this time Transgressors against the same, and shall
be at the last day condemned by it. This would be alike sensible, if we had the
same knowledge of him that is invisible, and consideration of Futurity, as we
have now regard to our Kings and Governors after the Flesh, and take care for
the present time; for (as before intimated) the Law of our God is written in a
Book, and may in like manner be understood as the Laws, Customs and Manners of
this or that Country we live in.

There are many Words in the World, and none of them is without Signification;
for they have respect unto Things; and what expresses things as they are, the
very Nature and Connection of them together, That is Truth. Now because many of
them are hidden, afar off, unseen, and not heard, it is the office of Reason to
search them out, and to bring them near by Probability and Witnesses. So there
may be many Words, and a long course of Reasoning to bring out one single
Truth. And then opposite to Truth and Reason, are Falsehood and Imagination. We
may evidently perceive that all things are Gods, and that his Word is perfect
and true, for that speaks of every thing according to its Nature (either in
express Words or just Consequence, though this is many times hidden, and not
discernable) which belong to mankind, from the greatest to the least, except
what may be known from our selves, and the most common observation. So all is
but vain and deceitful Words, which do not spring up, nor may be gathered from
this ground of Truth. This is left as a standing Rule to try the Doctrines
whether they be of men or no. And we may further know Truth by the
Understanding which is given us: for Truth (if it be clearly apprehended) has
a full conviction over the Heart and Conscience. Notwithstanding the shifts and
tricks, the disputing and crafty eluding, ^et there does remain a firm
persuasion in the mind which cannot be ^^t off. When the Spirit of the mind
suggests to the man, This is the ver^ Truth, it is exceeding dangerous to
resist or do despite to that; to be ^^^bborn against or despise it, to forget,
or be willingly Ignorant.

And hence we may learn to take a judgment and estimation of the Wisdom of
man's Words, fine Flourishes, smooth Language, or of notional unnecessary
things, which may delight a little, but perish in the Reading: there is nothing
in them, and it is all blown away as Chaff: But more especially are we to take
heed of the Leaven of the Pharisees (which they mingle amongst, and thereby
corrupt the Bread of Life) viz. their several kind of Glosses, Distinctions,
and their own Inventions, mere human Expositions and Traditions. Many ignorant
People give more regard to the Opinions and Sayings of such a Rabbi or Teacher,
than to what Christ, the Prophets and Apostles speak, or even what God himself
speaks by them. Indeed there was at first appointed a Peculiar, and distinct
Office of Men to turn his People away from Iniquity, Mal. 2. 6. and to turn
them to Righteousness, Dan. 12. 3. But instead thereof, They strengthen the
Hands of Evildoers, that None does return from his Wickedness, Jer. 23. 14.
And either conceal, or flatter them in Unrighteousness; and sooth them up in
the committing of those things, of which God has said, The Soul that sins,
it shall dye, Ezekiel. 18. 4. They are rather Men-pleasers (and yet that is a sad
way of pleasing men, to lead them blindly on to eternal Misery) then the
Servants of Christ; for as he taxed the Pharisees of old time, so do these now
reject the Commandment of God, that they may keep in favor with the chief
Princes of this Nation. For Moses said, Honor M^rke 7. 10, 11, 12, 13.
thy Father and thy Mother; and whosoever curses Father or Mother, let him dye
the Death. But ye will excuse, and vindicate, and justify, if the Children
shall not only take away the Right and Inheritance of the Father, but after
they have taken Possession, they proceed to Kill and Murder; as carrying on
unjust Wars, is intentional Murder all along. And this is that they may be
profitted, though the outward pretense is for the Protestant Religion against
Popery; Whereas if it were really so, yet if ye had a right knowledge of the
Glory and Work of the Lord; The One is not to be advanced, nor the other
carried on by sinful means. It is a wrong and contrary Method, to build up Zion
with Blood, and Jerusalem with Iniquity, Micah 3. 10. But our Priests and
Prophets do not exhort them to do Right and Equity to their Father, Making the
Word of God of none effect through your own Expositions, which ye have
delivered; and many such like things doye.

God is my Witness, whom I serve in ^he Gospel of his Son, and as I hope for
any Mercy at his Hand, I do here declare, That what I have already, and do now
here^^, is also out of a greater Zeal and Emulation for the Truth and
^xcellency of the pure Reformed Religi^^; which at this day ^e^ under much
Scandal and Reproach by falsification of an Oath and manifest Unrighteousness.
This Zeal of mine is according to Knowledge, and the certain direction of God's
written Word, both of the Old and New Testament. For we are not to use
Oppression, nor exercise Robbery, nor oppress the Stranger wrongfully, Ezekiel.
22. 29. See the next Verse, I will be a swift Witness against the Strangers,
and against those that Oppress the Fatherless, and that turn aside the Stranger
from his Right, Mal. 3. 5. We ought to give no occasion that the Way of Truth
be evil spoken of: We are to have our Conversation honest amongst the Gentiles,
and to walk as the Children of God without rebuke. Recompense to no man Evil
for Evil: Be not overcome of Evil, but overcome Evil with Good, Romans 12. 17.
21. as such is the design of the Law and the Prophets, Christ and his Apostles.
If our Ways and our Doings are contrary, God sees it, and it displeased him
that there was no judgment, Isa. 59. 15. And some one or more should appear
forth publicly to testify against this National Sin and Corruption. What I
have done herein, was to clear a great point, which is to manifest the Most
perfect Holiness and Vprightness of God, who does not allow to do Evil that
Good may come. As God is Righteous in all his Ways, and Holy in all his Works;
so according to his certain promise, Judgment shall return unto Righteousness,
and all the Upright in Heart shall follow it, Psalm. 94. 15.

So that it is not a matter of Indifferency what any one thinks, or speaks, or
does herein; but we are to side with the King Immortal, Invisible and only Wise
God against this Transitory World, the Folly, Falsehood and Corruption which are
seen therein. We ought to search and enquire diligently what is written, and to
speak and do as We that shall be judged by the Law of God in Scripture. Not
giving so much heed to them, whom the Word says, and Experience confirms,
But ye are d^parted out of the way; ye have caused many to stumble at the Law;
ye have corrupted the Covenant of Levi, says the Lords of Hosts, Mal. 2. 8.
whose assertion may so^^er be believed than their own Vindication. They may be
more properly styled followers of Mahomet, than of Moses or Christ, for these
were faithful in all their House; But they, according to the Impostors Doctrine
will call such a thing an especial Providence, and Immediate Deliverance sent
by God, though the means (by which it came to pass) are against his express
Word and written Revelation. But what, if some that handle the Law, know not
God? shall this diminish from the Righteousness of God, or take away from the
Purity and Uprightness of his Law? God forbid; yea, let God be true, and every
man a Liar, as it is written; That thou might be justified in thy Sayings,
and overcome when thou art judged. We are sure that all Scripture came by
Inspiration from God, and therefore all is Truth what that says. And whatever
the Practices of others are to keep their places, or to make a gain of
Godliness, (so called, but rather Hypocrisy) or procure and retain the favor
of the great Ones; yet such will be the greatest losers in the end: for there
is a real Truth and Signification in these Words, Blessed are they that keep
Judgment, and He that does Righteousness at all times, Psalm. 106. 3. And though
at this present short time, There is one event to the Righteous and to the
Wicked, to him that swears, or he that fears an Oath; Yet it will be
certainly better with those who have continued whole and steadfast in the
Covenant of their God, and have preserved a good Conscience in all things. So
it will be seen and experienced, when of this, and every day of our Life, after
years of discretion, we shall be called to Account; which will also extend to
every Idle and false word that men do now speak. The time, place, circumstances
and aggravations of such wilful Sins and deliberate Acts of Disobedience will
be manifested, as they were day by day committed. And then it will be no excuse
to have justified the wicked for Reward, or for fashion, or because they had
the greatest number of their side, or out of any wrong or indirect Principle.
They act foolishly, and are ignorant, who flourish over and vindicate the
Violent perverting of Judgment and Justice in a Province; for they may now Read
and Understand, that the Most Highest regards the Matter, and there is Higher
than they, who will set things at right again. That woe which is now denounced
against them who call Evil good, and Good evil, shall at length terminate in
execution and misery.

It is a sad Thing to consider that any People for profit and advantage, for
pride and pleasure, to get or keep the good will of their superior fellow
Creatures, should whilst they live do those things, for which after Death they
shall suffer punishment: And they should be more careful fearful to humor and
comply with a parcel of Dying Men, whose Gifts perish with them, and their Fury
vanishes into nothing, then they are to please an Almighty Father and
Everliving God. Do ye think the Scripture says in vain? Trust in him at all
times, ye People, pour out your Heart before him: God is a Refuge for us;
Selah. Surely Men of Low degree are Vanity, and Men of High degree are a Lie:
To be laid in the Balance they are altogether lighter then Vanity. Trust not
in Oppression, and become not vain in Robbery: If Riches increase, set not your
Heart upon them. God has spoken once, twice have I heard this, that Power
belongs unto God. Also unto thee, O Lord, belongs Mercy; for thou rendrest
to every Man according to his Work, Psalm. 62. 8, 9, 10, 11.

God has wisely established things for a Life of Trial, and an Obedience of
Faith, and to exercise our Trust on him. He has given us the Law and the
Testimony, and the Light that is in them, to discern and know Good and Evil,
Truth and Falsehood, Right and Wrong, Substance and Vanity. And the Salvation
which we expect from our God, should always keep us in that steadfast purpose of
mind, as not to commit any deliberate Sin, nor to continue in any known
Transgression, nor to practice Hypocrisy, nor to leave Duty undone for to
accomplish present things. If men did not talk of it as a Word of Course, but
do really desire to get to Heaven (as now they see the outside, and they must
certainly go off from this Earth) then they must not do those things that lead
a contrary way, as that Word (which reveals the invisible things within, and
the necessary means to obtain) does expressly declare. It is no jesting matter,
but rather a sad sign that the Curse of God, which is a forerunner of his
punishment, is fallen upon people when they add Iniquity to their Iniquity, and
not come into thy Righteousness, Psalm. 69. 27. For the next thing which
succeeds, is to be blott^d out of the Book of the living, and not be written
with the Righteous, Verse. 28. and that is ten thousand times worse then to lose
their Lives, Liberties and Estates.

And whereas it is further surmised, our pure Reformed Religion is more dear,
and that would be endangered; It is here deliberately and advisedly affirmed,
That the Doctrines and Practices of these corrupt Times are more dangerous and
prejudicial to Souls, than all the Errors and Supersti^ions of Popery: for that
same Word (which instructs in the way of Salvation, and makes known what is the
pure and undefiled Religion before God) does speak much more against Perjury,
Lying, Unrighteousness, Disobedience to Parents, Revenge, false Accusation,
Hypocrisy and an Hypocritical Nation, and such like, then it does against
Idolatry, Superstition, and false Worship. But the Will of God is, (which we
must also do, if we would be saved) that we abstain from them all. Thou
declarest upon Oath that the Pope cannot depose Heretical Princes, and that
neither he, nor any Person whatsoever, has Power to absolve thee of this Oath,
or any part thereof; but what if God should judge that Protestant Laymen
cannot absolve subjects from their Oath and Allegiance to a Popish King? In
Truth, neither can one do it, nor yet the other. The same God, who commands
that we keep from Idols, does likewise enjoin that we do no wrong, and that we
abstain from all appearance of evil. It is both folly and Wickedness to run
from one unlawful extreme to another; and God will show and manifest that there
is no necessity to proceed from evil to evil, and they know not me, says the
Lord, Jer. 9. 3.

It is impertinent and irk some to explain things so every particularly; but
People are dull of apprehension: fears and jealousies are endless: and more
especially a consciousness of guilt and wrong is not easily satisfied, for it
hopes to have this excuse for their Sin, a surmise of Danger, and they venture
upon these doubtful things to make more sure against it: for so they call such
things which are as evidently a breach of the Law, as Adultery and Fornication
are against the seventh Commandment, and are more certainly Sins, then
Drunkenness is one, as themselves may know, for compare their Actions with the
Law, and their own Thoughts will accuse them. When the Soul has departed from
the Law of the most High, she seeks out for this or that Imagination to pacify
(but it cannot satisfy) the grumblings with in at this present time; and which
she vainly and falsely hopes will save harmless as to the future. But
notwithstanding all the Deceiveableness of Unrighteousness, strong Delusions,
and human Allegations; Yet Gods Glory is not, nor can be advanced by sinful
means. For, The just Lord is in the midst of us, he will not do. Iniquity,
Zeph. 3. 5. and we ought to suffer himself according to his own Gracious
Promise to direct our Work (if we sincerely intend it for him, or otherwise it
is damnable Hypocrisy), in Truth, Isa. 61. 8. If we would indeed ride
Prosperously, It must be because of Truth, and meekress and Righteousness. For
whosoever does the Work of the Lord, must do it only in the Good and right way,
which himself does direct all along, and chalk out in his Word. And this does
strictly forbid all manner of Sin and falsehood. They also do no Iniquity, they
walk in his ways* thy Word is very pure Psalm. 119. 3. and verse. 140. Sanctify
them through thy Truth, thy Word is Truth. John 17. 17. neither is the least
evil to be done for the best end. Will ye speak wickedly for God, and talk
deceitfully for him? Job. 13. 7. and to the same purpose is Romans 3. 7. 8.

Here I have not so much to do with the clamours of the Multitude; but I ought
to give an account to the Saints that are on the Earth, and the true Servants
and Worshippers of God; who can better understand and judge of these things.
But ye know that every Scribe instructed in the Kingdom of God, if he would be
faithful in all his House ought to speak out all that (...) is commanded and
made known from the whole Scripture according to Deuteronomy. 18. 8. Psalm. 18. 22.
Jer. 26. 2. Mat. 23. 20. and so ye ought to receive and give attendance unto
all Deuteronomy. 27. ^^.
Gods Word, and to diminish nothing, nor lose ought of it. And then, If ye mark
diligently what is here, and all along said, ye will find that I speak not
these Things as a man, but both Law and Gospel say the very same. I speak
nothing of my self, nor do I use mere Human Arguments, but I make mention of
Gods Righteousness, even of thine only, Psalm. 71. 16. And therefore I do use
(according to that disd^i^f^l term of Reproach) such a farrago of Scriptures,
hodge podge, as they are tagged together. If the same imputation is endeavored
to be fastened on me, as was on those Jer. 20. 7. Mat. 27. 63. 2. Cor. 6. 8. My
answer is the same; for I speak all along out of the Word of Truth, and make
use of the Armor of Righteousness on the right Hand, and on the left.

Do not blame me, but let the Prophet Ezekiel arise forth and answer for
himself, as one that would bring in Heathenism and destroy the true Worship of
God; for what he says so emphatical in his seventeenth Chapter, on behalf of
the King of Babylon, according to humane apprehension, but in Truth he speaks
for the Oath and Covenant of God. In verse. 15. the matter of fact is recited
particularly (which may in like manner be applied by one who knows the exact
series of the affairs of our Time) and three Questions are asked in short,
which imply a strong Negative, as it accordingly fell out; so that they did not
prosper, nor yet escape who did such things, nor were they delivered. There was
some mean time between the Prophets speaking this, and it being accomplished.
Nay, do ye not accuse him neither, least your Murmurings are against the Spirit
of God which spoke by him: Who for further Illustration and Confirmation of
this point does in several other places speak expressly against a false Oath:
And there was not to be any breach nor absolution from it, for outward
convenience or temporal advantage; as in case of the Gibeonites, Jepthas Vow
and what may be gathered from Judges 21. 5, 7. concerning the Tribe of Ephraim.

And then further, let People take heed of provoking God to Anger, by limiting
the Holy One of Israel, as if Deliverance was begun already, and must be
accomplished by such an Instrument only; for herein they speak without the Book
of the Lord: why, what says that? Wilt not thou, O God, which had cast us
off? And thou, O God, which did not go out with our Armies? Give us help from
Trouble, for vain is the help of man. Psalm. 60. 10, 11. And so likewise false
and sinful is our fear; or if it were true and reasonable, yet vain is the
Opposition of Man. For if things were done (as they indeed ought) only
according to the Principles of Restitution and Justice, the exact rules of
Righteousness and Wisdom, purely out of Obedience to God and the Word of his
Grace, we should be all safe under the Divine Providence and Protection; so
that we may be bold to do Righteous things, and trust our God with the event of
all. Psalm. 4. 5.
This is better and more safe than to venture upon evil and unlawful means, and
so subject themselves to present confusion and future Punishment; for if such
an one is restored to his civil Right, he may see the Work of the Lord, how
Judgment is returned to Righteousness; and hereby he may be brought over to
the pure and incorrupt Religion; to which he may be the sooner won over by the
honest dealing of the true and sincere Members thereof. But if his Heart be to
do Mischief, Dan. 11. 27. and to practice Revenge and Cruelty, there is a God
above, who according to his workings and methods of old may suffer his People
for a while to be minished and brought low through Oppression, Affliction and
Sorrow: He pours contempt upon Princes, yet sets he the poor on high from
affliction, Psalm. 107. 39, 40, 41. It is said in the plural number, and he may
so overruled it by a clear ordaining Providence pursuant to his revealed Word,
The Land shall be forsaken of both her Kings, Isa. 7. 16. And then also will
this be found true, so that we our selves glory in you in the Churches of God,
for your Patience and Faith in all your Persecutions and Tribulations that ye
endure, which is a manifest token of the Righteous Judgment of God, that ye may
be accounted worthy of the Kingdom of God for which ye also suffer; seeing it
is a Righteous thing with God to recompense Tribulation to them that trouble
you, 2. These. 1. 4, 5, 6. so that admitting it should be thus, Here is the
Faith and Patience of the Saints, that they will rather choose affliction, than
to commit Sin: and will not refrain from doing Righteous Things, though they
did know and were assured it would bring suffering on them; for such indeed,
and none else will be accounted Worthy of the Kingdom of God for which they
suffer. But if Men will trust to the methods of their own Wisdom, till they are
run out, and themselves are confounded and bafled: And will either before or
afterward use some unlawful Means to preserve themselves from, or get out of
Persecution, God will proceed to do a marvelous Work amongst this People, even
a marvelous Work and a Wonder, that the Wisdom of these wise Men shall Perish,
and they shall justly suffer as Evildoers. Then they will wish they had done
otherwise when it is too late; for such Repentance is the same with that of
Judas or Esau, and the damned in Hell; who when they come to be fully sensible
of what they have lost, and are to suffer; then only they would have done
otherwise, when before they were proved the same thing, but did it not.

It would be looked upon as vain Arrogance and Proud Boasting, if I should
repeat at length and apply what is written and afferted thrice, Psalm. 119. 98,
99, 100. Yet it is thankfulness to God the given to speak out and acknowledge
the same, and also it is a benefit and instruction Eccles. 9. 15. 16.
to others to assign the very reason how such an one came to that Wisdom and
Understanding. And likewise great heed is to be taken all along that this is
confined within the bounds of God's Law. I am doubtful whether I shall not
Transgress my Commission to insert one Human saying, Inter detiria senum et
prejudicia juvenum cadit Respublica; but sometimes we are allowed to speak the
words of Man's Wisdom 1 Kings 12. 8.
and common observation. And notwithstanding the contempt, prejudice and
disdain, which may arise against me because of my Youth, 1 Samuel 17. 28, 29.
1. Tim. 4. 12. and seeming forwardness; I will add this yet further, and do
here take Liberty to make a public and solemn Protestation, that according to
the Grace and Knowledge God shall be pleased to continue and further endue me
withal, I will as soon stand in the gap to prevent the coming in and
overflowing of Popery, with my Life, Liberty, and younger Brothers Portion; as
now I expose them all against falsehood and unrighteousness. If at any time
(either now or hereafter) I should recede and draw back from this deliberate
Resolution of mine here made, then let me be made an object of the utmost fury
of the Multitude. I would undergo all Ravilliacs Torments and quietly submit to
the most cruel and lingering death that ever yet man endured since the World
began. This is here published and record^^ to stand against and be executed
upon me, and that it may be done with me according to mine own words.

I am as it were necessitated to use this confidence of Boasting; for it has
been surmised against me as if I plead for Baal and his false Worshippers; that
I have displayed a banner for Antichrist in this Kingdom, and that I am a
Minister of Satan transformed into a Minister of Righteousness: which last is
more supposed of me, because I do discover Iniquity to turn away our Captivity,
Lam. 2. 14. and that other threatening manifested under the Gospel. And also in
order to turn away Iniquity from Jacob, it is necessary to lay open the full
aggravation and sinfulness of Sin, and also to cite the Scriptures; but for
doing these things I am thought to be like him that accuses our Brethren before
God day and night. Romans 11. 2. 3.
But then this charge must also fall upon Elias and the Prophets, Christ and
the Apostles, and all faithful Teachers down ever since, and at this day; for
they according to their Duty and Office did the very same. We cannot inform God
of any thing, nor make the Sins of Men known unto him, nor recorded before him,
for he knows much more himself. The Sin of Judah is written with a Pen of Iron,
and Graven with a point of a Diamond, though no mortal Man did in the least
Speak or Write thereof. But our God commands that they be showed and told
thereof, in order to which it is necessary to do both. We have no way to
convince of Sin and turn unto Righteousness, but by the Scriptures; And when
the Devil quotes them, as we read that once he did, he leaves out the material
Words, To keep thee in all thy Ways, which is in Psalm. 91. 11. but quite
omitted Mat. 4. 6. and in Luke 4. 10. to keep thee is added, but the last Words
are again omitted. So that the Allegation is the more subtle and fallacious.
But our Lord did confront Scripture to Scripture; and let this be showed and
done by my Adversaries, and not think it sufficient barely to object the same
against me. Let the Learned, but Unstable of our days, show where the
Scriptures have been any where wrested; for there have been cited those places
which are easy to be understood, according to the plain and common
signification. But when there is a Comment added to hinder from coming into the
way of Righteousness, then this Imputation will truly fall back upon
themselves, as God will judge and determine at last; the now they justify
themselves before Men, and have the fashion and multitude on their side. If
Satan does once cite Scripture, not in generals, or by halfs, but particularly
and fully to turn People from Iniquity unto Righteousness, then He does rise up
against himself, and is divided: He cannot stand and has an end. And if my
self have done that under all (as I can think of) the principal heads of ^ood
and Evil, as may be seen in the Book of Happiness, etc. to which I have
prefixed my Name; then it may be judged whether I am a true Minister of
Righteousness; though by the Impositions and Restraints of Men, I am as yet
debarred from the public and outward Administration of that Office by reason
of contradictory Oaths, and to me doubtful Subscriptions. And if my self have
wrote against Popery more than my Equals, as may be seen in the abovecited
Book, page 75, 120, 121, 160, 190, 212, 243, 253, 411, 460, 461, 462, 487, 586,
618, 691, 700. And yet am a Papist, then also Popery is divided against it
self, and that has an end, and cannot stand. I shall never be able to do any
thing to advance the Cause, but subject my self to present shame and eternal
confusion. If I do once speak or act contradictory to mine own printed words in
the least considerable instance, then I am a Liar, Deceiver, false Prophet,
Traitor, heady and high-minded; and then I may be justly and safely proceeded
against as such.

That Book was indeed compiled in the late King's Reign, but came out of the
Press after his departure. And there is one single page therein, viz. the
hundred sixty second; which if he had been put in mind of, and thoroughly
observed, the Truth contained therein would have preserved him in his Throne to
this day, and the enemies of our reformed Church had got no advantage over us.
And also that Sin, Disturbance, Confusion, the bloody and doubful events of War
might have been prevented, which we have been since involved in.

If I have spoken the Truth, it ought to be believed and received; if I am all
along consonant and agreeable to my self (which others may examine as strictly
as they will) then it is Truth. And if my only drift and design is to teach
transgressors thy ways, and that Sinners may be converted unto God, then the
Truth of God is come unto you. Though according to the Divine Method it may
spring up from an obscure press, and compiler, and remain for some time hidden
and concealed from the World, for People are ashamed of such Words in an
adulterous and sinful Generation; and they hate the Light, neither come they to
the Light lest their deeds should be reproved. The Light shines in Darkness,
and the Darkness comprehends it not, John 1. 5. It does not see and perceive,
and also it is afraid and shrinks thereat. And also there is the whole Truth
spoken out without fear and respect of Persons and without favor of and siding
with any Sect or party; and also the time is come when they will not endure
sound Doctrine. for these and such like Reasons only, it has been universally
rejected, and not received.

I have all my Life time kept constant Communion with the Church of England,
and have daily frequented its public Worship as I have opportunity, and do at
least thrice in the Year receive the Holy Sacrament, according to the appointed
Institution. I have been also some few times, since the Established Liberty at
the Congregations of Protestant Dissenters; and herein I do act pursua^t to
that Truth Manifested in the fifth Chapter of my afore-cited Book under the
head of different communions. But I did never in the least join with the Popish
way of Worship, nor did ever so much as see it; which I have had the curiosity
only to incline me so far; but I thought even that to be a sin and unlawful,
because of their Superstition and Image Worship; and therefore I did utterly
refrain. I do desire and would endeavor after a Greater degree of purity and
reformation even in our established Church; for it should be yet more freed
from the Ordinances and Commandments of men. Though I do withal consider that
the Restorer of Paths to dwell in, Isa. 58. 12. is only to take away that
rubbish and corruption (which has so long laid in them) that they may be
smooth, right and plain as they were at first, and they are to remain the very
same, for we are to come up again to the old Paths, where is the good way, Jer.
6. 16. The Wall is in no wise to be removed, nor yet the Foundations altered,
but the old waste places are to be builded, and they are to be raised up, and
the breach is to be repaired; and all is to be done in the very same place.

We would not willingly bring a Scandal, or Odium, or Dishonor them in the
sight of their several Congregations; but yet the Sons of Levi are to be
purified, that they may offer unto the Lord an Offering in Righteousness; and
that they might be the same as in the days of Old, and in former Years; when
they did Teach Jacob thy Judgments, and Israel, thy Law; and the Lord did
accept the work of their Hands. When they did walk before him in Peace and
Equity, and did turn many away from Iniquity. And now the fault is only in
themselves, for why should they do those things as to be contemptible and base
before the People? As their office is to admonish the People of their Sin and
Error; so God in his abundant Care and Provision for his Church, has all
along instructed and raised up others (who were not of the Levitical
Priesthood) to do the like unto them also.

It seems to be Ignorance or Interest that People are so over zealous for, and
confined within a particular Church, or such a Congregation; whereas we should
acknowledge and answer to no other Name than that of a Christian; not according
to the common notions thereof, but as it is written in the Word of God, by
living according to all the Rules and directions there. And then we might all
agree to the same manner, and meet at the same place of Worship.

A summary of the proceeding Discourse.
Both the secret Thought and open accusation of the World are affixed on Me for
Publishing such Words unto them, This man seeks not the welfare of this
People but the hurt, Jer. 38. 4. He that conquers Kingdoms and enlarges
Territories, is reputed a Great Instrument of Men's Happiness; though it is
accomplished with the Price of Blood, and by unlawful means, and the utmost
hereof is a shadow only of Good, which just passes by and is gone for ever.
But they are the only unacceptable Persons to the World, who instruct People
how they must live and do, that they may be saved; and lead them into the right
way, that they may live as Peaceably and comfortably here, as can be well
desired in this World; and at last be Happy and Blessed throughout all
eternity. Men need not be in the least scrupulous and fearful as to this
present time; for these Words, if understood aright, would prevent that further
effusion of Blood in our neighbor Nations. And one Man's Life, if he knew how
rightly to esteem it, is more valuable to himself than two Kings and their
Kingdoms. They, according as is was long since foretold of them, 1 Samuel 8. do
turn their Subjects into Servants, and make use of the lower sort of People for
their Wars; but they have not so learned of Christ; for of him it is written,
He shall spare the Poor and needy, and shall save the Souls of the needy. He
shall redeem their Soul from Deceit and Violence, and precious shall their
Blood be in his sight. Psalm. 72. 13, 14. The same eternal Word and Truth would
put a stop to the further impoverishment which is likely to fall on our own
Nation through continued taxes and charge; which would some what take off from
the Oppressi-of the Poor and the sighing of the Needy; for that is drained out
which should carry on Trade and Commerce. The Spirit of God does take notice of
such things, as may be seen, Isa. 23. 18. And then the Seas might be set open
again, that People may follow their lawful Merchandise with less fear and
Danger. And then again, the like Way and Method may be found out to restore
unto all Nati^ns Unity, Peace and Concord, which we pray for as a Blessing, so
we should likewise endeavor after out of a mind to the public good, That
there be no breaking in nor going out: That there be no complaining in our
Streets, Psalm. 144. 14. Which would be in Deed and in Truth accomplished; If,
as they do already own and profess him, so the Kings and Princes, and Lords and
Counselors, and Pastors and Teachers of all sorts, would obey the Lord our
God, and do according to all his Laws and Statutes. If they do not, their Sin
will find them out severally, and as they are joined together in a community;
for the time draws near, when He will fulfill his Word, for the Nation and
Kingdom that will not serve thee shall Perish: Yea, those Nations shall be
utterly wasted. Isa. 60. 12.

The Lord executes Righteousness and Judgment for all that are oppressed,
Psalm. 103. 6. How is this true? for many are oppressed throughout their Life,
and dye so. But it is to be understood from the words following, He made known
his ways unto Moses, Verse. 7. He has commanded and showed in his Word how it
should be done. And if People will not do it freely and willingly, we his
Servants have no more to say, but we leave it to God himself to perform, fulfill
and execute his Word. They may believe and tremble that the same Almighty God,
who spoke the World into Being, and commanded his Word to a thousand
Generations, will also give forth the executive Sentence. And I will punish the
World for their evil, and the Wicked for their Iniquity; and I will cause the A
rogancy of the Prondro cease, and will lay low the Haughtiness of the Terrible,
Isa. 13. 11. which last has been already fulfilled in foregoing Generations,
and there is a fearful expectation of the other. The like does haste to be
accomplished and determined upon the present Generation, unless they agree with
their Adversary quickly whilst they are now in the way. Consider of it
seriously; Had ye rather die in your Sins, and utterly Perish in your own
corruption, then be told thereof and be put in a way how you may escape? Now it
is high time to look about your selves, for now ye are nearer to Death and
Immortality then ever ye were yet: and so ye approach nearer from Day to Day,
till one drop away after another into the future state. And then do appear
forth the things contained in Scripture (out of which I have spoken all along)
and are manifested to our separated Spirits, all one as the Things we now here
in the Flesh do see handle and converse withal. God will take care that what he
has said, shall come to pass. And those who are now so stout and disdainful to
value his Words as an empty sound, or a dead impertinent letter which may be
laid aside, and not minded, and suppose there is not much more in it then waste
Paper with some impressions of Ink: Or if it is quick and powerful, and sharper
then any two edged Sword; then out of the Spirit of opposition and revenge they
may do as Jehudi did, Jer. 36. 23. Cut it with a Penknife or cast it into the
Fire, or some other way embezil and lose it: such People may at length find and
be sensible of an hideous lamentation in themselves, and that it is become a
Savor of Death unto Death: As the words in a statute Book do now cause several
te suffer loss of Liberty, Life or Member, and other ways of punishment: and
that aforementioned is as silly a device, as for a guilty offender to tear the
Record or Statute by which he is to be judged, for this does only argue a
greater contempt and provocation to God, who did send forth his Word to bring
them to Repentance, that he might forgive Jer. 36. 3. and Pardon them. And it
remains still the same in the purpose and determination and Book of the Lord:
From Scripture, all that is truly inferred, will be in like manner fulfilled.
Let there go about never so many like Elymas the Sorcerer to defeat what is
here said; or as Jannes and Jambres of old time: So do too many now resist the
Truth, 1 Timothy ^. 8. or disregard it, still that remains: And however in the
mean while stifled or prevaricated; nevertheless it will rise up at the
Judgment of the great Day. Whether they will hear or forbear, whether they will
read or not, these Words are laid before them, that they might have turned from
Iniquity unto Righteousness: And not in Hypocrisy or outward show; but in
sincerity and Truth seek their God daily, and delight to know his Ways.

The Compilers Defense for himself.
And now methinks I hear the whispering and secret Counsel of those, which may
arise yet higher, and it shall be done in a solemn Judiciary proceeding, Away
with this turbulent Fellow, it is not fit he should live; for he does
exceedingly disquiet this Nation; we will send him away before to prove whether
the words he has here laid together, be true; or else do it according to the
subtlety of the old Serpent in the lu^king Places of the Villages, and Murder
the Innocent in secret Places, or by administering some deadly thing; for this
will not make much noise, and we shall be thus happily rid of one, who does and
will continue to Torment the Inhabitants of the Earth; and therefore one way or
another, let him be Slain.

Ye may indeed Kill my Body, but ye cannot Kill me; for there is an
Immortality, Resurrection of the Dead and eternal Judgment. If that should be
(which God forbid, and yet it may be supposed, for the like has been fulfilled
in our Brethren, who were Slain for the Word of God, and for the Testimony
which they held. Rev. 6. 9.) yet I shall see again, and meet with my Murderers.
But the safer way is to forewarn you all of these things. Hear my Voice, O God,
in my Prayer; Preserve my Life from fear of the Enemy: hide me from the secret
counsel of the Wicked and from the Insurrection of the Workers of Iniquity.
fear was on every side, while they took counsel together against me, they
devised to take away my Life. But yet with all their secrecy, violence and
consultations, they cannot do it in that place and after that manner, where God
may not see it and know it. And the Lord will find it out when he makes
Inquisition for Blood, this and that man was put to Death after such a manner,
by the Hands of such Persons, and for such a cause. God sends me as a Messenger
to his Subjects, to acquaint them of their Violation of his Laws, and to
testify against them, to turn them to God and Righteousness: And I put them in
mind to live under his Government, and to obey his Laws for the future: But for
doing of this they seek to Kill me. Help me, O Lord my God: O save me according
to thy Mercy, that they may know that this is thy Hand: That thou Lord have
done it.

If they should send me before, there is no calling of me back again, and so no
Restitution; nor yet will the Crocodiles Tears afterward wash away the guilt
of my Blood; The building the Tombs of the Prophets, and garnishing the
Sepulchers of the Righteous will not make an atonement for the Sin of killing
them. And moreover, it will be but a very small advantage and short respite;
for your Spirits also in a little time will fly out one after another. And if
they are so impatient now, that they cannot endure a single Troubler of Israel,
how then will ye endure to meet with the whole Company of Prophets and
Apostles, who were the very same to their Age and Country, what I am accused of
now? How will your selves look Christ in the Face (the great Preacher of
Righteousness) if ye should offend one of those little Ones that belongs to
him? And proceed in the same manner as those did, who Slew him and hanged him
on a Tree. How will ye answer it before God the Judge of all? And excuse your
selves to the Spirits of Just Men made perfect? Who then will be without
partiality and respect of Persons: Who will not in the least savor of what
belongs unto Men, and also have a right knowledge of both sides; the want
whereof does hinder the Saints on Earth from giving a righteous judgment. But
yet further, your own self-conviction, which is now stifled, shall break forth;
And your own thoughts which now a little accuse you, shall appear fully out,
and get the Dominion (as before did the Thoughts of Iniquity) and shall recoil
upon your selves.

This know, and be assured of in the mean while, that the Persecuting Spirit is
the Work of the Dragon, who has so long made War with them which keep the
Commandments of God, Rev. 12. 17. and Persecution or Prosecution of his
Servants (even as its first beginning, to the last wicked act) does arise and
continue from want of the true knowledge of God; as is evident from these
following places of his Word. For Strangers are risen up against me, and
Oppressors seek after my Soul; They have not set God before them, Psalm. 54. 3.
O God, the Proud are risen against me, and the Assemblies of Violent Men have
sought after my Soul, and have not set thee before them, Psalm. 86. 14. They
shall not hurt nor destroy in all my Holy Mountain. Why so? For the Earth shall
be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the Waters cover the Sea, Isa. 11. 9.
They shall put you out of the Synagogues; yea, the Time comes that whosoever
kills you, will think that he does God service: And these things will they do
unto you, because they have not known the Father nor me, Joh. 16. 2, 3. Which
none of the Princes of this World knew; for had they known it, they would not
have crucified the Lord of Glory, 1 Cor. 2. 8. He prayed for his Murderers,
Father forgive them, for they know not what they do, Luke 23. 34. But ^ow men
have no such excuse for their Sin; neither will God hear, nor are we allowed to
pray but according to Truth. Paul gives the Reason-why he who was a Persecutor
obtained Mercy, Because I did it ignorantly, and in unbelief, 1 Timothy 1. 13.
which implies the contrary, if it had been knowingly done. And here again, to
be willingly ignorant, and to make haste to shed Innocent Blood, Isa. 59. 7.
because they hope to have this excuse for their Sin; This is to seekdeep to
hide their Counsel from the Lord, Isa. 29. 15. Shall not God search this our?
for he knows the secrets of the Heart, Psalm. 44. 21. Or whatever pretense or
vindication they may have before the world, can they conceal from his Eyes,
before whom all things are naked and opened with whom we have to do, Heb. 4.
13. and are to be judged by him only. For it is a small thing, or nothing to be
accountable one to another. But it is a further degree of Sin and Iniquity, and
will bring on greater Guilt and Condemnation, when People are not only
contented not to obey the Laws and Truth of the Most high God, but also as
their Fathers did to the Prophets, Persecute and Kill such who are appointed to
make it known: And all those who are even now for filling up the measure of
their Fathers: Have they not so much knowledge and reason to reflect for their
own safety? Do ye not think, it would have been better for them if they had not
touched God's Prophets, and done his Anointed no harm.

My Authority and Commission for doing these things, is (as aforesaid) from the
23d Chapter of Matthew, and Verse. 34. And also what I can make evident from the
14th Chapter of John, and 17th Verse, Even the Spirit of Truth; which by some
is hard to be rightly apprehended, for the same Reason as the World cannot
receive him, because it sees him not. But yet they may conceive thus much,
What is that common sense and reason which is within themselves? May it be felt
or seen? And is it not only to be Understood? That Discourse and inferring of
one thing from another, is in order to bring out something that is Truth. The
pure acts of the mind may give a Light and glimmering to natural and reasonable
Souls, that there are higher and Spiritual things, which shall shortly be
revealed before us with open Face, as these low and Earthly things are, among
which we now dwell; I speak unto wise Men, Judge ye of what I say. The Truth
which I speak, that is my Commission. And though it is not seen, yet it may be
sensibly felt and evidently perceived within your own Consciences. I will put
my Words in his Mouth. Deuteronomy. 18. 18. Behold I have put my Words in thy Mouth,
Jer. 1. 9. and such Words only are a good and sufficient Commission of
themselves.

God has been pleased to try many of his Servants even unto the Death, to see
what they will endure for him: and to let the wickedness of Men go on, that he
may behold what they will do against him. For my part I know not what or when
is determined with me; but I trust on that God who gave me and all mankind Life
and Breath. Though my Faith may a little doubt, it w^ll not altogether fail, if
I should be conformed to the Example of Christ or Isaiah, to whom that
particular Phrase was, Behold my Servant whom I uphold Isa. 42. 1. Yet both of
them fell by the Hands of wicked Men. I have had the application of some
Promises, which encouraged me to this great Work; but yet if I should be cut
off in the midst of my days, I do believe and am assured (for I utterly
renounce the persons of Men) that seeing the thing is Government and Peace
which must be laid on an Holy, Righteous, True and lasting Foundation to bring
in Christ's Kingdom) and it is to Order it and to Establish it with Judgment and
with Justice, from henceforth even forever. The Zeal of the Lord of Hosts will
perform this, Isa. 9. 7. Now God does send that into the Hearts of his
Servants: And it is an active Principle which will still reach forth where it
can apprehend any thing more, until it be firmly and thoroughly Established, He
shall not fail, nor be discouraged till he have set Judgment in the Earth. Isa.
42. 4. That is the thing we go upon only. And here if one simple weak and
unworthy Instrument should be stopped and hindered, or shut up and kill^d; I
nothing question, but as the Lord spoke thus to me with a strong Hand, and
inst^ucted me that I should not walk in the way of this People; so likewise he
will stir up the Hearts of more; for one may be an hundred, and to ten may
succeed a thousand, who will in like manner fully accomplish what is here
imperfectly begun, for I do only speak out the thoughts of thousands, and what
the Conscience of all (even mine Enemies being Judges) does assent unto. And
though others by reason of Unbelief and Distrust, fear and the distates of
fleshly wisdom are, Isa. 56. 10. quiet and still; so that as in the days of
Elias, I do appear alone, Romans 11. 3. and they account me a Fool or a Mad man
because I know whom I have believed; I can stay on my God as to the present,
and discern his Promises as to the suture. I will go in the Strength of the
Lord God: I will make mention of thy Righteousness, even of thine only, Psalm.
71. 16. And I do here affirm, that if I were not hindered by the Devil and his
visible Instruments, who have already twice cast me into Prison that I might be
tried, Rev. 2. 10. God knows only what may be done yet further as to mine own
Person; but I trust, as he sits above, and is the Almighty God, King of all
Kings, and Governor of all things, whose Power no Creature is able to resist;
So he will overruled all, and manifest that he is stronger and will prevail.
And then if his Word has free Utterance and Passage, it will do yet more then
Armies and Fleets, national Laws and mere humane constitutions: For it will
Rebuke the Company of Spear-men, and scatter the People that delight in War,
and break their cords and snap their bands asunder. And the same Spirit may be
again revived, who through Faith subdued Kingdoms, wrought Righteousness,
obtained Promises, stopped the Mouths of Lions, Heb. 11. 33. It is observoble
how the Holy Ghost expresses it here, and also Psalm 15. 2. Isa. 32. 17. Asts.
10. 34. by the phrase of working Righteousness, for that implies Labor,
difficulty and succession of time. It must be worked out, and way made, as we
use to say in common speaking.

And though the Enemy, who lets, may here again surmise, that this is a
troublesome spirit, which must be taken off in the beginning and utterly
extinguished before it speads too far; for at this rate we shall never have any
Peace, or Quiet: Yet let them know, that here the Heathen do rage, and the
People imagine a vain thing, as quite to suppress it, and they think falsely
that it will put things out of order. He still and know that there is a God
above, who will continue to send out his Light and his Truth, till it
over-spreads and prevails over the Face of the whole Earth. And whoever in the
mean while shall endeavor to quench and stifle it, this is direct walking
contrary, Lev. 26. 21. and striving with their Maker. And it shall be at length
upon them as a consuming Fire to devour its Adversaries, and they shall find it
is hard to kick against the Pricks: The more they oppose Truth, it will strike
deeper, and wound, and lay them in a greater condemnation. All the World must
be subject unto God. If People do not provoke him to Anger, he will do you no
hurt, Jer. 25. 6. He is not a terror to single Persons, Families or Nations,
unless they do that which is evil, and transgress his Laws; and then by further
Restlesness and Provocation, they draw a much greater severity of his
threatenings and punishment on themselves. Will thou not be afraid of the
Government of God over the World, as he does exercise the same by the still
Voice of his Word and Spirit? Do that which is good and Righteous, then thou
shall have the approbation of our God at the present time, to which succeeds an
eternal reward. All People (High and Low, Rich and Poor, or whoever they be)
had better be Obedient and Submissive under this Almighty Power, who sits
King for ever, Psalm. 29. 10. For they might live as contentedly under him as
Subjects under the most Lawful and Excellent Prince; Children under the most
loving, just and wise Father; and Servants under the best of Masters. Whereas
it people be never so impatient and toss to and fro, it is to no purpose, but
to gaul themselves yet more, Only have a good mind toward God; and show your
selves accordingly to his Ambassadors, who come with the Word of his Truth; for
no other intent and purpose, but that there might be Glory to God in the
highest, on Earth Peace, Good Will toward men, Luke 2. 14. Then Judgment shall
dwell in the Wilderness, and Righteousness remain in the fruitful Field. And
the work of Righteousness shall be Peace, and the effect of Righteousness
quietness and assurence forever. And my People shall dwell in a peaceable
Habitation, and in sure Dwellings, and in quiet Resting Places, Isa. 32. 16,
17, 18.

POSTSCRIPT.
LEt no Man (either in the Transcribing or Reprinting) add unto, nor diminish,
nor alter any thing in this Testimony of Truth, without my Knowledge or Assent.

R. S.

FINIS.

