THE INSTITUTIONS OF THE LAW OF SCOTLAND, Deduced from its Originals, and
Collated with the Civil, Canon, and Feudal-Lavvs; and with the Customs of
Neighboring Nations.

The first PART.

By Sir JAMES DALRYMPLE of STAIR, PRESIDENT of the SESSION.

EDINBURGH, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, Anno DOM. 1681.

To the KING.
May it Please Your Majesty.
I DO humbly present to Your MAJESTY a Summary of the Laws and Customs of Your
ancient Kingdom of SCOTLAND, which can be no where so fitly Placed, as under
the Rays of Your Royal Protection: I am confident it will tend to the Honor
and Renoun of Your MAJESTY, and Your Princely Progenitors, that You have
Governed this Nation so long and so happily, by such just and convenient Laws,
which are here offered to the view of the World, in a Plain, Rational, and
Natural Method; In which, Material Justice (the common Law of the World) is in
the first place orderly deduced from self evident Principles, through all the
several private Rights thence arising: And in the next place, the Expedients of
the most Polite Nation, for Ascertaining and Expeding the Rights and Interests
of Mankind, are Applied in their proper places; especially these which have
been invented, or followed by this Nation; so that a great part of what is here
offered, is common to most Civil Nations, and is not like to be displeasing to
the Judicious and Sober any where, who dote not so much upon their own
Customs, as to think that none else are worthy of their notice. There is not
much here asserted upon mere Authority, or Imposed for no other Reason, but
quia majoribus placuerunt, but the Rational Motives inductive of the several
Laws and Customs, are therewith held forth: And though the Application of
those common Rules, to the variety of Cases determined by our Statutes, our
ancient Customs, and the more recent Decisions of our Supreme Courts, be
peculiar to us; Yet even the Quadrancy of these to the common Dictates of
Reason and Justice, may make them the less displeasing; and that no Nation has
so few words of Art, but that almost all our Terms are near the Common and
Vulgar Acceptance; Yea, the Historical Part relating the Helps and Expedients
for Clearing and Securing the Rights of Men out of the Word of GOD; the Moral
and Judicial Law contained therein; the Civil, Canon and Feudal Laws, and many
Customs of the Neighboring Nations Digested, as they fall in with the Common
Rules of Justice, may probably be acceptable to these who may, and will allow
time for their perusal, a quaint and gliding Style, much less the Flourishes of
Eloquence, the ordinary Condiment and Vernish, which qualify the pains of
Reading, could not justly be expected in a Treatise of Law, which of all
Subjects does require the most Plain and Accurate Expressions; to balance
which, the Nausiating burden of Citations, are as much as can be left out.

We do not pretend to be amongst the Great and Rich Kingdoms of the Earth, yet
we know not who can claim preference in Antiquity and Integrity, being of one
Blood and Lineage, without mixture of any other people, and have so continued
above two thousand years; during all which, no foreign Power was ever able to
setle the Dominion of a Strange Lord over us, or to make us forsake our
Allegiance to Your Majesty's Royal Ancestors, our Native and Kindly Kings;
Whereas, most of the other Kingdoms are Componds of Diverse Nations, and have
been subjugated to Princes of different and opposite Families; and oftimes
Foreigners. The great Monarchies which did design Universalitie, are all
broken in pieces; and there is no Family that can claim a just Title to
Redintegrat any of them. There is no Emperor nor King, except Your Self, but
knows to what other Families their Predecessors did Succeed, and when, and by
what means It is evident what a mixture has been in Greece and Italy, in
France and Spain, in ENGLAND, and elsewhere. This Nation has not been obscure
and unknown to the World; but the most famous Nations have made use of our
Arms, and have still in grateful remembrance, retained Trophies and Monuments
of our Courage and Constancy. There be few Wars in Christendom, wherein we
have not had considerable Bodies of Soldiers, Regimented and Commanded by
themselves, and oftimes general Officers Commanding them; and whole Armies of
Strangers, with great Reputation and Gallantry, which did advance them above
the Natives of these Countries where they served. Neither have we wanted the
fame of Learning at home and abroad, in the most eminent Professions, Divine or
Humane. And as every where the most Pregnant and Active Spirits, apply
themselves to the Study and practice of Law; so these that applied themselves
to that Profession amongst us, have given great Evidence of sharp and piercing
Spirits, with much readiness of Conception, and dexterity of Expression; which
are necessary Qualifications both of the Bench and Bar, whereby the Law of this
Kingdom has attained to so great Perfection, that it may without Arrogance be
compared with the Laws of any of our neighboring Nations, for we are happy in
having so few and so clear Statutes. Our Law is most part Consuetudinary,
whereby, what is found inconvenient is Obliterat and forgot: Our Forms are
plain and Prompt, whereby the generality of the Judicious, have with little
pains much insight in our Law, and do with the more Security enjoy their Rights
and Possessions, which by our public Records are better known then any where,
by which, we may with the greatest assurance Trust our Purchase, seeing no
Land-Right is effectual against Purchasers by Consent or by Law, but where the
ultimate perfection thereof, by Seasing or other Evident, is upon Record in
Registers, set apart for the several Rights, without mixture of any other,
whereof there are Authentic Minute-books kept, with the Records in each
Shire and Jurisdiction, whereby with the least pains or expense, all the Rights
affecting any Land within the course of Prescription, can easily be found. We
are not Involved in the Labyrinth of many and large Statutes, whereof the
posterior do ordinarily Abrogate, or Derogate from the prior, that it requires a
great part of a life to be prompt in all these Windings, without which, no man
with sincerity and confidence, can Consult or Plead; much less can the Subjects
by their own Industry, know where to rest, but must give more implicit Faith
to their Judges and Lawers, then they need or ought to give to their Divines;
and we do always prefer the Sense to the subtility of Law, and do seldom trip
by niecities or formalities. The greatest Fixation and Improvement of our Law
has been by the Establishment of the Supreme Civil Judicature of the Kingdom,
by King JAMES the fifth, in the Institution of the College of Justice,
consisting of fifteen ordinary Senators, in place of the Kings daily Council,
which followed His Residence and Court, and of the Lords of Session, who came
in their place, and were nominated of the Estates of Parliament Ambulatory; and
the Senators of the College of Justice were Invested with the powers of both,
and their persons and the place of Judicature became fixed, and has so
continued near the space of an hundred and fifty Years. This Court was much
improven by Your Majesty's Royal Grandfather, who delighted exceedingly in it,
and honouredit frequently with His Presence while He was in Scotland: So did
Your Royal Father when He came to Scotland to be Crowned: And Your MAJESTY has
owned and encouraged it more then any.

Your MAJESTY does not demand or expect great Revenues from this Kingdom; that
which we can be useful in to Your MAJESTY, is our personal Service, and our
firm adherence to Your Crown and Monarchy, and to Your Royal Family, in which
we have a peculiar Interest; and which no time can communicate to any of Your
other Dominions, which they neither can claim, nor should invy that You are of
our Nation, and has Governed us during twenty Centuries and more, and by us
You are the most Ancient King in the World, which is the most Noble and
Resplendent Jewel in Your Crown; What Family on Earth can parallel that Motto,
which an hundred Years ago, was Written about Your Royal Ensigns, upon Your
Palace, -- Nobis haec invicta miserunt
Centum sex proavi.


Therefore Your Royal Family has been betroathed to a Virgin Crown, which
never knew another Husband; and though it has been darkened with Clouds and
Recesses, yet never was, and I hope never shall be in Widuity. The mutual
Affection betwixt Your MAJESTY'S Royal Family and this Nation, is a prime
Interest to both, which should be much encouraged and improven: Your MAJESTY
without just ground of Jealousy to Your other Kingdoms, may own a peculiar
Care of us; and weought to (...) a singular kindness to, and confidence in Your
MAJESTY, and Your Royal Successors; This might he so promoved, that Your
MAJESTY might by Treaties, have Armies of this Nation abroad, Entertained
without Your Charge, and ready at Your Call, as You had Douglas Regiment in
France, which might secure Your Peace at Home, and make You stand in need of
less Aids from Your People. You might also have thriving Plantations abroad, if
these who every year go from this Nation, to seek their Fortunes abroad, were
directed and encouraged; And it is certainly a great Interest to keep the
Nation at Home, in constant Affection

INDEX of the TITLES of the whole BOOK, with the SUMMARIES subjoyned.
PART I.
TITLE I. Common Principles of Law.
1 DEscription of Law. 2 Description and Division of Justice. 3 Divine Law. 4
Reason, 5 Conscience, 6 Equity. 7 Moral Law. 8 Positive Laws of God. 9 Judicial
Law. 10 Law of Nations. 11 Civil Law. 12 Feudal Law. 13 Canon Law. 14 The
reasons of Humane Laws. 15 The Law of Scotland. 16 Whether Law may be handled
as a rational Discipline? 17 Three common principles of Equity, and three of
positive Law. 18 Obedience, 19 Freedom, 20 Engagement. 21 Description and
Division of Rights. 22 Method of the Civil Law, and the method here proposed.
TITLE II. Of Liberty.
1 LIberty described. 2 Liberty (...) from Dominion and Obligations. 3 The
Principle whence Liberty arises. 4 Restraint and Constraint. 5 Liberty is
bounded by Obedience. 6 It is diminished by Delinquence. 7 By Engagements. 8 By
subjection. 9 Liberty is lost by Bondage. 10 Bondage introduced by the Law of
Nations. 11 Bondage lawful. 12 Manrent. 13 Manumission. 14 Patronage. 15 The
condition of our Servants. 16 Injuries agaiost Liberty, how obviat.
TITLE III. Of Obligations.
1 PErsonal Rights and Obligations described. 2 Kinds of Obligations. 3
Obediential Obligations described. 4 Divided. 5 Enumerat. 6 Obligations Natural
and Civil. 7 Obligations principal and accessory. 8 Obligations pure,
conditional, and to a day.
TITLE IV. Conjugal Obligations.
1 MArriage a divine Contract. 2 Whereby Marriage is formally constitute. 3
Dissolution of Marriage by Death. 4 Desertion and Adherence. 5 Jus Mariti. 6
The Husbands Obligations. 7 The power of the Husband by the Civil Law. 8 By the
Custom of neigbour Nations. 9 By the Custom of Scotland. 10 The Wife's Escheat.
11 The Husband's concourse. 12 A Wife's Obligation null. 13 A Communion of
Goods and Debts. 14 Donations betwixt Man and Wife revocable. 15 Dissolution of
Marriage within the year. 16 Divorce. 17 Rights arising from the Dissolution of
Marriage. 18 Privileges of Wives.
TITLE V. Obligations between Parents and Children.
1 OBligations betwixt Parents and Children, are Divine by the Law of Nature. 2
The Power of Parents over their Children, 3 In Infancy; 4 In Minority; 5 In
Majority. 6 Oeconomical Government. 7 Provision of Children. 8 Obligations of
Children to their Parents. 9 Aliment due to Parents. 10 Obligations mutual of
Children. 11 Patria potestas amongst the Romans. 12 Amongst other Nations,
especially as lawful Administrations. 13 Forissawiliation and Emancipation.
TITLE VI. Obligations of Tutors and Curators, Pupils, Minors, and Persons
interdicted.
1 THe rise of Tutory in the Law of Nature. 2 Order of Tutory by the Law of
Nature. 3 The natural Obligation of Tutors: 4 Pupils Obligations to their
Tutors. 5 Kinds of Tutors by the Common Law. 6 Tutors Testamentar. 7 Tutors
Testamentar exclude all others. 8 Tutors of Law, who? 9 How Tutors of Law are
entered? 10 The Time within which they must enter. 11 Tutors Dative. 12
Pre-Tutors. 13 Factors for Tutors. 14 Con-Tutors. 15 Tutors custody of the
Pupil's Person. 16 Tutors authorizing their Pupils. 17 Tutors or their Factors
Rightsrelating to the Pupils, accresce to them. 18 Tutors can only do
necessary, not free arbitrary Deeds, but may not sell Lands. sine authoritate
judicis. 19 Tutors are liable for Annualrent for their pupils means. 20 Tutors
are conveenable with their Pupils, and liable in quantum intus babent. 21
Tutors Accounts. 22 Tutors are liable for exact Diligence, both for
Intromission and Omission. 23 Tutors are liable in solidum. 24 Tutory how
finished. 25 Tutors of Idiots and furious Persons: 26 Gesta Tutarum accrescunt
pupillis. 27 Removing or suspect Tutors. 28 Duty of Pupils to their Tutors. 29
Rise of Curators. 30 Curators ad lites and negotia. 31 Minors may at their
option, choose or not choose their Curators. 32 Minors Deeds having Curators
without their consent are ipso jure null, nisi in quantum (...). 33 Curators
Consent not requisite to Later-Wills. 34 Restitution of Minors upon enorme
lesion. 35 Minor non tenetur placuare super (...) paternam. 36 Differences
betwixt Tutors and Curators. 37 Duty of Curators. 38 Curators, or Interdictors
for Prodigals, or lavish Persons. 39 Interdictors constitute causa cognita. 40
Interdiction by Parents Consent: 41 Publication and Registration of
Interdictions. 42 Interdictions extend only to heritable Rights, not Movables,
nor to personal Executions. 43 Interdictions are only competent by way of
Reduction. 44 Interdictions cannot be taken off, but by authority of a Judge.
TITLE VII. Restitution.
1 REstitution of other men's Goods a natural Obligation. 2 Restitution is not
solely an effect of Property. 3 Restitution of things straying, or Waith and
lost. 4 Restitution of things bonafide acquired, not from the right Owner: 5
Restitution of things recovered from Thieves, Pirates, and Robbers. 6
Restitution not competent of things recovered from public Enemies. 7
Restitution of things quae cadunt in non causam, causa data and non secuta. 8
No Restitution of things given ob turpem causam. 9 Restitution of indebite
soluta. 10 Restitution reaches also the Fruits not consumed. 11 Restitution is
grounded on Having, and that ceassing without fault, the Obligation of
Restitution ceasseth. 12 Bonae fidei possessor facit fructus consumptos saos.
13 Restitution by Heirs. 14 From Restitution arises the Action of Exhibition
and Delivery. 15 Thence arises Division of things common without Society.
TITLE VIII. Recompense.
1 REcompense or Remuneration, a natural Obligation. 2 Obligation negotiorum
gestoram. 3 Actio directa and contraria de negotiis gestis. 4 The Diligence of
Negotiators. 5 The natural Obligement to recompense, in quantum locupletiores
facti sumus. 6 Actio de in rem verso. 7 Relief due to those who satisfy
Obligations, whereby more Persons are liable, in cosdem.
TITLE IX. Reparation: where of Delinquences, and Damage thence arising.
1 The Obligation of Reparation of Damages by Delinquence, ana ural Obligation.
2 Delinquence inters the Obligation of Punishment, and Reparation of the
injured. 3 Damage described. 4 Kinds of Delinquence. 5 Concurrers in
Delinquence, how liable. 6 Special kinds of Delinquence by our Customs. 7
(...). 8 Extortion, vi majori and metus causa. 9 Circumvention by Fraud, dolo
malo. 10 The Edict de dolo malo: 11 Circumvention rarely inferred by Witnesses.
12 Simulation. 13 Collusion. 14. The effect of Fraud, as to the Party
contracting. 15 Deeds done in fraudem creditorum, contrair the Act of
Parliament, 1621. anent Bankrupts. 16 The nature of Spuilzie. 17 The Title of
Possession. 18 Oath in litem, in Spuilzies. 19 Spullzies elided by any
colorable Title, Warrant, or bona fides. 20 Spuilzie elided by voluntar
Delivery. 21 By lawful Poinding. 22 Replies against Poinding. 23 Spuilzie
elided by Restitution within twenty four hours. 34 Prescription of Spuilzies.
25 Intrusion and Ejection described and distinguished. 26 Ejection proper to
the natural Possessor: 27 Exceptions against Ejections. 28 Molettation. 29
Breach of Arrestment and Deforcement: 30 Contravention.
TITLE X. Obligations Conventional, by Promise, Paction, and Contract.
1 THe Original of Conventional Obligatious. 2 The Acts of the Will, Desire
Resolution and Engagement, and their effects. 3 Pollicitation, or Offer, and
its effects. 4 Promise. 5 Contracts in favors of third Parties valid. 6
Pactions: and how Words are obligatory. 7 Naked Pactions. 8 Pactum corvinum. 9
Locus penitentiae. 10 Promises and Pactions are morally obligatory by Canon
Law, and our Customs. 11 Kinds of contracts amongst the Romans, with the
Exception de non numerata pecunia, and Homologation. 12 Distinction of
Contracts according to the matter. 13 Common Requisits to Contracts 14
Permutative Contracts, and the equality to be kept in them. 15 Latent
insufficiency alters Contracts. 16 How far Mutual Contracts are effectual to
Assignys, without performing the Cedents part. 17 Loan comprehends mutuum and
commodatum. 18 In mutuo transfertur dominium. 19 Senatus consultum Macedonianum
and Velleianum. 20 Mutuum can only be in Fungibles and Quantities. 21
Specialities in mutuo, and Bills of Exchange. 22 Mutuum stricti juris. 23
Commodatum described. 24 Borrowers Diligence. 25 Precarium. 26 Commodatum how
ended. 27 Actions arising from commodatum. 28 Mandatum, or Commission. 29 The
terms of Mandats. 30 Acceptance of the Mandatar. 31 Mandats in things lawful.
32 Acceptance must be freely. 33 Mandats are personal. 34 How far Mandatars may
Entrust others. 35 Mandats are ambulatory, and revocable by the Mandant. 36
Mandatars must perform, in forma specifica. 37 Mandatars Diligence. 38 The
Ohligations of Maudatars. 39 Kinds of Mandats. 40 Tacit Mandats. 41 More
Mandatars, how far they may act severally. 42 Whether joint Mandatars are
liable in solidum. 43 The effect of general Mandats. 44 What is special in
Offices amongst Mandats. 45 Specialities of Trust amongst Mandats. 46
Obligations of Exercitors. 47 Obligations of Institors. 48 The nature of
Custody, or depositum: 49 Diligence of Depositars. 50 Nautae caupones
stabularij. 51 Depositation of Writs. 52 Sequestration. 53 Consignation and
Trust 54 Depositation admits uo Compensation. 55 But admits Retention. 56 Joint
Depositars, how far liable. 57 The nature of Pledge, or pignus. 58 Specialities
in Pledges. 59 How Pledges may become irredeemable. 60 Clauses irritant in
Pledges. 61 Hypothecation of the Crop or Goods for the Rent. 62 Hypothecation
of the Teinds for the Teind-duty or Stipend. 63 Exchange and Sale, wherein they
agree and differ. 64 What things are liable to Sale, and of buying of Pleas by
the Members of the Colleege of Justice. 65 Effect of Earnest. 66 Reversion of
things sold. 67 Clauses irritant, or resolutive in Sale. 68 Knowledge of
Acquirers of an anterior incomplete Right, how effectual. 69 After Sale, before
Delivery, to whom the thing perishes. 70 Location described, and compared with
Sale. 71 Whether Sterility frees from the Pension. 72 The effect of Vastation.
73 Location is personal, and cease with the Constituent's Right. 74 Usury, or
Annualrent of Money. 75 Annualrent due by Law, without Paction. 76 The
Conductor's Obligation. 77 The Locator's Obligation. 78 The effect of Society.
79 The matter of Society. 80 The nature of Society and Equality therein. 81 The
Power of the Partners in Society. 82 How Society ceasseth. 83 Partners acting
severally, how these things accresce to the Society. 84 Diligence of Partners.
85 Contracts mediat and immediate. 86 Kinds of Cautioners. 87 Cautioners how far
liable. 88 Cautioners for Executors. 89 Cautioners for Tutors and Curators. 90
Cautioners for the Factors in Camphire. 91 Cautioners for loosing Arrestments.
92 Cautioners are liable according, by the Oath of the Principals. 93
Cautioners as Law will. 94 When the Cautioners are liable, and the Principal
not. 95 Cautioners when liable in solidum. 96 Relief of Cautioners. 97 Effects
of promissary Oaths. 98 (...). 99 Interest. 100 Profit of Performance. 101 Time
of Performance. 102 Place of Performance. 103 Manner of Performance.
TITLE XI. Liberation from Obligations.
1 OBligations ceass by contrary Consent, by Discharge, Declaration,
Renunciation, or per pactum de non pentendo. 2 Three subsequent Discharges
liberat from preceedings. 3 Payment made bona fide. 4 Confignations; 5
Acceptilation; 6 Compensation; 7 Retention; 8 Innovation; 9 Confusion;
TITLE XII. Rights Real: where of Community, Possession, Property, Servitudes,
and Pledges.
1 THe original Dominion of Man over the Creatures. 2 What Rights are
heritable, and what moveable. 3 Moveable and heritable Bonds. 4 How heritable
Obligations become moveable and return to be heritable. 5 The Original
Community of Mankind over this inferior World, and all therein. 6 What remains
yet common to Mankind. 7 Grass and Fruits on Highways are public, not common
8 In Possession what is facti, what is juris. 9 Possession described. 10
Possession natural and civil. 11 Possession of Movables. 12 Possession of the
Ground. 13 Possession by Limits and Bounds. 14 Possession by Occupation, and by
lifting the Profits. 15 Symbolical Possession. 16 Possession by Reservation. 17
Definition of Possession. 18 Requisits to begin Possession. 19 Requisits to
retain Possession. 20 How Possession is troubled, interrupted, or lost. 21
Kinds of Possession. 22 Lawful Possession gives Right to continue it against
all illegal and (...) Acts contrary thereto. 23 Bonae fidei possessor facit
fructus consumptos suos. 24 This not extended to unlawful Possessors. 25
Possessor decennalis and triennalis non tenetur docere de titulo. 26
Quinqutnnial Possession of forefaulted Persons. 27 Possession, to what Right
ascriveable. 28 The nature of Property. 29 Property by Possession of things
common. 30 Appropriation by Industry. 31 First Property of the Ground was of
Houses and Wails. 32 Next of Fields and Countries. 33 Quae nullius sunt. 34
Appropriation by Accession of Birth and Fruits. 35 Appropriation by (...). 36
Appropriation by Specification. 37 Appropriation by necessary Conjunction. 38
De tiguo injuncto. 39 Inaedificata solo cedunt. 40 Things sown and planted, haw
far-they follow the Ground. 41 Posseision of Movables presumes property. 42
Reprisals. 43 Enemies Goods taken in War. 44 Goods of Neuters assisting Enemies
become Prise.
TITLE XIII. Infeftments of Property.
1 THe original of Fees. 2 Feudal Jurisdiction, especially of the King in
Parliament. 3 Feudal Jurisdiction of Superiors. 4 (...). 5 Requisits of proper
Fees. 6 Kinds of improper Fees. 7 Dominium directum essential to all Fees. 8
Dominium (...). 9 Fidelity (...) necessary. 10 Feudal Contracts. 11 Udal
Rights. 12 Infeftment what it signifies. 13 How Writ is necesiary for
Infeftments. 14 What kinds of Writs are necessary for Infeftments. 15 The (...)
of formal Charters. 16 When Instruments of Sealin became necessary. 17 The
Tenor of formal Seasins. 18 The essentials necessary in Seasins. 19 Seasins
must have Warrands and Adminicles, and what these are. 20 Registration of
Seasins. 21 Registration of Ressignations ad remanentiam. 22 Registration of
the Allowance of Apprisings and Adjudications, Inhibitions, and Hornings. 23
The Attest of the Nottar and two Witnesses, necessary in Seasins. 24 Extracts
of Seasins not probative. 25 Transumpts of Seasins. 26 Bounding Infeftments. 27
Base Infeftments, how far effectual without Possession. 28 Infeftments by
Confirmation. 29 Infeftments upon Apprising or Adjudication. 30 The effect of
Apprisings or Adjudications with a Charge. 31 Infeftments Ward. 32 Feus of
Ward-lands, how far valid. 33 Infeftments Blench. 34 Infeftments Feu. 35 The
annexed Property of the Crown can only be set Feu after Dissolution in
Parliament. 36 Feus of the annexed property set with diminution of the retour'd
Duty, are null. 37 Feus of Kirk-Lands. 38 Infeftment in Burgage. 39 Infeftment
in Mortification. 40 Manses and Gleebs. 41 Conjunct Infeftments. 42 Infeftments
to Heirs substitute. 43 Infeftments Simple and Tailzied. 44 Union. 45 Erection.
46 Warrandice. 47 Tacit Conditions employed in Ward-Lands. 48 Tacit Conditions
in Warrandice and Relief. 49 Tacit Conditions in Infeftments of Offices. 50
Tacit Conditions in Excambion. 51 Tacit Conditions in Feus. 52 Liferents
reserved in Infeftments of Property. 53 Exceptions in Infeftments, how far
effectual. 54 Faculties reserved in Infeftments. 55 Burdens of Sums in
Infeftments, how far effectual. 56 The effect of impossible or unlawful
Conditions in Infeftments. 57 Conditions inconsistent are null. 58 Clause de
non alienando in Tailzies. 59 Clauses restrictive and irritant in Tailzies. 60
Regalia not expressed, are not carried by Infeftment. 61 Regalia are carried in
Barony, though not expressed. 62 Jurisdiction and Courts. 63 Juriidiction of
Baron Courts, how far restricted. 64 Issues of Baron Courts belong to
themselves. 65 Infeftments of Constabulary. 66 Fortalices, how far extended. 67
Forrestries. 68 Hunting of Deer, inter regalia. 69 Salmon-fishing. 70 Cruves.
71 Milns. 72 Privilege of Brewing. 73 Part and Pertinent. 74 Wood and Coal. 75
Houses and Biggings, and Park Dykes. 76 Fowling, Hunting, and Fishing. 77
Cunningars. 78 Dovecotes. 79 Free Ish and Entry. 80 Herezelds. 81 Steel-bow
Goods. 82 The effect of infeftments, in possessorio. 83 The effect of
Infeftments, in petitorio. 84 Inhibitions and their effects against
Infeftments.
TITLE XIV. Superiority: where of its Casualities, Non-Entry, Relief,
Compositions for Entries, Ward, Marriage, and Liferent-Escheat.
1 THe Superior's dominium directum. 2 How Property is established in the King.
3 Superiors may exerce all Acts of Property, except against their Vassals. 4
How the Property coming in the person of the Superior, is established. 5
Superiors cannot interpose betwixt them and their Vassals. 6 How far Superiors
need to instruct their Title. 7 Superiors have personal Action against
Intrometters with the Rent of the Land for their reddendo. 8 They have also
real Action for the same, by poynding of the Ground. 9 Jurisdiction of
Superiors. 10 Superiority carries to Heirs and singular Successors, all bygone
Casualities not separat by Gifts or Decreets. 11 Superiors of Kirk-Lands need
not instruct a Consent to the Surrender. 12 Superiors must receive Apprisers or
Adjudgers, or pay the Debt, salvo jure suo. 13 He must receive the King's
Donatar upon presentation gratis. 14 He must receive his Subvassal, whom his
immediate Vassal resuseth to enter. 15 How far Superiors may extend Gifts of
their own Ward against their Vassals. 16 Superiors need not accept Resignation
or Confirmation, and if they do, it is salvo jure suo. 17 Superiority falling
to more persons, the eldest Heir or greatest Interest only receives the
Vassals. 18 Non entry falls, when Infeftment is not renewed by every Vassals
Heir, or singular Successor, or upon Resignation. 19 Non-entry falls by
Reduction or Nullity of Infeftments, or Retours. 20 Burgage falls not in
Non-entry, as to the Burgh or particular Persons. 21 The effect of the general
Declarator of Nonentry. 22 The effect of Non-entry, after Citation in the
general Declarator. 23 Exceptions against Non-entry, as to the Feuduty or
retoured Maill. 24 Exceptions against Non-entry, as to the full Rent. 25
Whether Non-entry after Ward requires Declarator. 26 The original of Relief. 27
The Custom of England and France, as to Relief. 28 The quantity of Relief with
us. 29 Whether Relief be due during Non-entry. 30 Whether Relief is due when
the Heir is entered, whether the Fee be burdened with Conjunct-fee or Liferent.
31 Relief stops not the Heir's Seasin. 32 Compositions for the Entry of
Apprisers of Adjudgers 33 The original of Ward. 34 The effect of Ward as to the
Heir's person. 35 The effect of Ward as to the Fee. 36 The Restrictions of
Ward. 37 The Value of the Marriage of Heirs of Ward-Vassals. 38 The true
Interest of Superiors in the Marriage of their Vassals. 39 The single Value of
Marriage, not penal but favorable. 40 Double Value penal and unfavourable,
with the exceptions against it. 41 Single Value found due where the Heir was
married before his Predecessor died, by precipitation. 42 The quantity of the
single Value in Heirs Male or Female. 43 Marriage is debitum fundi. 44 It
belongs to the eldest Superior. 45 The Royal Prerogative prefers the King to
all others, as to the Marriage of the Vassal. 46 Marriage is due by the Heirs
of Apprisers. 47 Exceptions against the Value of Marriage. 48 The rise of
Liferent Escheat. 49 It extends to all kinds of Liferents. 50 Liferents of Fees
not having Infeftment, or not owing Fidelity to a Subject, belong to the King.
51 Liferent Escheat of Sub vassals, to whom they belong. 52 Liferent-Escheat is
not excluded by voluntary Infeftment after Denounciation, not being for Im
plement of a special Obligement to infeft before Denounciation. 53
Liferent-Escheat is excluded by Apprifing for Debts anterior to the Rebellion,
there being Infeftments or Charge in cursu rebellionis. 54 Liferent-Escheat
extends not to Burgage or Mortification. 55 But extends to Ministers Stipends.
56 Liferent-Escheat is made effectual by Declarator.
TITLE XV. Annualrent: where, of Pensions, and Poinding of the Ground.
1 DEscription of Annualrent. 2 The rise of Annualrent. 3 The manner of
constituting Annualrents. 4 The kinds of Holding of Annualrents. 5
Liferent-Escheat of Annualrenters. 6 Kinds of Annualrents amongst the English.
7 The difference of Feu-Annuals, Ground-Annuals, and Top-Annuals. 8 Poinding of
the Ground. 9 The extent thereof. 10 Who must be cited in Poynding of the
Ground. 11 The effect of poynding the Ground as to Ground Rights. 12 The Order
of poynding Movables, by several Annualrenters. 13 Annualrents are effectual,
personally against Intrometters. 14 Annualrents are moveable as to bygones. 15
Extinction of Annualrents. 16 Ecclesiastic Pensions affect the Benefice. 17
Pensions by secular Persons, how far effectual. 18 The Kings Pensions are not
arrestable.
TITLE XVI. Liferents: where of Conjunctfees, Terces, and Liferents by the
Courtesy of Scotland.
1 SErvitudes personal by the Roman Law. 2 Servitudes personal by our Custom. 3
Clauses of Conquest, of Liferent, or Fee of Lands acquired during Marriages,
how far extended. 4 All Liferents must be salva rei substantia. 5 Liferenters
are burdened with Aliment of Heirs. 6 Liferents without Infeftment are not
effectual against singular Successors. 7 The effect of Assignations to
Liferents. 8 Liferents are not prejudged by Tacks or other Deeds of the Feer,
being posterior. 9 What Terms do belong to Liferenters. 10 Conjunctfees. 11
Liferenters by Conjunctfees have all the Casualities of Superiority. 12 Terce.
13 Services of Terces. 14 Kenning to Terces. 15 The effect of Terces. 16 The
extent of Terces. 17 Exceptions against Terces. 18 Burdens of Terces. 19
Liferents by the Courtesy of Scotland. 20 Public Burdens.
TITLE XVII. Servitudes real.
1 REquisits to constitute real Servitudes by Consent. 2 How Prescription
constituteth Servitude. 3 How far Servitudes ate effectual against the
Superior. 4 Extinction of Servitudes. 5 Kinds of Servitudes. 6 Servitudes of
Support. 7 Stillicides. 8 Sinks. 9 Servitudes of Prospect or Light. 10 Ways.
11 Watering. 12 Watergang. 13 Feuelling. 14 Pasturage. 15 Thirlage. 16 Several
ways of constituting Thirlage. 17 Several Cases in which Thirlage is not
constitute. 18 The effect and extent of Thirlage. 19 The import of several
Clauses of Thirlage. 20 Invecta and illata, or tholling Fire and Water. 21
Sequels. 22 Miln-service. 23 Privilege of Milns. 24 How Thirlage becomes
extinct. 25 In Multure, Seed and Horse Corn, are to be deduced, but no other
expense of Laboring. 26 Thirlage constitute by a Vassal, not effectual against
the Superior. 27 Deductions for insufficiency of the Miln, breaking down of the
Damm, or Frost.
TITLE XVIII. Teinds: where of Benefices, Stipends, Presentation, Collation,
Institution, Tacks, Annats, and Patronage.
1 TEinds affect all Intrometters, but not singular Successors. 2 The rise of
Teinds. 3 The first division of (...). 4 Whether Teinds be jure divino. 5 Kinds
of Teinds. 6 We have no personal Teinds, and Vicarage is local according to the
Custom of the several Places. 7 What Lands are Teind-free. 8 Teinds might not
be Feued after the Lateran Council. 9 Teinds are not annexed to the Crown. 10
Teinds included. 11 Surrender of Teinds to the King, and his Decree arbitral
for valuing and selling thereof. 12 Commission for Valuation of Teinds. 13
Annuity of Teinds. 14 The Rule for valuing Teinds. 15 Benefices. 16 Decime
debentur parocho. 17 Consent of the Chapter, Convent, or Prebend, how far
requisite. 18 Diminution of the Rental of Benefices. 19 Consent of Patrons. 20
Tacks by Colleges. 21 The present condition of Teinds. 22 Drawn Teinds. 23
Spuilzie of Teinds and Inhibitions. 24 Rentalled Teind Bolls. 25 The Interest
of Bishops in their Benefices. 26 The Interest of Ministers in Benences. 27
Kirks patrimonial or (...). 28 Presentation and Collation. 29 The effect of
Possession as to Benefices and Stipends. 30 Stipends allocat and unallocat. 31
Teinds change as the Lands are in Grass, Corn, or other Crop. 32 Teinds are not
debita fundi. 33 The legal Terms of Benefices and Stipends. 34 The Annat. 35
Patronage.
TITLE XIX. Tacks where of Rentals, tacit Relocation, and Removing.
1 THe nature of Tacks. 2 How Tacks become as real Rights, effectual against
singular Successors. 3 Who may grant Tacks. 4 How Tacks may be ser. 5 The Tenor
or Tacks. 6 The effect of Obligements to set Tacks. 7 Tacks become real Rights
by Possession. 8 Tacks in Wadsets after Redemption become valid. 9 The extent
and effects of Tacks. 10 Tacks-men in Possession need not dispute the Setter's
Right, disputing as heritable Proprietar. 11 The effect of Tacks, whereof the
Tack-Duty is payable to Creditors. 12 Tacks are good active Titles for Maills
and Duties. 13 The effect of Tacks set to Husband and Wife. 14 Kinds of Tacks.
15 Rentals. 16 The effect of Assignations or Subtacks of Rentals or other
Tacks. 17 The effect of Sub-tacks, as to Tutors and Donatars. 18 The effect of
Rentals in Court Books, or Rental Books only. 19 The endurance of Rentals. 20
The effect of Grassums. 21 How far Rentals become void by Alienation,
Assignation, or Subtack. 22 Defect of Subtacks. 23 Tacit Relocation. 24 How
Tacks fall in Escheat. 25 Tacks sleep during Ward and Non-entry of the Setter,
and are valid against his Liferent-Escheat. 26 Tacks are (...) juris, and
extend not to Heirs, or voluntary Assignys, or Subtacks, or Removing, but when
expressed, except Tacks for Liferent or equivalent. 27 Tacks without Ish are
null. 28 How far Tacks to endure till a Sum be paid are valid. 29 Tacks are
null without a Tack-Duty. 30 Tacks are valid though not expressing the Entry.
31 Tenants must labor and not wast or open the Ground for any Minerals. 32
Tacks become void by two years not payment of the Tack-Duty. 33 Or for not
finding Caution to pay the Tack-duty bygone, and in time to come. 34 Or by the
Tenants Renounciation. 35 By contrary Consent of both Parties. 36 By Deeds
contrary to the Tack. 37 Or by Removing. 38 Summary Removing without warning,
in what Cases. 39 The old way of removing Tenants. 40 Warning of Tenants to
remove. 41 The active Title in Removings. 42 Exceptions against Removings not
instantly verified, are not receiveable till Cautiou be found for the violent
Profits. 43 Defenses against Removing and Replys thereto. 44 Violent Profits.
45 Succeeding in the vice of Tenants removed.
TITLE XX. Wadsetts: where of Reversion, Regress and Redemption.
1 Infeftments for satisfaction of Sums Principal and Annual, or for Relief,
are proper feudal Impignorations consisting with the Disponer's Property. 2 The
Nature of Wadsets. 3 The Nature of Reversions. 4 Kinds of Reversions. 5 (...)
requisite in Reversions. 6 The effect of Clauses irritant in Reversions. 7
Reversions are stricti juris. 8 Kinds of Wadsets. 9 Proper Wadsets. 10 The
effect of Tacks after Redemption, contained in Reversions. 11 Improper Wadsets.
12 Regress. 13 Discharges of Reversions. 14 Wadsets become legally extinct by
Declarator of explring thereof, or by the Order and Declarator of Redemption.
15 The Order of Redemption of Apprisings or Adjudications. 16 The Order of
Redemption by conventional Reversions. 17 Premonition. 18 Gonsignation. 19
Declarators of Redemption. 20 The effect of Declarators of Redemption. 21
Defenses against Declarators of Redemption. 22 Requisition. 23 How far other
Rights may be reserved in Redemptions, or Renounciations.
TITLE XXI. Extinction of Infeftments: where of Resignation ad remanentiam,
Recognition, Disclamation, Purpresture, and other Feudal Delinquences.
1 THe form of Resignations ad remanentiam. 2 They may be by Procurators, or
propriis manibus. 3 Instruments of Resignation prove not without a Warrant in
writ. 4 Resignations ad remanentiam, were valid without Registration, till the
year 1669. 5 Resignations imply all Burdens by the Vassal affecting the Fee. 6
Resignation by him who has no Right, with consent of him who has Right, how
far effectual. 7 How far Superiors may not reject Resignations ad remanentiam.
8 How Infeftments become extinct by Succession as Heir, or singulari titulo. 9
The original of extinction of Fees, not by the Vassals consent, but by his
Deed. 10 Recognition by Alienation of the Ward Fee. 11 Recognition by
Infeftments a se. 12 Whether Recognition can be incurred by Deeds in minority,
or on Deathbed. 13 Whether Recognition can be incurred by Subfeudation. 14 How
far Feus exceeding the Half of the full Rent may subsist without Recognition.
15 In what Cases other Feus of Ward lands, infer not Recognition. 16
Recognition by Alienation, is only of Lands clearly Ward, simple or taxed. 17
Recognition is not incurred, unless the major part be alienat. 18 Recognition
is not incurred by Alienations to the Vassals apparent Heir. 19 Whether
Recognition be incurred by Alienations on condition that the Superior consent.
20 Inhibition excludes not Recognition. 21 Recognition is not excluded by the
Vassals drunkenness, when he alienat. 22 How the Superior's Consent may be
adhibit to Alienations to shun Recognition. 23 How far the Kings Confirmation
without a novodamus takes off Recognition. 24 How Recognition is taken off by
homologation. 25 Recognition excludes all Infeftments, Tacks, or Servitudes, by
the Vassal's Deed without the Superior's Consent or authority of Law. 26
Servitudes by Prescription are not excluded by Recognition. 27 In Recognitions
who must be cited, and who may compear. 28 The Title and Order in Declarators
of Recognition. 29 Disclamation, how incurred. 30 Purpresture; how incurred. 31
Feudal Delinquences adduced by the Feudists for resolving Fees. 32 Atrocious
Deeds against Vassals Fidelity to their Superiors resolving their Fees. 33 How
far the Ignorance or Weakness of the Vassal excuses, with other exceptions for
the Vassal. 34 Whether the Delinquence of the Subvassal infers Recognition.
TITLE XXII. Prescription.
1 PRescription distinguished and described. 2 Usucapion. 3 The several times
required to Usucapion or Prescription, by the Roman Law. 4 Requisits to
Prescription. 5 Bona fides requisite to Prescription. 6 Whether he who doubts
of his Author's Right be in bona or mala fide. 7 Evidences of mala fides. 8 The
Title requisite to Prescription. 9 The Motives inductive of Prescription. 10
Exception where Prescription took no place by the Civil Law. 11 The common Rule
of Prescription with us. 12 The beginning of Prescription of personal Rights
with the extensions thereof. 13 Prescription of Movables. 14 Prescription is
reckoned de momento in momentum per tempus continuum. 15 Prescription of
heritable Rights. 16 Prescription is not extended against the Right of
Superiority. 17 Prescription runs not for Tenants against their Masters. 18
Prescription runs not against Minors, but there is no exception of
Mortifications to pious uses. 19 In our long Prescription bona fides is not
required. 20 The Titles requisite in Prescriptions of heritable Rights. 21 This
long Prescription secures Wadsets, Infeftments for Security, Teinds, and long
Tacks. 22 How far Teinds can prescribe. 23 This Prescription extends to
Patronage and Offices. 24 And to Thirlage and all Servitudes. 25 This
Prescription excludes all Action and ground of Reduction and Declarator, if the
essentials of the Title appear. 26 The several ways of interruption of
Prescription 27 The way of Interruption by King CHARLES the first, as to
special Rights of the Crown, by Letters of publication. 28 The annual
Prescription of the privilege of apparent Heirs intra annum deliberandi. 29
The biennial prescription of the preference of Diligences of the Creditors of
Defuncts, to the Diligences of the Creditors of the Heir. 30 Triennial
Prescription of Spuilzie, Ejection, Intrusion, and Succeeding in the Vice,
Merchants Compts, House-maills, and Removings. 31 Quadrennial Prescription of
the privilege to reduce Deeds of Minors intra quadrennium utile. 32
Quinquennial Prescription of Arrestments, Ministers Stipends, Multures, Rents
of Tenants removed, and legal Reversion of special Adjudications. 33 Septennial
Prescription of old Apprisings, and Summons for Interruption. 34 Decennial
Prescription of late Apprisings, or general Adjudications. 35 Prescription of
twenty years of holograph Bonds, Missives, and Subscriptions in Compt-books,
without Witnesses. 36 No Prescription runs in Minority, except Removings,
House-maills, and Merchant Compts.
PART II.
TITLE XXIII. Assignations: Where of Arrestments, and Actions for making
forthcoming.
1 THe several Conveyances of Rights 2 What Rights are not transmissible. 3 The
rise of Assignations. 4 The tenor of Assignations. 5 The Conveyance of blank
Bonds, etc. 6 The rise and effect of Intimations. 7 The several ways of
Intimation. 8 What Assignations are perfected by Possession, without other
Intimation. 9 Other supplies of Intimation. 10 Intimations to more correi
debendi. 11 Intimation is not necessary to Rights registrat for publication, as
Reversions, etc. 12 Nor to Orders of Merchants. 13 Nor to judicial
Assignations, by Apprisings, etc. 14 Nor to the legal Assignation, Jure mariti,
by Marriage. 15 Nor against the Cedent's Heirs or Executors, even though
Creditors. 16 To what Rights Assignations extend. 17 Assignations carry
Inhibitions following on the Rights assigned, albeit not expressed in the
Assignation. 18 In what Cases the Cedent's Oath proves against his Astigny. 19
Assignations intimat before the Cedent's Death, gives summar Execution without
Confirmation. 20 All Exceptions against Cedents before Intimation are relevant
against Assignys to personal Rights, or Tacks. 21 The effect of Back-bonds,
Discharges, or Assignations of Dispositions before Infeftment, or Apprisings
during the Legal. 22 Assignys by Tutors have no Execution till the Tutor-Counts
be made. 23 How far Assignys to mutual Contracts, may be debarred till
performance of their Cedent's part. 24 Arrestment may be granted by all Judges,
Superior or Inferior, and how far they are effectual before other Courts. 25
The effect of Arrestments made in the Debitor's own hand. 26 Arrestment is
Personal, and does not burden the Successors of him in whose hands it is made,
but is valid against the Successors of the Debtor. 27 Arrestment is not
effectual for, or against herltable Sums by Infeftment, but against the same,
when made moveable, or any other moveable Sums. 28 Rents or Annualrents are
always arrestable. 29 The effect of Arrestment of Rents, Annualrents, or other
Sums, laid on before the Term of payment. 30 The effect of Arrestment laid on
in the hands of Factors. 31 Arrestment extends, only to the Debts, due by him
in whose hands it was laid on. 32 Arrestment makes the Subject litigious. 33
The Order and Tenor of loosing Arrestments. 34 In what Cases Arrestments laid
on for Sums due by Decreets, are loosable or not. 35 The effect of loosing
Arrestment. 36 The order of Actions for making foorthcoming. 37 Exceptions in
the Actions for making foorthcoming. 38 The effect of Arrestments for making
moveable Goods foorthcoming. 39 The effect of Arrestment of Sums. 40 He to whom
payment is made after Arrestment, is liable to restore. 41 The Oath of Parties
in whose hands Arrestment is made, must condescend specially what they then
owed, and when they paid. 42 The Decree for making foorthcoming does only
transter the Right to the Arrester of the Goods, or Sums arrested. 43 But
Assignations do transfer the Right when intimat, without farther Diligence, and
so is preserable to all posterior Arrestments, and respect is had to priority
of Hours, if expressed in the Intimation. 44 If the Arrestment be prior to the
Intimation, (...) is preferable, not faillng Diligence. 45 How Assignations are
completed by (...), Citation, Charge, Possession, or Corroboration. 46 The
preference of Arrestments in Competidon.
TITLE XXIV. Dispositions: where of Resignations in favorem, Apprisings, and
Adjudications of real Rights.
1 DIspositions of Property carry virtually all lesser Rights. 2 How
superveening Rights, belonging to Authors, belong to their singular Successors.
3 Dispositions described. 4 How Dispositions are accomplished in Equity. 5 How
by the Law of the Romans, and other civil Nations. 6 Possession accomplisheth
real Rights. 7 Property of Movables is presumed from Possession. 8 Resignation
in favorem. 9 Dispositions or Assignations by those who have no Right with
consent of those who have, how far (...). 10 Procuratories or infeftments of
Resignation, after forty years Possession by Charters, need not be produced.
11 Infeftments on Resignation carry any lesser Right in the Disponer, though
not expressed. 12 The effect of Resignations accepted by the Superior, before
Infeftment follow thereon. 13 Superiors are not obliged to receive the singular
Successors of the Vassals after Infeftment expede, though it bear to the
Vassals Heirs and Assignys. 14 Apprisings can only proceed on liquid Sums. 15
Apprisings reach all heritable Rights, though not provided to Assignys. 16
Apprisings carry all personal Rights without Intimation. 17 The rise of
Infeftments upon posterior Apprisings. 18 Infeftments may be obtained summarly
upon Apprisings after the Debitor's Death. 19 The effect of Apprisings as to
Non-entry, Ward, and Liserent Escheat. 20 The Denounciation whereupon
Apprisings follow, renders the matter litigious, and excludes posterior
voluntary Rights. 21 Competition of Apprisings. 22 The effect of Apprisings at
the Instance of Superiors against their own (...). 23 The effect of Apprisings
at to Removings, and Maillsand Duties. 24 Allowance of Apprisings. 25 Whether
Superiors must receive Apprisers, not instructing their Authors Right. 26 The
quantity of the year's Rent due to Superiors for entering Apprisers. 27 What
course is competent against contumacious Superiors. 28 The legal Reversion of
Apprisings. 29 Apprisers may use other Diligence for their payment, though the
Apprisings were expired. 30 Nullities of Apprisings. 31 Modification of
exorbitant Penalties in Apprisings. 32 Apprising sustained without a Charge for
the sum. 33 Apprising sustained, though the Letters and Executions were blank
as to the Lands, the Messenger who denounced, being Judge to the Apprysing, in
which they were filled up, which was a more solemn Execution. 34 An Apprising
sustained without producing the Letters of Apprising, being long before, but
the Instructions of the Debt were found necessary to be produced within
Prescription. 35 An Apprising sustained, though by Dispensation at a private
Place, and the Court of Apprising adjourned. 36 An Apprising of Rights
generally, preferred to a posterior Apprising of the Right in special, being an
Annualrent. 37 Apprisings become extinct by Payment, and the Debitors Right
revives without new Investiture. 38 In what Cases Apprisers must possess, and
how they are countable. 39 What Alterations in Apprysings are introduced by the
Act of Parliament 1661. cap. 62. as to the indurance of the Legal, and coming
in pari passu. 40 Now Apprisings coming in the Person of the Debitor's apparent
Heir, are satisfiable from him or his Trustees. 41 How Apprisings against
Parties charged to enter Heir, are redeemable. 42 Legals run not against
Minors. 43 Apprisers continuing to possess after the Legal, can use no other
Diligence, but the Sums are thereby satisfied, though a part of the Lands were
evicted, the rest being worth the whole Sum. 44 The rise of Adjudications. 45
The Form of Adjudications on (...) to be Heir. 46 Why Adjudications past at
random, and the (...) may now be put to instruct some Interest in the Debtor.
47 What Rights are affected with Adjudications. 48 Superiors must receive
Adjudgers, paying a years Rent, unless they pay the Creditor, and then the
Superior will have no years Rent. 49 How Adjudications are redeemable: 50
Adjudications may be for the apparent Heir's own Debt. 51 How Adjudications
become extinct. 52 The form and effect of Adjudications to perfect
Dispositions. 53 The form and effect of the partial and total Adjudications
introduced by the Act of Parliament, September 6. 1672.
TITLE XXV Confiscation: where of Single-Escheat, Liferent-Escheat, Shipwreck,
Waith-goods, Treasure, Forefaulture, Bastardy, and Last-Heir.
1 THe Tenor of Letters of Horning. 2 The Executions of Horning must bear the
Party charged personally, or at his Dwelling House designed. 3 The Execution at
the Dwelling House must bear six Knocks at the most patent Gate, because the
Messenger could get no entry. 4 The Knocks must be audible, that those within
may hear. 5 If the Messenger get entry, the delivery of a Copy to any of the
Family, is sufficient without Knocks, and must be so expressed. 6 The Days
requisite for the Charge beyond the Water of Dee. 7 The Denounciation must he
against the Party, and at the Market Cross of the Jurisdiction where he dwells.
8 The Denounciations must bear three Oyesses, or the equivalent. 9 The
Execution must bear three blasts of the Horn. 10 The Execution must be stamped.
11 The Horning must be registrat, and how. 12 Denounciation after satisfaction,
has no effect. 13 The effect of general Letters of Horning. 14 The Order and
Effect of Relaxation from the Horn. 15 The Single-Escheat and extent thereof.
16 How far the Denounced's Debts or Deeds, affect his escheat Goods. 17 Gifts
of Escheat, and preference thereof. 18 Gifts of Escheat not expressing the
particular Horning whereon they proceed. 19 Gifts of Escheat, though bearing
Goods to be acquired, extend but to those acquired within a year after the
Gift. 20 Eicheats within Regality. 21 In what Cases Gifts of Escheat are held
simular. 22 Who must be called in the general Declarator. 23 The Titles and
Tenors of general Declarators. 24 Exceptions against general Declarators. 25
Special Declarators of Escheat. 26 Leferent-Escheat. 27 Confiscation of
Treasures, Waith, or Shipwrack-Goods. 28 Forefaulture. 29 Several kinds of
Treason by Statute. 30 Forefaulture confiscats without the burden of the
Debcs, or Infeftments, not confirmed by the King. 31 How far Feus are effectual
against Forefaulture. 32 How far Tacks of forefault Lands are effectual. 33
Forefaulture by a rescinded Act, was burdened with the Debts and Deeds of the
Rebel. 34 Forefaulture, when, and how it may proceed in absence. 35 How far the
Person of the Rebel gives Right to the Fisk. 36 The effect of Forefaulture of
apparent Heirs. 37 In what Cases Forefaulture dishabilitats. 38 How far the
Forefaulture of apparent Heirs may be extended. 39 Explanation of the Act of
Parliament 1594. cap. 202. importing burthening of Forfaultures with the Debts
and Deeds of the Rebel. 40 Forefaulture is not reducible upon any Nullity, but
only by way of grace. 41 How far Forefaulture takes effect without Declarator.
42 What Children are lawful, and what Bastards. 43 Declarator of Bastardy. 44
The effect of Bastardy, as to Succession. 45 Legitimation and effects thereof.
46 How the Debts and Deeds of the Bastard affect his Estate. 47 Ultimus haeyes,
and the difference thereof from Bastardy.
TITLE XXVI. Succession.
1 WHether in equity there be a Rule in Succession. 2 That Rule is the express
will, or presumed will of the Defunct. 3 The first Degree of Succession by the
presumed will of Defuncts. 4 Whether in equity, there be Right of
Representation. 5 Failing Descendents, Ascendents succeed in equity: 6 Failing
both, Brothers and Sisters succeed. 7 Failing those, the nearest agnat
succeeds. 8 The Succession of cognats. 9 The Jewish Succession, whereby all the
Sons succeed, and exclude the Daughters, and the eldest Son has a double
Portion. 10 Fathers could not prejudge the primogeniture of their eldest Sons.
11 By the Jewish Succession, failing Descendents, the (...) passes to
Brethren; and these failing, to Father's Brethren; and failing these, to the
nearest Kiufman. 12 Whether in the Jewish Succession there be Right of
Representation. 13 Why no Females but Daughters, succeed among the Jews. 14 Why
Parents succeed not amongst the Jews. 15 Succession amongst the Romans was
first by Testament. 16 If there was no Heir institute by Testament, the ancient
Roman Law called all the Children of the Family unjorisfamiliat, male and
female, (not excepting adopted Children) to succeed. 17 These failing, the
nearest agnats, (but no Parents) thereby succeed. 18 The Roman Succession by
the praetorian Law. 19 Their Succession by Justinian's Novel Constitution. 20
In Feudal Succession, the first Rule is the express will of the Party by the
Investiture. 21 The next Rule is, the conjectured Will, according to the nature
of the Fee. 22 Primogeniture now established by common custom, in Feudal
Rights. 23 Succession in Scotland, is wholly different in Movables and
Immoveabies. 24 The several Degrees of Succession in Movables. 25 Succession
in heritable Rights. 26 The difference betwixt the two Successions. 27 The
privilege of Heirs, not to be prejudged by their Predecessors Deeds on
Deathbed. 28 What is estimat Deathbed. 29 Against what Rights Deathbed is
extended. 30 Deathbed annuls no Deeds for Causes onerous. 31 Dispositions in
Testaments, are as on Deathbed. 32 Annus deliberandi. 33 Kinds of Heirs in
Scotland. 34 No place for Adopted, or Cognats in Succession with us. 35 Parents
succeed to their Children, and exclude the Parents Collaterals, or those
representing the Collaterals.
TITLE XXVII. Heirs.
1 APparent Heirs may pursue Exhibition ad deliberandum. 2 They may desend
their Predecessors Rights and Possessions, being called, or compearing for
their Interest; and their Executors have Right to the Rents of those years they
were apparent Heirs. 3 The Aliment of Heirs from the Donatars, and Liferenters.
4 Heirs not entered have the benefit of Clauses, which by nature import, they
should not be actual Heirs. 5 Heirs have Interest in all Rights granted to
their Predecessors, though not mentioning Heirs, which are not exclusive of
Heirs, by their Tenor and Nature. 6 Heirs have the benefit of all Rights
heritable, by Destination, or having a future tract of Time, after the
Defunct's Death. 7 Heirs have Right to Moveable Heirship, or Obligements for
Sums wherein Executors are excluded. 8 Heirs of Line, are Heirs generally;
their interest. 9 Heirship Movables. 10 Heirs of Conquest, their Interest. 11
Heirs Portioners, their Interest. 12 Heirs Male, of Tailzie, and Provision,
their interest. 13 All Heirs are liable passive for the Defunct's Debt, but not
in the same way. 14 Heirs portioners, how far liable? 15 The effects of
different Provisions, or Obligations by Defuncts, in favor of diverse
Heirs-portioners. 16 Heirs not being Portioners, not substitute in Bonds, are
liable in solidum. 17 The Order by which Heirs are liable passive, and may be
discussed. 18 Heirs of Tailzie represent not the Defunct, in Obligations
contrary to the Terms of the Tailzie. 19 Heirs of Marriage may quarrel their
Predecessors Deeds, being merely gratuitous in their prejudice, but not such as
are onerous, or rational Deeds. 20 Heirs having the benefit of Discussing, may
propone the Exception, That all Parties having Interest are not called, without
instructing the Right whereto they may succeed. 21 The Exception of the order
of Discussing, is not sustained without condescending on the Heritage,
whereunto the anterior Heir may succeed: and what Discussing is. 22 The order
and effect of a general Charge to enter Heir. 23 The Order and Effect of a
special Charge to enter Heir. 24 Renounciallon to be Heir, its Order and
Effect. 25 The Entry of Heirs general, and effects thereof. 26 The Entry of
Heirs upon Precepts of clare constat. 27 The Entry of Heirs by Hesp and Staple
within Burgh. 28 Entry of Heirs by Brieves out of the Chancery. 29 To whom
those Brieves are directed. 30 The manner of citing the Inquest, and
proclaiming the Brieve. 31 Exceptions competent against Members of Inquest 32
The apparent Heir's Claim. 33 Exceptions against the Claim. 34 First Head of
the Brieve. 35 The second Head of the Brieve. 36 The third Head of the Brieve.
37 The fourth Head of the Brieve. 38 The fifth Head of the Brieve. 39 The sixth
Head of the Brieve. 40 The seventh Head of the Brieve. 41 The Service. 42 The
Retour. 43 Reduction of Retours by a Great Inquest. 44 Reduction thereof
otherwise. 45 Reduction of Retours, how competent. 46 Precepts out of the
Chancery to Superiors to infeft. 47 Suspensions of the Precepts, and the
Reasons competent therein. 48 The Certification of the Loss of the Superiority,
during the Life of the Superiors disobeying. 49 Further Reasons of Suspension
of these Precepts. 50 Whether the Persons nearest at the Defunct's Deceass, may
be entered, where a nearer is in spt. 51 Who are Feers of Conjunct-Fees, or
Provisions substitute. 52 The Interest of Heirs of Provision, and import of
Clauses of Conquest, in Contracts of Marriage.
TITLE XXVIII. Behaving as Heir.
1 GEstio pro baerede described. 2 The time when this passive Title was
introduced. 3 The Reasons of introducing it. 4 The latitude used in this Title.
5 This Title not competent after the Intrometters Death, or where there was any
colorable Title. 6 Behaving as Heirs by Intromission with Heirship, only
competent against Heirs of Line. 7 Intromission of Tutors or Curators infer not
gestionem against the Pupils or Minors. 8 Cases inferring gestion by
Intromission with the Heirship-moveables. 9 Exceptions against this member of
the Title. As first, the Pursuer must instruct that the Defunct was either
Baron, Prelat, or Burgess, by Infeftments of Lands, or Annualrents. 10 The 2.
Defense against Intromission with Heirship Movables, and vicious Intromission,
That the Defunct died Rebel, and his Escheat gifted before intenting the
Creditor's Pursuit. 11 The 3. Defense, That the apparent Heir Intrometted, by a
Gift to himself, or to his behoose. 12 The 4. When Movables belonging to a
Defunct remain in his House, whereunto his apparent Heir has Right by
Infeftment. 13 Gestion by intrometting with Lands, Teinds, or Tacks, wherein
the Intrometter might be Heir. 14 Defenses against this member. 15 Gestion by
intrometting with the Defunct's Charter Chest. 16 Item, by intromission with
Sums due to the Desunct, or doing any Deed, that may transmit the Defunct's
Right. 17 This passive Title excluded, unless established in the Behaver's
Lifetime. 18 How far Heirs Portioners, behaving as Heirs are liable, and
whether behaving as Heir excludes the benefit of Discussion and Relief
competent to Heirs actually entering.
TITLE XXIX. Lucrative Successors.
1 THe rise of this passive Title: 2 It takes place though the Disposition bear
Cause onerous, unless it be otherwise instructed. 3 It is extended to
Dispositions in Contracts of Marriage, in some Cases. 4 Lucrative Dispositions
of any part of the Heritage infer this passive Title. 5 This Title is extended
to Dispositions made to Oyes, though then not immediate apparent Heirs; but not
to Brothers, though none then nearer. 6 Whether it suffices to infer this
Title, that the Infeftment was after the Debt; or if the Disposition whereon
the Infeftment proceeds, must also be after. 7 Cases in which this Title takes
no place.
TITLE XXX. Executory: where of Testaments, Codicills, Legacies, Relict`s part,
Bairns part, Dead's part, Confirmations, and Office of Executory.
1 THe Romans carefulness to preserve the freedom of Testing. 2 The ancient
form of Testing amongst the Romans. 3 The modern form of Roman solemn
Testaments. 4 Their nuncupative Testaments. 5 Their military Testaments. 6
Requisits for Roman Testaments. 7 How far Sons in familia could Test. 8 Persons
who could not Test: 9 Persons who could not be institute, or substitute. 10
Restriction of the freedom of Testing, in favor of Children. 11 The Legittimes
of Children. 12 The Falcidian Portion. 13 The difference of the Legittime and
Falcidian. 14 The Trebellianica. 15 Fideicommissa 16 Codicills. 17 Institution
of Heirs. 18 Substitution. 19 Substitutions vulgar and pupillar. 20 Legacies.
21 Legacies are void if the Legatar die before the Testator, or if the
Testament be void; unless there be therein a codicillar Clause. 22 The Kinds
and Effects of conditional Legacies, or (...). 23 Special Legacies. 24
Conditions adjected to Legacies in (...). 25 The Inventary. 26 Collation. 27
Jus accrescendi. 28 The Power of Testing with us may be restricted by Contract
or Paction. 29 It is restricted to Movables, and extends to no heritable
Right. 30 Wherein the Office of Executors consists. 31 The nearest Agnats are
Successors in Movables to the Intestat. 32 The line of Succession in
Movables. 33 The Nomination of Executors, and Codicills. 34 Solemnities
requisite in Testaments with us. 35 The Effects of Testaments made abroad. 36
Verbal Legacies. 37 The power of Testing is competent to Minors having
Curators, without their Consents, and to Wives without their Husbands Consent:
but not to Pupills, Idiots, or surious Persons. 38 Legacies with us. 39
Legacies and Donations mortis (...) are proportionally abated if they exceed
Dead's part. 40 Whether special Legacies will be so abated. 41 The Effect of
Legacies of things not in the power of the Testator. 42 The Effect of Legacies
left severally. 43 The Relict's part of the Executory. 44 The Bairns part. 45
What Forisfamiliation is. 46 Collation by our Custom. 47 Sums bearing
Annualrent without Clause of Inseftment, fall in Executory as to the Defunct
and his Children, but not as to the Relict. 48 Heirs have no benfit of the
Bairns part, except they renounce in favor of the remanent Bairns. 49 If there
be but one Child unforisfamiliat, the same is both Heir and Executor, and has
the full Bairns part. 50 The Executory is divided as it was at the Desunct's
Death, and the time of the Confirmation. 51 The interest of the nearest of Kin.
52 Dead's part. 53 The interest of Executors nominat, and Dative. 54 The Order
of confirming Executors. 55 How Executors nominat in England are admitted here.
56 Licenses to pursue. 57 Executors interest, as to the Rent the year the
Defunct's died. 58 Executors have Right to Steelbow Goods: 59 Co-executors and
their power. 60 The Effect of Executors Assignations before Sentence. 61
Executors ad non executa. 62 Executors ad omissa and male appretiata. 63
Executors Creditors. 64 How far Executors are liable passive, and of their
Diligence. 65 The Relief (...) Heirs and Executors. 66 How Executors may safely
pay Creditors. 67 What time Executors have to do Diligence, before they be
liable to Creditors. 68 All Executors, and Creditors, doing Diligence within
six months of the Defunct's Death, come in pari passu. 69 After six months,
Creditors come in according to the priority of their Diligence. 70 Executors
paying Relicts, Bairns, and Legatars, after six months, and before Citation of
Creditors, are secure; and the Creditors have only Repetition against these. 71
Executors after obtaining Bond or Decree, are not in pleno dominio of the
Defunct's Goods: not do they fall under the Executor's Escheat, but the
Defunct's Creditors are preferable to the Executor's proper Creditors. 72
Executors may pay privileged Debts, at any time. 73 Arrestments hinder the
Executor to prefer any Creditor. 74 Compensation is not competent to the
Defunct's Debitors, upon Debts due by the Defunct, assigned after the Defunct's
Death. 75 Exoneration of Executors. 76 Exhausting of Executors, how competent.
77 The Diligence necessary to liberat Executors: Executors are not obliged to
depone upon their Knowledge of the Defunct's Debt, except as to their own
Share. 78 How far Co-executors are conveenable severally. 80 Executors
surviving, are not liable for the Share of the deceased in so far as they
executed the Testament, and lifted their part. 81 Executors are liable for the
Inventary, without proving their Intromission. 82 Where Testaments are to be
confirmed.
TITLE XXXI. Vicious Intromission.
1 Vicious Intromission only a passive and no active Title, even against other
vicious Intrometters, without Assignation from the Creditors. 2 Vicious
Intromission is the most extensive palsive Title, reaching not only those who
migh represent the Defunct, but all other Intromet ters. 3 The reason of the
large extent of this Title. 4 All vicious Intrometters are liable in solidum,
and conveenable severally. 5 Whether vicious Intromission be competent by
Exception? 6 Vicious Intromission sustained generally, without the Pursuer's
Condescendence. 7 Vicious Intromission is only competent to Creditors. 8 How
far vicious Intromission must be universal. 9 Vicious Intromission is excluded,
if Executors were confirmed before Citation, though after the Intromission.
Whether Executors Creditors, being confirmed, exclude vicious Intromission
pursued thereafter. 11 How far Confirmation of Executors, although after
Citation, excludes vicious Intromission. 12 Super-Intromission. 13 Vicious
Intromission how far excluded by Gift of Escheat and Declarator. 14 Vicious
Intromission is excluded, by any colorable Title, though defective. 15 The
Custom of England as to Intromission. 16 Vicious Intromission sapit delictum,
and is only competent against Intrometters themselves during their life. 17 How
far vicious Intromission is excluded by acquiring bona fide?
TITLE I. Common Principles of Law.
1. Description of Law. 2. Description and division of Justice. 3. Divine Law.
4. Reason. 5. Conscience. 6. Equity. 7. Moral Law. 8. Positive Laws of God. 9.
Judicial Law. 10. Law of Nations. 11. Civil Law. 12. Feudal Law. 13. Cannon
Law. 14. The Reasons of Humane Laws. 15. The Law of SCOTLAND. 16. Whether Law
may be handled as a Rational Discipline? 17. Three Common Principles of Equity,
and three of Positive Law. 18. Obedience. 19. Freedom. 20. Engagement. 21.
Description and division of Rights. 22. Method of the Civil Law, and the method
here proposed.
MY Design being to give a Description of the Law and Customs of SCOTLAND,
such as might not only be profitable for Judges and Lawers, but might be
pleasant and useful to all persons of Honor and Discretion; I did resolve to
Raise my Thoughts and theirs, to a distinct Consideration of the Fountains and
Foundations of the Peculiar Laws of all Nations, which Common Reason makes
Intelligible to the Judicious, when plainly and orderly proposed: And
therefore, have always in the first place set forth, that Common Rule of
material Justice, by which Mankind ought to Govern themselves, though they had
no Positive Statutes or Customs; and then showing how these are thence
Introduced. I have therefore chosen the Method I thought fittest for this
Purpose, and the Terms most Intelligible in common use; and have as much as I
could, forborne the Terms of Art. No man can be a knowing Lawer in any Nation,
who has not well pondered and digested in his Mind, the Common Law of the
World, from whence the Interpretation, Extensions and Limitations of all
Statutes and Customs must be brought. I have therefore begun with the Common
Principles of Law, and thence have laid down the Method I follow, and have
Explained the general Terms, commonly made use of in Law.

There is no Term of which men have a more common (but confused) apprehension,
than what Law is: and yet there be few Terms harder to be distinctly conceived
or described. The clearest Conception of it I can find, is thus;

1. Law is the Dictat of Reason, determining every Rational Being to that
which is congruous and convenient for its Nature and Condition; this will
extend to the determination of indifferency of all Rational Beeings.

God Almighty, though he be accountable to, and controllable by none, and so
has the absolute freedom of his Choice; yet does he unchangeably determine
himself by his Goodness, Righteousness and Truth; which therefore make the
Absolute, Sovereign, Divine Law: The same is also the Law of all Rational
Creatures, by which they ought to determine and rule their free Actions; but
the congruity and convenience of their Nature affords them other Dictates of
their Reason, which quadrat not with the Divine Nature; such as Adoration,
Obedience, common to Angels and Men. And Reason does determine Mankind yet
further from the convenience of his Nature and State, to be humble, penitent,
careful and diligent for the preservation of himself and his kind; and
therefore to be sociable, and helpful, and to do only that which were
convenient for Mankind to be done, by every one in the same condition, whereof
the Rule in the Gospel is an excellent Test, Quodtibi fierinon vis, alteri ne
feceris.


Thence also are the three Common Precepts in the Roman Law, Honest vivere,
Alterum non ledere, Suum cuique tribuere; All which are evidently the common
Interest and Advantage of mankind.

This is that Eternal Law which cannot be altered, being founded upon an
unchangeable Ground, the congruity to the Nature of God, Angels and Men; and
therefore God cannot deny himself, or act unsuitably to his Divine Perfections:
And therefore it is said, Shall not the Judge of all the Earth do justly? And
that it is impossible for God to lie; Not by any fatal necessity, as if he had
not power and freedom enough, but because his Goodness, Justice and Truth, are
as certain by his free Choice, as are his Omnipotency and Sovereignty.

This is also called the Law of Nature, because it arises from the congruity
or convenience of Nature, and thence is known by the Light of Nature.

2. Correspondent to these Dictats of Reason, wherein Law consists, which are
in the Understanding; There is an Inclination in the Will to observe and follow
these Dictats, which is Justice: and therefore it is described, Constans and
perpetua voluntas suum cuique tribuendi, where, by the Will, is not understood
the Faculty, but the Inclination thereof, determined by the Law, to give every
one that which the Law declares to be due; and it is divided into Distributive
and Commutative Justice.

Distributive Justice, is the Inclination to retribute Rewards to the Virtuous;
and Punishments to the Vicious, proportioned to their actings, which is now
almost wholly devolved upon Public Authority; little remaining, but
Encouragement and Praise to the Virtuous, and Discouragement and Discountenance
to the Vicious.

Commutative Justice, is the Inclination to give every man his Right; and
though the Name is taken from the Interchange of private Rights, yet it
reaches to all Prestations, which are not by way of Reward or Punishment.

There being nothing here proposed but the private Rights of Men, it is only
requisite to consider the Laws by which private Rights are Constitute, Conveyed
or Destitute, and these are either Divine or Humane.

3. Divine Law is that mainly which is Written in Man's Heart, according to that
of the Apostle, For when the Gentiles who have not the Law, (to wit, written in
the Word) do by nature the things contained in the Law, these are a Law unto
themselves, which shows the works of the Law written in their hearts; their
conscience also bearing them witness, and their thoughts in the mean while
accusing or excusing one another; This is called the Law of Nature, because it
is known Naturally, either immediately, like unto these Instincts which are in
the other Creatures, whereby they know what is necessary for their
preservation: So the first Principles of this Natural Law are known to men,
without Reasoning or Experience, without Art, Industry or Education, and so are
known to men every where through the World; though they keep no Communion nor
Intercourse together, which is an unanswerable demonstration of the being of
this Law of Nature. It is said to be written in the Hearts of Men, because Law
uses to be written on Pillars or Tables, for certainty or conservation: So
this Law is written by the Finger of God upon man's Heart, there to remain for
ever. Such are the common practical Principles, that God is to be obeyed,
Parents honored, our selves defended, violence repulsed, Children to be loved,
educate and provided for.

4. With these common Principles, With which God has sent Men into the World;
he gave them also Reason, that thence they might by consequence, deduce his Law
in more particular Cases; and this part of the Natural Law, is called the Light
or Law of Reason. It is called by Solomon, the Candle of the Lord, searching
the inward parts, Proverbs 20. verse 27.

5. This Law is also called Conscience, which is said in the forecited place,
to bear Witness, and thereby our thoughts do either accuse or excuse one
another, according to the Judgment or Testimony we have of our own Thoughts,
as good or evil, consonant to, or dissonant from, the Law of Nature, shining in
the heart. This Natural Law, as it is derived from these Principles, the nearer
it is thereto, it is the clearer; and by the more immediate consequences it be
derived, it is the surer: for as the Body in its progressive motion, from one
step to another, walks surest by the shortest steps; so does the Mind in
deducing this Divine Law: whence it is, that this part of the Law of Nature is
not equally evident to all men; but the more of Reason they have, the more
clearness they have of it, which has made men of Reason, especially these who
have exercised themselves in the inquiry of Right, to be had in high esteem and
admiration amongst men, who, though their Invention was not so eminent, yet
their Judgment closed and went along with that, as having a native Obligation
in it. And so many times these responsa prudentium, have been received with as
much Authority, and more heartiness for Laws, than the Dictates of Sovereigns.
Cicero in his Oration, Pro Milone, Does excellently set forth and distinguish
this Natural Law, from Positive Law; for, says he, Hac non scripta sed nata
lex, quam non didicimus, accepimus, legimus verum ex natura ipsa arripuimus,
hausimus, expressimus, ad quam non docti, sed facti; non instituti, sed imbuti
sumus, ut si vita nostra in aliquas insidias, si in vim, aut in tela, aut
inimicorum, aut latronum inciderit, omnis honesta ratio esset expediendae
salutis.

6. This Law of Nature is also called Equity, from that Equality it keeps in
all persons; and is not framed or fitted for the Interest of any, as many Laws
of men's choice be; from the rigor whereof, recourse ought to be had to this
Natural Equity: for though men's Laws may be profitable and ne, cessar for the
most part; yet being the Inventions of frail men, there occurs many, casus
incogitati, wherein they serve not. But Equity takes place, and the Limitations
and Fallancies, Extensions and Ampliations of Humane Laws are brought from
Equity, though Equity be taken some times for the moderation of the extremity
of Humane Laws; yet it does truly comprehend the whole Law of Nature; otherwise
it could not possibly give remeid to the rigor, and extremity of positive Laws
in all Cases.

7. The Law of Nature is also termed the Moral Law, being the absolute and
adequat Rule of the Manners of men, for all times, places and persons; and this
denomination, it has commonly in opposition to the Judicial and Ceremonial Law.

The Roman Law does sometime take the Law of Nature in a most strict sense, as
it excludes the Law of Reason, and as it is founded in the Nature of man, in
so far as is common with other Animals; and therefore they define it to be quod
natura omnia animalia docuit, as the conjunction of Male and Female: or
Marriage, the Procreation or Education of Children, etc. But even in that Law,
the Law of Nature is extended and distinguished into the Original and Primitive
Law; and that which is derived thence, such, as for the most part, is the Law
of Nations: and there is no doubt, but there is more of the Law of Nature
founded in the rational Nature of man, as he is a rational and sociable
Creature; and even that which appears to be in the Sensitive Nature, is
truly founded in the Rational Nature; and therefore is not properly
communicable unto the Beasts, who have no Law but their natural Instincts,
having only some resemblance to the Law of Nature.

The Law of Nature, as it is impressed in our hearts; so in the goodness of God,
it is expressed in his Word, wherein he has not only holden forth these Sacred
Mysteries, which could only be known by Revelation, as having no Principle in
Nature from whence they are deducible; but also, because through sin and evil
Custom, the Natural Law in man's Heart was much defaced, disordered and
erroniously deduced: he has therefore Reprinted the Law of Nature in a viver
Character in the scripture, not only having the Moral Principles, but many
conclusions thence flowing, particularly set forth. This Analogy of the Law of
Nature, even in the Hearts of Heathens, and as it is set down in the Law of
God, evidenceth sufficiently, that both of them proceed from the same
Omniscient Author.

8. Beside this natural, necessar and perpetual Law, God has also given to men
voluntar and positive Laws, which, though not at the pleasure of men, yet in
themselves are mutable; and as they had a beginning, so some of them had, and
others of them shall have an end, when the occasion, exigence and utility for
which they were constitute, shall cease: such were the Ceremonial Laws, which
containing a Figurative and Typical Administration of the Worship of God,
shadowing forth Christ and his Propitiatory Sacrifice of himself; now when the
Sun of Righteousness has arisen, these shadows have flown away, and are in the
Scripture repealed; in lieu whereof, is the outward Order of the Worship and
Government of the Christian Church, and the Laws of God relating thereto,
though we are to expect no change of them while Time is, and are as binding to
all, to whom their Lines are gone, as the Natural Law, yet are they no part of
it, for they are not written in the heart of man, nor deducible by Reason from
any such Principle. Such are the Sabbath on the first day of the week, the
particular Offices in the Church, their Authority and Maintenance; for though
the Law of Nature does teach, that God is to be acknowledged and adored, yet
the impowering of some certain persons to be leaders in the Public Adoration,
and the fixed time thereof, either as it was under the Law, or as it is under
the Gospel, cannot be reached thence, but had its beginning, and has been
altered. Some also do account Marriage, and the degrees forbidden in Levit. to
be a positive Law of God, though they acknowledge it, not only to be given to
the Jews, but to all men; yet the natural and universal aversion of Marriage in
these degrees, and abhorrence of that brutish commixtion, without discretion of
degrees, which is observed in all Nations, whom corrupt custom has not so far
depraved, as to forget, not only this, but most of the uncontroverted Laws of
Nature, do sufficiently evince the contrair; for if Parents and Posterity be
all accounted as one Degree, there is nothing prohibited by the Law of God, but
the very next degree of these who are in the place of Parents, as Uncles and
Aunts, or in the place of Children, as Nephews, Neices, or Brethren and
Sisters, so that there can be no doubt, but the prohibition of commixtion of
Ascendents and Descendents, is purely Natural.

9. The prime Positive Law of God, is the Judicial Law, which God by the
Ministry of Moses, prescribed to the People of Israel, wherein the Lord was
pleased to be the particular Lawgiver, and Judge of that People whom he had
chosen from among all Nations, for a peculiar People to himself, and to whose
Inclinations it is befitted; there are not a few who esteem the Judicial Law
oblieging to all Nations, mainly, because it does not appear in the Gospel, to
be abolished as the Ceremonial Laws are, and because of its excellency beyond
the Laws of Heathens, or other men, who might not only err in expediency,
rendering their Laws unprofitable; but also might make them unjust and
inconsistent with the Immutable moral Law of Nature: which Reasons do
sufficiently infer, that in the constitution of Humane Laws, chief respect
ought to be had to the Judicial Laws of God; and they assumed where the
Inclination of the People and their condition, do not render them inconvenient.
But that these Laws were accommodate unto their proper temper, is evident in
the Law, concerning the Bill of Divorcement, which bears, to be permitted for
the hardness of their hearts, which was natural and peculiar to them, of
Jealousy and bitterness against their Wives; therefore the Lord not only
appointed trial, neither natural, necessar, nor accustomed elsewhere, by those
tokens of Virginity, for evidencing the Wifes faithfulness in not giving a
polluted Woman for a chaste; but also the extraordinar and miraculous Trial, by
the Water of Jealousy; and therefore Christ did expressly abrogate that Law,
and show us that Moses did not command to Divorce, but for the hardness of
their hearts, only permitted it, and did command, that when the Husband would
put away his Wife, he should give her a Bill of Divorce; but it does not
follow, that the Judicial Law is in it self a Law to all Nations, or that the
Lord purposed it so to be: but on the contrar, it appears that his Purpose
was only to deliver it, for a peculiar Law to Israel, when he says, What
Nation is so great, that has Statutes and Judgments sorighteous, as is all
this Law which I set before you this day, Deuteronomy. 4. verse. 8. And again, he
shows his Word unto Jacob, his Statutes and Judgments to Israel, he has not
dealt so with every Nation, and as for his Judgments, they have not known
them, Psalm. 147. verse. 19. And therefore the same Law was not to Israelits and
to Strangers, even to Proselytes, as appears in the matter of Usury and
Bondage, which were allowed as to Strangers; but the former simply forbidden,
and the latter limited as to Israelits: neither is there any necessity of an
abolition express of this Law in the Gospel, seeing it was not given to all
Nations; and it does yet bind the Jews, so far as it does not build upon the
Ceremonial Law: And therefore that part of the Judicial Law, which is founded
upon, or conducible to the Moral Law, may be well received by other Nations, to
whose Inclinations the same expediencies will agree, as most of the Criminal
Laws are: And though they could suit with the frame and current of the Laws
already established, yet would they be far from making up a Law to rule any
Nation now, after man's Pravity has so much increased Vice and Deceit, that
which was sufficient in the simplicity of these times, would come far short.

10. Humane Law is that, which for Utilities sake is introduced by men, which
is either by tacit consent, by consuetude or custom, or by express Will or
Command of these in Authority, having the Legislative power, and these were
ofttimes written, though sometimes also they were not written; as were Licurgus
Laws, which not only were not written, but a Law against it, that they should
not be written: Hence is the distinction of Laws, in written and unwritten,
because of their Original; for, ex post facto, Customs or other unwritten Laws
may be written by private persons; but they were not at first written by the
Law Giver.

It is true, the Law is sometimes strictly taken in opposition to Custom, as
it comprehends Equity or the Natural Law, and the Edicts and Statutes of
Nations, and their Law givers. And sometimes more strictly, as in the Vulgar
Distinction of Law, Statute and Custom; in which, Law signifies Equity, or
the Common Law, as Statutes and Customs do the peculiar recent Laws of several
Nations. And though that be only the Law of man, which is voluntar and
positive, constitute by man; yet Equity and the Natural Law, in so far as it is
allowed, declared and made effectual by man, is in so far accounted among the
Laws of men.

The Laws of men are either common to many Nations, or proper to one Nation, or
peculiar to some Places or Incorporations in the same Nation; as were the
Municipal Laws in the Roman Republic; and such are still in most Nations, not
only in matters of lesser moment, but in the highest matters of private Rights,
as in Succession, which is diversified in many Provinces, in France, Germany,
and the Netherlands, and England, as may be instanced in the Gavil kind of Kent.

The Law common to many Nations, is that which is commonly called, the Law of
Nations, which stands in the customs owned and acknowledged by all, or at least
the most civil Nations, which for the most part, are nothing else but Equity,
and the Law of Nature and Reason; though in part also, there be positive Laws
introduced, by common consent of Nations, and which do no less obliege these
Nations, as importing their obligatory consent, then do the customs of
particular Nations and Incorporations: Such are the Laws of Captivity and
Bondage, of these taken in War, the safety of Ambassadors, though more guilty
of the common quarrel, than the rest of the Nations from whom they are sent;
yet for common utilities sake, while they act in, and conform to that Capacity,
they are safe, otherways there could be no Commerce, orderly Indiction of War
or Pacification. And therefore the Romans, when they had to do with barbarous
Nations, who did not acknowledge this Law, did send their Ambassadors to their
Borders, and there did require Reparation, and denunce War because they could
safely go no further; and for the same reason (though Slavery be against the
Natural Law of Liberty) yet it is received for convenience by the Nations,
being more willing to lose Liberty than Life. Such also are the Laws of
Hospitality, or the mutual Trust betwixt the Host and the Guest, whom he has
willingly received in his House, whereby neither of them can act any thing
prejudicial to the Life or Liberty of the other, while in that relation; though
otherwise they had just reason, and might do the same; yet the doing of it
then, were a violating of the Law of Nations. But for the most part, the Law of
Nations is nothing else but Equity, and the Law of Nature and Reason, which
stands as the common Rule among men, appointed of God, by which they may
know, and crave each from other their Rights; and in case of refusal, may
vindicate the same by force, wherein they are still regulat by the common Law
of Reason, and the Customs of Nations, keeping a just proportion betwixt the
Wrong and Reparation, though taken by force: And not like Draco, who made the
punishment of all his Laws Death; and therefore were said to be written in
Blood, so by making the Issue of every Quarrel to be the Conquest of the
debelled, and the swallowing up of all their Rights, as if they had pactioned
to put them all upon the Issue of that War; whereas there is nothing in
question by either Party, but the striving for Reparation of that Injury which
the one owneth, and the other denies to acknowledge as an Injury, or refuses
Reparation thereof. This Law is chiefly understood, when the Common Law is
named amongst us; though the English so name the common Current of their Civil
Law, as opposite to Statute and their late Customs, which is sometimes so
taken with us: and ofttimes by the Common Law, we understand the Roman Law,
which in some sort is common to many Nations.

11. The Law of each Society of People under the same Sovereign Authority is
called, The Civil Law, or the Law of the Citizens of that Commonwealth; though
that now be appropriate to the Civil Law of the Roman Commonwealth, or (...),
as the most excellent. And because of that Assinity that the Law of Scotland
has with it, as have also the Laws and Customs of the Chief Nations, to which
the Victorious Arms of the Romans did propagat it, and its own worth, even
after the ruin of the Roman Empire, which has so commended it, that though it
be not acknowledged as a Law, binding for its Authority; yet as a Rule,
followed for its Equity: it shall not be amiss to say something here of it.

The Romans were first Governed by Kings who gave them Laws, which being
Collected by Papirius, in the time of Tarquinius Superbus; were therefore
called the Papirian Law, Tarquinius and Monarchy being thrown out, the Papirian
Law Collected in his Time and Name, was partaker of his Hatred, and Contempt of
the People; and there was no fixed, nor written Law among the Romans, till they
sent the triumviri, posthumus, Maulius and Sulpitius, to the Greek Republic,
to understand the Laws of these Commonwealths, and thence to frame a Model of
Government, and Laws for the Roman State, which they did, and made up the Law
of the twelve Tables, which being comprehended in few Words and marrowy
Sentences, all Written upon twelve Tables, was fixed upon the most public
Market place at Rome, that they might be easily known, and kept in mind by
all the Citizens.

These were so acceptable and satisfactory to the Romans, that they have been
the Foundations and Principles of all that great Body of Law, which afterward
they had; all which was ordered to that Ancient Law, as Extensions and
Limitations of it, which was done at first by parts, by the Plebiscita Laws,
Inacted by the Suffrage of the People, or by the Senatus Consulta, or by the
Edicts of the Praetor. or by the Responses of the Jurisprudents, who were
authorized to give answer in dubious Cases; as Cornelius, Nasica, Fabauf. Cato,
Gallus, Ariciusidius, Manlius, Scevola, Crassus, Iuventius, Ulpianus, Paulus,
Julianus and others; and when the Sovereign Power was devolved upon the
Emperor by their Edicts, Rescripts and Decrees, until the Roman Law increased
unto so great a bulk, that there were thousands of Books of Law, in which the
Brevity and Perspicuity of the twelve Tables was then lost, as now the body of
them, through the injury of time has perished. But at last the Emperor
Justinian, did by the pains of seventeen Select Jurisconsults, pick out the
Marrow of all the Ancient Laws, and digest them into some Method, into the
fifty Books of the Digest or Pandects, which therefore have the Author of
every Law prefixed to it; he did also by Tribonian and others, Collect the
Rescripts, Decrees, and all the Edicts of the Emperors, which before were more
imperfectly compiled in their Theodosian Codex, and which thereafter he
perfeited, and named the Justinian Codex, as Posterior Constitutions of the
Emperors were gathered together in nine Collations, which were called the
Novel Constitutions. Justinian did also cause frame the four Books of the
Institutes, as the Sums and Elements of the whole Law. But as nothing Humane is
stable, shortly after this greatest perfection of the Roman Law, in the time of
Phocas the Emperor, who Reigned fourth after Justinian, and died in the year,
565. The Roman Empire being oppressed by the Irruption of the Goths and
Longobards, the Roman Law did also lie under Ashes above the space of five
hundred years, until a new shape of the Roman Empire, being set up in Germany,
Lothaius the Emperor, who flourished in the eleventh Century, did again revive
and restore the Roman Law, which thence was every where Taught in the Schools,
and enlarged with more vast heaps of Commentaries and Treatises, then were
these of the Ancient Lawers, though not claiming the like Authority.

12. In the Interim, did the Feudal Law or Customs take rise among the
Longobards, and other Nations, who having expulsed out of Italy the Roman
Empire, were willing to change their Barbarity, and to be successors to the
Romans in Seats and Civility; and that they might maintain their Conquests,
gave out all their Lands to their Soldiers and Assecls, as Benefices to them
for their Service, and Assistance in their Wars: the example of which, and the
new Interest it afforded to Sovereigns, to have all their Territories to hold
of themselves; and most of their Subjects by that new relation, to become their
Feudatars and Vassals, has given the Feudal Law wings, whereby it has spread
it self over most of the World.

13. In the declining also of the Roman Empire, the Bishop of Rome having
mounted himself unto the Imperial Eminence of Universal Bishop, did in
imitation of the Emperors Cause, Compile the Cannon Law; and first, that part
which is called Decretum, which was perfeited by Gratian the Monk, out of the
Fathers, Doctors and Counsels, though much thrown and vitiat toward the
Interests and Errors of the Roman Church. And after the Decretals were
Compyled by Pope Gregory the ninth, out of the Decretal Epistles of the Popes,
which Boniface the eighth augmented by addition of the sixth Book of the
Decretals; The first whereof, is in imitation of the Digests made of the
Sentences of the ancient Lawers; and it out of the Sentences of the Fathers,
Doctors and Councils of the Church; and the latter, in resemblance of the
Codex, compacted of the Rescripts of the Popes, and that nothing may be
improportional unto the Noval Constitutions, do answer the Clementins and
Extravagants. This Pontifical Law extended unto all persons and things,
belonging to the Roman Church, and separate from the Laity, all things that may
relate to Pious Uses, or which may be claimed to be under the protection of his
Holiness, as Orphans, the Will of Defuncts, the matter of Marriage and Divorce,
all which he had obtained to be exempted from the Civil Authority of these
Sovereigns, who were devoted to that See. These things being holy, were not to
be temerat by the profane hands of Princes or free people; and so deep has
this Canon Law been rooted, that even where the Popes Authority is rejected;
yet consideration must be had to these Laws, not only as to these by which
Church Benefices have been erected and ordered, but as to these which contain
many equitable and profitable Laws, which, because of their weighty matter, and
being once received, may more fitly be retained than rejected.

14. Before we come to the Customs of Scotland, there lies this Block in the
way of all Humane Laws; that seeing, as has been said, Equity and the Law of
Nature and Reason is perfect and perpetual, all Laws of men's constitution, seem
not only to be dangerous, in that they may Impinge upon the perfect Law of God;
but also to be useless and unprofitable, seeing men may live better, and more
safely by the Divine Dictats of God written in our hearts, than by the devices
of men, so that it may be thought, that those, who in stead thereof, embrace
the Laws of men, may meet with the reproof of the Israelites, who were said to
reject God from reigning over them. This Reason is so pressing, that if the Law
of Nature, and of Reason, were equally known to all men, or that the Dispensers
thereofcould be found so knowing and so just, as men would, and ought to have
full confidence and quietness in their Sentences, it would not only be a folly,
but a fault to admit of any other Law; but the prime Interests of men being to
enjoy their Rights, not only in safety and security, but in confidence and
quietness of mind, that they may clearly know what is their Right, and may
enjoy the same: Therefore Humane Laws are added, not to take away the Law of
Nature, and of Reason, but some of the effects thereof, which are in our power.
And therefore as by the Law of Nature, man is a free Creature, yet so as he may
engage himself, and being engaged by the same Law of Nature he must perform: so
men's Laws are nothing else, but the public Sponsions of the people, which
therefore, even by the Law of Nature, they may and must perform, and therefore
are they introduced.

First, For clearing and condescending on the Law of Nature, and of Reason;
such Laws can none quarrel, because they do not alter, but declare Equity, and
that very necessarily, because, though Equity be very clear in its Principles,
and in thesi; yet the deduction of Reason further from the Fountain, through
the bias and corruption of Interest, may make it much more dubious, in
hypothesi, when it comes to the Decision of a particular Case, in all its
Circumstances; and therefore it is necessar it be so fixed and cleared by
Statutes and Customs, suitable thereto, that the people may be secured.

Secondly, There be many points of Rights competent to men in Equity, as it may
be more profitable for the people to forbear the pursuance of them, than to be
at the trouble and expenses of the pursuit; as when Humane Laws do cut
offmatters of less concernment, and in them, rathertake themselves to the
honesty of their party, than to compulsion by remeids of Law; such are the
Remuneratory Obligations of Gratitude, and the inward Obligations of the Mind,
as of Affection, Love, Kindness, etc. according to the Proverb, we cannot poind
for unkindness. It is not to be doubted, but there be more such obligations,
than are the Obligations relating to outward performances of some palpable or
sensible thing; and it might easily appear, what vexation it might breed, if
not only the latter, but also the former might all be pursued, and extorted by
compulsion of Law. And none can think the Law of Nature injured, because of
common consent, men will spare themselves the labor to pursue those things
which they may easily dispense with; and so likewise for the same reason,
though by the Moral Law, we are obliged to love our Neighbor as our Selves:
From whence arise Duties of Charity and Mercy, Assistance and Relief; yet for
the most part, men do not compel for the negative of these Commands, but only
for the contrary acts of Injury, by doing evil in stead of good.

Thirdly, For the security of the people and anticipation of Error and Fraud,
and that evident probation may be had, Men do most profitably order deeds to be
done in such a palpable and plain form, as may easily appear; in which there
can be no injury, seeing the manner of doing these deeds, is free, and in our
power: Thus, though the dispositive will of the Proprietar be sufficient to
alienate any thing that is his, and to constitute the Right thereof in another;
Yet by the Civil Law and custom of most Nations, delivery, or apprehension of
Possession, for conveying the Right of Goods; and Seasing is necessar for
conveying of the Rights of Lands by the Feudal Law; and so by our Customs,
Assignations are not effectual to transfer Personal Rights, till Intimation
follow: Our Custom also appoints Write to be made, where it is easy and
ordinar to be done: and therefore as the penalty of the neglect, or contempt
thereof does exclude Witnesses, in matters of importance, and admits only
Write, or Oath of party, in cases where Write is accustomed; So the Romans
ordained, that because the agreements of the people, when they stood in mere
Conference, that words were easy to be mistaken by themselves or Witnesses;
that therefore the parties should perfeit such Contracts by a solemn
stipulation, wherein the one party did interrogat, if the other did agree to
such terms as he expressed, and the other immediately repeated his answer, closing
with him in terms: and therefore, if they did not so stipulate, they refused
them Action upon naked paction.

Fourthly, Nations for the flourishing of their Families, do otherwise dispose
of their Estates and Possessions, and their Laws do order them otherways than
the Law of Nature does; for in the most part, the Heretage and Succession in
the whole Land-rights belongs to the eldest Son, as Stem and Line of the
Family; and the Parents are presumed to provide the rest of the Children with
competent Portions; though by the Law of Nature, the Right of Succession does
belong to all: and even in this positive Law, altering the course of the Law of
Nature, has its example from the Judicial Law of God, by which the Males
exclude the Females, and the eldest has a double Portion.

Fifthly, According to the humors and inclinations of People, men do lay the
heavier penalties upon the Transgression of such Laws as stand in opposition
thereunto, which may be altered when these inclinations alter. And so the Lord
did frame the Law of Moses for the humors of that People, in some things
permitting, without punishing the transgression of the most palpable and
weighty Laws of Nature, as in Poligamy and Divorce; and also extending the
proportion of Equality, observed in the Law of Nature, in Restitution and
Retribution, as in Theft: hence it appears how necessar the Laws of men are;
yetsurely they are most happy whose Laws are nearest to Equity, and most
declaratory of it: And lest altering of the effects thereof, except in cases
eminently profitable, like unto these now pointed at; yea, and the Nations are
more happy, whose Laws have entered by long custom, wrung out from the Debates
upon particular Causes, until it come to the Consistence of a fixed and known
Custom, for thereby the conveniences and inconveniences through a tract of
Time, are experimentally seen; so that which is found in some cases convenient,
if in other cases afterward it be found inconvenient, it proves abortive in the
womb of Time, before it attain the maturity of a Law. But in Statutes, the
Lawgiver must at once balance the conveniences and inconveniences, wherein
he may, and often does fall short, and there do arise, casus Incogitati,
wherein the Statute is out, and recourse must be had to Equity. But these are
best which are approbatory, or correctory of experienced Customs, and in a
customary Law, though the people run some hazard at first of their Judges
Arbitriment: Yet when that Law is come to a fullness and consistence, they have
by much the advantage in this, that what custom has changed, is thrown away,
and obliterat without memory, or mention of it; but in Statutory Written Law,
the Vestige of all the alterations remain, and ordinarily increase to such a
Mass, that they cease to be Evidences, and Securities to the people, and become
Labyrinths, wherein they are fair to lose their Rights, if not themselves, and
must have an implicit Faith, in these who cannot comprehend them without
making it the work of their life.

15. Our Customs, as they have arisen mainly from Equity, so they are also
from the Civil Canon and Feudal Laws, from which the Terms, Tenors and Forms of
them are much borrowed; and therefore, these especially (the Civil Law) have
great weight, namely in cases where a custom is not yet formed; but none of
these have with us the Authority of Law: And therefore are only received
according to their Equity and Expediency, Secundum bonum and equum; And though
it may appear from some Narratives of our Statutes, that the Parliament does
own the Civil and Canon Law, to be our Law, as in the Revocation of King James
the fourth, Parliament 1493. c. 51. where it is said, and since it is permitted
by the constitution of Law, Civil and Canon, that Minors may revoke, Par. 1540.
cap. 80. So likewise Nottars, Forgers of false Writs, are ordained to be
punished after the disposition of Common Law, Par. 1551. cap. 22. And in the
Act establishing Religion, all Acts contrair, or Constitutions, Canon, Civil,
or Municipal, are abrogated, Par. 1567. cap. 31. Yet these amount to no more,
then that these Laws are an example; after the similitude whereof, the
Parliament proceeded. And though in the cases of Falsehood, the punishment be
assumed as in the Civil Law, which will make that a part of our Law, it will
not infer that in so far it was our Law before, much less in the whole. And
there is reason for the Abrogation of the Canon Law, at the establishing of the
Protestant Religion; because in the Popish Church, it was held as an
Authoritative Law: but since it is only a Law as to these Cases, that were
acted by it when it was in vigor; and in the rest only as our Customs assume
some particulars thereof, according to the weight of the matter: But for the
full Evidence of the Contrair, there is an express and special Statute,
declaring this Kingdom subject only to the Kings Laws, and no other Sovereigns
Laws, Par. 1425. cap. 48. Par. 1503. cap. 79. Yea, the Law of Scotland regulats
the Succession, and Rights of Scottish men in Scotland, though dying abroad,
being resident there, as was found in the case of Colonel Hendersons Children,
who having died in Holland, Legatted upon Heretable Bonds, according to the
custom there; yet they were found not to be conveyed by Testament, but
belonging to his Heirs, according to the Law of Scotland, Dury, 9. December.
1623. The like betwixt Melvil and Drummond, Dury, 3. July 1634. and lately, in
the case of the Executors of Williami Schaw, Factor at London, dying there, it
was found, that a Nuncupative Testament, confirmed in England, being contrair
to the Law of Scotland, which admits of none such, was null, and the nearest of
Kin preferred to the Executor, and universal Legatar named there, January the
19. 1665. Schaw contra Lewens; but as to the manner of Probation, or
Subscription, the Law of the Place Regulates. Dury, 11. December. 1627. Falconer
contra the Heir of Beatty, and the 27. July 1623. Gordoun contra Morley, 15.
Feb. 1630. Harper contra Jaffray. So a Bond by an English man to a Scottish
man, residing there, being after the Style of England, payment thereof was
found probable by Witness, and by the Oath of the Cedent against the Assignay,
28. June, 1666. Mcmorlan contra Melvil; yet a Bond granted by Scottish men to
an English man in England, found regulate by the Law of Scotland, and not to be
taken away by Witness, being after the Style of Scotland, and Registrable in
Scotland, December. 8. 1664. Scot contra Henderson and Wilson. But the Law of
England and other Foreign Nations, is matter of Fact to us, probable by the
Declaration of the Judges there. January 18. 1676. Cunningham contra Brown.

The Law of Scotland, as of all other Nations, at first, could be no other,
than equum and bonum, Equity and Expediency; for it is not to be supposed, that
any Nation at their first association and owning of a Government, did appoint
positive Laws, nor could they have Customs anterior to their Constitution; and
yet it is necessarily employed, that they must submit to, and be Governed by a
Law, which could be understood no other, than what their Sovereign Authority
should find Just and Convenient. It may be some Cities at their first
Constitutions, might have enacted Laws; but it cannot be found in all the
Records of Antiquity, that ever any Nation or Country did so, whatsoever be
said of the Salique Law of the French, which they hold so ancient and
fundamental: It is either fictious or long posterior to their constitution,
into a Nation. And therefore, as in Arbitriments, parties are understood to
submit themselves to Arbiters, Secundum Arbitrium boni viri; So Nations of old
submited to their Princes, choosing rather to refer their Interests and
Differences to the Determination of their Sovereign, than that every one should
be a Judge to himself, and should take and hold by force, what he conceived to
be his Right, without any Superior Judge than himself to appeal to, and
thereby live in perpetual War: whence Government necessarily implys in the very
being thereof, a yielding and submitting to the Determination of the Sovereign
Authority, in the differences of the People, though one, or either party should
conceive themselves injured, that thereby private opinion may give place to
public Authority, although they had natural power, sufficient to withstand the
same; otherways they behooved to dissolve Authority and Society, and return to
the Soveraignity of their private judgment, and their natural force, from
which they did fly unto the Sanctuary of Government; which though it may
sometimes err, yet can be nothing like to these continual errors, when every
one owns himself as Sovereign Judge in his own Cause.

Next unto Equity, Nations were ruled by Consuetude, which declares Equity and
constituteth Expediencies. In the third place, positive Laws of Sovereigns
became to be accustomed; Customs always continuing, and proceeding, so that
every Nation under the name of Law, understand their ancient and uncontroverted
Customs, time out of mind, or their first and Fundamental Law: So the Romans
accounted their Laws of the twelve Tables, and when they did express any thing
to be ipso jure, they meaned it to be such, by that ancient Law, in opposition
to their recent Customs, introduced by their Pretors and Constitutions of their
people, Senate and Princes. The English also, by their Common Law, in opposition
to Statute and recent Customs, mean their ancient and unquestionable Customs.
In like manner we are ruled in the first place, by our Ancient and Immemorial
Customs, which may be called our Common Law, though sometimes by that name, is
understood Equity, which is common to all Nations; or the Civil Roman Law,
which in some fort is common to very many. By this Law is our Primogenitur, and
all degrees of Succession, our Legittime Portions of Children, Communion of
Goods betwixt Man and Wife, and the division thereof at their death; the
Succession of the nearest Agnats, the Terces of Relicts, the Life-rent of
Husbands by the Courtesy, the exclusion of Deeds on Deathbed, which are
anterior to any Statute, and not comprehended in any, as being more solemn and
sure than these.

In the next place are our Statutes, or our Acts of Parliament, which in this
are inferior to our ancient Law, that they are liable to Defuetude, which
never Incroaches on the other. In this, we differ from the English, whose
Statutes of Parliament, of whatsoever Antiquity, remain ever in Force till they
be repealed, which occasions to them many sad debates (public and private)
upon old forgotten Statutes. But with us, the Lords of Session, being, by their
Institution, Authorized with Power, to make Rules and Statutes, to be observed,
in the manner and order of Proceeding, and Administration of Justice, Par.
1537. cap. 43. Par. 1540. cap 93. Their Decisions are final and irrevocable,
when solenmly done, in foro contradictorio; and thereby, recent Custom or
Practique is established, both by their Acts of Sederunt and Decisions, which
extend, not only to the Interpretation of Acts of Parliament, but to the
Derogation thereof; especially so far as concerns the Administration of
Justice, which is specially committed to them, whereby all the old Acts of
Parliament, concerning the forms of Process, are in Desuetude, and in several
points more recent Statutes; for instance, albeit by the Act of Parliament,
1621. cap. 81. Reductions of Infeftments are appointed to be sustained by
exception or reply; yet the Lords seeing that this is inconsistent with the
necessar and ordinar form of Process, whereby Rights cannot be annulled or
reduced, till the parties and their authors be called, that the same maybe
first produced, therefore they do not take away Infeftments by exception or
reply, notwithstanding of the said Statute: But there is much difference to be
made betwixt a custom by frequent Decisions, and a simple Decision, which has
not like force, especially if it be invested with many Circumstances of Fact.
But such are more effectual, if they be in any abstract point of Law. Yet
frequent agreeing Decisions, are more effectual than Acts of Sederunt
themselves, which do easily go into Desuetude. Where our ancient Law Statutes,
and our recent Customs and Practiques are defective, recourse is had to Equity,
as the first and universal Law, and to expediency, whereby Laws are drawn in
consequence, ad similes casus; but if it appear, that such cases have been of
purpose omitted by the Parliament, the Lords will not extend the same, as
albeit by the Act of Parliament, 1621. cap. 6. Composition to Superiors for
receiving Apprisers, be appointed, and the same in the next Act omitted, as to
Adjudgers. Therefore the Lords presuming thence, from the propinquity of these
Acts, that such compositions were omitted of purpose, they would not extend the
benefit of the Superior to a composition in Adjudications. Dury, 21. of July,
1636. Greirson contra Closburn, but now it is extended to Adjudications; that
in these, Superior has a composition by the Act of Parliament, 23. December.
1669. How far the Civil, Common, or Feudal Law have place with us, has been
already said. But it is not to be thought, that the Feudal Law is our proper
Law, as Craig relates, lib. 1. dig. 8. sect. per. there being scarce any thing
as a Common, Feudal Law, but it is Local and customary to every place, and does
not extend to the half of our Rights: Craig does very well observe, near that
place, that these Books called Regiam Majestatem, are no part of our Law, but
were compyled for the Customs of England, in 13. Books, by the Earl of Chester,
and by some unknown and inconsiderate hand, stolen thence, and resarcinate
into these four Books, which pass amongst us; which though they be mentioned,
to be revised and reformed with our former ancient Laws, Par. 1425. cap. 54.
Par. 1487. cap. 115. yet these do not acknowledge them, as already become our
Laws; but as such, as by alteration thereof, may become our Law.

The Law of Scotland in its nearness to Equity, plainness and facility in its
Customs, Tenors and Forms, and in its celerity and dispatch in the
Administration and Execution of it, may be well parralleled with the best Law
in Christendom, which will more plainly appear, when the proportion and
propinquity of it to Equity shall be seen.

16. Before we come to the Common Principles of Law, this Question would be
resolved, Whether Law may, or should be handled as a Rational Discipline,
having Principles from whence its Conclusions may be deduced? Most Lawers are
for the Negative part, commonly esteeming Law, especially the positive and
proper Laws of any Nation, incapable of such a deduction, as being dependent
upon the will and pleasure of Lawgivers, and introduced for Utilities sake,
and so frequently alterable, that they cannot be drawn from prior common
Principles, and keep the artificial method of rational Disciplines; and
therefore they rest satisfied with any order, whereby the particular Heads and
Titles may be found, whereunto the confused Order of the Civil Law (which is
the greatest blemish in it) has been instrumental; for there is nothing more
ordinar for learned men, than to maintain their Authors, and through their
respect to them, not to be sensible of their tolerable Errors. There is little
to be found among the Commentars and Treatises upon the Civil Law, arguing from
any known Principles of Right; but all their Debates is a Congestion of the
Contexts of the Law, which exceedingly nauseates delicate ingines, finding much
more work for their memory, than judgment in taking up and retaining the
Lawgivers Will, rather than searching into his reason; yet there are not
wanting of late of the learnedest Lawers, who have thought it both feasible and
fit, that the Law should be formed as a Rational Discipline, and have much
regrated that it has not been effectuated; yea, scarce attempted by any, as
Duarrenus, de ratione discendi docendique juris. And Grotius in his Prologues
to his Learned Treatise, de jure belli and pacis, for which there are many
peregnant Reasons.

First, As we have hinted before, Equity or the Law of Nature, stands wholly
in these Practical Principles, which are created in, and with the Soul of Man,
and arise in him without reasoning or debate, as naturally as the Heat does
from the Fire, or the Light from the Sun: and in these Rules of Righteousness,
which are deduced thence by evident Reason, so that Law is Reason it self, as
it is versant about the Rights of men, and therefore called the Law of Reason:
and can there be any thing more congruous to a natural Discipline, than Reason
it self, and its Principles?

Secondly, God in his Goodness has given man more radiant Rays of Reason, and
preserved it more after his Fall, about his Rights, meum and tuum, than in any
other Science or Knowledge, which for the most part are dubious and
conjectural, and attainable only with great pains: but in the matters of Right,
a man of Reason, though without Education, if not blinded or biased with
Affection or Interest, or marred with the Statutes and Customs of men, which
are but as their Contracts and matters of Fact to him, would be able to discern
right from wrong, though he cannot be so distinct, as by reflecting on his own
Knowledge, to take up, and hold forth the Grounds upon which he does proceed,
or to reach matters of Intricacy or Difficulty, which require (...) Judgment
and long Experience.

Thirdly (...) Expostulate and Argue with men, even for Moral Duties, from
their Common Principles of Righteousness, which their Conscience cannot reject,
as is evident every where in his Word; and therefore, seeing the Law has such
Principles, it may and ought to be held forth as it is deduced from them.

As to the difficulties which seem to arise from the variety and multiplication
of positive Laws, it will say nothing; for seeing positive Law is only to
declare Equity, or make it effectual, and in some cases to lay aside the
effects of it, for the profit of man now in his lapsed estate, it may be
easily ordered, by bringing it to the parts of Equity, whereunto it does
relate; and as a man's body may well be described, though it be not naked, and
in its pure naturals, and have its hair cut and ordered, and ornaments upon it;
all which will fall to be described as Appendicles, to the several parts of the
body which they adorn: for, Equity is the body of the Law, and the Statutes of
men are but as the ornaments, and vestiture thereof; and in the Explanation of
every part of it, it will most fitly fall in: But the best demonstration of
this will be occular, by delineation of Equity and positive Law together.

17. The Principles of Law are such as are known without arguing, and to which
the judgment upon apprehenosin thereof, will give its ready and full assent;
such as God is to be adorned and obeyed, Parents to be obeyed and honored,
Children to be loved and entertained; and such are these common Precepts which
are set forth in the Civil Law, to live honestly, to wrong no man, and to give
every man his Right: but here we shall speak of the most general Principles,
which have influence upon all the Rights of men, leaving the more particular
ones to the Rights flowing therefrom.

The first Principles of Equity are these, that God is to be obeyed by man. 2.
That man is a free creature, having power to dispose of himself and of all
things, in so far as by his obedience to God he is not restrained. 3. That this
freedom of man is in his own power, and may be restrained by his voluntar
engagements, which he is bound to fulfill, or take them up more Summarly. The
first principles of Right are Obedience, Freedom and Engagement.

There are also three prime Principles of the positive Law, whose aim and
terest is the profit and utility of man, as the Natural Law is, in equo, so
the positive Law is, in bono, or utili; and upon those two legs does Justice
move, in giving every man his Right: If man had not fallen, there had been no
distinction betwixt bonum and equum; nor had there been anything more
profitable, than the full following of the Natural Law: but man being now
depraved, and wanting Justice, or that willingness to give every man his Right,
and apt to fraud or force; therefore, in this estate it is profitable for him,
to quite something of that which by equity is his due, for peace and quietness
sake, rather than to use compulsion and quarrelling in all things, and to find
out expedients, and helps to make equity effectual: And therefore, to make up
societies of men, that they may mutually defend one another, and procure to one
another their Rights, and also to set clear limits to every man's Property, and
to maintain Traffic and Commerce among themselves and with others; so that the
three Principles of Positive Law, may be Society, Property and Commerce. The
Principles of Equity are the efficient cause of Rights and Laws; the Principles
of Positive Law, are the final causes or ends, for which Laws are made, and
Rights constitute and ordered, and all of them may aim at the maintenance,
flourishing and Peace of Society, the security of Property, and the freedom of
Commerce, and so the Narratives of Statutes, do commonly bear the motives
introductory, toward some of these Heads.

18. Obedience is that submission and sequacity of the mind and will of man, to
the Authority and Will of his Maker, immediately oblieging without any tie upon
him by himself, intimate to him by the Law of Nature, Light of Reason, and the
Conscience, whereby man distinguishes betwixt Right and Wrong, betwixt what is
Duty, and what is not Duty; hence do arise these Obligations upon man, which
are not by his own consent or engagement, nor by the Will of Man, but by the
Will of God; and therefore, these are fitly called Obediential Obligations. The
first and most general of these, is, To Love the Lord our God with all our
heart, and our Neighbor as our Selves; upon which says our Savior, hangs
all the Law and the Prophets, Matthew. 22. verse. 40. which is a clear
demonstration from his Mouth, of the dependence of the Moral Law, upon this
Principle: such are also the Obligations betwixt Husband and Wife, Parents and
Children, and the Obligations of Restitution, Reparation, and Remuneration; in
all which we are engaged, not by our will and consent; and such are the
Obligations, which the Civilians call Quasi ex contractu, because they find
them Obligatory, and yet not by Contract, and not adverting this their rise
from Obedience, reduce them to Contracts by a quast.

19. Where Obedience ends, there Freedom begins, and man by Nature is Free in
all things, where this Obedience has not tied him, until he obliege himself. It
is a great mercy to man, that God has obliged him only in a few necessar
moral duties, and has left him free in much more, without any tie upon him, as
to the matter, but with a liberty, ad contradictoria, that he may do or not do;
and ad contraria, that he may do this or the contrair, providing that
whatsoever he do (even where he is free) be ordered and directed to the Glory
of God. It has been the opinion of some, both Learned and pious, that there is
nothing indifferent, in actu exercito; or as it is invested with the
Circumstances, but that then every thing is a duty or a sin, and that because
all things must be done to the Glory of God, and to mutual edification, from
whence there is no exception, and so are not free; that we must make account of
every idle word; and that we are obliged, to try all things, and to hold that
which is best: These Reasons indeed conclude, that there is nothing free, as to
this contradiction, either to be done to the Glory of God, or not, and to
Edification and Use, or not; but do not conclude that there is duty, or
necessity in the matter of the Action it self, of which, either part of the
contradiction may be chosen, so that either part be useful and ordered to the
Glory of God, as says the Apostle, He that observes a day, observes it to
the Lord, and he that observes not, does so to the Lord. And likewife in that
undeniable instance of Marriage, wherein the Apostle debating of the
convenience to Marry, or not to Marry, does conclude so, that he that Marries
does well, but he that Marries not does better; whereby both parts of the
contradiction are approven; and that which is less profitable, is said to be
well done: Therefore, there is a great difference betwixt duty which is
necessar, and wherein we are obliged, though we mistake or be wilfully
ignorant by the very weight of the matter, and absoluteness of the Command,
wherein the ordering of what is forbidden to Gods Glory, will not justify, as
we may not do evil, that good may come of it; as those who killed the Apostles,
were far from being justified, though they thought they did God good service
thereby. These things are, bona honesta, and mala inhonesta; but matters of
expediency, are but bona utilia, or, mala inutilia, and not inhonesta; and
therefore, our duty in these, is that which we conceive most to be for the
Glory of God, and good of our selves and others; but if we do mistake, and
choose that which is less expedient for these ends, we are free. God seems to
do with men, as Princes do with their Ambassadors, to whom they give some
express instructions, wherein they have no latitude in their Negotiations, and
for the rest to do as they shall judge most fit upon the place, wherein, if
acting bona fide, they mistake, and do not that which is most fit, they are not
culpable. So man being sent into the World to behold the Works of God, and to
Glorify him, for doing whereof, he has some Rules written in his Heart by the
Law of Nature, and in the Word of God, and for the rest, is allowed to do as he
conceives most conducible thereto, that whether heeat, or drink, or whatsoever
else he do, he do all to the glory of God. It were a sad Rack to the
Consciences of men, if their errors and mistakes in the matters of expediency,
were to lyeas a guilt upon their Consciences, but that bona fides, or,
conscientia illesa, so much spoken of in the Law, is that which clears and
acquitteth men in such mistakes.

From this Freedom does arise, not only our Personal Freedom and Liberty,
whereby men are sui juris; but also their power of the disposel of other things
within their reach, or that Dominion (which God has given them) over the
Creatures.

20. As Freedom began, where Obedience ended; so Engagement begins where
Freedom ends; it being our voluntar oblieging of our selves, where by Nature we
are Free; every such Obligation, is a diminution of that Freedom, for thereby,
we are either restrained from that power of disposel of the Creatures, or may
be constrained to some performances contrair to our Natural Liberty. Some hold
it not lawful for us, To give away our Native Freedoom, in whole, or in part,
or to bind our selves where God has left us free, and that such Engagements,
except where they are profitable for us, or for an equivalent cause, are not
obligatory; which shall be more proper to debate, when we come to the
Obligations by Paction, Promise, or Contract, all which do arise from the
Principle of Engagement; but it shall be sufficient here, to conclude with the
Law, that there is nothing more Natural, than to stand to the Faith of our
Pactions; This much for the Common Principles of Law.

21. As to the Object thereof, the formal and proper Objects of Law, are the
Rights of men; a Right is a power given by the Law, of disposing of things, or
exacting from persons that which they are due; this will be evident, if we
consider the several kinds of Rights, which are three, our Personal Liberty,
Dominion, and Obligation; Personal Liberty, is the power to dispose of our
Persons, and to live where, and as we please, except in so far, as by
Obedience, or Engagement we are bound: Dominion is the power of disposal of the
Creatures in their Substance, Fruits and Use: Obligation is that which is
correspondent to a Personal Right, which has no proper Name, as it is in the
Creditor, but has the Name of Obligation, as it is in the Debtor; and it is
nothing else but a legal tie, whereby the Debtor may be compelled to pay, or
perform something, to which he is bound, by obedience to God, or by his own
consent and engagement, unto which Bond the Correlate in the Creditor is the
power of exaction, whereby he may exact, obtain, or compel the Debtor to pay
or perform what is due, and this is called a personal Right, as looking
directly to the person obliged; but to things indirectly, as they belong to
that person; So Dominion is called a real Right, because it respects things
directly; but persons as they have meddled with these things, by which it is
clear, that all Rights consist in a Power or Faculty, the Act whereof is
Possession, Enjoyment, or Use, which is a matter of Fact, and no point of
Right, and which may be, where no Right is, as Right may be, where these are
not.

22. The Roman Law takes up for its Object, Persons, things and Actions, and
according to these, orders it self; but these are only the extrinsick Object
and matter, about which, Law and Right are versant; but the proper Object is
the Right it self, whether it concerns Persons, Things, or Actions, and
according to the several Rights, and their natural order, the order of (...),
may be taken up in a threefold consideration; First, in their Constitution and
Nature. Secondly, in their Conveyance, or Translation from one person to
another, whether it be among the living, or from the dead. Thirdly, in their
Cognition, which comprehends the Trial, Decision and Execution of every Right,
by the legal remeids, whereby the whole method may be clearly thus. First, of
the Nature of the several Rights, and because Liberty stands in the midst,
betwixt Obligations of Obedience, which are anterior, and of Engagements, which
are posterior; but both these being of the same Nature, must be handled
together; and therefore Liberty must have the first place; and next,
Obligations Obediential, and then Conventional; and after these, Dominion in
all its parts And in the Second place, shall follow the conveyance of these
several Rights. And Lastly, Cognition of all the judicial Process and
Executions: Rights, in respect of the matter, are divided in public and
private Rights; public Rights, are these which concern the State of the
Commonwealth; private Rights, are the Rights of Persons and particular
Incorporations, of which, in their places.

TITLE II. Of Liberty.
1. Liberty described. 2. Liberty distinct from Dominion and Obligations. 3.
The Principle whence Liberty arises. 4. Restraint and Constraint. 5. Liberty
is bounded by Obedience. 6. It is diminished by Delinquence. 7. By Engagements.
8. By Subjection. 9. Liberty is lost by Bondage. 10. Bondage introduced by the
Law of Nations. 11. Bondage lawful. 12. Manrent. 13. Manumission. 14.
Patronage. 15. The condition of our Servants. 16. Injuries against Liberty, how
obviat.
1. LIBERTY is that Natural Power which man has of his own person, whence a
Free Man is said to be suae potestatis, in his own power, and it is defined in
the Law, to be a Natural Faculty, to do that which every man pleases, unless
he be hindered by Law or Force.

2. That there is such a Right, distinct from the Dominion of the Creatures,
and from Obligation, it is evident from this, that it can be referred to none
of these, and yet is the most native and delightful Right of man, without
which, he is capable of no other Right; so Bondage exeemeth man from the
account of persons, and brings him rather in among things, quae sunt in
Patrimonio nostro, and the encroachments upon, and injuries against the Right
of Liberty, of all others, are the most bitter and attrocious; for the
nonperformance of Obligations, or Duties to us, or the taking away, or
detaining of the things of our Property, are not to be compared with the laying
violent hands on our persons.

3. This Right arises from that Principle of Freedom, that man has of
himself, and of other things beside man, to do in relation thereto, as he
pleases, except where he is tied thereunto by his Obedience or Engagement, and
this part of it which concerns Personal Freedom, is maintained by that Common
received Principle in the Law of Nature, of self-defence and preservation, for
as Cicero says in his Oration, Pro Millone, Haec and ratio doctis and
necessitas barbaris, and mos Gentibus, and feris natura ipsa prescripsit, ut
omnem semper vim quacunque open, a corpore, a capite, a vita sua pro pulsarint.
And as says Gains, Adver sus periculum naturalis ratio permittit se defendere,
which is only to be extended to private and unlawful violence.

4. Opposite unto Liberty are Restraint and Constraint, Restraint hinders man
to be where, and go whither he will; and Constraint forces him to do what he
will not; Restraint is exercised by Imprisonment and Captivity, or in the
hinderance of the use of things necessar for Life, as Meat, Drink, Sleep, etc.
Constraint is exercised by Beating, Wounding, or the like Force upon the Body,
or the fear of it, whereby any thing is extorted.

5. Though Liberty be the most precious Right, yet it is not absolute, but
limited; First, by the Will of God, and our Obediential Obligations to him, and
to men by his Ordinance; and so though man has power of his own person, yet
has he no power of his own Life, or his Members, to dispose of them at his
pleasure, either by taking away of his Life or Amputation, or hurting of any
Member by himself, or by giving power to any other so to do, unless it be
necessary for preserving the whole, but he is naturally obliged to God to
maintain his Life: so likewise men may be restrained, or constrained by others,
without Incroachment upon the Law of Liberty, in the pursuance of other
Obediential Obligations; as a Husband has power to restrain his Wife, from her
Liberty of going where she will, and may keep her within the bounds of conjugal
Society; so may Parents restrain their Children, and also constrain them to the
performance of moral duties, and that without any Engagement or Law; we may
also without any injury, restrain a furious person, or one who is inferring
violence to himself, in his Life or Limbs, because this is not against any Act
of his lawful Liberty, and is done as a duty in us, of Love and Mercy: But in
matters of utility and profit, where the Natural Liberty is not hemmed in with
an Obligation, there, unless by his own delinquence or consent, man cannot
justly be restrained, much less constrained upon pretense of his utility or
profit; for Liberty, as far preferable to profit, and in the matter of
utility, every man is left to his own choice, and cannot without injury to God
and Man, be hindered to do what he pleases, or be compelled to do what he
pleases not, in things wherein he is free, as Grotius says, De jure belli,
lib. 2. cap. 22. page 2. Non enim si quid alicui ntile est, id statim mihi
licet, ei per vim imponere, nam his qui rationis, habent usum, libera esse
debet utilium multilinimve electio, nisi alterijus quodam in eos quaesitum sit.

6. Liberty may be diminished or taken away by our Delinquence, in the way of
punishment, for seeing it is a Right in our own power; as Goods and Debts may be
forfaulted by our Delinquence, so may our Liberty, in whole or in part.

7. Thirdly, our Engagements do commonly import a Diminution of our personal
Liberty, but much more, of that Natural Liberty of things without us; whence it
is that the Law allows personal Execution or Restraint, and Incarceration of
the Debitors Person, until he do all the deeds that are in his power, for the
satisafction of his Creditor.

8. Liberty is diminished by subjection unto Authority; for as man by Nature is
a free creature in his own power, he does then become in the power of others;
whether it be in the power of a Society, where the suffrage of the plurality is
preferred to the natural and free choice of particular persons, or whether the
Authority be stated in a few persons, or in one Sovereign?

9. Fifthly, Liberty is wholly taken off by Bondage, Slavery, or Servitude,
which is Diametrically opposite to Liberty; for as Liberty is that power, by
which men are sui juris, so by Servitude, they became alieni juris, in the
power of another, unto whom they became as the rest of their Goods in their
Patrimony, and are possessed by them, and may be gifted, legated, sold, and
otherways disposed of at their pleasure, l. 4. ff. de statu hominis, l. qui in
servitute, ff. deregulis juris, so that Masters had among the Romans, and
almost every where, power of Life and Death of their Slaves, l. 1. ff. de his
qui sunt sui vel alieni juris, though the constitutions of the Emperors did
restrain that power to moderate chastisement, as appears by the former Law,. 2.
and next ensuing Servants being wholly their Masters, they could have nothing
of their own, l. acquiritur de acquirendo rerum Dominio; so that their
peculium, which their Masters committed to them, to Negotiat with, was wholly
in their Masters power, and might be taken away at his pleasure, l. 4. ff. de
peculio, neither could they be liable to any Obligation, l. nec servus 41. ff.
de peculio; neither could there be any Civil Action for, or against them, l. in
personam, ff. 22. de regulis juris, neither could they be Witnesses,
Procuratoss, or Arbiters, l. cum serve. ff. de regulis juris; yea, and they were
accounted as no body, or as dead men, l. 32. de Reg. Jur. l. 7. de testib. l.
6. Cod. de judiciis, l. 7. de recep. qui arb.

10. Bondage was introduced by the Law of Nations, and it is among the positive
Laws of Nations, settled by common Consuetude, and it took first place in the
these who were taken in War, who being under the power of their enemies Sword,
did loss their Liberty in lieu of their Life; such also were these, who sold
their Liberty, and gave it up, and were content to be perpetual Slaves, as were
the Jewish Bondmen, whose ears were pierced with an Aul, as the solemnity of
their perpetual and willing Servitude, the offspring of Servants remained in
their servile condition; and by the Custom of Nations, and the Roman Law, it
followed the Mother and not the Father, partus sequitur ventrem, and in some
cases, both by the Judicial Law, and the Roman Law, free Parents might sell and
give their Children into Bondage.

11. Bondage, though contrair to the nature of Liberty, yet it is lawful;
Liberty being a Right alienable, and in our disposel, so that the Natural Law
constitutes us free, but puts no necessity on us, so to continue; and therefore
Servitude is both approven in the Old Testament; and in the New, it is cleared
against that obvious Objection, that being made free by Christ, we should not
become the servants of men, to which the Apostle answers, Art thou called,
being a servant (or slave) continue so, for nevertheless thou art Christ's
freeman: But yet Christian Lenity and Mercy, has almost taken away Bondage,
except amongst the Spaniards, Portugals, and other Christian Nations, bordering
upon the Turks, where, because the Turks do extremely exercise Slavery,
especially upon Christians, their neighbors do the like, that they may have
Slaves to exchange with Slaves: little of Slavery remains elsewhere among
Christians, except the Ascriptitii, who are not absolutely Slaves, but they and
their Posterity are bound to several Services, to Ferms and Villages, to which,
by reason thereof only, they are in Bondage, and their Masters cannot apply
them to other Ferms, or to other Services, but those are fixed to, and follow
those Ferms, and they are conveyed therewith; such are the English villains,
but in Scotland there is no such thing.

12. There was formerly a kind of Bondage, called Man-rent, whereby free
persons became the men or Followers of these who were their Patrons and
Defenders, and these were rather in clientele, than in Bondage, but it is
utterly abolished, both by Act of Parliament, 1457. cap. 78. and by Custom.

13. From Servitude arise Manumission, and the Right of Patronage; Manumission
is the dimission of Servants, and the making of them Libertines, whereby they
become Free, but with remaining thankfulness, reverence, and obsequiousness,
and some other Duties and Offices, to their former Masters, then become their
Patrons, and if in these they failed, they forefaulted their new acquired
Liberty, and returned to their former condition of Servitude.

14. In these therefore, stood the Right of Patronage, and from this condition
of Libertines, arose that distinction of men, into these who were always free,
who were called ingenui, and in these who were bound, who were called servi,
and in these of a middle condition, who having been Slaves, became Free, and so
were neither fully free, but had some duties lying upon them to their Patrons,
neither were fully bound as Servants.

15. The Servants which now retain that name, are judged free persons, and have
at most but hired their labor and work to their Masters for a time, which is a
Contract betwixt them; of which afterward.

16. The Customs of this Nation have little peculiar, in relation to Liberty
directly, but the injuries done against the same, especially constraint, fall
under the consideration of Delinquencies, and are so punished.

The Romans had express Laws, de libero homine exhibendo, and de privatis
carceribus inhibendis, the English have their Action of false Imprisonment,
determining with much exactness, in what cases Imprisonment is lawful, and in
what not, and how remeidable.

It is also provided in the Judicial Law, against stealers of men; but amongst
us, as these Crimes are very rare; so, if unlawful Restraint, or unjust
Imprisonment should fall out, it remains among Delinquencies to be punished
according to the Circumstances and Attrocity, and according to Equity, and
thence also a civil Action for damnage and interest arises.

TITLE III. Of Obligations.
1. Personal Rights and Obligations described. 2. Kinds of Obligations. 3.
Obediential Obligitions described. 4. Divided. 5. Enumerat. 6. Obligations
Natural and Civil. 7. Obligations Principal and Accessory. 8. Obligations pure,
conditional, and to a day.
RIGHTS Personal, or Obligations, being in Nature and Time, for the most part
anterior to, and inductive of, Rights (...) of Dominion and Property, do
therefore come under consideration next unto Liberty.

1. The same Right as it is in the Creditor, it is called a Personal Right; but
as it is in the Debtor, it is called an Obligation, Debt, or Duty, which is
retained as the more proper name, Inst. de Obligationibus in principio.

Obligation is a Legal Tie, by which we may be necessitate, or constrained to
pay, or perform something; this Tie lies upon the Debtor, and the power of
making use of it, in the Creditor, is the personal Right it self, which is a
power given by the Law, to exact from persons that which they are due.

2. Obligations by the Romans, are distinguished in four kinds; in Obligations,
ex contractu vel, quasi ex contractu maleficiovel, quasi ex malificio, which
distinction insinuats no reason of the cause, or rise of these distinct
Obligations, which is requisite in a good distinct division; and therefore,
they may be more appositly divided, according to the Principle, or Original
from whence they flow; in Obligations Obediential and by Engagement, or Natural
and Conventional, or by the will of God, and by the will of man.

3. Obediential Obligations are these, which are put upon men by the will of
God, not by their own wills, and so are Natural, as introduced by the Law
Nature, before any addition made thereto by Engagement, are (...) which we are
bound to perform solely by our obedience to God, as Conventional Obligations
are, such as we are bound by, and through our own will, Engagement or Consent.

4. Obediential Obligations are either by the will of God immediately, or by the
mediation of some fact of ours; such are Obligations by Delinquence, whereby we
become bound to reparation and satisfaction to the party injured, and are
liable in punishment to God, which may be exacted by these who have his Warrant
for that effect; of these Obediential Obligations, there be some which tie us
to God alone, whereby there is no right constitute in man to exact the same as
his own due, or any Warrant or Command given him by God to exact them on his
behalf; and some, though they constitute not a right in man, yet man is
commanded and warranted to vindicate them; as the Crimes of Witchcraft,
Blasphemy, Beastiality and the like, for which there is an express Command to
inflict punishment, though there be no injury done therein to man, of which
there could be any reparation; for the Command, Thou shall not suffer a Witch
to live, takes place, though the Witch have committed no Malifice against the
Life or Goods of man: But these Obligations being among the public Rights,
belongs to the Magistrate, on whom is devolved that Authority, to vindicate for
God, as his Vicegerent: We shall not here insist on them, nor on these other
Obligations, whereby no right of execution is constitute in man for
vindication, and quae solum Deum habent ultorem, (being only now about the
private Rights of men) such are the Love and Fear we owe to God, and dependence
on, and confidence in him.

5. We shall therefore insist only on the Obediential Obligations that are
betwixt Husband and Wife, Parents and Children, Tutors and Pupils, Curators and
Minors, and the Obligations of Restitution and Remuneration, and the
Obligations of Reparation of Delinquence, and damnage, and then we shall
proceed to Conventional Obligations.

(...) There is another distinction in the Law of Obligations, viz. Natural and
Civil; Natural Obligations are these, which have a tie by the Law of Nature,
and do raise a Right in the person to whom they relate; but the Civil Law, or
Customs and Constitutions of men, do not second them with legal remedies or
executions, but they remain only as bonds upon the good. will and honesty of
these who are thereby bound.

First, There be many Natural Obligations which have no civil effect, either
because they obliege to inward duties of the mind, which Law does not consider,
as Cicero says, Philosophum spectant quae mente tenentur, juridicum quae manu
tenentur: Or, Secondly, Because though they obliege to outward performances,
yet the manner and measure is left to the discretion and arbitriment of the
obliged, as before has been showen, though that in matters of expediency or
utility, there be an Obligation to do that which is most conducible to these
common ends, to which we are obliged, yet in the particulars, our acting,
bonafide, makes us free: Or, Thirdly, Because, though Absolute Obligationslye
upon the obliged, yet they relate to duties performable to God, whereof he
has given no power nor command to man; that there be some such Obligations
that God has authorized or commanded man to vindicate for him, and not all
such, may be gathered from his own Judicial Law, in which many such are
expressed, and many others omitted; though these Obligations be to duties
relating to man, yet there is no correspondent Right or Power of Compulsion in
man, and so the Creditor is God, and man is the third party, to whose behoove
the Obligation is imposed, but who has neither power of exaction for himself,
nor of vindication for God; such are the Obligations of Beneficence, generally
and particularly; of Charity to the poor, assistance to these in hazard, and
relief of the oppressed; for Natural Reason will teach us, that though these do
naturally obliege us, yet they in whose favors they are, cannot compel us; for
example, we are bound is give alms to the poor, yet none will affirm, that the
poor can extort it, or take it by force. It is true, that by the positive Law
of any Nation, by their Consociation together, there is in the very Nature of
the association, a duty of assistance for the common interest, into which they
are associat; but that is not a Natural, but a Voluntary Obligation flowing
from their voluntar association or union. Likewise, all the people are bound to
concur and assist legal executions, and in some places to contribute by such a
proportion to the poor, but these are only positive Laws, having the force and
nature of Contracts: Legal compulsion is also laid aside in matters of smallest
moment, and in some things of greater importance, wherein a way of procedor is
prescribed, and as a penalty of none-observance of that order, legal remedies
are denied, when done any other way; as naked pactions among the Romans were
ineffectual, because they did not interpose Stipulation. And with us,
agreements requiring Write, are ineffectual, and may be resiled from, unless
Write be interposed; and in most matters of importance, Obligations with us are
ineffectual, unless proven by Oath of Party, or Write.

Civil Obligations, are these which have a civil effect and execution, though
perhaps they be not naturally oblieging; as with us, an Obligation in Write,
does Civilly obliege, and has execution at the Instance of the Creditors Heir,
or Assignay, though the Debt was paid to the Cedent, or Defunct, because the
Debtor has not been so cautious to keep a Discharge in Write; but most part
of Obligations, are both Natural and Civil: There are many such particular
Obligations which will occur in their proper places.

7. There is a third Distinction of Obligations in Principal and Accessory,
such are the Cautionary Obligations of Surety and Pledges, which are accessory
to all other Obligations.

8. The fourth Distinction of Obligations, is in these which are Pure,
Conditional, and to a day: Conditional Obligations are such as do depend upon a
condition, and so are but Obligations in hope, till the condition be existent;
but Obligations to a day, are such as are presently binding, but the effect, or
execution thereof is suspended to a day, betwixt which, there is this main
difference, that in Conditional Obligations, the Condition must necessarily be
uncertain, either as being in the power of man's will, or an accidential event:
For if the Condition be a thing certainly to come, though it may be conceived
under the Terms of a Conditional Obligation, yet it is indeed an Obligation to
a day, as if Titius be obliged to pay Maevius ten Crowns, if an Eclipse shall
be such a day; upon which day, by the certain Rules of Astronomy, it is known
that it is to be, though perhaps it was uncertain to both, or either party; yet
it is not a conditional Obligation: but the time of the Eclipse is the term
thereof: so likewise, if the condition be impossible, de facto, or impossible,
de jure, that is, unlawful, ( nam id possumus quod de jure possumus) then,
though the Obligation be conceived in Terms Conditional; yet because the
Condition is not depending, and in it self uncertain, the Obligation is not
truly Conditional, but is void and elusory in the case of the legal
impossibility of the Condition; and if it be in the power of the Creditor, or
any third party, so that it may be an occasion to move them to do wrong, the
Obligation is valide and pure, and the Condition is void, as not adjected, nam
conditio Illicita, est quasi non adjecta; Hence it appears, that such
Obligations as are without conditions, are pure, and such are simple which are
not clogged with the running of a course of time, the adjection whereof is
always in favors of the Debtor, as to the intervenient time; and in this
also, in favors of the Creditor, that he needs use no Interpellation, or
Requisition for performance, sed dies interpallat pro homine, and the day being
past, the Debtor is in mora; but in simple obligations, delay is only upon
demand, and whenever it is required, upon nonperformance, the Debtor is in
mora. Obligations, ad diem incertum, are in effect Conditioal, nam dies
incertus, habetur pro condition, as a Sum payable at such an age, which is
frequently in provisions of Children, if they die before that age, the sum is
not due to their Representatives; even after they might have attained that age,
as was found, January, 17. 1667. Edgar contra Edgar, February, 22. 1677.
Belshes of Toftes contra Belches.

A Conditional Obligation does necessarily imply an uncertainty and dependence
of the effect of the Obligation, upon the existence of the condition; for, if
the Condition fail, the Obligation is void: and ofttimes, Obligations are
conceived in conditional terms, though in effect there be no uncertainty of the
condition, as to the being thereof, though it may be uncertain, as to the
Contracters knowledge; as in Obligations where the condition is made of
something past, or of something that cannot but come; the coming whereof, is
the Term of Performance, and not a Condition, and it is an Obligation to a day,
and not conditional: As on the contrair, a Conditional Obligation may be, when
it is not yet conceived in Terms Conditional, as when it is conceived to a day,
if it be uncertain, whether by the course of Nature that day will ever come, it
is no Term, but a Condition. These uncertain Conditions are of two kinds,
voluntar, which depends upon the free choice of some persons; and casual, which
depends upon the casual event of that which cannot Naturally be foreknown.
Amongst voluntar Conditions, these are not to be numbered, which consist in the
mutual Obligations of the Creditor, which he is positively obliged to perform,
and so are not looked on by the Contracters, as an uncertain event in his
choice; and therefore, though frequently such Obligations in mutual Contracts,
are conceived by way of provision or condition, and so may stop the effect, or
execution of such Obligations, till the Creditors part be performed; yet that
is rather as the failzie, or delay of the mutual cause of the Obligation, then
as the nonexistence of the condition: and therefore, such Contracts may, and
ordinarily do reserve execution, by Poynding, and Apprising, before the
performance of these provisions; which executions are not null, but will be
preferred by their dates, to others proceeding upon pure Obligations, or to a
day, after the day is past, yea, the other Creditors cannot object the
non-implement of the provisions, except they had interest, in so far as the
fulfilling thereof would be to their behoove; which certainly they could do, if
they were proper Conditions, as they can do, when the condition is casual, or
when it is voluntar, not being a part of the Creditors mutual Obliegement.

In like manner, the end and intent of an Obligation, or the manner of
performance thereof, is ordinarily expressed as a condition, though these be not
real conditions, rendering the Obligation uncertain.

A condition is ofttimes employed in an Obligation, though it be not expressed, as
when a Tocher is promised; this tacit condition is employed, if the Marriage
hold, and the condition may either be expressed, or employed, as relating to the
Contracting, or to the performing of the Obligation; as if the Debtor said, on
such conditions I shall become obliged; which differs from this, that I
obliege my self to pay, or perform, when, or upon condition that such things
shall exist; for in this case there is a present Contract, though the effect be
uncertain: and therefore Arrestment, and Inhibition might be used thereupon:
But in the former, the very engagement is uncertain, as if one should promise
to Titius, if he married Maevia, that he should Contract with him, for such a
Tocher, before such a Marriage, Contracted or Solemnized, neither Arrestment,
nor Inhibition would be granted thereupon. An offer has the like employed
condition of the other parties acceptance, and in that it differs from an
absolute promise; so that if the acceptance be not adhibit presently, or within
the time expressed in the offer; in which the other party has Liberty to accept.
There arises no Obligation, as was found, June, 25. 1664. Alexander Allan
contra Mr. John Collier; and in mutual Contracts, the one party subscrybing, is
not obliged till the other subscribe, as being his acceptance: And a Cautioner
subscribing, is not obliged, unless the principal party subscribe, that being
employed as a tacit contradiction of his being Cautioner.

TITLE IV. Conjugal Obligations.
1. Marriage a Divine Contract. 2. Whereby Marriage is formally constitute. 3.
Dissolution of Marriage by Death. 4. Desertion and Adherence. 5. Jus Mariti. 6.
The Husbands Obligations. 7. The power of the Husband by the Civil Law. 8. By
the Custom of Neighbour-Nations. 9. By the Custom of Scotland. 10. The Wifes
Escheat. 11. The Husbands concourse. 12. A Wifes Obligation null. 13. A
Communion of Goods and Debts. 14. Donations betwixt Man and Wife revocable. 15.
Dissolution of Marriage within the year. 16. Divorce. 17. Rights arising from
the Dissolution of Marriage. 18. Privileges of Wives.
THE first Obligations God put upon man toward man, were the Conjugal
Obligations, which arose from the Constitution of Marriage before the Fall;
from whence have arisen, Rights of the greatest consequence; as of the Husbands
power over the Wife, and her Goods; the mutual society of Families, which is
the only society immediately Institute of God, in the Law of Nature; and from
whence, is the power of Parents over Children; and oeconomical Government of
Families, which of all other is the most absolute, and full, extending not only
to the determination of Civil Rights, but to the punishment of all Crimes, till
by the union of greater Civil Societies, many of these powers have been
devolved upon the common Authority of the Societies; and therefore, these
Obligations do deserve the first consideration.

1. Though Marriage seem to be a voluntar Contract by engagement, because the
application of it is, and ought to be of the most free consent; and because in
matters circumstantial, it is voluntary, as in the Succession of the Issue, and
the Provision of the Wife and Children; yet, that Marriage it self and the
Obligations thence arising, are Jure divino, it appears thus; First,
Obligations arising from voluntar Engagement, take their Rule and Substance
from the will of Man, and may be framed and composed at his pleasure; but so
cannot Marriage, wherein it is not in the power of the Parties, though of
common consent, to alter any Substantial, as to make the Marriage for a time,
or take the power over the Wife from the Husband, and place it in her or any
other; or the right of Provision or Protection of the Wife, from the Husband,
and so of all the rest; which evidently demonstrateth, that it ^s not a Humane,
but a Divine Contract.

2. That Marriage arises even from the Primitive Law of Nature, and that as it
is the Conjunction of two single Persons; is evident not only from that natural
Affection, which all sorts of Men in all places of the World (where no common
Example nor Consent can reach) have unto a married Estate. But as the Lawers
say, that it is founded in the common nature of Man, with other Creatures, who
have a resemblance of it in themselves, and it is given for the very Example of
the Natural Law, as contradistinct from the Law of Reason, and Law of Nations;
for most part of the living Creatures live and converse in pairs, and keep the
common Interest of their offspring, as is clear in all Fowls, whose Wings
have freed them from man's comptrol, and many of the Beasts of the Field: And it
is like, all of them would be so inclined, if their natural Liberty were not
restrained by Man, by pursuing such as are Wild, and making use of the Tame, as
they may be most profitable, preserving most of the Female for Increase, and
Destroying the Male.

3. The Affection of the Property and Chastity of Women, and Animosity and
Jealousy that arises in Men, naturally upon the Breach thereof, does evince,
that by the Law of Nature, every Man ought to content himself with his own
Wife, and Women not be common: for as no Man can endure the communication of
his own, so it must necessarily follow, that he should not incroach upon others
Property: and seeing Nature holds not out a proportion betwixt the Male and the
Female, whereby every man might appropriat more, it must therefore subsist in
one; and so was the first Institution by God, and all the Posterior Directions
in his Word are for a man, and his Wife, not his Wives; and as the man has not
power over his Body, but the Wife: so it were an absurd Inconsistency, if that
power were in many, and so behoved to resolve in a management by the common
consent of the Wives.

4. The Degrees in which Marriage is allowed or forbidden are, by divine
Institution; for the next Degree collateral, is only forbidden; for of
Asscendents and Descendents, there is properly no Degree, the great
Grandmother, being in that regard as near as the Mother; and so the next
collateral to all Ascendents and Descendents is in the same Degree with
Brothers and Sisters, and Uncles and Aunts, Nephews and Nieces, are alike in
the Propinquity of Blood, with these, and the great Grandmother's, Sister, with
the Mothers Sister; else if these were different Degrees, there would many
Degrees interveen betwixt a Person and his great Grand Aunt; But that there is
a natural abhorrence of that Promiscuous Commixtion of Blood, it is commonly
acknowledged over all the World, as to all Ascendents and Descendents. And as
to the next Collaterals, the Word of God clears it, not to have been a
Positive Law given to the Jews, but to have been a Common Law to the Gentiles
also: and therefore, Lev. 18. where the Degrees of Marriage are expressed, and
unlawful Commixtion forbidden, It is subjoyned, v. 24, 25. Defile not your
selves in any of these things, for in all these the Nations are defiled, which
I cast out before you, and the Land is defiled; therefore do I visit the
Iniquity thereof upon it. But unless these Degrees of prohibit Marriage, were
a part of the Law of Nature written in Man's heart, or a common positive Law
known to the Nations; the Lord, who has declared that he will judge men by
that Law, which is known, would not so have judged the Caananites.

5. The Perpetuity of Marriage is also evident, by our Savior's Sentence
against Arbitrary Divorce, which was permitted by the Law of Moses, for the
hardness of that Peoples hearts; but the Lord clears up the Ancient Law of
Nature, from the beginning it was not so; which shows the Perpetuity of that
Law, and that it was before the Judicial Law; and therefore he concludes, that
whosoever puts away his Wife, except for Fornication, is an Adulterer.

11. For understanding of these Conjugal Rights, it will be necessar, 1. To
consider the Constitution of Marriage. 2. The Dissolution of it. 3. The Rights
and Interests thence arising: For the first; Marriage is defined by Modestinus,
to be the Conjunction of Man and Woman, to be Consorts for all their Life, with
a Communication of Rights Divine and Humane, l. 1. ff. de ritu. nuptiarum; so
the essence of it consists in the Conjugal Society; the special nature of which
Society, appears by the state, Interest, and Terms that the married Persons
have thereby.

It may be questioned, whether the Conjunction wherein Marriage consists, be a
Conjunction of minds by mutual consent to the married state; and that whether
privately or in the public Solemnity; or whether rather it be, a Conjunction or
Commixtion of Bodies. For clearing whereof, consider, that it is not every
consent to the married state that makes Matrimony, but a consent de presenti,
and not a promise de futuro Matrimonio; for this Promise is only the Espousals
which are premised to Marriage, and that so solemn an Act might be with dew
Deliberation; and therefore though as other Promises and Pactions, Espousals be
naturally obligatorie and effectual also by the Canon Law, whereby the espoused
Persons may be compelled to perfect the Marriage, unless there arise some
eminent Discovery of the Corruption or Pollution of either Party, or defect or
Deformity, through Sickness or some other Accident. C.de literis extravag. de
sponsalibus, and cap. 2. eodem, c. ult, de Conjug. yet by the Civil Law, there
is place for either party to repent and renunce the Espousals, l. 1. Cod. de
sponsalibus, which is also the custom of this Nation; for Marriage uses not to
be pursued before Solemnization, r^ integris, so that the matter it self
consists not in the Promise, but in the present Consent, whereby they accept
each other as Husband and Wife; whether that be by words expressly, or tacitly
by marital Cohabitation, or Acknowledgment, or by natural Commixtion where
there has been a Promise or Espousals proceeding; for therein is presumed a
conjugal Consent de present^

The public Solemnity is a matter of Order, justly introduced by positive Law,
for the certainty ofso important a Contract, but not essential to Marriage:
thence arises only the distinction of public and solemn, private or clandestine
Marriages, and though the Contraveeners may be justly punished, (as in some
Nations, by the Exclusion of the Issue of such Marriages from Succession) yet
the Marriage cannot be declared void, and annulled; and such exclusions seem
very unequal against the innocent Children, But by our Custom, Cohabitation,
and being commonly repute Man and Wife, validats the Marriage, and gives the
wife right to her Terce, who cannot be excluded therefrom, if she were reputed
a lawful Wife, and not questioned during the Husbands life, till the contrary
be clearly decerned, Par. 1503. cap. 77. So also, a Contract of Marriage was
found valid, against the Husbands Heir, though the Marriage was never
solemnized in Kirk nor Congregation, Hope. t. Husband etc. William Barklay
contra Anna Naper. The like found to exclude the bastardy of the Children, by
the Father and Mothers, being repute Married, and keeping house and society
together, for several years; Nicolson, de Agnoscendis liberis, Brok contra but
the contrair was found, where it was positively proven, that the Defunct had
another Wife, Ibid. Archibald Chirnside contra Isobel Grieve and John
Williamson. So likewise, in the former case, a Contract of Marriage was found
valid, and the Man thereby obliged to Solemnize the Marriage, seeing he had
procreate Children with the Woman, and by his missives had acknowledged he had
Married her, though by a Contract, posterior to the Contract of Marriage, she
had renunced the same, Nicol. de sponsalibus, Barclay contra Janet Kelly; But
where a Man by his Write had acknowledged, that such a Child was got under
promise of Marriage, and promised to solemnize the same, yet the Lords, on the
man's alledgance that the woman had born a Child to another, and her answer,
that it behoved to be presumed his, would not sustain that presumption, without
instructing their conversing together, medio tempore, January 31. 1665.
Christian Barclay contra George Baptie. It was also found lately relevant, for
validating a Contract of Marriage, sixteen years Cohabitation, and being repute
Man and Wife, Elizabeth Grierson contra Lord of Craigdarroch.

As to the other point, though the commixtion of bodies seem necessar for the
constitution of Affinity arising from Marriage; yet the opinion of the Canon
Law is true, consensus, non coitus, facit Matrimonium; but this consent must
specially relate to that Conjunction of Bodies, as being then in the consenters
capacity, otherwise it is void; so the consent of persons naturally impotent,
or of dubious Hermophradits, where the one Sex does not (...) predomine, does
not make Marriage, and the common essentials of consent, must also here be
observed, so that, who cannot consent, cannot Marry, as Idiots and furious
Persons, neither they who have not the use of Reason, as Infants and those
under age, who are not come to the use of diseretion, unless malitia suppleat
aetatem, that is, when the person is within the years of Pupillarity, commonly
established in Law, to be fourteen in Males, and twelve in Females; yet seeing
Marriage is an Obligation natural, and not annullable by positive Law; as to
it, regard must be rather had, whether the parties be truly come to discretion
and capacity, whereof commixtion of bodies is sufficient evidence: And this
also is the sentence of the Canon Law, de illic. cap. 9. ult. de spons. Errors
also in the Substantials, make void the consent, unless future consent
superveen, as it did in Jacob, who supposed that he had Married, and received
Rachel, but by mistake got Leah; yet was content to retain her, and serve for
the other also. But Errors in qualities, or circumstances vitiat not, as if one
supposing he had Married a Maid, or a chaste Woman, had Married a Whore; So
then, it is not the consent of Marriage, as it relates to the procreation of
Children that is requisite, for it may consist, though the Woman be far beyond
that date; but it is the consent, whereby arises that Conjugal Society, which
may have the conjunction of Bodies as well as of Minds, as the general end of
the Institution of Marriage, is the solace and satisfaction of Man, For the
Lord saw that it was not fit for him to be done, and therefore made him a help
meet for him: Yet though this capacity should never be actuat, as it persons,
both capable, should after Marriage live together, and it should be known or
acknowledged, that all their lives they did abstain, yet were the Marriage
(...), as to the Conjugal Rights on either paart. If it be asked, whether the
consent of Parents be essential to Marriage? the common Sentence will resolve
it, Multa impediunt matrimonium contrahendum, quae non dirimunt contractum, so
that consent is necessary, necessitate praecepti, sed non necessitate medii;
though by humane Constitution, such Marriages may be disalowed, and the Issue
repute as unlawful, but the Marriage cannot be annulled, l. 11. de stat. hom.
l. 13. 6. de Adult, by which Laws, not only the Issue of such Marriages are
excluded from Succession, but the Marriage it self insinuat to be null, which
humane Constitutions cannot reach, though the Magistrate or Minister,
Celebrator of the Marriage, may refuse to proceed without consent of the
Parents; as by the Law and Custom of Holland, Art. 3. Ord. Pol. It is statute,
that before the Celebration of Marriage, there be three Proclamations in the
Church, or in the Court; and that where the Parties are Minor, they be not
married without consent of their Parents; and where they are both Major,
Intimation must be made to the Parents, and if they appear not, their consent
is presumed; and if they do appear and dissent, they must condescend upon the
Reasons, that it may be cognosced whether they be sufficient or not: And if the
Marriage do otherwise proceed, they account it null. Marriage is also void and
inconsistent, when contracted within the Degrees prescribed Levit. 18. whereby
the next Degree Collateral is only prohibit, both in Consanguinity and
Affinity, which makes those joined in Affinity, in the same Degree, as being by
Marriage one Flesh; neither can Marriage consist where either Party is married
before: But the Exclusion of further Degrees by the Canon Law, as of
Cousin-Germans, or of certain degrees in Affinity Ecclsieastick; or the
prohibiting Marriage to these in sacris, are there unlawful Devices, which
cannot alter this divine Contract, but become a Cheat, putting Parties in the
Pop's power, to approve or disapprove as His Avarice or Interest leads: neither
do the Civil Constitutions of Princes, annul or dissolve Marriage, whatever
they may work as to the Interest of the married Persons, or their Succession,
as were the Prohibitions of Marriage, between those of consular Dignity, and
Plebeian Persons, between Tuttors and their Children, and Pupils: Yea, between
Jews and Christians, for diversity of Religion cannot annul it.

2. The Dissolution of Marriage is only Natural by Death, Adultery, and
Desertion, do not annul the Marriage, but are just occasions upon which the
Persons injured may annul it, and be free; otherwise if they please to
continue, the Marriage remains valid. All do agree, that Adultery has some
Effect upon Marriage; the Canon Law does not thereupon dissolve it, that the
Party injured may be free to marry again, but only grants Separation. But our
Savior's Precept clears the contrary; who in Relation to the Custom that
then was of Divorce for light Causes, resolves, that putting away was not
lawful, except in the Cases of Adultery, and so in that case approves the
Divorce even as then used, Matthew. 19. v. 9. It may be doubted, whether the
Adulterer, after the Dissolution of the Marriage upon his default may marry
again: But though Positive Law, as a Penalty upon Adulterers, may hinder their
Marriage with the Adulteress or otherwise declare such Marriages, as to
Succession and civil Effects, void; yet, can it not simply annul it; and as to
any other person they may Marry. With us, Marriage betwixt the two Committers
of Adultery, is declared null, and the Issue inhabilitat to succeed to their
Parents, Parl. 1600. cap. 20. But otherwise, the person guilty may again marry.

The second ground of Dissolution of Marriage, is, wilful desertion, which is
grounded upon the answer of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7. 15. concerning the Marriages
of Christians with Infidels, which he declares valide, unless the unbeliever
depart; in which case, he declares, the Christian not to be under bondage,
which cannot have any speciality to the party deserted, as a Christian; and
therefore, must infer a general Rule, that all Married persons, wilfully
deserted, are free; but this seems inconsistent with Christ's resolution, making
Adultery the only exception, which is easily cleared, by adverting, that
Christ's determination is not general of the dissolution of Marriage, but of
putting away by divorce; and so concludes no more, but that the putting away of
the wife is unlawful, unless for Adultery, but the wilful deserter is not put
away, but goes wilfully away; yet whether the person deserted, or put away, be
simply free by the dissolution of the Marriage, or only freed from the bondage
of adherence, is not clear from that Text, 1 Cor. 7. 15. For from Matthew. 5. 32.
and 19. 9. Luke 16. 18. It would appear, that by desertion, the Marriage is not
dissolved, and that the person deserted may not marry again, because it is
said, That whosoever marries her that is put away (or deserted) commits
Adultery.

By the Law of Scotland, dissolution of Marriage for non-adherence, or wilful
desertion, is expressly ordered, Parl. 1573. cap. 55. That the deserter, after
four years wilful desertion, without a reasonable cause, must be first pursued
and decerned to adhere, and being thereupon denunced, and also, by the Church
excommunicate, the Commissaries are warranded to proceed to divorce; but the
absence will not be accounted a wilful desertion, if he be following any lawful
employment abroad, and content to accept and intertain his Wife, for she is
obliged to follow him.

3. The rights arising from Marriage, are the Jus Mariti, or conjugal power of
the Husband over the Wife, her Person and Goods, and therewith by consequence,
the obliegement for her debts. 2. His power, and the Wifes security, whereby,
during the marriage she cannot obliege her self. 3. The Husbands obliegement to
intertain the Wife, and provide for her after his death, and her interest in
the Goods.

Jus Mariti, as a Term in our Law, does signify the right that the Husband
has in the Wifes Goods, yet it may well be extended to the power he has over
her person, which stands in that oeconomical power and authority, whereby the
Husband is Lord, Head and Ruler over the Wife, by the express Ordinance of God,
Genesis 3. 16. Where the Lord says to Eve, Thy desire shall be toward thy
Husband, and he shall rule over thee; which, though it may seem as a penalty
imposed upon her, for being first in the transgression, and so not to be of the
Natural or Moral Law, which is perpetual; yet it is no more than a consequence
of the Moral Law, whereby Marriage being Institute before the Fall, The Woman
was made for the Man, and not the Man for the Woman: And therefore, in that
Conjugal Society, being but of two, the determination of things indifferent, of
their Interest, behooved to be in the Man, and he to have in so far the
Precedence and Government of the Wife; but when through the Fall, the greatest
measure of infirmity besel her, as being first in the transgression, whereby
she became the weaker Vessel: there was need, not only of a determination in
things free, but an exaction of duties, whereinto she became less knowing and
willing: Therefore, from that Consequence, and not by any new Imposition, the
Man became to have Dominion over her, and power to make her do these duties,
which in her Innocence, she would have done of her own accord.

This power oeconomical, as has been said before, did naturally comprehend all
authority, till most of it was devolved upon Magistracy, yet by this power the
Husband may still contain the Wife within the compass of the conjugal Society,
and her abode and domicile follows his, and he has right to recover her
person from any that would withdraw, or withhold her from him, except in the
case of an allowed Separation, for his Injuries and Attrocities, whereby she
might not be with him in security and safety.

From this power the Husband has over the Wifes person, and Conjugal Society
involved in the Nature of Marriage, arises the Husbands power and right to the
Goods of the Wife, whereby, according to the nature of Society, there is a
community of Goods betwixt the Married persons; which Society, having no
determinate proportion in it, does resolve into an equality; but so, that
through the Husbands oeconomical power of Government, the administration,
during the Marriage, of the whole, is alone in the Husband, whereby he having
the sole administration and unaccountable, his power may rather seem to be a
power of Property, having indeed all the Effects of Property, during the
Conjugal Society, yet is no more than is expressed.

This right of the Husband in the Goods of the Wife, is so great, that hardly
can it be avoided by the pactions of parties, whereby if any thing be reserved
to the Wife, during the Marriage, to be peculiar and proper to her, excluding
the Jus Mariti: Yet the very Right of Reservation becoming the Husbands, Jure
Mariti, makes it elusory and ineffectual, as always running back upon the
Husband himself, as Water thrown upon an higher ground, does ever return; And
therefore a Wife, before her Contract of Marriage, having disponed a part of
her Jointure, and taken a Back-bond for employing of it for the use of her
future Spouse and Family jointly, though the Husband by his Contract of
Marriage, renunced his right thereto; yet he was found to have the power to
manage it, to the use of the Family, February the 9. 1667. Lord Collingtoun
and Ratho contra Tennants of Innerteil, and Lady Collingtoun, nevertheless by
private pactions, the interest and division of the Goods of Married persons,
after the dissolution of the Marriage, may be according to their pleasure, as
they agree: and Alimentary Provisions, in case of necessary Separation, are so
personal to the Wife, that inhaerent ossibus, and recur not to the Husband or
his Creditors.

Besides the Obligations of the married persons, which are naturally in the
minds and affections of each to other, there is outwardly the Obligation of
Co-habitation, or Adherence, of which formerly; and the Obligation of the
Husband to Aliment, and provide for the Wife in all necessars, for her Life,
Health and Ornament, according to their means and quality, to which he is
naturally bound, though he had no means, but were to acquire the same, For he
that provides not for his own Family, is worse than an Infidel; yet the Civil
effect thereof, is only to give Aliment and Intertainment, according to the
man's means and quality, and so he is civilly bound, quoad potest; hence it is,
that the Aliment, or Furnishing of the Wife, is a Debt of her Husbands, not
only for what is furnished by Merchants and others, hoc nomine, in the Husbands
Life, but even her Mournings after his Death, if it be proper for her quality
to have Mournings, burden the Executors of the Husband, and not the Wife,
November 12. 1664. Lady Kirkaffie contra Cornelius Neilson. July 7. 1675. Agnes
Wilkie contra Christian Morison. Jus Mariti, is a Legal Assignation to the
Wifes moveable Rights, needing no other intimation, but the Marriage, and is
preferable to any voluntar Right, prior to the Marriage, if not intimate before
the Marriage, December 18. 1667. John Achinlek contra Mary Williamson and
Patrick Gillespie.

The Roman Law has exceedingly varied in this matter from the Natural Law; for
with them, the Wife was not in potestate viri, but either in potestate Patris,
or, sui Juris, and her Goods remained fully her own, unless they had been
constitute by her in a Tocher, of which the Husband had the administration and
profit, during the Marriage, ad sustinenda onera Matrimonii; and in which,
after dissolution of Marriage, he had no interest, except by paction, de
lucranda dote; and for security whereof, the Wife had donationes propter
nuptias equivalent, only in dote estimata, the Husband had power to dispose of
the Tocher, for the value to which it was estimate; all the other Goods of the
Wife were Paraphernalia, whereof she had the sole Power and Right.

The Customs of most Nations, even where the Roman Law has much weight, in
this matter have returned to the natural course, as is observed by Cassaneus,
ad consuetudines Burgundiae, tit. 4. And Duarenus, tit. ff. de nupt. in
relation to the Custom of France, Wessenbecius, in parat. ad tit. ff. de ritu
nuptiarum. And Covaruvias, Epitt. lib. 4. Decretal. part. 2. cap. 7. In
reference to the Customs of the Germans, Spaniards, and most part of the
Nations of Europe; Gudelinus, de Jure Noviss. shows the same to be the
Custom of the Netherlands, in which, they do almost in every thing agree with
our Customs, to which we return.

By the Custom of Scotland, the Wife is in the power of the Husband; and
therefore, First, The Husband is Tutor and Curator to his Wife, and during her
Minority, no other Tutor or Curator need to be conveened, or concur to
Authorize; So it was decided, French contra French and Cranstoun, hop. tit. de
minoribus: But on the contrair, the Wife is in no case conveenable, without
calling the Husband; and though she be Married, during the dependence, the
Husband must be cited upon Supplication, and the Process continued against him,
for his interest; Spots. Husband and Wife, Margaeret Bailie contra Janet
Robertson. And likewise, a Wife being charged upon her Bond, given before
Marriage, but the Letters not being raised against her Husband, for his
interest, they were found null by way of exception, Nic. Reverentia Maritalis,
Relict of Robert Young contra Wachup. yet a Wife was found con veenable,
without calling the Husband, he being twenty years out of the Country, and she
repute Widow, June 19. 1663. Euphan Hay contra Elizabeth Corstorphin.

Yea, a Wifes Escheat, or Liferent, falls not upon any Horning execute against
her, during the Marriage, because, being then under the power of her Husband,
she has no power of her self to pursue, suspend, or relaxe, Dury, February 16.
1633. Stuart contra Banner man, and this was found, though the Decree was an
ejection committed, both by man and Wife; yet where the Horning is upon a deed
proper to the Wife, as to divide the Conjunct-fee Lands, Horning is valide,
Nic. Reverentia Maritalis, Duff contra Edmonstoun, or where the Horning was
upon a Delinquence, as on Laborrows, Hope, Husband and Wife, Lord Roxburgh
contra Lady Orknay.

In like manner, a Wife cannot pursue or charge, without concourse of her
Husband, and so Letters not raised at his instance, were reduced, though he
concurred thereafter, Dury, July 27. 1631. Robert Hay contra Mr. John Rollo.
The like Spots. Husband and Wife, Napeir contra Mr. Robert Kinloch, and Agnes
Lial. The like in a Reduction of an Heritable Right, done by the Wifes Father
on death bed, which was not sustained, unless the Husband had concurred, or had
been called; in which case, if he refused concourse without just reason, the
Lords would authorize the Wife to insist. July, 8. 1673. Christian Hacket
contra Gordoun of Chapeltoun. But we must except from this Rule if the Husband
were Inhabilitat, or forefaulted. Had. the 26. of March 1622. William Hamiltoun
contra Stuart, or the Wife authorized by the Lords upon special consideration,
the Husband refusing to concur, Dury, the 9. of January 1623. Marshel contra
Marshel: Or that she were pursuing her Husband himself, against whom,
ordinarily she has no Action, except in singular cases, ut si vergat ad
inopiam; or in case he had diverted from her, Dury, December 21. 1626. Lady
Fowls contra her Husband: Or if a Wife with concourse of her Friends, at whose
instance, Execution was provided by her Contract, were pursuing reduction of a
deed done by her Husband, in prejudice thereof, during her life. February, 12.
1663. Lockie contra Patoun: or that the Obligation in its own nature, require
execution in the Husbands life, as an obliegement to Infeft the Wife in
particular Lands; but if it be a general Obliegement, to employ Money for her,
or to Infeft her, etc. which the Husband may at any time of his life perform:
the Wife will have no Action against him, neither will she get Inhibition upon
supplication, unless the Lords grant the same upon knowledge, that the Husband
is becoming in a worse condition, or that the Wife has quite a present
Infeftment for an Obligation of an other; in which case, the Lords granted
Inhibition, July, 13. 1638. Lady Glenbervy contra her Husband. This delay,
where a Term is not expressed, is upon consideration of Merchants, who ordinarily
having no other means, than the Stock with which they trade, it would ruin
them if they were necessitate to employ it on security, so soon as they are
married.

It is a Privilege of Women amongst the Romans, per Senatus consultum
velleianum, that the Obligations by which they became surety, or interceeded
for others, were void. But our Custom has enlarged that Privilege so far,
that a Wifes Obligation for Debt, or personal Obliegement, contracted during
the Marriage, is null, even though the Bond were granted by her, and her
Husband containing an Obliegement to Infeft the Creditor, in an Annualrent out
of their Lands; and in this case the Bond as to the Wife, and an Apprising
thereon, as to her Life-rent of these Lands was found null; But here there was
no special Obliegement of Annualrent, or Wodset of the Wifes Life rent Lands,
but generally out of both their Lands. Dury, March, 24. 1626. Greenlaw contra
Gulloway. The like, Hope, Husband and Wife, Archibald Douglas of Tofts contra
Mr. Robert Elphingstoun, and Susanna Hamiltoun. The like, Dury, January, 30.
1635. Mitchelson contra Moubray; in which case, the Bond being granted by the
Man and Wife, and thereupon Apprising deduced, though she did Judicially
ratify it upon Oath, never to come in the contrair: yet the Bond and
Infeftment, as to her Life-rent, was found null, seeing there was nothing to
instruct her Ratification, but the Act of an inferior Court, whereof the
warrant was not produced. But a Wifes Obligation with her Husband, conjunctly
and severally, oblieging them to pay, and also to Infeft in an Annualrent, out
of either of their Lands, found null, as to the Wife in the Obliegement to Pay,
but not as to the Obliegement to Infeft, December, 15. 1665. Master John Ellies
contra Keith. Neither was a Wife found liable for furnishing to the House in
her Husbands absence forth of the Country, which did only affect her Husband,
Spots. Husband and Wife, John Loury contra Lady Louristoun. The like, January,
29. 1631. Porter contra Law. The like, though the cause of the Bond was Money,
advanced for the Wifes necessar Aliment; for which, no Process was granted
against her, till her Husband was first discussed, December. 22. 1629. Mr.
David Artoun contra Lady Hackertoun: And also a Wifes Obligation, without
consent of her Husband, found not to affect her but him, though she was not,
praeposita Negotiis; but because she was Persona Illustris, and her Husband out
of the Country, Hope, Husband and Wife. Mr. David Russel contra Earl of
Argyle: but a Wifes Bond for necessar Habiliments for her Body, found to
obliege her self, and not her Husbands Executors; and as to these, she may
contract, Had. July, 6. 1610. Eustacius Wise contra Lady Hallyrudhouse; this
must be understood, where the Wife has an Aliment constitute by her Husband, or
other Right exempt from his Jus Mariti. And it was so lately found, in the case
of Adam Garrns Merchant contra Elizabeth Arthur, December, 19. 1667. February,
23. 1672. John Neilson contra Arthur. But a Wifes account of Furniture to her
Person, not being great, found valide against her Husband, being subscribed by
the Wife, though she was minor, being Persona Illustris, February, 20. 1667.
Andrew Littlejohn contra Duke and Duchess of Munmouth.

This Privilege of Wives was extended to Obligations, or Dispositions made by
the Wife, though before completing of the Marriage, being after Contract and
Proclamation, whereupon Marriage followed, January, 29. 1633. (...) contra
Brown. The like specially where the Proclamation was not only at the Husbands
Paroch Church, but the Wifes, July, 8. 1623 Stewart contra Aitkin. The like of
a Disposition in favors of the Wifes Children, after their Contract and one
Proclamation, July, 5. 1611. Fletcher in Dundee contra Brown. Yet Wives
Obligations relating to their Delinquence, are not void, but only such as
relate to their Contracting. So a Wife was found obliged to fulfill an Act of a
Kirk Session, under a Penalty that she should forbear an other man's company,
which was found, not to affect her Husbands Goods, but her own, Hope, Husband
and Wife, John Bell contra Executors of James Hogg and the Kirk Session of St.
Cuthberts. Here also are excepted, Obliegements relating to Dispositions of
Lands, Annualrents or Liferents, of which hereafter.

13. As to the Husband and Wifes Interest in their Goods, by our Custom,
without any voluntar Contract, there arises betwixt them a communion of all
Movables, except the Habiliments and Ornaments of the Wifes Body, which though
they be superfluous, and the Husband insolvent, are not Arrestable for his
Debts: the Husband has the full and sole administration of all moveable Goods,
belonging or accressing to the Wife, during the Marriage, and the Rents and
Profits of Heretable Rights, as being moveable: And therefore, an Heretable
Bond, found to belong to the Husband, Jure mariti, because he was married
before the Term of Whitsonday, at which time it was payable, June, 15. 1627.
Nicolson contra Lyell; and a sum was found to belong to the Executors of the
first Husband, though the Term of Payment was after his Decease, and not to the
Wife, or her second Husband. Also, a Legacy left to a Wife, was found to belong
to her Husband, Hope, Legacies, Elizabeth Brown contra (...). Likewise, a
Husband found to have right to a Bond, blank in the Creditors name, which the
Wife, during the Marriage, put in the hands of a third Party, who filled up his
own name therein, though the Husband and Wife were voluntarly separate,
February, 11. 1634. Drummond, contra Captain Rollo, except Aliments duly and
competently provided for the Wife, which are not Arrestable for the Husbands
Debt, November, 29. 1622. Thomas Edmonstoun contra Christian Kirkaldie, and
Alexander Barclay. The like of an Aliment modified by Decree Arbitral, betwixt
the Husband and a third Party, though the cause thereof was founded upon the
Husbands Right, March 27. 1627. Westnisbit contra Morison; yea, the Husband
himself found to have no access to a Sum provided to a Wife by her Father for
her Aliment, July 4. 1637. Tennant contra (...).

This communion of Goods, by our Custom, extends not to the Wifes Rights
Heretable, as Lands, Annualrents, Heretable Bonds, nor to Liferents; for as to
these, the Wife may obliege her self personally in Clauses, relative to such
Rights, as Clauses to Infeft, Clauses of Warrandioe, and Clauses of Requisition
of Sums, for which her Lands were Wodset by her, if the Wife be first, and
principally bound with consent of her Huaband: but where the Wife and Husband
were bound for Infeftment, in Lands belonging to the Wife, and both bound in
the Requisition, yet thereby the Wife was not found obliged, either for
granting the Infeftment or in the Requisition, because it appeared that the
Money was not borrowed for the Wifes use, December 19. 1626. Mathie contra
Sibbald, other ways such Obliegements are effectual against the Wife. The like,
Hope, Annualrent, Agnes (...) contra James (...), where a Wife was found liable
to pay an Annualrent, disponed by her and her Husband out of her
(...)-Fee-Lands, even during the time they were in Ward. The like of an
Annualrent disponed by a Wife and her Husband, for which both were personally
obliged, in respect she lifted the Rents of the Lands, out of which it was to
be uplifted. Spots. Husband and Wife, Walter (...) contra Margaret Chisholm.
The like of a Clause of Requisition, in a Contract of Wodset, granted by the
Wife upon her Lands, stante matrimonia, Hope, Husband and Wife, Agnes Gordon
contra Elizabeth Gordon. And this is the difference betwixt these and other
Personal Obliegements of the Wife, stante matrimonio, which even though the
Husband consent, are (...) and obliege her not: yea, a Renunciation of a
Tenement by a Wife, without consent of her Husband, being absent, though he
ratified it at his return, was found null, Spots. Husband and Wife Helen Melvil
contra So that the Husbands Right, Jure Mariti, to the Rents and Annualrents of
the Wifes Rights, which are not Alimentary, cannot be evacuate without the
Husbands consent, though the Wife may dispose of the Right it self to take
effect after the dissolution of the Marriage.

In Heretable Rights of Wives, Bonds bearing Annualrent, though without a
clause of Infeftment, are comprehended; for these remain Heretable, (...) and
relictum, by the Act of Parliament, 1661. cap. 32. And therefore, a provision
by a Father to his Daughter, bearing Annualrent, five per cent, found not to
fall under the Husbands (...) Mariti, June 28. 1665. James (...) against (...)
Edgar, July 4. 1676. John (...) contra Bruce.

The Marriage without any Contract, is a legal Assignation to the Rents and
Profits of the Wifes Lands, and other Heretable Rights, during the Marriage: so
that without his consent, the Wife cannot alter the condition thereof, in
prejudice of his Right, during the Marriage.

Jus Mariti is so effectual, as to the moveable Goods of the Wife, that though
a Life-renter in her second Contract of Marriage, reserved a part of her
Life-rent Lands, to be solely at her own disposel, and that the Husband in the
same Contract of Marriage, renounced his Jus Mariti thereanent, yet that
Renunciation was found to be his Jur. Mariti; and so the profits of her
Life-rent were affected by his Creditors, it not being constitute as a formal
and a proportional Aliment, as was found in the case of the Creditors of Mr.
Andrew Hamiltoun, contra Lady Carberry his Wife.

From this Communion of Goods, it follows also, that there is a Communion of
Debts, whereby the Husband is liable for the Wifes Debt, though it should both
exceed her and his Movables, and the profit of the Wifes Land, or of her other
Heretable Rights; but this was not found to hold in matter of wrong, or
Criminal things; and so the Husband found not liable for a Spuilzie, or
wrongous Intromission committed by his Wife, without his knowledge or
approbation, during the Marriage, February 2. 1628. Scot contra Katharine Banks
and James Neil. The same is observed by Spots, Husband and Wife, inter eosdem;
these were done, Stante Matrimonio, without the Husbands consent: And yet the
Husband found liable for the damnage of a Milne demolished by his Wife, as
praeposita negotiis; and by his Domestic Servants, though he was out of the
Country, Spots, Husband and Wife, Lord Ludqhairn contra Earl of Marishal.
Neither was a Husband found liable for the penalty of the contraveening the Act
of a Kirk Session, ut supra. A Husband found liable for his Interest, for his
Wifes Tutor Compts, not only what she was liable for, during her Widouity, but
during the time of a former Husband, his Successor being always first discust,
as to what was (...) in his time, March 28. 1629. Mathison contra Waristonn;
yea, without the discussing of the Successors of the first Husband, primo loco,
where the intromission was before both Marriages, but prejudice to the
Defender, to pursue the Heirs of the first Husband as accords, February 18.
1663. Dumbar of Hemprig contra Lord Frazer. But a Husband was not found liable
for Furniture, given by Merchants to his Wife, without his consent, she having
gone to London without his Warrant, except in so far as her ordinar expenses
would have amounted to; if she had stayed at home, though her Husband had not
Inhibite her, July 6. 1677. John Allan contra Earl and Countess of Southesk.

After Inhibition against Wives, the Husband is not liable for any thing they
Contract, except what is furnished suitable to their quality, and where the
Husband cannot instruct that he sufficiently provided his Wife otherwise, July
the 25. 1676. (...) Campbel contra Lord of Abden. The like was found at the
same time, concerning the Furniture of the Lady Monteith.

But this obliegement of the Husbands being only for his Interest, (...)
Mariti, the Debt it self does not properly become his; but only it may take
effect against his Person and Goods, during the Marriage: but if that Interest
were dissolved by his own, or his Wifes death, there will be no farther Process
against him, or his Heirs, Nic. de reverentia Maritali, Campbel contra Dumbar.
And though there was, Litis contestation, before the Wifes death, the Husband
was found free; (...) he was ordained by Interloqutor, to find Caution, to pay
what should be decerned, July 11. 1664. Dumbar of Hemprig contra Lord Frazer.
So likeways, a Husband decerned with his Wife for his Interest, she dying
before execution, he was free of the Debt, December 28. 1665. Dam Rachel Burnet
contra Lepers. The like, where the Husband was holden as confessed, upon refusing
to give his Oath of Calumny, February 26. 1668. George Graham contra Grizel
Touris, and Kelhead her Husband: so likewise, a Husband decerned with his Wife
for his interest, having died before execution, his Successors were found free
of thedebt, Hope, transferring, Francis Kinloch contra Dumbar: But the contrair
was found, where the Husband was denunced upon the Decree, and had sold his
Wifes Portion of Land; Ibidem, Earl of Murray contra Lord St. Colmb. The like,
where the Decree against the Husband, after his Wifes decease, was only found
effectual, in so far as might extend to his Wifes third part of his Movables,
February 7. 1629. Brown contra Dalmahoy. And a Husband was found liable for his
Wifes Debt, after her Death, in so far as might be extended to the benefit of
her Life-rent Duties, resting at her Death, February 1. 1662. Sir James
Cuninghame against Thomas Dalmahoy. And the Husband is always liable for his
Wifes Debt, even after her Death, in quantum est lucratus, which cannot be
understood to be by every Benefit, or Tocher, Marriage being an onerous
Contract, where a Tocher is given, ad sustinenda onera Matrimonii, and for the
Wifes Provision by Law or Paction, after the Man's Death: And therefore, he can
only be accounted, Lucratus, when the benefit he has by his Wife, does far
exceed these, onera, December 23. 1665. Dam Rachel Burnet against Lepers. And
even in case he be Lucratus, the Wifes Heretage must be first discust, January
23. 1678. Agnes Wilkie contra Stuart and Morison. A Husband being charged
Summarily for his Interest, upon a Decree obtained against his Wife, before
the marriage, and denunced thereupon; yet not being undertaken by him, or
affecting his Goods before his death, he was Liberat, March 20. 1627. Knows
contra Kneiland. The like, though not only Horning was used against the
Husband, but Arrestment thereupon, January 23. 1678. Agnes Wilkie contra Stuart
and Morison. But a Husband having given Bond of borrowed Money for his Wifes
Furniture, was found liable therefore after her Death, July 7. 1680. Slowan
contra Lord Bargainie. But that the Husbands Lands, or Here table Rights, will
be liable for his Wifes Debt, there is neither Decision nor Ground for it;
these not being in Communione bonorum. It is more dubious, and for any thing I
know, undecided, Whether the Heritable Debt of the Wife will affect the
Husband, Quoad mobilia; but seeing it is a Communion of Goods only moveable, it
should be also of Debts moveable, though in communi forma, as Tutors or
Curators. So Husbands will be decerned generally for their Interest; yet with
this difference, that Tutors and Curators will be liable, in so far as they
have the Pupils Means. But I never heard that there was distinctions, whether
the Wifes Debt did exceed the third part of the Man's Movables, which is her
Proportion of the same; but indefinitely, it hatheffect against the Husbands
Person by Caption, or his (...) by Poynding. But a Wifes Heretable Bonds,
become not her Husbands, though uplifted by her, or made moveable by a Charge,
during the Marriage, seeing she then re-imployed the Money for Annualrent,
February (...). 1679. Alexander Cockburn contra George Burn.

14. These are the Interests of the Man and Wife, during the Marriage; but
before we come to their Interests, after the dissolution thereof, it is to be
considered, that by our Customs, Donations between Man and Wife, Stante
Matrimonio, are Revocable by the giver, during Life; which our Custom has
taken from the Civil Law, where this Reason is rendered, Ne unituo amore se
spolient; Thus a Donation betwixt a Man and his Wife, was found anulled by the
Husbands Revocation upon Deathbed, subscribed by Nottars, because of his
Infirmity, Hope, Husband and Wife, Earl of Angus contra Countess of Angus. And
a Husband was allowed to recall a Bond granted to his Wife, bearing, that he
thought it convenient, that they should live a part; and therefore obliged him
to pay a Sum yearly for her Aliment; albeit it bore also, that he should never
quarrel, or recall the same, as importing a Renunciation of that Privilege,
February 6. 1666. Livingstoun contra Beg. Yea, a Donation by a Husband to his
Wife, was found Revocked by a Posterior Right to his Children, though it was
not a pure Donation, but in lieu of another Right, and quoad excessum only,
seeing it was notabilis excessus November 20. 1662. Children of Wolmet against
Lady Wolmet. And un Infeftment, bearing Lands and a Miln, was found Revockable,
as to the Miln, it not being expressed in the Wifes Contract, February 5. 1667.
Countess of Home contra Hog: This was extended to a Wifes accepting of an Infe
ftment in satisfaction of her Contract, February 12. 1663. Relict of George
Morison contra his Heir. It is also Revockable, indirectly by the Husbands
posterior Disposition of the Lands, formerly Disponed to his Wife, in
Life-rent, July 16. 1622. John Murray of Lochmaiben contra Scot of Hayning. A
Donation by Infeftment, granted by a Man to his Wife, beside her Contract,
found Revocked by an Annualrent out of these Lands, granted to his Daughter,
pro tanto, without mention of Revocation, December 15. 1674. Mr. Robert Kinloch
contra Raith. It was also found effectually Revocked, by the Husbands
submitting of the Right of the Land, wherein he had formerly gifted a Life-rent
to his Wife, and a Decree Arbitral, adjudging the same to another, Nic. de
Donat. inter virum and uxorem; Viscount of Annandail contra Scot. But Donations
by a man to his Wife, who had no former Provision, nor Contract of Marriage,
found not Revockable, being in satisfaction of the Terce, due by the Marriage,
March 25. 1635. Lord of Louristoun contra Lady Dunipace. The like, November.
22. 1664. Margaret Mcgill contra Ruthven of Gairn. But where the Husband
granted Infeftment of all that he then had, there being no Contract of
Marriage, And thereafter, a second Infeftment, both Stante Matrimonio; The
first was sustained, being in place of a Contract of Marriage; but the second
was found Revockable, 23. of November. 1664. Halyburtoun contra Porteous. And a
provision to a Wife, having no Contract of Marriage, was found Revockable, in
so far as it exceeded a Provision suitable to the Parties, 27. of July 1677.
Short and Burnet contra Murrays. Yet the want of a Contract did not sustain a
Donation by a Wife to her Husband, to whom she assigned an Heretable Bond, the
Husband being naturally obliged to provide for his Wife, and not the Wife for
her Husband, December 15. 1676. Inglis of East-shield against Lowry of
Blackwood. And an Assignation to an Heritable Bond, by a Wife to a third Party,
but to the Husbands behoove, found Revockable by the Wife, after the Husbands
death, even against the Husbands singular Successor, for causes onerous, the
trust being proven by Write, June 17. 1677. Margaret Pearson contra Mclane. Yea
a Donation by a Wife, by Assignation of her former Jointure, to her Husbands
behoove, found Revockable, though there was no Contract, unless the Husband had
given a remuneratory provision, January 22. 1673. Janet Watson contra Bruce.
And a Wifes consent to a Contract of Wodset of her Life-rent Lands, with a
back-tack to the Husband, only found valid as to the Creditor, but Revockable
as to the Husband, in relation to the back-tack, declaring the same to belong
to her for her Life-rent use, that she might enjoy the superplus more than the
Annualrent, June 28. 1673. Arnot contra Buta Donation by a Husband to his Wifes
Children of a former Marriage, was not found Revockable, though done at his
Wifes desire, January 15. 1669. Hamiltoun contra Banes. Nor by a Wife
subscribing her Husbands Testament, by which her Life-rent Lands were provided
to her Daughter, July 12. 1671. Marjory Murray contra Isobel Murray. Such
Donations are also annulled by the Wifes Adultery and Divorce. As all Donations
are Revockable for ingratitude, Hope, donatio inter virum and uxorem, Margaret
Douglas contra Aitoun. A Bond conceived to a Man and Wife and her Heirs, found
a Donation by the Man, whose Means it was presumed to be, and Revockable by him
after her death; and a Tack taken by him, to himself and his Wife in Life-rent,
was found Revockable, by a posterior Tack thereof to himself and his brothers
Son, December 21. 1638 Lord of Craigmiller contra Relict of Gawin (...), yet
thereafter it was found in the same case, January 30. 1639. that in respect the
(...) was set by a third person, and that it did not appear to be by the Man's
(...), that the Back-tack to the Wife, was not Revockable. But a Donation
betwixt Man and Wife, altering their Contract of Marriage, being done before
the marriage it self, was not found Revockable, January 23. 1680. John Home
contra John and George Homes; yea where the Donation did bear date before the
Marriage, the Husbands Heir proving the Write antidated, and that it was truly
after the Marriage; the Donation was therefore found Revockable, July 24. 1667.
Earl of Dumfermling contra Earl of Callender.

15. To come to the Interest of the Husband and Wife, after the Dissolution of
the Marriage, we must distinguish the Dissolution thereof, which falls by
death, with in year and day from the solemnizing thereof, and that which is
Dissolved thereafter; for by our Custom, this is singular, which is found no
where else in the Neighboring Nations, that if the Marriage Dissolve within
year and day, after the Solemnizing thereof, all things done in Contemplation
of the Marriage become void, and return to the Condition wherein they were
before the same; and so the Tocher returns back to the Wife, or these from whom
it came, and she has no Benefit or any Interest, either in the Movables or
Heretables, either by Law or Contract provided to her: nor has he any Interest
in hers, unless there were a living Child born, which was heard cry or weep: in
which case, Marriage has the same effect, as to all intents and purposes, as
if it endured beyond the year and this is extended to both the Marriage of
Maids and Widows, July 23. 1634. Maxwel contra Harestones. And extended also to
an Infeftment by a Husband to a Wife, though it had no relation to the
Marriage, but was only presumed to be, hoc intuitu, November 16. 1633. Grant
contra Grant, and not only extended to the Wife and Husband, and their Heirs,
but to any other person concerned, Restitution being made, hincinde, of all
done, (...) Matrimonii, June 8. 1610. Lord of Caddel contra Elizabeth Ross:
yea, a Disposition by a Father to a Son of his Estate, in Contemplation of his
Marriage, which was dissolved within year and day by the Wifes death, was found
void; seeing the Father persisted not therein, but Infeft his second Son, July
15. 1678. Lord Burley contra Lord of Fairny. And a Tocher paid within the
year, was (...) to be repayed without any Deduction, for the Wifes
intertainment, during the Marriage; but only for her Clothes which were before
the Marriage, and her Funeral Charges which was after the Marriage was
Dissolved, February 23. 1681. Janet Gordoun contra Thomas Inglis. But Gifts
given to the Married Persons, by the Friends of both, were divided equally, the
Marriage being dissolved within year and day, January 14. 1679. Wauch contra
Jamison. But if a living Child was born, the Marriage was found valide, though
both Mother and Child died within the year, Spot. Husband and Wife, Stuart
contra Irving. The reason why the Child must be heard cry, is to make certain
its lively ripeness, and not to leave it to the conjecture of the Witnesses:
and therefore, it sufficed not, though they did declare, that the Child was
living immediately before the Birth, and appeared lively and full ripe when it
was born, but that it was stifled in the Birth, as was found in the case of
Sandelands and Thores; yet a Wifes Infeftment was found valid, till her Tocher
was repayed, though the Marriage Dissolved within the year, July 20. 1664.
Petrie contra Paul. But where a Marriage continued a year, and a part of the
next day after the year, the Tocher was found not to return, Nam in
favorabilibus dies, ceptus habetur pro completo, February 25. 1680. George
Waddel contra George Salmond.

16. Marriage Dissolveth by Divorce, either upon wilful non-adherence, or
wilful Desertion, or by Adultery; and the party injurer loses all benefit,
accrueing through the Marriage, as is expressly provided by the foresaid Act of
Parliament, concerning non-adherence, 1533. cap. 55. But the Party injured has
the same benefit, as by the others Natural Death; as was found, March 21. 1637.
Lady Manderstoun contra Lord of Rentoun. But if Divorce follow upon Impotency,
all things return, hinc inde; because, in effect there was no Marriage, as was
found, Earl of Eglintoun contra Lady Eglintoun.

17. By the Dissolution of Marriage, there arises to Married Persons, not only
these Rights, which by voluntar Contract are Constitute to either, and which
are not proper here: but also these, which by Law and Custom, are Competent
without any special Convention, or Covenant; and these are either upon the part
of the Husband, or more frequently upon the part of the Wife: To the Husband is
Competent, the Life-rent of the Wifes Heretage; which, because it is peculiar
unto these Nations, it is said to be the Courtesy of Scotland or England. To
the Wife arises, her share of the Movables, which is the half, where the Man
has no Children, in familia; and the third, where there are such, and her
Terce, which is the third part of his Lands, during her Life. But of
Reversions, Heretable Bonds, Dispositions, or Rights of Lands without
Infeftment, and of Teinds, or Tacks, or Tenements within Burgh, the Relict has
no Terce. These Rights of Terce and Courtesy, fall in to be considered amongst
the Feudal Rights; and the Relicts third, or half of Movables, in the
Succession of Movables, wherein it is a Concomitant, and regulat according to
that which is proper Succession, either of Children, or others; though as to
the Wife, it be rather a Division of that Community of Goods Moveable, that was
Competent to the Married Persons, during the Marriage, and therefore shall be
insisted on no further here, but left to these places. And we shall proceed to
the next kind of Obediential Obligations, and Natural Rights, which interveen
betwixt Parents and Children.

Law and Custom has favored, and privileged Wives in many cases, propter
fragilitatem sexus, they are free from obliegements, for sums of Money, and
from personal Execution, by Horning or Caption, if it be not for Criminal
Causes, their Contracts of Marriage are preferable to other Personal Creditors,
February 8. 1662. Thomas Crawford contra Earl of Murray; their share of their
Husbands Movables, is not burdened with the Husbands Heretable Debt, December
28. 1668. Margaret Mckenzie contra Robertsons. July 19. 1664. Elizabeth
Scrimzour contra Murrays; yea, gratuitous, moveable Bonds granted by a Husband,
payable at his death, whereby the whole Executry would be exhausted, and the
Wife have no share, having no other provision; the same were not found to
affect the Wifes share: But otherways, such Bonds granted in Liege Poustie,
without fraud, were found to come off the hail Head, and not off the deads part
only, December 8. 1675. Thomson contra Executors of Eleistoun. And a Wife was
found not excluded from her share of her Husbands Movables, by a gratuitous
Disposition by her Husband to his Brother, of all sums that he should have at
his death, January 10. 1679. Grant contra Grant. In like manner, the
Infeftments and Provisions of Wives are effectual, although the Tocher, which
is the mutual cause thereof, be not paid, she not being obliged therefore her
self, though the Contract bore, that the Tocher being paid it, should be
employed to the Wifes use, July 5. 1665. Mackie contra Stuart. The like, though
the Contract bore, that the Husband should employ the Tocher for the Wife, in
Life-rent, albeit the Tocher was lost through the Fathers Insolvency, June 11.
1670. Margaret Hunter contra Creditors of John Peter. The like, though the
Contract bore, that the Wife should have no benefit while the Tocher should be
fully paid, if the Tocher could be recovered by the Husbands diligence,
November 21. 1671. Mary Menzies contra John Corbet. On the same ground, a
Contract of Marriage, bearing the one half of the Tocher to the Wife, failing
Children, albeit conceived passive, and not that the Husband was to pay the
same, or do diligence therefore; yet the Husband was found liable to pay the
half of the Tocher, although it was not recovered, unless he had done the
diligence of a provident man, which was found employed in his Duty and Trust as
Husband, the Wife being in potestate viri, July 14. 1676. Jean Lockhart and
Raploch her Spouse contra James Bonar. And though Husbands have no communion in
the Habiliments and Ornaments of the Wife, which cannot be affected for his
debt; yet she has her share of the Habiliments of the Husband, which falls in
his Executry; and he is obliged to pay all Accounts for her Habiliments,
suitable to her quality. But where the Wife had an Alimentary Provision for her
Habiliments, Ornaments and her other Uses, the Husband having furnished them,
and received that sum, was not found liable to repay the same to her
Executours, February 2. 1667. Executours of the Lady Piltoun contra Hay of
Balhousie. Wives have not only a half, or third of their Husbands Movables,
when they survive, but have their Aliment till the next Term, after the
Husbands death. Yea, a Wife was found to have right to the expenses of
Childbed, of a posthumus Child, born after the next Term, against the eldest
Son, though he was not Heir, but having an universal Disposition of his Fathers
means, which was very considerable: which Disposition was granted after the
Posthumus Child's Conception, November 10. 1671. Thomas Hasty and Barbara Ker
his Mother contra William Hasty. A Wife has also her Mournings, if her quality
require it, out of her Husbands Executry, November 12. 1664. Nicolas Murray
Lady Craigaffie contra Cornelius Neilson. July 7. 1675. Agnes Wilkie contra
Christian Morison. And likewise, if the Wife predecease, her Executours have
the half, or third of her Husbands Movables, the best of every kind being set
aside, as Heirship Movables, though there could be no Heir for the time, the
Husband being alive, December 8. 1668. Agnes Guidlet contra George Nairn.

TITLE V. Obligations between Parents and Children.
1. Obligations betwixt Parents and Children, are Divine by the Law of Nature.
2. The Power of Parents over their Children: 3. In Infancy; 4. In Minority; 5.
In Majority. 6. Oeconomical Government. 7. Provision of Children. 8.
Obligations of Children to their Parents. 9. Aliment due to Parents. 10.
Obligations mutual of Children. 11. Patria potestas, amongst the Romans. 12.
Amongst other Nations especially, as lawful Administrations. 13.
Forisfamiliation and Emancipation.
THAT there be Natural Obligations betwixt Parents and Children, not proceeding
from the consent of either Party, or from the Constitution of any humane Law,
but from the obedience Man owes to his Maker, who has Written this Law in the
Hearts of Parents and Children, as to their Interests and Duties, with Capital
Letters; Is evident by the common consent of all the Nations of the World, how
Barbarous soever; though evil custom has put out the Eyes of Natural Light in
other things; yet in this, the Rays of the Sun of Righteousness are so direct,
that their illumination cannot be extinguished. These Obligations are so firm,
that in most things they cannot be taken off, nor discharged by Men; though
Children would discharge their Parents of Natural Affection, Education,
Provision, etc. Or Parents would free their Children of Reverence,
Obsequiousness, and of Intertainment of Parents, not able to Intertain
themselves: yet would these Obligations still be binding upon either. These
Obligations are placed in the Common Nature that Man has with other Animals,
and so is given as an evident Instance of the Law of Nature, l. 2. ff. de
justitia and jure.

We shall then consider what these are; And first, What Interest the Parents
have in the Persons of their Children. Secondly, In what they are Naturally
bound-to to their Children. Thirdly, What interest the Children have in the
Goods of Parents. Fourthly, What they Naturally do owe to their Parents.
Fifthly, what they are bound in to each other.

2. For the first, ere we can distinctly know the power Parents have over their
Children, we must distinguish the Capacity and Ages of the Children, whereof
there are three, Infancy, or Pupilarity; Minority, or less Age; and Majority,
or full Age; So does Aristotle distinguish, Polit. 1. cap. ult. Ethic. l. 4.
cap. 3. l. 5. cap. 10. And after him. Grotius, de jure belli and pacis, l. 2.
cap. 5.

3. Infancy is, when the Children are without Discretion, and then are wholly
in the power of their Parents, who not only may, but must carry them whither,
and keep them where they will; and must also breed and order them according to
their capacities, means and qualities: And this is rather an Act of Dominion in
the Parents, the Children being then capable of no Obligation; and therefore it
cannot be received by them from the Parents as an Obligation, as it may
thereafter be done, during the Childrens Minority, wherein there is a Natural
Levity, for want of fixedness and experience, while the Light of Reason is but
drawing toward its Meridian clearness.

4. It will not much be debated, but the direction of Children in their
Minority, is naturally stated in their Parents; But the greatest Question will
remain, of their full Age, when the Children become able to govern themselves,
and their own Affairs: And as to that, it is the opinion of some, that it
stands alone, inpietate and reverentia, Steph.oeco.juris civilis, cap. 7. and
Vinnius partitionum, l. 1. cap. 7. in principio, shows, that the Custom of
Holland dissolveth the power of Fathers, by the Childrens age of 25.

5. Whatsoever may arise from the Custom of Nations, whereby the power of
Parents over their Children, in their full Age is much diminished; yet by the
Original and pure Law of Nature, not only the Tutory and Protection of
Childrens Infancy with the Cure, and direction of their Minority, is in their
Parents. But there is also an oeconomick Authority in the Father of the Family,
over all his Children and Descendants remaining in his Family, whom he has not
Elocat by Marriage (which is also a Natural Bond) unto other Families, whereby
the Females do naturally change their Families, and become under the power of
another Family.

6. This is the only Natural Authority and Government, which had in it self all
Authority, Public, Private, Civil and Criminal, till by Humane Constitution,
and Divine Approbation, most of that power is now devolved into Magistracy.
This Power was not only before Magistracy, but even thereafter remained, with
subordination thereto in most Nations, as Caesar de bello Gallico, lib. 2.
Writes that among the Gauls and Belgae, Parents had the power of Life and
Death. The like power had the Romans anciently, l. in suis haredibus, 11. ff.
de liberis and posthumis, l. libertati, 10. Cod. de patria potestate. Aristotle
testifies the like of the Persians, lib. 8. Ethic. cap. 12. And by the
Judicial Law, Deuteronomy. 21. verse. 18. The rebellious son, who obejed not the voice
of his Father and Mother, was to be brought forth before the Elders of that
place, and stoned to death, without other proof than the parents testimony; So
that the sentence was the Parents, though the execution was to be public. Such
Authority was that of the Patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, who with Divine
Approbation, made War, Peace and Confederacys, which are the public and proper
Rights of Magistracy, and Governed their own Families without any Authority
derived from any other. And though Jacobs Family arose to that greatness, that
in it were many Families, yet he remained the Father and Prince of them all; so
that the several subordinat Families, had their subordinat Authority over their
Wives and Children, and so their Children were bound in Obedience to them, but
with the exception of their Superior Parents, to whom the first Obedience was
due.

This Native Authority reaches all Children, whether procreat of lawful
Marriage or not, so that they be truly known to be Children, because the same
Foundation, and common Principles and Duties, are in both, though they have not
the same Interest in the Fathers Goods, in respect of that Community of Goods
betwixt Man and Wife, and the Conjugal Society, even naturally, whence the
Goods are derived into the Issue of the Lawful Marriage.

This Paternal Authority does not necessarily carry the property and disposal
of the Goods of the Children; but that they are capable of such by the Gift of
their Parents, or any other ways, even in Infancy, and that they have the full
Dominion and Administration thereof, in their full Age: And therefore, Bonds of
Provision, by Fathers to Children, if delivered, are not Revockable, directly
nor indirectly, by contracting Debts thereafter; And the delivery of such Bonds
of Provision, makes them irrevockable, whether the delivery be to the Children,
or to any other for their behoove (which behoove will be presumed, unless the
Father express his mind at the delivery, that the Write is to be returned to
himself, or depositate upon terms) and therefore, a Bond taken By a Father, in
the name of his Brother, the Father obtaining an Assignation from him to his
Daughter; the Bond was not found Revockable by the Father, being Registrate in
the Brothers Name, November 20. 1667. Executours of Trotter contra Trotter.
Childrens provisions by Bond, granted after a Testament, nominating them
Executours, found not to import that they should have the Executry, if the Heir
be obliged to pay the Bonds of provision; but that the Bond being Movables
should first affect the Executry, February 22. 1677. Belfhes of Tofts contra
Belshes. And a Father granting Bond to a Bairn, in satisfaction of her Portion
natural, was not found thereby to apply that Bairns Portion natural to the
Heir, Executour, or unlversal Legator, though they would be liable for payment
of the Bond; but to apply that Bairns share to the rest of the Bairns, who
thereby will have the whole Bairns part, February 17. 1671. Mistress Katharine
Mcgill against the Viscount of Oxford, for Bonds of provision, delivered in
liege pousty, do, as other Debts, affect the whole Executry, and where all the
Bairns had Bonds of provision, bearing in satisfaction, they had also their
Bairns part of the Executry, July 16. 1678. Murrays contra Murrays. But Bairns
provisions, payable at such a day, and not bearing the proportion of the
deceasing to accress to the surviving the share of these Bairns, who dyed
before that age, without Issue, was not found due, February 22. 1677. Belshes
of Tosts contra Belshes. The delivery of Writes in other cases, is presumed
from the date, if they be in the persons hands, in whose favors they are
granted; but in competition with other Creditors, the delivery of Bonds of
provision is not presumed to have been from the date, but that (...) be
instructed by some evidence, as taking Seasing, Registration, or Witnesses, who
saw the same in the hands of the Children, or others to their (...), and in
that case they are valide, if there be no (...), or prejudice to Creditors, by
latency or (...) and therefore Bonds of provision to Children, were reduced
upon the eldest Sons Contract of Marriage, though (...), January 10. 1668.
Lord of (...) his Brothers and Sisters. And a posteriour Tocher was preferred
to a prior Assignation, to a Bairn in Family, unless the prior delivery were
also proven, November 14. 1676. Major Ingles contra (...), June (...). 1668.
Johnstoun of (...) contra Isobel Arnold.

But from this paternal power, it follows, that the Parents may continue and
keep their Children in their Families, and that they are obliged to employ
their Service and Work, for the common interest of the Family, and what thence
arises, is the Parents, not their own, which does always endure, till by
consent of the Parents, they become (...), whereby they may employ their Work
and Service for themselves alone.

Thus the interest of Parents in the Persons and Goods of their Children, by
the Law of Nature, being cleared. As to the Obligations Natural of Parents
toward their Children (beside their Obligations that stand, and are acted in
the Mind and Affections, which the Law respects not, but these only, qua non
mente, sed manu tenentur) the main Obligations are Education and Provision. The
Education of Children consists not only in the Care and Intertainment of
them, during Infancy; but especially in Breeding of them for some Calling and
Employment, according to their capacity and condition.

7. The duty of provision of Children, comprehends, not only their Aliment, and
Intertainment in Meat, Clothes, Medicine and Burial, which may be competent,
during the Parents Life; but also competent provision after the Parents Death;
for the Apostle says, That he that cares not for his family, is worse then an
Infidel, 1 Timothy 5. verse. 8. And in both, the ability of the Parent, and
necessity of the Children is to be considered; for if the Children be (...)
provided, aliunde, the Parents are not bound; and though the Children be
necessitous, yet there must first be reserved for the Parents, that which is
necessar for subsistence, so that when they are not able to intertain their
Children, they may lawfully expose them to the mercy and charity of others. But
a Father, though indigent, was decerned to receive his Son (having no Means or
Calling) into his Family, or to pay him a modification, January 13. 1666.
William Dick contra Sir Andrew Dick. But a Father was not found liable to pay a
Merchant for Furniture given to his Son, where he gave his Son an allowance in
Money for his Clothes, January (...). 1672. High (...) contra Craufoord of
Camlarg. Neither was a Father found liable for his Daughters Bridel-Furniture
to a Merchant, whom he prohibit to give them off; but the Daughter and her
Husband, July (...). 1672. (...) contra (...) and Gairn: and a Mother was found
obliged to receive her Children into Family (but for no other modification)
though they were Noble Persons, there being none representing the Father, able
to intertain them, February 23. 1666. Children of the Earl of Buchan contra the
(...).

As to the Interest Children have in the Goods of their Parents, it is to be
considered, either during the Parents Life, or after their Death; for the
Interest they have after their Parents Death, it falls in to be considered
among the conveyances of Rights by Succession; but during the Parents Life they
have no real Right of Dominion, or Property in the Parents Goods: for though
the Parents be obliged naturally, to Intertain and Educate their Children out
of their Goods, yet that is but a personal Right, and intituleth not the
Children to meddle with the Parents Goods, upon that pretense, as says
Solomon, Prove. 28. verse. 24. Who robs his Father and Mother, and says it
is no transgression, the same is the companion of a destroyer.

8. The Obligation of Children toward their Parents, consists mainly in their
Obedience to them; and their duty to Aliment and Supply them in all their
necessities, according to the Childrens ability: their Obedience to their
Parents is much cleared from that Power and Authority their Parents have over
them, of which we have spoken. For unto Authority, or power to Command,
Subjection, or Obedience answers, as the Correlate; so that as the Parental
Power was most in the Infancy of the Children, and least after their
forisfamiliation; so are the duties of Obedience proportional: but after
Emancipation, these duties are so far diminished, that little remains, except
the Natural Reverence, Tenderness and Obsequiousness, that Children do still
owe to their Parents, in due order; which, though it has no civil remeeds, yet
it remains a Natural Obligation, to observe the Parents commands, throughout
their Posterity, as in that Nottour Example of the Rehabites, Jer. 35. is
clear, where they observed their Fathers Commands, in a free thing, though
inconvenient, viz. To drink no Wine, to build no houses, etc. and for their
Obedience, the Lord promises, There should not be wanting a man of them to
stand before the Lord for ever. But while they are in the Family, they are not
only under the oeconomick Government of their Parents, in so far as is not
devolved to the Magistrate; but specially they are bound to abide with their
Parents, and to employ their Service for their Parents, and the use of the
Family, whereunto their Parents may compel them by their own proper Authority;
and Parents have Action against all others, who shall hinder them to keep their
Children with them, or lead them whether, and employ them as they please.

9. The Obligation of Aliment, and Relief to Parents in necessity, is due, both
by the Law of Nature, and has in it also, that Remuneratory Obliligation,
whereby Children ought to retribute to, and recompense their Parents for their
Education and Intertainment; and though it be said, 2 Cor. 12, 14. That
Children ought not to lay up for the Parents, but the Parents for the Children;
yet it is to be understood, of that care, foresight and Providence that Parents
ought to have, not only to provide things necessar for themselves, but for
their Children also after them, which being an ordinary duty, ought to be in
their thought and consideration; and is not incumbent to the Children, it being
but rare and unexpected, that Parents necessities put them to expect relief
from their Children; or else it is to be taken comparatively, that parents are
rather to lay up for the Children, then Children for the Parents. Solons Law
made the Children infamous, who did not Aliment their Parents. And Cicero in
his Oration, de responsis aruspicum parentibus, nos primum natura constituit
debitores, quos non alere nefarium est.

In these Natural Obligations of Aliment betwixt Parents and Children, the
Order of Nature must be observed, that the nearest are first to be preferred,
and the Paternal Line before the Maternal, as being in an other Family; for
even the distinction of Families, and union thereof in the Paternal power, is
natural, as before is said. From the same ground, Parents must first Aliment
their Children in the Family, and amongst them that are Emancipat, the Males
are preferable to the Females, passing by Marriage into other Families.

10. As to the Natural Obligation of Children amongst themselves, there is no
doubt, but that there Naturally lie greater Obligations upon them, each to
other, than the common Obligations betwixt man and man, which are not only
greater in the measures and degrees, as to love them, assist them, support
them, and supply their necessities the more, by how (...) degree of Blood they
are bound to them than others, which is commonly acknowledged by all. But the
Romans, and many other Nations have acknowledged, the Natural Obligations of
Brothers and Sisters, to (...) each other; though our Custom has not
Authorized the same, unless the Brother were Heir to the Father in a competent
Estate, and the remanent Children not at all provided; in which case, the Lords
modified Aliment to them, January 24. 1663. the Children of Wedderlie contra
his Heir. Aliment was also found due by a Brother to a Sister of a second
Marriage (who had a Portion to be paid) at the age of fourteen, and no
Annualrent or Aliment in the mean time, though they had a Mother on Life, (...)
11. 1663. Catharin Frazer contra Hugh Frazer. The like found due by an Heir
Male, to Heirs of Line till their Marriage, seeing their Portions bore no
Annualrent, January 8. 1663. Lady Otter contra Lord of Otter. November 12.
1664. Daughters of Balmanno contra Heir-male thereof. It is also an Natural
Obligation upon Children, or Kinsfolk descending from one common Stock, to
defend, and have the Tuition of the Pupilarity of that Race, which is incumbent
ordinarily to the next degree in that same Family; and this is the natural rise
of Tutors, of which in the next Title.

11. The Romans did no more diminish the Conjugal Interests and Obligations,
competent by Nature (as is before shown) then they have exceeded the Law of
Nature, in the interests betwixt Parents and Children; for thereby the Parents
power is so great, that no Nation has the like, Institut. de patria
potestate,. 2. it being almost Dominical, and the Children as Servants, l.
placet. 99. ff. de acquirenda haered. the Father had also the power of Life and
Death, l. ult. Cod. de patria potestate, l. (...) 11. ff. de liberis and
posthumis; They had power also to sell their Children unto Servitude. This was
the ancient Roman Law, whereof the austerity was by little and little
corrected, by the recent Law, so that both in Servants and Children, it was
taken off, and this power (...) to cases of extreme necessity, l. 2. Cod. de
patribus qui filios. Children were permitted also to have Goods of their own,
which were called, peculia; in which they were as free, and had all their
Rights and Actions competent as others, but with these Restrictions, whereby
the Right of the Father, in the Goods of the Children, was much abaited; For in
the peculia, which the Son acquired by Arms, or liberal Arts, the Father had no
power, which was called, peculium castrense, vel quasi castrense, l. 2. ff. ad.
(...). Maced. of other Goods which befell the Children, or were acquired, and
came not from the Father, which were therefore called Adventitious, the Father
had the Usufruct and Administration; but not the Property or Power of
Alienation, l. 2. Cod. de bonis maternis, only in (...), which came from the
Father, he had full Right and Property, and all permitted but to the Son, was
to make use of, and manage it for the Fathers Advantage.

In these peculia, Children were as Fathers of Families, by recent Law, l. 1.
filius familias. 39. ff. de oblig. yea, even the ususruct ceased in Goods
given, or left to the Children, excluding the Parents, nov. 117. in principio.
2. Next, where any thing was given, or left to both (...). 3. When the Goods
came by the Fathers fault, as when he did unjustly Divorce with the Mother,
Nov. 117. de haered. cap. 10.

12. The Custom of the Neighboring Nations do follow more closely the Natural
Law, as the Custom of France, and the Netherlands, as is recorded by Gudel. de
jure Nov. cap. 13. And Mathias Stephanus, (...) the like of the Customs of
Germany, oecon. juris civilis, lib. 2. cap. 67.. 4. The Custom of this Nation
also keeps close, to what is expressed before of the Natural Law, as to the
Interests and Obligations of Parents and Children, and thereby Aliments are
frequently decerned to Children, to be paid by their Fathers, if they expel
them from their Families, and that not only by the Act of Parliament, providing
Aliment to Heirs of Land, to be paid by the Liferenters; but a Father, though
his Son had no Lands, was found conveenable, super Jure naturae alendi (...),
July 21. 1636. Lord of Ramorney contra Law. So also by our Custom, a Father
is Tutor of Law to his Sons being Pupils: and therefore, a Father was found
liable to the Son for Annualrent of his Mothers third of Movables, remaining
in the Fathers Hands, February 4. 1665. Beg contra Beg. But a Father was not
found obliged for Annualrent of a Legacy belonging to his Son, uplifted by
him, seeing he Alimented the Son, December 15. 1668. Margaret Winram contra Mr.
James Ellies. A Father is also Curatour to his Children, specially when in his
Family, unless other Curatours be chosen by his consent; and so a Father
discharging the Rent of his Sons Lands, set by the Father, though he was only
Life-renter, and the Son, the Pupil-Fiar, was found valid, for years after the
Fathers Decease, in respect he was lawful Administrator, young Rosyth contra
his Tennants. But a Father being poor, was not allowed to lift his Sons Money,
without finding Caution to make it forthcoming, February 12. 1636. Givan
contra Richardson. Neither might a Father, being lapsis bonis, assign a Tack,
acquired by him to his Son, though he might uplift the Duties, as
Administrator, January 29. 1629. Lands contra Douglas. So deeds done by such
Minors, without their Fathers consent, as lawful Administrator, were found
null, George Stuart contra Home of Rentoun.

After Pupilarity, a Father is no more Tutor to his Children, and so might not
discharge for his Daughter, being past Pupilarity, but only consent with her as
Curatour, June 26. 1610. John Forest contra Forest. A Father is lawful
Administratour, both as Tutour and Curatour honorarie, of himself, without any
Cognition or Solemnity, and is not liable for omission, neither is he exclusive
of other Curatours. But deeds done without a fathers consent by a Son, were
found null, albeit the Son resided not in his Family, but followed the Law,
having no Calling or Patrimony to maintain himself, but living on his Fathers
Charges; neither was his Fathers Subscribing with him, found a sufficient
Authorizing of him, seeing he Subscribed with his Father, as Cautioner for him,
December 7: 1666. Sir George Mckenzie contra Mr. John Fairholme.

13. As to the Fathers power, to keep his Children within his Family, and to
apply their work for his use, though controversies in that point have seldom
been moved, but the matter transacted by consent: It is not to be doubted, but
that Children may be compelled to remain with their Parents, and to employ
their Service for their use, even after their Majority, unless they be
foris-familiat by Marriage, or by Education in a distinct Calling from their
Parents, unless their Parents deal unnaturally with them, either by Attrocity,
or unwillingness to provide them with a competent Marriage, in due time, and
with means suitable to their Condition, for that obliegement to provide for
them, would be a ground of exception against them, if he would unjustly detain
them in these cases; or if the Father countenance, or allow the Children to
live by themselves, and to manage their own Affairs apart, from whence his
tacit consent to their Emancipation, may be inferred; in which cases also, Zas.
19. in lib. utrum turp. etc. De verb. oblig. And, Math. Steph. oecon. juris
civilis, lib. 2. cap. 1. does declare, that the Consuetude of Germany is the
same with our Customs before expressed. The English account Children to be
Emancipat, so soon as they pass their Minority, Cowell. Institut. jure
Anglicani. Tit. 12.. 4.

TITLE VI. Obligations of Tutors and Curators, Pupils Minor, and persons
Interdicted.
1. The rise of Tutory in the Law of Nature. 2. Order of Tutory by the Law of
Nature. 3. The Natural Obligation of Tutors. 4. Pupils Obligations to their
Tutors. 5. Kinds of Tutors by the Common Law. 6. Tutors Testamentar. 7. Tutors
Testamentar exclude all others. 8. Tutors of Law, who. 9. How Tutors of Law are
entered? 10. The time within which they must enter. 11. Tutors Dative. 12.
Pro-tutors. 13. Factors for Tutors. 14. Con-tutors. 15. Tutors custody of the
Pupils Person. 16. Tutors Authorizing their Pupils. 17. Tutors, or their
Factors Rights, relating to the Pupils, accress to them. 18. Tutors can only do
necessary, not free arbitrary deeds, but may not sell Lands, sine authoritate
Judicis. 19. Tutors are liable for Annualrent for their Pupils means. 20.
Tutors are conveenable with their Pupils, and liable, in quantum intus habent.
21. Tutors Accounts. 22. Tutors are liable for exact diligence, both for
intromission and omission. 23. Tutors are liable, in solidum. 24. Tutory, how
finished. 25. Tutors of Idiots and furious Persons. 26. Gesta Tutorum
accrescunt Pupillis. 27. Removing of suspect Tutors. 28. Duty of Pupils to
their Tutors. 29. Rise of Curators. 30. Curators, ad lites and Negotia. 31.
Minors may at their option, choose, or not choose their Curators. 32. Minors
deeds, having Curators, without their consent are ipso jure, null, nisi in
quantum ^^erantur. 33. Curators consent, not requisite to latter Wills. 34.
Restitution of Minors upon enorme Lesione. 35. Minor non tenetur. placitare
super haereditatem paternam. 36. Differences betwixt Tutors and Curators. 37.
Duty of Curators. 38. Curators, or Interdictors for Prodigals, or lavish
Persons. 39. Interdictors constitute, causa cognita. 40. Interdiction by
Parents consent. 41. Publication and Registration of Interdictions. 42.
Interdictions only extend to Heretable Rights, not Movables, not to Personal
Executions. 43. Interdictions are only Competent by way of Reduction. 44.
Interdictions cannot be taken off, but by Authority of a Judge.
TUTORS and Curators, succeeded in the place of Parents, and their Obligations
have a near resemblance; and therefore, shall be here fitly subjoyned, though
in the constitution, and duties of Tutors and Curators, the Positive Law
predomineth; yet, that without any Positive Law, or Contract, there is a duty
of Tuition, and Protection of Orphans, and specially upon these, who by
relation of Blood, are their nearest Kinsmen, and in place of their Parents, it
will appear by what ensues; and what is superadded, either by the consent of
parties, in Curators, or by the Law, in Tutors, with the condition and interest
of Pupils and Minors, cannot conveniently be separated. If there were no
Positive Law, the natural infirmity of Pupilage, would not want its natural
remedies provided by Him, who is the Father of the fatherless, and lays his
Obediential Obligations upon these, whom, by the Law Written in their hearts,
he has bound to the performance of these Duties, as is before shown. There is
a Common Obediential, or Natural Obligation upon all Men, of Love, Mercy, and
relief of the distressed, among whom Infants and Pupils, who have no
discretion, and cannot at all Preserve, or Govern themselves, are the first. It
has been also shown, that there is a more special Obligation put upon those of
one Blood, one Family, from one common Parent, to help and support each other,
and that in order.

2. The first and nearest degree, is first, and most obliged; hence arises
that orderly and comely natural substitution of Tutors, for the preservation of
Pupils: first, the Fathers Tutory and lawful Administration, whereof we have
spoken already; and these failing by death, or incapacity, the nearest degree
of Agnats are in the place of Parents, and are all jointly bound to this
natural Duty, unless the Parents, by their Parental power, have appointed, and
ordained others whom they trust, to undertake that work.

And lastly, the common Obligation that lies upon people, has devolved upon
the Magistrate, as representing them, the duty of being, or appointing Tutors
for Pupils; hence does arise the distinction of Tutors, in Testamentar,
constitute by the Parent in his Testament, legittime appointed by the Law,
which is of the nearest Agnats, and dative, which are ordained by the King.

3. The Natural Obligations of these Tutors to their Pupils, are first, to
preserve their persons, and defend them against injuries and prejudices; and
therefore, are they named Tutors, quasi tuitores, l. 1. 1. ff. de tutelis. 2.
To Aliment them out of the Pupils own Means, according to the condition
thereof; and to Educate them for a station in the Commonwealth, according to
their quality and capacity. 3. To manage their Affairs with such diligence, as
provident men use in their own Affairs, that nothing may be lost, but every
thing improven to the best advantage; in all which, they are not to exerce
voluntary Acts of Dominion, at their choice, as disposing of what is secure;
but only necessar Acts, for the preservation and recovery of what will, or may
perish, and for improving the profits of it. 4. They are bound to give an
account, and restore to the Pupil what is his own, so soon as he attains to the
Age of discretion.

4. And on the other part, the Pupil is obliged to the Tutor, by the
obediential Bond of Remuneration, or recompense of one good deed for an other,
to make up to the Tutors whatsoever is wanting to them, through their faithful
Administration: This is all the substance of the Interests and Obligations of
Tutors and Pupils, which the positive Law does no more but declare, apply, and
ascertain, by the form of entering that Office, the security for performance of
it, the fixed time of indurance thereof, which naturally is the Age of
Discretion, in some sooner, in some later, in some never: But for certainties
cause, positive Law determines a particular year, in which, for the most part,
Discretion comes.

That there are such Interests and Obligations, even naturally, the Light of
Nature will so easily go along, that it will rather need Consideration, than
Confirmation, the grounds thereof being commonly acknowledged, and accustomed
by all Men, who are led by Reason, and it is so insinuate by the ordinar Term
of Law, whereby these Obligations are called, quasi ex contractu, as arising
from no Contract betwixt the Tutor, and the Infant, or Pupil, as not capable of
Contracting, and yet are not simply by the constitution of Law; and therefore,
these Obligations, not being by the will of Man, must needs be Obediential
Obligations, by the will of God.

The Romans have in this matter kept clearly and clossely by the Law of
Nature; and therefore, our Customs have kept as near by them, and so have
the Customs of other Nations; So says Gudelinus, de jure noviss. l. 10. cap.
8.. ff. that the Custom of France and Netherlands, has very little altered in
this from the Roman Law; we shall therefore interweave the Civil Law and our
Customs, that it may appear how far they do agree, and differ, and how they do
quadrat to the Law of Nature, following this order; 1. What kind of Tutors they
be, and what order of the same. 2. What the Tutors Duties are in their Entry,
Administration, and Accounts. 3. How Tutories end. 4. The Pupils Obligation to
them therefore. And last, of that Resemblance that Curatours and Minors have
Tutors and Pupils.

5. As to the first, there be three kinds of Tutors, by the Civil Law, and our
Custom (befide that of the Father, who is called for distinctions sake, lawful
Administratour, of which formerly) The first is, Tutor Testamentar, or
nominate. The second, is the Tutor of Law. And the third is, the Tutor Dative,
all which follow in course, in the same order.

6. A Tutor Testamentar, by the Civil Law, behoved to be either named in the
Testament, or Codicills confirmed by Testament, l. 3. ff. de testamentaria
tutela, and could only be given to such as were in patria potestate,. 3. Inst.
de tutelis. But by our Custom, a Father may nominate Tutors to his Children,
in any writ he pleases, but it is of a Testamentary nature, always ambulatory
and mutable, during his Life; a Grandfather cannot name Tutors to his Oyes,
because his Son being Emancipat by Marriage, they are not in his Paternal
Power; Neither can a Mother, or Grandmother, who have also no such power; but
any person that gives or dispones any thing to a Pupil, may in that Disposition
name Tutors, who are not properly such, but only have the trust and charge of
that thing disponed, and as to it, exclude all other Tutors, which takes
place, because that nomination is a quality and condition in that Donation,
November 17. 1627. Fleming contra Brown. January 31. 1665. Kirktouns contra
Lord of Hunthill.

7. A Tutor Testamentar requires no preparatory solemnity to capacitate him to
Act, but the very nomination it self is sufficient, and if it be in a
Testament, it is valide, though the Testament be never confirmed, or be
rejected by the Executors; and so there needs no making of Faith, or finding
Caution, because it is presumed, the Father that did name him, did sufficiently
know his faithfulness and fitness: and the Confirmation of a Testament,
bearing, that a Tutor nominate, accepted, and made faith, was not found to
instruct his acceptance, with out the principal Act subscribed by him were
produced, or Acts of Administration proven, though it was thirty seven years
since the confirmation, January 31. 1665. Rutherfords contra Lord of Hunthil.
Neither was a Tutory found instructed by a Discharge, as Tutor Testamentar, it
being evident by the Testament, that he was only overseer, June 10. 1665.
Swintoun contra Notman. But a Write under the Tutors hand, designing him Tutor,
found to instruct, unless the contrair were proven by production of the Tutory,
December 2. 1668. Mr. Alexander Seatoun Advocat contra Seatoun of Menzies. And
a Tutor nominat with other two, who accepted not, was only found liable from
the time of his acceptance, by acting as Tutor, and not for what was lost
before, although there was a considerable Legacy left to him in the Testament;
and that shortly after the Defuncts Death, he Confirmed himself, qua legatar,
and had inspection of the Defuncts Writes, and subscribed an Inventar thereof,
whereof the Testament was one, yet did not act as Tutor for three years after;
but he was not found to have Right to the Legacy, not having followed the
Defuncts Will, by accepting the Tutory at first, February 2. 1675. Margaret
Scrimzeor contra Wedderburn of Kingennie: But where the condition of the Tutor
nominate, appeared otherways than when he was nominate, Action was found
sustainable at the Pupils Goodsirs Instance, to cause him find Caution, if the
Overseers thought fit, Nic. rem pupuli Salvam fore, Thomas Fowls contra
Alexander Mcmath. Neither needed there any making of an Inventar of the Pupils
Goods, as was prescribed in the Civil Law, Nov. 72. l. ult. Authen. quod nunc
generale l. de curat. furiosi. by which it is clear, that all Tutors did make
faith, de fideli, Administratione; they behooved also to find Caution, l.
tutores, 24. C. de Administratione tut. and they behooved to make Inventar, l.
7. Tutor. qui 7. ff. de Administratione, tut. l. tutores C. eodem. But now, by
the late Act of Parliament, 1672. Cap. 2. all Tutors ever they can act, must
make Inventar of the Pupils Means, with advice and consent of the nearest of
Kin on both sides, and deliver to them, doubles signed, or in their absence,
leave them with the Clerk, to be delivered to them, according to the order
prescribed in the Act.

8. A Tutor Testamentar, is ever preferred to a Tutor of Law or Dative, even
though the Tutor nominat forbear to act for seven years; and that a Tutor
Dative was nominate, and in possession of the custody of the Pupils Person,
December 17. 1631. (...) contra Oliphant; or though the Tutor nominate, had
ceased six years, and was Curator to a party, against whom the Pupil had an
Action or Process; seeing in both cases, no detriment could be shown by his
forbearance, July 6. 1627. Campbel contra Campbel. The like, where the Tutor
nominate had abstained seven years, and yet was preferred to the custody of the
Pupils person (here the Pupil had no means to be Administrat) Spots. de tutel.
Irving contra Irving.

If there be no Tutor nominate, there is place for Tutors of Law, who
ordinarily are these who have the benefit of Succession in the Pupils Estate;
and so by the Roman Law, all the Agnats of the nearest degree, as they were
Heirs, so were they also Tutors, by the Law of the twelve Tables, l. 5. and 6.
ff. de legit. tut. and so after the Succession was extended, as well to the
Cognats as to the Agnats, with the benefit thereof, the burden also of the
Tutory was extended, Nov. 118. cap. 5. And with us, upon the same ground, as
the prerogative of Primogeniture, has given the Succession, not to the whole
next degree of Agnats, but to the eldest Male, and his Issue; so the Tutor of
Law is only one, viz. the nearest Agnat or Kinsman on the Fathers side, of
twenty five years of age, Par. 1474. cap. 51. where it is expressly declared,
that though the Tutor of Law be ordinarily Heir, yet not always; for though the
Pupil have a younger Brother, who is immediate Agnat, yet the nearest Agnat of
twenty five years old, will be his Tutor, passing by all others within that age.

9. The Tutor of Law is servded, upon a Brief Directed out of the Chancellary,
by an Inquest, as appears by the foresaid Act of Parliament; but the Brief may
be directed to, and served by, any Judge ordinar, though the Pupil live not
within the Jurisdiction, March 8. 1636. William Stuart contra Agnes Henderson.
Tutors of Law before they Act, must find Caution, rem pupuli, salvam fore,
which though it be a ground to compel them to find Caution, or exclude them
from authorizing, or acting for the Pupil, till they find Caution; yet it did
not anull their office, or prefer a Dative to them, so soon as they find
Caution, though the Dative had already found Caution, June 29. 1632. Irwing
contra Elsick.

10. The Tutor of Law must serve himself within year and day, from the time
that he is in a capacity to be Tutor, either counting from the Defuncts death,
or from the Birth of the Pupil, if posthumus, or the ceasing of a just
impediment; so that after the Marriage of a Tutrix Testamentar, place was found
for a year, for the Tutor of Law to serve himself, before a Dative had access,
July 15. 1631. Grant contra Grant. But there seems no prefixed time to the
Tutor of Law to serve himself to the Tutory of an Idiot; and therefore, the
nearest Agnat, as lawful Tutor, was preferred to a Tutor Dative, though he had
made faith, and found Caution; and though the Service was not till five years
after the Idiots Majority, February 22. 1628. Calquhun contra Wardrop. It was
also found, that a Tutory Dative, did not hinder the service of a Tutor of Law
to an Idiot, quandocunque January 21. 1663. Stuarts contra Spreul; because, by
the Act of Parliament, 1585. Tutors to Idiots must beserved by an Inquest,
cognoscing the Idiotry, Par. 1475. cap. 66. Par. 1585. cap. 18.

11. Where there is no Tutor nominat, nor the Tutor of Law claims right
within the year, there is place for a Tutor Dative, which, though by diverse
Municipal Customs, may be Constitute by the Ordinar Magistrate of the place,
yet is most fitly Constitute by the Supreme Magistrate; and so with us, is
given by the King, in Exchequer; and by the late Act of Exchequer, 1672. It is
appointed, That before Constituting of any Tutor Dative, the Pupils nearest
friends on both sides, shall be cited, that they may offer and inform,
concerning the fittest persons to be Tutor: Tutors may be given to strangers
Pupils, in so far as concerns their Lands in Scotland, December 17. 1627.
Fleming contra Brown. The like, Spots. de tut. Donaldson contra Skiltoun. In
the nomination of Tutors Dative, though it be in the Arbitriment of the King,
to choice whom he thinks fit, yet he will have regard to the Interest of the
Pupil, to give a Tutor, either who was nominat by the Father, but not Legally;
or who was nominat by the Mother, or Grandmother, though having no Legal
Power, or the nearest of Kin, though they have neglected to serve within the
year; but of all these, he may take the best of such as offer, or are willing:
Seeing with us, all Tutors are free to accept, or refuse, yea, and may renounce,
not having intrometted with the Pupils Means, though several Actions were
pursued in their names as Tutors, Spots. de tut. Duff contra Mr. William
Chalmer. But Tutory being a publict Office, it could not be refused among the
Romans, unless the Tutor had excuses allowed of the Law, Tit. de excus. tut.
ff. per totum.

Tutors Dative must both make faith, de fideli Administratione, and find
Caution; the sufficiency whereof, is in the Magistrates trust. And among the
Romans, an ordinar, or inferior Magistrate or his Heirs, were liable, pro dolo
aut lata culpa; if the Caution taken by them, was not found sufficient, Tit.
ff. de Magistratu conveniendo; but not the greater Magistrates, as the Praetor,
or President, who, through the eminency of their Office, could not so
particularly know, but were necessitat to trust to the relation of others, l.
1. ff. Tit. eodem; and so it is with us: but the Datives not making faith, or
finding Caution, though his office there to compel him, or repel him from
authorizing, or acting; yet it does not annual his Office, or work to his
profit, as has been said of the Tutor of Law.

12. These that act as Tutors, not knowing but that they are such, or otherways
fraudulently knowing they are not such, are therefore called Protutors, and are
liable for all the Duties of real Tutors, during the time of their acting, and
by the civil Law, they were liable to make up his Interest, whom by fraud they
had deceived, by acting as Tutors, Tit. ff. quod falso tut. whence it follows,
that such actings were void; but if the person had been long holden, and repute
Tutor, the deed would be sustained, unless annulled, because of the Pupils
Lesion; there has no Decision occurred with us, to show whether Pro-tutors are
obliged for their intromission only, or also for their omission: but a case
lately occurring, the Lords thought, that upon some few Acts, this would not be
inferred, but upon an universal Acting, or express, under the name of Tutor;
but decided not, till they heard the parties, in praesentia; whereupon, after
long debate, they found, that an Overseer, acting under the name of Tutor (but
by a false designation, contrair the Testament) should be liable only for such
kinds of things, and for the Annualrents thereof, as he intrometted with, for
seeing he had no Law, or Custom regulating the case, the Defender could be only
condemned according to equity; but they declared, by an Act of Sederunt, that
whosoever in time coming, meddled with Pupils Means or Minors, as Pro-tutors, or
Pro-curators, should be liable from henceforth, as Tutors or Curators, for
intromission and omission, June 10. 1665. Swintoun contra Notman.

13. Tutors do use ordinarily, to name Factors, who do not exoner the Tutors of
any of their Obligations, but both the Tutors and they, as the Tutors, are
liable to the Pupils therein, if they be Factors generally, March 28. 1635.
Lord of Ludqhuairn contra Lord of Haddo, July 18. 1635. Edmonstoun contra
Edmonstoun.

14. If there be more Tutors nominat, or Dative, and no quorum expressed, if some
of them die, the Office is not void, but the rest of them may act, and so it
was found in Tutors nominat, Hope Executours, Stuart contra Kirkwood and Moor.
The like, though some of the Tutors accepted not, Hope Tutors Ruthven contra
Ibid. George Faside contra Edmonstoun. February 14. 1672. Mr. John Eleis contra
Mr. John Scot. But a Tutory to two, bearing to them jointly, was found void by
the death of either, January 17. 1671. Drummond of Ricartoun contra Feuars of
Bothkennet. And where there are many Tutors nominat, they may be either with,
or without a quorum, and either definitely, or by a distinct division; in which
case, each are but liable for their own division, l. 2. Cod. de dividen. tut.

15. As to the duties of Tutors, they are alike in them all; and the first is
the custody of the Pupils Person, wherein a Tutor was preferred to the Pupils
Mother, offering to entertain him gratis, though the person nearest to succeed
was Married upon the Tutors Sister, here the Tutor was nominat, and the Mother
Married, July 4. 1629. Lord of Longshaw contra Moor. The like, where both the
Tutor and the Mother offered to Aliment the Pupil gratis; but the Mothers
second Husband had Apprized the Pupils Lands, and the Pupil was a Lass only of
five years old, February ult. 1632. Gordoun contra Corsan. A Tutor was found to
have the custody of his Pupil (who was an Heretrix) and not her Mother, though
she offered to entertain her gratis, being Married to a second Husband,
February 5. 1675. Foullartoun contra Lady Boyne. Yea, a Tutor obtained his
Pupils Person, to be removed from her Mother, though Unmarried, at the Pupils
age of eleven years, albeit the Pupil was Valitudinary, and she was appointed
to remain with one of her Fathers Friends, to the effect that she might not be
influenced as to her Marriage, by her Mother, or her Friends, February 6. 1666.
Lord of Dury contra Lady Dury. But if the Tutor be immediately to succeed to
the Pupil, he has not the custody of his person, which is to be with his
Mother, or some other person, at the Arbitriment of the Lords, and a
modification for the Pupils Aliment, according to his Means, Nic. ubi. pupulli.
Mary Foulis contra Mcmath; but if there be any other immediate Successor,
though the Tutor was next, he had the custody of the Pupils Person, Ibid.
Forrester contra Smith. Of old, Tutors were excluded by the Donators of Ward,
from custody of the Ward Pupils person, January 15. 1549. Lord of Achnames
contra Lord of Elphingstoun and Lethingtoun. March 16. 1565. Weir contra
Lockart. And July 1566. George Weir contra Lord of Lee. Spots. hic. Hamiltoun
contra Lord of Gaustoun. Since, the Tutor and the Pupils Mother, having
license from him, were preferred to the custody of the Pupils Person, to the
Donator of his Ward, Nic. ubi pupulli morari, Mr. James Chalmers contra
Elizabeth Houstoun.

The next duty of Tutors, is, to authorize the Pupil in Actions of Law, which,
though it be done ordinarily by all the Tutors, when they are more, yet one of
three was admitted to authorize a Pupil, in a pursuit against the other two, to
accept or renounce, though they were all named jointly, March 8. 1628. Moor and
Thomson contra Kincaid.

Tutors or their Factors, are presumed to do that to the behove of the Pupil,
which they ought to do; and though it be done, proprio nomine, it accresceth to
the Pupil, July 18. 1635. Edmonstoun contra Edmonstoun; and so a Tack of the
Pupils Rents, taken by the Tutors Factor to himself, and his Wife in Liferent,
was found to accress to the Pupil, except as to the Wifes Liferent-lands, March
28. 1632. Lord of Ludquharn contra Lord of Haddo, this is presumed,
prasumptione juris; so that the Narrative bearing another clause is not
respected: and therefore, a Tutor acquiring a Discharge, or Assignation of an
Annualrent due by the Pupil to his Mother, the same was found to accress to the
Pupil, though it bore love and favor, and for the Tutors pains, and
discharging the Office, March 15. 1629. White contra Douglas. Hope, Tutors,
Duer contra Duer. Neither has the Tutor ordinarily Action against the Pupil,
till his Office end, and then he may pursue as a stranger, Hope, de Minoribus,
Nasmith contra Nasmith: likewise, he may Apprize the Pupils Lands for his own
debt, the Pupil having other Tutors, Hope, de haeredibus, White contra
Calderwood. So a Tutrix nominat, sine qua non, was admitted to pursue a
Registration of her Contract of Marriage against her Pupil, there being more
Tutors nominat, and she having renounced her Office, though she had acted by
subscribing deeds not hurtful to the Pupil, July 30. 1625. Lady Stanyhill
contra her Son.

18. Tutors may only do necessar deeds for their Pupils, either such as the
Pupil is obliged to do, as payment of his debts, which the Tutor may do
willingly, without compulsion of Law, or otherwise, deeds necessar for
mannaging of his Estate, and setting of his Lands, or laboring the same,
uplifting his Rents and Annualrents, uplifting the Sums that are not secured;
carrying on any Work which was left to the Pupil, which cannot otherwise be
disposed of: but Tutors cannot sell the Lands or Heretable Rights of their
Minors, without an interveening Decree of a Judge, Tit. ff. de rebus eorum qui
sub tutela, etc. And any such Alienation is null, without the Cognition
aforesaid, which must be, by calling the Creditors of the Pupil, and his
nearest Friends, to hear and see it found, that there is a necessity to sell
the whole, or a part of his Heretable Rights, and that the rate thereof may be
determined; in which it must appear, that the Pupils debt cannot otherways be
satisfied. The Law allows the like, in the case of the Pupils Aliment, which
cannot be afforded otherways; Alienations so made, are not easily reduceable,
or the Pupil or Minor restored against the same, if the true cause has been
known to the Judge, but not so, if that has been latent, either dolo or lata
culpa, l. 11. Cod. de praed. minor non alien. And therefore, a Tutors
Assignation of his Sons and Pupils Mails and Duties, for the Tutors own debt,
was found null by exception, even at the Pupils Tennants Instance, Spots.
Assignation, Lands contra Lands; yet a Tutors ratification of a reduceable
Decree given against his Minor, was found valide, though voluntar, being in re
antiqua, Spots. Tutors, Earl of Kinghorn contra George Strange.

19. Tutors and Pro-tutors are liable for Annualrents of their Pupils Moneys,
which they are obliged to make profitable, in so far as they are either liquid
Sums, that they had, in specie, or which the Tutors took up, which was made up
of their Pupils Movables, or Rents of Lands, after a Term, in Money Rent, and
a year, in Victual, from the Term of payment, in so far as it is not employed
for their own use, or profitably for paying of their Debts or Annualrents,
Alimenting them, or other uses necessar, according to the ancient Law of the
Romans, which obliged the Tutor, after he had the Money two Months in his
hands; but the Novel Constitutions, Novel. 72. cap. 6. de administrat. pecun.
pupilli, etc. it is left to the Arbitriment of the Tutor, either to keep the
Pupils Money by him, or to employ it for profit: but it is not so by our
Custom, Annualrent is due, even after the Office is extinct by Marriage, the
Tutrix having continued her intromission, though there were other Tutors, July
17. 1630. Vallange contra Kincaid, but not for Annual of the Pupils Annualrent,
though the Tutor received the same, and they were great, July 18. 1629. Nasmith
contra Nasmith. But it was lately found, that a Tutor by his Office and
Diligence, was obliged to lift and employ the Pupils Annualrents of sums in
secure hands, once in his Tutory, and so pay Annual for the Annualrents of his
Pupils Sums, omitted to be uplifted by him, but only from the expiring of the
Tutory, January 27. 1665. Mr. William Kintor Advocat contra John Boid. So a
Tutor was found liable for the Annualrent of his Pupils Annualrent, within a
year after his acceptance, but not for the current Annualrent, during the
Tutory, he leaving the same employed for Annualrent, at the Ishe thereof,
February 27. 1673. Isobel Douglas contra John Gray. A Tutors Heir being Minor,
found not liable, but only for Annual after the intenting of the Cause, the
pursuer being silent twenty five years, February 22. 1634. Davidson contra
Jack. Neither was the Heir found liable for Annualrent, where the Father died
during his Tutory, Hope, de haered. Graham contra Crichtoun. January 21. 1665.
Kintor contra Boyd.

20. Tutors are liable for their Minors, and must be conveened with them by
their Creditors, for their interest, and are also decerned with them for their
interest; upon which Decreets, personal execution is competent against Tutors,
for any deed prestable by them, by their Office; for example, he may be
compelled to receive a Vassal, whom the Pupils Predecessor was obliged to
receive; or grant a Tack of Lands, or a Charter, or Seasing, where there has
been a Disposition before; but in Decreets for payment of liquid Sums,
Execution cannot be made against the Means of Tutors, unless they be specially
decerned, to make forthcoming so much of the Pupils Means, as they have in
their hands, for satisfying of the Debt, in whole or in part; which, though it
be often done by a second Process, yet may be a distinct member of the first, or
by way of special Charge, in the discussing of a Suspension, raised by the
Tutor against Creditors, on that or other grounds. But the Tutors oath was not
sustained, to prove against the Pupil, an agreement made by the Defunct, though
there were concurrent probabilities, and testificates, December 11. 1664. Eleis
contra Eleis; yet the Tutors Oath was sustained against the Pupil, as to the
Tutors intromission, in name of the Pupil, that being factum proprium,
oblieging also himself, and yet he was not holden as confessed, as being a party,
but was compelled to Depone by Caption, June 27. 1665. Mr. Walter Cant contra
James Loch.

21. The last duty of Tutors, is to make an account, and to restore, and
refound, wherein they will be liable to account, and satisfy for the Pupils
whole Means and Estate, not only for their Intromission, but for their
Omission, and for such diligence as they use in their own Affairs, which seems
sufficient in Tutors Testamentar, seeing the Office is gratuitous, and free, and
not sought by them, but in Tutors of Law and Dative, who ordinarily seek the
Office, and offer themselves, both the diligence accustomed by provident men,
and such as they use in their own Affairs, may be justly required.

By the Law, all Tutors were liable, pro dolo culpa and negligentia, l. 33. de
Administratione and periculo tutorum, etc.

22. That Tutors are liable, not only for what they did intromet, but what they
might have intrometted with by diligence, and particularly of Rents of the
Pupils Lands, wherein his Predecessors died, infeft and in possession, though
the Pupil himself was not infeft, was found January 26. 1628. Commissar of
Dunkel contra Abercromby. Yet a Tutrix found only liable for her intromission,
in respect she continued but some Months, and the place where the Minors Goods
were, was infected with the Plague, Hope, de tutoribus, William contra Allan
Cathcart; neither was a Tutor found liable for a Sum due to the Pupil, as not
doing diligence by Horning and Caption for uplifting thereof, unless it were
alleged, that by diligence he might have recovered it, and that the Debtor
was become worse, July 2. 1628. Hamiltoun contra Hamiltoun. The like, where the
Tutor offered to prove by the Neighbourhead, that the Debtor during his
Tutory, was repute and holden insolvent, February 6. 1623. Watson contra Watson.

23. Contutors, both by the Civil Law and our Custom, are liable, in solidum,
and so some of them were decerned for the whole, though the rest were not
conveened, February 22. 1634. Davidson contra Jack; they were also found
liable, in solidum, though they had divided the Tutory among themselves; but if
the same were divided by the Testatour, or a Judge, the Tutors are only liable
for their share, and not for the rest, unless they have by Fraud and supine
negligence, omitted to pursue the other suspect Tutors to be removed, l. 2.
Cod. de dividenda tutela. The benefit of the order of discussing, competent of
the Law, whereby the Tutors who did Administrate, were only liable for their
parts, primo loco, if the rest were solvendo, l. 3. C. de dividenda tutela, and
that they should be first discust, who had Administrate and intrometted before
them, who had neglected or forborne, Ibid. These, our Custom follows not; yet
a Tutor was not found to have Interest, to cause the Con-tutors find Caution to
warrant him for their acting without him, or against his mind where they did
out-vote him, or else to quite the Tutory, but was left to his ordinary course,
to remove them if they malversed, June 27. 1672. Mr. James Stirling contra his
Con-tutors.

Tutory is finished, First, by death either of Tutor or Pupil. Secondly, By the
Marriage of a Tutrix Testamentar, which no provision, even of the Testator can
dispense with. Thirdly, By the Tutors renouncing the Office; after which,
though he were Tutor Testamentar, he cannot resume the Office, July 6. 1627.
Campbel contra Campbel; but forbearance for six or seven years does not
extinguish the Office of a Tutor Testamentar, by the former Decisions. The
like, December 17. 1631. Auchterlonie contra Oliphant. Fourthly, By Fury,
Lethargy, or any natural defect of the Tutor, rendering him unable to exercise
his Office. Fifthly, And most ordinarily, by the Pupils running his Pupilarity,
which in Men is fourteen years, and in Women twelve. But if the Tutors continue
to act till Majority, they are liable as Curators; yet the express Appointment
of the Defunct, that the Tutors continue Curators, cannot extend the Tutory
after Pupilarity, or hinder Election of Curators, February 6. 1633. Harper
contra Hamiltoun.

Tutors or Curators appointed to furious Persons, their Office cease, when
the fury fully cease; for though they have Lucide Intervals, in which, acts
done by them, without their Tutors, are valide; yet their Tutory cease not,
as to the Acts done in their Furiosity.

25. The Tutory appointed to Idiots and Furious Persons, is prescribed by Act
of Parliament, 1585. cap. 18. Whereby the nearest Agnats or Kinsmen of Natural
Fools, Idiots, or Furious Persons, should be served, received, and preferred to
their Tutory and Curatory, according to the Common Law; where, by the Common
Law, the Civil Law is understood, and though the Act seems only to hold out
Tutors of Law, where any are served; yet seeing it is according to the
disposition of the Civil Law, it excludes not Tutors Testamentar, during such
persons Pupilarity, nor Tutors Dative, if the nearest Agnat serve not: but
ordinarily the Tutors of Idiots, are the Tutors of Law. This Act by Custom is
extended to Deaf and Dumb Persons, though they be not expressed who have Tutors
in the same manner, albeit they have sufficient Judgment, since they cannot
act by it.

26. When Tutory is ended, whatsoever the Tutor Acted in name of the Pupil, the
Pupil has thereupon Action, as if it had been done by himself, l. 2. ff.
quando ex facto tutaris, so whatever was decerned against the Tutor, hoc
nomine, cease when the Tutory is ended, l. fin. C. de per. tut. and the
Action is competent against the Pupil; as likewise, if the Pupil be advantaged
by the Fraud of the Tutor, he may be therefore conveened, l. 3. ff. quando ex
facto tutoris.

27. Lastly, Tutory cease by the Action of removing suspect Tutors, which is
a popular Action competent to any, l. 1.: 6. ff. 3. Inst. de susp. tut. but
ordinarily, it is done by the Overseers, Mothers, or Friends of the Pupil, or
by the other Tutors: the grounds thereof, are not only his Malversation: and it
was found a Malversation that the Tutor had not made Inventar, conform to the
late Act of Parliament, July 7. 1680. Mr. Alexander Gibson contra Lord Dunkel
and Sir James Thomson; but any thing incident, or appearing to weaken his
trust, as if he become insolvent, or his Cautioner become such.

After Tutory is ended, the Tutor has no Action against his Pupil, ante
redditas rations, till he make his Accounts, July 24. 1662. Mr. James
Cranstoun contra Earl of Wintoun: Neither has the Tutors Assignay, Action
against the Pupil before the Tutor Compts be made, albeit Assigned to a Liquid
Sum, unless the Assignay had found Caution for the Tutor, January 24. 1662. Mr.
James Ramsay contra Earl of Wintoun. Neither for the same reason had the Tutors
Assignay, Action against the Pupil as Heir to his Father, though it was ten
years since the Pupilarity past, July 7. 1676. Spence contra Scot. But a Tutor
was not found liable for the Services he got of the Pupils Tennants in kind,
January 11. 1668. Grant contra Grant. Yea, a Tutor having counted, and given
Bond for the Balance, being charged with other Articles, though these were not
instantly Liquidat, yet the Extract of a Decree upon the Bond was stopped for
a time, till the additional Articles should be closed, but the Bond was not
reduced, as being in confinio minoris aetatis, and anteredditas rations,
December 5. 1671. Mr. George Scot contra Mr. John Elleis. In the Tutors
Accounts, it was a sufficient instruction of an Article of the Charge, a Bond
due to the Defunct, produced by the Pupil: Nor was the Tutor liberat, upon
alleging he knew not of it, but it was presumed to have been in the Charter
Chist, unless the Tutor could instruct, that he had made search of the Charter
Chist, and neither found this Bond, nor any Inventar relating thereto; but the
Tutor was found liable, though the Sum was lost by the Debitors becoming
Insolvent during the Tutory, June 24. 1680. William Cleiland contra Lord of
Lamingtoun. Neither did a Tutor get any further allowance for his Pupils
Maintenance, then the Annualrent of his Stock, though he expended more,
November 17. 1680. William Sandelands contra Patrick Tailziefer.

28. The Reciprocal Duty of Pupils to Tutors after their Tutory is ended, is to
restore and make up to them whatsoever they wared out profitably, or is so
wanting to them by that Office, wherein the Expenses of obtaining the Tutory it
self, will be a part, Nic. de tut. Charters contra Mcmillan. But Tutory being a
Free Gratuitous Office, the Pupils are not liable to their Tutors for any
Allowance, Sallary, or Satisfaction for their Pains, but only for their
Expenses, Nic. de tut. Tutors of Bucleuch contra Earl of Bucleuch.

29. Curatory has such a resemblance with Tutory, that though the constitution
of Curators be not of the Law of Nature, which leaves all persons of
Discretion free, but of Positive Law, whereby a way is provided for the Levity
and Facility of Minors; yet to shun repetition, it will be most proper here to
annex that Office, and the Obligations therefrom, arising betwixt Curators and
Minors; and in these, we shall touch the difference betwixt Tutors and
Curatours, supposing the rest as common to both, which is chiefly in these
points.

30. First, In the Election and Constitution of Curatours, which is done by way
of Process, at the Instance of the Minor, before any Judge ordinary
whatsomever, whereby he cites two or three of his nearest Kinsmen, on both
sides, upon nine days warning, to hear Curatours chosen, Parliament 1555. cap.
35. and all others having interest, generally at the Market Cross, to hear and
sec, Curatours decerned to him, and it is in his option whom to choose, as it
is in their option also to accept, or refuse, he may also make any number a
quorum, or adject auy condition he thinks fit in their Election, and the
parties compearing, must accept and make Faith, de fideli administratione, and
find Caution; Yet where some of the Curators Elected, made not Faith, but all
finding Caution, the Curatory was found valid, Hope, Curators Paterson contra
Wishart; their Acceptance must be by Subscribing the Act of Curatory,
specially, if the Election be in an Inferior Court; for want whereof, an Act
of Curatory before the Bailiffs, was found null, Hope, Curatory, Sibbald contra
Hay and Lindsay. Curatours also may be chosen by Procuratours, without the
Minors presence, so that the Procuratorie express the Curatours Names, Hope,
Curatours, Marquess of Hamiltoun contra his Curatours; yea, being done in
England, according to the Custom there, it is sufficient to Authorize the
Minors Here, Hope, tut. Posso contra Nasmith. Though the Minor may choose
Curatours when he pleases, yet may he not choose Rebels unrelaxed, if it be
objected, and verified at the Election by his Friends, July 4. 1629. Corbet of
Arbel contra

31. Curatours are of two kinds, ad lites, and ad negotia; the former are
appointed for Authorizing Judicially in Process: the other are mainly for
Extrajudicial Affairs; Curatours, ad lites, are so far necessary, that they
must be given by the Judge ordinar, before whom any Action is pursued, for
Authorizing of the Minors, either Passive or Active; and they will be given
upon the desire of the other party. Their Office seems to reach no further,
than to Faithfulness and Diligence in the Processes, whereunto they are
Elected. There are sometimes, Curatours named to Pupils, to supply the defect
of their Tutors, as if their Tutour be concerned, or be absent or incapable to
Act for a time. These, though for a distinction from Tutors, they be called
Curatours, yet their Office, pro tempore, is of the same nature with Tutors.

32. Curatours, ad Negotia, are free, and in the Minors option, in so far, that
a Son being Minor, and choosing Curators without the Fathers consent, but with
consent of his Mothers Father, the Curators were preferred to the Father as
lawful Administratour; but here the Father was known to be a weak Person, and
to have Controversies with his Son, Nic. de tut. Lord of Barganie contra his
Son. And Curatours must be freely chosen, that though the Minors Father named
his Tutor expressly to continue till the Pupils Majority, their Office was found
not to hinder the Minors to choose Curatours, or to disown his Tutors after his
Pupilarity, February 6. 1633. Harper contra Hamiltoun. Minors having chosen no
Curators, are in the same condition; for extrajudicial Acts allone, as if they
had Curatours; in either case, the deeds are revocable, and reduceable upon
enorm Laesion.

33. But if once they choose Curators, all deeds done by them, without consent
of their Curatours, are eo ipso, null by exception, without necessity, to (...)
Lesion, December 9. 1632. Maxwel contra Earl of Nithisdail, and that so
exactly, that the Minority was counted, de momento in momentum, though the
Minor wanted only twelve hours of twenty one years, June 26. 1624. Drummond
contra Lord of Cunningham-head; and this extended to a Judicial Act, whereby
the Minor Acted himself Cautioner, Hope de Minoribus, Paterson contra Wishart:
and extended also to a Minors service, without consent of Curatours, and that
by exception, without instructing Lesion, Spots. de mino. Simpson contra Lord
of Balgane, and to a Tack taken by the Minor without consent of Curatours,
Hope, de Minoribus, Seaton contra Lord of Caskiben, and extended to deeds done
by Minors in their Fathers Family, without their Fathers consent; and so it was
found, that a Minors Bond Subscribed Cautioner, with, and for his Father, was
null, and that his Father, as lawful Administratour, could not Authorize him to
be Cautioner for himself; here the Minor was a Student at Law, but entertained
by his Father, and not forisfamiltat, December 7. 1666. Sir George (...) contra
Fairholme. December 25. 1667. inter eosdem, yet the deed was sustained, being a
Bond of borrowed Money, the Creditor proving by Witnesses, that the Sum was
converted for the Minors use profitably, December 21. 1629. Gordoun contra Earl
of Galloway; this is according to that (...) ground of Equity, nemo debet ex
alieno damno lucrari; hence follows, Minor tenetur in quantum locupletior
factus; but though there was some onerous Cause of Minors deeds, yet unless it
were liquid, as delivery of Money, it is not receiveable by way of exception,
or reply, but only is reserved to the Creditor to pursue, as Accords, and the
Minors deed found void notwithstanding, December 19. 1632. Maxwel contra Earl
of Nithisdail: but this was not extended to necessar Furnishing of Clothes,
taken on without consent of Curatours, which was sustained by reply, February
5. 1631. John Inglis contra Executours of John Sharp.

34. The Civil Law seems not to extend the consent of Curators, as necessary to
concur with the Minor, making his latter Will, but only to deeds among the
living; because Law has rejected all ties and hindrances of full Liberty, in
Testaments of Defuncts in the disposal of their Goods; and therefore, if a
Minor having Curators, do in his Testament say quaestionem Curatoribus meis,
(...) faciat eam nam ipse tractavi; in that case, Curatours are liable for
Restitution of what they have of the Minors Goods by Fraud, but not for a
complete Diligence, l. 20.. 1. ff. de liberatione legata. And by our Custom,
Minors having Curatours, may Test without their consent; and therefore a Minor,
making his Curator his Executour, and universal Legatar though the Minor was
with the Curator, when he Tested and Died shortly after, and his nearest
Relations were not acquainted, whom he had named in a former Testament, it was
sustained here no threats nor importunity was alleged, November 30. 1680.
Stevinson contra Allans.

There are other two Privileges of Minors which cannot be so conveniently
spoken to, as in this place; the one is, that Minors are restored against Deeds
done by them in their Minority, to their Enorme Lesion. The other is, Minor non
tenetur placitare super haereditate Paterna.

As to the first, Minority and Lesion, are the ordinary ground of Reduction;
but because they are facti, and abide Probation, they are not receivable by
exception, if he who pursues the Minor, can instantly instruct his Pursuit; but
if he take a Term to prove, the Minor may take the same Term to prove his
Minority, which does not acknowledge the Libel, or free the Pursuer from
Probation thereof: Or if the Minority be instantly verified, as sometimes it
is by sight of the Minors Person.

There is no difference as to the Restitution of Minors, though the Deed be
done with consent of Curators; nor did it exclude a Minor, because his
pretended Curators had received the Money in question, and so were liable to
the Minor for misimploying it, as behaving themselves as Curatours, upon
pretense that his Lesion could not be known, till they were discust, they not
being in this Process, July 2. 1667. Lord Blantyre contra Walkinshaw.

But this Remeid is not competent for every small Lesion, but it must be Enorm,
which is, in Arbitrio Judicis.

Neither is a Minor restored against Lesion, which falls not by Levitie, but by
Accident; as by Shipwreck, the Minor being a Trading Merchant, Hope, de
Minoribus, William Edgar contra Executours of Edward Edgar: neither because he
was bound conjunctly and severally for ware, with another Merchant, who was in
society with him in Trading, June 20. 1678. George Galbraith contra Patrick
Lesly, because Trading Merchants, and others exercising Trade, requiring
peculiar skill, capacity and understanding, are held rather to design to
deceive, then to be deceived, as was found, in the case of a Nottar Public,
July 14. 1636. Gardner contra Chalmers.

Neither was a Minor restored upon his judicial Confession upon Oath, upon
point of Fact, and swearing never to come in the contrair, November 28. 1626.
Mr. Thomas Hope and Mr. Thomas Nicolson contra Mr. James Nicolson. Neither was
a Minor restored against his Promise upon Oath, to quite twenty Chalder of
Victual, provided to him by his Contract of Marriage, as not lesed by keeping
his Oath, which is conform to the Authentic Sacramenta puberum, November 1626.
Sir Robert Hepburn contra Sir John Scatoun. And it was found relevant against
Restitution of a Minor, of a Bond granted for a Debt of his Fathers, whom he
Represented not, that he swore to perform the same, February 10. 1672. Mr.
George Wauch contra Bailzie of Dunraget. But a Minor has not the privilege to
reduce a Disposition of Land, without Authority of a Judge, as in the case of
Pupils, unless he also allege Lesion, February 2. 1630. Sir John Hamiltoun
contra John Sharp. The like, though the Minor had no Curatours, December 13.
1666. Janet (...) contra Stevenson. Neither is Restitution competent, unless
Reduction be intented within the age of twenty five complete; for with us,
Majority comes at the age of twenty one complete; and there are four years
allowed to Minors to intent Reductions, which therefore are called, Anni utiles
Nicolson, de Minoribus, James Goodlet contra Doctor Austine and others. Lord:
of Craigie contra Dunbar.

A Minor was restored against his Contract of Marriage, wherein he was obliged
to Infeft his first born Son in Fee of his whole Estate, which was very
considerable, having gotten but ten thousand Merks of Tocher, March 7. 1623.
Lord of Barganie contra his Son. The like, where a Minor getting but a
thousand Merks of Tocher, provided five thousand Merks to his Wifes Father, in
case of no Succession, but not restored against that part of his Contract,
providing all his Means acquired, and to be acquired in Liserent to his Wife,
June 4. 1632. Alexanderi Donaldson contra And a Minor Woman was restored
against the Exorbitancies of her Contract of Marriage, November 22. 1674.
Margaret Mcgill contra Riven of Gairn; but here, she was only restored to a
suitable Liferent, but not against that provision in her Contract, providing
her Lands and Sums to the Heirs of the Marriage, (...) failzieing, to the Man's
Heirs. The like, as to the Heirs of a Woman, who had Land worth twelve hundred
Merks yearly, the Husband being of a more honorable Birth, Nicolson, de
Minoribus, Slemen contra Ker. The like, where the Wife Disponed her Lands to
her Husband, whose means were altogether unanswerable, Spots. Husband, Fleming
contra Mr. Robert Hog.

Minors are also restored against Judicial Acts to their Lesion, as against a
Decree of Exoneration of his Tutors, with concourse of his Curatours, before
the Lords, in foro contradictorio, December 1. 1638. William Stuart contra
Robert Stuart, Hope, universal and lucrative Successor, Knows contra Knows and
Watson, and against a Defense proponed by an Advocat, without special mandat,
which did homologat a Deed in Minority, February 14. 1677. Duke and Duchess of
Bucleuch contra Earl of Tweeadale, In which case, it was found, that accepting
an illiquid Right, for a Liquid, was no Enorm Lesion inferring Restitution.

But Restitution is excluded, Si monor se majorem dixerit, Nam deceptis, non
decipientibus jura subveniunt; as where the Minors Bond bore expressly, that he
was Major, and that the Creditor knew not he was Minor by his Aspect, or
otherways; nor did fraudfully induce him to insert his Majority, February 23.
1665. Kennedy of Achtifardel contra Weir; It is also eleided, if it be proven,
that the Deed in question was profitable, as that the Sum in question was wared
upon the Minor for Meat and Clothes, though his Father gave him a sufficient
Allowance, seeing he was then abroad from his Father, Hope, Minority, Hendry
Creich contra Hendry Walker. It is also eleided by Deeds of Homologation, after
Majority, July 14. 1636. Gaindner contra Chalmers. The like, though the
Annualrent was paid upon a Charge, July 30. 1630. Johnstoun contra Hope.

But where Majority was alleged against a Minors Restitution, neither party
was preferred in Probation, but Witnesses allowed, hinc inde, February 20.
1668. Farquhar of Tonley contra Gordoun.

But Lesion needs not be proven by the Minor, granting Bonds of borrowed Money,
for the misapplication is presumed, unless the contrary be proven.

This privilege is not only competent to the Minor himself, but to his Heir,
who if he were Minor, may reduce the Deed done in his Prodecessours Minority,
during the time of the Heirs Minority; and also, during so much of the
quadriennium utile, competent to the Defunct Minor, as rested the time of his
Death. But he cannot claim both the rest of his Predecessors quadriennium, and
his own quadriennium, after his Majority, but only the rest of his
Predecessors quadriennium, March 14. 1628. (...) contra Barron of Brughtoun;
whence it is consequent, that if the Heir Succeeding be Major, and quarrel his
Predecessors Deed, as in Minority, he has quadriennium utile, to intent
Reduction, except in so far of that quadriennium as was past before his
Predecessors Death; but he has not the time of his Predecessors Minority,
which was peculiar, and only personal to himself, but only the quadriennium
utile, competent after Majority, which the Law has allowed, as a competent
time to search out and raise Reduction of Deeds done in Minority; yet if a Deed
were fraudulently kept up and concealed, during the quadriennium utile, it
might be reduceable, ex capite fraudis.

Minority and Lesion was also found relevant at the Instance of a Minors
Creditors, seeing the Minor, intra annos utiles, had intented Reduction;
Nicolson, de temporibus in integrum restitutionis, Sir John Hamiltoun contra
Mr. John Sharp and others. But the Privilege of Restitution is not competent
to Minors upon Revocation, unless they intent Reduction, and declarator intra
annos utiles, which was found to hold in the Kings Revocations, as to Lands not
annexed, Spots. Revocation, Pringle contra Ker.

This other Privilege of a Minor, is, quod non tenetur, placitare super.
haereditate paterna; which, though it be not peremptorium causae, delaying only
pursuit, till Majority; yet there is no necessity to verify it instantly, but
a term will be granted to prove the same, February 24. 1676. Heleson Kello
contra Alexander Kinneir.

The privilege is introduced in favors of Minors, that they be not put out of
their Fathers Heretage, whereof he died in peaceable Possession; for though
their Privilege of Restitution might recover such Rights by Reduction, yet the
Minor would lose the Fruits and Profits, medio tempore, and until their Rights
were produced, and made clear in Reduction, which might be of great importance
to them; for if a Minor of a Year old were dispossessed of his Fathers
Inheritance, he would lose at least twenty years Fruits of it; and therefore,
the Law has introduced this privilege in favors of Minors, besides the
privilege of Restitution, wherein Minors are not in contradistinctione, to
Pupils: But the privilege is chiefly competent to Pupils; And though it bear
only, de haereditate Paterna; yet thereby Minors succeeding immediately to their
Grand Father, or other Predecessor, who died in Possession, It is not like the
privilege would be denied to them, though I have not found it controverted or
determined; seeing the Law, under the name of Father; does ordinarily comprehend
Grandfather, Great-grand-father, and all Predecessors in direct Line, who
come all under the Designation of Forefathers, as all Successors in the right
Line, come under the name of Children.

But the Law indulgeth this favor only as to the Heretage of Fathers; and
therefore, neither the style nor custom has extended it to Collateral
Succession, as to Brothers or Uncles, wherein Minors, if they be excluded, can
only be restored by Minority and Lesion, so soon as their Predecessors, or
Authors Rights can be found.

Neither was ever this privilege extended further, than to Minors in
possession of the Heretage of their Forefathers, who died in peaceable and
lawful possession, and to whom the Minor immediately succeeded; for there is no
privilege to Possession, Vi, clam, aut praecario; though Law or Custom has
not determined, how long Possession of the Defunct is required, to exclude
Clandestine or Momentany Possession; but the continued Possession of the
Defunct with his Author, may be accounted sufficient, or the Defuncts
Possession by a Liferenter, whose right is granted by him, or reserved in his
right, but not to the Possession of singular Successors, by redeemable Rights,
as Wodsetters or Apprizers; Neither has there been any exception made of the
pursuits, at the instance of Minors against Minors, as being both privileged;
there being no parity in recovering, and retaining Possession; but where a
Minor was put from Possession by a Decree of Removing, obtained by a Minor
from Lands, wherein her Father and her self were Infeft, and in Possession, she
was not excluded to reduce that Decree of Removing, upon the Minority of the
other Minor, whose Father died not in Possession, June 18. 1680. Sara Leyel
contra Dons.

This Privilege will not only exclude Possessory Judgments, such as
Removings, or Mails and Duties, but also Declarators or Reductions; as to
which, it has been variously decided, whether it should stop certification,
contra non producta, especially in the case of Improbation; and though it
cannot exclude Improbation, where the Writes are produced, or where they are in
the hands of the Minors, and his Tutors and Curatours, if that shall appear by
their Write or Oath: Yet where the Minor produced his Fathers Infeftment, and
proved his Fathers Possession, he was found obliged to produce no farther,
January 31. 1665. Heleson Kello contra Pringle and the Lord of Wedderburn, so
that it cannot defend simply against Production: But if it could not defend
against Production of any further, but the Fathers Infeftment, and that
certification in Improbations would be granted in all other Rights, if these
certifications should take effect, the privilege might be wholly Evacuat; and
if they should take no effect till Majority, certifications in Improbations
should not be granted, being hardly Reducible, even though in absence. And
though it was not sustained against Production in a Reduction, November 27.
1678. Guthry contra Lord of Guthry; yet in that case, the Minors Right was
only an Appryzing at his Fathers instance, upon which his Father was never
Infeft.

This being a Feudal Privilege, whereof there is no mention or foundation in
the Civil Law, it is only competent to Minors, whose Fathers were in Possession
by virtue of Infeftment, as in the former case of Appryzing, or where the
Father had a Disposition without Possession, January 31. 1665. Heleson Kello
contra Pringle. But the want of Infeftment of the Fathers Author, was not found
relevant, January 18. 1667. Barbara Chapman contra John White.

Neither will this Privilege exclude the Fathers obliegement, to denude
himself of the Infeftment in question, Spots. Minor, John Hamiltoun contra For
there there is no Competition of Rights, but implement of an obliegement; and
so it was not sustained in a Reduction upon a Clause, irritant in a few, Hope,
de monoribus contra Mitchel: Neither to exclude Reductions ob non solutum
Canonem, by the Father, though the few contained no conventional Clause
irritant, February 20. 1633. Lennox contra (...): neither did it exclude the
Probation of the Tenor of a Charter, which might exclude the Minors Right,
February 15. 1628. Master of Jedburgh contra Earl of Home, albeit it would
exclude Process upon that Charter.

Neither does it exclude Processes in relation to Marches, Perambulation, or
vision of Lands, July 27. 1675. Robertson of Inveray contra Gilbert Stuart.
Neither did it exclude the nullity of a Disposition by a Wife to her Husband,
dying within the year, February 15. 1678. Mary Gordoun and her Spouse contra
Captain Robert Maxwel.

But the Privilege was found, not only competent to defend Minors in their
Property, but in their Commonty, Hope, de Minoribus, contra Mitchel.

where reasons of Reduction are probable by Witnesses, so that the Probation
may perish by delay, Witnesses are always received to remain, in retentis,
January 31. 1665. Kello contra Pringle. February 15. 1678. Mary Gordoun and her
Spouse contra Captain Robert Maxwel.

where the Interest of Minor is not the Chief Right, but a Majors Right,
whereby the Minors would fall in consequence, the Process does proceed, but the
Minor is held as not called, November 25. 1624. Hamiltoun contra Matheson.
Spots. Minors, Hamiltoun contra Chrysty. Or where a Major Liferenter is called
with a Minor fiar, the Process proceeds against the Liferenter; but the Minor
is as not called, March 21. 1628. Alexander Bamanno contra Zule. July 5. 1665.
James Borthwick contra Janet Skein. This Privilege is not relevant against the
faults of the Father, or his Authors, as to his Possession or Right; and
therefore, it will not defend against Forefaulture of the Fathers Author,
whereby the Fathers Right fell in consequence, Spots. Minor, James (...) contra
Galstoun. Neither against Recognition, February 19. 1662. Lady Carnagy contra
Lord Cranburn. Neither will it defend against the Superior, or his Donator,
pursuing for any Casuality of his Superiority.

35. Curatours differ in their Office from Tutors, mainly in this, that Tutors
are given chiefly for the Pupils Person; but Curatours are given for the right
Managing of their Goods and Affairs. Secondly, Tutors act for, and in name of
their Pupils, who, in their Pupilarity have no discretion; but Curatours
cannot, and are only obliged by their Office, to authorize their Minors, and
act with them, by consenting to their deeds; For instance, Curatours cannot
discharge for their Minors, but only consent to their Minors Discharge; and so
Fathers, after their Childrens Pupilarity, June 26. 1610. Forrester contra
Forrester. January 9. 1675. Mckintosh contra Frazer of Strichen.

36. Their duty is to see to the Minors Affairs, that they get not detriment,
and so they must answer, not only for the deeds, whereunto they consent; but
for their omission, and for any detriment the Minor suffers by their
negligence; and therefore a Curator was found liable for Intromission and
Omission, albeit the Act of of Curatory, did not bear, that he compeared and
did find Caution, seeing he accepted thereafter, by Subscribing a Write with the
Minor, as his Curatour, which was found to obliege him, from the time of the
acceptance, November 18. 1671. Charles Calsie contra James Elleis. But
Curatours continuing to uplift their Minors Rent, after Majority, were found
not liable for Omissions these years, unless they had a distinct Factory
continued, per tacitam reconventionem, Ibidem; and therefore, they must not
only be Councillors to the Minors, showing them what they ought to do, and
requiring them to do the same; but specially, they must cause them constitute
Factors, and grant Procuratories to persons, for uplifting their Money, whether
it be the Stock of that which may be in hazard, or Annualrent, or Rents; and to
grant Procuratories for pursuing their Actions, and putting them to Execution,
for seeing they must be countable, they must not suffer the Minor to have his
own Goods, and his own Money in his own hand, lest he lose and mispend them;
these Procuratories may be given to some of themselves, and in many things,
their very Office includes a Procuratory, being less then Curatory; but though
they may intromet with the Pupils Means themselves, yet they are not obliged
to be Servants or Factors, but may authorize such, being liable always, that
they acted therein profitably; but if the Minor will not authorize such, nor do
these deeds needful and profitable for his Affairs, the Curatours may crave to
be exonered; so they may also do, if he meddle with his own Means, and will not
be Restrained, or if any of the other Curatours act unprofitably, or without
consent of the rest, the Curatours must do diligence to remove them, as suspect
and malversant: Curatours are to recover that which was unwarrantably meddled
with; otherways, they are liable, not only for their own omissions, or
intromissions, but for the other Curatours, and so are all liable, in solidum,
as has been said of Tutors, February 11. 1630. Guthrie contra Guthrie; and
they are liable for Annualrent of Minors Means, as Tutors are, February 24.
1627. Francis Guthrie contra Guthrie; Yea, their Heirs, though Minors for the
time, after expiring of the Tutory, Ibid. Where the Curatours Heir are found
liable for the Annualrent of a Sum consigned to the Minor: But Curatours
expressly chosen with a quorum, and with this condition, that they should be
only obliged for deeds, whereunto they consented, and be free of omissions,
were so approven by the Lords, during their Office; and though the Minor acted
deeds very prejudicial with any other quorum, yet the rest were not freed, nor
acquitted of their Office, as not being in hazard by these deeds, Nic. de tut.
Clerkingtoun and Scots Tarbet contra Earl of Bucleuch and his other Curatours.
But where the Act of Curatory bore, that the Curatours were named jointlie, or
three of them to be a quorum, two only accepting the Curatorie, was found null,
January 25. 1672. Sir James Ramsay contra Maxwel. But where they were not named
jointly, the death of one did not anul the Curatory, January 4. 1666. Fairfowl
contra Binning. And though there be a quorum constitute, all the Curatours are
liable for diligence; and if any quorum Act hurtfullie, they must crave them to
be removed, and what they have so done, to be restored; and Curators are not
simply liable for all their Pupils Means, which may be lost without their
fault, neither to do diligence in all cases, but where diligence might be
profitable, as has been said of Tutors. Curatours being Elected by Authority
of a Judge, cannot be liberate by the Minors consent. Neither did a Decree
against a Minor, on his consent, liberate Curatours from their Office, July 21.
1664. Scot of Broad-meadows contra Scot of Thirlestoun.

37. Curatours are appointed in the Law, not only for that ordinary Levitie and
Weakness, incident to Minority, which therefore runs only to twenty one years
complete, at which time, by our Custom, Minority ends; but also, in case of
known or conspicuous Levitie, though after Majoritie: such were the Curatours
of Prodigals, to whom, as to Furious Persons, Curatours were Constitute, their
nearest Agnats; instead of this, our Custom has Interdictions, whereby
Persons acknowledgeing their own Weakness and Levitie, and readiness to hurt
themselves; do therefore bind themselves, that they shall not Act without the
consent of these Persons, Interdictors therein mentioned, who thereby become as
Curatours, though they be not obliged for Intromission, or Omission, but only
to consent with the Persons Interdicted, and for their Fraud and fault in
consenting.

38. Interdictions are most fitly made, Judiciallie upon Cognition of the
Cause; by which, after trial, that the Person craving to be Interdicted,
acknowledging his own lavishness and prodigality, Interdictors are appointed by
the Judge competent, and that either, at the Instance of the Party himself, or
of his Friends; Yea, the Lords, ex proprio motu, did Interdict a Person, who
was evidently Lavish, and had thrice made opposite Rights of the same Subject,
and that Incidenter, in an other Process, where his Levitie did so appear,
February 17. 1681. William Robertson contra Gray of Shivis. That this is the
genuine Way of Interdictions, is clear by the Narrative of the Act of
Parliament, 1581. cap. 118. And therefore, an Interdiction was Reduced, only
because it was done, sine causa cognita, Hope, Interdictions, John Robertson
contra (...) but there has not been a just ground for the Interdiction alleged
and instructed.

39. The more ordinar way of Interdictions, is of consent, whereby the person
Interdicted, acknowledging his own Lavishness, does, by a Write under his hand,
Interdict himself, and this is Reduceable, if the Narrative was not true; but
the person Interdicted, was prudent and provident, December 20. 1622. Campbel
contra Lord of Glenurchy. And December 4. 1623. Geichan contra Hay and
Davidson. The like, thought by the Lords, but came not to a Decision, February
12. 1633. Forbes contra Forbes. Interdictions use also to be in the way of
Obligation, not to contract Debts, or Dispone Lands, without consent of such
Persons, and Inhibition Registrate thereupon, which was sustained, though not
in the ordinar style of Interdiction; the person obliged being known
unsufficient to manage his own Affairs through Levity or Prodigality, November
10. 1676. Stuart contra Hay of Gourdie. But a Bond bearing, that a Man should
not Sell or Dispone, without consent of his Wife, on the Narrative of his
Facility, whereon Inhibition was used, found not to be valide as an
Interdiction, as inconsistent, binding a Man to the Direction of his Wife, but
that it was only valide to secure the Wifes own Interest, by an Aliment,
according to her Quality, as an Inhibition, February 27. 1663. Lord of Miltoun
contra Lady Miltoun.

40. Interdictions must be Published at the Market Cross of the Head Burgh of
the Shire, where the party dwells, and within forty days after Publication,
the same, with the Executions thereof, must be Registrate by the Sheriff Clerk
of that Shire, in the Register of Interdictions, and Inhibitions, within the
Shire; the Interdiction must be also Registrate, in the Register of Inhibitions
of any other Shire where the Lands of the Interdicted Person lie; otherwise, if
it be not Published, it is absolutely null, and has no effect to Lands or
Heretable Rights in any other Shire, unless it be also Registrate there,
Parliament 1581. cap. 118. Yet it needs not be intimat to the party
interdicted, December. 11. 1622. Hendry Seatoun contra Mr. Alexander Elleis.

41. The Effect of Interdictions by Custom, is retrenched only to the
Preservation of Heretable Rights, and does not extend to Movables, or personal
Execution against the Person Interdicted, so that he may Dispone his Movables,
or upon any Personal Bond granted by him, his Movables may be Poinded,
Arrested, and made forthcoming, and his Person Incarcerate, though the style of
Interdiction does expreslie Prohibit Alienation of Movables, July 11. 1634.
Bruce contra Forbes. June 20. 1671. Thomas Crawford contra James Haliburtoun:
He may thereupon be also Denunced, though thereby the Liferent fall in
prejudice of the Heretage, December 7. and February 8. 1610. Hay of Bruntfield
contra his Father and Sisters. And December 21. 1610. Lady Broksmouth contra
Relict of Gilbert Wauchop. But it has Effect in favors of the Heir of the
Interdicted Person, that neither his Heritage can be Affected upon any
obligation, granted by his Predecessors, after interdiction; neither any
Personal Execution, by Caption and Horning against him, as would have been
against his Predecessor: but such Bonds will take effect against the Heir, as
meddling with the Heirship Movables, or other Movables of the Defunct; the
reason wherefore Movables are excepted, both from Inhibitions and
Interdictions, is, because they are of less moment, and the Traffic of them
must be current and free; and therefore, these remeids being but by Positive
Law, and not by Natural Equity (by which the Engagement, or Disposition of any
Person, having the use of Reason, is Effectual, though Lavish) Positive Law
Prohibiteth, and voideth such only, as to Heretage, as being of the greatest
Importance; in which, even a Tack to a kindly Tennant, set without consent of
the Interdictours, was found null, Hope, Interdict. Douglass contra Cranstoun.
But Interdiction can only extend to Lands, lying within the Jurisdiction where
it was Published and Registrate, but to no other Lands or Movables, February
11. 1662. David Ramsay of Torbain contra Mcclellan. Interdictions do not make
void all posterior obligations, but only such where there is Lesion; and
therefore, where there is a just and onerous Cause, the obligation or deed is
good, though without consent of the Interdictours, July 29. 1624. Lord of
Collingtoun contra Hall. November 10. 1676. Stuart contra Hay of Gourdy.

42. The remeid by Interdictions, is only by Reduction, and not by Exception,
or Suspension, March 17. 1630. John Sempel contra Doby. January 22. 1631. Hardy
contra Mccalla. Yet Interdiction is sustained by way of reply, seeing the
pursuer thereby does only delay himself, February 18. 1662. Robert Lockart
contra William Kennedy. It is a competent ground of Reduction, at the instance
of the Interdicted Person, his Assignays or Heirs: and it is also competent at
the Instance of the Interdictours, without consent of the Person Interdicted,
December 21. 1610. Lady Broksmouth contra Relict of Gilbert Wauchop.

43. Interdictions cannot be taken off by consent of the Interdictours, or
Interdicted Persons, though they should renounce or discharge them; but only by
the Act of a Judge competent, finding the grounds thereof, either not true, or
otherways, that the Person Interdicted is come to a more stable deportment,
Hope, Interdict. George Anderson contra Interdictours of William Craig,
December 4. 1623. Gichan contra Hay and Davidson, which is to be understood of
Inderdictions, laid on by Authority of a Judge, causa cognita.

TITLE VII. Restitution.
1. Restitution of other men's Goods, a Natural Obligation: 2. Restitution is
not solely an effect of Property. 3. Restitution of things straying, or waith
and lost. 4. Restitution of things, bona fide, acquired, not from the right
Owner. 5. Restitution of things recovered from Thieves, Pirates and Robbers. 6.
Restitution not competent of things recovered from public Enemies. 7.
Restitution of things, quae cadunt in non causam, causa data and non secuta. 8.
No Restitution of things given, ob turpem causam. 9. Restitution of indebite
soluta. 10. Restitution reaches also the fruits not consumed. 11. Restitution
is grounded on having, and that ceasing without fault, the obligation of
Restitution cease. 12. Bonae fidei possessor facit fructus consumptos suos.
13. Restitution by Heirs. 14. From Restitution arises the Action of Exhibition
and Delivery. 15. Thence arises division of things common without Society.
1. THE Obligations whereby men are holden to restore the proper Goods of
others, are placed here among Natural or Obediential Obligations; because they
are not by Contract or consent, neither have they their Original from Positive
Law; for though there were no Positive Law, these Obligations would be binding,
and they are Obligatory among persons, who are not subject to one Positive Law;
and therefore, seeing they are not Obligatory, by the Will or Law of man, of
necessity they must have their Original from the Authority and Command of God,
and that obedience we owe thereto, by the Law written in our hearts.

We are not here to speak of the Obligations of Restitution, which are by any
voluntar engagement, or which are by Delinquence; but of these only, whereby
that which is another coming in our power, without his purpose to gift it to
us, and yet, without our fault, ought to be Restored, as things straying, or
found, or recovered from Pirates, Thieves, etc. or bought, bona fide, or the
like.

2. Restitution of things belonging to others; may seem to be an effect of
Property, whence comes the right of vindication or repitition of any thing;
but beside the real Action, the Proprietar has to take or recover what is his
own, which does not directly concern any other person, and so being no personal
right, has no correspondent Obligation upon the have of that which is an
others, to restore it. There is a personal Right, which is a power in the Owner
to demand it, not only when it is in the possession of the haver, but if he
bath fraudfully put it away; and yet it is his once, having it that oblieges
him, and his fraudulent away-putting, though it be a Delinquence, yet it gave
not the rise to the Obligation, but only continues it in the same condition, as
if he yet had it; so in that case, his obligation is more palpable, for
vindication of the thing, where it is not, cannot take place properly. The
learned Grotius, de jure belli, l. 2. cap. 10. makes such obligations as arise
from Dominion and Property, to be by tacit consent, or Contract, whereby the
Nations, who have agreed to appropriat things common to men, have thereby also
tacitly agreed, that each man should restore what is the property of an other;
yet this will not hold, if we consider, that though for the most part, property
be by consent; yet in many things it is without consent of the simple Law of
Nature, as things which have their specification from their owner, his skill
and industry, and others, as will appear in its own place; and therefore, it is
most just and sure, to attribute such obligations to the Law of God written in
our hearts, rather than unto any other conjecture of supposed consent. To this
agrees the Roman Law, which holds these obligations not to be ex contractu,
sed quasi ex contractu; neither does account them obligations, ex lege, and if
they were of tacit consent, these obligations were ex contractu.

3. There is many ways by which the things of others may come to our hands,
without our fault or Delinquence; As first, things straying, concerning which,
the Lord has ordained, Deuteronomy. 22. verse. 1, 2, 3. To bring again unto their
brethren that which went astray, and if he were not near, to keep it till he
sought after it, and then restore it; and to do so with all things lost by him,
wherein there seems something to be admixed of Positive Law, as the taking of
it home to him, or keeping of it for his Brother; whereas the simple Natural
Obligation of Restitution, oblieges to no duty of Custody, or pains, but only
not to conceal that which is an others, and to restore it, when demanded; and
such is the Custom of Scotland, that waith or straying Goods must be
proclaimed, and intimate to be waith; and if the owner make them appear to be
his, he may have them, satisfying for what was wared upon them, for their
preservation, as Orass, etc. And if none appear within such a time, Custom
has added, that waith or strayed Goods become public, and escheat to the
King, or others to whom he has disponed, or committed that power; and this
intimation is so far requisite, that if the Goods be meddled with, or disposed
of otherways, it is Theft; but though the publication makes the Goods public,
and the meddling therewith to be without fault, so that if there do never any
owner appear; the things do become really and absolutely public, and they do
not become the Possessours by that ancient Law, quod nullius est sit
occupantis, which takes place amongst us, in things which were never known to
have an owner, as Pearls or Stones, found on the Shore, and many others; but
therefrom are excepted waith Goods, and Goods by Shipwreck, which become
escheat as public. Secondly, Things lost, of which we see the rule for Israel,
Deuteronomy. 22. How far they may be possessed without Delinquence; in these, our
Custom agrees with the Roman Law, and other Nations, except in the Matter of
waith and wrack Goods, of which before; that such things being not concealed,
may remain with the possessours, and if none claim, they become their own, and
they may dispose of them, if they cannot be conveniently preserved without
hazard.

4. Thirdly, Things belonging to others, coming to our hands without
Delinquence, when we acquire, bona fide, either the property, use, or security
thereof, by pledge or depositation; in which cases, we are bound to restore to
the owner, though thereby we lose what we gave, except in some cases, wherein
Positive Law secures the buyer, and leaves the owner to seek the seller.

This Restitution takes place, notwithstanding any obliegement in the contrair;
and we have an excellent species in Law, l. bona fide, 31. ff. 1. depositi, a
Robber, depositat with Seius, that which he spoiled or robbed from Mevius, to
which is Seius obliged to restore, if he look only upon his engagement, truly
to the Robber, but if upon the whole matter, certainly to Mevius; for the
Precept of Law is, to render every thing to the owner; and therefore, no
promise or engagement can here prevail against the natural obligation of
Restitution, because that being natural and indispensible, the Engagement,
whether ignorantly or willingly made, to Restore that which the Ingager knows
to be another, is a Delinquence, inferring punishment for ingadging, but no
obliegement to perform; so also, he who ignorantly takes in custody, or pledge,
that which is his own, though thereby he promise to Restore it, yet his
obligation being by error in the substance of the Contract, makes it void, and
he may retain or recover it as his own.

5. Fourthly, things recovered from Thieves, Robbers, or Pirates, are liable to
this obligation of Restitution, wherein these things may be lawfully detained
for the expenses and labor in recovery, especially if the labor was
undertaken of purpose, to recover such things, and if it was but by accident,
the recoverer projecting some other thing, the satisfaction is due, as a
remuneration of the trouble and pains which it might have cost the owner in the
recovery, which, with the expenses following thereon, being saved to him; he
ought to recompense the profit accressing to him, to the Author thereof.

The doubt remains greater, whether what Enemies having Possessed, being
recovered by a Nation or Party, ought not to be Restored to their proper owners
of that Nation who bore the equal expense of the War, and who being any way
engaged in that Quarrel, cannot but acknowledge the War of their Enemies to be
unjust; and therefore, as to these things, I think, that Equity would require
Restitution upon satisfaction, and gratification of the favor received, which
ought to take place, unless by the peculiar Customs of Nations, it has been
otherways agreed, which may alter, or derogat from this Common Law; and
therefore, David recovering back his Wife and his Spoill from his Enemies,
delivered every man his own, vid. Tit. 12. Rights real,. 43.

7. Fifthly, The duty of Restitution extends to these things, quae cadunt in
non causam, which coming warrantably to our hands, and without any paction of
Restitution, yet if the cause cease, by which they become ours, there
superveeneth the Obligation of Restitution of them, whence are the condictions
in Law, ob non causam, and, causa data, causa non secuta, which have this
natural ground; and of which, there are innumerable instances, as all things
that become in the possession of either party, in Contemplation of Marriage;
the Marriage, which is the cause, failing to be accomplished, the interest of
either party cease, and either must Restore.

8. But there is not the same ground for things given for an unjust cause, ob
turpem causam; in which, the will of the owner, and his purpose to transfer the
property is effectual, though his motive was not good; but Positive Law does
sometimes obviat the inconveniency, by such Donations, and makes them void, and
either to Return, or become Caduciary and Escheat. As for these things which
are attained by force or fear, they have their original from Delinquence, and
comes not under this Consideration.

9. Sixthly, Restitution extends to indebite soluta, when any party through
error, delivers or pays that which he supposes due, or belongs to an
other, if thereafter it appear, that it was not due to that other, he who
received it, is obliged to restore, and yet not by Paction or Contract;
therefore the Law calls this promutuum, vel quasi mutuum, having in it the
same Natural Obligation, which mutuum or Loan, has by voluntar engagement; but
here, Positive Law, for utility and quietness sake, excepteth transactions,
which are properly such, and which are of two sorts, the one Extrajudicial,
when in any matter doubtful and debateable, either party to shun their hazard,
and trouble of a Legal Decision, is willing to transact and agree, so as
thereby they may quite, or abate part of what they claim as their Right, and so
they renounce all future question, upon any appearing of Right, either
Judicially or Extra-judicially; and therefore, what either quitteth to other of
their Rights, is due, for the same cause, and has in it, either expressly or
implicitly, that that Transaction shall not be Ransacted upon any thing that
shall accidentally appear thereafter, (Fraud only as the common exception in
all Humane Actions, being excepted) and therefore, such things, though they
appear not to be the havers, are not to be Restored. The other Transaction is
Judicial by Litiscontestation, when any cause in difference is put upon the
Oath of the party, or other Probation, and particular diets for that effect
assigned, wherein, if either party fail, he loses what is put thereupon by his
implicit consent, and when the right of any thing is referred to the havers
Oath, and he swears it to be his own, though thereafter it may be made
palpably appear, not to be so, yet it will not be Restored, because of the
owners reference, implying that condition, that he shall stand to the Oath,
without questioning right or wrong, because an Oath is an end of all
Controversy, though the swearer may be punished as a wilful perjurer: And
thus, most of things that become ours, by Sentences and Decreets of Judges, are
not liable to Restitution, upon any subsequent Question. There is this
exception against indebite solutum, that it cannot be repeated, when the
Creditor gets that which is due to him, though not due by that party who paid
the same, l. 2. C. de condictione indebiti, l. 44. ff. eodem, which was not
found when the payment was made to an Executor Creditor, pursuing upon his
Confirmation, and before Sentence obtaining payment from the Debitors Heir, who
was decerned to refound upon a Discharge of the Debt, granted to the Defunct
Debtor, whereby it appeared the Debt was not truly due, but twice paid,
January 10. 1673. Sir James Ramsay contra Robertsons.

10. Under Restitution do fall, not only the things of others, but their
Natural Birth, and Fruits extant, not consumed, bona fide, which are accounted
as parts of the things, being accessory thereto, and belonging to the same
owner, but industrial and artificial profits in so far as such as arise from
the havers industry, and not from the thing, fall not under Restitution, if
separate.

11. In all these, the Obligation of Restitution is formally founded upon the
having of things of others in our power; and therefore, that ceasing, the
Obligation also cease, as he who did, bona fide, buy that which did belong to
an other, if while he has it, it appears to be that others, he must Restore
it without expectation of the price he gave for it; but as to that, he must
take himself to his warrandice (express or employed) to the seller, but if bona
fide, he have sold it before he be questioned, he is free, and not obliged to
Restore it, though in so far as he is profited in receiving more for it, than
he gave, he be liable by the Obligation of Remuneration or Recompense, of which
anon. And as to the Fruits of that which is an others, the Obligation of
Restitution, takes only place against the haver, where they are extant; and
therefore, where they are neglected, or being reaped, have perished; yea, where
they are consumed by the havers making use of them, the Obligation of
Restitution takes no place, though the Obligation of Recompense has place, in
so far only, as by such Fruits, the haver conceiving them to be his own, is
gainer, and in better condition, than if he had not had them; but if he have
increased his spending, bona fide, because of his having he is free, under his
profiting comes his paying of his Debts, or even his Benificence, where it
appears he would have gifted, whether such a thing had come to his hand or not;
for in either case he is Locupsetior, and must recompense; so that if he has
sold or delivered that which was an others, and which came to him without
price, he is not obliged to Restore the thing, but to recompense what he has
enriched himself by the price, and that without any question of the
proportionable value of it to the thing.

12. In the Enjoyments of Fruits, the Positive Law of the Romans, and of this,
and most other Nations has not only owned what is before said of Restoring, no
more then that by which the haver has profited; but have extended this much
further, for utility and common quietness sake, that bonae fidei, possessor
facit fructus perceptos, and consumptos suos, whereby what Fruits he who has
possessed, bona fide, has consumed, though he have profited, and been enriched
thereby, he is not obliged to restore the same, which does much secure and
quiet men's Enjoyments, that they may freely use and enjoy that, which, bona
fide, they have; and to shun the hazard of their ruin, by answering for the
bygone Fruits, or their great vexation in clearing, whether they be enriched
thereby or not.

Amongst these Obligations, neither by Contract nor Delinquence, are commonly
accounted the Obligations, which are incident to these who enter Heirs, or are
Successors to others, whereby they are obliged to perform all their
Predecessors Obligations, and satisfy their Debts, in such manner as in Law
is prescribed, and yet it is not by their own engagement, nor by their fault,
but by their fact of entering Heirs. Such also are the Obligations upon
Executors, to satisfy the Children, and Relict, Legatars, or Debitors of
Defuncts, by, or for whom they are entrusted, and indeed the Restitution of the
Relicts part, is properly such; as also, the Legatars to whom the Right by the
Legacy is transmitted ofttimes of peculiar things; the giving also to Children,
or nearest of Kin, is a Restitution, because the property of the Defuncts
Goods, by his Will, expressed or presumed, is transmitted to them after his
death; but for payment of the Defuncts Debts, they are not properly by
Restitution, because the Debtor had no property in the Goods, but an
Obligation upon the Person, and they arise either from that Natural Obligation,
that lies upon Children from their Parents engagement, of which before: Or by
the Natural Obligation of Remuneration or Recompense, by which these
Successors, in so far as they are profited by the Succession of the Defunct,
they must satisfy or recompense, and the Positive Law in some cases makes them
liable simply; yet in Equity they are liable, in so far as they are gainers,
secundum vires haereditatis.

13. In the Restitution of the Goods of others, though the ground thereof be
the having of that which is to be Restored; yet if the haver cease to have
through his own Fraud, his Delinquence therein oblieges him to Reparation, as
if he still had it, according to the Maxim of Law, pro possessore habetur qui
dolo desiit possidere, and this extends not only to the thing it self, which
he must Restore, though he has fraudently put it away, or at least the value
of it; but also it extends to the Fruits which he has enjoyed, mala fide; and
after he knew and had intimat to him the Right of another, so that such Fruits
must be Restored, though the enjoyer become not the richer thereby.

14. From the right of Restitution, arises the Action of Exhibition and
Delivery; The Exhibition is but preparatory to the Delivery, that thereby the
thing in question may be known to the Parties, Judge and Witnesses; and
therefore, majori inest minus, he that has right to crave Delivery, has much
more right to crave the Production, or the Inspection. This Action may be
Institute concerning any moveable things that can be conveyed before a Judge,
or his Delegats, as if the question were of a Horse, if he be extant, he may be
fitly craved to be Exhibit, that the Witnesses may be in the clearer capacity
to Depone, to whom he does belong; but the ordinary subject of this Action, is
Exhibition and Delivery of Writes, wherein the Tenor and Style of the Action
is, that the Defender has, or had, or fraudfully put away the thing in
question, his having is probable by Witnesses, and relates not unto the time of
Probation, but unto the time of the Citation; for, if after it the Defender had
the thing in question, he ought to have acknowledged it; and if he have justly
or necessarily put it away, or wanted it, he ought to have pleaded that as a
defense, which therefore would exeem the Pursuer from Probation of the Libel,
as being acknowledged by the defense, and so being omitted, and the Pursuer
proving his Libel, the exception is not competent, but the Defender is
accounted as a fraudful away-putter after Citation; so that this Defense, that
the Writes in question were given to be Registrate, and were burnt in the
Tolbooth, was found relevant and probable by the Members of Court, January 12.
1610. Patrick Home contra Wilson.

There is a second Member in this Action, to wit, that the Defender at any time
before the Citation, had the Writes in question, and fraudulently put them
away, and is therefore repute as haver of them, both these Members must be
proven; for it will not be sufficient to prove that the Defender had the Writes
before the Citation; but it also must be proven, that he fraudfully put them
away; which therefore being a matter of Fraud, concerning the mind and purpose,
is not probable by Witnesses, but by Write, or Oath of Party, November 17.
1627. John Inglis contra Gilbert Kirkwood. 30 of January 1629. Captain Crawford
contra Lord of Lamingtoun. Yet if Fraud otherways appear, Witnesses will be
admitted to prove the having before Citation, that the haver may instruct that
he warrantably put the same away, July 14. 1666. Fountain and Brown contra
Maxwel of Netheryet. But Witnesses, will not be admitted to prove the delivery
of any Write by the granter thereof, whether it be Bond or Assignation, as
being, Chyrographum apud debitorem repertum presumitur solutum, which was
sustained, as to an Assignation in the hands of the granters Son, who did his
Affairs: and Witnesses were not admitted to prove that the same was delivered
to the Son, as Agent for the Pursuer, December 14. 1666. Anna Fairly contra the
Executors of Sir William Dick. This presumption is stronger in relation to
Bonds, which are most ordinarily taken away, by retiring the same without
taking Discharge; and therefore, being found in the Hands of the Debtor, or
his Heir, they are presumed to be satisfied and retired; or being in the hands
of a Cautioner, if it appear by his Oath, or other Evidence, that he got the
Bond from the Principal Debtor, to take his name from it, June 26. 1623.
Carmichael contra Hay of Munktoun, otherways the presumption would not hold by
the Bonds, being found in the hands of a Cautioner, or of an Executor, for whom
simple retiring of the Bond, will not be sufficient without Discharge or
Assignation. Exhibition and Delivery is competent to any party in whose favors
a Write is conceived, without necessity to prove that it was delivered, for
that is presumed, if the Write be out of the granters hand, so that the granter
is necessitat to prove, that the Writ was depositat upon terms not performed;
or that it was lent, lost, Stolen, or passed otherways from him, then by
delivery: for prevention of which, the English custom is good, that the Write
bears, not only Signed and Sealed, but delivered before the Witnesses. But
seeing with us, delivery is presumed, it is ordinarily required, that the
granter of the Write be called in the Exhibition, that he may be heard to
propone any thing, that may take off the presumption; yet this will not be
necessary in recovering Securities of Land, or other real Rights, especially if
the Pursuer be in Possession. But in several cases, Writes are effectual
without Delivery; As First, Writes granted by Parents in favors of their
Children, November 11. 1624. Bairns of Eldersly contra his Heir. Secondly,
Mutual Contracts or Minutes, June penult. 1625. Valence contra Crawford.
Thirdly, Writes bearing a Clause, dispensing with Delivery. Fourthly, By
Reservation of the granters Liferent, and power to Dispone, June 19. 1668.
Agnes Hadden and Mary Lauder contra Shoarswood. The like was found lately in a
Disposition of some Ackers of Land to Thomas Kincaid Chyrurgian. Fifthly, An
Assignation taken by a Debtor in name of his Creditor, for his Creditors
releif, as Cautioner for him, intimat by the Debtor, was found effectual
without delivery, January 18. 1677. Dick of Grange contra Oliphant of Gask,
February 24. 1680. John Mclurg contra William Blackwood. The like was found,
where the Debtor took a Bond in name of his Creditor, which was presumed to be
for that Creditors satisfaction security, and not in trust, and not affectable
by Arrestment, for the Procurers Debt, before it was delivered, July 12. 1677.
Mr. John Bain contra Mcmillan. But where the Bond was taken blank, and
Arrestment laid on, before it was filled up with the Creditors name, or
delivered to him, the Arrester was preferred, February 27. 1678. Campbel and
Cunninghame contra Mr. John Bain and Mcmillan. Delivery is not presumed of
Bonds of provision, to Children in the Family, in competition with Creditors,
though their Debts be posterior to the dates of the Bonds of Provision, unless
the delivery thereof be proven, anterior to the Debt, otherwise Creditors would
be most unsecure by Parents, making large Bonds of Provision, which they
ordinarily keep by them, which will not be extended to Bonds taken from
Debitors in the names of Children, or wherein they are substitute, these not
being latent, but known to the Debtor; but the simple proving the having of
Writes, after Citation, is sufficient to infer the Conclusion, unless the
lawful Cause be alleged in the Defense and proven, and the having of Writes,
though of great importance, is probable by Witnesses.

15. Under the Obligation of Restitution, is comprehended the Obligation of
Division, whereby what we possess in common with others, or indistinct from
that which they possess, we are naturally obliged to divide it with them,
whenever they desire to quite that Communion, for thereby we Restore what is
their own, and we are not obliged thereto by any Contract or Delinquence; It
is true, the Contract for Society includes the obliegement to divide, after
the Society is ended; but Communion falls many times, where there is no
Society or Contract, as by Succession, Legacy, Gift, etc. Hence arise these
three Actions, frequent in the Roman Law, mainly, because Heretage did then
befall to the nearest degree of Agnats, as now it does not, viz. Actio familiae
Hersiscundae, Actio de communi dividendo, and Actio de finibus regundis. The
first is the division of that which falls by Succession. The second, for
division of that which is otherwise common. The third, for distinction, or
clearing the marches of Contiguous Grounds. In these, either Party might be
Pursuer, and he is held to be pursuer, who did first provoke to Judgment; but
because they do chiefly concern Immovable or Ground Rights, we shall say no
more here of them.

TITLE VIII. Recompense.
1. Recompense, or Remuneration, a Natural Obligation. 2. Obligatione
Negotiorum Gestorum. 3. Actio directa and contraria de Negotiis gestis. 4. The
Diligence of Negotiators. 5. The Natural Obliegement to Recompense, in quantum
locupletiores facti sumus. 6. Actio de in rem verso. 7. Relief due to these who
satisfy Obligations, whereby more Persons are liable, in eosdem.
1. THE Obligation of Remuneration, or Recompense, is that Bond of the Law of
Nature, oblieging to do one good deed for another, and it comprehends, First,
all Obligations of Gratitude, which are generally acknowledged by all Nations,
and the breach thereof is abhorred, si ingratum dixeris, omnia dixeris; yet
because the complaints of Ingratitude, are so frequent and unclear, every one
esteeming highly of the demerit of his own Actions; therefore most of them are
laid aside, without any legal remedy; for that which is done, animo donandi,
though it does induce an Obligation upon the mind and affection of the receiver
to be thankful; yet does not bind to the like liberality, in case of necessity,
but in few cases; as a Master, gifting Liberty upon this ground, did put an
Obligation upon the Servant, who thereby became free: Whence also arose that
Right of Patronage, of which before. But that is rather by a Positive Law, and
tacit consent, as a Condition employed in the Gift: So also in every Gift, there
is a correspondent Duty of Gratitude; and therefore, by ingratitude the
Donation becomes void and returns: But the matter is more clear when the Good
Deed is done, not animo donandi, but of purpose, to obliege the Receiver of the
Benefit to Recompense. Such are Obligations, Negotiorum Gestorum: And
generally the Obligations of Recompense, of what we are profited by the damnage
of others, without their purpose to Gift; or as the Law expresses, in quantum
locupletiores facti sumus ex damno alterius; It is a Rule in Law, Donatio non
presumitur; and therefore, whatsoever is done, if it can receive any other
construction then Donation, it is constructed accordingly. Whence arises that
other Rule of Law, Debtor non praesumitur donare; So that any deed done by the
Debtor, is either presumed to be in Security, or in Satisfaction of his Debt;
as if he assign his Creditor to any thing due to him, or Dispone any thing to
him, it is understood to be in Security or Payment, unless the Deed express to
be a Donation, or done for love and favor; yea, Trust is rather presumed than
Donation, as if a man take a Bond, Assignation, Disposition, or other Right in
another Man's name; it is held to be a trust, he may force that other to denude
himself, if he was not Creditor to the Acquirer; yet these Rules have their
Limitations; As first, Bonds, Assignations, or other Rights, in the names of
Children, unforisfamiliat, unprovided, are presumed to be Donations, because of
the Parents Natural Affection, and Natural Obligation to provide Children,
which was extended to some Goods and Money of a small value, delivered by a
rich Brother who wanted Children, to his Brother who was no Merchant, which was
presumed to be animo donandi, and was not imputed in part of an Annual Legacy,
left thereafter by that rich Brother to the other, November 13. 1679. Anderson
contra Anderson; yea, an Assignation to ones nearest of Kin, Mortis causa, was
found a Donation, and not in satisfaction of a Debt due to that Party, June 16.
1665. Crookshank contra Crookshank. And Bonds of Provision to Children, are not
Interpret in satisfaction of prior Bonds, but to be a further Addition; and so
are any other Rights taken in name of Children, especially if unforisfamiliat:
yet a Tocher in a Contract of Marriage, was found to be in satisfaction of all
former Provision, though it did not so express, June 29. 1680. Francis Young
contra Pape and Vauns. And Aliment to Children, is ordinarily interpret to be,
ex pietate, and not to obliege, as was found in the case of a Mother, where the
Children had no considerable Estate, February 2. 1672. Captain Guthry contra
the Lord of Mckerstoun and his Brother. The like, though the Mother was
Married, Alimenting her Daughter, who was appearand Heir to her Father, though
she renounced to be Heir, July 16. 1667. Hamiltoun contra Simontoun. The like
was found in the Mothers Father, Alimenting his Oye, July 21. 1665. Lord of
Ludquharn contra Lord of Giht. And in the case of a Grandmother, Alimenting
her Oye in the Fathers Life, till she require the Father to take her home,
January 11. 1681. Janet Gordoun contra Janet Lesly. Yet Aliment by a Sisters
Husband, who was also Debtor, was not found to be a Donation, seeing it began
in Minority, and was continued after, though without paction, February 11.
1681. Margaret Spence contra Foulis of Ratho. And in all cases, Aliment or
Intertainment given to any person without paction, is presumed a Donation, if
the person was Major, and capable to make agreement. But Intertainment to
Minors or weak persons, does ever infer Recompense, according to the true value
of the Benefit received. And in the case of these who are in use to furnish
Provisions for Money, the presumption cease, and Recompense is due. In like
manner, where more persons are bound for the same Debt, when any one pays the
whole Debt, or more than his share, Recompense by way of relief, is due,
although there be no Clause of relief; and generally, the delivery of any thing
is not presumed to be a Donation, but for Recompense, or Loan. And so though
the delivery of Victual to an ordinary Buyer, or seller of Victual, was found
to infer the ordinary price, though no agreement or price was proven, unless
the receiver instruct another cause of the delivery, June 15. 1677. David Home
contra Jamison.

2. Likeways the Obligation betwixt Negotiators, and these to whose behove they
Negotiat, tying to Recompense, what others without our Command, Knowledge, or
Presence, have necessarily, or profitably done for carrying on of our Affairs,
these Deeds must be done without Command, or Commission; otherways they come in
the nature of the Contract, Mandat or Commission; yea, what is done in our
presence, with our Knowledge, in our Affairs, is repute, as with our tacit
Consent and Commission, Nam qui tacet, consentire videtur; These must also be
done for the carrying on of our Affairs; For Negotiators cannot begin any new
Business, but only carry on that which is begun, and they must be necessarily
or profitably done; otherwise he has his Labor for his Pains, and he that set
him on Work must pay him his Expenses. And last, though these Deeds may be done
without our Knowledge or Consent; yet may they not be contrary to our Will and
Command; for such obtruders can expect no Recompense, L: Final. C. de negotiis
gestis; though no Positive Law hinder, we may be liable even to such, in
quantum facti sumus locupletivres. But the obliegement to Negotiators is
greater; for, if they do that which is necessary or profitable, for carrying on
our Affairs, though by some accident, that Affair may perish, or miscarry, and
we no richer, but it may be poorer, yet are we obliged. The ground of these
Obligations, is, because it is frequent for men to go abroad upon their
Affairs, supposing quickly to return, and leave no Mandat for managing of them;
and yet being detained from them beyond expectation, they may be easily lost;
For instance, some Redemptions must be peremptor, and the failer therein has a
great inconvenience; or the perfecting of some great Bargain, a great part
whereof is already done; and the not perfecting the rest, loses the whole; or
the management of any work of great profit, that for want of some pains or
expenses might be lost. These who interpose themselves in such cases, do
necessarily and profitably for the good of the absent, and so are under no
Delinquence, neither are they presumed to gift their pains and expenses, nor
have they any Conventional Obligation upon their part: And yet though there
were no Positive Law for it, the very Light of Nature would teach, it ought to
be Recompensed; and therefore, can be no other then an Obediential, or Natural
Obligation, by the Authority of God, and our obedience to him, Grotius, l. 2.
Cap. 10. de Jure Belli. 8. does not own this Obligation as Natural, but as
arising, Ex lege civili nullum enim (says he) habet eorum fundamentorum, ex
quibus natura Obligationem inducit; but the contrary appears, not only from
what is said, but by the Testimony of the Law it self, which reckons the
Obligations, Negotiorum Gestorum; not amongst Contracts, or Obligations, or
Actions, ex lege; but amongst these which are, ex quasi contractu.

That this Obligation is effectual, if it be profitably carried on, though the
success answer not, is acknowledged in Law, and set forth by an excellent
Species, by Ulpian, l. 10.. 1. F. de negotiis gestis; It justifies (says he)
if the Negotiator did profitably act, although the Affair had not the effect;
as if he had Cured a sick Servant, if not with standing the Cure, the Servant
died, he has this Action.

3. From this Obligation there arise Mutual Actions, the one direct, whereby he
whose Affair is managed, craveth Account, and Restitution of the Negotiator,
and Reparation of what he has done amiss; and the contrair Action to the
Negotiator, whereby he craveth Recompense, and Satisfaction of what he has
profitably expended, and for his labor and pains, but the Action is valid on
either part, whether intended, direct, or utiliter, l. Actio ff. 47. de
negotiis gestis.

4. The Negotiator is holden, not only to answer for Fraud, but, pro culpae
levi, for his fault, though light; yea, if any other Negotiator offered, whom
he excluded for the lightest, he may be made also to follow forth his
Negotiation, according to that Precept, Susceptum perfice munus; but this, and
the exactness of diligence, is induced by Positive Law; Equity leaving the
Negotiator free, if he has acted profitably, though he might have acted more
profitably, in making his Party liable to him according to his acting.

5. The other Obligation of Recompense, is, for that whereby we are enriched by
another Means, without purpose of Donation, which is only presumed in few
Cases, even he who mala fide, builds upon another Man's Ground, or repaireth
unnecessarly his House, is not presumed to do it, animo donandi, but has
Recompense by the owner, in quantum lucratus, l. 38. ff. de haereditatis
petitione. This Remuneration is a most Natural Obligation, as Cicero, l. 3. de
officiis, Says, that it is against Nature, for a man, of another damnage, to
increase his profit: And again, Justice suffers not that with the spoil of
others, we should augment our riches; and therefore, this is a common exception
in all Positive Laws, that every one should be holden, in quantum locupletior
factus sit. So Pupils, though they cannot obliege themselves by Contract, yet
if they receive that which is another, they are liable to Recompense, in
quantum locupletiores facti, l. sed mihi ff. commodati. Minors also, though by
Positive Law, they are not liable for what they borrow, and receive, and
mispend, yet they are liable, in quantum locupletiores facti sunt.

6. Hence arises the Action in Law, de in rem verso; whereby whatsoever turns
to the profit of any, makes him thereby liable, though without any engagement
of his own. We are enriched, either by Accession, of Gain, or Prevention of
loss: Whence is the Obligation of Contribution, for making up Goods, thrown out
to lighten Ships, whereby Shipwreck, and the loss of all is prevented, Lege
Rodia de jactu, ff. l. 2. by which, whatsoever is thrown out to lighten a Ship,
for preventing Shipwreck, is to be satisfied by the Contribution, of all who
enjoy that common benefit of Safety from Shipwreck, proportionally according
to the value of what is thereby saved. wherein the owners of the Ship, bear
their share, l. 2.. 2. eodem, wherein not only Jewels, though of small weight,
but even the Clothes and Rings of Passengers, bear a share, Ibidem, and the
Master of the Ship may detain their Goods till their share be paid, l. 2.. 1.
codem; which holds also, when there is hazard of Naufrage, by entering a
shallow River, or Port, if a part of the Goods be put in a Boat, and perish,
the value thereof is to be satisfied by Contribution. Contribution is also
made, for what is paid for Redemption of Ships from Pirates, which is not
extended to things taken away by Pirates, or Robbers out of Ships, l. 2.. 3.
eodem. This, Lex Rodia, is now become a Law of Nations, as commonly received by
all, for its expediency to prevent Shipwreck, and to encourage Merchants to
throw out their Goods, seeing thereby they will but bear their share of the
loss. But this Law is not Declaratory of pure Equity, and does hold by Custom;
otherways, what any Party does for his own profit, though it have a
consequential advantage to others, it will not obliege them to bear a share of
the Expenses, nor will it be interpret as, Negotium (...); for, he who improves
aright, though it becomes simply void, and other Right beside his be
preferreds, yet he was doing his own business, not theirs, and can claim no
share from them of his Expenses. It was found, that to evite Captor by a
Privateer, a Skipper having by consent of some Merchants aboard, and of the
Company, made a hole in the Bottom of the Ship, that he might run near the
Shore at a Creik, and opening the hole, make the Ship so far sink, that she
could not be carried off by the Privateer; yet that Privateer having reached
her near the Shore, but before the hole was opened, and having agreed for a
Ransom, for which the Merchants Contributed, the Ship having been Wracked five
days after by a Storm, which she might have prevented, by going off before the
Storm arose, the Merchants and Passengers, were not found liable for
Contribution of their shares for the loss of the Ship, July 15. 1680. Lesly and
Millars contra Logan, Weir, and others.

7. From the natural Obligation of Recompense, does arise the Obligation of
Relief, whereby when many persons are obliged, in solidum, and thereby liable,
conjunctly and severally, payment or satisfaction made by one, for more then
his own share, does obliege all the rest, pro rata, although there be no
conventional Clause of relief, nor any Law nor Statute, but the natural
Obligation of Recompense; for he who paid, not only for himself, but for
others, is not presumed to do it, animo donandi, as was found in the Case of
Co-principals, June 19. 1662. Mr. John Wallace contra Forks. June 28. 1665.
(...) contra Anderson. It was so found before, as was observed by Haddingtoun,
(...) contra Hunter. And upon the same ground, Relief is competent amongst
Cautioners, without Clause of Relief, because the payment of one liberats all,
June 27. 1675. Monteith contra Roger. Yea, Relief was found competent to a
Cautioner, who in a new Bond of Corroboration, had engaged for the Debt, with
the Principal, and that against the Cautioners in the first Bond, though he had
no Assignation to the Clause of Relief, granted to the first Cautioners, Spots.
Cautioners, Lubra contra david Vauns. The same must hold in Con-tutors,
Co-curators, and wherever more Debitors are liable, in solidum, for the same
Debt or deed.

TITLE IX. Reparation where, of Delinquences and Damnage thence arising.
1. The Obligation of Reparation of Damnages by Delinquence, a Natural
Obligation. 2. Delinquence infers the Obligation of Punishment, and Reparation
of the Injured. 3. Damnage Described. 4. Kinds of Delinquence. 5. Concurrers in
Delinquence, how liable. 6. Special kinds of Delinquences by our Customs. 7.
Assythment. 8. Extertion, vi majori and metus causa. 9. Circumvention by Fraud,
dolo malo. 10. The Edict, de dolo malo. 11. Circumvention rarely inferred by
witnesses. 12. Simulation, 13. Collusion. 14. The effect of Fraud, as to the
party Contracting. 15. Deeds done, in fraudem Creditorum, contrair the Act of
Parliament, 1621. anent Bankrupts. 16. The Nature of Spuilzie. 17. The Title of
Possession. 18. Oath, in litem, in Spulzies. 19. Spuilzie eleided by any
colorable Title, Warrant, or, bona sides. 20. Spulzie eleided by voluntar
Delivery. 21. By lawful Poynding. 22. Replies against Poynding. 23. Spuilzie
eleided by Restitution within twenty four hours. 24. Prescription of Spuilzies.
25. Intrusion and Ejection described and distinguisbed. 26. Ejection propper to
the Natural Possessour. 27. Exceptions against Ejections. 28. Mollestation. 29.
Breach of Arrestment and Deforcement. 30. Contravention.
AMONGST Obligations Obediential, we have placed these, which are by
Delinquence, because they arise without any Convention, Consent, or Contract,
either particularly, or by virtue of any Positive Law; and therefore, they must
needs have their Original from the Authority and Will of God, and of our
Obedience due thereto; for, though they do proceed from our Fact, and from our
Will, whence that Fact is voluntarly committed, yet it is not from our
Contracting Will; and therefore, these Obligations do not receive their
measure, or extent by our will.

1. That Obligations of Delinquence, are introduced by the Law of Nature, the
Suffrage of all Men, and all Nations will evince, who do every where
acknowledge the Reparation of Damnages, and Punishment of Crimes, and Injuries,
as having by Nature, a clear Evidence, and sharp Sense thereof; and thereupon,
can without Reluctance, concur with the Magistrate in the Punishment of
Citizens, and of Enemies by the sword.

But it may be doubted, how the Law of Nature, which is perpetual, and had
place chiefly in Innocence, can prescribe any thing in relation to Delinquency,
or Malifice, which was not to be found in that condition. This will be easily
cleared, if it be considered, that though Man was made in the state of
Innocence; yet had he a natural Instability, for which God did warn and arm
him; and though the Principal, and direct Law of Nature, did teach Man, to love
his Neighbor as himself; yet he could not but by consequence know (though he
had stood in Innocence, as do the Angels) that any who acted against that Royal
Law of Love, by doing evil to his Neighbor, and taking away from him that
which is his, ought to Repair him, and to be liable to Divine Justice, which is
that Certification, which God put upon his Natural Law, as he did more expressly
upon the forbidden Fruit, morte morieris.

2. An Obligation of Delinquence, is then, that whereunto Injury, or Malifice
does obliege, as the meritorious cause thereof, as the Will of God thereupon is
the efficient cause; and it is twofold, either that which relates to God, or
that which relates to Man; the former is the Obligation of Punishment, Pain,
or Penalty; for unto God, there can properly no Reparation be made by the
Creature, whose duty and service is due to him: so that to him the Creature is
obliged to underly the Punishment. In reference to Man is, the Obligation of
Reparing his Damnage, putting him in as good condition as he was in before the
Injury, and this only is Man's part for himself; for the inflicting of
Punishment is for God, in so far as it is Authorized, or allowed by him: but it
is not for, or from Man of himself, Revenge is mine, and I will repay, says
the Lord: For, as has been said before, an Obligation in the Debtor, has a
correspondent power of exaction in the Creditor, which is the personal Right.
So in Delinquence, the power of exaction of Reparation of his Damnage, is Man's
for himself: but the power of exacting Punishment, is in God; and, as for him,
or (...) it is (...) to Man; it is but a Ministerial Power, and not Dispensible
at (...) pleasure, and has an Obligation, whereby Man (...) bound to God, for
doing his duty therein: Though Positive Law, and (...) of (...), and in some
things, the Positive Law of God it self, may (...) a (...), and employ it for
the proper use of the Injured; yet it is not a proper punishment, that has its
force by Paction, or Positive Law, and nor by the Law of Nature. The Obligation
to Punishment, arising from (...), and Man's Power, and duty to inflict the
same, is a public Right; which, though naturally did concern every man, yet it
is now with Divine approbation, for most part devolved upon Public Authority,
which is said, Romans 13. (...) 3, 4. To be a terror to evil doers, and not to
bear the sword in vain; for be (...) the Minister of God, a Revenger, to
execute wrath upon him that (...): by which it is clear, that the Magistrate,
as he Executes Revenge, does (...) not of, or for himself; nor for, or from
the people, as their proper Right or power of exaction; but therein as he is
the Minister of God, he does (...) for, and from God, even though his Authority
and Commission, were not immediately from God, but from Man; yet he stands in
the place of these Men to God, to Execute that Revenge, which they themselves
are naturally obliged unto. But how far Man's Natural Duties, or the
Magistrates, in the Punishment of Crimes reaches, the Lines of the Law of
Nature, are become dark in many Points. It is manifest, and agreed by all, that
though in all Damnages done to man, there are also Punishments which may be
inflicted by God: yet, where the matter is chiefly Man's Interest, and so
Repairable to him; none will think, that it is a duty in all of these cases, to
inflict vengeance on such; neither does any own a Power, and necessity to
inflict Punishments for Man's Spiritual Delinquence, standing in his Mind and
Affection, as for want of Love, and Confidence, Hope, etc. In somethings also,
the power of Punishment is no less evident, even when there can be no
Reparation to man, as in that general Precept, of equal Crimes and Punishments,
Life for Life, Eye for Eye, Tooth for Tooth, etc. But there are many middle
Crimes, that are much more unclear, wherein the Word of God, even in the
Judicial Law, is an excellent Light; for we may safely conclude, that it would
be no Injustice or Intrusion, for man to vindicate these Crimes for the Lord,
which-himself gave order to Revenge. But our purpose being here, only to insist
in private Rights, we shall not follow these, nor the many (...) Questions that
rise on that matter; but shall return to the private Rights of Men, arising to
them by Delinquence, by exacting Reparation of their Damnages inferred thereby.

3. Damnage is called, damnum a (...); because it (...), or takes away
something from an other, which of Right he had. The Greeks for the like reason,
call it (...) by which Man has less then he had. It is not every Damnage that
raises this Obligation; for, some Damnages may be just, as these which are
inflicted by way of Punishment; and others may have their Reparation arising
from Contracts, whereby, though a Delinquence may arise, in nonperformance of
the Contract; yet the Original Cause of the Obligation is the Contract. Some
also arise from deeds or things, the nonperformance whereof is also a
Delinquence, as in the Obligations of Restitution and Recompense: but here are
only understood, Obligations which Originally arise from Delinquences, as the
first Cause thereof.

4. Delinquence in the Romon Law, is reduced into these four, furtum, rapina,
damnum, injuria; all which are separate from the public Crimes, wherein we
shall not insist, but follow Delinquences private, and Obligations and Actions
thence arising, as they are known by the Terms in our Law, in so far as they
use to be civilly prosecute; for though in public Crimes, which are Criminally
pursued, there is competent Reparation, either from the Nature of the Crime, or
from Law or Custom; yet that is incident unto a public Right, and not
ordinar, it shall in general suffice here to consider, that according to
several Rights and Enjoyments, our Damnages and Delinquencies, may be esteemed.

As first, our Life, and Members, and Health; which, though they be
inesteemable, and can have no Price, yet there are therewith incident Damnages,
and that either lucrum cessans, ceasing gain; or damnum emergens, loss. So the
Life of any being taken away, the Damnage of these who were entertained, and
maintained by his Life, as his Wife and Children, may be Repared. So likewise,
the loss any man has by the expenses of his Cure, or the loss of his Labor,
and Industry in his Affairs, is also Reparable.

Next to our Life, is our Liberty, and the Delinquences against it, are
Restraint and Constraint; though Liberty it self be inesteemable, yet the
Damnages sustained through these Delinquences, are Reparable.

The third is Fame, Reputation and Honor, which is also in some way Reparable;
First, by making up the Damnage that is inferred in Men's Goods, by the hurt of
then Fame, whereby their Gain cease, in that being repute such Persons, they
are disinabled for their Affairs; as if a Merchant be called a Bankrupt, it may
not only hinder his Traffic, but make all his Creditors fall upon him
suddenly to his ruin: so if a Man be called a Cheater, Deceiver, or the like,
it disables him to manage his Affairs, Men being unwilling to meddle with such.
And if a Man being about to Marry, be called Impotent, or to be infected with
any noisome Disease, he may be Demnified in his Match and Tocher: such Actions
upon Injurious Words, as they may relate to Damnage and Means, are frequent and
curious among the English; but with us, there is little of it accustomed to be
pursued, though we own the same Grounds, and would proceed to the same effects
with them, if questioned. Secondly, Damnage in Fame or Honor, is Repaired by
Homage, acknowledgement, or Ignominy put upon the Delinquent. Thirdly, By
equivalent Honor, and Vindication of the Injured. Slander is competent to be
Judged by Commissars; and therefore, a Decree of the Commissars of Edinburgh,
upon a pursuit for Slander and Defamation, decerning the Slanderer to make
acknowledgement of the Injury before the Congregation, and to pay an hundred
Pounds Scots to the Party, and as much to the Poor, was sustained by the Lords,
February 5. 1669. James Deans contra Alexander Bothwel.

The Fourth Interest that may be Damnified, is our Content, Delight, or
Satisfaction; and especially by the singular Affection to, or our opinion of,
the value or worth of any thing that owners have: in which consideration it is
said, that every thing is to every Man as he esteems it, and though this be
not the Intrinsic Value of the thing, nor the common Rate of it in the account
of Men, but praetium affectionis, the Rate that the affection of the owner puts
upon it; yet, that being free to him, and his Right, his Damnage therein ought
to be Repaired, according to the value himself, esteemed the thing taken from
him worth: on this Ground, in most Actions in the Civil Law, wherein there is
force, or Attrocious Injury, Reparation is to be made, according to the
reasonable estimation of the injured; and therefore, he has, juramentum in
litem, his Oath to declare how much he accounted himself damnified; the
exorbitancy whereof, might have been taxed by the Judge: but otherways, though
his estimation be much above the common value, it were receivable. This has
also place with us, as in Actions of Spuilzie, etc. and other Delinquences by
violence.

The last Damnage is in Goods and Possession, the Redress whereof, is more
clear, because the things themselves are more valuable and esteemable. In all
Reparations, the Natural Fruits and Profits of the thing taken away, come in as
part thereof: and in many cases, the Industrial Fruits and Profits, which the
owner might have had, at least used to make thereof.

Reparation is either by Restitution of the same thing, in the same case, that
it would have been in, if it had remained with the owner, and this is most
exact: or, where that cannot be, by giving the like value, or that which is
nearest to make up the Damnage, according to the desire of the Damnified; and
if none be found fitter, Reparation must be made in Money, which is the common
token of exchange, and has in it the value of every thing esteemable.

5. In the Reparation of Delinquences, it would be considered, when many have a
hand in it, who come in to be liable, and how far; for in some cases, the
Delinquence is committed by one principally, and others are but accessory: in
other cases the Delinquence is equally and principally committed by more,
though unto these also, there may be accessories.

Accession to Delinquence, is either Anterior, Concomitant, or Posterior to the
Delinquence it self: Anterior, is either by Counsel, Instigation, or
Provocation, or by Connivance, in foreknowing, and not hindering these whom
they might, or ought to have stopped; and that either specially, in relation to
one singular Delinquence, or generally, in knowing and not restraining, the
common and known inclination of the actors toward Delinquences of that kind;
as when a Master keeps outrageous and pernicicious Servants, or Beasts; and
therefore, in many cases, even by Natural Equity, the Master is liable for the
Damnage done by his Beast, as is clearly resolved in the Judicial Law, in the
case of the pushing ox, which if it was accustomed that he pushed
before-times, the owner is liable for the damnage thereof, as being obliged to
restrain: but if not, he is free. So the like may be said of Mastives, and
other Dogs, if they be accustomed to assault Men, their Goods, or Cattle, and
be not destroyed, or restrained, their owner is liable.

Hence also is that Famous Edict of the Praetor, in the Roman Law, Nuntae
caupones stabularii, quod salvum fore receperunt nisi restituant in eos
judicium dabo, by which the Masters of Taverns, Stables, or Ships, are liable
for Restitution (of what is brought in upon the account of their Employments)
of the Damnages that may be sustained by their Servants, or any other that
shall happen to be there for the time.

Concomitant Accession is, when the Accessories are not equally concurrent in
the Act, but countenance, or otherways assist, abett, cherish, praise, or
connive at the Delinquence. Posterior Accession, is by Ratihabition,
Approbation, Praise, (...) Defense, or Support of the (...), in order to the
(...) all these (...) in our Law, (...) (...) and Part.

As to the Question then, who of these co-operants are obliged, and how far?
First, It is clear, that where the Delinquence is committed by many alike,
there all of them are liable alike; but whether in equity they be all liable,
in solidum, or for the whole Reparation, it is not so (...). Positive Law has
made them all liable, in solidum, for the repressing such concurrences, and
that the injured be not put to the trouble of seeking in by parts, from the
several Delinquents; yet Equity would rather lay the Reparation of every Man's
part upon himself; and in case of his not being found Solvent or sufficient,
upon the rest, making up with all the trouble of obtaining Reparation from
many, by refounding the expenses in obtaining thereof, and the labor and
pains, and content of the injured. As to the Obligation of Punishment, of many
concurring Delinquents, if an Army, or a part of it in a Mutiny, all shoot at
on Person, if he be killed, it would not be thought just, for that ones life,
to take the lives of all; and therefore, because it cannot be known whose Ball
killed the man, it is accustomed, and not without good ground, by lot, to
single out who are to suffer, and the rest are free; from whence it may be
gathered, as in the Punishment, so in Reparation, fellow Delinquents, socii
criminis, are to concur in the Reparation, as they concurred in the Action;
though, as has been said, Positive Law does well to make all liable, in
solidum; yet so, that the satisfaction of one or more, liberats the rest.
Secondly, As to the Accessory Delinquents, though Delinquents by Command, be
numbered among them, yet (as we say) he does, that causes do; therefore such
are propper Efficients, though mediat; and therefore, no less liable then
Concurrents.

Thirdly, Other Accessories, albeit by Positive Law, they are (...) all, or
many of them, made liable, in solidum; yet as we have said of Concurrents, in
Equity they are liable; but according to the influence they had in the
Delinquence: but in these, the Obligation may be much more to the Punishment,
where the Will comes in to be considered with the Act, then in the Reparation,
where the damnage (which is the outward and more conspicuous thing) is mainly
considered; but in these we shall insist no further, but come to the
Obligations by Delinquence, which are civilly cognoscible by our Custom,
according to their known Names and Titles in Law: which, though they do rather
signify the Act or Actions, whereby such Obligations are incurred, or
prosecute, then the Obligations themselves, yet will they be sufficient to hold
out both.

6. These are either general, having no particular Name or Designation, and
such are pursued under the general Names of Damnage and Interest, which has as
many Branches and Specialities, as there can be valuable and reparable
damnages; besides these of a special Name and Nature, which are chiefly these,
Assythment, Extortion, Circumvention, Spuilzie, Intrusion, Ejection,
Molestation, breach of Arrestments, Deforcement, Contravention.

7. Assythment, as it signifies the Reparation made, so it insinuats the
Obligation to Repair Damnage sustained by Slaughter, Mutilation, or other
Injuries in the Members, or health of the Body; but it is chiefly pursued by
the Wife, or Bairns, or nearest of Kin, of Parties slain. In other cases, it is
competent to the Party mutilat or hurt, or otherways prejudged by the Muti the
mutilation, or hurt; and though the private Interest be only for Reparation of
Damnage and loss, yet our Custom applies much of that, which is paenal
therein to the Injured; and therefore, consideration is had of the Ability and
Estate of the Offender, and the Assythment is accordingly modified, all
Circumstances being considered, and that either against the Principal Offender,
or the Accessories: So was it found in the pursuit, at the Instance of Patrick
and Isobel Greers, for the Assythment and Slaughter of their Brother against
Thomas Horn Baxter, Nic. de siccariis, this Action was so favorable, that it
was sustained, though there was no particular quantity of Damnage libelled, but
the same referred to the Lords, Spots. Summonds and Libel; and though it was
pursued by one of many Brethren, his part was decerned, reserving the Right of
the rest, January 8. 1577. Ker contra

Yea, it was sustained, at the instance of some of the Kin, though not of the
nearest degree, and though there were not some concurring of the four Branches
of the slain, it is a sufficient proof in this Action, if the Defender have
taken Remission, as was found in the case of Greer. And the like is observed,
January 25. 1611. Drew contra Home in Montrose, where the Defender was not
freed, though he had an acknowledgement under the Defuncts hand, and that he
was cause of the wound, and therefore quit the wrong. Assythment is a
Privileged Action, as recent Spulzie, Par. 1528. cap. 7.

8. Extortion signifies the Act of Force, or other mean of fear, whereby a
Person is compelled to do that, which of their proper inclination, they would
not have done. It does also imply the Obligation of the Injurer to the Injured,
to Repair his loss and damnage by such Acts; things so done, are said to be
done, vi majori, or metus causa, by force or fear; deeds or obligations
extorted, are in their own nature and equity, efficacious, because they have
truly the consent or act of the will, by which such Rights are constitute; and
therefore, the Romans had no civil remeid in their ancient Law for such, till
the Edict of the Praetor, quod metus causa gestum erat ratum non habebo, l. 1.
ff. quod metus causa; but by that Edict, and the Custom of this and other
Nations, such Deeds and Obligations, as are by force and fear, are made utterly
void, though in equity, the effect almost would be the same; for seeing the
Delinquence done by Extortion, oblieges to Reparation; if any should be pursued
upon an extorted Obligation, he would have the exception of Compensation upon
the obliegement of Reparation, and so might also by Action, obtain such
Obligation, or other Right to be anulled.

This Edict was not Competent upon every force or fear, but first, it behoved
to be unlawful, l. 3.. 1. ff. quod metus causa. Secondly, Such as might befall a
constant man, as of Life, l. 6, 7, 8, 9. ff. l. 9. C. eodem, or torment of the
Body, l. 4. C. eodem, or of bondage, l. 8.. 1. ff. eodem, or the loss of
Estate, l. 9. ff. quod metus causa, or infamy or disgrace, l. 8.. 2. ff. eodem,
or of bonds and prison, l. 22. ff. eodem: but only unlawful and private, and
not public Imprisonment, l. 3.. 1. ff. eodem, it was not Competent upon
reverential fear, l. 8. ff. l. 6. C. eodem: nor upon fear contracted upon
power, and dignity, d. l. 6. nor of threats, l. 9. C. eodem, except they were
from powerful persons, l. 23.. 1. quod metus causa. The effect of the Edict
was, being pursued within a year, unless Reparation was made before Sentence,
the Party was condemned in the quadruple, and the penalty was triple, and
applied to the Injured, and after the year simple Reparation, l. 14.. 1. ff.
eodem. Our Customs go much along with the course of the Civil Law in this, but
so, as not bound thereby, respecting most when the true Reciprocal Cause of the
Obligation or Deed, is Force or Fear, not being vain or foolish Fear. And it is
competent ordinarily by way of Action, or sometimes by exception, Spots.
Exceptions, Tennants of Cockburns-path contra the Earl of Home, it was eleided
by a Judicial Ratification of the Deed upon Oath, July 4. 1642. Agnes Graham
contra Anthony Balvaird. Extortion is more easily sustained in deeds of weaker
persons; and therefore, Extortion was found relevant to reduce a Disposition,
by a facile weak person, who was apprehended by the purchaser upon a Caption of
a third party, and detained by his Servants and Officers, and not by
Messengers, and kept latent in obscure Houses, and carried from Place to
Place in the Night, till he subscribed a Disposition of his whole Estate, for a
cause not near the third of its value, albeit there was produced a cancelled
minute to the same effect, with the Disposition in question, wherein the two
Actors of the Force, were Witnesses insert; but the Disponers name, nor no part
of it was to be seen, but a lacerat place, as if it had been cancelled, without
any anterior adminicle to astruct the truth of it, January 10. 1677. Sir
Archibald Stuart of Castlemilk contra Sir John Whitefoord and the Duke of
Hamiltoun. Extortion falls most to be contraverted in deeds done by Wives; and
therefore, when the deed is extremely to their prejudice, and to the behove of
their Husbands, it is presumed as done, ex reverentia maritali. Thus a Wifes
Discharge of her whole Contract, was found null, without alleging any
Compulsion, January 9. 1623. Marshel contra Marshel: But ordinarily, Marital
reverence is not sufficient, though the Husband were vir foerox, and was
thereafter Divorced, Hope, Husband and Wife, Hepburn contra Nasmith. In the
case of Wives Dispositions, or consent to their Husbands Disposition, it was
found relevant to reduce the same, that the Wife, at the time of the
subscribing, before the Witnesses declared that she was compelled, providing
that a third party, a stranger to the Husbands fault, were restored, Nicol. de
his quae vi, Lady Cockpen contra Lord of Conheath. It was also found relevant,
to reduce a Wifes consent to her Husbands Disposition; because, before he had
beaten, menaced, and extruded her for not consenting: But in this case, it
being alleged, that the Wife appeared well content at the subscription,
Witnesses were examined, hinc inde ex officio, for trial of the truth June 27.
1632. Cassie contra Fleming. But where a Husband was proven to be, vir foerox,
and that he did threaten his Wife to do the deed in question, and that she
appeared to the Witnesses, unwilling the time of the subscription, it was found
relevant, June 24. 1664. Woodhead contra Barbara Nairn. But a Wife subscribing
her Husbands Testament, containing provisions prejudicial to her Contract of
Marriage, was not reponed, as having done it, ex reverentia maritali, at her
Husbands desire, who was moribundus, he having lien long sick, and she having
married within a year thereafter, and the deed done to her only Daughter,
January 24. 1674. Marjory Murray and Michael Jaffray contra Isobel Murray. Upon
the like ground, Extortion will be the more easily presumed, and sustained in
the deeds of the persons, who are weak and infirm of Judgment or Courage, then
of these who are Knowing and Confident, and more easily in Deeds and
Obligations gratuitous and free, then in such as are for an Onerous Cause,
which will not easily be anulled, unless manifest Lesion do appear, or that the
compulsion be very evident. Yet the Resignation of the Earldome of Mortoun in
the hands of King James the fifth, was reduced, because the Resigner was then
imprisoned by the King, without any visible cause, and was discharged the same
day he made the Resignation, Sinclar, April, 12. 1543. Earl of Mortoun contra
the Queen. Metus was sustained to reduce a Bond granted by a party, because he
was taken by Caption, being sick, January 22. 1667. Mr. John Mair contra Stuart
of Shambelly. It was also sustained, to reduce a Bond, granted by two Sons, for
freeing their Father, who was taken by a Caption, though the Charge was
suspended, he being carried to the hills, and Menaced on his Life, though the
Sons got abatement, and so there appeared a Transaction, December 8. 1671.
Mcnish contra Spalding and Farquherson.

9. Circumvention signifies the Act of Fraud, whereby a person is induced to a
Deed or Obligation by deceit, it is called dolus malus, and it must needs be
the cause of the Obligation or Deed, and so not be known to the party induced,
before it can have any legal effect; for he who knows the snare, cannot be
said to be ensnared, but to ensnare himself; and though deceit were used, yet
where it was not deceit that was the cause of the Obligation or Deed, but the
parties proper motion, inclination, or an equivalent cause, Onerous, it infers
not Circumvention; so neither does error, nor mistake, though it be the cause
of the Obligation or Deed, and be very prejudicial to the erring party; and
though if it had been fraudulently induced by the other party, it would have
been sufficient; yet not being so, there is no Circumvention, and the Deed is
valid, unless the error be in the Substantials of the deed, and then there is
no true consent, and the deed is null, as if one Married Sempronia, supposing
she were Maevia; the Marriage has no further progress (but by subsequent
consent) and it is void; but if he Married Sempronia, supposing her to be a
Virgin, rich or well natured, which were the inductives to his consent, though
he be mistaken therein, seeing it is not in the Substantials, the Contract is
valid, but if the error or mistake, which gave the cause to the Contract, were
by Machination, Project or Endeavor of any other then the party errant, it
would be Circumvention, l. 2.. 1. and 2. ff. de doli mali and metus exceptione,
so that there is nothing more frequently to be adverted, then whether the error
be through the parties own fault, or through the deceit of an other; and
therefore errore lapsus and dolo circumventus are distinct defects in deeds.

10. The Roman Praetor, among other perpetual Edicts, did give this of fraud,
quae dolo malo facta esse dicuntur, si de his rebus alia actio non erit, and
justa causa videbitur judicium dabo, l. 1.. 1. ff. de dolo malo. This Edict was
competent, either by way of Action or Exception, l. finali, ff. eodem; and in
hatred of Fraud, these who were condemned of this action became infamous, l.
ff. de his qui notantur infamia; and therefore, as the Edict expresses it, it
was not competent, if there was any other more favorable remeid: neither was
it competent for a very small sum, not exceeding two Crowns, l. 9.. finali, ff.
de dolo malo: neither was it competent to Children against their Parents, nor
to the Vulgar against these of consular Dignity, nor to vile persons, against
those of an orderly life, l. 11. ff. eodem. It was also personal, and reached
no further then the person committing the Fraud, and not in rem, reaching the
thing, if lawfully it came to any other not partaking of the Fraud, dolus
authoris non nocet successori, l. 4.. 27. C. de doli mali and metus exceptione
nisi in causa lucrativa Ibidem, so that the deed done thereby, was not rendered
null, as in Extortion. But Reparation given to the injured, to the single value
only, Infamy being a sufficient penalty, but according to the estimation, by
the Oath, in litem, of the party injured, l. 18. ff. eodem, and tit. ff. and
Cod. de in litem jurando.

The Romans had also their actio redhibitoria and quanti minoris, whereby the
deceived might obtain, what damnage they had by the Fraud, or might thereby
anull the bargain. And where Lesion was very great, Fraud was presumed, as when
the price exceeded the double value of the Ware: but they did not consider
small differences betwixt the Ware and price, which would have raised
multitudes of Debates, hurtful to Trade, the design whereof, is to gain; and
therefore, nothing to induce a moderate gain was questionable: as when
Merchants set out their Ware, or though they should falsely assert, it cost
them so much, and others had given them so much, or that the Ware was
fashionable or good; there was no civil remeid, unless the damnage were
considerable. In which sense only it is true, in comercio licet decipere;
because, though it be not simply lawful, yet it is against no Civil Law. But
the Sophistication of Ware, or concealing of the insufficiency thereof, was
held Fraudulent and Reparable, action redhibitoria aut quanti minoris.

We have the more fully summed up the Sentence of the Civil Law, in the matter
of Fraud, because it is most equitable and expedient; and therefore, is
generally followed by our Custom, which regards not inconsiderable damnages
in Traffic, that it may be current and secure, for nothing is more
prejudicial to Trade, then to be easily involved in pleas, which diverts
Merchants from their Trade, and frequently marres their gain, and sometimes
their credit; therefore we allow not the quarrelling of Bargains upon presumed
Fraud, ex re ipsa, although that which is bought be within the half of the just
price, if there be not sophistication, or latent insufficiency, which we
exactly consider, because it is destructive to Trade, Vide tit. 10.. 14, and 15.

11. Fraud is not to be presumed, but must be proven, and is always competent
to be proven by the Oath or Write of the Party committing the Fraud, when the
question is betwixt himself and the Party prejudged, whereby it may be proven,
that he designed to deceive, or that he did such Acts from whence Fraud is
presumed, which by his Oath he may qualify, what he did, and why he did it,
and if there be a probable construction, that the deeds done were not to
deceive, Fraud will not be thence presumed, and will hardly be presumed in a
person of entire Fame and honest Life, but much more easily in these who have
been found to Defraud, or are so reputed: And it being ordinar for Parties to
allege contrary or different Circumstances, to infer or exclude Fraud;
therefore the Lords do neither give the benefit or burden of Probation to the
one Party, but do state the points of moment alleged, or what others they
think fit for clearing the truth, and allow either Party to prove, where their
alledgeances are not contrary; and where they are contrary, there are abstract
Queries stated, as to which, either Party may adduce such an equal number of
Witnesses as is prescribed, as whether a Write was read at the signing, and
what the condition of the Parties then were; for the not reading of a Write at
subscribing, will not alone infer Fraud, because it might have been read
before; yea, it was not sustained to be proven by Witnesses, that a Write was
not read at subscribing, though there was great Lesion to the subscriber, in
favors of his Curator, sine quo non, within six Months after his Majority,
ante redditas rations. And that a Wodset was commoned, yet the Write bore an
irredeemable Disposition, July 4. 1635. Lord of Monymusk contra Lord Lesly.
But these Circumstances would have been certainly relevant by the Oath of
Party, or Write. Neither was Witnesses admitted to prove Circumvention, in
causing a Testator give Warrant to a Nottar to subscribe a Testament unread, of
a Tenor, (...) to what the Testator expressed, Hope, Testament, nearest of Kin
of the Lady Innerleith contra her Executors. Neither were Witnesses admitted to
prove the Fraud of a Debtor, retiring a Bond from a Person, whose Name was
only in trust for another, to whom the Debtor had paid Annualrent, July 4.
1622. Barckley contra Cuningham. But where the deeds alleged can have no fair
construction, but do infer Fraud, Witnesses are receivable, as in a Collusion
betwixt a Creditor and Debtor, whom the Creditor brought home from abroad,
that he might prevent the diligence of an other Creditor, who had denunced that
Debitors Lands to be Apprized, upon sixty days: but upon return of the Debtor,
this Creditor denunced upon fifteen days, and so did first Apprize: yet the
first Denunciation and last Apprysing was preferred, Hope, de dolo, Sir Hendry
Wardlaw contra Thomas Dalyel. And the Liferent Escheat of a Vassal was
excluded, because the Superior, upon whose Horning it fell, had taken payment
of the Debt, and had not acquainted the Vassal that he was Denunced, that he
might have relaxed within the year, as was found in the same case, Ibidem.
Though this case and that of latent insufficiency, be rather, lata culpa quae
dolo equiparatur, for the difference betwixt dolus and lata culpa, is, that
dole est magis animi, and oftentimes by Positive Acts, and lata culpa, is
rather facti, and oftentimes by Omission of that which the Party is obliged to
show. A Discharge was found null, as to an Assigney, to a Bond granted by one
Brother to another, the Discharge being of the same date with the Bond, which
could have no construction, but that the Brother by assigning the Bond might
deceive, December 4. 1665. Thomson contra Henderson. And a Discharge by a Son
to his Father, of a Sum provided to him by his Contract of Marriage, without
satisfaction, But upon agreement betwixt the Father and the Son, the time of
the Contract, that the Sum in the Contract should be Discharged gratis, was
found fraudulent and null, as to the Sons Creditors, who Traded with him, even
after the Discharge, January 21. 1680. Isobel Caddel contra John Raith. And a
Liferent by a Husband to his Wife, of his whole Estate, providing she disponed
the half to the Children of the Marriage, was found fraudulent, as to that
half, and the Creditors of the Husband preferred to the Children therein,
December 23. 1679. John Erskin contra Carnagies and Smith. But where the
Liferent was but suitable to the Parties, a clause therein, that so much of it
should be applied for the Aliment of the Children, that clause was not found
fraudulent, in prejudice of the Husbands Creditors, but was sustained to the
Children, it flowing only from the Mother, November 16. 1668. Wat contra Russel.

12. Under Fraud, Simulation and Collusion are comprehended; Simulation occurs
mainly in two cases, in Dispositions, retenta possessione; for although the
Disposition be delivered, and that there be Instruments of delivery of the
Goods Disponed: yet if the natural Possession be retained, the Disposition is
presumed simulat, and others affecting the things disponed by Legal Diligence,
or by natural Possession are preferred.

Simulation in Gifts of Escheat and Liferent, are very frequent and easily
presumed, retenta possessione, Vide Tit. 25.. 12.

13. Collusion occurs chiefly, when the Debtor or common Author opposes some
Creditors, and concurs with others, that these may attain the first complete
Diligences, which imports direct Fraud: or if he oppose one, though he do not
concur with an other, but only not oppose that other, his opposition is holden
as Fraudulent.

14. Fraud gives remeid by Reparation, to all that are damnified thereby,
against the Actor of the Fraud, either by anulling of the Contract, or other
deed elicit or induced by Fraud, or by making up the damnage sustained by the
Fraud, at the option of the injured, and so Fraud was sustained at the instance
of a Seller, to anull a Bargain of sale of Wines, delivered to a Skipper, upon
the Buyers order; because the time of that order, the Buyer knew himself to be
insolvent, which might appear by his Books: and though the Wines were Arrested
by a Creditor of the Buyers, in the Ship, and a Decree for making forthcoming
recovered; yet the Wines were ordained to be restored to the Seller, December
22. 1680. Magnus Prince contra Peter Pallet.

15. Reparation of Fraud, is not only competent to the Party defrauded, but
also to his Creditors, or Assignays, for which the Romans had a peculiar
remeid, Per actionem Paulianam, for anulling all deeds, in fraudem Creditorum:
in imitation whereof, the Lords of Session made an Act of Sederunt, in July,
1620. against unlawful Dispositions and Alienations, made by Dyvers and
Bankrupts, which was Ratified by Act of Parliament, 1621. cap. 18. By this Act
of Sederunt, the Lords declare, that according to the Power given to them to
set down Orders for Administration of Justice, meaning to follow and practice
the good and commendable Laws, Civil and Canon, made against Fraudful
Alienations, in prejudice of Creditors, against the Authors and Partakers of
such Fraud, that they will Decern all Alienations, Dispositions, Assignations
and Translations, made by the debtor of any of his Lands, Teinds, Reversions,
Actions, Debts, or Goods whatsomever, to any conjunct and confident Person,
without true, just and necessary Causes, and without a just price, really
paid, the same being done after contracting of lawful Debts, to have been from
the beginning null, by way of Action or Exception, without further Declarator,
but prejudice to purchasers of the Bankrupts Lands and Goods, for just and
competent Prices, or in satisfaction of their lawful Debts, from the Interposed
Persons: But the Receiver of the Price from the Buyer, shall be holden to make
it forthcoming to the Creditors: and it shall be sufficient to prove by Write,
or Oath of the Receiver of the Disposition from the Bankrupt, that the same was
made without a true and just Cause, or that the Lands and Goods being sold by
him that bought them from the Dyver, that the most part of the Price was
converted, or to be converted to the Bankrupts profit and use: And in case the
Bankrupt, or interposed Person, shall make any voluntar Payment, or Right to
any Person, he shall be holden to make the same forthcoming to the Creditor,
having used the first lawful Diligence, and he shall be preferred to the
Concreditor, who being posterior to him in diligence, has obtained payment by
the partial favor of the Debtor, or his interposed Confident; and shall
recover from the said Creditor, what he has so obtained: But what the
interposed Person has paid, or assigned to the Bankrupts lawful Creditor,
before preferable diligence done by others, shall be allowed to him, and he
shall be liable to make forthcoming the rest of the price: Yea, the said
Bankrupts, and interposed Persons, and all others who shall give Counsel and
Assistance, in devising and practizing the Fraud, shall be holden infamous,
incapable of Honor, Dignity, or Office, or to be Witnesses, or Assyzers.

This excellent Statute has been cleared by Limitations and Extentions, in
multitudes of Decisions, occurring since, relating to defrauding of Creditors,
which being of the greatest importance for Public Good and Security. We shall
distinctly and in order, hold forth the several Cases that have been decided in
this matter.

First then, though the Statute be only in favors of anterior Creditors, for
anulling posterior Deeds; yet it is not exclusive of other Remeids, for
anulling Deeds done in defraud of Creditors, though contracting after these
Deeds, where Fraud in the design does evidently appear, whereof we have now
instanced several Decisions. So a Bond granted by a Father to a Son,
forisfamiliat, payable after the Fathers Death, was Reduced at the Instance of
the Fathers posterior Creditors, continuing Traffic with him; February 1669.
Pott contra Pollock. And a Bond payable only by the granters Heir, if he had no
Heir of his own Body, was Reduced as Fraudulent, January, 24. 1677. Blair of
Ardblair contra Wilson. And a Disposition of Lands, purchased by a Merchant to
his Son, was found Affectable for the Debts of Merchants Strangers, who began
to Trade with the Father before the Disposition, and continued after, even as
to the posterior Debts, seeing the Father continued still to act as Proprietar,
though by his Count Book, it appeared he knew himself to be Insolvent: And
though the Sons Infeftment was public and Registrat, which stranger Merchants
were not obliged to know, July 2. 1673. Street and Jackson contra Masson. Yea,
an Infeftment by a Father to his eldest Son, an Infant was reduced at the
Instance of posterior Creditors his neighbors; where the Seasing was
Registrat, seeing the Register was carried out of the Country, and the Father
continued to act, not as Liferenter, but as Proprietar, December 4. 1673. Reid
of Bullochmyle contra Reid of Daldillin. And generally, Latent Rights amongst
confident persons, are reduceable by posterior Creditors: But the Liferent of
the whole Conquest of a Merchant, provided in a Contract of Marriage to his
Wife, being an ordinary Clause, was not found fraudulent, February 10. 1674.
Marion Gray contra the Son and Creditors of her Husband.

Secondly, though this Statute bears all Alienations, without Cause onerous, in
prejudice of prior Creditors to be null, ab initio, and without declarator by
exception, or reply: Yet Custom has found this inconsistent with the nature
of Infeftments, which cannot be reduced, till they be first produced, and all
the Authors called, which cannot be by way of exception, but by action. But a
Disposition of Movables was found anullable by reply, November 18. 1669.
Henderson contra Henderson. June 18. 1671. Bower contra Lady Couper. And
likeways, a profitable Tack, February 6. 1662. Doctor Hay contra Marjory
Jamison. Neither are the receivers of such Alienations comptable for the
profits, ab initio, till they be put, in mala fide, by the pursuites of
anterior Creditors, whose Rights they are not presumed to know, till they be
produced, and found preferable.

Thirdly, Though the Title of this Statute, and much of the Body of it be
against the Alienations of Bankrupts, in prejudice of their Creditors: yet the
Statutory part declares against all Alienations to any conjunct or confident
person, without a just price, being in prejudice of anterior Creditors to be
anulled, which has always been extended, not only to Dispositions of
Bankrupts, made to confident persons, but to any person without a competent
price, or equivalent cause onerous; and therefore, such gratuitous Deeds are
reduceable by anterior Creditors, though the granter was not then Bankrupt, as
a broken Merchant flying: But if he were before, or did by these fraudulent
Deeds become insolvent, Hope, Usury, Pringle contra Ker. February 16. 1628.
Kilgour contra Thomson. January 17. 1632. Skeen contra Belstoun. Yea, if
thereby his Estate cannot afford ready Satisfaction or Security, as being
encumbered with many Appryzings, or Adjudications, though the Reversions may be
equivalent to all his Debt: Yet anterior Creditors may reduce gratuitous deeds
done by such persons, being more fit that anterior Creditors should be
preferred, and the obtainers of these gratuitous Rights should be put to recur
upon the Reversions, by their warrandice, February 10. 1665. Lady Craig contra
Lord Lour.

But there is nothing in this Statute, or by Custom, to anull any gratuitous
deed in favors of Wives, Children or Strangers, if at the time of the granting
and delivery thereof, the granter had an Estate sufficient for these, and all
his Debts unaffected by Appryzing, Adjudication, or Arrestment. Neither will
Inhibition suffice, nor Apprizing, or Arrestment for small Sums, to be a ground
for this Reduction.

Competent provisions to Wives or Husbands, are not accounted gratuitous, but
onerous, ad sustinenda onera Matrimonij, and for mutual Provisions: But if
exorbitant, they will be liable, in quantum locupletiores facti, December 23.
1661. Dam Rachel Burnet contra Lepers. Neither are Provisions or Gifts to
Children anullable by anterior Creditors, if the granter had then a visible
Estate, sufficient for these, and all his Debts, as was found in a provision by
a Father to his Son, by his Contract of Marriage, though the Son received the
Tocher, June 22. 1680. Grant of Cairnhauch Contra Grant of Elshes. November 10.
1680. Mckel contra Jamison and Wilson. Yea, the Portions of Children were not
excluded by prior Creditors, their Father having then a sufficient visible
Estate, though ex eventu, it proved insufficient, by running on of Annuals, and
Accumulations of Appryzings, December 11. 1679. Creditors of Muswall contra
Children of Nuswald. June 30. 1675. Clerk contra Stuart and Williamson. And so
a Disposition by a Grandfather to his Oye, was not annulled by Anterior
Creditors, March 6. 1632. Lord of Grantoun contra Ker.

Fourthly, Though this Statute requires a just price, it did not anull a
Disposition, though a prior Creditor offered a greater price, if the price
received was the ordinary Rate of the Country; and though there was a personal
Reversion to the Disponers eldest Son only, January 16. 1677. Earl of Glencairn
contra John Brishane. The like, where the pursuer had obtained a prior minute
of Sale, for a greater price; yet it did not reduce a posterior Infeftment
purchased, bonafide, though for a lesser price, being competent, July 18. 1677.
Murray of Kilor contra Drummond of Machanie.

Fifthly, Though the Statute mentions only the anulling of Dispositions, etc.
yet it is ordinarily extended to Bonds, or obliegements, whereupon Appryzing,
Adjudication, or Arrestment follow.

Sixthly, Though Dispositions or other Rights be, fore equivalent Causes
Onerous: yet by the posterior part of the Statute, they are accounted
fraudulent and reducible, if the Bankrupt, or the interposed person in Trust,
do by voluntar gratification, prefer one Creditor to another, who has done
more timeous and lawful diligence: where by, Bankrupt, is not only to be
understood a notour Bankrupt, but any person insolvent, or by the preference
becoming insolvent, or who has not a sufficient visible inaffected Estate, for
his other Creditors. But where a Debtor of an intear Estate, pays his lawful
Creditor, or satisfies him by Dispositions, or Assignations, neither the Tenor
nor Extention of the Statute reaches these Cases; albeit there be inchoat and
incomplete Diligence, at the Instance of other Creditors.

Seventhly, Where that Clause of the Statute bears the annulling of Deeds done
in gratification, or preference of one Creditor to another, who has done more
timeous Diligence by Inhibition, Horning, Arrestment, Compryzing, or other
lawful mean, duly to affect the Dyvers Lands, or Goods, or Price thereof; the
meaning is, that when these Diligences are not complete, but Inchoat, and the
Creditor is, in cursu diligentiae; the Debtor or his Trustee, cannot prevent
the course of that Diligence, by preferring another Creditor, doing less
Diligence: For, if the meaning were, of Appryzing, perfected by Infeftment, or
Arrestment, by Decree, to make forthcoming, there needed not this remeid; for
these Diligences being complete, would exclude any other posterior Disposition
or Diligence: Yea, Inhibition, if the Executions were complete and Registrat,
would of it self be effectual to Reduce, ex capite inhibitionis: But if these
Diligences be only Inchoat, as if the Inhibitor had begun his Execution; but
had not completed it at all the Market Crosses requisite, any Disposition,
Infeftment, or other real Right made to another Creditor, medio tempore, less
vigilent, is anullable thereby, December 15. 1665. and February 27. 1667. Mr.
John Eleis contra Keith and Wishart. Or if Lands be Denunced to be Appryzed, or
Summonds of Adjudication be execute, Rights thereafter made to other Creditors
doing less Diligence, in cursu diligentiae, with the first, are thereby
reducible, although done before the Decree of Apprysing or Infeftment: But
Inhibition, Apprysing, or Adjudication Inchoat, have no effect as to Moveable
Rights, not being as the Statute requires, Diligences duly to affect that
subject. Neither does the laying on of Arrestment affect Heretable Rights, and
so cannot hinder the Debtor to Dispone these to lawful Creditors, doing less
Diligence: But Horning is a Diligence, relating both to the Moveable Estate, by
single Escheat, and the Heretable Estate, by Liferent Escheat; and therefore,
after the Charge of Horning it is effectual, February 12. 1675. Veach contra
the Executors of Ker and Pallat. July 18. 1677. Murray of Kilor contra Drummond
of Machany. January 25. 1681. Bathgate contra Bogil. It has not been yet
cleared by practice, if insisting in Processes for constituting Debts, be
comprehended under other lawful means, duly to affect the Debitors Lands or
Goods.

But this Statute will not (...) Dispositions, or other Rights made in favors
of these persons, who have used the most effectual Diligence, duly to affect
the Subject, because this prevents Expenses, prejudicial both to the Debtor
and Con-creditors, and is not contrary this Statute.

Neither will Dispositions, or other Rights for equivalent Causes Onerous, made
to Creditors, be anulled, if not done, in cursu diligentiae; but if the
Con-creditor insist not in his Inchoat Dillgence, till it be complete, he has
not the benefit of the Statute, vigilantibus, non dormientibus jura subveniunt;
and therefore, a Disposition was not Reduced at the Instance of a Creditor, who
had Appryzed before the Disposition, but for several years had neither obtained
Infeftment, nor charged the Superior, February 8. 1681. John Neilson contra
Ross of Pittendreich. But how long this negligence must be to exclude it, must
necessarily be, in arbitrio judicis.

But this Clause of the Statute will not anull Dispositions made to buyers, for
a just price paid, where the price was not an anterior Debt due to the buyer;
for there, there is not preference of one Creditor to another, but a lawful
Bargain in Commerce, where the buyer neither does, nor can know Inchoat
Diligences, but only such as are complete and Registrat, except in the case
where the Subject becomes Litigious, which is not to be extended to every
diligence, in prejudice of Puchasers of Lands, whereby Rights would become very
uncertain, especially when Irredeemable Rights are purchased; but against the
purchasing of Bonds, Annualrents, or Wodsets, it may be more extended as in the
former case, February 8. 1681. Neilson contra Ross of Pittendreich. This
Defense was also sustained, that the Disposition was for a price paid, and for
no anterior Debt. And in the former case, Bathgate contra Bogil, the
Disposition after Horning, though it was in the terms of sale, was only
anulled, because it was granted for anterior Debts, due to the buyer.

Fraud is no vitium reale, affecting the Subject, but only the committer of the
Fraud, and these who are partakers of the Fraud, as is clear by this Statute,
bearing an exception of lawful Purchasers, not partakers of the Fraud. But
where the Right purchased, has evidence of Fraud in it self, the Purchaser,
though for a just price paid, is thereby partaker of the Fraud, and so may be
excluded, as if the Right acquired bore, for love and favor: or if it be
betwixt conjunct persons, the Purchaser must instruct the Cause Onerous; as
when the Right purchased was from one Brother to another, December 28. 1679.
Gordoun of (...) contra Ferguson of Keroch. January 24. 1680. Andrew Crawford
contra James Ker.

Eighthly, Though the manner of Probation by this Statute, be by the Oath of the
Purchaser, or Write: Yet the Narrative of such Rights, being betwixt conjunct
Persons, albeit it bear Causes Onerous; must be otherways astructed, wherein
Witnesses, and other Exidences will be received, which is not only sustained.
As to Dispositions by Parents to Children, but by Brothers and Sisters to
Brothers, or to Good-Brothers and Good-Sisters: yet not to two persons Marrying
two Sisters, or two Brothers, where there is but affinitas affinitatis: It has
also been extended to Uncle and Nephew, where other Circumstances concurred,
January 18. 1678. Kinloch of Gourdy contra Mr. George Blair. December 18. 1673.
Creditors of Tarsapy contra Lord of Kinsans.

The like effect is in Rights, acquired in name of Children in the Family, who
have no visible Estate, for these are held fraudulent, and may be affected for
the Fathers Debt, as has been frequently decided.

This Case only remains, whither a notour Bankrupt may prefer one Creditor to
another, though neither have done Diligence. The Tenor of the Statute favors
the Negative, annulling Alienations by Bankrupts, not being for an equivalent
and necessar Cause; and therefore, it is not safe to purchase from such, even
by buying.

16. Spuilzie is the taking away of Movables without consent of the Owner, or
Order of Law, oblieging to Restitution of the things taken away, with all
possible profits, or Reparation thereof, according to the estimation of the
Injured, made by his juramentum in litem. Thus things Stolen or Robbed, though
they might be Criminally pursued, as Thest or Robbery: Yet may they be civily
pursued as a Spuilzie.

Spuilzie, inurit labem realem, whereby the Goods may be recovered from
Purchasers, bona fide, November 21. 1677. James Key contra Leonard Carnagy and
others. The profit of things Spuilzied, are called violent profits; because
they are not such ordinary profits, as the Persons Spuilzied used to make of
the Goods, but such as he might have made thereof. Where the things Spuilzied
have profits, as Horse, Oxen, or other Cattle, and Instruments, or other Tools;
but Corns and the like have no profits. The violent profits of a Horse
Spuilzied in Laboring time, was modified to five Shilling Scots, per diem,
February 28. 1668. Lord Justice Clerk contra Home of Lenthil: but the
modification depends much upon the violence, and attrocity of the Spuilzie.

17. In Spuilzies, the Pursuer needs no other Title but Possession, from
whence, in Movables a Right is presumed; and therefore, Spuilzie of Goods in
Coffers was sustained upon the Pursuers having the Keys, and the Defenders
breaking up the Coffers, not being done by Parents or Masters, July 25. 1676.
Rachel Maxwel contra Mr. Hugh Maxwel and Marion Maxwel. A Relict in Possession
was admitted to pursue a Spuilzie of Corns, Sown and Reaped by her Husband,
though not Comfirmed by her, July 26. 1626. Janet Russel contra Spuilzies must
be by unlawful meddling, or accession thereto; and therefore, it was found
relevantly Lybelled, that the Goods Spuilzied were immediately received into the
Defenders House, January 26. 1628. Earl of Roxburgh contra Lord of Lugtoun.
The like was found, that it was Spuilzie in the case of accession; because the
Defender received the Spuilzied Goods, that night in his Byres, December 2.
1609. contra Dennistoun. Yet a Spuilzie was not sustained against a Person as
accessory, who being charged by the Messenger, did Appryze the Goods upon the
Ground, though in other Solemnities the Poynding was illegal, for which he was
not answerable, Hope, Spuilzie, Patrick Butter contra Alexander Gordoun. But
where the Pursuer transacted with one of the Parties guilty for good deed, all
the rest were freed, though he may freely pass or forbear the Pursuit of any of
them, June 20. 1611. Douglas contra Leich and Jamison. Yea, Sums were proven
paid by Witnesses, which was found sufficient. The like found by a Discharge
to one of the Parties, though it bore not Satisfaction, Hope, Spuilzie, Mr.
John Douglas contra Young, though the Discharge did bear, but prejudice of the
Spuilzie against the rest.

18. In Spuilzie, the Fact being proven or acknowledged, as to some particulars
libelled, the Pursuers Oath will be admitted to prove the rest of the Libel,
though consisting of diverse Kinds of things, March 8. 1628. Brown contra Murray.

19. Spuilzie is elided, if the Deed was warrantably done, at least, bona fide,
by a collourable Title, as by Custom, and so the Spuilzie of a Horse was
elided, because he was meddled with, as being carrying Corn out of the Thirle to
another Miln, according to the Custom of the Country, whereby the Horse is
forefaulted to the Master of the Miln, and the Corn to the Miller, January 22.
1635. Menzies contra but not eleided by a Disposition of the Goods Libelled,
for relief, being meddled with, brevi manu, seeing Distress was not instructed,
July 19. 1633. Kirkwood contra Ferguson, so where there was a Disposition, and
Instrument of Possession, albeit the Disposition was, omnium bonorum, and
Possession retained for two year, yet it was found sufficient, contra spolium,
especially, seeing there was no violence used in attaining real Possession of
the Goods, January 29. 1662. Halbert Irving contra Mccairtnay. And the Spuilzie
of a Horse was eleided, because the Pursuer having committed Hamsucken, and
Slaughter, was taken by the Defender with a Horse, as being Bailzie of the
Barrony where he did it, January 8. 1611. John Bailie contra Lord Torphichen.
And a Spuilzie of Corns was eleided by the Defenders entering in Possession of
the Corns upon the Ground, whereupon the Corns were growing, Hope, Spuilzie,
Elliot contra Lord Bucleuch. It was also eleided as to a Messenger, because he
Poynded the Goods, Libelled by virtue of Letters of Poynding, directed against
the Pursuer, unwarrantably raised, because there was no conclusion in the
Decree against him, March 4. 1628. Scot contra Catharin Banks. The like, if
the Defender meddle with Goods by a Title or Warrant from any other Party to
whom they belonged; And though this be contrary the Libel, it will be
sufficient: And if either Party allege Right, the most pregnant will be
preferred: And it was found sufficient to evite Spuilzie, because the Defender
bought the Horse in question from the Pursuers Son, who had ridden upon him to
several Mercats, as his own Horse, by the space of nineteen days, Nic. hic.
Ross contra Stuart.

20. The second exception in Spuilzies, is voluntar delivery, which was
sustained, though it seemed contrair the Libel, Spotswood, Spuilzie, Margaret
Cunninghame contra Peter Mcculloch, Nic. de. vi. bon. rapt. Russel contra Lord
Ross.

21. The third exception against Spuilzie, is, that the Goods Libelled were
lawfully Poynded, for though the Decree, whereupon the Poynding was, should be
reduced for want of formality; Yet it will not be a Spuilzie, unless it
proceeded, mala fide, or, spreta authoritate judicis, as when a Decree
proceeded, and was used after Advocation, intimated to the Party, though the
Inferior Judge refused to receive, or record it Judicially, or when the Debt
contained in the Decree, was thoroughly satisfied before the Poynding, Spots.
Spuilzie, contra Brown. But the exception of Poynding will be elided by this
reply, that the Pursuer offered the sum Poynded for the time of the Poynding,
when the Poynded Goods were offered.

22. The most ordinar Reply against Poynding, is that the Goods were not
Poyndable, as being Pleugh Goods, which are not Poyndable the time of Pleughing
the Ground, if there be any other Goods upon the Ground sufficient for paying
the Debt, according to the Act of Parliament, 1503. cap. 98. Nic. de. vi. bon.
rapt. Hepburn contra Binning. And Morison contra Fordice. And it was found
sufficient, that there were other Goods upon the Ground, without necessity to
allege, that they were the Debitors proper Goods; or that the Goods Poynded
were then in Labor, being two or three days before in the Pleugh, December 10.
1631. Gibson contra Corsbie. Yea, Poynding of Plough-goods was found a
Spuilzie, being done in the ordinary time of Plowing, though the Goods were not
yoked that year, because of Frost, June 7. 1678. Wood contra Stuart. There is
an other Reply against Poynding, that the Goods Poynded were not the Debitors,
but an other offered to depone they were his, or that this offer was made by
his Warrant, or by his Servant, but it is not enough that this offer was made
by these who had no direct, or presumed Commission, July 6. 1666. Corbet contra
Stirling. This offer must be made before the solemnity of Poynding be ended,
but was not sustained, being offered about an hour after, to give summar
Restitution July 9. 1675. Cots contra Harper: But this Oath will not exclude
Probation, that the Goods were the Debitors, or another by way of declarator,
that thereafter they might be affected by Poynding, but is only like an Oath of
Calumny, that in possessorio hinders Poyncing.

23. The last exception against Spuilzie, is Restitution of the Goods Spuilzied
within twenty four hours, re integra, it was also eleided by Restitution of the
Goods within forty eight hours, they being accepted, and kept by the
pursuer, Nic. de vi. bon. rapt. Sym. contra Ambross; but not eleided by
Restitution within twenty four hours, not being re integra, the Spuilzied Horse
his back being broken by the Spuilzier, Nic. Ibid. Robert Knows contra Joseph
Lermont: Neither eleided by Restitution within four or five days, before which,
the pursuit was intented; and here the Spuilziers Brother had taken away the
Goods shortly after Restitution, January 12. 1610. contra Forrester.

24. There is also a common exception against Spuilzies upon prescription of
three years, they not being pursued within that space, after the committing
thereof, and that by express Statute, Par. 1579. cap. 51. But this prescription
is only against the Spuilzie as such, so that it takes away the Privilege
thereof, as to the violent profits, and juramentum in litem; yet may it
thereafter be pursued, as wrongous intromission, for Restitution only; and if
many be pursued, they are not liable, in solidum, but equally, unless a greater
Intromission of some of them be proven, January 17. 1668. Captain Strachen
contra George Morison, which also is competent in many Cases, where Spuilzie is
either not sustainable, or eleidable in its Atrocity, as a Spuilzie, nam levis
exceptioexcusat a spolio, and yet action for Restitution remains: And sometimes
the Spuilzie may be restricted thereto, if the Pursuer please, before (...), so
to do; or otherways he has therefore a several action, as if Spuilzie be
pursued, and an exception of lawful Poynding admitted to be proven, the
Defender will be assoilzied from the Spuilzie, even though the Decree,
whereupon the Poynding proceeded, be reduced for informality; and yet he will
have a several action for Restitution, which may be also decerned in the Action
of Spuilzie. But Spuilzie is not eleided by Masters of the Ground, their
bringing back the Goods of their Tennants, by virtue of their Hypotheck, ex
intervallo, February 9. 1676. Park contra Cockburn of Roslin. Neither was the
Spuilzie of a Horse eleided, because he was found in the skaith, and was
offered back within forty eight hours, upon payment of the skaith, unless he
had been put in a Poind-fold, or safe place, having Water, Grass, or Fodder;
And that by the Sentence of a Judge the skaith had been estimate, and the Horse
Poynded therefore, February 10. 1676. Duncan contra Kids. December 2. 1679. Mr.
John Beaton contra Home. So spuilzie was not eleided upon alleging the Pursuer
had Spuilzied, or recept as much of the Defenders Goods, by the Act 112. Par.
7. and Act 16. Par. 10. King James 6. unless the Pursuer had been a broken man,
and notorious Thief, of a Clan who could not be reached by the ordinary course
of Law, July 23. 1678. James Baird contra Parochioners of Fivie.

25. Intrusion and Ejection, are Delinquences in Lands and Immoveables, as
Spuilzie is in Movables, and they differ in this, that Intrusion is the enter
ing in Possession, being for the time void, without consent of the Parties
Interressed, or Order of Law: But Ejection, as its Etymon intimats, is not only
the unwarrantable entering in Lands, but the casting out violently, of the then
Possessor: In this there is violence, in the other wrong, but no violence in
the entry, though it be a violent detention: And in either case, the Injured
must be at least repute in Possession: But as the Possession must begin by some
bodily Act, it may be continued alone by the Act of the Mind, willing, or
affecting the Possession, which is conjectured or presumed from Circumstances;
for, if it be but a short time since the Possessour did corporally possess, and
nothing appear that he has relinquished his Possession, or his Affection
thereto ceased; then he is still Possessor, and is so presumed, because of his
interest; but if his abstinence be total, or long, that he has retained
nothing, as Keys, or keeping of Doors closs, then the Possession is holden as
(...): And he who enters by a real or colorable Title, is no Intruder, and
cannot be Extruded, but by Warning, and Process of (...); and therefore, though
Intrusion be said to be in the void Possession, it is only meaned; as to
corporal Possession, there being still a presumed possession animo on the part
of the injured In other things, Intrusion and Ejection do in all things agree,
Ejection must be pursued within three years, Pa. 1579. cap. 81. which is
extended to Intrusion by these words of the Statute, That Eject and others of
that Nature, be pursued within three years, after committing thereof, February
2. 1610. (...) of Craighall contra

26. Ejection is only competent to the natural Possessors, Possessing by
themselves, their Hinds and Cottars; but not to an Heretor for Ejection of his
Tennants, unless the Tennants concur, November 26. 1626. (...) contra Bruce.
Hope, Ejection, Margaret Cunninghame contra Peter (...). Hence it is, that
Intrusion or Ejection is not committed, but by entering in natural Possession;
or at least, by out-putting, or in-putting of Tennants: For though Possessours
invert their Masters Possession, and pay their Rents to another, this will not
infer against them Intrusion or Ejection: But in both these cases, there are
other remeids in Law, by removing, or action for Mails and Duties, which is
competent against Intrometters: though Ejection and Intrusion prescrive by this
Statute, yet it is only as such, for taking away of its singular Privileges,
viz. the violent profits; for though they be not pursued within three years,
yet they are competent, being libelled, and restricted to Restitution of
Possession, and for the ordinary profits; and in this they differ from
Removing, which cannot be pursued but upon Warning forty days preceding
Whitsonday: But these may be pursued at any time, without Warning, March 16.
1627. Walter Hay contra Mark Ker. Spots. Ejection, James Mowat contra James
Davidson. July 15. 1626. Mcphedrick contra (...). Yet where the pursuers Title
was only an Assignation to a years Tack, though he restricted the Ejection to
the Possession, and the ordinary profits, the same was not sustained, in
respect the years Tack was long before expired, and was only sustained for
Damnage and Interest, in not possessing his years Tack, during the time, and
for the profits thereof during that year, December 17. 1631. Lord Lowdoun
contra Lord of Capringtoun. Ejection and Intrusion are founded, especialy upon
Possession, and the Pursuer needs not dispute his Right, neither his Entering
in Possession, which, though it were Vicious; yet if it be continued by a
considerable space, and the (...) being then ejected, he will not be excluded,
by alleging his entry was vicious, as if he had entered in the vice of a
Tennent, removed by the Defender: Yea, after the death of the Person Ejected,
the Action was sustained at the instance of his appearand Heir, upon condition
he Infeft himself before, Extracting Nicol. de haeredibus, Blair contra Mathie.
As also Ejection was sustained at the Instance of Infants, whose Father died in
Possession, and had an old Infeftment, albeit a Decree of Removing was
obtained against the Mother, they not being called; nor was the Ejecter
allowed, in hoc (...), to dispute the Infants Right: But spoliatus was found
instantly to be restored to Possession, February 19. 1663. Scot contra Earl of
Home.

27. Ejection or Intrusion, are excluded, by alleging the Pursuer relinquished
the Possession, or did voluntarly Remove; especially, if he be the (...)
Tennant, July 2. 1678. Lord of (...) contra (...) which must be proven by
Write, or Oath of Party, if there be no matters of Fact, from whence the
Dereliction does evidently appear, as transporting of the Parties Goods, June
19. 1634. Colonel Ruthven contra Gairn. This was also found proven by
Instrument, and the Witnesses insert, though the Pursuer Libelled Violence,
contrair to the Instrument, Hope, Ejection, Cunninghame contra Mcculloch. And
also found proven by a Renunciation, attested by an Act of the Defenders Court,
and other Circumstances, Hope, Ejection, Lord of Monyntusk contra his
Tennants. The like upon voluntary Removing and Renuncing in the Pursuers
Masters Court, June 15. 1610. Brown contra (...) It was also found probable by
Witnesses, viz. that the Keys were delivered, though the Pursuer offered to
prove Violence, Nicol. de vi. bon. rapt. Home contra Dickson. And it was elided
by voluntar Removing, or Renuncing, after the Defenders entry. But Ejection was
not elided by a personal obliegement, to Possess the Ejector, or a Decree
Arbitral; seeing the entry thereto was not by order of Law, or consent to
Possess, Spots. Arbiter, Wood contra Scot.

Violent Profits in Ejection and Intrusion within Burgh, are ordinarily
sustained for the double Mail: But in Landward, the violent Profits are
accounted by the quantity of the Seed the Land can Sow, and the Increase such
Land can Yield, deducing the Expenses of Seed and Labourage, and the profits
the sums can yield which the Land can hold, wherein are comprehended the Calf,
and Milk of Cows; and the Wool, Lamb, and Milk of Sheep, deducing the Expenses
of hirding.

In Ejection and Intrusion, the Defender must find Caution for his violent
Profits at the first term after Litiscontestation; or otherways, Decree is to
be given against him, Parl. 1594. cap. 217.

Succeeding in the Vice; is a kind of Intrusion, but because it is ordinarily
consequent upon Removing, it is spoken to, Title Tacks.

28. Molestation is the troubling of Possession, chiefly in and about Marches
of Lands, whereby the Party Injurer is obliged to refound the Damnage to the
Party injured; and the Marches being cognosced, he will be decerned to desist,
and cease from troubling in time coming, whereupon all Execution Personal is
competent. It is also competent when Possession is troubled otherways, and
there is no special remeid at the Heretors Instance, as upon taking away the
Tennants Corns upon the Marches, November 30. 1596. Lord of Dalgety contra the
Constable of Dundee: This is ordinarily a Mutual action, and Probation allowed
hinc inde, for it is the same with the Roman Action finium regundorum; and in
case of further trouble, Lawborrows and Contraventions will be sustained, after
the Marches are cognosced, which otherways can have no effect while the Marches
and Possession are dubious. The Process whereby Molestation is determined, is
called a Cognition, the whole course whereof is clearly ordered, and set down
by the Statute of Session, ratified in Parl. 1587. cap. 42. whereby it is
clear, that Molestations were of old decided by Sheriffs, Bailiffs of
Regalities, and other Judges ordinar, where the Lands lay, by the determination
of an Assize or Inquest of the best and worthiest of the Country, and they may
be still so pursued, but if before the Session; the Lords are not to hear and
determine the cause themselves, but to remit the same to the Judges ordinar, or
in case they be suspect, to name others, as Judges delegat for that Act, except
only in those Molestations, which do concern the Lords of Session, which are to
be heard and determined before themselves: The said Judges ordinar, or delegat,
are first to hear Parties Debate, and to make Litiscontestation, and so much
thereof as is found probable by Witness, is to be done by an Inquest, the most
part whereof is to be Landed-men, worth three hundred Merks of Rent and above,
in the Paroch where the Lands lay, or failing them, in the next adjacent
Paroches, as is fully set forth in the said Statute. In these Cognitions; the
Superior must be called in all the dyets of Process, Hope, cog. Calden contra
Purvess of Corfindie. And if the Cognition be pursued by a Liferenter, ^or
others, the Heretor must be called, or otherways the Cognition is null, Ibid.
Lord Lothian contra Traquair.

29. Breach of Arrestment, and Deforcement, are by our Law and Custom in all
things Equiparat, both being violations of Legal Acts; and concerning both, it
is Statute, Par. 1581. cap. 117. That breakers of Arrestment, or the Deforcers
of Poinding, or any other Legal Execution, shall Escheat all their whole
Movables, and the Party injured shall be first paid of his Debt and Damnages,
for which he shall have ready Execution against the Injurer, which is further
extended, Par. 1592. cap. 150. That the one half of the Escheat of the
Movables shall belong to the Party Injured, if the executer of the Process, or
Letters, be deforced or molested in the execution, which yet shall stand as a
valid execution, which must be understood in executions of summonds, or Charges
of Horning though the latter act be more favorable to the injured; yet being
in his favor, he may make use of the first, which will infer a personal
obliegement upon the Deforcer, or breaker of Arrestment, to pay the Sums due to
the Injured, whereupon the Arrestment, or Execution did proceed, with the
Damnage and Interest, July 25. 1633. Mitchel contra Laws and Stuart. The like
was found in the Deforcement of a Caption, and that the Pursuers having
insisted Criminally, ad vindi I am publicam, did not hinder him to insist
civilly for private interest, December 13. 1672. Murray contra French of
Frenchland, which takes no place where the Arrestment is not for Debt, but upon
conraverted Rights and Possession, which hinders not continuation of
Possession, but only Innovation, as when Tennants continue to pay contraverted
Ferms to the former Possessor, June 10. 1579. Kings Advocat and Kirkaldy contra
Tennants: Or the taking away Corn sown upon contraverted Ground, the first year
by the sower, July 30. 1566. Seaton contra Tennants of William Foulis. Neither
is it competent against any, but those to whom intimation of the Arrestment, or
Citation thereon was made, Ibid. February 1574. Dawson contra Bairdie.

Deforcement of a Poynding was elided, because the same was not done in lawful
time of day, but before the Sun, but not elided because the goods were attested
to pertain to another party, whose oath had been made thereon the time of the
poinding; neither when kept on the Ground for the Masters Rent, by his
Servants, seeing they expressed not that cause, nor craved not security therefore,
from the Poynder, February 1. 1628. Lord of Halkertoun contra Kadie and
Grieves: But if it had been expressly for the Rents resting, it would not infer
Deforcement, if such were truly resting. Neither did resistance of poynding of
Plough-Goods in Laboring time, where there were other Goods sufficient, infer
Deforcement, February last, 1561. Abbot of Kilwinning contra Tennants: stopping
of poynding by the Master of the Groundor Landlord of an House, for that years
Rent, infered not Deforcement, December. 7. 1630. Dick contra Lands; or that he
hindered entry, unless there were special Warrant in the Letters to make open
Doors.

30. Contravention as it signifies any Act done against Lawborrows, so it
implys the Obligation of the Contraveener and the personal Right, which the
user of the Lawborrows has thereby, and likewise the Action, by which it is
pursued. For the uptaking of all, it must be considered what Lawborrows are,
which the word it self insinuats to be Caution, found to do nothing but by
order of Law; for a Burrow or Burgh in our ancient Language, is a Cautioner,
and Lawborrows is Caution to keep the Law; the reason hereof is, the safety and
security of the people, who in equity have no more then the Reparation of the
Damnage they sustain through Delinquences, or illegal Acts: But to prevent
such, and terrify evil doers, a greater penalty then Reparation is appointed,
according to the Quality and Estate of the Injurer Par. 1593. cap. 166. The
half of the Penalty is applied to the Injured, and the other half is Public.
Par. 1581. cap. 117. By the Narrative of which Statute, it is clear, that
before Lawborrows were granted, only for safety against bodily harm, in the
persons of the Complainers; yet for the reason therein expressed, the same was
extended, that the Complainers, their Wives, Bairns, (...) and Servants, shall
be harmless and skaithless in their Bodies, Lands, Tacks, Possessions, Goods
and Gear, and no ways molested or troubled therein, by the persons complained
on, nor no others of their causing, sending, hounding out, ressetting, command,
assistance and ratihabition, whom they may stop, or let, directly or
indirectly, otherways then by order of Law, or Justice; By the same Statute it
is also evident, that Lawborrows are granted upon the supplication of parties
fearing harm, who without citing the other party, but making Faith upon their
Complaint, have Letters of Horning, summarly to Charge the party complained on,
to find Caution, ut supra; and if Caution be found, the Action of Contravention
does proceed upon, and conform to the Act of Caution: but if obedience be not
given, the Complainer may proceed to Denunciation or Caption; but the
Contravention will proceed, though there be no Caution found, but only a Charge
upon the Letters, without Denunciation, unless the Charge be suspended, as uses
to be done, when the penalty charged for is exorbitant, and not conform to the
act of Parliament, January 8. 1628. John Semple contra Cunninghame.

Contravention may proceed upon any Delinquence, according to the Tenor of the
Act of Caution, or Letters of Lawborrows, which, though very comprehensive, yet
is not extended to Acts done without Order of Law, being matters of
inconsiderable moment, as the Tilling up of some Furrows in a March, the same
being offered to be laid down, and the Damnage to be repaired, Nic. hic,
Nicolson contra Hay. Neither is it sustained upon any illegal deed, when the
matter of Right was dubious, as in matters of Molestation, before the
Cognition, or before that the Marches be clear, Spots. contravention, Lord of
Balcaskie contra Florence Strange.

Neither upon a deed done by a colorable Title, though afterward reduced, as
entering in Possession by a null Decree, Hope, hic, George Moorhead contra
Lord of Barskub. Neither upon Pasturing upon Bounds contraverted, or where
there was no violence, nor unlawfulness in Pasturage, upon clear Marches, July
14. 1626. Lord of Grange contra Lesly. Neither upon a deed of Spuilzie against
the pursuers Tennant, not complaining, though the Lawborrows bears,
Men-tennants and Servants to be harmless, which was esteemed, stilus curiae,
January 28. 1632. Grant contra Grant, and February 9. 1633. Lindsay contra
Dennistoun. Neither was it sustained upon Deeds done by the Defenders Tennants,
without alleging Command or Ratihabition, unless the Deeds be manifest, or
known to their Masters, as in conveening daily, and cutting another Woods,
July 9. 1611. Vauns contra Lord of Balnagown. Neither upon Deeds done by
Servants without Warrant, unless they be menial Servants, Hope, bic, John
Galbraith contra William Anderson: Yet Contravention was sustained, upon hurt
done to the Pursuers servant, though he was then Rebel, being afterward
relaxed, Hope, Horning, Bruce of Clackmannan contra Bruce. It was also
sustained upon attempts of injury, though there was no hurt, as a stroke on the
Clothes, and one offer to strike with a Whinger, December 21. 1609. Greenyards
contra Clackmannan. And also upon a violent troubling the Pursuer, without
Order of Law, though without Damnage, Spots. hic. Lord of Balcaskie contra
Florence Strange. It is also sustained upon a Delinquence, though there be
another Action competent therefore, as for Molestation, November 29. 1609.
Dundass contra Cuming of Ironside: Or for violent Possession after Warning,
Hope, de actionibus, Cuthbert Cunninghame contra But if the other ordinar
Action was insisted in, and Decree obtained, Contravention also cannot be
pursued, though the other were offered to be renounced, Hope, contro. Johnstoun
contra Sir John Charters.

Contravention was elided by granting a Factory after the Deeds Lybelled to do
the like, reserving only Damnage and Interest, February, 19. 1633. Dennistoun
contra Lindsay. Contravention on several Deeds sustained, separatim toties
quoties: And against many Contraveeners, Contraveening in one Act; but in such
cases the Lords will modifie and lesten the Penalty, within the Rate of the Act
of Parliament, November. 29. (...). Dundass contra Cuming of Ironside. Nic.
contro. Sir John Scot contra Barns. Contravention is not found pursuable before
any inferior Judge, otherways the Decree thereof will be null by exception,
July 6. 1611. Kennedy Taylzeor contra Kennedy of Garriehorn: Yet it was
sustained, where the matter was small, and the parties poor, March 12. 1622.
Blair contra Marshel. In Contraventions, the Kings Advocat must concur for the
Kings Interest, but he cannot insist alone, as when the private party has
discharged the Deeds, even after the intenting of the cause, Hope, entro.
Forest contra Malcolme Turnbul.

TITLE X. Obligations Conventional, by Promise, Paction and Contract.
1. The Original of Conventional Obligations. 2. The Acts of the Will, Desire,
Resolution and Engagement, and their Effects. 3. Pollicitation or Offer, and
its Effects. 4. Promise. 5. Contracts in favors of third parties valid. 6.
Pactions, and how Words are Obligatory. 7. Naked Pactions. 8. Pactum corvinum.
9. Locus penitentiae. 10. Promises and Pactions are morally Obligatory, by
Canon Law and our Customs. 11. Kinds of Contracts amongst the Romans, with the
Exception, de non numerata pecunia, and Homologation. 12. Distinction of
Contracts according to the matter. 13. Common Requisits to Contracts. 14.
Permutative Contracts, and the Equality to be kept in them. 15. Latent
insufficiency alters Contracts. 16. How far Mutual Contracts are effectual to
Assignays, without performing the Cedents part. 17. Loan comprehends, mutuum
and commodatum. 18. In mutuo transfertur Dominium, Senatus consultum
Macedonianum, and Velleianum. 20. Mutuum can only be in Fungibles and
Quantities. 21. Specialities, in mutuo, and Bills of Exchange, mutuum strict
juris. 23. Commodatum described. 24. Borrowers diligence. 25. Precarium. 26.
Commodatum, how ended. 27. Actions arising from Commodatum. 28. Mandatum, or
Commission. 29. The Terms of Mandats. 30. Acceptance of the Mandatar. 31.
Mandats in things lawful. 32. Acceptance must be freely. 33. Mandats are
personal. 34. How far Mandatars may entrust others. 35. Mandats are Ambulatory,
and Revockable by the Mandant. 36. Mandatars must perform, in forma specifica.
37. Mandatars Diligence. 38. The Obligations of Mandatars. 39. Kinds of
Mandats. 40. Tacit Mandats. 41. More Mandatars, how far they may Act severally.
42. Whether joint Mandatars are liable, in solidum. 43. The Effects of general
Mandats. 44. What is special in Offices amongst Mandats. 45. Specialities of
Trust amongst Mandats. 46. Obligations of Exercitors. 47. Obligations of
Institors. 48. The nature of Custody, or depositum. 49. Diligence of
Depositars. 50. Nautae caupones stabularij. 51. Depositation of Writes. 52.
Sequestration. 53. Consignation and Trust. 54. Depositation admits no
Compensation. 55. But admits Retention. 56. Joint Depositars, how far liable.
57. The Nature of Pledge, or pignus. 58. Specialities in Pledges. 59. How
Pledges may become Irredeemable. 60. Clauses irritant in Pledges. 61.
Hypothecation of the Cropped or Goods for the Rent. 62. Hypothecation of the
Teinds, for the Teind-Duty or Stipend. 63. Exchange and Sale, wherein they
agree and differ. 64. What things are liable to sale, and of buying of Pleas,
by the Members of the College of Justice. 65. Effect of Earnest. 66. Reversion
of things sold. 67. Clauses irritant, or resolutive in sale. 68. Knowledge of
Acquirers of an anterior incomplete Right, how Effectual. 69. After sale,
before delivery, to whom the thing perishes. 70. Location described, and
compared with Sale. 71. Whether sterility frees from the Pension. 72. The
effect of Vastation. 73. Location is personal, and cease with the
Constituents Right. 74. Usury, or Annualrent of Money. 75. Annualrent due by
Law, without Paction. 76. The Conductors Obligation. 77. The Locators
Obligation. 78. The effect of Society. 79. The matter of Society. 80. The
nature of Society, and equaquality therein. 81. The power of the Partners in
Society. 82. How Society cease. 83. Partners acting severally, how these
things accress to the Society. 84. Diligence of Partners. 85. Contracts mediat
and immediate. 86. Kinds of Cautioners. 87. Cautioners how far liable. 88.
Cautioners for Executors. 89. Cautioners for Tutors and Curators. 90.
Cautioners for the Factors in Camphire. 91. Cautioners for loosing Arrestments.
92. Cautioners are liable according by the Oath of the Principals. 93.
Cautioners as law will. 94. When the Cautioners are liable, and the Principal
not. 95. Cautioners, when liable, in solidum. 96. Relief of Cautioners. 97.
Effects of promissary Oaths. 98. Delay. 99. Interest. 100. Profit of
performance. 101. Time of performance. 102. Place of performance. 103. Manner of
performance.
FROM Obligations Obediential, flowing from the Will of God; Order leads us
over to Obligations Conventional, arising from the Will of Man, whereby our own
Will tyeth us in that, wherein God has left us free; for as Obligations
Obediential descend from the Principle of Obedience to God, and have their Rise
and Reason from his Sovereign Power to Command, and our absolute obliegement to
Obey; so in his gracious goodness, in the greatest part, he has left us free,
and has given power to none to exact, or compel us: Yet so as he has given
that liberty in our power, that we may give it up to others, or restrain and
engage it, whereby God oblieges us to performance, by mediation of our own
will; yet such Obligations, as to their Original, are Conventional, not
Obediential.

Conventional Obligations do arise from our Will and Consent; for as in the
beginning has been shown, the Will is the only Faculty constituting Rights,
whether real or personal; for it is the will of the owner, that naturally
transferreth Right from him to the acquirer: So in personal Rights, that
freedom we have of disposal of our selves, our actions, and things which
naturally is in us, is by our engagement, placed in another, and so engagement
is a diminution of freedom, and constituting of power in another, whereby he
may restrain, or constrain to the doing or performing of that whereof we have
given him power of exaction, as in the Debtor, it is the Debitors duty or
necessity to perform; but it is not every act of the will that raises an
Obligation, or power of exaction; and therefore, that it may appear, what act
of it is Obligatory,

2. We must distinguish three acts in the will, Desire, Resolution and
Engagement; desire is a tendency or inclination of the will toward its object,
and it is the first motion thereof, which is not sufficient to constitute a
Right; neither is resolution (which is a determinate purpose to do that which
is desired) efficacious; because, whatsoever is resolved or purposed, may be
without fault altered, unless by accident the matter be necessar, or that the
resolution be holden forth to assure others: the alteration whereof, without
evident ground, imports levity and inconstancy, and sometimes deceit and
unfaithfulness: but still resolution is but an act of the will with it self, as
deliberation is of the understanding, acting with it self; and it is
unquestionable, nothing can be obliged to it self, though it be obliged to
God, or an other in relation to it self; and therefore, if a party should
express a resolution, to give unto, or bestow upon an other any thing, though
that resolution related to the good of an other; yet it is not Obligatory, nor
can that other compel the resolver to perform, though it were never so fully
cleared, or confirmed by word or write. It was found, that a resolution expressed
both by word and write, in favors of near relations, did infer no Obligation,
February 27. 1673. Mr. John Kincaid contra Mr. Alexander Dickson. It remains
then, that the only act of the will, which is efficacious, is that, whereby the
will conferreth or stateth a power of exaction in an other, and thereby becomes
engaged to that other to perform.

3. Again, we must distinguish betwixt Promise, Pollicitation, or Offer,
Paction and Contract; the difference amongst which, is this, that the
Obligatory act of the will, is sometime absolute and pure, and sometime
conditional, wherein the condition relates either unto the obligation it self,
or to the performance, such are the ordinar conditional Obligations; which,
though they be presently (upon the granting thereof) binding, and cannot be
recalled; yet they are only to be performed, and have effect when the condition
shall be existent, but when the condition is relating to the constituting of
the Obligation, then the very Obligation it self is pendent, till the condition
be purified, and till then it is no Obligation; as when any offer or tender is
made, there is employed a Condition, that before it become Obligatory, the party
to whom it is offered, mustaccept; and therefore, an offer by a Son, to pay a
Debt due by his Mother, if it were made known to be accepted at such a time,
and in such a place, found not Obligator after the Mothers death, unless it had
been so accepted, June 24. 1664. Alexander Allan contra Mr. John Collier. So
then, an offer accepted is a Contract, because it is the deed of two, the
offerer and accepter.

4. But a Promise is that which is simple and pure, and has not employed as a
Condition, in its being the acceptance of another, in this Grotius differs,
de jure belli l. 2. C. 11., 14. holding, that acceptance is necessar to every
Conventional Obligation in equity, without consideration of positive Law; and
to prevent that obvious objection, that Promises are made to Absents, Infants,
Idiots, or persons not yet born, who cannot accept; and therefore, such
Obligations should ever be Revockable, till their acceptance, which in some of
them can never be: he answers, that the Civil Law withholdeth, that such
offers cannot be revocked, until these be in such capacity, as to accept or
refuse; though promises now be commonly held Obligatory, the Canon Law having
taken off the exception of the Civil Law, de nudo pacto; It is true, if he in
whose favors they are made, accept not, they become void, not by the Negative
none acceptance, but by the contrair rejection: for as the will of the Promiser
constitutes a Right in the other; so the others will by renouncing, and,
rejecting that Right, avoids it, and makes it return. This also quadrats with
the nature of a Right, which consists in a faculty or power, which may be in
these, who exerce no act of will about it, nor know not of it, so Infants
truly have right as well as men, though they do not know, nor cannot exerce it
themselves: Promises with us are not probable by Witness, though within an
hundred Pounds, July 3. 1668. James Donaldson contra Harrower. February 9.
1672. William (...) contra Thomas Robertson. The like was found of a Promise
engaging for a Party, who bought Goods, not being a partner in the bargain; for
promises, when parts of bargains about Movables, are probable by Witnesses,
June 19. 1672. John Deuar contra Thomas Brown.

5. It is likewise the opinion of Molina, cap. 263. and it quadrats to our
Customs; that when parties Contract, if there be any Article in favor of a
third party, at any time, and jus quaesitum tertio, it cannot be recalled by
both the Contracters, but he may compel either of them to exhibit the
Contract, and thereupon the obliged may be compelled to perform. So a Promise,
though gratuitous, made in favors of a third party, that party, albeit not
present, nor accepting, was found to have Right thereby, November 25. 1609.
Achinmoutie contra Hay. Promises dependent upon acceptance, may either be made
by way of offer, or when the promise requires some things to to be done on the
part of him to whom it is made, not as a condition annexed only to the
performance, for then the promise is presently Obligatory, though the Effect be
suspended, till the condition exist; but if the condition be so meant, or
expressed, that it must preceed the Obligation it self, as in mutual Contracts,
the one party subscribing, is not obliged until the other also subscribe, or
that the other party accept or consent. And so a Contract being Registrat, was
found orderly proceeded, though he who Registrated it had not subscribed, seeing
at the discussing he did summarly consent to the Registration thereof against
himself, February 9. 1627. Mcduff contra Mcculloch. Hence is our vulgar
distinction betwixt Obligations and Contracts, the former being only where the
Obligation is (...) on the one part; the other where the Obligation is (...) an
Obligation on both parts.

6. Pactum, or a Paction, in the Law is defined, duorum pluriumve in idem
placitum consensus atque conventio, l. 1. ff. de pactis, it is the consent of
two or more parties, to some things to be performed by either of them; for it
is not a consent in their opinions, but a consent in their wills, to obliege
any of them; and it is much to be considered, whether the consent be given,
animo obligandi, to obliege, for the same words will sometime be interpret as
obligator, and sometimes not according to the circumstances, as if it be
jestingly or merrily expressed, whatsoever the words be, there is no obligation;
because thereby it appears there is no mind to obliege; or if the words be in
Affairs, or Negotiations, they are interpret obligator, though they express no
obligation but a Futurition, which otherways would import no more then a
resolution, as Titius is to give Mevius an hundred Crowns in any matter of
Negotiation, would be obligator; but otherways would be no more, but an
expression of Titius his purpose, so to do; yet because it is inward and
unknown, it must be taken by the words or other signs, so if the words be
clearly obligator and serious, no pretense, that there was no purpose to
obliege, will take place, if the promise be pendent upon acceptance, and no
more then an offer, it is imperfect and ambulatory, and in the power of the
offerer, till acceptance, and if he died before acceptance, it is revocked as a
Commission or Mandat, which necessarly imports acceptance, expires by the
Mandators death, morte mandatoris perit mandatum, so acceptance cannot be by
any third party, unless he have Warrant for that effect; and so if a promise be
made by one to another, in favor of a third, importing the acceptance of that
third, it is pendent and revockable by these contracters, till the third accept.

7. The Romans, that they might have clear proof of Pactions and Agreements,
would second none with their civil Authority, but such as had a solemnity of
words, by way of stipulation, whereby the one party going before, by an
Interrogation, other party closed by an answer conform, which was both clear to
the Parties and Witness; or otherways, unless there were the intervention of
some deed, or thing beside the consent, or that it were a Contract allowed of
the Law, or such other paction as it specially confirms; without all which,
it was called nudum pactum inefficax ad agendum. We shall not insist in these,
because the common Custom of Nations has refiled therefrom, following rather
the Canon Law, by which every paction produces action, omne verbum de ore
fideli cadit in debitum, C. 1. and 3. de pactis. And so observes Guidilinus,
de jure, Nov. l. 3. cap. 5.. ust. and Corvinus de pactis, we have a special
Statute of Session, November 27. 1592. acknowledging all pactions and promises
as effectual: So it has been ever decided since, January 14. 1631. Sharp
contra Sharp.

8. And even pactum corvinum de haereditate viventis, is found binding, though
among the most odious, July 6. 1630. Mr. James Aikenhead contra Both we l. But,
pactum de quota litis, whether it be a naked Paction or Promise, or a mutual
Contract, is rejected both by the Civil Law and our Custom, whereby Advocats,
in place of their Honorary, take a share of the profit of the Plea, to prevent
the stirring up, and too much eagerness in Pleas, which was extended to an
Agent or Writer, if he had made such a Paction before, or during the Plea, but
not after all Plea was ended, having given Bond to an appear and Heir, to
denude himself of a Right he had acquired for Sums of Money, getting his
expenses, and a fourth part for his pains and hazard, February 24. 1675.
Catharine Home contra Mr. Archibald Nisbit Writer. Yea, an Advocat taking
Assignation to a part of a Plea, it was found, pactum de quota litis, and
Process was thereby excluded, though proponed by the Debtor, and not by the
party with whom the Paction was made, but it was not found probable by that
parties Oath alone, as being but one Witness, June 23. 1680. Edward Ruthven
contra Mr. William Weir.

Pactions for Money played, or other Prize played at Games of Fortoun, such as
Cards, Dice, etc. found valid as to the Debtor, but the excress to be
consigned for the use of the poor, if it exceed an hundred Merk, by the Act of
Par. 1621. cap. 14. Nevember 12. 1668. Patrick Park contra Nicol Somervel.
Instead of the remeids of Stipulation, the inconveniences that rejected naked
Paction among the Romans, are remeided with us by this means.

9. First, If the matter be of great Moment, and which requires to its
perfection, solemnity in Write; all such Agreements, Promises and Pactions are
accounted imperfect, and not Obligator, until Write be subscribed, such as
Dispositions of Lands, and Heretable Rights, Tacks, Rentals, and Assignations
to Writs, etc. In all which, there is locus penitentiae, even after the
agreement, and either party may resile till the Write be subscribed and
delivered. It was so found, though the buyer by a missive Letter, wrote, that
he thought he would not be able to furnish the Money, but that he would not
pass from the communing, seeing there was no minute nor obligation otherways,
January 20. 1663. Sir Robert Montgomery of Skermorly contra John Brown. So was
it also sound, that a Cautioner subscribing a Bond, might resile before it was
delivered by him, though it was subscribed, and delivered by the Principal and
other Cautioners before, March 5. 1628. Megil contra Thenilstoun. The like of a
Disposition subscribed, and left in the Writers hand to frame a Charter by, and
a promise made after to abide by it, seeing there was no delivery to the party,
nor to the Writer to be given to him, Lord of Innerleith contra Byres. The
like of a bargain of Land, agreed upon by Word, some things being done by the
buyer in contemplation thereof, being restored, October 5. 1628. Oliphant
contra Monorgan. The like in a Tack for years, which was found to endure but
one year, though the Tacks-man was thereby in Possession, January 24. 1630.
Lowry contra Ker. July 16. 1636. Keith contra his Tennents. Yet a verbal Tack
for a year, found not to be past from, seeing the Tennant was thereby in
Possession, and had been warned, Hope, Process, John Adamson contra John
Fullartoun. Neither was it found competent to pass from a verbal Rental, where
the Grassoum was paid, Nicol. de migrando, Angus contra Mckie. Neither to pass
from a Rental delivered to the Chamberlain, to be given to the Tennants upon
payment of the Grassoums, in so far as concerned these Tennants, who had paid
a part of their Grassoums, Nic. Removing, Eglintoun contra his Tennants.
Neither was place found to resile from a Transaction verbal, seeing a
considerable part of the Soum Transacted for, was satisfied, February 25. 1679.
Kings Advocat contra Earl of Nithisdale. Neither is there locus poenitentiae in
pactis liberatoriis, where any Right is past from or restricted, and no new
Right to be made, December 5. 1661. Hellen Hepburn contra Sir James Hamiltoun
of Orbistoun. The like in restricting an Annualrent, to a part of Lands
affected therewith, February 8. 1666. Ker contra Hunter, locus poenitentiae was
found competent to a defender, who produced a Right granted by the Charger,
with a blank Assignation to instruct compensation, which he got up before it
was delivered to the Charger, or any Decree thereon; and no minut of the
Decree being extant, the suspender was found, in tuto, to make use of the
Right compensed on, December 9. 1674. Lord Balmerino contra the Tennants of
Northberwick, and Creditors of Sir William Dick. Yea, locus poenitentiae, was
found competent to resile from a bargain, which might have been valid without
Write, because it was expressly agreed to be redacted in Write, January 12.
1676. Robert Campbel contra Robert Douglas. The other remedy we have in stead
of Stipulation, is that by a Statute of Par. 1579. cap. 80. all Writes of great
importance, are to be subscribed by the party, or by two Nottars and four
Witnesses, wherein custom has interpret matters of importance to be that
which exceeds an hundred Pound Scots, and it is so far extended, that in
matters where Writes may, and uses to be adhibit, probation is not admitted by
Witnesses, but only by Oath of party or Write; by these remeids very necessarly
introduced, the inconveniences foresaid are sufficiently caveat.

10. But to inquire whether Promises or naked Paction, are morally Obligatory
by the Law of Nature, few do contravert; yet Conanus, l. 1. C. 6. l. 5. C. 9.
holds, that Promises or naked Pactions, where there is no equivalent Cause
Onerous interveening, do morally produce no Obligation or Action, though in
congruity or decency, it be fit to perform, least it be an argument of Levity,
against which, there is not only the Testimony of the Canon Law, which
insinuats an anterior Reason to its own position; but also the Civil Law l. 1.
ff. de pactis, there is nothing so congruous to humane trust, as to perform
what is agreed among them; and the Edict, de constituta pecunia, says, it is
suitable to natural Equity, and says farther, that he is debtor by the Law of
Nature, who must pay by the Law of Nations, whose faith we have followed, l.
cumamplius, ff. de regulis juris, but especially, this is confirmed by the Law
of God, Prove. 6. 1. If thou be surety for a friend, if thou have stricken thy
hand with a stranger, thou art taken with the words of thy mouth, and the
performance of words is acknowledged, a part of Gods righteousness, Nehemiah 9.
verse. 8. Hebrews 10. verse. 23. where it is acknowledged a part of Gods
faithfulness. And if Promises were not morally oblieging, they could have no
effect, but by Positive Law (which is no more it self then a public Paction,
laborans eodem morbo) and then all Pactions and Agreements among Nations would
be ineffectual, and all Commerce and Society among men should be destroyed,
Pactions, Contracts, Covenants and Agreements, are Synonimous Terms, both in
themselves, and according to the recent Customs of this and other Nations; so
that it will be unnecessar to trace the many subtilties and differences amongst
Pactions and Contracts in the Roman Law.

11. This much only in a word, their Contracts were of four kinds, either
perfected by Things, Words, Write, or sole consent. Contracts by intervention
of things, remain naked Pactions, ineffectual, until something be given or done
by either party to other; such are all these Contracts, which are called
innominat, which have not a special Name and Nature, acknowledged in the Law;
and therefore, obliege not by sole consent, but the giving or doing of the one
party only, obliegeth the other, as Permutation, Excambion, or Exchange, when
either a thing is given for another, or a thing is given for a Deed, Work, or
Use, or one Deed or Work is done for another, for the which, the Law has no
special Name; and therefore, names them, do ut des, do ut facias, facio ut
facias.

Amongst real Contracts, the Law numbereth matuum and commodatum, (for which,
we have but the one name of Loan) Depositation or Custody, Pignus or Pledge, of
which anon.

Contracts perfected by words are stipulations, which being wholly out of use,
we shall say no more of them, then that before is hinted. The third kind of
Contracts is these, which have their force by Write; and therefore, are called,
Chyrographa. The hand Write, or Subscription of the Debtor, by which, he
acknowledges the receipt of so much Money, either in borrowing, or Tocher, and
accordingly is obliged to pay at his day, or at the dissolution of the
Marriage; these Writes for the space of two years after their date and
delivery, do not prove the recept of the Money, as they express; but during
that time, if the Creditor pursue thereupon, he must prove the delivery of the
Money: and the Law presumes, that the Write was given, spe numerandaepecuniae,
upon hope of delivery of the Money, but after the two years, it presumes the
Money to be delivered; and therefore, then the Write is (...), and is the cause
of the Obligation; whether the Money was delivered or not, after which, the
Debtor could not prove the not delivery of the Money, even by the Oath of the
Creditor, l. in contractibus, ff. de non numerata pecunia, but this is also
changed with us, and with the Neighbor Nations, as Baldimius testifies, ad
titulum, Just. de lit. oblig. And Boethius, de consuetudine, tit. de jurisdic.
And Rebuffus, ad proximum, constable. Reg. gloss. 5. number. 59. So now the Custom
is, that the Write is not the Substance of the Obligation, but is only a
Probation of the Promise; though in some case it be a necessar solemnity, till
which, the parties may resile, as has been formerly showen: But the Write
being subscribed and delivered, proves from its date, and is valide, unless it
be improven, yet so, as it admits contrair Probation by the Creditors Oath
or Write, though the Write bear the numeration of Money, and do expressly
renounce the exception of not numerate Money.

The last kind of Contracts are these, which are by sole consent, as are the
Contracts of Sale, Location, or Hyring, Society, and Mandat or Commission; but
not only now these, but all other Promises and Pactions are valide Contracts,
by sole consent, except where Write is requisite, as is before expressed, and
this consent may be either express by Word, Write, or Fact, by doing Deeds
importing consent, which therefore is called Homologation, whereof acceptance
of any Right is a special kind, and it takes place in many cases, but it cannot
take place unless it be proven, or presumed that the Homologator knew the
Right; and therefore, a Bond drawn in name of several Apprizers, to
communicate their Rights, and subscribed by some, found not Homologat by one
who subscribed not, seeing it appeared not that he knew thereof, though de
facto, he concurred in pursuits with these Apprizers to exclude other Rights,
July 6. 1661. Telfair contra Maxtoun and Cunninghame. Neither does Homologation
take place, where the Deed done may be attribute to another cause, and so
possessing Lands, whereof there was an Infeftment granted, in satisfaction of a
Wifes Contract, was not inferred, where she was appearand Heir to another
person Infeft, December 12. 1665. Christian Barns contra Helen Young. But such
an Infeftment was found Homologat by seven years Possession, and setting
several Tacks, as Liferenter, though there was a general obliegement to Infeft
the Wife in Lands of such a value, none being expressed, though it was not
instructed that the warrant of the Seasing was ever known to the woman, and
only generally mentioned in the Band, but her knowledge was presumed after so
many Acts, November 14. 1665. Barbara Skein and Mr. David Thores contra Sir
Andrew Ramsay. Neither was a Debt found Homologate by payment on a Decree,
being pronounced by the English Officers, before Law was patent, July 24. 1661.
Jack contra Fiddes. Neither does payment of one Article of a Decret Arbitral,
Homologate others of a different Nature, November 22. 1662. Pringle contra
Dune. Homologation of a Fathers Legacy, as to his Children, was inferred by his
Relicts Confirming the Testament without Protestation, not to aprove that
Legacy, February 19. 1663. Bessie Muir contra Jean Stirling. But where a Relict
in the Confirmation, Protested not to prejudge her own Right, by a provision
contained in the Testament, in favors of her Daughter, it was not found to
Homologate the same, July 12. 1671. Marjory Murray contra Isobel Murray.
Homologation of a Fewars Right, not inferred by acceptance of two years Duty,
after declarator of the nullity, further then that no more could be demanded
for these two years, June 6. 1666. Earl of Cassils contra Sir Andrew Agnew.
Neither did the payment of some years Annualrent Homologat a Decret of Poinding
the Ground, as being an Act necessary to shun Poinding of the Tennants,
February 9. 1672. Cockburn of Piltoun contra Halyburtoun and Burnet. Neither
did a Ministers receiving a Tack Duty of Teinds, hinder him to reduce the Tack
thereafter, as being without consent of the Patron, February 27. 1668. Mr.
William Chalmer contra Wood of Balbegno. Neither did the payment of Annualrent
after Majority, by a Minor Cautioner, paying with the Principals Money, and
taking Discharge to him only, hinder the Minor to Reduce, February 14. 1668.
Sir George Mckenzie contra Mr. John Fairholme. Neither the payment of
Annualrent to an indigent Sister, after Majority, exclude Reduction upon
Minority, but Registrating the Contract after Majority, without Charge or
Execution, was found to infer Homologation, June 28. 1671. Helen Homecontra
Rentoun Justice Clerk. Neither did the Confirming of a Sum as Moveable, hinder
the Confirmer to recover it as Heretable, June 28. 1672. Kilgour contra
Menzies. December 23. 1673. Mitchel contra Mitchel. Neither does the granting
of a Precept of Seasing on obedience, import acknowledgement of Right, or
exclude Reduction, and Improbation, December 20. 1662. Mochrum contra Myretoun
and Airiolland. Neither was a Decret found Homologat by taking Discharge, and
giving a Bond without abatement, which might import transaction, the granter
being in the Messengers hands, under Caption, July 3. 1668. Thomas Row contra
Andrew Houston. Neither was Homologation of the truth of a Debt, inferred by
granting Bond by a Party in Prison, for not finding Caution, Judicatum solvi,
February 18. 1680. Mr. Andrew Burnet contra John Ewing. Neither did allowance
to a Tennant in his Rent of Annualrent paid by him, exclude Reduction of the
Bond on Minority, though the allowance was after Majority, December 14. 1675.
James Moodie contra Mcintosh. Neither accepting a Bond jointly with another,
did Homologate the Right of that other, February 1. 1676. Veich contra Ker and
Pallat.

Consent may be adhibit by signs, as the borrowing of a Watch by a sign made
by the borrowers hand, was found to obliege him to restore, though another
instantly borrowed it that same way from him; nor was the first lenders silence
in an Act so subite, interpret a consent to the second loan, July 3. 1662. Lord
Couper contra Lord Pitsligo. But a Dumb man subscribing a Discharge, was not
found to infer his consent, in favors of his Sister, seeing he knew not what it
imported, July 9. 1663. Hamiltoun contra (...). Neither was consent to a March
inferred by the one Heretors building a Dyke, and another silence for a time,
January 8. 1663. Patrick Nicol contra Sir Alexander Hope. Neither was the
knowledge and silence of a Husband, found to infer his consent to his future
Spouse, renuncing a part of her jointure, after Proclamation, and yet going on
in the Marriage, January 5 1666. Lady Bute and her Husband contra Sheriff of
Bute. And albeit consent to the Contents of a Write, is not always inferred
from subscribing as a witness; yet in some cases it is, when the consent
relates not to the Tenor, but to the time of subscribing, as an Heirs
subscribing as a witness to a Write on death bed, June 25. 1663. Stuart of
Ascock contra Stuart of Arnholm. But the consent of a Party to a Decret, was
not found probable by the Decret, without a warrant under the Consenters hand,
seeing it appeared that the minut of the Decret, on the judicial consent was not
instantly written, but long after, and it was no ordinar point in Process
consented to, but a transaction of a special Nature, July 24. 1661. Lord of
Buchannan contra L. Colonel Osburn, but one of the parties having offered
Implement by Instrument, (...) by the Witnesses insert, was not suffered to
quarrel his consent, as not under his hand, February 4. 1671. Lowrie contra
Gibson. But consent was not found to be inferred by subscribing Witness, as to
the Contents of the Writ, February 1. 1676. Veich contra Ker and Pallat. Yea,
though the Write did bear the Witness to be Cautioner, unless it were proven by
the Witnesses insert, that the Write was fully Read to that Witness before he
subscribed, July 26. 1672. Mr. Airthur Gordoun contra Menzies.

12. All Pactions and Contracts, being now equally efficacious, may according
to their subject matter be taken up thus; they are either merely gratuitous, as
he who oblieges himself to bestow a Horse, is thereby bound, But there is no
Obligation on the other; but if the Donation be perfected by a present
tradition of the thing Gifted, there is no Obligation contracted on either
hand; or next the Obligation is gratuitous on the one part as Loan, which is
either by the free lending of things, consistent in number, measure, and
weight, which the Law regards as a quantity, without regard to the individual
body or thing, such being commonly of equal value, according to their
quantities, these are called Fungibles, as Money, Corn, Wine, either where the
Loan is expressly, or implicitly, for the delivery of the like quantities,
though not the same very thing. Or otherways, it is the lending the use of a
particular thing, to be delivered again, the same in substance, the former is
called mutuum, the latter commodatum, in both, if the thing lent be not
delivered, this will be effectual to cause it be delivered, though it be
gratuitous, if it be in the lenders power; but on the part of the borrower, it
is onerous, for he is obliged, either to restore the same body, or the same
quantity. Such also is Commission or Mandat, whereby the Mandatar does freely
undertake, and is obliged, susceptum perficere munus, and that freely; but he
is onerously obliged to restore, what by the Mandat he has from the Mandator,
as the Mandator is obliged to refound him his Interest and Expenses. Such also
is the Contract of Custody. Or Depositum, which is a kind of Commission,
whereby the Depositar undertakes the Custody of the thing depositate. Pledge is
also a kind of Commission, whereby the thing impledged is given to a Creditor
for his security, that he may detain; and in case of not payment, he may sell
it and pay himself.

The other Contracts are such as are Onerous on both parts, and Obligator on
both parts, and in them there is also always, quid pro quo, according to the
nature and intent of these Contracts, observing in them an equality of the
deeds or things to be done or given on either part, as not being of their
nature, or of the direct purpose of the parties gratuitous, or donative; for
uptaking of these, we must consider, that all that can come in these
Obligations, is either something to be given, or the use or fruit of something,
or the labor, work, or deeds of Persons: and among things, special
consideration is had of Money, which is the common token of Exchange; and
therefore, there are special Contracts in relation to it, different from the
Exchange of other things: So then, all these Permutative Contracts, are either
of things for things, as are Permutation, Excambion, Barter, etc. Or of things
for numbered Money, and that is sale, or Money for Money, as by Bill of
Exchange.

Secondly, Profit, use, fruit, or work, may be either exchanged with things,
and this has no proper name, but is called in Law, facio ut des; or otherways
may be exchanged for the like use, profit, or work, neither had this a proper
name, but is called facio ut facias: But if the use and profit of things,
deeds or industry of persons, be exchanged for Money, or other Fugibles, it is
called Location, and Conduction.

And Lastly, If the Contract be not to Exchange totally things, use, or work
for the like, but to communicate them together, where there is an Exchange in
part, there arises the Contract of Society; in which, sometimes Money or
things, by the Society are communicate, and the property constitute in the
Society without division; or sometime the use of things, or Money, are by the
Society communicate on the one part, and the substance of Money on the other, so
that the property of the ones Money remains his own, and the profit becomes
common; or there may be communication of work with Money, or work with work,
though these be the most ordinar Contracts among men, yet there be as many
varieties as the conjunction or variety of these things, in the various use or
humors of men can make up, as the contract of Assurance: where Money or things
are given, for the hazard of any thing that is in danger, whether it be Goods
or Persons. We shall only then touch the common requisites, First of all
Contracts, and next the specialities of the prime, unto which Law or Custom
has given a special Nature, that by the very naming of the Contract and
Agreement, therein all the Obligations interests and consequences thence
arising, are known commonly and presumed, and as effectual as if they were all
expressed, without necessity, to dispute precisely, what Reason and Equity will
conclude, from the nature of what is done or said. This seems to be the only
profitable distinction betwixt Contracts nominate and innominate; for in all
Contracts, not only that which is expressed must be performed, but that which is
necessarly consequent and employed, but in nominate Contracts, Law has
determined these implications; we shall therefore speak specially of the
Contracts of Loan, Commission, Custody, Pledge, Excambion, Sale, Location and
Contracts, Usurary and Society. Transaction may well be numbered amongst mutual
onerous Contracts, for thereby either party quiteth a part of what he claims,
for shunning the hazard and expenses of Law, which being an useful mean to
terminat Pleas, the Law of this and most Nations observe the same unviolably,
and will not admit the recalling thereof, upon any thing can be pretended from
new discovery of the parties Rights, as finding of Writes or Witness; but if
nothing be abated, there is no Transaction; and therefore, a Bond for a sum,
for which the party was under Caption, being without any abatement, was found
no Transaction, July 13. 1668. Thomas Rue contra Houstoun. Neither was payment
made, pendente processu, without abatement found a Transaction, January 8.
1673. Sir James Ramsay contra Robison. Neither was Transaction inferred by
granting a Bond for Accounts, for which the granter of the Bond was Arrested,
unless a lesser sum had been accepted, then what was claimed by the Accounts;
here the instructinos of the Accounts were not given up, nor a Discharge
thereof, but an obliegement to give a general Discharge upon payment of the Sum
contained in the Bond, February 18. 1680. Mr. Andrew Burnet contra John Ewing.

13. For the common requisites and properties of Contracts, First, They must be
deeds of the rational appetitte or will, which, as we have said, can only
constitute Rights; therefore the consent of Infants can work nothing, because
they have not the use of Reason; and though equity keeps not one time for the
attainment of Reason, but takes it as soon as truly it is, which in some is
much sooner, and in some much later; yet Positive Law, following that which is
most ordinary for stabilities sake, fixes it at the end of Pupilarity, which in
men is fourteen, and in women twelve years of age; so neither Infants, Idiots,
nor Furious Persons, except in their lucide Intervals, can contract: This is to
be cognosced by an Inquest, upon a Brief of the Chancellary, called the Brief
of Idiotry, which is mainly for appointing the nearest Agnat to be Tutor to
such: And the deeds of Idiots are not only void after this Inquest, but after
their Idiotry, or Furiosity, when ever it began, which therefore must be
cognosced, yet it was sustained by Reduction without a Brief, at the furious
persons instance, Convalescing, February 21. 1531. Elizabeth Alexander contra
Kinneir. And at the Instance of the Furious Persons Heir, for anulling an
Assignation, July 28. 1638. James Loch contra William Dyke. But it was not
found competent by exception, Spots Idiots, Crawford contra Kinneir. Furiosity
takes away the Escheat of these, as selfmurtherers, being then Furious, Hope,
horning, Robert Ripeth contra William Wauchop.

Secondly, These also, who through Fear or Drunkenness, or Disease, have not
for the time, the use of Reason, do not Contract.

Thirdly, These who err in the Substantials of what is done, contract not; we
shall not here debate of the effect of Extortion, Error or Circumvention, what
influence they have upon Contracts, but refer that to the former Title. These
who are Deaf or Dumb may Contract, if they have the use of Reason, if it appear
they understood what was done, and expressed their consent, by their ordinary
known signs.

And Last, Positive Law for Utilities sake, has disabled Minors, having
Curators, to Contract without their consent. Like unto these are Persons
Interdicted, of which before, this much for requisite in the persons
Contracting.

Secondly, In the Act of Contracting, it must be of purpose to obliege, either
really or presumptively, and so must be serious, so that what is expressed in
jest or scorn, makes no Contract.

Thirdly, In the matter of Contracts it is requisite, that it be of things in
our power in their kind; and so Contracts of impossibilities are void; and
Contracts in things unlawful are also void; but though the particular thing be
not in our power, and be not manifestly impossible, the Contract is obligator;
and albeit it cannot obtain its effect, upon that thing it is effectual for the
equivalent, as damnage and interest, Contracts may interveen where there
interceeds a Natural and Obediential Obligation, where it has this use to
declare and express the Natural Obligation to avoid debate thereupon: But the
proper matter of Contracts, are things free, and the declaration or
acknowledgement of necessar duties may be free, though the duty it self be
necessar, yet where Obediential and Conventional Obligations are concurring,
they are both Obligator.

14. It is the property of permutative Contracts, that the purpose of the
Contracters is to keep an equality in the worth and value of the things, fruit
or works interchanged, the value is regulate according to the common esteem and
custom of men in every place, and its liquidat or known by Money, or some
fungible like unto Money, as Suggar and Tobacco in the American Islands, for
Money being the common token of Exchange; and therefore, having virtually in it
all things, they are accounted better or worse, or equal, according to the
common rate of the place, as they are worth in Money for the time, the prime
grounds of this common estimate are necessity, utility, and delectation,
whether it be real or imaginary, as Plin. lib. 9. cap. 55. Margaritis pretium
luxuria fecit, such is the value of Portraits, Tulips, or other Flowers, upon
which, in some places, a far greater rate has been put, then any usefulness
thereof would allow; hence it is that the rate of things does frequently
change, as the necessity or esteem of them changes, and the more they abound,
the easier is their rate.

But the question is here, whether in these Contracts there be a moral
necessity to keep an exact equality, that whosoever, ex post facto, shall be
found to have made an unequal Bargain, the advantager ought to repair the
loser: in this the Romans did not notice every inequality, but that which was
enorm, above the half of the just value, which our Custom allows not, June
23. 1669. Robert Farie contra James Inglis. And the opinion of Grotius, de jure
belli, l. 2. cap. 12. Is for the affirmative upon this ground, chiefly that the
purpose of the Contracters is to give one thing for an other of equal value,
without purpose to gift on either hand; yet the contrair opinion is more
probable in some cases, wherein, though it be the purpose of the parties, to
interchange things of equal value, without Donation; yet that equality has no
determinate or certain rule, but their own opinions: for as is said before, the
special affection and opinion of the owner, is a piece of his interest and
enjoyment; and if the thing be taken from him unwarrantably, and cannot be
restored, the Reparation is not according to the common rate, but secundum
pretium affectionis, according to the value the owner had of it; and if that
owner sell it for the rate he thought it worth, it would be thought no less
then cousenage, for the buyer to offer but what others thought it worth, if
then the particular value or esteem be the first rule in such Contracts, when
both parties being free, do agree upon such a rate, there is here no Donation,
but a particular Estimation, wherewith either ought to rest satisfied: It is
true, where there is no rate agreed upon, the common rate must be the rule, but
it cannot always be a rule, seeing the public rate does but arise from the
private rate, otherways rates should never change, except where by public
Authority they are determinate, which is but seldom: But ordinarily the change
of rates begins at particular persons, and the second Contracters use for a
pattern the first; and the fuller the example be, the stronger it is until it
become common; and therefore, it is safest to conclude with the Law, l. si
voluntate, C. de resin. vend. which says, this is the substance of buying and
selling, that the buyer having a purpose to buy cheap, and the seller to sell
dear, they come to this Contract, and after many debates, the seller by little
and little diminishing what he sought, and the buyer adding to what he offered,
at last they agree to a certain price, or as Seneca says, l. 6. de beneficiis,
cap. 15. It is no matter what the rate be, seeing it is agreed between the buyer
and the seller, for he that buys well, owes nothing to the seller; therefore,
the equality required in these Contracts cannot be in any other rate then the
parties agree on; but in other things, this equality ought to be observed, as
in any Penalty adjected, or Clauses irritant, which therefore ought to be, and
are reduced to the just interest, what ever the parties agreement be: So then,
seeing Promises and Contracts are morally binding, permutative Contracts must
also be such, else they should not bind by virtue of the consent, but by reason
of the matter; but in them as in all others, if any party has disadvantage by
Fraud or Guile, it ought to be repared, but not by virtue of the Contract, but
from the Obligation arising from that Delinquence, and so unjust balances are
an abomination to the Lord, because of the deceit thence arising: as also,
false Money, and insufficient Ware, by any latent insufficiency or defect,
which was not obvious and easily perceivable by the acquirer, in which case,
there can be no presumption of Fraud, his eye is his merchant; but in others,
according to the Sentence of Ambrose, in Contracts, says he, even the defects
of the things which are sold, ought to be laid open, and unless the seller
intimate the same, there is competent to the buyer an action of Fraud; so also,
if the buyer take advantage of the ignorance and simplicity of the seller, and
where there is no alteration of the common rate, nor ground thereof asks or
craveth more if it be not deceit, at least it is against Charity: so is it when
ware is kept up till pinching necessity, which raises extreme dearth, or
when some special necessity of an acquirer, puts him so upon the mercy of the
Disponer, that he may take a price, even above that which himself accounts the
thing worth, in such cases, there is the violation of the Natural Obligation of
Charity, whereby men are bound in some cases, to Gift freely to the necessity
of others; but frequently we are obliged to exchange what our necessity may
spare, to supply others necessity for the like which they may spare, and so
without injury, in case of necessity, men may be compelled to sell that which
is their own.

15. This agrees with our Custom, by which only a latent insufficiency of the
Goods and Ware, at the time of the sale and delivery, is sufficient to abate or
take down of the price, but not unless when the unsufficiency appeared, the
thing bought be offered to be restored (if it be not carried abroad before the
insufficiency appear) after which, retention is accounted an acquiescence in,
and Homologation of the Contract: So no other then the latent insufficiency of
Wines, as being mixed with Peary, etc. is relevant to liberate from a Bond
granted for the price thereof. But the insufficiency of a Horse was not
sustained to liberate from the price, he not being offered when that appeared,
January 9. 1629. Brown contra Mr. James Nicolson. Insufficiency of Skins
received upon trust, was found only probable by the Oath of the seller, after
the buyer had sold them again, July 7. 1675. Patton contra Lockhart.

16. Before we come to the special Contracts, this question which is of much
importance in practice, would be resolved, whether in mutual or reciprocal
Contracts, a party Contracter, or his Assignay, can obtain implement of the
Articles of the Contract in his favor, till he fulfill or cause to be
fulfilled the other part: Our Decisions have been exceeding various in this
matter; for clearing whereof, several cases must be distinguished; First, In
the case of the Contracters themselves, and in that, either the mutual
obliegements are conceived conditionally, that the one part being performed, or
upon the performance thereof, the other part shall be performed, or where the
obliegements are not conceived conditionally, yet they are properly mutual
Causes, each of other. The obliegement to deliver the Ware, and to pay the
price in permutation, the things exchanged, and mutual obliegements for
delivery thereof, are the mutual causes each of other, in Location, the use of
that which is set for hire, and the hire are the mutual Causes, and so are the
Obligations, hinc inde, otherways, the Obliegements are not the proper Causes
each of other, but either wholly different matters, which are frequently
accumulate in the same Contracts; or the one, but the occasion and motive, and
not the proper cause of the other: The case of Assignays must be considered in
all these.

For the first, The Civil Law is for the Negative, that in reciprocal
Contracts, neither party can have effectual Action, except he perform the whole
Contract on his part. As to the first member of the first case, there is no
question, but when the mutual obliegements are conceived conditionally, he that
demands the one part, must perform the other. As to the other member when the
Obliegments are mutual causes each of other expressly, when the Contract bears,
for the which causes; or when by the nature of the thing; appears so to be:
It is most consonant to reason, to the Civil Law an our Practice, that neither
party should obtain implement of the obliegement to him, till he fulfill the
obliegements by him, it was so found, July 27. (...) Lord of Keirs contra Mr.
James Marjoribanks Leidingtoun. November (...) 1565. James Crichtoun contra
Marion Crichtoun. July 1581. Lord (...) contra Provost of Lincluden, where the
reason is rendered, because it is (...) data and non sequuta, till he who
craves implement fulfill his own part, (...) though it be ordinarily understood,
when the cause of the Obligationaltogether fails; yet upon the same ground,
so long as the cause is suspended, or delayed on the one part; the effect is
also to be delayed on the other. But in Contracts, wherein the Obliegements are
not the proper Causes each of other; the one part has effect before the other
be fulfilled, and the same is only reserved or declared not to be prejudged by
way of Action or Charge, Sinclar, February 19. 1548. Lord of Ker contra
Panter. December 1563. Earl of Glencairn contra Commendator of Kilwinning.

As to the second case, whether an Assignay Charging or Pursuing upon a mutual
Contract, be in any better case then the Cedent, or can crave implement, till
the Cedents part be performed, the difficulty is here, that if Assiggnays be
cloged with the obliegements of the Cedent, it will mar Commerce, and render
such Contracts ineffectual, as to summar execution, and so Obliegements therein
for Liquid sums of Money, might not be Poinded or Apprized for, nor any
Execution valid thereupon; but this will not follow, for though these
Executions be summarly used, they will stand valide, only the effect will be
suspended, till the other part be performed: But the Assignay having no title
whereby to compel his Cedent to perform his part; therefore the other
Contracter must either be decerned to assign his part of the Contract to the
Assignay to the other part, that thereupon he may insist for performance; and
that before the Extract of his Decree, or rather execution may be sisted,
except as to Adjudication for his security, till he procure implement of his
Cedents part; or otherways, that he find Caution, that the other Contracter
using diligence against his Cedent for performance, that the Assignay shall
make up what shall be wanting to him, as was done in the case betwixt William
Cunningham contra John Ross, wherein an Assignay Charging upon a Contract for
the price of Lands; by which Contract his Cedent was obliged to cause the
Tennants pay certain bygone Ferms; therefore the Assignay was ordained to find
Caution for satisfying of these Ferms against the Cedent, February 15. 1627.
William Cunninghame contra John Ross. Hope, Contracts, Lord of Rentoun contra
Robert Douglas. And though a Donatar was found to have Right to the price of
Lands, due by a Contract, though the Rebel had not performed his part of the
Contract, Hope, Cessio bonorum, Balfour contra Futhy, there was nothing
alleged of the insolvency of the Cedent: But a Donatar pursuing for the price
of Fews, the Fewers were assoilzied from the Declarator, till the Donatar
obtained the Fews to be perfected; here it was known, the Donatar was in trust
for the Rebel who was in power to perform, January 28. 1673. Lord Lion contra
Arthur Forbes. But there can be no reason that the one part of the mutual Cause
should be effectual without the other, for if the Cedents Back-bond apart would
affect the Assignay, much more when it is in the same Contract; yea, though the
matter proceed not by way of Contract, but by Bonds apart; if thereby it
appear, that these Bonds are mutual Causes one of another, the effect should be
the same, and though there be no more to prove that they are mutual Causes, but
that they are of the same date, and before the same Witnesses, the Lords will
readily examine the Witnesses insert, ex officio, whether they be mutual Causes
each of other; and therefore, where a Bond apart did bear, that the Creditor
should ratify a Disposition of the same date, at his Majority, under a great
penalty. A Bond granted apart to that party of that same date, being Assigned,
the Assignay was found to have no power to lift the principal sum, till the
Cedent ratified at his Majority, or were past his anni utiles, without
Reduction, November 14. 1628. Cunninghame contra Cunninghame. The like was
found, as to Writes of the same date, with a Contract anent the same matter,
though not mentioned in the Contract, Hope, Contract, Duncrub contra Chapman:
But if in Contracts or mutual Bonds, the mutual obliegements have different
terms of performance: a pursuit upon the one part will not be stoped by not
performance of the other part, while the term agreed for the performance is not
come, November 28. 1676. Sir David Carmichael of Basmedy contra Dempster of
Pitliver.

17. To come now to particulars according to the order proposed, Loan
comprehends both the Contracts in the Law, called mutuum, and commodatum; by
the former, a thing Fungible is freely given, for the like to be restored in
the same kind and quantity, though not the same individual. A Fungible is that
which is estimate according to the quantity, and is not easily decernable, nor
noticed in the individual or particular body, but only in the like quantity of
the same kind, the chief of which is Money, where ordinarily the extrinsick
value and common rate is regarded, without respect to the matter, and so what
is borrowed in Gold may be paid in Silver, according to the common rate of the
place, unless it be otherways contracted: such also are Wine, Oil and Grain,
wherein the quantity is ever respected in the same kind, as in the loan of
Wines, payment must be had, not only by the Wine of the same Country, but if
there be any difference by the Wine of the same place of the Country, and so
of all the rest; for it is never accounted a quantity, where there can be other
differences remarked: these Fungibles have no fruit or use, if they be
retained; and therefore, the end of the Contract and purpose of the Contracters
is, that the property thereof shall pass to the borrower from the lender, and
may be by him alienate; and thence is its name, for mutuum est quasi de meo
tuum, l. 2. ff. de rebus creditis: Salmasius alone denies this, holding that
the intent of this Contract, non est transferredominium, but to give the use,
and that the alienation falls of accident, because Law makes no difference of
quantities of the same kind; so that if Money be found, Restitution may be made
without any Contract, though not in the same Money, but in the like, wherein
there is no consent, and so can be no alienation.

18. Yet the common opinion holds, that the purpose of the Contracters is to
alienate, because they know without it there can be no use: And if a Fungible
be not lent to that purpose, but only to be detained, as in some cases it may,
as Money to make a show with, to appear rich, or to make a simulate
Consignation; there the borrower without injury, could not alienate, and he who
finds, unwarrantably alienateth his Neighbors Money, and may be compelled,
not only to render the like in current Money, but to render the same Species
and pieces of Money. So he who has the custody of Money, if he meddle with it
he commits Theft by the Law; hence it follows, that the whole peril of the
thing lent, after delivery, is the borrowers, ejus est periculum eujus est
dominium, so that Money or any other Fungible thing lent, though it were
immediately taken away by force, or destroyed by accident, the borrower is
obliged to pay.

The transmission of the Property of things lent mutuo, is so necessary, that
without it, it cannot consist; and if a paction or condition be adjected,
though with interposition of a Stipulation, that the thing lent shall not be
alienable, it destroys the Contract, and trans-changes it into commodatum.

It is not here fit to repeat the general requisites of mutuum, common to other
Contracts, as that it must be done by an act of the Will, with Understanding,
and so is impeded by Errot in the substance of the Contract, and cannot be
effectual by Infants, Furious Persons; nor by the Civil Law could it be done by
Prodigals, which we notice not, unless they be interdicted: Neither by Minors
having Curators, without their consent. Nor can they who have not the Right of
Property lend, except by Commission, because they cannot transmit more then
they have; mutuum may be constitute by such as can Contract effectually, having
all the former requifites of the lender.

19. And the Civil Law had this exception further, per Senatus. Consultum
(...), prohibiting and annulling lending to sons in the Family, which our
Custom owneth not, and looks to Sons at most, but under the privilege of
Minors, if within age; and if they contract, without their Fathers consent, who
is their lawful Administrator, their deed is anullable, unless it be of small
Importance wherein they use to Negotiat.

Our Custom in stead of the Senatus. Consultum Velleyanium, in favors of
Women, whereby they could not interpose as Cautioners, or any ways be Surety
for others, has indulged the favor to Wives, that while they are Married,
they cannot effectually obliege themselves, otherways then in reference to
their Lands, of which formerly, Title Conjugal Obligations.

20. Because of the matter, things cannot fall under mutuum, which cannot be
(...), and which are not properly Fungibles (as Money, Corn, Wine, Oil) and I
doubt not, but Oxen, Kine, and Sheep, are mutuable, as is ordinary in
Steelbow-Goods; which are delivered to the Tennant with the Land, for the like
number and kind at his removal.

21. As to the specialities of mutuum, First, It is not Contracted without
delivery of the thing lent, and it has very little, either by the Civil Law or
our Customs, as a nominat Contract, but what is competent by the Obligation of
Restitution, or Recompense; and therefore, promutuum per indebitum, where there
is no Contract, is equiparat to mutuum, for the like, not only in kind, but in
value, must be repayed, though nothing be expressed therefore. As he who lent so
much Wine, is not obliged to accept the same kind of Wine, but also of the
same value, as if he lent old Wine, he is not obliged to take new, which is
accounted worse. l. 3. ff. de rebus creditis, and this is rather by that
equivalence, due in Recompense, then by any tacit Paction, understood to be
implied in this Contract. And it were more convenient for Commerce, that there
should be understood a contrary Paction, that being repayed in the same kind,
there should be no debate of the equivalent value, which leaves a perpetual
incertitude in all such Contracts, raising ever a quarrel, that the repayment
is not as good as the thing lent, as there is difference of the goodness of
Wines in the same Country, yea, the same field; likewise there is a difference
in kinds of Money, Silver or Gold, and in the Intrinsic and the Extrinsick
Value, wherein the common opinion is, that not only the Extrinsick, but
Intrinsic Value is to be respected, that the same weight and species of Money
must be repayed. But none make difference of Gold or Silver, not allayed; and
all reject Copper or Layed-Money, our Custom was to have repayment in the same
Intrinsic Value, as appears, Par. 1451. cap. 36. Par. 1457. cap. 19. Par.
1555. cap. 37. But that was well altered by a posterior Custom, allowing the
current Coin for the time, by the Extrinsick Value to be sufficient, in all
Redemptions, much more in personal Contracts, which is most convenient, seeing
Money is regarded as the Token of Exchange, and as a Fungible, not as a body;
and it is not to be supposed, that if the lender had kept his Money from the
present borrower, that he would have lost the profit of it, to keep it up till
the Extrinsick Value might change to his advantage; or that the borrower was to
keep it by him, but to make present use of it; for which cause we notice not
the Intrinsic Value, even as it was at the Term of payment.

22. The Civil Law gives so little to mutuum, by the Nature of the Contract,
that it is amongst the Contracts stricti juris, where nothing is understood but
what is expressed, or necessarly consequent therefrom. And therefore, there is
no Annual or Profit, due in mutuo; yea, though it be expressed by Paction, it
will not suffice by the Civil Law, unless it be by Stipulation; we allow not
profit, in mutuo, unless it be so agreed upon, which may be by paction, even
ex intervallo; in which case it retains the name of mutuum, though it be rather
Locatione of the use of the Fungible, for the Annual, as a competent hire, and
so we shall speak to Annualrents, not here, but in Location; yet the Law did
allow to mutuum, that any thing might be transchanged in a Fungible, as the
price thereof, and that Fungible constitute, in mutuum, which is equivalent, as
if the Fungible had been really delivered, l. 11. ff. de rebus creditis. And
any Contract is easily changed, in mutuum per fictionem braevis manus, as if
all these alterations had been actually made. But if it were but acknowledged,
per Chyrographum, that Money was delivered, the exception, de non numerata
pecunia, was competent. With us the transmission from any other cause is
sufficient, and the acknowledgement of the receipt of Money proves, unless the
contrair be proven by Write or Oath.

The ordinary way of mutuum amongst Merchants, is by Bills of Exchange, or
Letters of Credit, which have several specialities, which arise from the
Nature of these Acts, and from Custom, especially these common Customs of
Merchants, observed in Cities of greatest Trade, in the Neighboring Nations.
The Nature and ordinary Tenor of these Bills of Exchange is, that the drawer of
the Bill orders such a Merchant, or his correspondent, to pay the sum contained
in the Bill upon sight, or at such certain time, or at useance, and that for
value received, wherein there is implied a Mandat to the Correspondent, and an
obliegement upon the Drawer of the Bill, to make that Mandat effectual, wherein
mutuum is implied, if the value received by him be numerate Money, or of any
other Cause, such as delivery of Ware; there is in it, fictio braevis manus, as
if the Ware were sold to the drawer of the Bill, and the sum in the Bill were
the price received, and delivered again in Loan; there uses two or three Bills
to be drawn for the same sum, which do bear, to be the first, second, and third
Bill, and the payment of any one satisfies all: the fixed form by Custom, of
making use of these Bills, is by presenting them to him upon whom they are
drawn, and if he accept the Bill, he Writes thereupon, accepts, which if it be
simply, he becomes liable in the Terms, and at the time mentioned in the Bill:
But sometimes the accepter does qualify his Acceptance, which the Creditor by
the Bill may refuse; and require either simple acceptance, or may Protest for
Non-acceptance; but if he suffer the Acceptance to be qualified, it imports his
consent, and he cannot Protest for Non-acceptance, as if the Acceptance be to a
longer day, then what is contained in the Bill: Or if it bear Acceptance, if
provisions come betwixt and the day; or if Ware or Bills in hand do raise the
sum. At or after the day, the Bill is again presented, and if payment be not
then made, the Creditor in the Bill Protests for not payment, and both these
Protestations must be by Instrument of a Nottar, either for Non-acceptance, or
not Payment: Which Instruments with the Bill, make sufficient Probation, both
against the Drawer of the Bill, and against him upon whom it was Drawn; and
neither Witnesses, nor the Oath of Party will be sufficient to supply the
Protest: So that the Instrument or Protest, is not only a Proof, but a
Solemnity requisite. These Protests may be taken against him upon whom they
were drawn, either personally, or at his Dwelling House, which was sustained,
though before presenting of the Bill, the party upon whom it was drawn was
dead, July 3. 1664. Hugh Kennedy contra George Hutcheson.

Upon Bills so Protested, the Creditor in the Bill has Action, both against
him upon whom the Bill was drawn, if through his fault, he has either refused
to accept, or to pay, and so if he had Provisions in his hand, he will be
decerned to pay; and if without Provisions, he accept and pay, the drawer of
the Bill becomes his Debtor, ex mutuo, or ex mandato.

The Creditor in the Bill may also return upon the drawer of the Bill, who will
be Decerned to pay the sum, with the damnage the Creditor has sustained
through its being Protested, wherein will be comprehended the Expenses of the
Pursuit against the Correspondent, and the profit the Creditor in the Bill
might have made, if according to it, he had received his Money, which will
differ in several persons and cases; as if the Creditor in the Bill be not a
Merchant; the ordinary damnage will be the Exchange, that is the rate ordinarily
given at that time, for answering Money from the place, at which the Bill was
drawn, to the place to which it was direct; but if the Creditor in the Bill was
a Merchant, and was to Trade with the sum in the place, to which the Bill was
direct, he has also no more but Exchange; but if he was to Trade in any other
place, before he returned to the place where the Bill was drawn, he will not
only get Exchange, but Re-exchange, as being damnified in the profit of his
Ware that he was to buy, at the place to which he was bound, from that place to
which the Bill was direct, for the Ware he was to buy there, and for the loss
of his profit of the Ware he was to buy at the second prot: but though there
might be further progress in his Traffic, his damnage is no further extended,
then to Exchange and Reexchange; and in all, the Oath of the Creditor in the
Bill, concerning his design with the Bill, must be sufficient Probation, and is
Taxable. As all Oaths in litem are, when they appear Exorbitant, if the Bill of
Exchange be unsatisfied by an interveening accident, which the drawer could not
prevent, the damnage will be modified or taken off; as in the former case, the
Correspondent upon whom the Bill was drawn, dying before the day of payment,
the Creditor in the Bill having Protested at his Dwelling House, and not
insisting against his Successors, but returning against the drawer, he got no
Exchange or Re-exchange; yet certainly, the drawer of the Bill being hereby
obliged to deliver the Money, at the place to which the Bill was directed, it
had been no stretch to give him Exchange.

But if the Correspondent upon whom the Bill is drawn, Break, or become
Insolvent, full damange will be due by the drawer, whose part it was to have
his Money in secure hands, unless the Correspondents Insolvency, be by the
delay, or fault of the Creditor in the Bill; for though there be no determinate
time at which he is obliged to present it, yet convenience and ordinary
diligence is employed; but if the delay sall by an accident, though the
Correspondent break before the Bill be presented, or paid, the drawer of the
Bill will be liable for the value received, but for no damnage, July 1. 1676.
Doctor Wallace contra Simson.

These Bills of Exchange are Probative, though they neither have Witnesses, nor
be Holograph, by the Custom of Merchants, because of the exuberant trust among
them, and because they do not ly over as other Securities, but come quickly to
be questioned, if they be not satisfied. Yea, a Bill of Exchange by a Drover,
neither having subscription of his Name, nor initial Letters thereof, but a
mark, at which the Writer of the Bill Wrote, this is the mark of the drawer of
the Bill, the Writer and several Witnesses being Examined, ex officio, and
deponing, that it was the Drovers Custom to mark Bills thus, which he readily
paid, though of greater sums then this, which was an hundred Pound Sterling,
and one Witness deponing that he saw him set to the mark to this Bill, the Bill
was sustained.

Bills of Exchange are also transmitted without any formal Assignation, or
Intimation, by a Note upon the Bill it self, ordering it to be paid to such
another.

Bills or Precepts, not being amongst Merchants, or in re mercatoria, import
only warrandice upon the drawer, and give action against the person upon whom
they are drawn, but neither require the Solemnities, nor have the Privilege or
Effects of Bills of Exchange, but have only the Effect of Assignations from the
drawer upon him upon whom they are drawn.

Letters of Credit among Merchants, are equiparate to Bills of Exchange in some
cases, but in others they are but Cautionary for other Merchants, in whose
favors they are granted; and therefore, a Merchants Letters of Credit, to
honor another Merchants Bills, was only found effectual, as to such Bills as
were accepted and paid; and whereof repayment was not made, and advertisement
given to the Writer of the Letters, of the particular Bills not paid in due
time, before the other Merchant became Insolvent, January 17. 1581. John Ewing
Merchant in London, contra Mr. Andrew Burnet.

This is also singular, in mutuo, by the Law, that though thereby Contracts
cannot be made, per tertium; yet delivery by the Lenders Debtor to the
Borrower, is holden sufficient, l. 15. ff. de rebus Cred.

23. The other kind of Loan is called Commodatum quasi commodo datum, and it is
a Contract whereby the use of any thing is freely given to be restored, the
same without Deterioration, if it be not freely lent, but for a hire, it is
Location; if the like be restored, it is mutuum; but if it be lost through the
commodatars fault, or otherways deteriorat, the value must be restored, either
as it was estimate by the parties before hand, which changes not its Nature,
because the price, though estimate, cannot be offered but in case of loss, or
Deterioration, sine dole, if there be no estimation, then the estimation is to
be according to the rate of the thing lent, at the time and place appointed in
the Contract, or as it was worth the time of the Sentence: But Restitution must
be made without Deterioration, except such as necessarily follows the use for
which it was lent: as Clothes lent may be worn, and Cattle lent become older;
or if a Horse be lent for a long Journey, and therefore become leaner, without
the borrowers fault, he is not obliged to make up the same, l. fin. ff.
Commodati; but all other Deteriorations must be made up, it must be lent for
use, that it may differ from Depositation, that admits of no use, but Custody.

This Contract may be celebrate amongst all that have the common requisites of
Contracting; yea, if the lender have the Possession, he may lend, though he
have no property; and Servitudes and Habitation may be lent: And though the
lender have neither Right nor Possession lawful, the Law says, l. si servus
ff. Commodati, that this Contract has Effect, which is only to be understood
that the Action, Commodati, is competent, but not as to all Effects; for the
borrower cannot effectually detain the thing lent to his day, or any fruit
thereof, seeing the lender had no Title.

All things may be lent that can have an use without Consumption of their
Substance, and so Fungibles cannot be accommodat, unless they be given, ad
pompam, as Money lent, to seem Rich, or to make a simulate offer or
Consignation.

24. As to the diligence due by the borrower, the case must be distinguished;
for some things may be accommodate only for the behove of the lender, as he who
lends Clothes, or instruments to his Servants for his own use and honor;
sometimes to both the lender and borrowers use, and of test to the borrowers
use alone; in all cases, the borrower is holden, de dolo: Yea, no paction can
be valid in the contrary, as against good manners; in no case is the borrower
obliged for any Accident, as Death, Naufrage, Burning, unless he has
undertaken that hazard, either expressly or tacitly, in commodato estimato,
which imports that if the thing perish, it is lost to the borrower, and he must
pay the price, l. 5.. 3. ff commodati: For as in dote estimata, so in commodato
estimato, it is in the Debitors option, whether to restore the thing it self
entire, or the price to which it is estimate; but if the Estimation be only in
the case of the deterioration, or loss, it does no more but save Questions as
to the value, and is not commodatum estimatum, as was found, November 17. 1668.
betwixt the Town of Arbroth and Montrose: Or that the borrower has applied the
Loan to another use, then it was lent for; in which case it perishes to him;
yea, he commits Theft in that misapplication, l. 18. ff. commodati: But in
the first case, the borrower is only holden for the grossest faults and
negligence; in the second, for ordinar faults, culpa levi; in the last for the
lightest fault, and is obliged for such diligence, as the most prudent use in
their affairs, l. 5. ff. commodati.

25. Precarium is a kind of commodatum, differing in this, that Commodatum has
a determinat time, either expressly when the use of a thing is given to such a
day, or such an use, which imports a time, as lending a Book to Copy, must
infer so much time as may do it, lending a Horse to ride a Journey, must import
a competent time. But precarium is expressly lent, to be recalled at the lenders
pleasure, and if nothing be expressed, it is presumed in Law, commodatum, during
the use granted, unless there be no special use expressed, and then it is
esteemed precarium, because there can be no time consequent upon general use.

26. Commodatum is ended by the ending of the special use, for which it is
granted, or the time prefixed, or by Revocation if it be precarius, or by the
perishing of the matter lent, but precarium is not finished by the death of the
lender, till his Heir recall it: But it is finished by the death of the
borrower, unless it be otherwise agreed.

27. From Commodatum arise two Actions, the direct, whereby the Lender may call
for the thing lent; and the contrary, whereby the borrower may call for his
expenses, wared out necessarly, or profitably on the thing lent, more then is
necessary to preserve it in the case it was lent, which he may use by way of
exception, to have retention till these be satisfied.

28. Commission is called in Law, Mandatum, either because it uses to be
expressed by way of Command, or Precept, though this be special in a Precept,
that most Mandats are free, and may be refused; but Precepts may not, when the
party upon whom they are drawn, has provision from the drawer: Or otherwise,
it is called mandatum quasi de manu datum, because it is given out of the hand,
or the management of the Mandant, into the trust of the Mandatar. The
requisites of this Contract, must be, first, a Desire, Warrant, or Order, upon
the part of the Mandant to the Mandatar, to do some Affair, to the behove of
the Mandant only, or of the Mandant and Mandatar, as to manage that which they
have in common, or to the behove of a third party only, or of a third party and
the Mandatar, or of the three jointly; for if to the behove of the Mandatar
only, it infers no obligation, but either is a mere Counsel, in whatsoever
terms it be expressed; as if Maevius desire or command Titius, not to employ his
Money upon Annualrent, but to buy Land therewith, or particularly to buy such
Land, there arises thence no Obligation: It is true in Crimes, such desires
may infer punishment; but no Obligation in favors of the party desired: Or
when a Commission is granted only to the behove of the Receiver, it
transmitteth a Right to him, and no Obligation upon him. So personal Rights are
transmitted by Assignations, which are Procuratories, but to the Procurators
own behove; such are also Precepts for taking Seasiue or Possession.

29. As to the Terms in which Mandats or Commissions are expressed, if it be
any way to the behove of the Mandant, there is no difference what the
Expression be, unless the words be, Mendicatorie, importing the desire of a
Donation; but if it be only to the behove of the Mandatar, or of a third Party,
or both, without any behove of the Mandant, then it must be considered, whether
the words import only a Counsel, that the Mandatar do such a thing upon his own
account; in which case there is no Contract, nor Obligation, unless it appear
that it was upon the Mandants account, or a third parties.

30. The second requisite is the Consent or Acceptance of the Mandatar, which
compleateth this Contract, which is perfected by sole Consent, and may be
either by word or deed, from whence the warrant of the Mandant, and acceptance
of the Mandatar may be inferred, or by any other sign, as by pointing with the
hand, or beckning with the head: And albeit it was free to accept or consent,
yet it is obligatory and necessary to perform, unless re integra, the Mandatar
renounce, so that the Mandator be not hindered in obtaining thereafter another
Mandatar.

31. The third requisite in a Mandat is, that it be in relation to a thing
lawful to be done, for it cannot reach to what is already done; and being in a
matter unlawful, albeit it be accepted, it oblieges not the accepter to
perform; and if it be performed, it oblieges not the Mandant to make up the
Mandatars damnage: But in this as in other things unlawful, albeit both parties
be in the fault, Potior est conditio possidentis, he who is actually free of
the loss, has the advantage.

32. The last requisite in Mandats, is that the acceptance must be free, not
only in so far as the Mandatar may freely accept or refuse, whereby a proper
and voluntary Mandat differs from a necessary Command or Precept, which is no
proper Mandat, because it is not inferred by consent, but also in so far as
acceptance must be gratuitous; otherwise the Contract thence arising, is not
Mandat, but Location: Yet Honoraries, or Sallaries, for performing of things,
having no proper Price nor Estimation, alter not the Nature of this Contract,
as the Sallaries or Honoraries of Physicians for procuring of Health, which
has no Price; or of Judges or Advocates, for giving or procuring of Justice.

33. It is employed in the Nature of Mandats, that it is personal, depending
upon the singular choice of the Mandant, which he has made of the Mandatars
Person; and therefore it is neither continued in the Heir of the Mandant, or of
the Mandatar; but morte mandatoris perimitur mandatum, which holds also upon
the death of the Mandatar; for this Contract arising from a singular affection
or friendship betwixt both, the removal of either resolves that Tie: So that in
Delegation, which is a Mandat by the Creditor to his Debtor, to pay the Debt
to the Creditor of his Creditor, it was found to cease by the Death of the
Creditor Mandant; and that a Letter written by him to his Debtor to pay his
Creditor, was no Warrant to pay, after the Debtor knew that his Creditor the
Mandator was dead, February 2. 1628. Executors of the Lord of Duffus contra
Forrester: But here there is an exception, fi res non sit integra, if the
matter of the Mandat be not entire, but that the Mandatar has entered upon,
and performed a part of his Commission; for in that case it continues after
the death of either party; It has also the exception, bonae fidei, if the
Mandatar perform the Mandat, though after the Mandators death, if he knew not
that he was dead, albeit the matter was entire at the time of his death.

In General or Complex Mandats, the performance of a part does not continue all
the several members of different natures of the Mandat, but only that
particular whereof a part is done.

34. Here there arises a question, whether a Mandatar may entrust another
person, or sub-commit his Mandat, wherein the Civil law, and most of the
Doctors are in the Affirmative: But the Nature of the Contract infers the
Contrary, which ought to take place, unless Law or Custom were opposite, which
is not with us. The Reasons for the Negative are pregnant; First, Because the
singular and personal fitness of the Mandatar is chosen by the Mandator, and so
cannot without his consent be altered. Secondly, It is a common Ground, that
which belongs not to Heirs, much less to Assignays or Substitutes. Thirdly,
It is a common Brockard, delegatus non potest delegare, especially in the
matters of Jurisdiction, which the Doctors acknowledge, but say that it is
introduced by the Law, against the Nature of this Contract: But they should
rather say, that the power of sub-committing in extrajudicials, is so
introduced.

It is true, the Reasons foresaid fail in some cases, as if the Mandat be of a
Nature so Common, that there is no distinction of the fitness of persons; as
Precepts of Seasine, which are therefore directed blank, that any persons Name
indifferently may be filled up: Or if the Mandat be so general, that it cannot
be all performed by one.

35. It is also consequent from the Nature of this Contract, that it is
Ambulatory, and Revockable at the pleasure of the Mandator, even though it bear
a definit Term; because that being introduced in favors of the Mandator, it
cannot hinder him, cuique licet juri pro se introducto renunciare, which
holds not, when the Mandat is partly to the Mandators own behove; for then
the interest not being wholly the Mandatars, he cannot alter the time agreed
upon without consent of the Mandatar: Yea, if the Mandat be wholly to the
behove of the Mandatar, it may, and frequently is Irrevockable, and contains
a Clause, de rato, as is ordinary in Assignations, and Procuratories of
Resignation, and Precepts of Seasine, bearing them to be an Irrevockable Power
and Warrant.

36. The Obligation arising from Mandat, is chiefly upon the part of the
Mandatar, to perform his undertaking, wherein he is obliged to follow the
Tenor of his Commission, in forma specifica, in so far as it is special and
express, wherein if he transgress, some of the ancient Lawers denied him
repetition of his expenses, not only as to the excrescence above his
Commission, but for all, as having received Commission to buy such a Field, for
one thousand Crowns, he had bought it for one thousand two hundred, he should
have Repetition of nothing: But Proculus thought that he should have Action for
the part in the Commission; which, as the more benign opinion, Justinian
follows, l. sed proculus, 4. ff. mandati, where the Mandat is not special, it
must be performed, secundum arbitrium boni viri.

37. As to the Diligence whereunto Mandatars are obliged, the Doctors are of
diverse opinions; the Law inclines most, that Mandatars are obliged for the
exactest Diligence, and for the lightest Fault: But by the Nature of the
Contract, Mandatars, seeing their undertakings are gratuitous, they ought to be
but liable for such Diligence as they use in their own Affairs; and the
Mandatar ought to impute it to himself, that he made not choice of a more
diligent person, which our Custom follows, Nicol. Mandats, David Crawford
contra Katharine Alexander. And a Commission to receive Money abroad, was found
to infer no Diligence, Earl of Weims contra Sr. William Thomson. The like of a
Commission to a buyer, to Infeft the seller and himself, and to do all other
things necessary for his Security, December 16. 1668. Sir Alexander Frazer
contra Alexander Keith.

The Obligation upon the part of the Mandator, is to Refound to the Mandatar
his damnage and expense, and to keep him harmles; but this extends not unto
casual damnages, as if the Mandatar were spoiled in the way, or suffered
Shipwreck in going about the Execution of the Mandat, l. 26. inter causas,. 6.
non omnia, ff. Mandati, but this is to be limited, unless the Mandat do
specially require Concomitant hazard, as if a Mandatar be sent through a place
where there are Forces of Enemies, Robbers, or Pirates, commonly known to haunt
the place, by which he must pass.

38. To come unto the special kinds of Mandats, they are either express, or
tacit, to one Mandatar, or more, general, or special, to be performed in the
name of the Mandatar, for the Mandators behove, or in the name of the Mandator:
As also, amongst Mandats are comprehended the Commissions of Institors, and
Exercitors, and all Precepts, Procuratories, Assignations, and Delegations.

39. A tacit Mandat, is that which is inferred by signs, and is not expressed by
words, as he who is present and suffers another to manage his Affairs
without contradiction, gives thereby a tacit Mandat, l. qui patitur, 18. l. qui
fide alterius, 53. ff. mandati; for in this, qui tacet consentire videtur. So
he who whispereth his Servant in the Ear, if he immediately Kill or Wound any
Person present, is presumed to give Command to the Servant so to do; if there
was capital Enimity betwixt him and that person before. In like manner, the
giving of Evidents or Writes; yea, which is more, the having of these, though
the giving appear not, it is presumed to Constitute Procurators, as is evident
in the having a Precept of Seasine, which is sufficient without any other power
given to the Bailzie, or Acturnay. And Advocats are presumed to have Warrands
from Parties for whom they compear, without producing any Mandat; not only upon
production of the Parties Evidents, or alledgeances, special in Points of Fact;
which if wanting, the compearance of Procurators in inferior Courts, is held
as without Warrant, and the Decree as in absence; But even without these, if
Advocats do no more but appear, and take a day to produce Parties to give their
Oaths. A Wife having her Husbands Band in her hand, Impignorating it for an
hundred Pounds, the Impignoration was found valide against the Husband, the
Wifes Warrant being presumed by her having the Bond, February 4. 1665. Paterson
contra Pringle. And the Warrant of a Servants taking off Furniture for his
Master, and giving Receipt in Name of his Master, and for his use, found not to
obliege the Servant to pay, or instruct his Warrant, which was presumed to be
known to the Merchant, unless the Servant had otherways employed the
Furnishing, November 17. 1665. Howison contra Cockburn. And a Warrant was
inferred, by the presence of him who had Commission to do, and hindered not,
February 23. 1667. Lord Rentoun contra Lambertoun. And a Warrant of a Factor or
Agent, for Charging and Denuncing a Daughter, And her Husband upon a Bond
granted to her Mother, was presumed from having the Bond, December 23. 1673.
Thomas Dalmahoy contra Lord Almond.

40. Mandats given to more Persons, may be either to each, or some of them
severally, by diverse Warrands, or to more by the same Warrant, whereupon these
Questions arise; First, When there are many Mandatars jointly, Whether they
must all necessarly join before they can Act, so that if one should die, the
Commission is void? Or whether it be understood to the Survivers, Or to the
plurality of them? Secondly, Whether Mandatars be all liable, in solidum, or
but prorata.

As to the First Question, If many Mandatars be Constitute severally, or with a
quorum, or Plurality expressed, there is no debate; but if otherwise, the case is
very doubtful, and there be pregnant Reasons and Testimonies upon both parts,
but this seems to prevail as the general Rule, that Mandats jointly given,
can only be jointly execute;

First, Because by the Nature of this Contract, the personal and singular
fitness and industry of Mandatars is chosen; and therefore, this being a
special trust, when it is given to many, it is presumed, that the Constituent
trusts them all jointly, and not a part of them.

Secondly, A Mandat given to ten, cannot be regularly understood, given to any
lesser number, or given to Titius, Seius, and Maevius, that it is given to any
two of them: It may be objected, that where there are many Executors or Tutors,
without mentioning a quorum, the death of one makes it not to cease, Hope,
Executors, Stuart contra Kirkwood and Moor: Or the death or non-acceptance of
some of them, Ibid. Ruthven (...) contra George Fauside contra Edmonstuon; and
therefore, this being the most important Trust, the like must hold in all other
cases. It is answered, that the parity holds not; for the deeds of Defuncts in
their latter will are always extended, that the Act may stand: But in Contracts
it is contrary, that words are interpret more strictly; and in this case the
difference is clear, that a Mandator, inter vivos, giving power, it is strictly
to be Interpret; because the Power failing, returns from the Mandatars to the
Mandator himself: But a Power given by a Defunct in Contemplation of death,
cannot return; and therefore the Defunct is presumed to prefer all the persons
nominate, to any other that may fall by course of Law.

But this Rule, as it is founded upon the singularity of the Choice, it
fails, and must be limited, where that ground cease, and is preponderat: As
First, If the deed to be done, be common and ordinary; there, not only the
plurality, but any of the Mandatars will suffice; so any of more Curators may
authorize a Minor.

Secondly, If the thing to be done, be to the advantage of the Constituent, and
has not a considerable hazard or power to infer his disadvantage; as if a
Commission being begun to many, of things which admit no delay, it may be done
by any part of the Mandatars, and they will have actionem mandati, and not only
negotiorum gestorum. So Ambastadours sent to Solemnize a Marriage, or receive a
Crown, though some of them should die, or disassent, unquestionably the
plurality might proceed. But it would not be so in a Treaty for Marriage or
Peace; much less for surrendering a Kingdom, City, or Fort; and therefore, it
cannot always be thought that a plurality is understood, though not expressed.

Thirdly, In cases necessary, where matters may not be delayed, plurality is
always understood, as in Commissions for Jurisdictions ordinary.

Fourthly, Where the consuetude of the place, or of the Mandator himself, uses
to allow a plurality, there it is understood, though not expressed.

41. As to the other Question, where more Mandatars are Constitute severally,
they are no doubt liable, in solidum, because they are Constitute, in solidum:
But when they are Constitute jointly, or added, the doubt remains; for the
Affirmative, There is First, The Authority of the Civil Law, l. creditor
mandatorem,. duobus, ff. mandati.

42. Secondly, Albeit the Obligation of Many, for payment of a quantity, make
them liable but prorata; Yet where it is a Fact, they are liable, in solidum.
And so Tutors and Curators are liable severally, in solidum: But Executors are
not, because their duty is to pay, secundum vires lnventarij; and therefore, in
rigore juris, Mandatars being malversant, or grossly negligent, are liable, in
solidum, if they may act severally, especially in Acts indivisible.

43. General Mandats do occasion the most debates in this Contract; for there
is much more clearness where the Mandat is special, which uses to be
distinguished in determinate, when both matter and manner are special, and
indeterminat, when the matter is special, but the manner is not specified; in
the former the precise Tenor of the Commission must be followed; and yet if any
part thereof be, or become unprofitable, and evidently and considerably
hurtful, the Mandatar in the latter case may safely, and in the former case,
must necessarly do what is best, secundum arbitrium boni viri, and must do the
like in all indeterminat Mandats: But the great Question is, how far general
Mandats may be extended, and in what cases they are not effectual: But there is
necessarly required special Mandats, which refer to the pleasure, choice, or
opinion of the Mandatar, as if it have a Clause, cum libera aut plena
administratione, or the like: Or where that is wanting, the Doctors enumerate
multitudes of cases, whereunto general Mandats are not to be extended;

First, In the Contracting of Marriage no general Mandat, albeit, cum libera
and. is sufficient, because the affection and choice of the person is singular,
and incommunicable. And albeit Abraham's Commission for Eleazar, to take a Wife
for his Son of his Kindred, was valide, though not special, as to the person;
yet the case was singular, there being so few Families that worshipped the true
God, to choice upon. But recenter Customs require it to be special, even as to
the person, as well as to the Family.

Secondly, No general Mandat, though cum libera, can be extended to any thing
that may import a Fault or Crime.

Thirdly, No general Mandat can reach to Donations, or mere Liberality, and yet
does not hinder gratifications for Services done, or upon the expectation that
the receiver may probably be induced thereby, to do matters of importance, as
the Gifts of Ambassadors, or Generals, are not only valide as to the
receivers, but as to the Mandators, if there was probable reason.

Fourthly, General Mandats extend not to Alienation of Immoveables, but that
must be specially expressed.

Fifthly, General Mandats extend not to Submissions or Transactions, nor to
insist in any Action Criminal or Famous, or to anull that which is specially
done by the Constituent, or to dispose of that which was specially reserved
before, either by Law or deed, as regalia, or things peculiarly reserved to
Princes.

Sixthly, A special Mandat is required, to enter any party Heir to any
Predecessor. The Civil Law numbered, additionem haereditatis inter actus
legitimos, and so excluded even a special Mandat therein: But our Customs
allow the same. But because Heirs are liable, in solidum, to all the
Predecessors Debts; therefore a special Mandat is necessary.

Seventhly, Wherein the general Mandats, some things are specially expressed, the
generality is not extended to cases of greater importance, then these expressed.

44. Amongst Mandats are all Offices, which do ever imply a condition
resolutive upon committing Faults; but not such as are light Faults, or of
negligence; but they must be Atrocious, at least of knowledge and importance;
upon this ground it was, that the Town of Edinburgh having deposed their Town
Clerk from his Office which he had, ad vitam, The Sentence was sustained, if
the Fault were found of the Clerks knowledge, and of importance, and that it
was not enough that no hurt followed, and that he was willing to make it up,
February 14. 1665. Town of Edinburgh contra Sir William Thomson.

But an Office of a Sheriff Clerk, was not found extinct by his being at the
Horn for a Debt, or being sometimes out of the Country, having power of
Deputation, February 6. 1666. Archbishop of Glasgow contra Commissar Clerk of
Dumsreis. The Office of a Commissar does also import, as a necessary condition,
that the Commissar be qualified to discharge the Office in his own person,
though he have Deputs, seeing he must answer for, and overruled his Deputs,
February 14. 1666. Arch. Bishop of Glasgow contra Commissar of Glasgow. Where
it was also found, that by the Commissars instructions, they must reside in the
place of the Commissariot, under the pain of Deprivation, notwithstanding the
common Custom in the contrary, which only excuses from bygone Faults.

45. Trust is also amongst Mandats or Commissions, though it may be referred to
Depositation, seeing the Right is in custody of the person entrusted. Mandatars
in the Law could not obliege the Mandator, or directly acquire to him; but they
could only obliege themselves, and acquire to themselves, and thereafter
transmit to the Mandators; and that because in most Contracts, thereby the
person Contracter behoved immediately to Act, and no person interposed, which
our Customs regards not; and therefore Mandatars may act in their own names:
In which case, the Right, whether real or personal, stands in their person,
as he who by Commission acquireth Lands, or Goods, in his own name, the real
Right thereof is in his Person, and there lies an Obligation upon him, if he
was Commissionat to transmit them to his Constituent; but he may also Acquire,
Transact, or Contract in name of the Constituent: In which case, the real
Rights stands immediately in the Person of the Mandator, and the Obligation
constitutes him Creditor: and there is no Obligation betwixt the Mandatar and
the third Party. Nor is the Mandatar obliged to instruct that he had
Commission, but that is upon his hazard who acted with him, unless the contrary
be proven by his Oath or Write; and therefore a Servant, though by a Ticket, he
acknowledged he had taken off such Furniture for his Masters use, was not found
obliged to pay or to instruct his Warrant, especially after his Masters death;
but the Warrant was presumed as known to the Merchand, November 17. 1665.
Howison contra Cockburn. Trust in the Right of Lands, Sums, or Goods, to the
behove of another, does frequently occur; and because Fraud is ordinarily in it,
it is not only probable by Write or Oath of the Trusty, but Witnesses are
examined, ex officio, to find out the Truth, February 22. 1665. Viscount of
Kingstoun conira Colonel Fullertoun. February 6. 1669. Rule contra Rule.
February 24. 1669. Earl of Annandale contra Young. June 19. 1669. Scot contra
Langtoun. And Trust was found probable by presumptions only, January 12. 1666.
Executors of William Stevinson contra James Crawford. January 22. 1673. Janet
Watson contra Mr. (...) Bruce. But it was not found proven by a Declaration
upon Deathbed, in prejudice of the Heir, November 26. 1674. William (...)
contra Stirling of Airdoch. But a person entrusted in a Disposition of Lands,
having componed for the Intrusters Debts, was found to have no Interest to
burden the Intruster, with more then what he truly paid out, November 15.
1667. James Maxwel contra Adam Maxwel. Neither was a person entrusted for
payment of the Intrusters Creditors, found to have power to prefer them to the
more timeous Diligence of others, by Inhibition, or Apprizing, though only done
against the Intruster, July 24. 1669. Crawford contra Anderson. And a person
receiving Money to buy Goods for another, but having bought and received them
in his own name, without mention of the Truster, the property thereof was found
to be in the person entrusted, and his Creditors Arresting, were preferred,
January 24. (...). (...) contra Robertson and Fleming. Yet Trust in Sums, or
Personal Rights, after the death of the Person entrusted, was found not
necessary to be Confirmed, as in bonis (...), of the Entrusted Person; but that
the Trust might be proven against the Debtor, and the nearest of Kin of the
Person Entrusted, June 9. 1669. William Streit contra Home of Bruntfield. But
Trust in an Infeftment of Annualrent, found not to make the Person Entrusted
liable for omission, but only for Intromission, December 18. 1666. Charles Cass
contra Mr. John Wat. The like in an Assignation in Trust, which was not found
to infer an obliegment to do Diligence, if the Assignay was not required,
either to do diligence, or denude: But he having transferred without Warrant,
was found liable for the sum, albeit he offered to procure a Reposition, July
18. 1672. Janet Watson contra Mr. Walter Bruce. And an Assignay in Trust, that
the sum might be included in his Appryzing, giving Back-Bond to be comptable in
case of payment, having disponed the Appryzing without reservation, was found
liable for so much of the sum entrusted, as might have been recovered, January
5. 1575. Earl of Northesk contra Lord of Pitarro.

Trust was inferred by a Grandfathers delivering of a Disposition, conceived
in favors of his Grandchild, the Disponer at the delivery, having not expressed
the terms of the Trust, or his design, and having recalled and received back
the Disposition, and Disponed the half of the Lands therein, to another; it was
thence found, that the Disposition was not absolute, and irrevockable, but was
entrusted to that third Party, to be recalled if the Disponer pleased; or
otherways to be delivered to the Oye, January 25. 1677. Janet Ker contra Niman
Ker. When Trust is referred to parties Oath, whether such a Right standing in
their person, be in Trust to the behove of another, they use commonly to
Depone, that it is to their own behove, which being found dubious and
fallacious, what the meaning of such words were, special Interrogators are
allowed to expiscat the truth: And parties use to Reexamined thereupon, as
whether the Deponents meaning by these words, that the Right was to his own
behove, and not to another, was only that he gave no Promise or Back-Bond, to
apply the Right or Benefit thereof, in whole or in part to another: Or whether
the true meaning of the design was, that the other put him upon acquiring that
Right, being a Gift of Non-entry of Lands, bought by that other, so that the
whole benefit should not be applied to the acquirer himself; for it was not
presumable, that he would put another upon taking Gift of Non-entry of the
Lands himself had bought, to be made use of to the full extent, which being so
acknowledged, the Gift was found so far to the behove of the buyer, that the
seller by the warrandice, should pay no more for the Non-entry, then the
acquirer of the Non-entry gave truly for it, seeing the buyer had communed with
the Superior, and brought the Non-entry to the same rate, and then put his
Couzin-German to acquire it, February 2. 1681. Master of Balmerino contra Lord
of Pourie. Upon the same ground a Donatar of a Liferent Escheat being examined,
whether it was to the behove of his Good-brother, having deponed, that it was
to his own behove, he dying before he was re-examined, his Oath was interpret
only, that he had given no Back-bond or Promise in favors of his Goodbrother;
and therefore pregnant presumptions of the Trust were inferred, in that the
Brother only was concerned in that Liferent, that he managed, and was at all
the expenses of the Process, that the Donatars Successors never owned, nor
confirmed the Benefit of the Gift, February 11. 1679. Forbes of Balvenie
contra Lord of Boyn.

46. The Law for utility of Commerce, did against the common Rules foresaid,
constitute an Obligation upon Exercitors, by the Deed or Contract of the
Masters of the Ships. An Exercitor is he to whom the profit of Vessels or
Ships, whether upon the Sea, Rivers or Lakes belongs, whether he be owner of
the Ship, or have only hired the same; the Master of the Ship is he that has
the command thereof, who therefore may Contract and borrow Money for Reparation
of the Ship, or out-rigging thereof; or for the intertainment of the Mariners,
or any other thing for the use of the Voyage. And thereby not only the Master
Contracter, but the Exercitor who constitute him is liable: Yea, if the Master
substitute another Master, his engagement also obliegeth the Exercitor; so that
whosoever he be that Contracts with him, who for the time officiats as Master,
obliegeth the Exercitor, in what was borrowed for the use of the Ship, Company,
or Voyage. And there seems no necessity of showing a Commission, but the
exercing of the Office is sufficient; and thereby the Ship and out-rigging may
be hypothecat and affected: Yea, if there be many Exercitors, they are all
liable, in solidum; and if there be many Masters, the Contract of one of them
obliegeth the Exercitors, unless it be expressly provided, they cannot Contract
but jointly, which must appear by their Commission: Neither needs he who
Contracts with the Master, instruct that the Money borrowed, was actually
employed for the use of the Ship, Company, or Voyage, but this much he must
make appear, that when he lent the Money there was such need of it, albeit he
be not obliged to take notice whether the Master misimployed it or not,
because the Exercitor should have looked whom he trusted. If the Master be
constitute with power to buy Ware, and load the Ship, the prepositor is liable
to these who Contract with him, upon that account; but this is not presumed
upon acting as Master, unless his Commission appear, and the Masters other
Contracts obleige not the Exercitors, albeit their fault do, by the Edict,
nautae caupones stabularij, all which is clear from the Title ff. de
exercitoria action per totum, and is generally in vigor.

47. After the similitude of the Exercitory Action, the Praetor by the perpetual
Edict, did introduce the Institory Action, where by the Contracts of Institors
in relation to that wherein they were entrusted, their prepositors are
obliged, as Exercitors are as to Maritime matters; so Prepositors are
correspondent in Trafficque at Land. And Institors are these who are entrusted
in such Affairs, corresponding to the Masters of Ships; such Institorsare these
who are entrusted with keeping of Shops, buying or selling of Ware keeping of
Cash for Exchange, such as are sent abroad to buy Ware. And these who are
entrusted with the labourage of any Field, or any other like business. And it
is alike of whatsoever Sex or Age they be, though even they be Pupils who
cannot obliege themselves; or Minors who have the (...), yet both do
effectually obliege their Prepositors: And it there (...) more Prepositors,
they are liable, in solidum. But such Obligations reach no further, then for
what is Contracted for the use of the Affair wherein they are entrusted:
Neither are the Prepositors obliged, if they have intimate to the party
Contracter, not to Contract with their Institors: But if they Contract bona
fide, albeit the Institor be limit, and prohibit to Contract; In such cases,
the Creditors Contracting, bona fide, with them, are secure. All which
appears, Title de instit. action ff. per totum.

48. Custody is called in the Law Depositum, or Commendatum, to which we have
no suitable Term; but this Contract is most fitly expressed by the duty and
obligation thereof, which is to keep or preserve that which is given in
Custody, and it is here subjoined to mandat, because indeed it is a kind of it,
for the Lawers do not so much notice the accuracy of Logical Divisions, whereby
no member can comprehend another, as the usual Terms known in Law; and
therefore, handle mandatum, depositum and pignus, severally, though all of them
be truly Mandats; and therefore, also Depositum may be fitly defined, to be a
Mandat or Commission, given and undertaken, to keep and preserve something
belonging to the mandator, or some third party; and therefore, whatsoever has
been before said of Mandats, must be here understood of Custody, and needs not
be repeated, except what is special in Custody.

49. The Civil Law makes a difference in the diligence of Mandatars and
Depositars, that these are liable only for Fraud, where of alone the Pretors
Edict makes mention, l. 1. 1. ff. depositi, l. 23. ff de regulis juris, l. 20.
ff. depositi, where by the Depositar, though he loss the thing Depositate,
without Fraud is free, but it is extended to lata culpa, the grossest fault
quae dolo aequiparatur in jure, l. quod nerva, 32. ff. depositi, where the
diligence opposite to grossest faults, is excellently described, by such
diligence as men ordinarily do, or the Depositar does in his own Affairs; But
Mandatars are liable for the lightest fault; yet as is shown before, that is by
the constitution of the Civil Law, and not by the Nature of the Mandat, for
surely the reason and ground of the diligence of both is alike, as being
gratuitous, and at the free choice of the Constituent, who therefore should
demand no more in either case, but such diligence as the person entrusted
uses, or men ordinarily do in their own Affairs, unless it be otherways agreed,
or that the Depositar has procured the Custody when others offered, l. 1.. 35.
ff. depositi, or that he have any Honorary or Sallary therefore, which may be
consistent here, or in other Mandats, when in the meaning of the Parties, it is
not an equivalent satisfaction to the benefit received, which ordinarily is not
esteemable, as the Sallaries of Medicines for the preservation of Health, or
Life, and curing any Member; or of Judges, or Lawers for the doing or procuring
of Justice; and therefore, is called a Honorary, and the Contract is esteemed
notwithstanding free; or in Depositations, made in case of Naufrage, Fire,
Tumult, or falling of Houses, where the positive Law gives the double in case
of denial of the thing Depositat, in commiseration of these cases for the
public Good, l. 1. ff. depositi; but these cases must be evident, and the only
causes of the Contract, l. 1.. 3. ff. depositi.

Hence it follows, that Depositars are not liable for light faults, or the
perishing or deterioration of the thing depositat by casuality or accident; yet
it may be questioned, if the Depositar delay, and not redeliver, whether in
that case he is liable to make it good. The same question is also in Mandats,
and the Law is for the affirmative in this, and all other cases, unless the
thing after the delay would have the same way perished, if it had been
restored, l. 5. ff. de rebus creditis, l. 12.. 3. ff. depositi, where the
Depositars peril is, per judicium acceptum; the reason whereof, is rendered,
because if the thing had been restored, the owner might have sold it, and so
though it had perished, he had been no loser, yet this is partly penal, and the
Adequat Ground of it must be by the Obligation of Reparation, of the damnage
sustained by that Delinquence, in not restoring the thing Depositat to its
owner when required; and therefore, it is to be measured according to the true
interest, and though possibly the owner might have sold it before it had
perished; yet unless there had been a known occasion or offer to have bought,
or purchased it, at the time of the remaining of it after delay, equity would
not conclude the making up of what had so perished, in this we are not bounded
with any positive Law or Custom; and therefore, Equity in it with us may take
place, and we are not severe in diligence of Mandatars, as appears from the
former Paragraph, neither yet in Custody; and therefore, a person having
received Money in keeping, and it being demanded, he did declare that it was
sent with his own to Dundee for safety, and that the owner might have it there
for sending for; and thereafter, Dundee being taken and plundered, he was
liberat, giving his Oath that the Money he got in keeping was lost there, July
19. 1662. Fiddes contra Jack. And a Horse being put in the Park of
Halyroodbouse for Grassing, though he was lost; the Keeper was found free,
because there was a Placat on the entry of the Park, that the Horse to be put
there was upon their Masters peril, though this Horse was delivered to a
Servant, who said nothing of the Placat, November 16. 1667. Whitehead of Park
contra John Straitoun.

50. In the Civil Law there is a Depositation of special Nature, Institute by
the Edict, Nautae caupones stabularij, quod cujusque salvum fore reciperunt
nisi restituant in eos judicium dabo, l. 1. ff. eodem.

By this Edict, Positive Law for utilities sake, has appointed, that the
Custody of the Goods of the Passengers in Ships, or Voyagers in Inns, or in
Stables, shall be far extended beyond the Nature of Depositation, which
obliegeth only for Fraud, or Supine Negligence, them who have expressly
Contracted for their own fact: But this Edict, for public utilities sake
extends it, First, To the Restitution of the Goods of Passengers, and
Voyagers, and Reparation of any loss or injury done by the Mariners, or
Servants of the Inn or Stable, l. 1.. 8. eodem. Whereas by the Common Law,
before that Edict, in this and other such cases there is no such obliegement,
much less are persons now obliged for their hired Servants Fact or Fault,
except where they are specially entrusted by them: But because the theft and
loss of such Goods is very ordinary in Ships, Inns and Stables before, this
Edict was introduced for the security of Travelers, l. 1.. eodem.

Secondly, The Edict extends this obliegement, even to the damnage sustained by
other Passengers or Voyagers of the Ship, Inn or Stable; for the which, the
Master of the Ship, Innkeeper, or Keeper of the Stable, could be no way
obliged, but by virtue of this Edict.

Thirdly, They were made liable for the loss or theft of such things
absolutely, from which they were free by no diligence, but were not liable for
accident or force.

By Nautae in the Edict, are understood not the Mariners, but the Exercitors or
Owners of the Ship, to whom the profit belongs, and so the Master of the Inn or
Stable; and by the Statute they are only liable for that, quod salvum fore
reciperunt, that which they received in Custody, either by themselves, or such
others as they entrusted, to admit Passengers or Voyagers, their Goods and
Horses, l. 1.. 2. eodem, whether the same be Ware, Clothes, Cloag-bags and
other Furnishing for Passengers or Voyagers, or the Furniture of Horses in
Stables, l. 1.. 6. eodem, or whether other things brought in, the more common
opinion is, albeit the things brought in were neither known or shown to the
Master of the Ship, Inn or Stable, they are liable for restitution l. 1.. 8.
eodem. And if any thing be wanting, the party loser has, jur amentum in litem,
and is not obliged to show what is in his Clog-bag, Pockets, etc. Gloss. ibid.
The Reason of all which is rendered, l. 1. ibidem, because it is in the Master
of the Ships option, to receive such persons or not, and consequently, if he
doubt of their Trust, in case they allege any thing wanting, he may refuse
them access unless they show what they have, otherways he is presumed to trust
their Oath, without which, this Benefit would be useless: They are also not
only liable for what is received and entered in the Ship or Inn; but also, if
it be expressly received for that end else where, by these having power, and if
it be lost before it be entered in the Ship, as on the Shore, l. 3. ibid.
Neither are these persons liberate, by bidding each man look to his own Goods,
unless the Passengers consent, l. 7. eodem, but their silence will not import
their consent, when they are entered, and in their Passage; yet if it should be
so expressed before, or at their entry, when it is free to them to enter or not,
such silence would sufficiently infer consent. Neither are they free, though
the Passenger take the Key of the Chamber or Chest himself, which is but
propter majorem securitatem, and not to liberate their obleigment, especially
seeing they may have other Keys which the Passenger cannot know.

This excellent Edict being but Positive, will be effectual with us only in so
far as the common Customs of Nations have owned it, especially in maritime
matters, betwixt us and other Nations, or in so far as our own Custom has
received it at home; but the evident expediencie of it cannot but make it
acceptable any where, where the least respect is had to the Civil Law; it was
found therefore, that the Master of the Ship was liable for the Goods loaded
therein, being burned by the fault of the Mariners, after they came to the
Road, and he desired them to take their Goods ashore; which some did, yet that
was not respected, being very late, and not convenient time for all to disload,
as was lately found, Bain contra Peter Nairn. It was likeways lately found,
that a Passenger losing his Money out of his Clog-bag, the Innkeeper, was
liable therefore, and the Fact being proven of his having a Clog-bag at his
entry, he had his Oath in litem, for the particulars, contra Stuart in
Whitehorn.

A Skipper was found liable for the damnage of Ware by the spouting of the
Pomp, although the Ship was tight at the lousing, and that the owner of the
Ware was on Board, and had put the Ware near the Pomp, that it might not be
found easily by Capers, seeing there was no extraordinary accident by stress of
Weather, November 7. 1677. Thomas Loury contra George Angus. The like was found
by the damnage of Ware by the Sea Water, though the Ship was repaired in the
Port, and the damnage was befallen by a Leck, struck up in that same Road,
after the Reparation, seeing there was no extraordinary stress of Weather, or
other accident that could not be prevented, July 24. 1680. Colline Lawmont
contra Hendry Boswel.

Depositation of Writes fall most frequently in question, by which the
Depositar is trusted with the keeping of the Writes, and the delivery thereof,
according to the terms of Depositation, express, or presumed; the terms
presumed are, that the Depositar should give back the Write to the Deponent, if
he require it, and if not, to the person in whose favors it bears to be
granted, as was found in the case, Ker contra Kers, January 25. 1677. in the
case of a Disposition of a Tenement, by a Grandfather to his Oye, merely
gratuitous, given to a third party, without expressing any Terms of
Depositation: But if the terms be expressed, they are to be faithfully observed
by the Depositar, who is trusted, and which are always probable by his Oath, if
they be not in Write, signed by the Deponent; in which case, the Oath of the
Depositar cannot be received against the Deponents Write, or even besides the
same; and therefore, a Depositars Oath was not found receivable, to prove that
the Deponent passed from the Write Depositat, and ordained it to be cancelled,
February 24. 1675. Charles Cowan contra James Ramsay. But the Depositars Oath
will not prove that the Write was Depositat; but the Oath or Write of the
granter, because delivery, is presumed, unless the contrair be proven by the
Oath, or Write of him in whose favor the Write is conceived.

Under Custody is contained Sequestration, whether of consent, where any thing
Litigious or contraverse is entrusted in the hand of a third party, till the
Rights and Poslessions of the pretenders be cleared, or by authority of a
Judge, which is a part of Judicial Process, of which hereafter.

53. Consignation is also a kind of Custody, whereby the Consigner Depositats
in the Consignatars hands, the sum or thing which is refused by the Creditor,
to the Creditors behove, therein the Consignatar is but the Interposed person,
either by consent, as it is frequently provided by Clauses of Consignation, or
by Law; and the Contract of Custody stands betwixt the Creditor and the
Consignatar, by which he is obliged to keep, and restore to the Creditor, and
thereby the Debtor orderly Consigning is liberat, and is not obliged to
uplift Sums Consigned from the Consignatar, and make them forthcoming to the
Creditor, unless the Consignation be simulat, and taken up again by the
Consigner, and where the Law condescends on consignatars, the Consigner is
liberate, and not liable for the Consignatars sufficiency, or faithfulness, as
where Consignations are to be legally in the hands of the Clerk of the Bills;
yet if the Consignation has not been orderly, but by the fault of the
Consigner, if the public Consignatar prove Insolvent, the peril is the
Consigner.

In Conventional Obligations, where the choice of the Consignatar is in the
Consigner, the Consignation is upon the peril of the Consigner, if the
Consignatar was Insolvent, which uses ordinarily to be expressed, but if it were
not, it is employed.

Trust is also a kind of Depositation, whereby the thing entrusted is in the
custody of the person entrusted, to the behove of the intruster, and the
property of the thing entrusted, be it Land or Movables, is in the person of
the Entrusted, else it is not proper Trust; so if it be transmitted to singular
Successors, acquiring bona fide, they are secure, and the Trusty is only liable
personally upon the Trust; but such Trusts being of Importance, albeit Write
uses not to be adhibite in them, they are not ordinarily proven but by Write,
or Oath of Party; yet Witnesses were used, ex officio, and trust of an
Assignation found proven thereby, February 22. 1665. Viscount of Kingstoun
contra Colonel Fullertoun. And a Bond being in Trust to an other parties
behove, was found proven by presumptions, January 12. 1666. Executors of
William Stevinson contra James Crawford.

54. This is singular in the Law of Depositation, that there is no exception of
compensation competent against it, l. pen. C. depositi, which Donellus and most
Interpreters account to be introduced only by Justinian, and was not so before,
nor by the Nature of this Contract, nor by Equity: But the contrary appears,
because the very intent and Nature of this Contract is, that the thing
Depositate must be kept and restored whenever demanded, yea, though it had
a Term, yet unless there were a Sallery, or some Interest in the Keeper, it may
be demanded whenever, because the Term is in favors of the Deponent, not of
the Depositar, whom it binds during that time, and so it may be renounced
whenever by the Deponer, cuique licet juri pro se introducto renunciare; and
therefore it is the nature of this Contract, that the thing Depositate should
be restored upon demand, and his accepting thereof so, is a tacit quiting of
any objection in the contrary, but the convincing reason is that compensation
is only in things of the same nature and liquid. But in Depositation, the
Dominion and Possession of the thing remains in the Deponent, though it be
numerate Money Consigned, and to meddle with it is unwarrantable, and accounted
in Law theft, as being contrect atio rei alienae; and therefore, that being a
thing cannot be compensed with mutuum, where the property and dominion is in
the borrower, and but a personal Obligation to repay, which cannot be compensed
with a body or quantity, the property whereof is not alienat. The like
therefore holds in Money found, or any other way in the detainers hands,
without right to the property of it; yet if two Depositars were in question of
that same kind of thing, as both of money, the Law allows compensation in that
case.

55. The question is also moved here, whether the thing Depositat may be
detained for the necessary and profitable expenses wared upon it, though Law
and most Interpreters fovour the Negative, upon the same ground that
compensation is excluded; but the Affirmative is preferred, because, as the
contrary action is competent for the Melioration, so much more the exception,
being a part of the same Contract; and therefore, the Lord Balmerino having, by
his own Missive and Back bond, acknowledged that the Estate of Jedburgh was
Disponed to him in trust, to the behove of the Earl of Somerseat, all the
expense on the Land, or for Somerseat in contemplation of the trust, was found
competent against Bedford, who had adjudged Somerseat's Right.

And in all cases in the Law where Action is competent, Exception is also
competent, and so with us, if instantly verified. Amongst the Romans, there was
an Edict of the Pretors, in deposito, to this effect, that Depositars should be
obliged to restore or make up the single value: But in things Depositat
through the present occasion of Tumult, Fire, falling of Houses, or Shipwreck
(in the case of not due Restitution) for the double, l. 1. ff. depositi,
wherein there is much utility to secure persons, Depositating of necessity in
these deplorable cases, but it has not been allowed by our Customs as yet.

56. It may be questioned, if any thing be Depositate to more Depositars,
whether they are liable in solidum? So that the Deponent may crave Restitution,
or Reparation from every one for the whole value, or for his share only: The
Civil Law is clear for the Affirmative, that all are liable in solidum, l. 1..
43. eodem, and upon good reason, because it is fidelity in preserving one
Individual thing that is undertaken, which therefore, de natura rei, must
obliege every person to the whole, seeing he is not obliged to restore a part
of the thing Depositat, but the thing it self; yet if the Depositars be all
solvendo, they are free paying their part, the thing depositat being Money, l.
22. si duo haeredes, ff. depositi; but in this case, there were not more
depositars, but more Heirs of a Depositar.

And in this Depositars and Con-tutors differ, that the diligence of these,
even as to their Con-tutors, being greater then of the other; this being
consequent to the nature of Depositation, will no doubt be followed by us. In
deposito, in the Law, the Deponent has beneficium juramenti in litem, or to
prove the particulars or quantities wanting and their value, secundum praetium
affectionis, because of the exuberance of Trust in this Contract, l. 1,. 26.
ff. depos. but not the Depositar in the contrary action, l. 5. eodem. where the
reason is added, because there is no breach of Faith nor Trust, but Damnage and
Reparation in question: The Depositar also detaining, being condemned becomes
infamous, l. 1. ff. de his qui infamia notantur. Hence it is from this Trust,
that if a Chest or other continent sealed be Depositat, action is competent for
all that was therein shown or not, l. 1.. 41. eodem; and therefore in such
cases, the Deponents Oath in litem, must be taken, or else this Interest
perishes, which is suitable to our Custom, before mentoned in the case of
Innkeepers, and there is good reason and equity, pro pretio affectionis, but I
have not observed it questioned or decided. This being a Contract of greatest
Trust, Restitution is to be made, cum omni causa, as Fruits, and Birth, and
Annualrent, post moram, l. 2. C. depositi, but Annualrent with us is not due,
sine pacto, but may be made good by modification of expense by the Lords.

There is a frequent case of Depositation of Writes before delivery thereof,
which therefore suspende their effect, until the Terms of the Depositation
appear, which is unquestionable by the Oath of the Party receiver of the Write,
both that the Write was not delivered, but depositat, and also upon what terms.

57. Pledge either signifies the thing impignorat, or the Contract of
impignoration, in the same way as Pignus in the Law is taken, and it is a kind
of Mandat, whereby the Debtor for his Creditors security, gives him the pawn,
or thing impignorat, to detain or keep it for his own security; or in case of
not payment of the Debt, to sell the Pledge and pay himself out of the price,
and restore the rest, or the Pledge it self upon payment of the Debt; all which
is of the nature of a Mandat, and it has not only Custody in it, but the power
to Dispone in the case of not payment; but if the profit of the Pledge be
alloted for the profit of the Debt, which is called (...), it is a mixed
Contract, having in it a Mandat, and the exchange of the Usufruct, or use of
the Pledge for the use of the Debt.

58. This Contract has this special in it, that it is not merely to the behove
of the Constituent, as ordinarily Mandats are, but it is to the behove of the
Hypothecar, for his security, and so ends not with the death of either party,
nor is Revockable as other Mandats but passes to Heirs and Assignays; and
therefore requires greater diligence then Mandats, viz. such diligence as
prudent men use in their Affairs, but obliegeth not for the lightest fault, l.
23. ff. de reg. juris.

This is also singular in Wodsets, or Impignorations, that thereby there is
constitute a real Right in the Pledge, which no Deed nor Alienation of the
Constituent can alter or infringe, which is not so in Mandats, or things
Depositat, neither in Location, whereby there is only a Personal Right, and if
the property of the thing be Alienat from the Constituent, the Personal Right
has no effect, as to the thing about which it is Constitute; but there is here
a real Right, of which hereafter among other real Rights.

59. We shall not insist in the manner of the sale of Pledges prescribed by the
Roman Law, and the Intimations or Denunciations requisite to be made to the
Debtor, that being wholly changed by our Customs, for in Wodsets of Lands,
the Wodsetter has a Disposition of the Property, but with a Reservation or
Paction, to sell back again to the Debtor, upon payment of the Debt, and so
the Wodsetter cannot by virtue of the Impignoration, sell the Lands and pay
himself, but all he can do is to affect the Wodset Lands, by legal diligence as
an other Creditor; and if any other prevent him in diligence, they acquire the
Right of Reversion, and no posterior diligence of his can take it away, or
capacitate him to acquire the full property of the Pledge, or to alienate it
simply to another. The like is in the Impignoration of Movables, which cannot
be thereby sold, but the Creditor may affect them by his Legal Diligence, by
Poynding thereof.

60. In Impignoration either of Heretable or Moveable Rights, the Law rejected,
pactum legis commissoriae, which we call a Clause Irritant, whereby it is
provided, that if the Debt be not paid at such a time, the Reversion shall be
void. Our Custom does not annull such Clauses; but by Act of Sederunt,
November 27. 1592. it is declared, that the Lords would decide in all Clauses
Irritant, in Infeftments, Bonds, and Tacks, according to the express words and
meaning thereof precisely; yet the Lords allow such Clauses to be purged by
performance, before Sentence, declaring the Clause irritant committed.

In which Process, though it be committed long before, yet by payment at the
Bar, it will be purged, even though the Party after the irritancy get
Possession, Hope, Clause irritant, John Edgar contra Gordoun of Earlestoun:
Yea, though the Wodsetter had obtained a Decree of Removing, two years after
the failzie; against which Reposition was granted, paying all Damnage and
Interest, July 8. 1636. Cleghorn contra Ferguson: And albeit the Money was not
ready to purge at the Bar, so that the Failzie was declared, yet it was
superceeding Extract for a time, that it may be purged in the mean time,
February 7. 1628. Pringle contra Ker. But where the Requisition was on nine
score days, there was no time granted after the Decree to purge, July 19.
1625. Nairn contra Naper. This Clause is so odious, that it was elided by the
Wodsetters Possession of a part of the Lands, and thereby getting a part of the
Annualrent, March 18. 1629. Barcley contra Stevinson. The like by accepting of
payment of Annualrent after Failzie, Hope, Clause irritant Nasmith contra
Kinloch. The like by payment of Annualrent, or by compensation therewith, ibid.
Barns contra Barcley. The reason of the Law and our Custom is, because
Impignoration is a permutative Contract, wherein equality is meant and
required, and Clauses irritant are redacted to equality, respect is not had to
the Terms and Expressions of the Contract, but to the thing truly done; and
therefore, though sale of Lands with Reversion be expressed, yet if there be not
a competent equivalent price, and that it be not a real and proper sale, but
only a Wodset, under that conception, the Clause irritant has no further
effect then is before expressed; but if it be a true sale and competent price,
the Clause irritant is not penal, but has its full effect; but otherwise it is
still purgeable till declarator, which therefore is necessar, even though the
Clause irritant bear, that the Reversion shall be null without declarator, for
the remeeding of the exorbitancy of such Clauses irritant.

61. Impignoration is either express by the explicit consent of parties, or
implicit, which is introduced by Law without consent of parties; of such tacit
hypothecations, there have been many in the Civil Law, as in the Ware, for the
price, in Houses for expenses in Preservation or Melioration, or for Money lent
for that use, to a Wife in the Goods of her Husband, for her Tocher: To Pupils
and Minors in the Goods of their Tutors and Curators for their Duty and
Administration to Pupils in the Goods of their Mother being their Tutrix, or in
the Goods of her second Husband, if she did not make an account, and procure a
new Tutor before her Marriage: to Legators in the Goods of Executors: To the
Fisk for their Tribute, or their Contracts: to Cities in the Goods of their
Administrators. But our Custom has taken away express hypothecations of all,
or a part of the Debitors Goods without delivery, and in the tacit legal
hypothecation, has only allowed a few, allowing ordinarily parties to be
preferred, according to the priority of their legal diligence, that Commerce
may be the more sure, and every one may more easily know his condition with
whom he contracts; and therefore, Goods sold were not found under any
hypothecation for the price, June 14. 1676. Thomas Cushney contra John Crystie.

Yet with us there remains the tacit Hypothecation of the Fruits on the Ground
in the first place, and they not satisfying, the Goods on the Ground, belonging
to the Possessour, for the terms or the years when the Cropped was on the Ground,
but not for prior or past years; and therefore, all Masters of the Ground, or
their Assigneys, having right to the Mails and Duties, have interest to recover
the rents thereof, from all intromettors with the Fruits, Rents or profits
thereof, though upon a Title, unless their Title be preferable, or at least
have the benefit of a Possessory Judgment: This was extended to Intromettors,
though they bought the Corns which grew on the Ground, in public Market at
Zule, albeit the Heretor had Poynded a part of the Crop, for the Rent of a
prior year, unless at the Term of payment, Candlemas, there were sufficient
Fruits on the Ground to satisfy the Rent, March 29. 1639. Dam Mary Hay contra
Archibald Elliot.

Secondly, It is extended to Intromettors, with the Cropped and Goods of the
Ground, though they lawfully Poynded the same from the Tennants for their just
Debts, Nic. in quibus causis pignus, etc. Earl of Wintoun contra Barcley,
unless they left as much upon the Ground as might satisfy the rent, besides
the Household Stuff, July 25. 1623. February 3. 1624. Hay contra Keith. The like
wherein the present Cropped was not accounted, but left for the subsequent Rent,
of which the Terms were not come, June 29. 1624. Polwart contra

Thirdly, It is extended, that thereby the Master of the Ground may summarly
stop Poynding, unless sufficient Goods be left to pay the Rent, beside the
plenishing of the House, February 3. 1624. Arrocks Bairns contra Keith.

Fourthly, This is extended against the Donatar of the Tennants Escheat,
intrometting thereby, who was found liable, though no Action was moved by the
Master of the Ground for seven years, in the said case, Hay contra Keith.

The like is sustained as to the Goods of the Possessours of Houses, invecta
and illata, for House-mailes, for all intromettors therewith are liable, and
the Goods may be stopped from Poynding for the Possessours Debt, without
Deforcement, being invecta and illata: But this extends only to one year, or
two Terms Mail, December 7. 1630. Dick contra Lands.

But the Hypothecation of the Fruits of the Ground is greater, then of the
Tennants other Goods; for the Fruits are liable according to the value thereof
for the rents, though there remain other Goods sufficient to pay the Rents on
the Ground, seeing there remained not sufficient Fruits to pay the same, March
ult. 1624. Lady Down and her Spouse contra Lord of Down. This Hypothecation of
the Fruits for the Rent, was extended to a Town setting their Customs, even
against the Sub-tacksman, not bound to the Town, who were preferred to the
Tacksmans Creditors in a double Poynding, January 31. 1665. Anderson and Proven
contra the Town of Edinburgh. It was also extended to the seller of Fishing
against the Donatar of the Tacks-mans Escheat, who was found liable to restore,
July 4. 1667. Cuming of Alter contra Lumsdean. This Hypothecation was found to
give the Master of the Ground Right, not only to detain, but to bring back the
Tennants Goods to the Ground, de recenti, December 11. 1672. William Crichtoun
contra the Earl of (...), but not ex intervallo, February 9. 1679. Park contra
Cockburn of Riselaw: But this Hypothecation was not extended to an Appryzer
without diligence or Possession, July 29. 1675. Lord Panmoor contra Collistoun.

The like Hypothecation is competent to Teind-Masters for their Teinds, even
though the Heretor get a Rent for the whole, or Profit of the Land, Stock and
Teind jointly, he is thereby liable as Intromettor, which was extended to
Ministers for their Benefices or Stipends, whereby they may have access to any
Intrometter with the Teinds, out of which the Stipend is modified, not only for
the Intrometters proportion of his Lands, but in solidum, for his whole Teind,
according to the value of his Intromission, July 6. 1625. Mortoun contra Scot,
which held, though the Intromettor had a Wodset of Stock and Teind, whereby he
had but his Annualrent, March 21. 1633. Mr. Gilbert Key contra Mr. James Gray
and Carmichael, and this was found not only in Beneficed Ministers, but in
Stipendiaries, who may either take them to the Tennents or their Masters
Intrometting, Spots. Kirkmen, Mr. Andrew Ker contra Gilchrist. There is with us
no Hypothecation in Lands, for the Price or Money borrowed, expressly to buy it,
Nicol. quae in fraudem, Paterson contra Scarlet. And the preference of Relicts
for Implement of their Contracts of Marriage, out of their Husbands Movables,
in their hands, to other Creditors, is not a Hypothecation, but a privilege
personal.

63. Permutation, or Excambion and Sale, are so congenerous Contracts;
especially in our Customs, that the same work will explain both, by holding
out in what they do agree, and in what they differ: Permutation or Exchange, is
a Contract whereby one thing is agreed to be given for another, which, if it be
Money, as it is current for Goods or Ware (under which all things which can be
bought, are comprehended) then its sale, or emption and vendition.

These Contracts agree in this, that both are perfected according to Law and
our Custom, by sole consent: Naked pactions being now efficatious, and though
neither of the things exchanged be delivered, the agreement is valid, but if
there be any latent vitiosity, if it impede the use of the thing bought, the
Romans gave action em redhibitoriam, to restore and annual the bargain, or
quanti minoris, for making up the buyers Interest; but if the seller was
ignorant of the vitiosity, or insufficiency, he is not liable to make it good,
unless he affirm it to be free of that, or in general, of any other faults, but
if he knew, he is liable, if it were not showen to the buyer, or of it self
evident or known; in which case, the seller is only obliged, if he expressly
paction, our Custom allows making up of latent insufficiency, of which
before.

But these Contracts differ, First, in the materials, which in sale must be
Money, as such, and as a liquid price, else if it be respected as a body, or
indefinite quantity, as uncoyned or uncurrent Money, or if it be bought by the
weight, or intrinsic value; or if Money of one Country be exchanged with
Money of another Country, having no common Standard, here is no sale but
exchange: Neither is exchange of Money loan, because it is not as a liquid
quantity, as when so much English Money is given for the Floren Crown, or
Gilder, and the remitting thereof. The price must be also certain, or which may
be assertained, as such a person gave, or as shall be had from others by the
seller for the like Goods, or as such a person shall appoint, which if
exorbitant, may be redacted, ad arbitrium boni viri, which seems to consist,
though the arbitriment be made the buyers.

Secondly, Excambion and Sale differ mainly in this, that in sale, delivery of
the Goods or things bought, with the Obligation of Warrandice in case of
eviction, which is employed in sale, though not expressed, is the implement of it
on the sellers part, even though the buyer know, and make it appear that it
were not the sellers, yet he could demand no more but delivery and warrandice;
but contrarways, the price must be made the Sellers, and he may refuse it if he
can show another Right.

But in Excambion, delivery must be made on either part, and the thing
delivered must become thereby the receivers, else, if it appear to be another,
it may be refused before delivery, and if it be evicted after, the Contract
becomes void, and the other party has regress to what he gave in Excambion,
which follows even singular Successors, though it be not so expres, and
though the singular Successor was by Appryzing, etc. prior to the eviction,
November 21. 1623. Earl of Montrose contra Sir John Ker. And that without
necessity to instruct, that he who craves regress had right when he changed any
further then by the Narrative of the Excambion, which was of an old date, in a
Charter from the King, bearing, These Lands to have been Disponed in Excambion,
for the Defenders Lands, and that the Excamber and his Heirs should have
regress, without mention of Assignays, albeit the Pursuer was Assignay, July
14. 1629. Lord of Wardess contra Lord of Balcomy; where it was also found,
that no person needed to be cited to obtain regress, but the present proprietar
of the Lands Excambed, and the Successor of the Contracter, and no intervenient
Authors, July 2. 1629. inter eosdem.

64. Sale may consist in all things which are not prohibit, such as buying of
Pleas, by Members of the College of Justice, by the Act of Parliament, which
is understood of all persons, having employment about the Session, as Advocats,
Clerks, Writers, etc. Agents and their Servants; wherein by Pleas, are not
understood things wherein there may be contraversie, but wherein there is
Process actually depending, and called and not decerned, July 6. 1625. Mowat
contra Mcclane. July 30. 1635. Sir Robert Richardson centra Cranstoun Riddel.
But the Prohibition does not annul the Right or hinder Process, but is a Ground
whereupon deprivation may follow by the Act, as in the former case, June 5.
1611. Adam Cunninghame Advocat contra Maxwel of Drumcoltrane.

Sale being perfected and the thing delivered, the property thereof becomes the
buyers, if it was the sellers, and there is no dependence of it, till the price
be paid or secured, as was in the Civil Law, neither Hypothecation of it for
the price, Hope de empto. John Parker contra Stevin Law. Nic. quae in fraudem
creditorum, Paterson contra Scarlet.

In fale there may be Earnest interposed, or Reversion granted, or the
Commissory Paction or Clause irritant, adjected, that if the price be not
paid, the sale shall be void, or the same may be conditionally, if the price
be paid by such a day, or if any other offer not a better Price in such a
time, or with condition not to sell, without consent, of which in order.

65. As to the First, Though giving of Earnest be very ordinary in Bargains of
sale and others, yet it is no less dubious, what the Nature and Effect thereof
is, some holding it to be, to the effect the Bargain may be evident and
certain; for though sale be perfected by sole consent, yet it is not always
evident to the parties and the witnesses, whether it be a Communing or a
Contract; and therefore, to make it sure to both, Merchants who may not hazard
upon dubious Interpretations, do give Earnest as an evidence of the Bargain
closed and perfected: But others think, that the effect and intent of Earnest,
is that the giver of the Earnest may resile from the Bargain if he please to
lose his Earnest, and the taker may resile, if he return the Earnest with as
much more. The Civil Law, l. 17. C. de side instrumentorum and instit. de empt.
vend. in principio; And many Interpreters seem to favor this construction: Yet
many Texts in Law adduced by Wezenbecius, Faber and others, are for the former
opinion, and they do Interpret the contrary places, not to be of sale
perfected, but of an antecedent promise or paction, to buy or sell: It has not
often occurred (so far as I have observed) to be decided with us, which of these
opinions is to be followed with us, but the former seems to be preferable,
because ordinarily with us, Earnest is so inconsiderable that it cannot be
thought to be the meaning of the parties to leave the Bargain Arbitrary, upon
the losing or doubling thereof, so was it found, February 24. 1628. contra
James Riddel. To this also suits the sense, that Earnest is taken in the
Scripture, for Evidence and Assurance, making the matter Fixed and not
Arbitrary, which at least evinceth that the Word has been anciently taken so,
whatever has been the Custom and Constitution of the Romans.

66. Reversion or the Paction of Redemption, though ordinarily it is used in
Wodsets, which albeit they be under the form of sale, yet in reality they are
not such, there being no equivalent price, yet may it be where there is a true
sale, and this paction is no real quality or condition of the sale, however it
be conceived, but only a personal obliegement on the buyer, which therefore
does not affect the thing bought, nor a singular Successor, though Reversion of
Lands and Heretable Rights, be made as real and effectual against singular
Successors, when it is ingrosled in the Bargain, or duly Registrate, yet that
is not by the nature of the thing, but by the Statute, and takes no place in
other cases, as in Reversion of Movables, which are sold under Reversion; but
if impignorat, the Reversion is a part of the Contract, and is effectual
against singular Successors.

As to the other Pactions adjected to sale, sometimes they are so conceived and
meaned, that thereby the bargain is truly conditional and pendent, and so is
not a perfect Bargain, till the condition be existent: Neither does the
property of the thing sold pass thereby, though Possession follow, till it be
performed, as if the Bargain be conditional, only upon payment of the price at
such a time, till payment the property passes not unto the buyer; but there
are many other adjections which are expressed under the name of Conditions and
Provisions, which are not inherent as essential in the Bargain: But extrinsick
personal Obliegements, the existence where of does not annual the sale, or
suspend or annual the property in the buyer, at least in his singular
Successors, as has now been said in Reversions, and is frequent in many other
cases.

67. In Sale there uses to be adhibit a Clause irritant, or resolutive Clause,
that if such a thing or Condition were, or were not, in that case the Bargain
should be null and void, as if it had never been made and granted: whence
arises a very subtle Debate, whether such Clauses, whatsoever their Tenor be,
are effectual, and follow the thing to singular Successors, and do render the
Bargain and Property acquired, null in it self? Or whether such be but personal
Obligations only? Which though they may annul the Property or Bargain, if it
remain in the hands of the Contracter, cannot reach it, if it be in the hands
of a third party, is the Question: for clearing whereof, it appears,

First, That if such Conditions, or resolutive Clauses do stop the transmission
of Property, and be so meaned and expressed, then as is said before, the Bargain
is pendent, and the Property not transmitted, even as to singular Successors,
and the seller remains the Proprietar: But if by the Contract and Clause, the
buyer become once the Proprietar, and the condition is adjected, that he shall
cease to be Proprietar, in such a case, this is but personal, for Property or
Dominion passes not by conditions or provisions, but by Tradition, and
otherways prescribed in Law; so that these conditions, however expressed, are
only the foundation, upon which the Property might pass from the buyer, if the
thing bought remain his, unless by Law or Statute it be otherways ordered, as
in Reversions of Lands, Alienation of Fewdal Rights, which become void, and
return if alienat, and not payment of the Few Duty, whereby the Few Right
becomes void, but all by Law and Custom, and not by private Paction.

68. Secondly, The doubt remains, if such personal Conditions with such Clauses
resolutive be in the body of the Bargain, whether it be effectual against
singular Successors, who cannot but know their Authors Rights, and therefore
are in dolo and mala fide, if they acquire such Rights in prejudice of the
conditions thereof, and so ex dolo, at least such Clauses will be effectual
against the singular Successors; But first, this has no force where the
acquiry is not voluntar, but necessar for satisfaction of Debt by Appryzing,
and other Legal Diligence, in which ordinarily the acquirer does not, neither is
supposed to know his Authors Right.

Secondly, If the Bargain be so necessar, that the Purchaser be a Creditor, and
has no other probable way of payment, in which, though he see his Authors
Right bearing such Clauses, yet he acts upon necessity, for his own
satisfaction.

Thirdly, These who acquire such Rights without necessity, and see therein such
conditions in themselves personal, though having resolutive Clauses, do not
thereby know that the third party has the Right, jus in re, but only jus ad
rem; and therefore, if they acquire such Rights, the property is thereby
transmitted: and though there may be Fraud in the acquirer, which raises an
Obligation of Reparation to the party damnified by that Delinquence; yet that
is but personal, and another party acquiring, bona fide, or necessarly, and not
partaking of that Fraud, is in tuto: but certain knowledge, by intimation,
citation, or the like, and inducing malam fidem, whereby any prior Disposition,
or Assignation made to another party, is certainly known, or at least
interruption made in acquiring, bona fide, by Arrestment or Citation of the
acquirer: Such Rights acquired, not being of necessity to satisfy prior
Engagements, are Reduceable, ex capite fraudis, and the acquirer is partaker of
the Fraud of his Author, who thereby becomes a granter of double Rights, but
this will not hinder Legal Diligences to proceed and be completed, and become
effectual, though the user thereof did certainly know any Inhoat, or incomplete
Right of another; but it is more doubtful, and not yet clear by Custom,
whether a voluntar Right taken for satisfaction of a prior Debt by him, who
certainly knew of a prior Disposition or Assignation, though not perfected,
would be reduced as Fraudulent.

The relating of a Right unto another Right, without any invalidity thereof
expressed, was found to infer an acknowledgement of it, February 15. 1637. Lawder
contra Goodwise of Whitekirk. Of late the like conditions have become very
ordinary, that thereby property may become inalienable, and as a perpetual
Usufruct; yet it seems such are neither expedient for Commerce, or for the
necessity of the Proprietar, nor consistent with the nature of Property, whose
main effect is Alienation, or disposal of the Substance of the thing, as
Usufruct is of the Fruits; and therefore, it were safest upon such Clauses to
use Inhibition, yet they may be effectual against Lucrative Alienations or
Donations, in respect that by these Clauses, at least the parties are personal
Creditors, and so Alienations gratuitous in their prejudice, may be anulled by
the Statute, 1621. c. 28.

But of late, it has been found, that the Clause irritant being in a Tailzie,
and in the Seasine of both the first Heir, and of the last, that it did annul
the Creditors Rights and Appryzings, and the next who might have been Heir of
Tailzie, had access to the Land without that Heir who incurred the clause
irritant his Debt, February 26. 1662. Lord (...) contra Creditors of the Earl
of Annandale.

69. Sale being complete, the Question is, if the thing should perish by
accident before delivery, and not after delay, and without the fault of
theseller, whether the hazard be the sellers or the buyers, by the Civil Law,
the buyerhath the peril, l. 34.. 6. ff. de contrahenda emptione. l. 14. ff. de
furtis. l. 1. Cod. de periculo and commodo, the peril is not the sellers,
unless expressly he take the hazard, or that the buyer buy, per aversionem, l.
62.. 2. l. 2.. de contra abenda emptione, all which puts both the peril and
profits of the thing upon the buyer, ejus est periculum, cujus est commodum;
and it is far more clear, that the Accessions, Fruits and Profits of things
bought, are the buyers, even before delivery; and by the same ground, must the
peril be his also: But on the other part, that the loss is the sellers, is the
opinion of others, because the seller after the sale is debtor for the
delivery, and it is a general Rule, that the Debtor is never obliged for the
hazard of accidents, when he is debtor for a certain body; but all agree, that
if the sale were of a Fungible, as Wine, Oil, or Grain, not considered as a
particular body, as the Wine in such a Seller, or the Grain in such a House,
but generally so much Grain or Wine as a mere Fungible, in that case the peril
would be the sellers, because the perishing of any one particular could not be
the buyers; but beside Authority, the main reason on the contrair is, that
every thing perishes to its owner; and before Tradition, the seller is
Proprietar of the thing sold. I have not observed it debated or decided with
us, if the thing sold should thereafter perish, that yet the price is due; and
if by common custom, the seller had not forborne in that case, doubtless the
buyer would not have paid willingly, which therefore seems to be our Custom,
seeing none have obtained the price, who did not deliver, or offer the thing
sold, which is also the opinion of Cujac. ad l. 33. ff. Locati, yet the peril
of a Housesold, and thereafter burnt, found to be the buyers, though the
Disposition bore an obliegement to put the buyer in Possession, but the buyer
did voluntarly take Possession, and re-builded the House, and was Infeft before
the Burning, December 13. 1667. Hunter contra Wilsons. In sale, absolute
warrandice is employed, which is not to be extended to moderate servitudes, as
was Aquaeducts and City servitudes, l. 66. ff. de contrahenda emptione.

70. Location and Conduction is a Contract whereby hyre is given for the
fruits, use, or work of persons or things; this Contract keeps a great
proportion with sale, for as no Sale can be without a Price, so no Location
without a Hire, and as the price must be certain, either being expressly named,
or indirectly, being the price that such another gave for the like, or that
such a person should think reasonable, both which become certain, if the price
given by that other party appear, or if that third person modifie the price
otherways, the sale is void and pendent, and unperfect, till that be performed:
So in Location the hire must be the same way assertained; for if the price be
but made, ex post facto, it is no proper Location, as he who gives his Cloth
to be dyed, and promises to agree for the Cloth, as the dye shall be in
fineness, this is no Location, but an innominat Contract.

But it is contraverted, whether Sale and Location do also agree in this, that
as the price must be in current Money, so also the hire. It was of much moment
in the Roman Law, because Location was a nominat Contract, perfected by sole
consent, but other Contracts innominate were but naked pactions, till the thing
agreed upon was interposed; and therefore it is there accuratly debated, some
holding that Money only can make the hire in a proper Location, and some that
any other Liquid quantity or fungible is sufficient, as Oil, Grain, etc. But
with us, all agreements being effectual by sole consent, we need not much
debate; and therefore, seeing all the effects and conditions competent, where
the hire is Money, are also competent where it is any other Fungible, we agree
with that opinion, that such are proper Locations.

Sale and Location differ mainly in this, that the intent and effect of Sale,
is to alienate the Substance of the thing bought, and state the property
thereof in the buyer; but in Location, the ordinar intent thereof is, that the
Substance and property of the thing is not alienat, but remains in the setter,
and the taker has only the fruits and work thereof, which must not be already
done, and extant, but that which is to be done, and in spe: as for instance, a
Bargain for the Fruits of a Field, which are already growing, is no Location,
but Sale, and so of use or work, already performed; and therefore, in the
nature of this Contract, there is a hazard and uncertainty in the conductor of
the quantity, or value of the Fruits, use or Work, the peril and profits
whereof is the Conductors.

71. But here arises the Question, that in the case of the sterility of the
Ground set, or the absolute ceasing of the Use, Fruit or Work, whether the hire
be due in that case? The determination thereof will clear the exception of the
former Rule, concerning the peril and quantity of the Use, Fruit and Work
locat; and therefore, First, Where the Use, Fruit and Work does altogether
cease, without the fault of the Conductor, there the hire must also cease,
because the one is given as the cause of the other, and the peril undertaken,
is not of the being, but of the quantity and value thereof; for instance, if
Land taken be inundat or sanded, and so have no Fruit, it is the common opinion
of all, that the hire or cane cease to be due for that time: Or if a Horse
set, or a Servant hired die, the hire or see is but due according to the time
of their life; but if they be sick or unprofitable for a time, yet with hope of
recovery and profit, in that case there is no abatement.

Secondly, Though the opinion of the Learned be very diverse, in the matter of
the barrenness of the Ground, some accompting it, if the half of the ordinar
Increase fail, some if the third, and some leaving it to the common estimate of
the place, what is called barrenness or the arbitriment of the Judge; yet I
think it more rational to determine that case with the rest, upon the former
ground, that if there be any profit of the Fruit above the expenses, or work,
the rent or hire should be due.

72. The like is in vastation by public Calamity, which has been frequently
decided upon occasion of the late Vastations, but this will not extend to
private accidents besalling the Cropped after the growing or reaping, even though
by accident it should be destroyed or burnt without the Takers fault, the
hazard is his own, because it is not then respected as the Fruit, but as a Body
in being, whereof he has the property and peril: But in public Calamities by
War, not only the Cropped is taken away, but the Tennants aredisinabled, and
hindered to Labor, and therefore must have abatement, this will take no place,
if the abundance of another year compense the sterility of the former, l. 8.
Cod. Locati.

73. Seeing the intent and effect of the Location, is not to alienate the
property of the thing Locat, it follows, that this Contract is merely
personal, and thereby there is no real Right in the thing, whose Use, Fruits,
or Work are Locat; so that if the property of these things be alienate from the
Locator, the interest of the Conductor cease, and a singular Successor may
recover it from the Conductor, notwithstanding the Location, which reaches it
only by the personal Contract, as it did belong to the Setter, and so it would
be in our Tacks or Rentals, by their own nature, but it is otherways provided
by a special Statute, of which hereafter. We shall speak nothing here of
Feu-Farms, which though they are Locations, yet by the Law they become real,
leaving these to their own place.

74. What shall be said of that Contract, whereby Money or any Fungible is lent
for the like in kind again, with such a hire for the use thereof? These are
called Usurary contracts, and they cannot be comprehended under Loan, because
they are not Gratuitous, or under Location, because the property and substance
is alienat, Usurary Contracts come nearest to Location; but to repress the
exorbitance of Usurers, the Civil Law rejected Usurary Contracts, and admits
only of the profit of fungibles. In some cases, the Judicial Law also
rejects them, and prohibiteth Usury to be used among the Jews, though they
might use it with other Nations. So does the Canon Law disapprove it, and most
Nations, where that Law is in vigor; yet we, and generally other Protestant
Nations do allow of the profit and hire of Money, or other Fungibles, being
within the proportion allowed in Law, which sometimes was ten for each hundred
in the year, thereafter eighth, and now six; and therefore Usurary-contracts
are only, wherein there is unlawful or exorbitant profits beyond the Law. So
did the Civil Law allow, usuras centesimas, viz. one of an hundred Monthly;
and their Usuras besses, semisses and Dodrantes. In the several cases allowed
in Law, we have only one measure for all; the nauticum foenus, is where so much
is given, not only for the profit of the Money, but for the hazard and peril
of the Ware bought thereby, or of other Fungibles, by Sea, and so it is a mixed
Contract; and in both cases Profit and Annualrent is lawful, as having no
moral countermand, and so being free, is not only subject to our pactions and
promises, which we are morally obliged to observe; but has also in it
permutative Justice, in that Money, Wine, Oil, Grain or the like, have a real
use profitable to men by the exchange thereof, and increase that may accrue
thereby, and for which proportionable hire may be lawfully and profitably
constitute: These Usurary-contracts therefore are to be reduced, not to Loan,
but to Location, though by accident they have that difference from the rest,
that the property is alienate, because there can be no use of Money or
Fungibles otherways.

The penalty of exorbitant Usury with us was, that the Debtor for such Usury,
revealing the same, should be freed of the Contract, and if he did not, any
other revealing it should have right to the sum given out upon Usury and Profit
thereof, Par. 1594. cap. 221. But afterward, all taking of more Annualrent
then ten per centum, directly or indirectly, by taking of Victual within the
ordinary prices, or buying Victuals for the Annualrent with exorbitant prices
in case of not delivery, or by improper Wodsetts, having greater backtack
Duties then effeiring to ten per centum, or otherwise, do confiscate their
Movables and the Sums so given out; which the party cannot renounce, but the
Advocat has interest to pursue therefore, without the parties concurrence; and
if he concur, he shall have restitution of what more Annual he paid norten per
centum, Parl. 1597. cap. 247. But the Annual was retrenched to eight per
centum, Parl. 1633. cap. 21. and to six per centum, Parl. 1649. cap. revived,
Parl. 1661. cap. 49. But whether proper Wodsetts without backtack, though the
Rent be much more then the ordinary Annualrent, be an usurary Contract, and
falls under the general Clause of the said Act, though it has sometimes been
essayed, yet has not been decided. The main reason that the parties found on
is, on the one part, that there is indirectly more then the ordinary
Annualrent, and so falls under the Act, 1597. and on the other, that improper
Wodsetts are there expressed, and proper Wodsetts seem ex proposito omitted, and
in proper Wodsetts all hazard lies upon the Wodsetter. Of setting the Land of
dead, poor and waste, we shall leave this to every man's private judgment, till
public judgment cast the balance; but all proper Wodsetts before 1661. are
restricted to the Annualrent by the Act of Parliament, 1661. cap. 62. If upon
offer of security, the Wodsetter will not quite possession, he is countable
from the offer, as has been often decided since that Act.

There uses also, in Wodsetts and Reversions, to be included, a condition to
set the Wodsett Lands for such time, to begin after redemption, which if it be
far within the true worth, is Usurary, and is declared so, Parl. 1449. cap. 19.
That Lands provided to be set for Tacks not near the true worth, the same shall
not be kept: yet such a Tack was sustained, seeing the Wodsetter had not his
full Annualrent, by reason of a Liferent reserved in the Wodsett, and the
Wodsetter was the Constituents Brother, and so like to be for his Portion
natural, whereof the Tack was a part, June 21. 1662. Lord of Polwart contra
Home; but in other cases, such a Tack was found null by the said Act, but not
by the Act betwixt Debtor and Creditor, February 15. 1666. my Lord Ley contra
Porteous.

75. This much for Usury of Annualrent by Contract or Pactions, it is also due
of the Law, and by the obligation of recompense and reparation; and in the
Civil Law, in all Contracts bonae fidei, it is due ex mora, by the delay of the
Debtor, which is understood after he be required for the same, or that the
Term is past, nam dies interpellat pro homine, and in other Contracts by
litiscontestation: but our custom has little use of that distinction, neither
follows it that rule; but where Annualrent is not agreed, first, ordinarily it
is not due till Horning be used against the Debtor, and that by a special
Statute, 1621. cap. 20. Yea, though the Horning was not registrat, and so null
as to Escheat, it was found valid as to the Annualrent, July 16. 1673. Isabel
Ker contra Parochioners of Moramside; but it was found not competent by way of
special Charge in the Suspension of the principal Debt, but ordinarily by
ordinary action, July 2. 1629. Purveyance contra Lord of Craigie, where Dury
his opinion is, That if the Charger had raised Horning upon the Act of
Parliament, it would have been sustained summarly, and is now ordinarily
sustained summarly by a special Charge, when the sum is charged for or
suspended; but it being once due, it not only continues during the life of the
person denounced, but still thereafter till payment, July 4. 1642. Huntley
contra Heirs of Mr. John Manson. 2. Annualrent provided by a Bond for one year,
though it express not for all years thereafter, yet continues due till
payment, December. 2. 1628. Blair contra Ramsay. The like where one Term was only
in the Bond, Spots. usury, Keith contra Bruce; and where Annualrent was
promised for a time by a Letter, it was found still due till payment, January
13. 1669. George Home contra Seaton of Menzies. 3. It is due by use of payment
only without express paction, March 4. 1628. Forrester contra Clerk. 4.
Annualrent is ordained to be due to Cautioners by their Principals, for sums
paid by them as Cautioners by the Clause of relief, as being damange and
interest, though the Bond bear no Annualrent, by Statute of Session, December.
21. 1620. Hope usury, Torry contra Dowhill; Dec. 4. 1629. (...) contra
Johnstoun, where the Clause of relief bare only to relieve the Cautioners of
his Caution, and not of all damage. The like though there was no further
distress against the Cautioner, but registration, January 24. 1627. I. Wauchton
contra L. of Innerweek; and this was extended to co-principals, having Clause
of mutual relief of cost, skaith, etc. November. 15. 1627. Black of Largo contra
William Dick. 5. Annualrent is due without paction by Tutors and Curators to
their Pupils, of which formerly, in the Obligations betwixt them. 6. Annualrent
was found due without paction, by an Heirmale for the Portion of the
Heirfemale, though not required for many years, and that still from the term of
payment, July 5. 1610. Calhound contra L. of Luss. The like by a husband, who
was obliged to his wife for the Annualrent of the Tocher payable by the
Father, though the Tocher was never paid, Hope Husband and Wife, Baird contra
Gordoun, Spots. Usury, Mr. John Skeen contra Mr. John Heart. 7. Annualrent was
found due for the price of Lands possessed by the buyer, without paction, Hope
Usury, Mr. James Stirling contra Mr. David Ogilvy; February 17. 1624. Dury of
that ilk, contra Lord Ramsay; the like though the delay of payment was not the
Debitors sault, November 14. 1628. Cuming contra Cuming; Spots. Usury, Home
contra Lord Rentoun. Annualrent was not found due without paction, for a sum
lent to an old man, on condition, that if he died without Heirs, the Creditor
should become the Debitors Heir, and yet he having Heirs, Annualrent was not
found due, December. 11. 1662. George Logie contra Logie. But the Lords do
sometimes allow Annualrent, or an equivalent expense among Merchants; and they
did so in a Provision by a Father to his natural Daughter payable at her
Marriage, which was found so favorable not to hasten her to marry, that
Annualrent was allowed her, seeing the condition was in her power, June 25.
1664. Margaret Inglis contra Thomas Inglis. The Romans allowed Annual till it
equalled the Principal, but no further; but our custom has no such
restriction. Yet, we restrict the English double Bonds to the single Sums and
Annualrent thereof, but no further then till it be equivalent to the Principal,
seeing by the tenor of such Bonds, it appears the meaning of the Parties, that
no more should be demanded in any case, January 2. 1679. Sir Alexander Frazer
and Leyes Burnet, contra Sir James Hamiltoun.

Annual upon Annual is condemned of all, when it is comprehended in the first
paction; but it is ordinar, by posterior Contracts, to accumulate Annualrents
and make it a Principal, and so both that which was first Principal, and that
which was once Annual, bears Annual: so also Annual, by virtue of the Act of
Parliament, if Decree follow thereupon and Horning, will bear Annual, seeing
there is no limitation; but this will not be extended to Annuals in time coming
after the Horning: and last, Annualrent paid by a Cautioner, by the said
Statute of Session, will bear Annual, because to him it is a Principals.
Annualrent was also found due without paction, for money expended by the Custom
of Bourdeaux, December. 8. 1677. Antonieta Peron contra Morison.

To return to Location, all things may fall under the same, that can have any
use, fruit or work, but real servitudes cannot be set severally, but only as
accessories to the thing which they serve. Works which can be locat, 1. must be
lawful. 2. They must be performable in that which belongs to the conductor,
or in reference to his person; for work employed upon the workers own matter,
it is no Location; as if a Goldsmith be employed to work such a piece of work
in his own Metal, and the same to be bought as it is so wrought, it is Sale
and no Location, unless there be two distinct Bargains, one for the Metal,
which is Sale; and the other for the Workmanship, which is Location; So he that
bargains for the benefit of what fish he shall take for such a time in his own
water, contracteth Sale, and not Location; and if the work be to be employed on
that which concerns a third party, it is not Location, but a Mandar.

76. From this Contract, the Conductors Obligation is to pay the hire, and
after the end of Location, to restore the thing locat, making up all damages,
in which the Conductor is liable even for light faults, and must use such
diligence as prudent men use in their Affairs, but is not liable for casual or
accidental perishing of the thing locat. Some hold him liable for the most
exact diligence and lightest fault; but others, with better reason, are for the
contrary, it being the common rule in diligence, that which is only to the
behove of the keeper, he should use most exact diligence, and is liable for the
lightest fault, as it is in Loan, and these who have the custody only for
another, are liable but for the grossest fault, which is equivalent to fraud,
and for such diligence as is commonly accustomed by every man; but these who
have the custody for themselves, and partly for others, are in the middle way
obliged for such diligence as themselves or prudent men use in their Affairs.

77. The Obligation on the part of the Locator, is to deliver the thing locat,
and to continue it during the time of the location, and to refound to the
Conductor his necessary expense employed upon the thing hired, unless the
custom of the place be otherwise; and so the reparation and upholding of
houses set in prediis Urbanis lies upon the setter, if it be not otherwise
agreed; but in Lands, or prediis Rusticis, the Tennent is obliged to keep the
Land and Houses in as good condition as he got them, and may not destroy
Mosses, nor rive out Meadows, and is liable for the damage, though there be no
such provision in his Tack, February 6. 1633. Lord of Haddo contra Johnstoun;
but he has no reparation for any building or policy which he makes, which is
accounted as being freely due without expectation of recompense, if it be not
otherwise agreed, or that the Rent be raised thereby.

78. Society is not so much a permutative, as a commutative Contract, whereby
the Contracters communicate each to other some Stock, Work, or Profit. The
effect of Society is, that thereby something which before was proper, becomes,
or is continued to be common to the copartners, and it is either a Stock, or
the profit of a Stock, or Work, Labor or Industry: Yet, this communication is
not effectual to transfer the Property in part, or to communicate it without
delivery or possession, by which, Property by positive Law is conveyed. There
is ofttimes a communion without Society, because it is of accident, as
Legators, Heirs or Acquirers of the same thing, pro indiviso, but if there be
interposed a Contract thereupon, to continue that Communion for the common
profit of the Contracters, it becomes a proper Society.

79. The matter of Society are things, fruits, work or industry, and that
variously; for sometimes the thing or stock is only put by one, and the work
and industry about it by another, as where a stock is given in partnership to a
Merchant to Trade with, here it may be that the Merchants skill and pains is
balanced with the profit of the stock of the other, who does not, nor cannot
make that use of it. Or Land is set to Husbandmen to be Labored, and the
Increase to be common. Sometimes each partner brings a stock to the Society,
and their work or pains withal, and sometime only work, and the profit thereby
is made common; and sometimes the one communicates the stock it self, whereby
the property thereof becomes common to himself and other partners, and the
profit accrewing thereby, and the other brings in a stock, but does not
communicate it self, but the profit thereof; in all the interest and shares,
may either be equal or unequal, but without work and industry by the partners
or others, there can be no Society, because there can be no profit or hazard,
of profit or loss.

80. The nature of this Contract is, to have in it equality of profit and
loss, proportionable to the value and worth of the stock and work, which is
unalterable and undispensible by the nature of this Contract; and scarcely can
any paction or indirect course, be effectual in the contrair, because thereby
the Contract would become Usurary and void; which equality, as to the work and
industry is illiquid, and the value thereof is esteemed according to the common
estimate; but where there is a special value set upon it, by the private
consent of parties, which (as was said before of the private rate of parties)
without Fraud it is sufficient; so sometimes the value of the work is estimate
equal to the stock or industry of the other partner, and sometime the half,
third, or other proportion of it: But where the matter is clear, or where the
Society consists of a Stock in Money, the profit must necessarly be
proportionable thereto, and the hazard or loss accordingly; but if it be
agreed, that where the Stocks are equal, the one should have one third, and the
other two thirds of the profit or loss, or that one should bear the hazard of
the Stock of both, and the profit should be equal, or any other inequality, it
is clearly Usurary, unequal and unjust, neither does it subsist as a Donation,
unless so specially expressed and really meaned; for oftimes to make inconsistent
Contracts subsist, it is agreed, that the inequality, if any be, shall be a
Donation; but that is a mere color, and does work no effect, seeing the intent
of the Contract is truly to communicate like for like, and not to gift, and
that addition is but simulate or fraudulent: Hence Society may be described a
Contract, for communicating the profit or loss of that which is brought unto
the Society, proportionably according to the share and interest of each
partner. It is true that if there appear no inequality in the Stock and
industry of the partners, when no proportion is expressed, equal share of profit
and loss is understood; or if the skill or industry of some of the partners be
of great importance, the Society may consist in these terms, that these persons
shall have no share of the loss, and shall have such a share of the profit
according to the Sentence of Sulpitius, but if such inequality appear not, the
Sentence of Mucius, rejecting such inequality is just, and there is no
contrariety between the opinions of both,. 2 instit. de societate.

81. It remains to consider, what are the effects of Society while it is, and
how it cease: As to the first, the disposal and management of all the affairs
of Societies is in the whole partners, and each of them (though having an
unequal share) has an equal vote, unless it be otherways agreed, and the
common rule is, potior est conditio prohibentis, so that every one has a
Negative Vote, in Acts that are not necessary for the design of the Society,
unless by the custom, or paction, or deed of the parties, it be otherways
ordered; as where its the custom of the place, that in such Societies, there
should be a plurality, or when it is agreed that the minor part should give
place to, and is comprehended in the Acts of the major part, or when the
Society has been accustomed to act in such a way, not only the greater part,
but even one or more of the partners may continue that way, which is still held
to be the mind of the whole, unless the contrary be expressed; and therefore it
was found, where one of more partners in a Ship had fraughted her to a
dangerous Voyage, without the others consent, yet was not found liable for her
value, being lost by accident, where no just objection could be made against
the Skippers skill, July 22. 1673. John Sim contra William Abernethy. So
letting out of Lands, or setting out of Houses, employing of Moneys in a
Society, may be continued by one or more of the partners, and their actings
with extraneous persons, in name of the Society, do constitute the whole
Society Debtor or Creditor, or does acquire to them, or dispone from them. It
is also consistent with the nature of this Contract, to give a Negative Vote to
one or more of the Society, whose interest in the Stock, or whose skill and
industry is esteemed the greatest; but the simple nature of Society it self is,
the most tender ingadgement, and so if it be not otherways provided, it is
always dissolveable at the option, and the choice of any of the Society, and it
implys that the management is in the whole partners equally, and that every one
has a Negative Vote; and therefore, when it is Contracted to a time, that it
may not be parted from, in that case, the interest and end of the Society is
changed, and if the minor part will not cede to the Major part, or to
Arbitriment, it must be decided by the Judge ordinar, which of the parts is
most conduceable to the Society, but this being so great a retardment upon the
management of the affairs of the Society, it loses the fraternity among the
partners, and is sure to lose the pleasure and readily the profit of all:
Therefore the Romans did upon good grounds annul and disown all pactions,
whereby Society did continue beyond the life and pleasure of any of the
partners, except in few cases.

82. Society is finished; First, When the matter whereupon it is Contracted is
extinct.

Secondly, By the death or incapacity to act in the Society of any of the
partners; for it being one individual Contract of the whole, and not as many
Contracts as partners, it is like a sheaf of Arrows bound together with one
tie, out of which, if one be pulled, the rest will fall out, and the personal
humor of the partners is so chosen, that it is not supposed to be communicate
to their Heirs or Assigneys, unless by custom or paction the contrair be
provided, which, no doubt is consistent with, though not consequent from the
naure of Society.

Thirdly, It is most consonant to the nature of Society to be dissolved at the
option and pleasure of any of the partners, it being very contrair thereto, and
much impeding of the ends of it, that any should be continued a partner against
his own will; and therefore ordinarily, not only the express renunciation of the
Society, but any Contracting or Acting separatly in the matter of the Society
dissolveth it, yet propter bonam fidem, whatsoever is done with, or by the
Society, before the dissolution thereof be known, is valide; but this
dissolution at pleasure may be altered by custom, or consent of parties: And to
sum up all, in Society proportionable equality is essential and inseparable,
and all the other specialities are congruous and convenient, and therefore
understood, if by custom or consent it be not otherways ordered.

83. The same question is incident here, that before has been touched
concerning Mandats, when one or more of the parties act in the matter of the
Society, whether thereby the whole Society be obliged by the obligations of
these? Whether obligations made to these, constitute the Society Creditor? Or
whether real Rights acquired by these, are ipso facto, common to the Society?
Or if there be but an obligation upon the actors, to communicate, the property
always remaining in the actors, till they effectually communicate, the
resolution of this being the same with that in Mandats, we refer it thither,
and say only this in general, that when these parties only act in name of the
Society, and by its warrant express, or what they have been accustomed to do,
in so far they are not only partners, but Mandatars, and it has the same
effect, as if the Society had acted it self; but when they act not so, there
does only arise an obliegement upon the partners actors to communicate, in the
mean time the property remains in them: And if transmitted to others before
this communication, the Society will be thereby excluded, but the actors will
remain obliged for Reparation of the Damnage and Interest of the Society; and
this will hold, though things be bought or acquired by the common Money of the
Society: But all the natural interest, birth, fruit and profit of the Society,
is of it self and instantly common to the Society.

84. Partners are liable each to other, for such diligence as men do ordinarily
use, or the Partners themselves use in their own affairs; for this Contract
being undergone for the mutual good of either party, the diligence keeps the
middle way betwixt exact diligence and supine negligence, but none of them are
liable for what is lost by force or accident, without their fault.

Society has as many divisions, as has the various and multiform matter in
which it may be contracted; but that which is most noticed in Law is, that some
Societies are common and general, whereby parties communicate all their goods,
rights and interests, communicable; others are particular of one or more of
them; upon the first there are many questions arising, as how far the partners
may gift, or educat and provide their Children, so that the rest are obliged,
or understood to concur: But such Societies being altogether unaccustomed here,
it shall be vain to debate the properties of them.

85. These be the several kinds of Pactions and Contracts; there be other
distinctions of them, not from their nature, but from their adjuncts or
circumstancee, of which this is the chief, that Contracts may be celebrate,
either immediately or mediatly by the interposition of other persons, as
Mandatars, or Commissioners; concerning which it has been showen before, that
as there is a Contract betwixt the Mandant and Mandatar, so ofttimes there is a
Contract engaged betwixt the Mandant and a third party, who has acted with the
Mandatar according to his warrant; in which case ordinarily there is no Contract
or Obliegement betwixt the Mandatar and the third party; as he who buys Land
in name, and to the use of another by his warrant, the Lands are acquired to
him who gave the warrant, and he is obliged to pay the price to the seller,
but not his Mandatar, so the seller is obliged to deliver and warrant to him,
and not to the Mandatar.

To all manner of Promises and Contracts, Caution and Oaths may be accessory;
with which therefore, it shall not be improper to sum up this Title. Caution or
Surety is the Promise or Contracts of any, not for himself, but for another;
and therefore, this being a gratuitous engagement, having no equivalent cause
onerous, as to the Cautioner, it required a stipulation among the Romans to
make it effectual, though it was sometime by Mandats or Constitution; but now
every promise and paction, according to the Law of Nature, being effectual, it
is valid without Stipulation.

86. Caution is interposed any way, by which the consent is truly given, and
it may be either by Mandat or Commission, when the Mandator gives order or
warrant to Contract with any other party, to that parties behove; for then that
party is the principal Debtor, and the Mandator is Cautioner, or it may be by
taking on the Debt of another freely. This Cautioner in the Law is called
Expromissor, but is more improperly a Cautioner, seeing himself is principal,
having but an obligation of relief as Mandatar, or Negotiator: But the most
proper and ordinary Cautioner, is he who is obliged with, and for the
Principal Debtor, and is called, ad promissor, or fide jussor, because upon
his Faith or Trust the Creditor contracteth. These Cautionary Promises or
Contracts are of the same kind or nature with these, of which we have now
spoken, yet have they something peculiar, which we shall shortly touch, which
resolve in these Questions; First, Whether Cautioners are liable and
conveenable simply, or in so far as the principal Debtor is not solvendo, or
after discussing of him. Secondly, Whether Cautioners are liable, in solidum,
or pro rata.

87. As to the first, the nature and intent of Surety is, that the Creditor may
be secure of his Debt; and therefore Cautioners are not ordinarily decerned till
the Creditor assign the Debt, and all security they have for it from the
Principal, if they have not a distinct interest to retain the security, January
10. 1665. Lesly contra Gilbert Hay. July 10. 1666. Dam Margaret Hay contra
Crawford of Kerse.

88. Cautioners cannot be pursued till the principal Debtor be discust, unless
it be otherways Contracted or provided by the Custom or Law of the place: It
was contrary by the ancient Roman Law, l. jure nov. C. de fidei juss. which was
corrected by the Authentic Constitution, Coll. 1. Tit. 4. With us Cautioners
are frequently bound for, and with the Principal, as full Debitors, conjunctly
and severally, and thereby, ex pacto, the Question cease: But otherways the
Cautioner is understood to be obliged for the Principal Debitors performance,
and so is liable only subsidiarie after the Principal is discust, and specially
where the performance is a Trust or Deed, proper to the Principal Creditor;
thus Cautioners for Executors are only liable after the Executors are discust,
at least by Horning execute, June 27. 1610. John Sorogy contra Constable of
Dundee.

The like, though the Executor was alleged to be Bankrupt, July 24. 1662.
Birsbane contra Monteith. But a Cautioner for an Executor was discerned with
him, superceding execution against the Cautioner, till the Executor were first
discust, December 2. 1662. Douglas contra Lady Ormistoun. And Executors were
not holden discust by Horning, till Poynding were essayed, and search made for
his Movables, though none was condescended on, February 12. 1623. Arnot contra
Patrick Abernethy. The like, that search behoved to be made, both for Movables
and Lands, and they Appryzed, if any were; and that Horning and Caption
sufficed not, Hope Executors, Robert Stuart contra Thomas Fisher. But there is
no necessity in that discussing to call the Cautioners, December 5. 1623.
Ruchead contra Manderson. So the Diligence for discussing must be according to
the Estate of the Principal Debtor; if he have Movables, these must be
Poynded; if Lands, these must be Appryzed; if Debts, they must be Arrested and
made forthcoming.

89. Cautioners for Curators are not liable till they be discust; yet they were
decerned for constituting the Debt, with this quality, that before execution
against the Cautioners, the Curators should be discust in his Person, Goods and
Lands, November 20. 1627. Jean Rollock contra Corsbie.

90. Cautioners for the Factors in Camphire to the Burrows, found not (...)
till the Factors were discust, July 8. 1626. Smith contra But Cautioners for
these Factors were not found liable for the Goods sent to a Factor, after he
was known to the pursuer to be Bankrupt, March 4. 1630. Richee contra Paterson.
Cautioners in suspensions are only liable after discuscussing the suspenders,
and because by the Tenor of their Act or Bond, they are bound to pay what shall
be decerned against the suspender, if the Decree suspended be turned into a
Lybel, they are free; or if the reason of suspension was relevant and
instructed, though it were elided by an answer emergent after the suspension,
Spots. suspension John Weir contra John Bailie. And because of the tenor of the
Bond, and the unfavourableness of the matter, it was so strictly interpret,
that if the suspender dyed before he were discust, the Cautioner was free: Yet
by Act of Sederunt, Anno, 1649, all Cautioners were declared liable, though the
suspender dyed, if the Charge being transferred against his Heir or Executors,
if the Letters were found orderly proceeded, which is in use whenever the
Creditor insists in the suspended Decree, and obtains Sentence, in which the
Cautioners uses to be called. A Cautioner in a suspension of a real Action of
Poynding the ground, was not found liable to pay the Annualrent suspended, but
to warrant it, February 18. 1623. Blackburn contra Drysdail. A Cautioner in a
suspension was found liable, though his Bond of Cautionry contained a clause of
Relief, which was not signed by the suspender, seeing the Bond did not obliege
the Principal and the Cautioner to perform what should be decerned, but only
the Cautioner to perform, and the Principal to relieve him, January 6. 1681.
George Home contra Mr. Patrick Home. In which case, it was only found necessary
to discuss the suspender, and not the Cautioner, in the first suspension,
Ibidem.

91. Cautioners for loosing of Arrestments, are not Cautioners for those in
whose hands Arrestments are made, but for the Debtor, whose Goods or Money are
Arrested in lieu of the Arrestment, and yet they are no further liable then in
so far as was in the hand of the person against whom the Arrestment was used,
who therefore must be pursued before or with the Cautioner, that it may be
constitute, June 21. 1626. Lord Balmerino contra Lochinvar. And it may be
constitute against the Cautioners by the Oath of these in whose hands
Arrestment was made, February 22. 1627. inter eosdem.

92. Cautioners are liable according to the Oath of the principal Debtor,
which is a sufficient probation against them, because their obligation being
accessory, is liable to the same Probation with the Principal, as is clear from
the case last instanced; but it is more dubious, whether the Cautioners runs
all other hazard with the Principal Debtor, wherein, though the Cautioner of
an Executor was not admitted to propone exhausting, being proponed by the
Executor himself, and he failing therein, March 4. 1623. Wood contra Executors
of Ker. Yet it was found, that where exhausting was omitted by the Executor, it
was admitted for the Cautioner, being instantly verified, July 9. 1623. Arnot
contra Executors of Home and Mastertoun. And likewise, though the Principal
intented Reduction, and was holden as confessed by his Oath, de calumnia, yet
that was found not to prejudge the Cautioner, or to exclude him from insisting,
in proving that same point, January 22. 1629. Carberry contra Kello. Whence we
may conclude, that Collusion or wilful Omission, or negligence of the Principal
hinders not the Cautioner, but if the Principal, proponing any reason of
defense, used Probation by Witnesses, which was not found to prove the same, it
would not be again admitted to be proven by the Cautioner, with these or other
Witnesses; and therefore, a Cautioner was not secluded to prove a defense,
wherein the Principal succumbed, not being intimate to the Cautioner, December
11. 1673. Earl of Kinghorn contra Earl Wintoun.

93. Cautioners as Law will are liberat, if the Cause be Advocat upon
incompetency. The like of Cautioners judicio sisti, March 1. 1626. ^ because
the Caution was not warrantably taken being for a Debt only assigned to a
Burgess by a stranger; yet it will take place in other cases, where the
Citation was competent and warrantable if the inferior Judge do not put
parties so Arrested in Ward. The like, (...). de saetisdando, William Stuart
contra Archibald Hutchison. For though Advocation be obtained, the Cautioner as
Law will must sist the Principal, when he produces the Advocation, who must
then remain in Ward as he was before Caution was found, till the Cause be
(...), as was found, February 20. 1666. contra Hugh Mcculloch. The like found,
that a Cautioner judicio sisti and judicatum solvi, was Liberat by putting the
party in Prison, though not at the calling of the Cause, July 10. 1666. Thomson
contra (...).

94. Cautioners may be accessory to Obligations, though the Principal (...) be
not liable by any Statute or Custom, giving him a special privilege, as
Minors, or Wives cled with Husbands, November 28, 1623. Shaw contra (...). But
where the Obligation is in it self null, and has not so much as a natural
Obligation; if the Principal be free, the Cautioner is also free, as if the
Principal did not at all, or did not validly Subscribe, Hope fide jussor. The
like may be said of Obligations by Pupils, Fools or Furious Persons, whose
(...) are free with themselves. But a Cautioner was found liable for the whole
Sum, though the Principal Party subscribed but by one Notar, whereby he would
be only lyably for an hundred Pounds, July 8. 1680. Sophia Johnstoun contra the
Lord of Romano. And a Cautioner was found liable, though the Debtor having
received a Disposition of Movables from the Principal Creditor in security of
his Sum, promised not to trouble his Person or Goods, reserving power to
distress the Cautioner, July 12. 1680. Leitch of Monsie contra Mr. Andrew
Hedderwick.

As to the other question, Whether Cautioners be liable insolidum, unless they
be expressly bound conjunctly and severally? If they become Cautioners at
diverse times without relation one to the other, there is no doubt but as they
obliged themselves, so are they liable all insolidum; but when they obliege
together, or with relation to one another, the nature of the Deed imports no
more then Surety; so that each is liable for what is wanting by the Principal,
and what is wanting by the other Cautioners: but this holds even when parties
are bound, not only as Cautioners for, but as Principals with the Debtor, for
then they are liable only pro rata, unless they be bound conjunctly and
severally, or when the matter of the obligation is an indivisible Fact.

Cautioners ordinarily have no Action against the principal Debtor till they
be distressed, unless the Clause or Band of relief bear, to free, relieve and
skaithless keep them; yet where an Executour was becoming poor, the Cautioner
pursuing him to relieve him or find Caution, was thought by the Lords to have
interest so to do, January 19. 1627. Adam Thomson contra Lewis Moor.

If a Cautioner pay, without intimation to the principal Debtor in due time
before Litiscontestation, it is on his peril, and the Principal is not obliged
to relieve him, if he had a competent Defense that would have excluded the
Debtor, December. 19. 1632. Maxwel of Gribtoun contra Earl of Nithisdale.

Cautioners getting Assignation from the Creditor, whether they insist in the
Creditors name, or their own as his Assigneys, are obliged to allow their own
part, July 8. 1664. Nisbet contra Leslie; in this cause there was a Clause of
mutual relief amongst the Cautioners. Co-principals bound conjunctly and
severally, are mutually as Cautioners for their shares, and are liable to
relieve other, though there were no express clause of relief, which hold also
in cocautioners, though there were no clause of mutual relief amongst the
Cautioners, June 19. 1662. Wallace contra Forbes. Co-cautioners were found
liable for relief ex natura rei, without an express clause of relief, January
27. 1675. Monteeth contra Rodger. Cautioners having paid, if they seek their
relief from the other Cautioners, any ease they get on special favor to
themselves, hinders not to obtain of the rest their full proportion; but if
they get ease by transaction, or upon account of question of the debt, they can
ask no more then what they truly gave out, allowing their own share, as was
found in a Charge to the Cautioners behove against the Co-cautioner, July 27.
1672. Joseph Brodie contra Alexander Keith: June 28. 1665. Monteith contra
Anderson. A Cautioner in a Suspension of a Bond wherein there were five
Cautioners, being distressed, and having paid and obtained Assignation from the
Creditor, was found to have access against the first four Cautioners, allowing
only his own fifth part, Febr. 23. 1671. Arnold of Barncaple against Gordoun of
Holm.

97. As Caution, so Oaths are accessory to all Promises, Pactions and
Contracts; not these declaratory Oaths which are ordinary in the discussing of
Rights, whereby all persons are bound to declare the truth upon oath as
witnesses, or as parties against themselves in civil Causes; but promissory
Oaths, whereby they promise to observe or fulfill any thing active, or passive
never to quarrel it; concerning which Oaths, there is no small matter of debate
among Lawyers, what effect they have: all do agree, that in so far as any
promise can be effectual, a promissory oath is valid, and has this much of
advantage, that the Creditor is the more secure, because he may justly expect,
the Debtor will be more observant of his oath then of his ordinary paction,
seeing the penalty of the violation of an oath deserves a more attrocious
judgment than any other, God being called as a Witness and Judge: which effect
it has, though adhibit to that which by the matter has an anterior
obligation; as obligations betwixt Husband and Wife, Parents and Children, in
these things in which they are mutually obliged, or where there has preceded
or is conjoined an obligator Contract, which of it self is binding without an
oath. 2. All do also agree, that Oaths interposed in things unlawful, not only
as to the manner, but as to the matter, are not obligator; so no man justifies
Herod, for taking John Baptists head without cause, upon pretense of his oath.
3. All do agree, that in matters free, and in our own power as Contracts are
obligator, so also are Oaths.

The question then remains, Whether in acts civiliter inefficacious, the
interposition of an Oath can give efficacy; or whether that which is done in
debito modo, becomes valid by an Oath to perform it, or not to impunge it, and
if that efficacy will not only extend to the swearer, but to his heirs or
successors. Of this there are multitudes of cases and examples debated among
Civilians; by the Civil Law, naked Pactions are not efficacious to ground any
Action upon; quaeritur, whether if the Paction be with an Oath, the Creditor
may not effectually pursue thereupon? By Law likewayes, the deeds of Minors,
having Curators not consenting, are null; but if the Minor swear not to quarrel
them quid juris, Minors laesed have by Law the benefit of restitution, but if
they do the deed upon oath to perform it, or not to quarrel it, whether if they
pursue to reduce it, will they be excluded by their Oath; or if a Wife be
obliged personally for debt, and swear to perform it, or never to come in the
contrair, Whether yet she may defend her self with her privilege; or if a
woman's Land given her for security of her Tocher donatione propter nuptias, be
sold by her Husband with her consent, which the Law declares null, Whether her
oath interposed will validate it, or if pactum Legis Commissoriae in
pignoribus, confirmed with an oath will be valid, or if an oath for performance
will exclude the common exceptions of fear, force or fraud: And innumerable
such cases, whereby positive Law prohibiteth any act to be done, or declares
it void simply, or void if it be not done in such a manner, and with such
solemnities.

For clearing of these and the like cases, we are chiefly to consider, quae
sunt parts Judicis, or what is the Judge his duty in deciding cases wherein
oaths are interposed, rather than what concerns the parties, and the
obligations upon their conscience by these oaths in foro poli; and therefore,
we shall take up the matter distinctly in these ensuing points.

First, if an Action be pursued upon a ground ineffectual in Law, albeit the
Defender has interposed an oath never to come in the contrair, yet that which
would not be sustained by the Judge, though the Defender should not appear or
object, which is ineffectual of it self, in that case the interposition of an
oath has no effect: as if by the Civil Law, an Action were intented upon a
promise or a naked paction, with an oath interposed, the Action would not be
sustained, albeit the Defender should not appear, or appearing should not
object, that it were a naked paction. Or, if a Declarator should be intented,
to declare pactum legis commissoriae in pignoribus to be valid and effectual,
though it were lybelled, that the other party did swear never to come in the
contrair, yet the Judge could not sustain such an Action, nor generally can
sustain any Action which is unjust or irrelevant, albeit it should not be
opposed, but consented to simply, or with an oath never to quarrel it, because
in such cases, pactis privatorum non derogatur juri communi. The consent or
oath of no party can make that just which is unjust, nor can make that
sufficient or effectual, that is deficient in its essentials; as if any party
should grant a Disposition of Lands or Annual-rents, and declare, that it
should be effectual for poinding the ground without Infeftment, and should
swear never to come in the contrair thereof, if thereupon the obtainer should
pursue poinding of the ground, the same could not be sustained, because these
Rights are defective in their essentials, wanting Infeftment; and yet in these
cases, if the party should object, or any way hinder the effect of their oath,
they contraveen the same: But the Judge not sustaining the same, does no wrong,
because his not sustaining proceeds upon a defect of an essential requisite,
and not because of any exception or objection of the party: from this ground it
is, that if a Wife be pursued or charged upon a Bond for Debt subscribed by
her, bearing expressly her to be designed a Wife, though it were condescended on
that she made faith never to come in the contrair; the Lords would not sustain
the pursuit or Charge, because by the very Action it self it appears, that
the Summonds or Charges are irrelevant, and contrair to Law, which declares a
Wifes Bond for Debt ipso jure null; and therefore, though she may be faulty in
suspending, or hindering the performance of the engagement of her oath, the
Lords do justly reject such an irrelevant Libel or Charge, as they did in the
case betwixt and Catharine Douglas, Feb. 18. 1663. where her Band was suspended
simpliciter, as being expressly granted by a wife, though she judicially made
faith never to come in the contrair: or if the husband should suspend and
allege, that such an Obligation or Oath could not be effectual against his
Goods, or the person of his Wife in his prejudice, there could be neither wrong
on his part, nor on the Judges part. 2. If either Action or Exception be
founded upon that which is not defective in essentials, but in circumstantials,
ordained and commanded by Law, the defect thereof may be supplied by the other
parties consent, much more by their oath; and in that case, quae fieri non
debent facta valent: for every prohibition of Law does not anull the deed done
contrair thereto, but infers the penalty of Law upon the doer, as Tacks of
Teinds are prohibit to be set by Prelates for longer then nineteen years, Parl.
1617. cap. 4. Yet it was found, that a Tack granted for a longer time was not
thereby null, November. 9. 1624. Mr. Thomas Hope contra the Minister of
Craighall: So likewayes, members of the College of Justice are prohibit to
buy Pleas; yet the Right acquired thereto was not found null, or Process
refused thereupon, but that it might be a ground of deprivation, June 5. 1611.
Adam Cunningham Advocat contra Maxwel of Drumcoultroun. In like manner, the
solemnities of Marriages are prescribed in Law, and all prohibit to proceed any
other way; so they are appointed to be publicly solemnized by a Minister, and
the consent of paretns are required; yet the want of these will not anull the
Marriage, because it is a divine Obligation which cannot receive its essentials
from positive Law or Statute: Whence it is justly said, Mult a impediunt
Matrimonium contrahendum que non dirimunt Contractum. It is not therefore the
prohibition of Law that anulleth an Act, but the Law must expressly anull it, or
at least declare such points as the essential requisites to such Deeds or
Rights: some Deeds are declared null ipso jure, and others are only anullable
open exceptionis, or by way of restitution, or at least where something in fact
must be alleged and proven; which does not appear by the Right or Deed it
self, and so belongs not to the Judge to advert to, but must be proponed by
the party: in these an oath interposed does debar the swearer from proposing or
making use of such exceptions and allegiances; and therefore, neither may the
party justly propone the same, nor the Judge justly sustain the same, for there
be many things of themselves relevant and competent in Law, which yet may be
excluded by a personal objection, against the proponer; for in many cases,
allegeances competent to parties may be renounced, so that though they be
relevant, that personal objection will exclude the proponer, but his Oath is
much stronger then his Renunciation; and therefore, seeing such points are not
parts judicis, nor consistent in any intrinsic nullity or defect, though the
Law allow or prescribe them, yet it does not mention or express, that though
the party in whose favors they are introduced renunce them simply, or with an
Oath, that these shall be admitted; and therefore, they are justly to be
repelled, being in detrimentum animae, of the proponer. This ground solveth
most of the cases before proponed; for if a Minor pursue Restitution upon
Minority and Laesion, his Oath to perform, or not to quarrel the deed in
question, excludes him, both by the Civil Law and our Custom, by the
authentic sacramenta puberum spontefacta, super contractibus rerum suarum non
retractandis, inviolabiliter custodiantur, C. si adversus vend. It was so
decided in an obliegement by a Minor, to quite twenty Chalders of Victual,
provided in his Contract of Marriage, January 15. 1634. Sir Robert Hepburn
contra Sir John Seatoun, where it was found that the Oath was valide, though
not judicial. The like was found, that a Minor having given a Bond for his
fathers Debt, whom he represented not, and being sworn not to come in the
contrair, the same was not reduced upon Minority and Laesion, February 10.
1672. Mr. George Waugh contra Bailzie of Dunraget. Upon this same ground, a
Minor having Curators not consenting, swearing to perform his Obligation, or
never to come in the contrair, his exception of its being null, because it
consists in Fact, and must be proven that he was Minor, and that he had
Curators, may justly be repelled, and he excluded from proponing thereof, in
respect of his Oath, seeing it is not the part of the Judge to know or advert
thereto; but his Curators who have not sworn may, yea, must propone that
nullity, because they have not sworn.

On this ground likeways, the exception or reason of Reduction upon force or
fear is excluded, if the party have sworn to perform, or not quarrel the deed,
which is the sentence of the Canon Law, not only as to Wifes consent, to the
alienation of Lands given to them, donatione propter nuptias, which is both
null, and presumed to be granted upon her fear or reverence of her Husband, C.
licet mulieris, l. 6. de jure jurando C. cum continget de jure jurando, whereby
such consents and oaths, being interposed, are declared to be valide; but
generally, that no deed having an oath interposed, can be recalled upon an
alledgeance of force and fear, C. 3, and 4. de iis quae vim metumve; albeit the
Pope assumes to himself liberty to absolve from such oaths as are done upon
fear, yet they are declared of themselves to be valide, which our Custom
follows, and was so decided, Parl. 1481. cap. 83. and was so decided by the
Lords, July 4. 1642. Agnes Grant contra Balvaird, where a Wife was excluded
from the Reduction of the alienation of her Liferent Lands, super vi and metu,
because she had judicially ratified the same, and sworn never to come in the
contrair; neither was it respected, that the Oath as well as the Disposition
was by force and fear, this is the great foundation of all public Transactions
betwixt different parties and Nations, where ofttimes the one party is induced
through fear, to that which otherways they would not yield to; and yet both
parties acquiesce in the Religion of an Oath interposed: So the Oath of Israel
to the King of Babylon was binding upon them, though thereby the people of God
subjected themselves to a Heathen King; and therefore they are accused by
Jeremiah for breach thereof, and likewise for breaking the Oath to their
Servants, whom they manumitted upon mere necessity, for their defense.

From this reason it is, that the exception or reason of Reduction upon
deception, Fraud or Circumvention is excluded, if an Oath be interposed,
whereof we have the most eminent example, of the Oath of the People of Israel
to the Gibeonites, who purposely deceived and circumveened them, feigning
themselves to be a people far off, though they were of the Hivites, whom Israel
was commanded utterly to destroy; against which judicial Precept, they being
induced through error and deceit to swear, the Oath was binding on them and
their posterity, and was punished upon Saul for breach thereof. From this
instance we have occasion to return to the last case, whether Oaths be only
personal oblieging the swearer, and so inherent to their persons that they bind
not their Heirs, wherein some are for the affirmative, that even Heirs are
obliged, as being fictione juris eadem persona cum defuncto, which is also
fortified by the punishment in the Successors of Israel, in the days of Saul;
but I rather incline to the Negative, that Heirs are not obliged, but only the
persons who swear, which is the more common opinion of Lawers, Civilians, and
Canonist's; nor does the instance infer the contrary, because Oaths by
Societies and Incorporations, continue not as to their Heirs, but because the
Society dies not, and is ever the same, especially in Contracts betwixt
Nations, where the parties intend not to obliege particular persons, then
living, but the Nation; neither does the fiction of Law operate in this case;
for no position or fiction of Law can either extend or abriege the obligation
of an Oath, which is alterius and superioris juris.

There remains yet this Objection, that if Oaths be so effectual, great
inconveniences will follow, a door being opened to Force and Fraud, for the
same facility that parties are induced to act, they will be induced to confirm
it by an Oath. It is answered, in commodum non solvit argumentum; which
therefore was not regarded in the case of Agnes Grant contra Balvaird, but
there may be a remeid by severe punishment upon parties, who shall induce
others to swear to their own hurt, which the Prince may inflict, and repair the
damnage of the laesed; it is true, if the fear be such as stupifieth, and takes
away the act of reason, there is nothing done, because there can no Contract in
its substantials consist without the knowledge and reason of the party; or if
the deceit be in substantialibus, as if a man should by mistake Marry one woman
for another, there is nothing done, but when an act of reason is exercised: But
upon motives by fear, error, or mistake, the deed is in it self valid, but
annullable by the Fear or Fraud, which are excluded by the Oath, against which
they cannot be alleged by the party who has sworn, but may be proponed by his
Heirs, Executors, or Cautioners, or any other having interest.

Having now spoken of the several kinds of Obligations, before we go over to
real Rights, it is fit to touch the common considerations that fall into all or
most Obligations, as to the implement or performance thereof, viz. delay,
interest, profit, time, place, and manner of performance.

98. Delay or mora, is not that time, which by the adjection of a day or
condition, or by Law is allowed to perform, but that time which runs after
lawful delay is past, and is the Debitors fault, in not performing his
Obligation, so that it seldom makes any part of the Contract, whereupon the
Obligation arises, except penalties be adjected in case of delay, or an
estimation made of the interest.

Delay is incurred in pure Obligation by interpellation or requisition, for
when no term is prefixed, the option of the Debtor is the time of performance,
and though requisition be most clear and secure by Instrument of a Nottar; and
therefore, verbal requisition by a Merchant to a Skipper, to loose after the
Ship was loadened, was not found sufficient without an Instrument, where the
Charter party had no definite term, but to do diligence to transport the
Fraught, February 14. 1678. David Calderwood contra James Angus: Yet in some
cases that is not necessar, but being only emission of words, it will only be
probable by the Debitors Oath or Write. In Obligations to a day, delay is
incurred by the passing of the term, nam dies interpellat pro homine. In
Obligations Conditional, delay connot be till the condition be purified, and
even then, either requisition or a term is requisite, for it is frequent in
Obligations Conditional to add a term also, so that the existence of the
condition makes the Conditional Obligation to become pure, and so requisition
is to be used before delay, if no term be expressed; but if there be no party who
can require or be required, delay is incurred, if performance be not made so
soon as it can be, as is in the case of the Restitution of things found, or
come in the hands of others without Contract, which is seldom known to the
owner. So also in Obligations due to Pupils, delay is incurred without
requisition, l. 1.. ult. de ujuris. And in Obligations by Delinquence, delay is
without requisition, and runs from the first time performance can be made.

Till delay, legal execution is not competent ordinarily, because none should be
pursued till he have failed: Yet in some cases the Debtor may be pursued
before the term, to pay at the Term, as si vergat adinopiam: Yea, in removing
it seems very expedient, to pursue the party warned, even before the Term, to
remove at the Term, otherways the Lands cannot be safely set, the Tennent not
knowing if others will remove willingly, and may not be uncertain in that
point, which is a public Interest, for setting Land, and preventing wast; but
upon all Obligations which are truly contracted, the legal diligences of
Arrestment or Inhibition may be used even before requisition, or the term of
performance.

The ordinar effect of delay is, that when the Obligation is to give or deliver
any thing, if it perish, even without the Debitors fault, it perishes to the
Debtor, and must be made good to the Creditor, unless it appear that it would
have so perished with the Creditor, which seldom can be made appear, because it
is ordinarily presumed, that if the thing had been delivered, the Creditor would
have disposed of it, and so been free of the hazard, especially if it be a
thing for sale, not for keeping, and if an occasion was offered, to have
disposed thereof.

99. The next effect of delay, is the interest or damnage of the Creditor; for
if the Obligation be performed within the due time, and in due manner, there is
no interest; if not, after the delay incurred by requisition or term, it is in
the Creditors option to pursue for performance or for damnage and interest. But
in some cases delay may be purged, which is much in arbitrio judicis, and is
always granted in things penal, where the penalty is great and exceeds the true
interest, as in non-payment of Few Duties, which infers loss of the Few. And in
Clauses irritant, in Wodsets. When delay is purged, the hazard returns upon the
Creditor, and the Debtor is free, if the thing to be delivered perish; but if
the Creditor do again! equire, after the former delay is purged; delay is again
incurred by that new requisition.

This is a general rule, (...) factiimprestabilis subit damnum and interesse,
yet in some cases if the delay be wilful or fraudulent, that the thing might
become imprestable, all personal execution by escheat, and Caption will proceed.

Interest may either be competent for the whole Obligation, as when it is
imprestable, or when any part or qualification is unperformed, or the value
thereof.

Interest does both comprehend damnum emergens and lucrum cessans. The first is
commonly competent, the last but in some cases, and that ordinarily for such
gain as the Creditors used to make; and so the delay of Bills of Exchange,
gives Exchange and Re-exchange, as the Creditors condition requires, but would
give neither, when not drawn for the use of a Merchant, or him that behoved to
obtain the sum for a Merchant, for present use. In Ejections, Spuilzies, and
other attrocious Delinquences, the greatest profits that might have been made,
are allowed as the Creditors interest. In Obligations which are not in dando,
but in faciendo, the common opinion of the Doctors is, that there can be no
pursuit for performance, but only for interest; for before the delay there is
no pursuit, and after, the Debtor cannot pursue for performance but for
interest, l. 13. in fine ff. de re judicata; but it seems more suitable to
equity, that it should be in the Debitors option, even after the delay, either
to suit for performance or interest, as he pleases, if both be prestable.

In Obligations in dando, where there is delay incurred, it will not be purged
by offering performance, especially, if the thing have a certain definite
season of its use, as Grain of such a year, if it be not delivered, debito
tempore, the delay will not be purged by offering it after, but the price comes
in place of it.

In Interests, the value thereof may either be that which is agreed by parties,
which, if high and penal, may be modified, or ordinarily the common rate, and
sometimes pretium affectionis, in these cases where the Creditor has
juramentum in litem, the value was estimate by the Romans, in bonae fidei
(...), as at the time of Sentence, in stricti juris, as it was worth the time
of Litiscontestation, this distinction is not now of much use with us; and
therefore, it is rather in the arbitriment of the Judge, to ponder all
Circumstances, and accordingly modifie the value, either as at the time of
delay, at Citation, Litiscontestation, or Sentence.

100. Profits which comprehends Fruits, is a part of the Creditors interest in
sale, for by the special nature of that Contract all Accessions and Fruits
belong to the buyer, from the time of the sale, and so it it a part of that
Contract; but in other Contracts it is only due, post moram, and is no part of
the Contract. The Sentence of the Roman Law is in this, as in the estimation
for in actionibus bonae fidei, and Arbitrary, Fruits and Profits become due
from delay, which also take place in Legacies; but in these which are fructi
juris, if the Obligation be to deliver that which was the Creditors before, the
Fruits and Profit follow the property, and are due from delay; but where the
property was not the Creditors, the Fruits are not due till Litiscontestation,
l. 3. and l. 34. and l. 38. ff. de usuris.

101. The time of performing Obligations, is at, or before the Term, in
Obligation to a day so soon as requisition is made, which cannot be understood
in that instant, if the thing require more time to perform it; but such time is
allowed, that by ordinar diligence it may be performed so, that delay is not
understood till that be past, as when a party is obliged to do a work, he must
have so much time as the work requires; or if Money be required, if the Debtor
offer within twenty four hours, it would not infer delay, for it is not his
part to carry a sum of Money about him, nor to have it ready each instant, and
pasiing an instant, the strickest time Law respects, is an artificial day or
twenty four hours, if the Debtor offer before the day the Creditor cannot
refuse it, seeing the day is in favor of the Debtor, and so may be renounced
by him, if a Term be expressed there needs no requisition, nam dies interpellat
pro homine.

102. The place for performing Obligations, if it be expressed, is to be
observed, and another place cannot be obtruded, though it may seem as
convenient for the Creditor, unless there be not safe access to that place, in
which case, the Debtor may offer, and the Creditor may pursue as if no place
were named; in which case he has the choice to pursue either in the place of
the Contract, if he find the Debtor there, or where ever the Debtor is
conveenable, and even where the place is expressed, the Creditor may else where
pursue for performance, if he allow the Debitors damnage, in not paying at the
place appointed; but if the thing to be performed be delivery of a certain
species or body, which cannot follow a man as a Horse or a Dog, but an inanimat
body, as a Coatch, Coffer, Cabin, or the like, if no place be expressed, the
place where it is must be understood, but if it be a quantity, simply the place
of Contract, or where the Debtor resides, is understood, for the Debtor is
not presumed to follow the Creditors Residence, if Custom or Paction be not
contrair.

103. As to the manner of performing Obligations, the main Question is, when
there are correi credendi, or debendi, whither performance must be by all, in
solidum, or but pro rata? For eviting the question, Debitors use to be bound
conjunctly and severally, but when that is omitted, the Debitors are understood
to be but bound conjunctly, and pro rata, for in dubiis potior est conditio
debitoris, if the Debitors were bound by several Obligations, not relating to
others as becoming parts of the same Obligation, all are bound severally and in
solidum; but when they are bound together in one Bond, and so correi debendi:
By the ancient Roman Law, they were all liable, in solidum, which was altered
by Justinians novel constitution, giving the benefit of division, pro rata, as
to these who are solvent and not far absent, which as more equitable and
favorable is followed, unless the matter of the Obligation be indivisible, as
the delivery of a Man, a Horse, or any thing which the Law considers not as
quantity or genus, but as corpus; for ofttimes that cannot be divided without
destruction of the thing, and always its the Creditors interest that it should
not be divided.

Secondly. Obligations in suciendo, are ordinarily indivisible, l. stipul. ff.
de verborum oblig. as was lately found in an Obligation by two owners of a
Ship, to carry Corns from one Port to another, both were found liable in
solidum; or if the Obligation be, in non faciendo, that such a thing shall not
be done, but that they shall hinder, each is obliged in solidum, June 14.
1672. Sutherland and Grant contra Flut. This also concerns the manner of
performance, that in alternatives, electio est debitoris, whose part is more
favorable, but the adjection of a penalty or estimation makes not the
Obligation alternative: But if any of the Members of the alternative, become
not entire the Debtor connot offer that Member, January 18. 1675. Collector of
the King and Lords Taxation contra Inglis of Straitoun.

The manner also of performance admitts not that the Debtor may perform by
parts that which he is obliged to by on Obligation, if it be not that which
cannot be performed all at once, as the performance of some Acts, requiring
diverse seasons, but otherways it must be done without intermission, for neither
can Money or Grain be delivered at one instant; but that is understood to be
performed together, which is without intermission; yet the Civil Law favors
the Debtor so far, that the Creditor cannot refuse to accept a part of the
Money due.

TITLE XI. Liberation from Obligations.
1. Obligations cease by contrary consent, by Discharge, Declaration,
Renunciation, or per pactum de non pentendo. 2. Three subsequent Discharges
Liberat from preceedings. 3. Payment made, bona fide. 4. Consignation; 5.
Acceptilation; 6. Compensation; 7. Retention; 8. Innovation; 9. Confusion.
HAVING thus run through the constitution and effects of Conventional
Obligations, It is requisite in the next place, to consider their destitution
and how they cease, which we have expressed in the general term of Liberation,
comprehending not only payment, but all the ways by which Obligations, or Bonds
are dissolved or loosed, and Debitors Liberat; We are not here to speak of the
Objections competent against Obligations from their nullities, for such were
never truly Obligations; neither of the common exceptions against them, and
other Rights, as Prescription, Litiscontestation, res judicata, Circumvention,
Extortion, etc. of which in their proper places: But only of the proper ways of
taking away Obligations; and these are either by contrair consent, or by
performance, or the equivalent thereof.

1. First, As consent constituteth, so contrary consent destituteth any
Obligation, whether it be by Declaration, Renunciation, Discharge. or per
pactum de non petendo, which may be extended, not only to Conventional, but to
Natural Obligations, as to any duty omitted or transgressed, which is past,
though not to the discharge of the Obligation it self, as to the future, for
love to God or our Neighbor, and most of the Duties betwixt Husbands and
Wives, Parents and Children, cannot be Discharged as to the future; neither can
future Fraud or Force be effectually Discharged, for such, cadunt in turpem
causam; If the Write be special and express, there can be no question when it
concerns a personal Right, and is given by the party having power to Discharge;
and therefore, a Discharge of a clause in a Bond, constituting an Annualrent,
whereupon Infeftment followed, for a sum lent by a Father, and taken to his Son
in Fee, and bearing, with power to the Father during his life to Dispone, was
found valid, and that it required not Registration, as a Discharge of
Reversion, January 6. 1681. Mary Bruce contra Patrick Hepburn. But a Discharge
of an Annuity, belonging to an office by infeftment, containing a renunciation
of that annuity, was not found Relevant against an Appryzer, December 9. 1679.
Lord Hattoun contra the Town of Dundee. Neither did a Discharge of a sum,
payable to a man and his Wife, and the Bairns of the Marriage, subscribed only
by the Husband, exclude the Wife from her Liferent Right to that sum, January
22. 1680. Isobel Caddel contra John Raith. Neither was a Discharge to a
Cautioner, upon payment found competent to the principal Debtor, unless the
Cautioner concur, for the Principal may be distressed by the Cautioner, using
the name of the Creditor as his Cedent, July 13. 1675. Margaret Scrimzour
contra the Earl of Southesk. A Discharge to one or more Debitors, Viz.
Con-tutors found not to liberat the rest, except in so far as satisfaction was
made; or as the other Con-tutors would be excluded from relief by the party
Discharged, December 19. 1669. Seatoun contra Seatoun. But payment made by one
party, whose Lands were affected by Inhibition, did Liberat the rest, pro
tanto, though it bore not in satisfaction, but to restrict the Inhibition,
January 5. 1675. Ballantine contra Edgar. But Discharges by Masters to Tennents
for Rent, by their Subscription, without Witnesses, and not being holograph,
are sustained, in regard of the custom so to Discharge, November 7. 1674. John
Boyd contra Story. And by the same custom, receipts and discharges of Merchants
and Factors, in re mercatoria, are sufficient by the parties subscription,
albeit neither holograph, nor with Witches.

But the main Question is, how far general Discharges are to be extended, which
are of two sorts; One where there are particulars Discharged with a general
Clause, and then the general is not extended to matters of greater importance
then the greatest of the particulars, February 24. 1636. Lawson contra Ark
Inglas. The other is, where the Discharge is only general without particulars,
which uses not to be extended to Clauses of Warandice, Clauses of Relief, or
obliegements to Infeft, or to purchase real Rights; and therefore, a Discharge
of all Debts, Sums of Money, Bonds, Obligations, Clags, Claims, for whatsoever
cause, was found not to Discharge a Contract for purchasing an Appryzing of
Lands, and Disponing the same November 19. 1680. Beatrix Dalgarn contra the
Lord of Tolquhon. Neither was a Discharge wholly general, extended to an
Obligation by the party Discharged as Cautioner, unless it were proven that the
Discharge was granted upon satisfaction of that Debt, Hope, Bonds, Ogilbie
contra Napier. But it was extended to Contravention, though there was a Decree
after the Discharge, Hope Contravention, Lord of Aitoun contra his Brother.
Yea, a general Discharge in a Decree Arbitral, was found to Liberat the
submitters Cautioner, Hope, Bonds, Lady Balmastiner and her Son contra
Alexander (...). Neither was a general Discharge, found to extend to a sum
assigned by the Discharger before the Discharge, albeit the Assignation was not
intimat, seeing the Discharger was not presumed to know the want of the
Intimation, unless it were proven that the sum was particularly commoned upon,
or satisfied at obtaining the general Discharge, February 3. 1671. Blair of
Bagillo contra Blair of Denhead. Neither was a general Discharge extended to
sums, whereuto the Discharger succeeded after the Discharge, February 14. 1633.
Halyburtoun contra Huntar.

2. Three subsequent Discharges, do presume that all preceedings are past from;
As first, The Discharges of three immediate subsequent years Rent, June 21.
1610. Nowison contra Hamiltoun. This was sustained, though the Discharges were
only granted by a Chamberlain, Hope, Clause irritant, Lord of Wedderburn
contra John Nisbit, this was sustained to purge a Clause irritant; yea, though
some of the Discharges were granted by the Father, and the rest by the Son as
Heir, February 17. 1631. Williamson contra the Lord of Bagillo, which was
extended to by gones, though a Bond was granted for them, the Bond bearing
expressly for a Term, and having lain over very long, and all subsequent Terms
paid, March 18. 1634. Douglas contra Bothwel. But Discharges of three
subsequent years, granted by Merchants, who had bought Ferms, did not Liberat
from former years, March 26. 1626. Minister of Corstorphen contra Neither where
the Discharges were not in Write, February 19. 1631. Moristoun contra Tennents
of Eastnisbit. Neither where the payment of three Terms, was acknowledged by
the parties oath, which bore not three Terms immediately subsequent, March 26.
1622. Kennedy contra Dalrymple of Stair. Nor where there were two years
Discharges and Receipts, making up the third, March 28. 1631. Lord of (...)
contra Wood; and therefore, Receipts, though being joined, they would make up
more then three years; infer not this presumption, that all preceding years
are paid, yea, one Discharge for three consequent Terms or years, would not
infer the same; for the presumption is mainly inferred from the reiteration of
the Discharges without reservation, which no prudent man is presumed to do; the
presumption is also introduced in favors of Debitors, that they be not
obliged to preserve forty years Discharges; and therefore, if the payment be
Annual, there must be three Discharges, of three years immediately following one
another, as in the payment of Ferms; but if the payment be Termly, as in
Annualrents, or Silver Rents, the ground of the presumption holds by three
several Discharges, of three immediate subsequent Terms, Hope, Bonds, David
Weyms contra the Lady St. Colmb. But as to the Discharges of Factors or
Chamberlains, three subsequent Discharges are sufficient against the
Chamberlain, during his Commission, and against his Constituent, who gave him
power to Discharge, during that Commission: But the presumptions from
Discharges of the Chamberlains will not always hold, as if the former
Chamberlain Discharge two Terms, and the later one; much more, if the former
Discharge one Term, and the later two; But if there be three consequent
Discharges from two immediate Chamberlains, though they will not infer
presumptionem juris, which the Law has acknowledged; yet they may infer
presumptionem judicis: But the strongest of these presumptions admits of
contrary Probation by the Debtor, that he knows there are preceding Rents,
which his Write will not prove, though he should acknowledge in Write, so much
resting at such a time; for three subsequent Discharges thereafter, will
presume that rest paid, though still his oath may prove it is not paid; so
that the strongest of these presumptions, though they be presumptiones juris,
yet they are not presumptiones juris and de jure, which admit of no contrary
Probation.

The more proper way of dissolving Obligations is by performance, by which they
attain their effect, and that is either by payment, or consignation; the more
Improper ways are Acceptilation, Compensation, Innovation, Confusion; of which
in order.

3. Payment is the most proper lousing of Obligations, and therefore retains
the common name of Solution;

And therefore, in many cases payment made, bona fide, dissolveth the
Obligation, though he to whom it was made, had no right for the time. So
payment made to a Procurator, was thought sufficient, albeit the Procuratory
were thereafter improven, seeing there was no visible ground of suspicion of the
falsehood of it, February 15. 1661. Elphingstoun of Selms contra Lord Rollo, and
Lord of Niddery. And payment made by Hererors to their Ministers, who were
suffered to continue to Preach, was sustained, though they had not obtained
Presentation, or Collation, conform to the Act of Parliament, 1661. seeing no
Process Civil or Ecclesiastical, was intented against them, nor the Heretors
before payment, February 10. 1666. Collector of the vacand Stipends contra
Heretors of Maybole and Girvan. And payment made to a Minister, though he was
deposed, having continued to Preach after the Term, before intimation of the
deposition, was sustained, but not for Terms after the intimation, February 10.
1679. College of Aberdene contra Earl of Aboyn. So also payment made by a
debtor to his creditor, bona fide, was found sufficient to Liberat, against an
Appryzer, who had appryzed the Right of that sum, before payment made, albeit
the Appryzing, as a Judicial Assignation, was sound to need no intimation, as
was found in the case of Thomson contra Elizabeth Douglas Lady Longsormacus.
And payment made, bona fide, to a Donatar, was found relevant against a prior
Donatar, Hope, Horning, James Wright contra Thomas Wright. And most ordinarily
payment made, bona fide, by Tennents to their old Master, is found relevant
against singular Successors, though publicly Infeft, using no diligence to put
the Tennents in mala fide, Spots. Appryzing, Lord Lowdoun contra the Tennents
of Jedburgh. And payment by Tennents to their Master, was sustained against the
Donatar of his Escheat, not having obtained Declarator, February 10. 1610.
Blackburn contra Wilson. Neither will Citations against Tennents, or
Arrestments upon the Titles of singular Successors, put them in mala fide, to
pay to their Master, till the Titles of the singular Successors be judicially
produced against the Tennents compearing, because Tennents are not obliged, as
purchasers to search Registers to find their Masters Rights, or the Rights of
singular Successors; yea, the Arrestments of their Masters Rents not insisted
upon, and their Masters Debts instructed before the Term, seem not to infer
double payment, against the Tennents, paying after their Terms are past: But
payment made before the hand does not liberat, against Donatars Arresting and
doing diligence after payment before the Term, February last 1628. Lord of
Lauchop contra Tennents of Cleghorn. February 5. 1667. Lady Traquair contra
Marion Houatson. But it will not be accounted payment before the hand, if by
the condition of the Tack, the first Terms payment be made at the entry, and
the Tennents to be free at the ish, January 7. 1662. Earl of Lauderdail contra
Tennents of Swintoun. Neither will a Discharge freely granted, without true and
real payment, besufficient, though it bear payment, to obtain the privilege of
payment, bona fide, as was found in the foresaid case, Thomson contra Douglas.
Payment made by Tennents, bona fide, to their Master of Stock and Teind
promiscue, as they had been accustomed, found to Liberat from their Teind
Master, who had Inhibite and intimate the same to the Tennents, seeing the
proportion of the Duty they paid for Teind was not known, December 13. 1627.
Arbuthnet contra Tennents. March 21. 1628. Mr. Patrick Murray contra Tennents
of Inchassray Abbay. Yea, payment made of a part of the price of Lands to the
Disponers Bairns, to whom it was destinat, was found relevant, albeit after a
Reduction, depending of that Disposition, seeing there was no reason filled up
against the Bairns interest, nor they cited, July 19. 1662. Peter contra Mr.
William Wallace. Payment of a Tocher, Contracted by a Wife, inferred by
presumption, that the lived twenty two years, and that the Husband acknowledged
in his Testament that she had paid the Tocher, February 16. 1671. Marrion Dods
contra Laurence Scot. Payment is always presumed by retiring of the principal
Bonds, Chyrographum apud debitorem repertum presumitur solutum; and therefore,
Missives or Narratives in other Writes, will not instruct, where the principal
Write it self is not produced; and therefore is held as retired, albeit these
are adminicles to prove the Tenor, if the casus amissionis, be so far
instructed, as to take off the presumption, that the Write is retired. Payment
made indefinitly by a Debtor for several sums, is generally ascribed to any of
these sums, that the Debtor pleases to apply, because the case of the Debtor
is favorable, and the Creditor granting a receipt indefinitly, it is interpret
against him, the matter remaining entire as it was the time of the receipt; But
where the Debtor became Bankrupt after the indefinit receipt, the famine was
not found applicable to a sum having Caution, there being another sum which had
no Caution, which would be lost by that application, February 2. 1680. Samuel
Moncref contra Donald Cameron. But where the Debtor makes no application, but
his Creditor or singular Successor do count for the application, presumitur in
duriorem sortem, as if for one debt there be a Band bearing Annualrent, and
another Debt bearing no Annualrent, the indefinit receipt is to be imputed to
the Bond bearing annualrent, or where the one security has a greater penalty,
legal or conventional, in case of not payment, as Apprysing, or Adjudication,
whereof the legal is near to expire.

4. Consignation in case of the absence, lurking, or refusal of the Creditor,
is equivalent to payment, and where it is not otherways agreed (with us) it is
ordinarily done in the hands of the Clerk of the Bills, by way of Suspension,
and it stops the running of Annuals, and all other inconveniences upon the
Debtor, and the Consigner is free, though that which is Consigned be lost by
the keepers being Bankrupt; or otherways, if it was the Creditors fault who
charged for more then was due, as if he charged for the whole penalty, which
ought to be modified, and there is no necessity in that case, to offer what is
due; but if the fault be the Consigners, if the Money be lost, it is lost to
him, as was found in the case of the Earl of Galloway and (...) of Kilkerran.
It was also found, that a sum Comsigned in the hands of the Clerk of the Bills,
upon obtaining Suspension, the Consigner having first offered by Instrument the
principal sum and Annualrent, and so much of the penalty as the Charger would
Depone he had truly debursed upon Oath, the Instrument being also instructed by
the Oath of the Witnesses insert, the Consigner was declared free, though the
then Clerk of the Bills was become insolvent, July 28. 1665. Bessie Scot contra
Somervail. So that in Consignation of Sums, for which there is a Charge of
Horning, if the Charge be for more then what is due, Consignation may be
warrantably made, without offer of what is due; but other way, the offer of
what is due should proceed, else the peril is the Consigners, if the sum
Consigned be lost; but if when the Consignation is authore pretore, either by
deliverance of the Lords, or by the ordinar passing Bills of Suspension upon
Consignation, it stops the course of Annuals; because there is always a several
reason of Suspension, which ought to be relevant, though Consignation would
make it pass without instruction; for then, Consignation is only for the
Creditors security in place of Caution, and seeing the Creditor may quickly
discuss the Suspension, and will be heard to answer summarly upon the Bill,
albeit at discussing the reason be not found relevant, or not instructed.
Annuals is not decerned after the Consignation, being modica mora, yet if the
sum were lost, the peril would be the Consigners, not having first offered all
that was due, by Instrument; and though the Creditor be uncertain, lurking, or
out of the Country, the Lords upon supplication will grant Letters of
Requisition and offer, to be execute at the Cross of Edinburgh, and Peer of
Leith, where all men are presumed to have Procurators to answer for them,
tanquam in communipatria: But if an offer be made of all that is due, and not
accepted, it is a relevant reason of Suspension, upon production of the
Instrument, and Consigning the Principal and Annual, though no part of the
expenses be Consigned, till they be modified, if the Consigners reason be found
relevant, and instructed, the Charge will be suspended simpliciter, and the
Decree will contain warrant to the Clerk of the Bills, to deliver up the
Consigned sums to the Suspender, who must bear the expenses of Consignation;
but if the Suspender be in mora aut culpa, as if he do not Consign the expenses
modified by the Lords, whereby the Charger will be put to a new Charge, he must
bear the expenses of Consignation; yet a Sheriff having Charged an Heritor for
the Kings Taxation, albeit at discussing, it was found he had Charged for more
then was due, the expenses of the Consignation was laid upon the Heretor, seeing
he did not offer what was due, for in that case the Sheriff might proceed by
general Letters, as he was informed, and was not in the case of a Creditor,
charging for his own Debt, which he could not but distinctly know: but if an
Assignay or singular Successor Charge for more then is due, the hazard will not
be his, who may be ignorant of his Cedents Discharges; and therefore, the
Suspender ought to produce to him the Discharge, and offer to him what is due,
which if he omit, the hazard will be his: As to the Obliegements upon the
Consignatar, these shall more properly come in with Redemption of Wodsetts,
where Consignations are most frequent.

5. Acceptilation is the solution of an Obligation by acceptance of that which
is not the direct performance of the Obligation, in satisfaction thereof,
either really, or imaginarly, by acknowledgement thereof, as if it were truly
performed.

The Romans did only allow Acceptilation as a Liberation from Stipulations, and
therefore, before any other Obligation could be dissolved by Acceptilation, it
behoved to be innovat, by a Stipulation engaging for the same matter and the
Acceptilation it self could only be by Stipulation, by the Interrogation of the
Debtor, quod ex tali stipulatione debeo acceptum fers. To which the Creditor
answered, acceptum fero, whence it had the name of Acceptilatio, expressing an
acknowledgement of the receiving and accepting of the performance of the
Obligation, and of present bearing and having the same, which was valid and
effectual, though the Creditor, neither then nor before had received any
performance of the Obligation, and needed no other Probation; nor does it admit
of a contrary Probation, that nothing was truly received, in respect that the
sole will of the Creditor may evacuat the Obligation, by Discharge or
Renunciation; and therefore, Acceptilation without any performance is
sufficient, and is the more solemn and secure way of Exoneration.

For where there are many Co-debitors, the Discharging one Liberats not the
rest, if they be Co-principles, unless the Discharge be impersonally conceived,
that the thing obliged shall not be demanded; or that the Renunciation or
Discharge be granted to the principal Debtor, for thereby the Obligations of
the Cautioners being accessory, are understood also to be Renunced: But
Acceptilation extinguisheth the Obligation as to all the Debitors; because it
imports an acknowledgement of performance.

Acceptilation with us may be of any Obligation, and requires no Stipulation,
but as the acknowledgement of payment Liberats all the Debitors; so the
acknowledgement of any satisfaction, which imports payment, or any thing
accepted as equivalent, has the same effect; and therefore, we use more the
Term of Satisfaction, then Acceptilation; which Satisfaction, if it be upon
grounds equivalent to payment, or direct performance, it is equiparat thereto
in all points, and has the privilege of payment made, bona fide, to Liberat,
though the Obligation be not performed, to the party having the present, and
better Right; but otherways, neither the acknowledgement of payment, or of
satisfaction, or any Discharge, has the privilege of payment made, bona fide,
which is mainly founded upon this ground, that bena fides non patitur ut idem
bis exigatur.

6. Compensation is a kind of Liberation, as being equivalent to payment, for
thereby two liquid Obligations do extinguish each other, ipso jure, and not
only open exceptionis; for albeit Compensation cannot operat if it be not
proponed, as neither can payment; yet both perimunt obligationem ipso jure, and
therefore are not Arbitrary, to either party to propone or not propone as they
please; but any third party having interest may propone the same, which they
cannot hinder; for instance, if a Cautioner be distressed, he can propone
payment, or compensation, upon the like liquid Debt, due to the principal
Debtor, which he cannot hinder; and therefore, a liquid clear Debt, though
bearing no Annualrent, compenseth another Debt bearing Annualrent, not only
from the time Compensation is proponed, but from the time that both Debts came
to be due; from which time, it stops the course of Annualrent, as is clear by
many Laws in the digeste and C. de compensationibus, which is constantly
followed by our Custom, wherein positive Law for utilities sake, has
influence, to shun the multiplication of Pleas; for otherways, if compensation
were rejected, the Creditor would proceed to execution, and the Debtor would
be put to a new Action, which is very inconvenient; and therefore, when a
Debtor forbeareth to insist for a liquid Debt, after the term is past, it is
presumed to be on that account, that the Creditor owes him the like, or a
greater sum, and frustra petit quod mox est restituturus; but otherways
compensation is neither payment formally nor materially, for when a Creditor
borrows from his Debtor a sum, and expressly obliegeth him to pay the same,
it is so far from being done for payment of a sum, formerly due to the Debtor,
that there is an express obliegement to pay the same in numerat Money, at a
day; and yet if that posterior Debt be insisted on, it may be compensed with
the prior.

If compensation be renunced it will be excluded by that personal objection,
which will take no place against other parties interest; for thereupon
Compensation would be admitted for a Cautioner, for a Debt due to the
principal, though the principal should renounce Compensation; or if the
Compensation be indirectly renounced, by giving a Bond blank in the Creditors
name, which is understood, as done of intention, that the Bond may pass to
singular Successors without a formal Assignation or Intimation, but by filling
the parties name who gets the Bond, who charging thereupon will not be
compensed by any Debt of the party, to whom it was first granted, Nic. hic.
November 14. 1621. Findlayson contra Gardine. February 27. 1668. Henderson
contra Birny. And on the same ground, a Bond of Corroboration, bearing a
general exclusion of Suspension, was found to exclude Compensation, though the
Bond was granted under Caption, without any Transaction or abatement, June 28.
1672. Robert Murray cantra Spadie of Assintully.

Compensation is described by Modestinus debiti and crediti contributie, l. 1
ff. de compensationibus; which description is neither clear nor full: It is not
clear whether the Contribution be by concourse of two Debts, or by proponing of
the Compensation: Neither is it full by expressing what kind of Debts are
compensible, for they must be commensurable, and liquid, being considered as
Fungibles, indecernable in the value, or in the Individuals, as Money, Wine,
Oil, Grain, etc. Or if both Obligations be in general, as if either party be
obliged to deliver a House, a Sword, etc. for then no speciality being
expressed, the Obligations are commensurat, and so compensible. But Obligations
of a particular body, are not compensible by Money; and therefore, Money
depositate being demanded, cannot be compensed by a Debt due to the Depositar,
because the Money depositat was not delivered as a Fungible to be restored in
the same kind, but in the same individual; and likewise, acceptance of
Depositation imports so much trust, for ready delivery, that Compensation is
understood to be renounced, l. pen. C. depositi.

Upon the same ground Compensation is not relevant upon sums secured by an
Heritable Infeftment, whereby Lands or Annualrents are Disponed for these sums;
for though Impignoration be intended, yet the Contract being in the form of
vendition with a reversion, the sum lent becomes the Debitors, as the price of
the Land or Annualrent, and is no more the Creditors, unless there be a clause
of Requisition, that he may return to his Money, or pass from his Infeftment,
or a clause to repay upon a simple Charge; and therefore, till the Requisition
or Charge, there can be no compensation, except upon the bygon Annualrents, due
by the Infeftment, which remains still moveable and compensible, January 2.
1667. Oliphant contra Hamiltoun. But Compensation was sustained upon liquid
sums, though Appryzing was led thereupon, unless it were cled with Possession
and expyred, June 18. 1675. Leys Burnet contra Forbes of Blacktoun. The like
was found as to a sum Appryzed for, but not upon a Wodsett, requiring
Requisition, unless Requisition were made, November 12. 1675. Home of
Plandergast contra Home of Linthil.

But by a liquid Debt, is not understood a Debt, for which there is a decree,
or quae habet paratam executionem, for Restitution; but it is sufficient that
the Debt it self is liquid of the same kind with the Charge; And therefore,
Compensation is competent against sums due by Registrat Bonds, upon sums due by
Bonds, though not Registrat, yea, though not Registrable.

Compensation is also competent upon Debts which are not liquid so soon as they
become liquid, either by a liquidation of consent, or by a Decree, which was
sustained, though the Decree was after the Charge, December 23. 1635. Keith
contra Glenkindie. Yea, a Decree of liquidation against a Principal, was found
sufficient to infer Compensation against the Cautioner, or his Assigney, though
not called to the Decree, it being without collusion, June 24. 1665. Irwing
contra Strachen. And Compensation was sustained against an Assigney, upon a
debt due by the Cedent, though liquidat after the Assignation, in respect the
Assignation was gratuitous, January 18. 1676. Corbet contra Ramsay: But the
Compensation ought not further to be drawn back then the liquidation; and so
Ferms being liquidat will stop the course of Annualrent, from the time of the
liquidation, but not from the time the Ferms were due, unless it were Money
Rent; but Ferms or Services only from the liquidation, December 4. 1675.
Walstoun contra Robert Cunninghame.

Compensation is relevant, not only upon a Debt of the Creditors own, but if he
be Creditor by Assignation, the Debt is compensible by a liquid Debt, due by
the Cedent, before he was denuded by Assignation, and Intimation, because the
Compensation was effectual, ipso jure, from the concourse of the two liquid
Debts, inter easdem parts, February 14. 1633. Keith contra Heriot. March 16.
1639. Coupland contra Forsyth.

Compensation is also relevant upon a Debt Assigned to the Compenser, by our
common Consuetude, albeit the Debtor pursued or charged, do seek out and
acquire a Debt of the Chargers, even after the Charge, which is a further
Benefit introduced by Custom, though it has this inconveniency, that a
Creditor can hardly recover any Debt, if he be due Debt to others himself; but
if an Assigney Charge for a Debt, the Debtor will not have Compensation upon a
Debt of the Cedents, Assigned to him after the Intimation of the Chargers
Assignation, for these two Debts never concurred, inter easdem parts, for
though the Debtor may always compense the Assigney upon the Cedents Debt
before the Assignation, if it was originally due to the Debtor himself, but
after the Cedent is denuded by Intimation, the Debtor cannot acquire a Debt of
the Cedents due to another, therewith to exclude the Assigney, unless the
Debtor Compenser was Creditor to the Cedent, ab initio, or became Creditor to
him by an Assignation to the Creditors Debt, Intimat to him before he was
denuded in favors of an other Assigney, otherwise the Debts do never concur
betwixt the same Debtor and Creditor, January 22. 1663. James Wallace contra
Edger. July 4. 1676. John (...) contra Alexander Brownlie. But Heirs and
Executors are accounted, eadem persona cum defuncto; and therefore,
Compensation may be both upon, and against their Debts: So Compensation was
admitted against an Heir or Executor, upon Debt due by the Defunct, to the
Defenders Father whom he represented, Spots. hic, Cassmire Pyet contra
Russetter. And Compensation was admitted against an Executor upon a Legacy left
to the Defender, though there was no sentence thereupon, Spots. Executors,
Williamson contra Tweedies. It was also admitted for an Executor, upon a Debt
due by the pursuer to the Defunct, though the Executor had not Confirmed that
Debt, but he behoved to cik the same, December 7. 1609. Aikman contra Lady
Brughtoun.

But Compensation is not competent to a Creditor of a Defunct, taking
Assignation to one of the Defuncts Debts after his death, which is upon account
of the Privilege of the Creditors, who have access to the Defuncts Estate
according to their diligence; And therefore, the Executor cannot prefer one to
another; much less can a debtor of the Defunct, by taking Assignation to the
Defunct Debts, prefer that Creditor to the rest of the Creditors of the
Defunct, February 8. 1662. Thomas Crawford contra the Earl of Murray. February
14. 1662. Children of Mouswall contra Loury of Maxwelstoun.

Compensation was found competent against a Donatar upon a debt of the Rebels
before the Rebellion, for which the Compenser was Cautioner, though he paid
after, February 3. 1635. Innes contra Lesly. January 23. 1669. Mr. James
Drummond contra Stirling of Airdoch.

Compensation is competent against Factors, Procurators, or Commissioners, upon
their Constituents liquid debt, but not upon their own debt, for they are not
Creditors as to their Constituents sums: Yea, a Factor being charged by his
Constituent for his Intromission with his Rents, was not admitted to compense
the same with a debt due by his Constituent, whereunto the Factor took
Assignation. Neither was the Chamberlain accounted a debtor to his
Constituent, as by a liquid debt, but that his Constituents Rents were in the
Property of his Master, and in the Factors custody as a Servant, November 9.
1672. Pearson contra Sir Robert Murray, alias Crightoun.

Compensation takes no place in the Provinces of France, which acknowledge not
the Roman Law, but a (...) Law, without a privilege from the King, as is
observed by Gregorius, Tholesanus, upon Compensation. And it seems not to have
been competent by the Law of Scotland, before the (...) of Parl. 1592. cap.
141. Whereby it is Statute, That any debt, de liquido in liquidum, verified by
Write, or oath of party, before giving of Decree, be admitted by all Judges
within the Realm, by way of Exception, but not after the giving thereof, in the
Suspension, or in the Reduction of the same Decree: So that if the charge or
pursuit be instantly verified by Write, the defender will not get a Term to
prove Compensation; but if a Term be assigned to the pursuer, the same would be
assigned to the defender, to instruct any debt wherewith he would compense by
Write, or Oath, yea, by Witnesses, if the Probation be closed as soon as the
pursuers Probation; for the Statute bears, Compensation to be in liquid debts
instantly verified before the Decree, although it mention not Probation by
Witnesses, it does not exclude the same; but it excludes Compensation after the
Decree, either by Suspension, or Reduction, which seems to import more then
the rejection of Compensation, because it was competent and omitted, which has
been always a common objection against any reason of Suspension, or Reduction;
but that Compensation should not be admitted after Decree, though the Decree
were in absence, unless it were Reduced upon Improbation of the Executions, or
other nullity, or by purging the contumacy in not compearing and that taking
Assignation to debts of the Cedents after Decree, should not found a
Compensation, as being against the letter of the Statute; for though it seem an
emergent reason, which would be sufficient against competent and omitted, yet
not against the speciality of this Statute, excluding all Compensation after
Decree; but this Statute is to be understood only of Decreets proceeding upon
Citation, and not Decreets of Registration, which are summar, and of consent,
by the clause of Registration; and therefore, Compensation was not sustained
against a Sheriffs Decreetsthough in absence, July 25. 1676. William Wright
contra John Shiel.

It remains to consider in what case Compensation may be elided, by
Recompensation which but seldom occurs, and I have observed no decision upon
it; it can only occur when the charger or pursuer has more liquid debts due to
him by the defender, and insists not for them all; for in that case, if the
defender propone Compensation, the pursuer may propone Recompensation, upon the
other liquid debts, whereupon he pursued not; and if both the pursuers debts be
anterior to the defenders, there appears no recompensation, because the
defender may impute his debt to either of the pursuers debt he pleases, as he
might in indefinit payments; but if the defenders debt be anterior to both the
pursuers debts, or in the middle betwixt them, in that case, Recompensation
seems not to take place; because Compensation being competent, ipso jure, so
soon as ever two liquid debts concur, inter easdem personas, both debts are
thereby in so far mutually extinct, and so there is no place for Recompensation
by a debt posterior to that concourse, so that if the defenders debt be
anterior to both the pursuers debts, The first of them by its concourse, did
extinguish the defenders debt; and therefore, if he pursue for the first debt,
Compensation is proper to the defender upon his debt, anterior to both the
pursuers debts, and cannot be excluded by the pursuers posterior debt, by way
of Recompensation, for then the debts from their first concourse, should not
compence ipso jure, which holds also when the defenders debt is after the
pursuers first debt, and before his second, for the pursuers prior debt, and
the defenders debt first concurring extinguisheth each other, and the pursuers
posterior debt cannot hinder the same, and so cannot found Recompensation: But
if the pursuit or charge be on the second debt, if compensation be proponed on
the defenders middle debt, there is place for recompensation on the pursuers
first debt.

7. Retention is not an absolute extinction of the Obligation of repayment, or
restitution, but rather a Suspension thereof, till satisfaction be made to the
retainer; and therefore, it is rather a dilatory then a peremptory exception,
though sometimes, when that which is due to the retainer, is equivalent to the
value of what is demanded, if either become liquidat it may turn into a
Compensation, such is the right of Mandatars, Impledgers and the like, who have
interest to tetain the things possessed by them, until the necessary and
profitable expenses wared out by them thereupon be satisfied.

8. Innovation is the turning of one Obligation unto another, if it be a third
person becoming debtor for relief of the former debtor, it is called
Delegation. Innovation is not presumed by granting of a new Obligation, either
by the debtor or another; But it is rather held to be as Caution, or
Corroboration of the former Obligation, consistent therewith; and in the Civil
Law it is never esteemed Innovation, unless it be so expressed, l. ult. de
novationibus: But with us, though it be not named, yet if it appear to have
been the meaning of the parties, not to Corroborat, but to take away the former
Obligation, it is a valid Innovation: So it is ordinarily inferred, when a
posterior Security bears, in satisfaction of the former Obligation, though it
did not renounce or discharge it, nor expressly innovate it, December 6. 1632.
Chisholm contra Gordoun. The like where the posterior Bond bears, in full
satisfaction of the sum, for which the former was granted, though it made no
mention of the former security, July 23. 1633. Mr. John Lawson contra Scot of
Whitslade.

9. Confusion of Obligations is, when the Creditor and Debtor become one
person, as when the one succeeds as Heir to the other, or becomes singular
Successor in the debt, for thereby the Obligation is ineffectual, seeing none can
be Creditor or Debtor to himself, which was extended so far, that an Heir
Portioner being Debtor, by meddling with the Defuncts means, and thereafter
her Husband taking Assignation to a debt, and pursuing another, representing
the Defunct thereupon, the exception of Confusion was found relevant, because
he was Creditor as Assigney, and Debtor as the intromettors Husband, Spots.
Assignation, John Moor contra Richard Calder. Thus vicious Intromission is
ordinarily sustained by exception, to elide any debt due to the Intrometter,
proprio nomine, or as Assigney, Hope, vicious Intromission.

But where an appear and Heir gave a Bond, and thereupon Adjudication was used
of his Predecessors Estate, his taking Assignation to that Adjudication, was
not found to extinguish the debt by Confusion, though Rights so taken will not
free the Assigney of behaving as Heir, if he intromet; whereupon there was an
Act of Sederunt made, as to all cases thereafter, in the case of the Creditors
of the Earl of Nithisdale, January 22. 1662. But if by different Successions,
the Debtor and Creditor should become distinct, the Obligations would revive,
as in many cases may occur, and so Confusion is not an absolute extinction, but
rather a Suspension.

Confusion does not always take place, where the same person who is debtor
succeeds to, or takes Assignation, as is evident in Cautioners taking
Assignation to Bonds, wherein they are debitors as Cautioners; yet may pursue
the principal, or Co-cautioners as Assigney, and will not be excluded upon
alledgeance of Confusion, which is only relevant when that debtor who has no
relief, becomes also Creditor by Succession or Assignation. And so an Executor
taking Assignation to an Heretable debt, may thereupon pursue the Heir for
relief: Or any Heir male, of Tailzie or provision, taking Assignation to his
Predecessors debt, may as Assigney, have recourse against the Heir of line, of
Conquest, or Executor. Yea, if any person take Assignation to a debt due by his
Predecessor to whom he is Heir male, though during his life the Assignation can
have no effect; yet after his death, his Heir male will succeed to him in that
Assignation, and may thereupon pursue his Heir of line, or Executor for
payment, for the taking of an Assignation and not a Discharge, did clear the
mind of the Defunct, that the debt and Credit would divide after his death, and
that his Heir male would succeed to him in credito, and his Heir of line in
debito.

TITLE XII. Rights real, where, of Community, Possession, Property, Servitudes,
and Pledges.
1. The original Dominion of Man over the Creatures. 2. What Rights are
Heretable, and what moveable. 3. Moveable and Heretable Bonds. 4. How Heretable
Obligations become Moveable, and return to be Heretable. 5. The original
Community of Mankind over this inferior World, and all therein. 6. What remains
yet common to Mankind. 7. Grass and Fruits on high ways, are public not
common. 8. In Possession what is facti, what is juris. 9. Possession described.
10. Possession natural and civil. 11. Possession of movables. 12. Possession
of the Ground. 13. Possession by limits and bounds. 14. Possession by
occupation, and by lifting the Profits. 15. Symbolical Possession. 16.
Possession by Reservation. 17. Definition of Possession. 18. Requisites to
begin Possession. 19. Requisites to retain Possession. 20. How Possession is
troubled, interrupted, or lost. 21. Kinds of Possession. 22. Lawful Possession
gives right to continue it against all illegal and clandestine Acts contrary
thereto. 23. Bonae fidei Possessor, facit fructus consumptos suos. 24. This not
extended to unlawful Possessers. 25. Possessor decennalis and triennalis non
tenetur docere de titulo. 26. (...) Possession of forefaulted persons. 27.
Possession, to what right ascriveable. 28. The nature of Property. 29. Property
by Possession of things common. 30. Appropriation by Industry. 31. First
Property of the Ground was of Houses and Walls. 32. Next of Fields and
Countries. 33. Quae nullius sunt. 34. Appropriation by Accession of Birth and
Fruits. 35. Appropriation by Alluvion. 36. Appropriation by Specification. 37.
Appropriation by necessary Conjunction 38. De tigno injuncto. 39. Inaedificata
solo cedunt. 40. Things sown and planted, how far they follow the ground. 41.
Possession of Movables (...) Property. 42. Reprysals. 43. Enemies Goods taken
in War. 44. Goods of Neuters assisting Enemies become Prize.
HAVING gone through the first two Branches of private Rights, Personal Freedom,
and obligation, we come now to the third, which is Dominion: But because that
Term is more appropriat to men over men, then over other creatures, it is
therefore called a real Right, or a right of things: For as Obligation is a
right personal, as being a power of exacting from persons that which is due, so
a right real is a power of disposal of things, in their Substance, Fruits, or
use: For unfolding this right, and the progress thereof, both according to the
order of time, and nature, advert;

1. First, That when God created man, he gave him the Dominion or Lordship over
all the Creatures of the Earth, in the Air, and in the Sea, Genefis 1. Verses
29, and 30. with power to Man to dispose of the Creatures, even to the
consumption thereof; and it is like, that during man's innocence, there was upon
the part of the creatures, a great subjection and subserviency to man, till
afterward, when he revolted from God, the Creatures revolted also from him:
Yet Gods Dominion over Man, and Man's Dominion over the Creatures, remains
still in right; so that he has a legal power and warrant to dispose of them,
though not so much Possession, or natural power, being less able to master them
then before.

It is a false and groundless opinion which some hold, that Man by his fall
has lost his right to the Creatures, until by Grace he be restored, and that
the sole Dominion of them belongs to the Saints, who may take them by force
from all others. For by the whole strain of the Law of God, he still owneth
Dominion and Property of the Creatures in Man, without distinction, and
prohibiteth all force, or fraud in the contrary, which sufficiently clears
that subtilty of man's forefaulture; which, though it makes man obnoxious by
way of Obligation to punishment, by Gods exterminating him from the use and
comfort of the Creatures, yet that Obligation does not infer actualceassing of
man's right, much less the stating of the rights of mankind in a small part of
them.

This Dominion of the Creatures being given to man without distinct
proportions, or bounds; it necessarily follows, that by the Law of Nature,
the birth and fruit of both Sea and Land were common to all Mankind, who had
equal interest therein, and every one might take and make use thereof, for his
necessity, utility, and delight: yet so, as the use and fruit thereof must in
some cases, and might in all cases become proper, as what any had taken and
possessed for his use, became thereby proper, and could not without injury be
taken from him. much more the things which had received specification from his
Art or Industry became proper, and all others might be debarred from any profit
or use thereof, but so, that some property or use might be communicate to
others, which being the lesser, and not reaching the power of the substance of
the thing, is therefore called a servitude, whereby that which is proper to one
serves another, in part: And when the proprietar gives not the fruit, or use,
but only the holding, or the detention of the thing to another, for his
security of some debt, or Obligation of the Proprietars to him, that right is
called a Pawn or Pledge, so that in whole, all real rights are either that
original community of all men, or the Interest which Possession gives, or
Property, Servitude or Pledge, of which in order.

First, Generally as they were of old, common to both things moveable, and
immovable, and then specially in relation to things immovable, and to
Heretable Ground-rights of the Earth, and things fixed thereto, which now by
the Feudal Customs are much changed from what they were, and yet are in
movables.

2. The distinction of moveable and Heretable, is very necessary to be here
known, as being the common materials of real Rights, and having a general use;
any thing is called moveable, which by its nature and use is capable of motion,
as things immovable are the Earth, Sea, and things fixed to the Earth, not to
be removed therefrom, as Trees, Houses, etc. which though they may be possibly
moved, yet it is not their use so to be, the superfice of the Earth is
immovable, though it may be moved from one place to another place of the
Earth: The Sea also is immovable, though it has at the Shore its agitation by
ebbing and flowing, which is not the use man makes of it. These things are
called Heretable, because they descend not to Executors, to whom only Movables
befall, but to Heirs: And so the distinction comes ordinarily of Movables and
Heretables, as that which is fixed to, or part of the Ground is compted
immovable, as Trees, and Grass, and all he natural Fruits of the Earth; yet
industrial Fruits, as Corns, are counted Moveable, and belong not to the Heirs
of Defuncts, but to their Executors, when they are sown, or growing upon the
ground at their death, as well as when they are reaped, and so fall under
single Escheat, February 2. 1627. Lewis Somervel contra Mr. William Stirling.

The distinction of Heretable and Moveable is derived to Rights and
Obligations, as the matter thereof is Heretable or Moveable, and so all
Dispositions or Obligations for constituting any right of the ground, in
property, community, or Servitude, are Heretable, although they have not yet
attained their effect, and become real rights complete, as dispositions of
Lands, Annualrents, Pasturages, Thirleage, etc. which is so far extended, that
all which is by Destination, to have its accomplishments by a real right of the
ground, is Heretable, as Bonds bearing clause of Annualrent, which because
Annualrents were usually by Infeftment; therefore, the very provision of
Annualrent, though but a personal obliegement to pay it yearly or termly,
without mention of Infeftment, made the provision or Bond Heretable, and not to
descend to Executors, Children, or Wives, but to Heirs only; yea, though the
Bond bore but five per cent, which was alleged but an alimentary clause, June
28. 1665. Jean Pitcairn contra Isobel Edgar, till the Act of Parliament, 1641.
revived, Parl. 1661. cap. 32. whereby such Bonds as were, or should be made
after that Act, 1641. bearing only a clause of Annualrent, and no obliegement
to Infeft the Creditor in an Annualrent, were declared to be Moveable as to the
Defuncts Children, or nearest of Kin, but not as to the Wife or Fisk, to fall
undersingle Escheat, and that because many have their Estates and Stocks in
Money, and take obliegement for Annualrents, for the profit thereof, without
purpose to exclude their younger Children therefrom: But Wives are excluded,
because they are ordinarily provided by their Contracts of Marriage; but before
this Act, all such Bonds were to all effects Heretable, yet so, assums destinat
for Annualrent, though de facto, they bore none, are Heretable, quoad, the
party who destinat, as when a Tocher is obliged by a Wifes Father or Brother
to be paid to her Husband, who is obliged to employ it upon Annualrent: This
sum as to the Husband is Heretable, and excludes his Executors: But as to the
Debtor who was neither obliged to pay Annualrent, or employ it, it is
moveable, and so would affect the Debitors Executors, and exhaust his
movables, but would only belong to the Creditors Heirs, January 19. 1637.
Robison contra Seatoun. July 25. 1662. Barbara Nasmith contra Jaffray.

This was so far extended, that when the Destination was by a distinct article,
or Bond; yet the Executor might be compelled to assign, or repay the sum to the
Heir, Spots. juramentum de calumnia, Margaret contra Janet Watson. Idem de
haeredibus, Executors of David Seatoun contra Thomas Robison.

Bonds also become Heretable by distinct superveening Rights, as by a several
Disposition of the Debitors, of his whole Goods and Lands, with obliegement to
Infeft, and also by a superveening Appryzing.

But even the complete Heretable Rights themselves, containing also personal
Clauses of Requisition, become moveable by the Requisition or Charge, which is,
pro tempore, a passing from the infeftment, and taking the Creditor to the
personal obliegement, yet so, as when ever he pleases to pass from the
Requisition or Charge, it convalesceth, and is not excluded by interveening
Rights, and was found moveable by a Charge, though but against one of the
Cautioners, not only as to him, but as to all the Debitors, seeing thereby the
Creditor had taken his option, January 24. 1666. Colonel James Montgomery
contra Stuart. But the showing the Defuncts mind to require, is not sufficient
to make the sum moveable, unless it be done habili modo: So a Requisition being
disconform to the clause of a Requisition, was found not to make the sum
moveable, January 18. 1665. Stuart contra Stuart. Yea, a Charge upon a Bond of
Corroboration, accumulating the Principal and Annual in a former security by
Infeftment, and bearing but Derogation of the former security, was found to
make the whole sum moveable, and to belong to the Executor, without necessity
to instruct a warrant to give the Charge, which was presumed; albeit the
Defunct upon deathbed expressed, that the sum belonged to his Heir, June 25.
1672. Executors and Heir of Sir Robert Seatoun. But sums were not found
Heretable, because a Disposition of Land did bear, as the condition of the
Reversion, that the Land should not be redeemed, or the Acquirer denuded, till
he were satisfied of all sums due to him, or which should de due to him by the
Disponer; neither yet when the sums are in the dispositive clause, to be
contracted thereafter but only sums which are the anterior causes of the
Disposition, for thereby the Creditor does not make such sums jura fixa; nor
are they the causes of the Disposition, February 18. 1676. Thomas Wauch contra
Doctor Jamison. Sums are also Heretable, when Executors are expressly excluded;
and a Charge or Decree for such sums, will not make them moveable, July 13.
1676. Christy contra Christy: The reason is, because the mind of the Creditor,
by calling for his Money, is not to retain it in his hands as movables, but to
make it a fixed right for his Heir, seeing he excludes his Executors. And for
the like reason, Wives charging for their Heritable sums, the Stocks whereof is
not in their Husbands power, are not presumed thereby to make them moveable,
and to fall in the power of their Husbands: And if any party in his Process or
Charge, should so declare his intent, it would not make the sum moveable. But
Requisition or a Charge will make sums which were Heretable by Infeftment or
Destination, moveable. And so likewise will a Decree for payment, December. 13.
1676. Mr. John Fairholm contra Mr. Francis Montgomery. Sums consigned by an
order of Redemption, do not thereby become moveable till declarator of
Redemption, or till the Creditor accept of the Confignation, and insist for the
consigned sums, which if he do not, his Executor cannot recover the same, but
his Heir, to whom the Wodsett right belongs. For it is not in the power of the
debtor to alter the condition of his Creditors sum, and to make it either
Heretable or Moveable, without consent of the Creditor, or authority of a
Judge; but the Consignet may take up his sum Consigned, and pass from his
order, January 21. 1673. Thomas Nicol contra Lowrie. June 18. 1675. Lord of
Lie contra Foulis of Blacktoun.

The Requisition and Charge may not only be past from expressly, but tacitly, by
taking Annualrent after the Charge, if it be for Terms thereafter, as in the
last case, Spots. Assignation, Denaldson contra Donaldson. Requisition or a
charge, makes Bonds Heretable, even after the Act, 1641. moveable as to the
relict. The like is when they become otherways simply moveable.

But sums only Heretable by Destination for Annualrent, are moveable till the
first Term of payment of the Annualrent be past, though the Term of payment of
the Principal be not come; yet if the first Term of payment of Annualrent be
past, the sum is Heretable, July 31. 1666. Sir Lodovick Gordoun contra Sir John
Keith. And if the Debtor die before that time, they affect his Executors, June
29. 1624. Smith contra Relict of Peter Sanderson, or by the Creditors death
before the first Term of the Annualtent, they fall to his Executors and Wife,
February 12. 1623. Wallace contra Mcdowal. And generally all Rights and
Obliegments, having a tract of Future time, are Heretable as to the Executors,
who are thereby excluded, though they no way relate to Infeftments, or Lands,
as Pensions, Tacks, etc. But as to the (...), where the distinction is betwixt
Movables, Liferent Rights, and Heretable Rights; The first being carried by
single Escheat; the next by Liferent Escheat, the whole by forefaulture. All
Rights relating to Infeftment by Destination, are Heretable, or moveable in the
same manner as betwixt Heirs and Executors: But Rights having a tract of time,
but not for a Liferent, are Moveable, and fall under single Escheat; yet the
bygones of Annualrent by Infeftment, are still moveable: But as to both
effects, Assignations to Literent Tacks, were found moveable, and to fall under
single escheat, Hope, Horning, Sir Robert Ker contra Sir John Ker. Clauses also
of relief in Heretable Bondsare moveable; and the jus Marti of Husbands, though
they carry the profit of the Wises Heretable Rights, or Rights of Liferent,
fall under the Husbands single escheat.

3. To return now to the several kinds of real Rights; The First whereof, is,
that original Community which all men had at first, in the whole Creatures of
this inferior World.

For as to that Community which is competent to a Nation, Incorporation.
Society, or more single Persons, it is property indeed to these in respect of
other Men, though amongst themselves it keeps a proportion with the universal
Community; First, In that there is an equal right and interest presumed to be
in all these that have Community, unless the contrair appear.

Secondly, That this Equality is not exact in the use, but that which is
enjoyed in common, may freely be made use of for the ends of the Community,
though some make use of more, and others of less, according to their need or
satisfaction: As when two persons have an universal society of all their means,
if the one be taler then the other, he is not to go naked, in so far as he
exceeds his fellow: Or if his appetit be greater, he is not to pinch it: and if
he have more Children, he may entertain and provide them, and thereby consume
more of the common Stock then the other; so that in these universal Societies,
there is not an Arithmetical equality, but a Geometrical proportion to the need
and use of the parties, to be observed.

Thirdly, Such Communities may be past from, and division being made of that
which is common, thereby it will become proper to either party, unless the
nature of the thing, or paction hinder; in which case, division cannot be made
without consent of the whole; for (as is showen before) under the Obediential
Obligations of Restitution, to every man that which is his own, divisions of
that which is common, is comprehended.

Fourthly, Even during the Community, that which any party takes for his use
is proper, and may not be taken from him by any other, if he exceed not the
ends, or the interest of the Society, by seeking more then is proportional to
his need and use, with the rest in the Society: All these agree to the original
Community of Mankind, and so they did continue in the first and golden Age of
the World, when Gold was not known, nor regarded, but simplicity and sincerity
were the Gold of that Age, whereby every man contented himself with the natural
Fruits and Birth of the Earth, Sea, and Rivers: And it is like, that the Fruits
of the Ground and Trees, were satisfying to man at first, before they came to
hunting, and killing of Beasts, fishing in the Seas, and Rivers, and Haulking
and killing of Fowls.

5. Then also, men were contented with Caves of the Earth, or shades of Trees
for Houses, and skins of Beasts for Clothing; in this Community do many of the
Savage Nations of America continue to this day, in these vast and unpeopled
places of the World: But for the most part, man being multiplied upon the face
of the Earth, there was necessity of division, and appropriation, which has so
far prevailed, that now there remains nothing common, which by its nature and
man's necessity, can be appropriat, whereby some things in whole, and some uses
of others remain yet common to all men; as,

6. First, The Air is common to all men, because it can have no limits or
bounds, and because all men every where must necessarily breath it.

Secondly, Running Waters are common to all men, because they can have no
bounds; but Water standing, and capable of bounds, is proper.

Thirdly, The vast Ocean is common to all mankind, as to Navigation and
Fishing, which are the only uses thereof, because it is not capable of bounds;
but where the Sea is enclosed, in Bays, Creeks, or otherways is capable of any
bounds or meeths, as within the points of such Lands, or within the view of
such Shoars, there it may become proper, but with the reservation of passage
for Commerce as in the Land.

Fourthly, All the wild and free creatures, which are in the property of none,
are in some sort common to all, as Fishes, Fowls, Bees, etc. But in respect
property has taken hold of all that is appropriable, these are said rather to
belong to none, as being by common consent declared void by all, that property
thereof may be inferred by occupation, and possession, without respect to the
persons necessity or use, as was in the ancient Community, but that simply
whosoever possesses that which belongs to none, does thereby acquire the
property thereof.

Such also are Gemms and precious Stones on the Shore, or things relinquished
by the proper owners, except where there is a National Community, that people
or their authority, do possess in common, not only some reserved rights of the
Earth, but also the rights of precious things, or things relinquished, or lost
by Shipwreck, or otherways, whereby the imaginary possession of having such
within their Territories, is sufficient by the custom of Nations to appropriat
them, and to exclude other Nations, or single persons of that same Nation from
them. So with us, Treasures hid in the Earth, whose proper owners cannot be
known, are not his in whose Ground they are found, nor the finders, but belong
to the King: And things stray or waith, whose owners cannot appear, are
public, And shipwreck, which is only understood, when all living things in
the Ship have perished; but where an Ox escaped out of the Ship to Land alive,
the Goods were not found escheatable as Shipwreck, November 22. 1622. Hamiltoun
contra Cochran. But shipwreck is not to be made use of by the King, in
prejudice of the owners of such Countries, as use not that Law themselves, but
they shall have the same favor here, as they keep to Ships of this Land broken
with them, Par. 1429. cap. 124.

Fifthly, Of things appropriat, there remains still the common use of Ways and
Passages, which is like a servitude on property, for this is necessarly
required for the use of man; and therefore, understood as an use reserved, both
in their tacit consent to appropriation, and in their custom. So all Nations
have free passage by Navigation, through the Ocean, Bays and Navigable Rivers;
and have also the benefit of Stations in the Sea or Rivers, and have the
common use of the Shoars, for casting Anchors, disloading of Goods, taking in
of Ballast, or Water rising in Fountains there, drying of Nets, erecting of
Tents, and the like. Yet does the Shore remain proper, not only as to
Jurisdiction, but as to Houses, or Works built thereupon; and as to Minerals,
Coals or the like found there, and so is not in whole common, but some uses
thereof only.

Nor does it follow, that these uses are not common to all men, because they
are denied to enemies; for, as for these, we may take away that which is in
their power, in some cases; so, much more may we detain from them that which is
ours, and as we pursue their Persons and Goods in their own, much more in our
bounds.

The Shore in the civil Law is defined to be so far as the greatest Winter
Tides do run, Inst. de rerum divisione.. 11. which must be understood of
ordinary Tides, and not of extraordinary spring Tides. But the use of the
Banks, of the Sea, or Rivers to cast Anchors, or lay Goods thereon, or to tie
Cables to Trees growing thereon; or the use of Ports, which are industrial, or
Stations made by Art, or fortified for security, are not common to all men, but
public to their own people, or allowed to others freely for commerce, or in
some cases are granted for a reasonable satisfaction of Anchorage, Portage, or
other Shore dues, which oftimes belong to private persons, by their proper
right or custom, or by public grant.

So also, Ways or Passages in the Land are common to all, and may not be justly
refused by one Nation to another; and being refused, have always been accounted
lawful to be forced, as Plutarch relates of Simon, who going to Lacedemon,
forced his passage through Corinth. And Agesilaus returning from Asia, craved
passage through Macedon, and while they craved time to consult of an answer, he
conceiving delay to be a denial, said, consult you, but I will pass; but to
take away all questions, whether these were by might or right, we have a divine
Example of Moses, Numbers 20. Verses 17, and 19. where Israel in their way to
Canaan, craved passage of Edom, by the high ways, and offered payment even for
their Water, which was to be understood of their standing Water, as Wells,
which were rare and precious there; and did the like with the Ammonites, and
upon refusal, forced it by War.

There is also in Property employed an Obligation of Commerce, or Exchange, in
case of necessity; for without this, property could not consist, seeing by the
division inferred there through, every man cannot have actually all necessars
without Exchange, which being denied in cases of necessity, or where there is
no common Authority, may be taken by force, as these who pass through the
Territories of others, if by their opposition, or otherways they be short of
provision, they may lawfully take the same for Money, as is employed in Moses
offer to Edom, yea, there is employed in property, an Obligation to give in
cases of necessity, to these who have not wherewith to exchange, and cannot
otherways preserve their life, but with the Obligation of Recompense when they
are able, for humane necessity does also infer this, but it must be a real, and
not a pretended and feigned necessity. So David being hungry, eat the
Shewbread, though appropriat to God. And the Disciples being hungry, eat the
Ears of Corn; and this is the ground of the Obligation, to aliment the poor,
which though it also flows from the Obligation of Charity; yet (as has been
spoken before) that Obligation has no determinat bounds, but is left to the
discretion of the giver, not of the demander, and so can be no warrant for
taking by force, and without consent.

7. The Community that is of Grass and Fruits growing upon the highways,
follows the Community of the ways themselves: But the common use of natural
Fruits brought forth without industry, even in proper Fields, as of Nutts,
Berries or the like; Or the promiscuous use of Pasturage in the Winter time,
accustomed in many places of Scotland, are no part of this Community, but are
for the most part permitted as of little moment, or disadvantage; and
therefore, may be denied without injury.

8. The second step of real Rights is Possession, which as it is the way to
property, and in (...) cases does fully accomplish it, so it has in it a
distinct lesser Right then property, which has no other name then Possession,
though it be more facti then juris: And seeing Possession is a common precognit
to the most of real Rights, it fitly falls in here to be considered, both as
it is a Fact, and as it is a Right; for as it is a Fact, it is not only
requisite to constitute real Rights, but is also an effect thereof, when
constitute.

9. Possession has its name from its special kind, for it is as much as
positio sedium, expressing the way of Possession of the Earth, (at first
common) by Families, Nations, or Persons, by fixing or settling their Seats or
Habitations there, evidencing their affection and purpose to appropriat these
Seats, which therefore was not understood by their passing through it, but by
fixing in it; and therefore, Territories of old were called Possessions. That
we may take up aright the nature of Possession, wherein it does consist, and
how it is begun, continued, interrupted, and lost, we must first distinguish
the several kinds of Possession: And secondly, collect the common nature
wherein they agree: And thirdly, the point of Right thence arising.

As to the First, The reason why the kinds and distinction of Possession are so
much multiplied, is because by positive Law, and the custom of Nations,
Property and Servitude cannot be constitute but by Possession, though it be not
natural or necessary to these Rights, but by the will and constitution of men;
therefore it receives diversification at their pleasure.

10. So what men think fit to call or esteem Possession, is enough to
constitute Property, seeing without any thing such, it may be constitute, as
afterward appears. Hence arises the distinction of Possession, in Natural, and
Civil; the former being that which is, and the latter that which is holden or
repute such, under which there are degrees, as it comes nearer to the natural
Possession; we shall proceed in order from the more plenary and plain
Possession, to these which are less clear.

11. First then, the clearest Possession is of Movables, and it is the first
possession that was amongst men, for so did the Fruits of things become proper;
and thereafter, Ornaments, Clothes, Instruments, and Cattle become proper, the
possession whereof is simple and plain, holding and detaining them for our
proper use, and debarring others from them, either by detaining them in our
hands, or upon our bodies, or keeping them under our view or power, and making
use of them, or having them in fast places, to which others had no easy
access. This possession of Movables was so begun and continued, and by
contrary Acts interrupted and lost, when others exercised the same Acts, either
without the possessors consent, or by their tollerance, or tradition and
delivery, or by forsaking or relinquishing them, so that in the matter of
possession of Movables, there is little controversy.

12. Secondly, Possession of the Ground is also clear in many cases; As First,
In Habitations, whether in Caves, Tents, or proper Houses. Next in Gardens,
Enclosures and all Plantations. Thirdly, In Fields by Pasturage or Tillage, in
so far as the Acts extend, so far these all are most natural possessions: But
after that most ancient simplicity, Rights and the ways of acquiring thereof
were multiplied; and therefore, possession could not be entire, but behoved to
be divided amongst the several interests, then did the difficulties arise, as
when one had the property, a second the fruits, a third the use, a fourth the
servitudes in some, part a fifth the detention for security, a sixth, the
custody or location, and all these exercised, either by the parties themselves,
their servants or Children in their power, and their Procurators in their name:
Yea, and by opposite and interrupting Acts, many at once pretending to the same
kinds and parts of possession.

13. So then the third kind of Possession was, when the Earth began to be
divided by limits and bounds, and to have common denominations, then the
possession of the whole was attained by exercising possessory Acts upon a part,
as he who possesses a Field, needs not go about it, or touch every Turff of
it, by himself or his Cattle, but by possessing a part, unless there were
contrary possessory Acts. So possession of the greater part of Lands, contained
in one Tenement, was found sufficient to validat a base Infeftment, as to the
whole, and to exclude a posterior public Infeftment, for removing the Tennents
from a part of the Tenement, though the base Infeftment had possession several
years, and had attained or pursued for no possession of these Tenements, Spots.
removing, Hunter contra Hardy, observed by Dury, January 14. 1630. The like of
possession of a Tack, of a part of Teinds in a Tack, found sufficient to
validat the Tack as to the whole, Spots. 1. possessione, Lady Merchistoun
contra Wrights-houses.

14. Possession Civil is extended to uplifting of Mails and Duties, which is
sufficient to introduce and preserve property, though the pasturage and
tillage, and all other natural deeds of possession be in others, who are
properly called possessors, who hold and possess for themselves, in so far as
concern the excresce of the profits, above the rent, as to which they possess
in name of their Masters; and therefore, this possession is partly naturral to
the Master of the Ground, and partly civil by their Tennants.

15. Fifthly, Possession is attained Symbolically, where there is not use of
the whole or a part, but only of a Symbol or Token, and this is when the thing
to be possessed, is present, as the civil possession by Infeftment, by delivery
of Earth and Stone upon the Ground of the Lands, or by delivery of a parcel of
Corns for a Stack or Field of Corn, or some of a herd or Flock for the whole
Flock being present, in which the Symbols being also parts of the thing to be
possessed, have some affinity to natural possessions.

Sixthly, Civil Possession is by a Token or Symbol, which is no part of the
thing to be possessed, but is a Token to represent it, as either having some
resemblance with it, as the delivery of a Copy or Scroll for an office, or a
penny for an Annualrent, or otherways has no resemblance, but is a Token
merely suppositious to represent it, as delivery of a Batton in Resignation; or
Delivery of a thing bought or sold, by a wisp of Straw, which ordinarily is in
absence of the thing to be possessed.

16. Seventhly, Possession is attained or retained without Symbol, and without
Interposition of any person in our power or procurator, but only by conjunction
of Interest: So when the property of Lands is granted to one, and the Usufruct
or Liferent to another, or when the Liferent is reserved, the possesssion of
the Liferenter is held to be the possession of the Fiar, as to all other third
parties, and Rights. And a Husbands possession of Lands by himself, or any
deriving right from him, is held to be the Wifes possession, by her Liferent
Infeftment.

The several kinds and degrees of possession being thus laid open, it will be
more easy to takeup the common notion and nature of it, and it may be thus
described.

17. Possession is the holding or detaining of any thing by our selves, or
others for our use, it is not every holding or detaining which makes
possession; for so Depositars detain, but because it is not for their use, they
do not possess. To Possession there must be an act of the body, which is
detention and holding; and an act of the mind, which is the inclination or
affection to make use of the thing detained, which being of the mind, is not so
easily perceiveable, as that of the body, but it is presumed whenever the
profit of the detainer may be to make use of the thing, but where it may be
wrong, or hurtful, it is not presumed: As he who takes another man's Horse by
the Head, or keeps that which is waith; or takes in his hands the Money or
Goods of another, which if it were to make use of, it would infer theft; and
therefore, such detention is not presumed to be possession. He also who
detaineth or holds a thing, not at all for his own use, but for another, who
does detain by him, as by his Servant, or Procurator, does not possess: But
otherways, if he have no warrant from another, but only intended, or is
obliged that it shall be to the behove of another, in that case he is
possessor, because the real Right is in him, and there is upon him only an
obligation to make it forthcoming to another: And they who possess partly for
themselves, and partly for others, as Tennants have possession in part.

18. To come now to the Requisites for entering and beginning Possession, there
must be both the detention of the body, and the detention of the mind, for use,
for neither of the two alone can begin possession; corporal possession alone
can neither begin it, nor continue it; and if any act of the mind were enough,
possession would be very large, and but imaginary, but the manner of this
seasure of possession, to begin it is very diverse, by all the several ways
which are before set forth.

19. Possession being once begun, is continued, not only by reiteration of
possessory acts, but even by the mind only, though there be no outward acts
exerced, and the mind and affection to continue possession is always presumed,
unless the contrary appear, so that if the thing once possessed be void, as to
outward acts, yet it is held possessed by the mind; and any contrary act of
others, entering to that possession, is unwarrantable, and intrusion. For as
has been before showen, intrusion is where the entry is made in possession
without violenc, but without warrant or consent, as ejection is by violence.
But these contrary acts, though unwarrantable, yet they take away the
possession that is detained by the mind.

20. Possession then is lost by a contrary Possession, and it is interrupted by
contrary acts, and attempts of possession, which if they do not attain the
effect to expulse it, it is called also a troubled or disquieted possession,
for nothing can be possessed in solidum, by more then one, either simply, or in
relation to the same right, as there cannot be more Proprietars then one, of
the same kind, though one be superior, and another Vassal, so more Liferenters
cannot possess in solidum; and therefore, the entry to possess that which is
already possessed, must expulse the prior, or else introduce a partial and
common possession; yet it is not the contrary attempts, or every act that
expels a prior possession; but if the same be violent, the prior possessor
has the benefit of possessory Judgments, and may lawfully use violence to
continue possession, which afterward he may not, for recovery thereof, when it
is lost, though unwarrantably, or violently: Thus Possession is transferred
from one to another: But Possession is simply lost, when it is forsaken and
relinquished; it is not easy to be known when Possession is detained by the
mind, and when relinquished, wherein there is a general Rule, that dereliction
is not presumed, except it appear by evident declaratory Acts or Circumstances,
as when it is thrown away in any public place, where it cannot but be taken
up, or when another is suffered to possess without contradiction, or when
possessory Acts have been long abstained from; all which conjectures, are in
arbitrio judicis.

21. From what has been said, the ordinary distinctions of Possession may be
easily understood, as being either natural or civil, continued quiet and
peaceable, or interrupted and disturbed, lawful or unlawful. Under which
distinction, are comprehended, possessio bonae fidei, which may be called
innocent Possession; and malae fidei, or fraudulent, and Possession public and
clandestine, and long possession, momentany or precarious.

22. To come to the Right employed in Possession, it is mainly in two points;
First, in the right to continue it against all illegal contrary acts. Secondly,
The right of Appropriation of the Fruits consumed, bona fide, both these are
introduced by positive Law, for utilities sake: For, by equity any man might at
any time recover the possession of that which is his own by force, and all the
Fruits thereof, whether extant or consumed: But civil Society and Magistracy
being erected, it is the main foundation of the peace, and preservation
thereof, that possession may not be recovered by violence, but by order of Law;
and therefore, there is no more allowed to private force, then to continue
possession, against contrary, violent and clandestine Acts, immediately after
acting of the former, or notice of the latter: But a violent clandestine and
unlawful possession, may not be troubled, though there be an evident right;
much less may Possession be entered, where there is a Right in a party himself,
or his predecessor, to whom he is Heir in that thing; for as they are accounted
as one person in Law, so their Possession is accounted as one Possession. Like
unto this, is the Right of appearand Heirs, to possess their predecessors
Rents, though they be not Infeft, which will not only exoner the possessors,
but if the appearand Heir die uninfeft, his nearest of kin will have right to
the Rents resting, from his predecessors death to his own death, and these will
be subject to hi own proper Debts, albeit they will not affect the Land it
self, but the next appearand Heir must enter to the Defunct last Infeft, and
his Person and Estate will only be liable for the Debts of the Defunct to whom
he entered.

23. The other Possessory Right is, that which was allowed in the Civil Law,
bonae fidei possessor facit fructus consumptos suos, l. certum 22. Cod. de rei
vindicatione; the reason whereof, is because they who enjoy that which they
think their own, do consume the Fruits thereof, without expectation of
repetition or account, else they are presumed to reserve them, or employ them
profitably for Restitution, and if it were otherways, there could be no quiet
nor security to men's minds, who could call nothing securely their own, if the
event of a dubious Right might make them restore what they had consumed, bona
fide, and as it is in the favors of the innocent possessor; so it is in hatred
of the negligence of the other party not pursuing his Right.

24. This Right is only competent to possessors, bonae fidei, who do truly
think that which they possess to be their own, and know not the right of any
other; but private knowledge upon information, without legal diligence, or
other solemnity allowed in Law, at least the private knowledge be certain, is
not regarded, nor does constitute the knower, in mala fide, March 14. 1626.
Nisbit contra Williamson. But a Mother was not found to enjoy this benefit in
prejudice of her Children, there being several presumptions of her knowledge of
their right, November 20. 1662. Children of Wolmet contra Lady Wolmet and
Dankeith her Husband. In some cases a Citation and Production of any other
evidently preferable Right is sufficient, when the possessor has no probable
Title; but where he has a doubtful Title, mala fides, is only induced by
Litiscontestation, or Sentence, as in Reductions, whether the defender is
liable for the bygone profits, from Citation, Litiscontestation, or Decree is
in the arbitriment of the Judge, July 11. 1627. Pitmedden and the Lord
Elphingstoun contra Smith. The like in a Tack reduced upon a failzie, Hope,
Reduction, Seatoun contra Seatoun. The like, June 2. 1610. Mr. Robert Hunter
contra Lord Sanquhar. The like as to a Decree of Removing reduced, and the
violent profits found due only after Litiscontestation in the reduction,
January 24. 1611. Jousie contra Mortimer. And found only to take effect after
Sentence, in Reduction of an Appryzing, because the half of the of the sum was
paid, Hope, poinding, James Lamb contra Smeatoun Hepburn. And though the
Possessors Right was but a Tack, which fell in consequence with the setters
(...), reduced in Parliament; yet the Tacks-mans Possession, bona fide, was
sustained, though he needed not to be called to the Decree of Parliament,
seeing that on that Decree there was nothing done to make him know it, or put
him in mala fide, July 19. 1664. Elizabeth Douglas and Longformacus her Spouse
contra Lord of Wedderburn. Upon this ground, an adjudger was preferred to the
bygone duties uplifted by him, to a prior Appryzer, who charged the Superior
to Infeft him before the Adjudication, December 1. 1632. Lord of Kilkerran
contra Ferguson. This was extended to the profits uplifted by Infeftment upon a
Disposition, though granted after the Liferent Escheat fell, in prejudice of
the Superior and Donatar, July 3. 1624. Moor contra Hannay and the Earl of
Galloway; And extended to a Tack or Few of Ward-Lands not Confirmed by the
Superior, in prejudice of his Donatar of the Ward, March 13. 1627. Lord of
Ley contra Blair. And extended to the profits of a Procurator-Fiscals place,
wherein the incumbent served three years without interruption, though his Right
was reduced thereafter, and declared null, ab initio, February 17. 1624.
Thomson contra Law. It was also extended to one, who having a posterior Right
of Reversion, first redeemed and possessed thereby, as to bygones, before the
Citation, though he had not possessed so long as to give him the benefit of a
possessory Judgment, November 18. 1664. Guthrie contra Lord of Sornbeg. It
was also sustained against a Minor, reducing upon Minority and Lesion, yet the
possessor by virtue of his Contract, was secure as to bygons, before Citation;
here there was a probable cause of contracting for an onerous consideration,
though not fully equivalent, February 16. 1666. Earl of Wintoun contra Countess
of Wintoun.

Upon this Title, a Tennent was liberat from removing, upon a warning by a Fiar
after the death of his Father the Liferenter, in respect he set the Tack
without mention of his Liferent, and was reputed Fiar; and therefore, the Son
was put to a new warning, February 16. 1669. Hamiltoun contra Harper.

Possession bona fide, was found to Liberat an Appryzer from being countable to
the other Appryzers within year and day, July 17. 1675. Bailzie Baird contra
Bailzie Johnstoun. It was also sustained against the Donatar of forefaulture,
January 28. 1679. Lord of Blair contra Lady Heslehead. It was also sustained
upon an Infeftment for relief, whereby the rents were to be imputed in
satisfaction, both of the Principal and Annual, February 8. 1676. Margaret
Scrimzour contra the Earl of Northesk. Yea, it was sustained, though the
possessors Title was forged, he being a singular Successor, not accessory to,
or conscious of the forgery, even after improbation of his Title, was proponed
by exception, but not sustained, but reserved by way of Action, in which the
Title was found false, yet the bona fides was extended to the rents spent, till
he was put in mala fide, by probation of the forgery, but he was found liable,
in quantum lucratus, for getting more price for the Land in question, then he
paid to his Author therefore, December 10. 1677. Dick of Grange contra Sir
Laurance Oliphant.

But no unlawful Possession is valid in this case, if it be vicious, violent,
clandestine, or momentany. But it is not so evident when a possession is
accounted momentany; sure little time will suffice in Movables, but in Lands
more time is required; a year or term, or less time may suffice.

This Right is different from the possessory Judgment competent upon
Infeftments which require longer time; and because it is an effect of
Infeftments, Tacks or the like, we shall speak thereof in that place. If the
Possession bona fide, be by virtue of a colorable Title, though perhaps null
in it self upon informalities in the Law requisite, or upon Inhibition,
interdiction, or want of power in the granter, it is effectual. Yet when by a
common or known Law, the Title is void materially; in this case the possessor
is not esteemed to possess, bona fide, it being so evident, ignorantia juris
non excusat: As if a Relict should possess Lands or others, the Marriage being
dissolved by her Husbands death within year and day, November 16. 1633. Grant
contra Grant. Hereby it is evident, that possession has much in it dictinct
and several from Fact, and therefore it stands in place of a Title in Ejections
and Spuilzies.

25. By the Canon Law allowed by our Custom, possessor decennalis and
triennalis non tenetur docere de titulo etiam in causa salsi, whereupon
Prebendars were assoilzied from production in an improbation of their
provisions, Hope, Improb. Bishop of Galloway contra the Prebendars of the
Chappel-royal. But this holds not in Reductions, where the Title is supposed,
but craved to be reduced upon a better Right, as when the debate is, who has
the right of Patronage, Earl of Wigtoun contra Drummellier, July 24. 1622. Earl
of Wigtoun contra Bishop of Glasgow; for in these cases an Ecclesiastical
persons Title was to be reduced, in consequentiam with the Patrons Title, which
has not this privilege. But this possession must be as being holden and
repute a part of a Benefice, and must be proven by Witnesses; and therefore,
the possession of Lands by tollerance, was found probable by Witnesses, to
elide thirteen years possession thereof by a Minister, who pretended to it as a
part of his Glibe Ministers of contra Duke of Bucleugh. And if the Churchmens
Title can be found, their possession will be ascribed thereto, and regulate
thereby. And therefore the Bishop of Dumblain, as Dean of the Chapel-Royal,
having long possessed ten Chalders of Victual, as a part of his Benefice, there
being found a Mortification of that Victual by the King, bearing the King to
have had right by Disposition from another, and that others right being
produced, did bear, Reversion in the body thereof for seven thousand Merks,
which being paid to the King when the Bishops were suppressed, and his grant of
Redemption thereupon voluntarly, without an Order or Sentence: The Church-mens
possession more then thirteen years before the Redemption, and thirteen years
after the Redemption, was elided by the reverse Right and Redemption: Neither
did the Act of Sederunt, after the Reformation, declaring ten years possession
of Kirk Lands before the Reformation, and thirty years after, to import a right
sustain this Church-mans possession: That Act being only for Fews, granted by
Churchmen, not for rights granted to Churchmen, July 7. 1676. Bishop of
Dumblain contra Francis Kinloch. And it was found, that thirteen years
possession of Viccarage by a Minister, did not prefer him to a Tacksman, where
the Ministers Title was a Decree of Locality produced, and not containing the
Teinds in question, February 24. 1681 Doctor Lesly contra the Minister of
Glenmuck. This right in favors of Churchmen, is by a rule of Chancelary of
Rome, which has been continued after Reformation, as being convenient, that
less time and Title should give right to the Church Benefices, whose
Mortifications may be easilier lost, or suppressed, then other Rights. There is
also another rule in the Chancelary, that triennalis pacificus possessor
beneficii est inde securus; this rule gives not right to the Church, but
prefers one Churchman to another, if he continue to possess three years,
without interruption, though he could not defend by his Right.

There is a third Benefit by Possession of Benefices and Stipends, by seven
years peaceable possession, whereby they have the benefit of a possessory
Judgment, and cannot be called in question but by Reduction, or Declarator;
and therefore, a Ministers possession of his Stipend for seven years, was
continued, though it partly affected the Stock, and no Title produced but a
Horning upon a Decree of Locality, which was lost and never Booked, December
6. 1672, Mr. John Veitch contra Lord of Wedderly. And a Minister having
possessed his Stipend seven years after the restitution of Bishops, was
preferred to a Dean, who had a Right before the year 1637. and that all Bishops
and Deans are restored by Act of Parliament, to their Rights and Possessions as
before, 1637. until the Deans Right were declared, in petitorio, February 9.
1675. Mr. Lewis Dunlap contra his Parochioners of Skeen. And by an Act of
Sederunt, possession of Benefices, or Ecclesiastical Rights, thirty years after
the Reformation, or ten years before, is appointed to stand as a valid Title,
Hope, possession, Earl of Home contra Earl of Bucleugh.

26. So also Possession of a forefault person five years, and being repute as
Heretable (...), is appointed to stand as a valid Right to the King, and his
Donatar of forefaulture, Parl. 1584. cap. 2. And so it was found, though the
Donatar was nearest of Kin to the forefault person, and might be presumed to
have had his right, Maxwel contra Westraw, July 11. 1623. where Hope observes,
that the Donatar made faith, that he had just reason to affirm that the Rights
were wanting, Hope Possession. This was sustained, though it was offered to be
proven, that the Rights were reduced, in foro contradictorio, upon recognition,
February 20. 1611. Hairstones contra Campbel. The like, though the forefault
persons predecessors was denuded, by a public Infeftment of Wodsett; and
possessed also by a Back-bond, seeing the Wodsett might have been renounced;
therefore it was left to the Inquest, appointed to cognosce by the Act of
Parliament, whether the possessor was repute as Heretor, or as Backtacks-man,
as was found in the case of Sir John Scot of Scotstarbet contra Tennents of
Garvock. So effectual is Possession active, besides that it is the ground of
prescription, whereby property and all other rights are introduced; and
passive, it is sufficient to hold out all others, who have not a good right,
and it is always favorable in dubious cases; from the experience whereof, is
the vulgar saying, that Possession is eleven points of the Law.

27. Possession as distinct from Right, is ascriveable only to that Title, by
which it did begin, in prejudice of him from whence the Possession was
acquired, and must be restored, notwithstanding any other Right in the
Possessor, to which he might ascribe it, and which after he had quit the
Possession, might recover it, Spots. possession, George Herreis contra
Anderson. Idem. Elphingstoun of Selms contra Bethia Gutherie. The like, when it
is acknowledged as accepted from a party, after Decree of Removing, Nicol. de
migrando, Earl of Angus contra Gilbertson. Possession attained without Process,
by on who had in his person, both a Wodsett and an Appryzing of the Lands,
found only ascryveable to the Appryzing, that the same might be satisfied by
Intromission, as being jus nobilius and durior sors, as was found in the case
of the Earl of Nithisdale contra Countess of Balcleugh. But as to all others
from whom the Possession flowed not, the same may be defended upon all Rights
in the Possessor, or him from whom he has tollerance or right.

28. The Main real Right is Property, standing in the middle betwixt Community
and Possession, which precide it, and Servitude and Pledge which follow it.

The nature of Property is best understood, when it is compared with Community;
for in this they both agree, that either has a power to dispose of things, and
in this differ, that Community is a promiscuous, and a conjunct power; but
property is a disjunct and separat power of disposal, which, if it be with
diminution of any part of the Fruits or use, it is a diminished property, and
that diminution is called a Servitude, or Pledge; but though the Proprietar,
and these who have Servitudes, have both the power of Disposal of the same
thing, yet in this they differ from Community, that it is not promiscuous, but
a distinct power, relating to distinct Effects and Interests.

The way to distinguish betwixt Property and Servitude is, that the greatest
interest retains the name of Property, which has in it a power of Disposal
of the Substance of the thing, or alienation thereof; whereas, Servitude is the
lesser Right, and reaches but the Fruits or use in part, or for a time; it
will be here proper to inquire the manner of Constitution of Property, where it
was not; for the transmission of Property (being constitute) from one to
another, comes in afterward amongst Conveyances, or Transmissions of Rights.

29. The first and most simple way of constitution of Property, is by
Possession of things common to all men, in so far as the Possessors use
requires; for as before is showen the original Community of the Creatures, did
necessarly carry this with it, that every one might possess that which was
possessed by no other, in so far as his use required, and might not be lawfully
dispossessed thereof without his own consent, which made it to become proper to
him, and that he might defend violence against his posession of it. This
Property began first in Movables, Clothes, and Ornaments of the Body,
Instruments for making use of the Creatures, as Darts, which are the most
ancient Instruments of force, while man was satisfied with the natural Fruits
of the Earth, and such other Creatures as for his use and delectation, he
seized on for the time.

30. Secondly, Appropriation was by man's Industry and Possession, by subduing
and taming of the Creatures, and his Affection to make use of them, not for a
time, but constantly, for thereby not only his common Right and Possession, but
his industry and labor did properly Entitle him to these things he possessed:
Thus when man made use of the other Creatures, not by his own strenth alone,
nor by Darts, Stones or the like, but made use of one Creature to master
others, as Hounds, Halks, etc. these Instruments of pleasure managed by him,
became unquestionably proper to him; then man proceeded also to subdue and make
proper Cattle, as Cows, Oxen, Sheep, Horse, Mules, Camels, etc. by constant use
making of their work and fruits.

Thirdly, Property having extended it self to the ground, appropriated Seats
for Habitation, and Fields for Pasturage, and Tillage, and that for a constant
abode; whereas at first, though man's use-making of the Earth did introduce some
kind of Property in it for the time, yet was it without a purpose or evidence
of a constant or perpetual appropriation, but men moved with their Cattle, from
place to place, without fixation in any one place.

31. This fixation of the Ground began first in Houses, and Wells, which in the
places of the World first Inhabited by man, were rare, and of great necessity
and use, and therefore, Dug with Industry, and preserved with Earnestness.

32. Fourthly, When man increased upon the Earth, and Societies became to be
Erected, they possessed whole Countries, and divided them amongst them, by
Meiths and Marches, and when any one of them swelled to that greatness, that
their Territories could not contain them, either the whole, or the Excreass of
them removed to places of the Earth not then inhabited, and fixed Seats for
themselves, though the unjust ambition of some of them, made them expel
others: Yet that, as contrary to the Law of Nature, was also abhorred, and gave
occasion to the rest, from that same Law to concur with, and maintain the
oppressed. So that almost the whole Face of the Earth became changed from its
Original Community, and there was a tacit consent of Division, and Property
established throughout the World, except some Barbarous Nations, and nothing
was left common that could be proper, but the few ways of Community (of which
before) do only remain. In which Division and Appropriation, this also is
employed, by the common consent of Nations, that what is possessed or
appropriated by none, or relinquished, is not now common to all, but held as
belonging to none, that by posession it might be appropriat.

33. And therefore, Fifthly, Property is introduced, by Possession of things
which are simply void and belong to none, and that without limitation. This is
by the Law of Nations, and their common consent, whence is that principle, Quod
nullius est fit occupantis. And this way of Appropriation, differs from the
first way, whereby things common or their Fruits, become proper by seasure and
possession; for, that being an effect of the Native Community, was with this
limitation employed in the Nature of Community, that one might sease upon no
more then their use required, without hurt to the rest, who enjoyed that same
Community, as in a Theater, which is common to a City, every Citizen as he
comes, may possess a place for himself, by standing, or sitting there, but he
may notly along, if thereby others of the Society might be hindered, to be
present and behold. So if Property now were but the effect of that Original
Community, when the Earth is so straightened with the increase of man, it would be
the ground of perpetual Contention and War, that the Possessions of some were
unequal and exceeded, and others had not enough; therefore, for preservation of
the common Peace of mankind, the custom and consent of Nations, has allowed
Property of things void by Occupation, without any further debate. All these
ways of Appropriation are by Possession or Occupation, and thus are all free
Creatures Appropriat, as Fowls of the Air, wild Beasts of the Earth, Fish of
the Sea, without distinction, upon whose ground they be taken; and though men
may be hindered to come within the ground of others, there being now no ground
for passage only upon account of Hunting, Halking, or Fishing: Yea, though in
some Nations, the use of some of these free Creatures be prohibit to any but
to the Sovereign power, yet the personal restraint hinders not, but he who
seaseth upon any wild Creature in another man's bounds, it becomes his own,
though he be punishable for that trespass; and Positive Law may make a part of
the punishment to be the loss of what he has taken. So likewise, it is the
first seasure that introduces Property, and not the first attempt, and
prosecution; as he who pursues or wounds a wild Beast, a Fowl, or Fish, is
not thereby Proprietar, unless he had brought it within his power, as if he had
killed it, or wounded it to death; or otherways, given the effectual Cause
whereby it cannot use its native freedom as at the Whale Fishing at Greenland,
he that wounds a Whale, so that she cannot keep the Sea for the smart of her
Wound, and so must needs come to Land, is Proprietar, and not he that lays
first hand on her at Land, though the falling in upon another Game, when he
alone is in prosecution, may be (...) civility, or injury, yet it hinders not
the constitution of Property, though it be a just ground to annull the Right of
the first Possessor, and make him restore to the first prosecuter, if he
continue his pursuit, with a probability to reach his prey. And therefore, in
the last Dutch War, a Frigot of the Kings, called, the Nightingall, and a
French Frigot, being then auxiliary to the King in that War, having
Rencountered a Dutch Privateer, who had possessed and manned three Pryzes, and
having debelled him, in the mean time the Prizes made sail to escape; while the
two Frigots were taking two of these Pryzes, a Scottish Privateer atacked the
third, called, the Tortoice, and made her strick Sail, but not knowing whether
the other Frigots were friends or foes at such a distance, did not board her,
till they came near. The French Frigot being nearer then the English Frigot,
both the French Frigot and the Scottish Privateer claimed the Tortoice as their
Prize: The English Captain sent the Prize to Leith, and declared the case under
his hand, whereupon the Admiral adjudged the Tortoice Prize to Rankine the
Scottish Privateer, and the matter being brought before the Lords by Reduction,
the French Privateer pursued not, but the Kings Advocat; the Lords found, that
the Frigots under the Kings pay having defeat the Dutch Privateer, who was
Possessed of the Tortoice, and being in view and prosecution of her, that
Rankins Capture and Possession was injurious, otherways then to assist the
first attacker, unless it were proven that the Prize would have escaped, if it
had not been stopped, and forced to strick Sail to Captain Rankine, February
15. 1667. Kings Advocat contra Captain Rankine.

The Creatures are understood to be free while they are not within the power of
any. But Fishes within Ponds are proper, and Fowls though never so wild, while
the are in custody. Amongst these free Creatures, these which are tame are not
comprehended, but only these which are wild, which if they be tamed, contrary
their Nature, are so long proper, as their tameness remains; but if they return
to their ancient wildness, the property thereof is lost; so soon as the owner
cease to pursue for Possession, It is so long continued, or understood to be
continued by the mind, having once begun by bodily Acts; and therefore,
prosecution of wild Creatures will not begin, though it may continue the
property of them. Bees are numbered amongst these wild Creatures, which
therefore are not proper, though they hyve on Trees, more then Fowls who set
their Nests thereupon, but if they be within a Skep, or work in the hollow of a
Tree, Wall, or in a House, they are proper, or while they Hyve, or flying away
are pursued by the Proprietar: but thereafter they belong to him who next
gets them in his power: As also, these who were tamed and become wild,
become theirs who regain and tame them again, and return not to their first
owner. Thus are also Gemms, Pearls and precious Stones, appropriat by the
finders. And likewise Lands not possessed, or which do arise of new, as do some
Islands in the Sea, or more frequently in public Rivers, which by the Civil
Law are accounted to accress to these whose Ground lies nearest proportionably,
according to that part of the Ground that fronts them; but where such civil
constitution is not, such Islands are public as the Rivers are, in which they
are bred.

34. The Second way of Appropriation, is by Accession, whereby the accessories
of things proper are also proper, as the birth of all Cattle, and their Fruits.
It is likewise a natural acquisition of property, which arises by accretion of
part, accretion of Birth and of Fruits, and even the Dung, or any other profit
follows the property of that whereunto it is accessory, not only because by
common utility, that is understood to be comprehended in the common consent of
Mankind, to depart from the Original Community of the Earth, and all the parts,
Fruits and Profits thereof, and all other things thereupon, that the samine
might be appropriat. But also from that general consent of Mankind, Quae
nullius sunt, fiunt occupantis. And so the Birth and Fruits being a new
production, are carried as accessory by the first possession.

So Trees and all Plants, as the Birth of the Earth are carried therewith,
while they are growing thereupon, even to singular Successors; but if separat,
or contained in moveable Boxes, they are not so carried with the Ground, as
accessories, but are separat Movables. So likewise, the Natural Fruits of the
Ground, as Grass, and Herbs, are carried as the Fruit thereof accessory
thereto. But by our Custom, Corns and Industrial Fruits, are esteemed as
distinct Movables, even before they be separat or ripe, and belong not to
purchasers of Land or Heirs. These are the ways of constituting Property by
natural equity, without consideration of the positive Law of any particular
Nation; but there is no doubt that the sole Dispositive Will of the owner, may
state the property of what is his, and fully at his dispose in another: So may
the public content of any people introduce ways of Appropriation, as they find
most convenient, for public good, and that either expressly by Statute, or
Declaration of the Legislative Authority, or tacitly by Consuetude; and albeit
it be a good and solid rule, Quod meum est, sine me alienum fieri nequit, yet
it has the exception of public sanction, or common custom, and so though it
be not by the sole and proper consent of the owner, yet it is by the consent of
that Society of people, or their Authority, wherein the submission or consent
of every one in the Society is employed, in so far as the design of Association
extends.

Therefore, first, In Fungibles and all such things as are not discernable from
others of that kind, Possession is generally esteemed to constitute property,
which is most evident in current Money, which, if it be not sealed, and during
its remaining so, is otherways undiscernable, and does so far become the
property of the Possessor, that it passes to all singular Successors without
any question, of the knowledge, fraud, or other fault of the Authors, without
which, Commerce could not be secured; if Money, which is the common mean of it,
did not pass currently without all question, whose it had been, or how it
ceased to be his, l. si alien. 78. ff. de solutionibus, and though that Law is
in the case of commixtion of Money with his Money, who was not owner of it,
whereby it is esteemed as consumption of the Money commixed, that ground does
necessarily reach all Money, so soon as it passes to any singular successor by
commerce, for thereby in the same way it is consumed.

35. Secondly, Upon the like ground it is, that Appropriation by Alluvion, is
admitted in all Nations, for thereby the adjection of others ground insensibly,
and unperceivably by the running of a River, becomes a part of the ground to
which it is adjected, because it is uncertain from whose Ground such small and
unperceivable particles are carried by the Water, and thereby also the frequent
questions that would arise betwixt the Proprietars, upon the opposite Banks of
Rivers are prevented; and though the adjection may be perceivable and
considerable in a tract of time, it makes no difference, if at no particular
instant the adjection be considerable, as the motion of the Palm of a Horologe
is insensible at any instant, though it be very perceivable when put together,
in less then the quarter of an hour.

36. Thirdly, Upon the same ground, confusion of Liquids, which are not
separable, alters the property, in so far that what before belonged to
several owners severally, becomes now to belong to the same owners, pro
indiviso, according to the proportion of the value of their shares, neither is
there any difference, whether the confusion be made by the consent of parties,
by accident, or by mistake, or fault, the effect being the same in all: that
because the parts are undiscernable and inseparable, so as to give every owner
the individual body he had before, therefore, he can only receive by
equivolence, the like value by division.

Fourthly, upon the same ground, commixture of Grain or other arid bodies,
belonging to diverse owners, which cannot be easily separate, or of any
materials in one Mass, Work, or Artifice, if they be not separable, they induce
a communion proportionable to the value of the several ingredients: And though
all the ingredients remain without alteration of their substance, so that in
subtilty, the property of each part might be considered as remaining with the
former owner, not only in commixture, but in confusion, alluvion, and Money:
Yet public Authority for utilities sake, constituteth or declares Property in
manner foresaid, which is also consequent from necessity, and the nature of the
thing, though there were no positive Law; and such commixtures are not like the
commixtures of a Flock, where every individual is discernable and separable, as
having the several marks of their distinct owners; and if a commixture in that
case should become undiscernable, it would of necessity introduce a community,
as if different Flocks of unmarked Lambs should in any way fall to come
together, so that the owners, or the servants could not distinguish their own,
there were no remeed but to divide according to the number belonging to the
several owners, and till that division were made, every owner had
proportionable interest in every individual, seeing none of them could say or
instruct this or that to be properly his own.

38. Fifthly, Positive Law for the common benefit, constituteth Property by
necessar conjunction in constructure; such is the Roman Law, de tigno injuncto,
whereby a Beam, or any other material builded in a House, becomes proper to the
owner of the House or Building, that policy be not prejudged by demolishing of
Buildings, which therefore takes effect, whether the materials be made use of
bona, or mala fide; yea, though the materials were affected with theft, which
in other cases, is labes realis, the public interest would not suffer
demolition, but give the prior owner the value, secundum pretium affectionis,
and further punish the transgressor; as the Roman Law gave the double value,
but if before receiving of that satisfaction, the Building become to be
demolished, there is no doubt but the owner of such materials will recover the
same, rei vindicatione.

Upon the like ground of common utility, the Roman Law did constitute Property
by contexture, whereby the materials wrought into Cloth, Garment, or other
Artifact, did become the property of the owner of that Artifact, if without
destruction thereof, or considerable detriment thereto; such materials could
not be separate therefrom, in which they made no difference, whether these
materials were made use of bona, or mala fide; nor did the inherent labes of
materials stolen, hinder the accession and appropriation thereof by
contexture,. 26. instit. de rerum divisione: But both in constructure and
contexture, he who thereby acquireth the property of materials belonging to
other owners, seeing restitution thereof ceasseth, he is liable, not only for
recompense, in quantum locupletior fastus est, but also for reparation of the
damage of the former owner, in which the manner of Acquisition is considered;
for, if the materials of others be made use of, in constructure or contexture,
bona fide, the orninar value thereof is only due, but otherways the greatest
value, according to the estimation of the former owner, per pretium affectionis.

In Contexture it is considered, what is the design of the Artefact, that it
may appear what it is principal and what it is accessory, as in Clothes the
Materials though much more precious then the Cloth, are accessory thereto, and
the property of the whole befalls not to the owner of the Materials, but the
owner of the Clothes. And precious Stones set in Rings, are accessory thereto,
though more precious then the Gold, or other Material of the Ring. But
otherways, if a Gemm beset in Gold, the Gold becomes accessory thereto, and
wherever the case is dubious, that which is of greatest value carries the
property of the whole.

Albeit that contraversies have been seldom moved with us, as to constructure,
or contexture, it is not to be doubted, but we would proceed upon the like
grounds of equity and utility.

Upon the like ground of accession, questions in relation to Pictures are to be
resolved, for if the Ground, broad, or Table of a Picture belong to one and the
same be painted by another, either for his own use, or for the use of a third
party, there does not continue two distinct properties, one of the Broad, and
another of the Picture, nor a communion by proportion of Interest, but the
property of the whole befalls to one, as to which, there was a contrariety
betwixt the two Roman Juris-consults, Paulus and Caius, for Paulus allowed the
Picture to follow the Broad, as accessory thereto, and carried therewith, l. in
rem, 23.. 3. ff. de rei vindicatione; but Caius on the contrair, attributes
the Broad as accessory to the Picture, l. 9.. 2. ff. de acquirendo rerum
dominio, and both Sentences be confirmed by Justinian in the Digest. In the
Institutes, he prefers the opinion of Caius,. 34. Instit. de rerum divisione;
upon that reason, that it were ridiculous, that a precious Picture of Appelles
should follow a Broad, though of the lowest value: Albeit before, precious
Stones, though of greater value then Cloth, were declared by him to be carried
therewith, Positive Law may determine the point either way, without injustice,
according to equity and expediency; but there are diverse cases in the matter,
which should be diversely resolved; as,

First, If any Picture be Painted upon a Wall, or other immovable, it does
necessarily cede to the ground thereof, and quality, wherever the Picture is,
for ornament of its ground, as when a Scrine, or Cabine, or the like Movables
are Painted, because the adorning of the ground is in that case designed; but a
Face or any other Picture, where the Broad is only designed for it, the Broad
is most conveniently esteemed as accessory thereto, and in all cases, the owner
of the whole is liable in quantum lucratus est, even though the Painting be
done by him, who knew that the ground was not his own, for in that case, the
presumption is not strong enough, that he did it animo donandi, for it cannot
be imagined, that the making use of an inconsiderable Broad of an other, should
infer the purpose of gifting a fine Picture thereupon, neither that they who
Paint a Wall, Scrine, or Boxes of others, being Articens, who work for profit,
did the same to gift. but to obliege the other party.

Writing upon Parchment, Paper, or other Tables, was by the Rontan Law
accounted as accessory thereto, Instit. de rerum divisione,. 33. l. 3.. pen.
ff. ad exhibendum, which is very disionant from that which is there determined
of Pictures; and therefore, is every where in desuetude, as is observed by
Grotius, Minsynger and others, both as to Writing and Printing in the same way
as Painting; for if the Writing be upon the Wall or other Movables of another,
or if it be upon the Books of others, it cedeth thereto; but if it be upon
Paper or Parchment, the design and use whereof is for Writing, and the use
whereof is consumed and lost by Writing, it does follow the Writing, and it
were very unreasonable to think that the Evidents and Securities of Lands, or
any Manuscript, should be accessory to the Paper, or Parchment whereon they
were Written, and which were only designed to bear and preserve the Write.

38. It is a Rule in the Roman Law, which we follow inedificatum solo cedit,
for thereby all Buildings of Houses, Walls, Wells, Dyks, etc. And generally,
all things sixed to the Ground, are accounted as parts of the Ground, and pass
therewith (though not expressed) to all singular Successors: And not to
Executors, but to Heirs; and thence, not only the Materials of others become
the owners of the Ground, on which they are builded, and for preserving of
policy, cannot be demolished, as has been said of Constructure: But likeways,
he that Builds with his own Materials upon another Man's Ground, the samin
accresce to the Ground, and if the owner of these Materials knew the Ground to
be another, the Roman Law gave him no Recompense therefore, but presumed it to
be done, animo donandi, which is rather penal, in hatred of these who incroach
upon the ground of others, then from any sufficient ground of presumption; and
therefore, our Custom does allow a Recompense to the Builder, in so far as the
Heretor were profited thereby, in that he might get a greater Rent for that
Building. But Building by Tennents of Houses for their own use, though at their
removing, they leave the Land in better condition, then at their entry, they
get no satisfaction thereof, without paction. And a Liferenter having Rebuilded
a Jointure-house, which was burnt by accident in her Vidowity, and Rebuilt by
her second Husband, was found to have no satisfaction therefore, except the
House had been accustomed to be set for Rent; and that the Liferenter, or her
Husband had no power to demolish any thing, that was fixed to the Ground,
February 2. 1672. Captain Gutbrie contra Lord of Mckerstoun. And an Appryzer
having Rebuilded a burnt House, was not presumed to gift the same to a
Liferenter, albeit her Seasine was Registrat, but she had her option, either to
get so much out of the Rent of the Tenement, as it was worth before the
Reparation; or to have the possefsion of the Tenement, paying the Annualrent of
the Sums necessarly and profitably wared upon the Reparation thereof, during
her Life, January 24. 1672. Hacket contra Wat.

There remains to be cleared, that Appropriation which is by Specification,
whereby of materials belonging to other owners, a new species is produced,
whether the product belongs to the owners of the materials, or to him for whom
the Work was made, as to which, the two great Sects of the ancient Lawers, were
divided, Proculus and his followers attributing the property of all materials
to him that made the Work. And Sabinus and his, attributing the whole to the
owners of the materials: But Tribonian midseth the matter thus, that if the
product can easily be reduced to the first matter, the owners of the matter
remain proprietars of the whole, as when a Cup or other (...) is made of
Metal; but otherways the materials cedes to the Workmanship, not only when the
materials are consumed, but even when they remain, and cannot be reduced to
their first nature, as Wine of other men's Grapes, Malt of other men's Bear,
Cloth of other men's Wool, and even a Ship of other men's Timber, but not by
Maultning of Barley, or Dying of Cloth, or the like, which change not the
Species. Conanus is of opinion, that whether the Workmanship or the Materials
be more precious, the property is carried by the value. And (...) esteems,
that there arises a communion, as in confusion of Liquors, proportioned
according to the value of the Materials and Workmanship. Positive Law, or
Custom may without injustice, follow any of these ways, reparation being always
made to the party who loses his interest, unless the presumption be strong
enough to infer, that the Workmanship was performed, animo donandi, by him who
knew the Materials belonged to others.

In Immoveables, the constitution or transmisson of property, is expressed in
Write, and is parted in many interests; but in Movables, property is simple
and full without servitude, and there is no other interest in them, unless they
be impledged, neither need the Title Constitution or Transmission of property
in Movables be instructed by Write, but is presumed from possession; and
therefore, for the Restitution or recovery of Movables from the possessor
thereof, it is not sufficient to instruct that the pursuer had a sufficient
right thereto, as by the birth or fruit of his Ground or Cattle; or as being
bought by him and in his Possession: But he must instruct the manner how his
Possession ceased, as being either taken from him by violence, or by stealth,
or having strayed, and being lost or the like; and the reason thereof is,
because movables pass without Write, and oftimes without witness; and
therefore, whatever right parties once had to Movables, it is presumed to be
transmitted by Donation, sale, or otherways, unless it be proven that he lost
Possession, as aforesaid; or otherways, that it be proven by the Defenders
Oath, that he knew the thing in question to be the pursuers proper Goods; for
in that case, even his private knowledge will prejudge him, though he had bought
it at a competent rate, though it be not so in Heretable Rights, to whose
constitution and transmission, Write and Solemnities are necessar, neither will
it avail, though it were a Horse bought in public Market and Booked there; for
we have not the privilege of Fairs which the English have, that Horse bought
in public Market should be secured to the buyer, without further question, but
he buys the same with the peril of the sellers rigt, March 19. 1639. Ferguson
contra Forest. Hence it is, that in all Actions for recovery of movables,
there is no more lybelled, then that the movables were the proper Goods of the
pursuer, and in his Possession, for such time, by using the same as his own
proper goods, and condescending how he ceased to possess, as being lent by
him, which was found relevant to be proven by witnesses, though the question
was of a Book of a considerable value, January 27. 1665. Walter Scot Oy to
Scotishtarbet contra Sir John Fletcher; or that the goods did stray, February
3. 1672. Scot of Gorrenberrie contra Elliot; or if the goods were in possession
of a Defunct at his death, the presumption of sale ceasseth; or if there be a
stronger contrary presumption, as was found in the case of Jewels, which the
Defender neither could use as proper to his quality, and he was not a Merchant
or Jewler; (these Jewels were once in pignorat by Write,) in that case
possession was not found sufficient to infer property, December 12. 1665. John
Ramsay contra James Wilson. And even in the case of Ships of War, which are the
most considerable movables, property was presumed by possession without write,
July 26. 1673. Captain Hamiltoun contra the owners of the Statine, and the
property of Money was inferred, by having the Key of the Chist in which the
Money was unsealed, unless a contrary positive probation were adduced, June 18.
1675. Tailour contra Rankin. Yea, movables acquired bona side, for causes
onerous, were found not liable to a Hypothecation, or conditions of a written
disposition of them unless they had been affected with diligence, when they
were in the hands of him to whom they were disponed with these conditions,
December 17. 1675. Creditors of James Masterioun contra Creditors of Alies Thin.

These are the ways of Appropriation by private Right; Appropriation by public
Right is by War, and force, where there is no common Judge or Authority, for in
that case, equity and that common justice, which is acknowledged by all
Nations, as the rule of right and wrong, especially in so far as it is owned by
the Law of Nations, is a sufficient warrant for obtaining satisfaction by
force, where it is denied by justice; but our design here being only to
consider private Rights, we shall but noice that which by public Authority is
allowed in these cases, to be the peculiar Right of private persons, which does
only reach movables, seized upon by reprysals, or the Goods of enemies, or
their partakers taken in public War.

42. Reprysals or Letters of Mark, are granted by Princes or States, by their
Warrant or Commission, to seize upon the Goods of all persons under the
Dominion of such Princes or people, who have refused to make just reparation,
for the wrongs and damages done by any of their Subjects, which the Law of
Nations does justly and necessarly allow, for the common good of mankind; for
if private persons be injured, by these who are not under one common authority
with them, by Piracy, Pillage or otherways, oftimes they cannot know the
injurer, and all force being stated in public Authority, they cannot make use
thereof to redress or revenge themselves; and therefore, they can only make
application to the Sovereign Authority of that society of people, whereof they
are members, and represent and instruct the injury and damage sustained by
them, by the Subjects of other Princes or States, and thereupon desire that a
redress may be demanded, which is ordinarily done by Ambassadors, or other
Ministers of State; and if redress be not so obtained, the Sovereign authority
of the persons injured, may and ought to give Commissions for seazing upon the
goods of any of the people of that Society, whereof the injurers are members,
till just satisfaction and reparation be obtained, and though there be that
singularity in it, that the goods of these who did not the injury, are taken to
satisfy the same; yet therein, there is not only necessity but moral justice,
allowed and approven by the Custom of all Nations, by their common consent, for
without this Societies could not be preserved; and therefore, the public
association of people implies this in it, that the Society is liable for
reparation of the injuries and damages of any of their Society, when reparation
is refused.

Reprysals ought to be limited to a just satisfaction; and therefore, what is
thereby seized, ought to be adjndged in Courts of Admirality, wherein it ought
to be proven, that the goods seized belonged to persons of that Society, of
which the injurer is a member, and to be valued according to the rate they are
worth, where they are brought in and to be adjudged, in satisfaction to the
injured of their damage and interest, in whole or in part: So that the excress
should be forthco ming to the owner: thereof; and so soon as satisfaction is
obtained, the reprysals ought to ceass: Neither does the use-making of
reprysals in this just order and measure, import the breach of Treaties, or
common Peace, or infer public War, though they may become the occasion thereof.

43. But where the injury is public and attrocious, the Law of Nations has
necessarly and justly allowed public War, not only to reach the movables of
public enemies, but their Territories, Jurisdictions and Estates, wherein the
proportion of satisfaction cannot be so measured, nor is it so considered as in
reprysals. That which accreweth to private persons in War, is only the giving of
quarter, or getting of spoil, in so far as the same is allowed, or permitted by
the Commanders in chief, warranted by public Authority, as is ordinar to the
Soldiers upon defates of their enemies, to seize upon, and appropriat such
movables as are upon their enemies persons, or in their baggage: And sometimes
for the encouraging of Soldiers besieging, and for the obstinacy of the
besieged, the plunder of places gained by force, is for some time permitted,
and ceasseth so soon as countermanded. In other cases, what belongs to enemies
is confiscated for public use, and Soldiers ought to be contented with their
wages.

44. The main private interest in public War, is that which accreweth by
Commissions granted by the Admiral, for seazing and appropriating of the Ships
and Goods of public enemies, and of these who become partakers of the War, and
who carry not themselves as friends, or newters, to the Princes, or States
engaged in the War: For by our Custom, albeit such Ships and Goods be confiscat
as public, belonging to the King or States; yet private persons who undertake
these Commissions, have the expenses and profit of these seazures, paying a
fifteenth part thereof to the King, and a tenth part to the Admiral.

There have been many questions as to the Rights and Interests of Allies, and
Newters, very fully and accuratly debated, and decided in the Session, upon
occasion of the late Wars, betwixt the King and the States of the United
Provinces, which, because they are of great use, for clearing the important
points that occur in these controversies, and for vindicating of the public
justice of the Kingdom, we shall in the clearest and shortest method we can,
give account of what has been determined in all the Pryzes which came before
the Lords of Session in these Wars.

The Lord Admiral of Scotland is the Judge ordinar, and the sole Judge in the
first instance of all Prizes taken at Sea, but in the second instance, the
Lords of Session, who are the supreme Judges in all civil Causes in Scotland,
which are not determined by, or depending before the Parliament, or their
Commissioners, do upon complaint of iniquity committed by the Admiral, before
final sentence Advocat such Causes, wherein they find probable ground of
iniquity alleged and instructed; or in the second instance after sentence, do
grant Letters of suspension, or reduction of the Admirals Decreets, whereupon
all intricat and difficile questions in matters of Pryzes come to be debated
and determined by the Lords; there is no question, when the Goods and Ships
seized on belong to enemies, but only when they do belong, or are pretended to
belong to Allies or Newters.

The Lords, upon complaint of iniquity committed by the Admiral, it being
alleged, that the Lords were not Judges in the matters of Pryzes in the first
instance, yet they found, both by the amplitude of the power of their
Jurisdiction, and by the custom in former times, that it was competent to the
Lords to Advocat Causes from the Admiral upon iniquity, albeit the process
cannot begin before them in the first instance; for as they are the Kings
ordinar Council, all matters, not belonging to the Jurisdiction of another
Court, belongs to them; and therefore, they may, and often have Advocat Causes
from the Justice General, and other Judges in Criminal Causes; albeit the Lords
cannot decide these Causes, as being only Judges in Causes Civil, yet they may
Advocat the same, that in case, the reasons of Advocation be relevant and
proven, they may remit the Cause to the proper and competent Judge, if the
reason of Advocation be upon incompetency, or to other unsuspect Judges, if the
reason be upon the suspicion of the Judge, as being concerned in the Cause, or
nearly related to the parties, or having enmity against any of them; and
therefore, the Lords in the Advocation, raised by the owners of the Ship,
called, the Bounder, against Captain Gilleis, it being, alleged that the
Admiral had committed iniquity, in granting a conjunct probation for proving
the property of the Ship and loadning; the Lords found this no relevant ground
of Advocation of the Cause, it being in arbitrio judicis, whether to grant a
conjunct probation before answer to the relevancy of the reasons of
Adjudication, or to discuss the relevancy first, and then to admit the points
found relevant to probation; but in the other way witnesses, are adduced for
either party, yet this being only, ex nobili officio, the Lords remitted the
Cause to the Admiral, and ordained him to proceed to discuss the relevancy,
there being pregnant grounds of Adjudication instantly verified, June 12. 1673.
and upon his refusal, they did Advocat the Cause to themselves; they did also
ordain the Admiral to proceed upon the evidences adduced to adjudge or
assoilzie, without allowing a conjunct probation before answer, and declared,
that if he proceeded not accordingly, they would Advocat the Cause, albeit the
Danish Treaty bear, that their Ships shall not be meddled with, or their Goods
disloaded, till they be adjudged in a Court of Admirality; for the Lords are
the Kings great Court of Admirality, in the same way as his Commissioners in
England are Judges in the second instance, of Pryzes brought before the Admiral
of England, December 17. 1673. Captain Stuart contra the owners of the Danish
Ship, called, the Seal Fish.

When Questions concerning Prizes come before the Lords, they do not exclude
the Defenses of strangers, as being competent, and omitted in the first
instance, though that be a Rule by our custom, but do proceed according to the
common Law of Nations, and so they decided, July 23. 1667. Hans Jurgan contra
Captain Logan, which was the first case occurring in that question, and was
always followed after.

The rule by which the Lords have always proceeded in the matter of Pryzes,
has been the Law and Custom of Nations; and therefore, the Tenor of the
Admirals Commission was not found to be the rule, February 21. 1668.
Bartholomew Parkman contra Captain Allan.

The treaties betwixt the King and his Allies, in so far as they differ from
the common Law of Nations, have always been allowed by the Lords, as exceptions
from that general Rule, and good Defenses to the people, comprehended in these
Treaties.

In dubious cases, the Lords have proceeded by the Kings Instructions,
ordinarily adhibit to the Admiralities of all his Kingdoms, that they might keep
one uniform rule with strangers, in which, not only respect has been had unto
Justice, but even favor toward Allies, and policy and prudence toward all
Newters, that none of them might receive irritation, by the extension of
Justice in savourable case (...)

The ground of Justice for confiscating the Ships of those who are not enemies
is, that they have assisted the enemy in carrying on the War, and thereby
became accessories to the War, and by that Delinquence, do confiscat the Ships,
and the loading, by which they have had accession; for the Law and Custom of
Nations has very fitly restricted the reparation of this Delinquence, so as
not to state the parties offenders, as enemies, and thereby to make all their
goods confiscable, as enemies goods, but does limit the same to these Ships, in
which the concurse is acted, ifthey be seized in that Voyage, in which they
give assistance, or in the immediate return.

Engagement in War by Princes and States, cannot justly hinder the free Trade
of other people, upon whom, neither party has either Obligation or
Jurisdiction; but the common consent and Custom of Nations requires an
equality and newtrality in all other parties, that they concur not in the War
with either party, forbearing assistance in the War, which is by furnishing
them men, instruments of War, materials specially requisite for the present War,
Money furnished for public use, and in some cases Victual, as when carried to
places besieged, and other things which have promiscuous use in Peace and War,
when there is a special application there of to the necessar use of the War; as
Iron, Brass, Leid, Pitch, Tar, and the like, which are therefore called
counterband-goods, or prohibit-goods; and by the Denunciations of War,
intimation is ordinarily made to Newters, from what things to abstain, as from
carrying of counterband-goods toward enemies Ports, or carrying the goods and
ware of enemies, whereby their Trade is promoted, and they enabled to maintain
the War; or by carrying on their. Trade under the color of the Trade of
Neuters; and therefore, in time of War, Neuters do instruct their Vessels with
Passes, and other Documents, instructing, that the bottom and goods belong to
their subjects freemen, and that the parties engaged in the War, or any of
their subjects have no interest therein; which Passes are upon the oaths of the
owners of the Ship, or Masters thereof, and those who embarque the loading; and
where there is any Treaty, the formula of such Passes uses to be expressed,
always including an oath, and being given by such Magistrates as are agreed
upon.

First, Then seeing the accession of Neuters is a Delinquence, it can have no
place where there is not a public denunced War, which were presumed to be
known to the Delinquent; and therefore, the Ship and Goods belonging to
Neuters, were not found Prize, because carrying counterband-goods toward the
enemies Ports, unless the War had been nottourly known, at the place where they
loosed, at the time when they loosed, and acts of hostility, and declaring of
Prizes, in neighboring places was not found sufficient, July 22. 1667. Hans
Jurgan contra Captain Logan. The like was found of a Ship of Hamburg, carrying
counterband-goods to Danish Ports, after acts of hostility betwixt the King and
the Danes, because the Ship was taken before the Proclamation of the War
against the Danes, February 25. 1668. Merchants of Hamburg contra Captain
Dishingtoun. If Ships have in them counterband-goods, they may be brought up,
if the Port be not expressed upon oath, and be a free Port, or be contradicted by
the oaths of the Skipper and Company, which infers a full probation, in case
they acknowledge an unfree Port, and a presumptive probation, in case the Pass
bear not a free Port, yet it admits a contrary probation, for proving of the
true Port, January 21. 1673. Hendrick Anderson Master of the Sun of Dantzick
contra Captain Douglas. The like was found, where the Pass made the Port
uncertain and ambiguous, bearing, London to be the Port, but a greater fraught
promised, if the Ship was brought up into Holland, which was found to be elided
by a positive contrair probation, February 19. 1673. the owners of the
Palm Tree, and Patience contra Captain Atchison.

Amongst counterband, Pitch and Tar were found comprehended, July 9. 1668.
Captain Allan contra Bartholomew Parkman, Timber propper for Shipping, as
Masts, etc. is unquestionably counterband, but Timber of promiscuous use, is
not counterband, except in special cases, for the peculiar use of the War.

There is a particular Article in the first Treaty betwixt the King and the
Swedes, by which it is declared, that in regard the most of the materials of
the Swedish Trade, are Pitch, Tar, (...), etc. which are counterband, yet the
King declares, these shall not be seized upon that account, which was not found
sufficient to defend a Swedish Ship carrying such counterband-goods, not being
the product of their own Country, July 27. and 31. and November 6. 1665.
Parkman contra Captain Allan.

In the last Treaty betwixt the King and the Swedes, there is an Article,
bearing, that counterband shall be prize, si deprehendatur; and therefore, it
was thereby inferred, that the Ship and remanent loadning was not Prize, July
18. 1673. Captain Winchester contra the owners of the St. Andrew.

There was the like Article, both as to counterband, and enemies goods, in the
Treaty of Breda, betwixt the King, the Dutch, the French and Danes, at the
pacification of the first Dutch War, but that pacification being broken by the
second Dutch War, it was not found effectual in the subsequent War, upon a
Letter from the King.

A Ship was not found Prize for carrying of Victual or Money to the enemies
Country, July 16. 1673. Captain Lyel contra the Master of the Leopard.

There is no doubt but carrying of Soldiers to the enemies Country of what
Nation soever they be is counterband, and uses to be expressed in the Treaties
of Allies generally, under the name of men, which can only be understood of
strangers when they are actual Soldiers in the enemies service, for thereby
there is a greater participation of the War, then either by carrying of enemies
goods, or by carrying the instruments of War toward the enemies Ports; but
otherways, passengers who are Neuters, may freely go to the Ports of enemies
for Trading, traveling, or any other end not being found or presumed to become
Citizens or Soldiers there, but residing only as Factors for strangers, and
not contributing with the enemy to the War, they do not exceed the bounds of
Neutrality.

The difficulty is greater in case persons belonging to the enemies Country,
be carried in the Ships of Allies or Neuters, and there is little doubt but the
persons of enemies, residing in the enemies Country, and contributing to the
War, have the same or more effect, then the carrying of their goods, though
that has not occurred to be determined with us, and there is less doubt, that
being born in the enemies Country, or having resided there as Citizens, but
having left the same before the War, does no further state them as enemies,
then that by their Language, or other evidence they are presumed to be enemies,
unless they make it appear that they had left the enemies Country, and fixed
their residence elsewhere: Neither will any burdens imposed upon their Lands
or Houses, import their concurse in the War as enemies.

There was a special Concession by the King in favors of the King of Spain,
that because the Language of his Subjects in the Netherlands, is the same with
these of the United Provinces, that there should be no seazure of the Ships
belonging to his Subjects, upon account of being served, or Navigat by
Hollanders.

There is also an Article in the Swedish Treaty, that it should be free for
them to make use of Dutch Masters for Navigating their Ships, provided that
these Masters fix their Domiciles in Sweden, and become Citizens and
Inhabitants there.

These Concessions gave great occasion of doubt, whether these or other Allies
or Newters might make use of Hollanders as Mariners, or Servants in their
Ships, because, if without that Concession they were free to hire Hollanders
for Servants, they might hire them for Masters of Ships, as well as other
Mariners, and so needed no such privilege, and therefore run no hazard by
being Navigat by Hollanders; but if they might not lawfully make use of a
Hollands Master, till they had it by special privilege, a pari, they could not
make use of Hollands Mariners. It is clear, that the being by Nation Hollanders
infers no hazard, either as to the Masters or Seamen, for the War is only
with the Citizens and Inhabitants of the enemies Country, so that the true
Domicile or Residence is the main point in question. There is also great
difference betwixt the Master or Stearsman and the common Mariners; for the
Master is in possession of, and entrusted with the Ship, which is affected both
with his Delinquence, and by his Contracts of Bottomarie; and therefore, his
oath alone is always accounted sufficient probation, as to the property of the
Ship, and frequently the Stearsman is entrusted with the Loading, in which case
also his oath will be sufficient probation as to the property thereof, but the
oaths of the Mariners have only been made use of as ordinar witnesses, proving
by the concurse of two or more, and the confessions of the Master, Stearsman or
Company at Sea when they were taken, have not been allowed as sufficient
probation, to Confiscat the Ship or Loading, yea, though renewed after they
came to Land, but only when taken judicially, and very little use has been
made of the oaths of the Privateer, or his Company, for proving against
Strangers, but only their own oaths, and other evidences, the oath of the
Skipper alone was found to prove against the owners, July 13. 1669. Captain
Wood contra Booz Neilson.

The taking privilege for a Hollands Master upon the considerations aforesaid,
does not import that Mariners may not be made use of, who are by Nation
Holanders, if they reside not in the Jurisdiction of the enemy; neither will
the being of some of them aboard, infer such evidence, that the whole Ship and
Loading belong not to Newters and Free men; but if the most part of the Company
be Hollanders, or if the Master be a Hollander, the presumption is strong, and
gives sufficien ground for seazure; and therefore, is fitly declared by
Treaties, that if the Master by Nation be a Hollander, the Pass shall bear
expretly, that it is sworn upon oath that he is Citizen and Inhabitant in
Sweden.

The King by his Proclamation of the first War against the Dutch, did command
to seize and make Prizes of all Ships, where there were found any number of men
belonging to the enemy; and therefore, a Swedish Ship was found Prize, because
Navigat with Hollanders, being all or the most part of her company, albeit she
had a Pass from Sweden in the Terms of the formula, contained in the Swedish
Treaty; and albeit the Treaty bear, that where such a Pass is, in bona aut
homines nullo modo inquiratur, because in that same Article it is subjoyned,
nisi gravis suspicio subsit, and it was a most weighty ground of suspicion,
that the Ship or Goods belonged to Hollanders, that the Company acknowledged
that they resided in Holland, and were taken on there immediately before this
Voyage in this Process, it being alleged, that the confession of the Company,
taken by an Admiral Depute at Cromarty, was extorted by holding Swords and
Pistols to their Breasts, or that the samin was so extorted at Sea, when they
were taken, it was found sufficient to enervat their Testimonies, if they were
made to swear at Sea, the Privateer and Company having Swords and Pistols in
their hands, because to evite the insamy of Perjury, they might adhere in their
judicial Re-examination to their Testimonies taken at Sea, upon oath, albeit
not true, or if by force or just fear, they did so depone before the Admiral
Deput, February 25. 1668. the owners of the Ship, called, the Castle of Riga
contra Captain Seatoun. The like was found, where a great part of the Company
were Hollanders, June 30. 1668. Peterson contra Captain Anderson. And in the
case betwixt Captain Allan and Bartholomew Parkman, decided, July 9. 1668. the
Ship was found Prize for having a number of Hollanders Sailers, viz. three, the
Company being nine, and for having a small parcel of Tar, as counterband
aboard, and having aboard the product of counterband, taken in the immediate
return of that Voyage; upon all which grounds jointly, the Ship was declared
Prize.

But in this War there has no Ship been declared Prize upon account of the
Companies being Hollanders, neither because the Master was a Hollander, if he
were not also a part owner, albeit two of the Company were Hollanders, July 24.
1673. Captain Bennet contra the owners of the Pearl. But the Master being a
Hollander was found a sufficient ground of suspicion and seazure, but not of
Confiscation, the property being proven to pertain to free men; and therefore,
probation was allowed to either party, July 16. 1673. Captain Lyle contra the
Master of the Ship, called, the Leopard.

The hyring of the enemies people is no assistance to them in the War, but
rather a weakening of them, so that if these of the enemies Country be only
aboard as Servants to Newters, and not upon their own account, either as
Traders or Passengers, there has been no inquiry in the last War, as to their
Residence, neither has any thing as to that point been mentioned in the last
Proclamation of War, or in His Majesty's Instructions to the Admiralities of
His Kingdoms; and though the Law might have reached Ships Navigat by
Hollanders, residing in Holland, and not changing the Domicile, yet in favor
and prudence, that ground has not been sustained, it being more the Kings
Interest to allow his enemies to withdraw from their Country, then to force
them to serve only there.

Counterband is not only a cause of Confiscation, when taken going toward
enemies Ports, but also when the Ship is taken in her return from the enemies
Port in that same Voyage, for then the Delinquence is complete, whereas it had
not taken effect before the Ship attained the Port, and yet might be justly
seized before the full effect, because the seazure of the Ship in her Voyage is
the impediment that the effect is not attained; and therefore, the common
custom of Nations has allowed such seazures, for otherways it were impossible
to hinder Newters to carry Counterband-goods to enemies, for carrying on the
War; neither will the pretense of altering their resolution, to sail to, or
disload in a free Port, be a sufficient Defense, unless the Ship were actually
stearing another course; but if a Ship should be pursued to be searched for
counterband in her passage to an enemies Port, and should be waited for till
her return, and taken as she came from that Port, there could be far less
pretense to excuse that Delinquence; and therefore, it was one of the grounds
of Confiscation of Parkmans Ship, taken by Captain Allan, that she was taken in
the return of the same Voyage, in which she carried counterband to the enemies
Ports, July 9. 1668. And though in that case the reason was lybelled, that the
Ship was taken, having in her the product of counterband, having the same
effect with counterband it self, quia surrogatum sapit naturam surrogati, yet
without that, in the foresaid case of Captain Lyle, it was found sufficient
that the Ship was taken in the return of that same Voyage, in which she carried
counterband, without mention of the product thereof, July 16. 1673. in which
case it was found necessar that the Ship belonged to the same owners, that had
carried in the counterband, so that though the Ship had been light without any
Loading, she would have been Prize, unless she had been a Swedish Ship, and so
secured by the Swedish Treaty, Confiscating only counterband when it is
actually taken.

It is a most convenient moderation of the Law of Nations, that the Delinquence
of carrying counterband, is followed no further then the immediate return of
that Voyage, otherways it would be the foundation of marring Trade, by
perpetual quarrels, upon pretense of counterband carried in to enemies in
former Voyages.

In these Wars there has been no occasion to determine, whether it be a cause
of Confiscation, if a Ship be taken in return of that Voyage, wherein she was
Loaded with enemies goods.

The Dutch by their Declaration did prohibit all Friends and Allies, not only
to carry counterband-goods to any Port in the Kings Dominions, but to be found
therewith upon his Coasts, or diverting from the Voyage they might make with
counterband toward the Kings Ports, holding that for a sufficient probation of
their intending these Ports, which is like they would not take off by Documents
aboard, expressing their own Ports, or the Ports of Newters, it being so easy
to procure false and colorable Documents, yet that was never sustained as a
relevant ground of Adjudication with us.

By what has been said, the confiscation of the Ships and Goods of Allies and
Newters upon account of counterband, and the assistance given to enemies
thereby, has been cleared; the other chief ground of confiscation of the Ships
and goods of Newters, is by their concurse with enemies, in carrying on their
Trade; and therefore, in all the Treaties, the formula of Passes does require,
that it be attested upon oath, that the ship and Loading belongs to the
Subjects of that Ally, and no part thereof to the Kings enemies; and likewise
the particular kinds and quantities of the Cargo, and the owners thereof, and
of the Ship must be expressed.

Some are of opinion, that an unfree Ship Confiscats the Loading, as accessory
thereto, but that unfree Loading or a part thereof does not Confiscat the Ship,
which is but a groundless subtilty; the reason of this Confiscation being the
partaking with enemies in carrying on of their Trade, it takes place alike in
the Ship and Loading, or any part thereof; but it being a Delinquence, it has
still the exception of the bona fides, and ignorance of these who partake in
that Conjunction of Trade, but though the Society or partnership was entered
into before the War, it was not found to liberat, seeing there was time and
opportunity to dissolve it after, July 17. 1673. Master of the Golden Falcon
contra Captain Buchannan.

That a part of the Ship belonging to an enemy, does confiscat the whole Ship,
and Loading, has been of times decided, even in the case where the Master was
hired by the Swedes, or other Allies, and was a sworn Citizen in Sweden, unless
it were sufficiently instructed, that he were an Inhabitant and Residenter
there, and had changed his Domicile from Holland, and carried his Wife and
Family, if any he had, to a newtral place. Neither was the production of a
Burgess Brieff in Sweden found sufficient, seeing the Skipper by his oath
acknowledged, that he left his Wife lying-in at Amsterdam, February 28. 1673.
and July 18. 1673. Master of the Elsingburg contra Captain Douglas. The like
was found, because the Master by his oath acknowledged that he was a Hollander,
and a part owner, and that the evidences that his Domicile was still in
Holland, was more pregnant then that he had changed the same to Copenhagen,
June 25. 1673. Captain contra Master of the Saint Mary. The like was found
where the Skippers oath bore him to be a part owner and a Hollander, and that
he intended to change his Domicile, but had not done it, though he produced a
Swedish Burgess Brieff, July. 10. 1673. Captain Frazer contra Master of the
young Tobias. It was so decided, July 23. 1673. Captain Seatoun contra the
owners of the King David; where the Skippers oath contradicted the Pass.
acknowledging himself a part owner, and an Emdener, under the Jurisdiction of
the States, though he show Certificats of being a Burgess, and having Children
in Denmark; seeing it was also deponed that his Wife and Family remained in
Emden. The like was also lately found in the case of Captain Stuart contra the
Master of the Wine grape, in November. 1674. where many evidences were adduced
for changing the Masters Domicile, to Sweden but the contrary evidences were
found the stronger. The like was found in the reduction at the instance of the
owners of the Ship, called the Calmer, against Captain Smeatoun, which was
first found Prize by the Admiral, and twice thereafter by the Lords, be cause
the Skippers oath contradicted the Pass, bearing, the Ship to belong wholly to
Swedes, and yet he deponed that he was an eighth part owner, and a Hollander,
and probation having been adduced by Commission, both from Sweden and Holland,
the most pregnant probation was, that his true Domicile was at Amsterdam,
December 13. 1673.

The Loading belonging to enemies, was also found to make the Ship Prize, seeing
it appeared, that they knew the same to belong to enemies, when inloaded, and
had no privilege by Treaty, July 15. 1673. Captain Wilson contra Master of the
Ship, called, the Venus. In like manner, the most part of the Loading being
proven to belong to a Jew, residing and Traffiquing in Amsterdam, the same was
found Pryze, but the Ship belonging to Lubeck was found free, because the
loosed from Lisbon before the certainty of a War, and so was in bona fide to
engage for a Fraught with a Hollander; neither was it respected that this Jew
was an Agent for the King of Portugal, seeing he was a residing Traffiquing
Merchant in Holland, February 11. 1673. Earl of Kincarden, contra the Master of
the St. Andrew; but thereafter this Ship was also found Prize upon other
grounds. The greatest difficulty in the matter of Prizes, is, the discovery and
probation of the Interest of Enemies, if probation be not had from the Oath of
the Skipper and Company, or from the Documents found Aboard, there remains no
more but presumptive Probation, which sometimes is so pregnant, as it admits no
contrary positive probation, and oftimes it does admit the same, and then there
is probation allowed to either Party, for clearing the Matter of Fact, either
as to the property of Ship, or Goods, the true residence of the Master, or the
Port truly intended, or any other Matter of Fact, whereupon Confiscation or
Liberation may be inferred.

In the second Dutch War, they had found out so cunning contrivances to cover
their Trade, that the same could hardly be so far discovered as to make a
lawful Probation; for they did not only procure Passes from the Swedes, and
Danes, and other Allies, and Newters, and upon the Privilege granted to them
of Hollands Masters, did send persons entrusted by them, as Masters or
Steersmen to manage their Trade, under pretense of fixing their Domiciles in
Sweden, or in Denmark, conform to these Treaties: But also, they entrusted
their Money to Merchants, or Factors, belonging to the Countries of Allies, and
Newters, who bought Ships and Goods in their own Names, but to the use and
behove of the Hollanders, and upon their risk and advantage and profit, so
that they had pretense to depone, that the property of Ship and Goods did
belong to these freemen who bought them, because there lay only an obligation
of trust upon them, to communicate the same to Hollanders; as did appear by a
report returned from the Magistrates of Stock-holme, upon a Commission from the
Lords for clearing the property of the Ship called, the Wine Grape, and her
Loading, for the persons who by the Pass, made faith as owners, being
interrogat, whether they had lent their names for the behove of the Dutch, or
had bought the Ship and Goods for their use; so that the benefit or loss was to
redound to the Dutch, they declined to give a direct answer upon Oath, denying
the same, and only asserted, that they ought not to be interrogat upon such
indirect dealing, or the like, or to that purpose: yea, use was made of the
Name and Trust of his Majesty's Subjects, to color the Dutch Trade, and many
Passes were procured from the Admirality of England for the same effect: all
these were the more easily obtained, because the sufferings of innocent
Merchants, upon account of their Governors was generally pitied, and the
profit of Privateers was als generally hated and envied.

The ordinar grounds of a presumptive Probation of the Interest of Enemies, by
the custom of Nations are these, first, if in the time of War, Ships were not
instructed with Passes upon Oath, expressing the Owner of Ships and Loading;
and therefore, the want of Passes, or the want of Documents for instructing the
properties of the Ship and Loading, or any part thereof, the samen is presumed
to belong to enemies. Secondly, False or forged Documents. Thirdly, Double
Documents. Fourthly, Destroying of Documents, as throwing the same over Board,
or sending them away at the time of the Capture; infer that the Ship or
Loading, or some part thereof, belonged to Enemies, and likewise the having
Aboard double Flaggs, to be made use of at diverse occasions.

As to the first ground of Confiscation upon want of Documents; First, There is
no necessity to have Aboard a Vendition of the Ship in write, but in Ships, as
other movables, property is presumed from possession. July 26. 1673. Captain
Hamiltoun contra the Master of the Ship, called the of Stattin; neither does
the want of a Pass, conform to the formula in Treaties, as being defective and
not expressing the Port to which the Ship was direct, infer Confiscation: in
this case there was no Counterband Goods Aboard, so that though the true Port
had been the Enemies Port, it would not have inferred Confiscation, January 21.
1673. Hendrick Anderson, Master of the Sun of Dantzick, contra Captain Douglas.
The like was found the 19. of February, 1673. the Owners of the Palm Tree and
Patience, contra Captain Atchison. and upon the 27. of February, 1673. The
owners of the King David, contra Captain Donaldson; where a Swedish Ship
wanting a Pass, conform to the Swedish formula, and not being upon Oath, though
these were found presumptive Probations of the Interest of Enemies, yet not so
pregnant as to exclude a contrary positive Probation, that the property of the
Ship and Goods belonged to Freemen, and the not expressing the Port in the
Pass of a Swedish Ship, was not found so to infer the Goods to belong to
Enemies, but that it admitted a contrary Probation, that the Ship and Loading
belonged to Free men, and because the Loading was Pitch and Tarr, which is
Counterband, the not expressing the Port, being essential as to Counterband,
would have Confiscate the Ship and Loading, unless it had been secured by the
Swedish Treaty, declaring Pitch and Tar, and others, being the Growth of Sweden
not to be Counterband, February 28. 1673. The Master of the St. Peter of Stoad
contra Captain Stewart.

Passes for Ships in time of War, must be renewed for every Voyage, and cannot
otherwise express the kinds and quantities of the Cargo, which was sustained
as one of the reasons of the Adjudication of the Ship called the Elsinburgle,
at the instance of Captain Douglas, decided July 18. 1673. yet a Ship was not
found Prize as wanting a Pass for the present Voyage; in respect, She having
loused at Nantz, and having there a particular Pass, she was forced in to
England by stress of Weather, and there sold her Loading, and went back to
Nantz, and took in the like Loading for the same Owners and Port, and therefore
altered not the first Pass, June 17. 1673. Captain Donaldson, contra Master of
the Debora.

It is Likewise most necessar, that Passes be truly granted upon Oath made,
which is the greatest security against colorable Documents, and therefore was
sustained as one of the Grounds of Adjudication, of the Ship calledth (...) St.
Mary, that the Master by his Oath acknowledged, that he had not made Faith, as
the Pass bears: as was found June 25. 1673. and upon that reason a Ship was
found Prize; in which case also, one Witness Deponed, that papers were thrown
overboard, July 9. 1673. Captain Gilles contra the Owners of the Bounder.

Double Documents infer Confiscation, but that is Chiefly understood when the
Documents are contrary in material points, but where there was one pass from
the College of Commerce, and another from the King of Sweden, having some
contrariety, but not in material points, the same was not found to make the
Ship prize, June 13. 1673. Captain Winchester, contra the Owners of the St.
Andrew.

The throwing of papers overboard, or destroying the same at the time of the
captur, is a most pregnant ground of Confiscation; for thence it is presumed,
that these papers would have instructed the property to belong to Enemies, and
therefore being proven but by one Witness, it put the burden of probation upon
the strangers, that the Ship and Loading belonged to free men, February 28.
1673. The Master of the White Dove, contra Captain Alexander: regard was also
had to the same, though but proven by one Witness in the Confiscation of the
Bounder, July 9. 1673. and if there were concurring Witnesses in this point, it
would infer praesumptionem juris, and de jure, not admitting contrair probation.

Ships have oftimes been found prize by the concurse of several evidences of a
contrivance, under colorable Documents, and therefore a Ship was found prize,
because the pass did not mention the Port, which a Toll-breif bore to be Breme,
and the Master by his Oath acknowledged the Port to be Amsterdam, and that the
Owners were other persons then were expressed in the pass, and that the Master
resided in Holland, though the pass bore him to to be a Burgess in Dantzick,
against which a contrary probation was not admitted, January 23. 1673. the
Owners of the Crown of Dantzick, contra Captain Lion; a Ship was also
Confiscat, because the Master and Steersman deponed that they knew not to whom
the Goods belonged, but that they had order from a Merchant in Amsterdam, to
consign them in the Pack-house of Stockholme, to be delivered to such persons
as should show such marks, July 10. 1673. Captain Frazer contra Master of the
Flying Heart, and in like manner the Fortune of Trailsoundt was found prize,
July 22. 1673. because it was acknowledged upon Oath, that if the Ship were
taken by Hollanders, the Company should depone the Goods belonged to the Tarr
Company in Stockholme, as the pass bears, and if it came safe to Scotland or
England, they should declare the same belonged to Samuel Souton an English man
residing in Sweden.

Albeit a part of Ship or Loading be found to belong to Enemies, and that
thereby the whole becomes prize, as being partners with the Enemy in carrying
on their Trade, yet these who can show that they were in an invincible
ignorance of the interest of an Enemy, and did all that they could do, to
secure against the same, by taking the Oaths of the Owners of the whole Ship
and Loading, that the property belonged to themselves, and no part thereof to
an Enemy, it would take off the Delinquence of that party, and preserve their
interest, which was never pleaded during these Wars, but by some of the Kings
Subjects; as in the first War, the King having by His Proclamation, warranted
all Ships even from Enemies, to be employed for bringing Timber for the
rebuilding of London, a great part whereof was then lately burnt, Certificats
and passes being always had from the Duke of York, Lord High Admiral of
England, whereupon John Dyssone Merchant at London, Fraught a Ship of Norway,
whereof Booz Neilson was Master, called the Raphel, to Import to London, six
thousand Dail boards, the Ship in her Voyage to London, was taken by Captain
Wood, and the whole Ship and Loading adjudged as prize, which being brought
before the Lords by Reduction, they found that the Ship and Loading became
prize, because there were found Aboard fifteen hundred Dails belonging to the
Owners or Company, who then were in enmity in the Danish War; and yet the six
thousand Dails belonging to the London Merchant, who had contracted bona fide,
by the Kings Proclamation did not become prize with the Ship, as was decided
July 13. 1669. for the London Merchant not being the place of Embarquing, could
not know whether there was more entered then the Dails he Fraughted, or whether
the Owners gave truly an Oath upon the property and quantity of the Loading.
And in like manner, Sir Francis Clerk Merchant at London, having ordered a
parcel of Brass wire to be brought home to him from Sweden, the samen was
imbarqued in the Ship, called, the Calmer, which was taken in her Voyage to
London, by Captain Smeatoun, and was adjudged prize by the Admiral, because the
Pass was convelled by the Masters Oath, yet the Parcel of Brasswyer belonging
to Sir Francis Clerk, was found not to be prize, December. 13. 1673. Sir Francis
Clerk contra Captain Smeaton, and that because, Sir Francis residing in
England, and not being upon the place of Embarquing, could not know the
false-hood or simulation of the pass, or other grounds of Confiscation; and
albeit there was no Document Aboard for this parcel of Brass-wyer, which would
have inferred a presumptive probation against Allies or Newters, that the same
belonged to enemies, yet the same or any other presumptive probation, though so
strong against Newters, that it would admit no contrary probation, as to the
Kings Subjects residing in His Dominions, who could not Trade but under
colorable Documents, it was not dolus malus, unless they had or could have
known the Interest of any of the Kings enemies. And likewise, some Merchants in
Hull, having embarked a Loading in a Ship of Hamburg, called the Lyveday, the
Admiral found the Loading prize, because there were double and forged Documents
made use of, against which no contrary probation would have been admitted for
Newters, who being free with all parties ingadged in the War, had no reason to
make use of false or double Documents, so that it necessarily inferred, that
the Ship and Loading belonged not to Newters, but to Enemies, yet the matter
being brought in question by Reducton, the Lords found, that there being no
ground of Confiscation of the Ship, but it was a free Hamburg Ship, except upon
account of the colorable Documents for the Loading, they admitted a contrary
probation, that the property of the Loading belonged to the Merchants of Hull,
Nov. 14. 1673. Master of the Lyveday contra Captain Middletoun. We have now
gone through the ordinary grounds of Adjudication of prizes, there are some
other grounds that have been alleged for Confiscation, but have not been
sustained, as first, It was not found a ground of Confiscation of a Ship or
Loading, that the same belonged to the Subjects of the Duke of Holstein, who
held some of his Estate of the King of Denmark, then a declared enemy to the
King, unless the Duke of Holsten had contributed to the War, as was found
January 4. 1667. Paul Herrison contra L. of Ludquharn, neither that the Ship
wanted a Vendition in write, July 26. 1673. Captain Hamiltoun contra Master of
the Ship called of Stattin; neither was it found a relevant ground of
Confiscation, because the Ship was bought in Holland, and taken at Sea ere she
touched any other ground, February 21. 1673. the owners of the Ship called, the
Prince of East-Freezland contra Captain Binnie; the like was found in the
foresaid case of Captain Hamiltoun, neither did the insurance of Ship or
Loading in Holland infer a sufficient ground of Confiscation alone, though it
might concur with others as an adminicle, albeit the insurance was alleged to
put the risk and hazard of the Capture upon the Kings enemies, without
detriment to his Allies; Yet the Lords found, that seeing the property of the
Goods insured, did remain in the Kings Allies, the samen ought not to be
Confiscat, neither was it alleged, that the insurance was expressly against
capture, but against hazard at Sea in general, July 22. 1673. Captain contra
Owners of the Fortune of Trailsound.

This further is to be observed, that when the Ships of Newters have aboard
counterband, the deffect of Documents for the counterband, or double, or
colorable Documents to cover the same, will not infer confiscation, if the
property be proven to belong to free men, and that the true Port intended, was
not an enemies Port, because in such cases Newters have necessity of colorable
Documents: but as to the property of Ship and Goods, they have no such
necessity; and therefore, contrary probation is not admitted against the
ordinar presumptive probation, by wanting of Documents, concealing or
destroying of Documents, or making use of double or false Documents.

When Prizes adjudged by the Admiral, are rouped and sold, if by reduction they
be liberat by the Lords, the owners are decerned in solidum, to restore the
price, the Ship and Loading being indivisible; and oftimes some are assumed as
owners which are not solvent, June 10. 1680. the Ann of Christiana contra
Captain Martin. And if the Ship and Loading be orderly rouped, upon the
Admirals warrant, or sold upon his Decree, before the same be called in
question by citation upon reduction, albeit the Lords thereafter liberat the
Ship, they will decern no more but the Price obtained by the roup before the
Admirals Adjudication, or the Price obtained by sale, bona fide, after the
Admirals Decree: And if the Kings fifteenth part, and the Admirals tenth part,
be bona fide, paid, they are liberat, pro tanto, and the strangers must have
recourse to the Thesaury and against the Admiral for repetition.

TITLE XIII. Infeftments of Property.
1. The original of Fees. 2. Feudal Jurisdiction, especially of the King in
Parliament. 3. Feudal Jurisdiction of Superiors. 4. Allodials. 5. Requisits of
proper Fees. 6. Kinds of improper Fees. 7. Dominium directum essential to all
Fees. 8. Dominium utile. 9. Fidelity also necessary. 10. Feudal Contracts. 11.
Udal rights. 12. Infeftment what it signifies. 13. How write is necessary for
Infeftments. 14. What kinds of writes are necessary for Infeftments. 15. The
Tenor of formal Charters. 16. When Instruments of seasine became necessary. 17.
The Tenor of formal seasins. 18. The essentials necessary in seasins. 19.
Seasins must have warrands and adminicles, and what these are. 20. Registration
of seasins. 21. Registration of resignations, ad remanentiam. 21. Registration
of the allowance of Apprysings and Adjudications, Inhibitions and Hornings. 23.
The attest of the Nottar and two witnesses, necessary in seasins. 24. Extracts
of seasins not probative. 25. Transumpts of seasins. 26. Bounding Infeftments.
27. Base Infeftments, how far effectual without Possession. 28. Infeftments by
Confirmation. 29. Infeftments upon Appryzing or Adjudication. 30. The effect of
Appryzings or Adjudications with a charge. 31. Infeftments Ward. 32. Feus of
Ward-lands, how far valide. 33. Infeftments blensh. 34. Infeftments Feu. 35.
The annexed property of the (...) can only be set Feu after (...) in
Parliament. 36. Feus of the annexed property, set with diminution of the
retour duty, are null. 37. Feus of Kirk-Lands. 38. Infeftment in burgage. 39.
Infeftment in mortification. 40. Manses and Gleibs. 41. Conjunct Infeftments.
42. Infeftments to heirs substitute. 43. Infeftments simple and tailzied. 44.
Union. 45. Erection. 46. Warrandice. 47. Tacit conditions employed in
Ward-Lands. 48. Tacit conditions in Warandice and relief. 49. Tacit conditions
in Infeftments of Offices. 50. Tacit conditions in Excambion. 51. Tacit
conditions in Feus. 52. Liferents reserved in Infeftments of Property. 53.
Exceptions in Infeftments, how far effectual. 54. Faculties reserved in
Infeftments. 55. Burdens of sums in Infeftments, how far effectual. 56. The
effect of impossible or unlawful conditions in Infeftments. 57. Conditions
inconsistent are null. 58. Clause de non alienando in Tailzies. 59. Clauses
restrictive and irritant in Tailzies. 60. Regalia not expressed, are not carried
by Infeftment. 61. Regalia are carried in Barony, though not expressed. 62.
Jurisdiction and Courts. 63. Jurisdiction of Baron Courts, how far restricted.
64. Issues of Baron Courts belong to themselves. 65. Infeftments of
Constabulary. 66. Fortalices, how far extended. 67. Forrestries. 68. Hunting of
Deer, inter regalia. 69. Salmond-fishing. 70. Cruives. 71. Milns. 72.
Privilege of Brewing. 73. Part and pertinent. 74. Wood and Coal. 75. Houses
and Biggings, and Park Dykes. 76. Fowling, Hunting and Fishing: 77. Cunningars.
78. Dovecotts. 79. Free Ish and Entry. 80. Herezelds. 81. Steelbow-goods. 82.
The effect of Infeftments, in possessorio. 83. The effect of Infeftments, in
petitorio. 84. Inhibitions and their effects against Infeftments.
THE Roman Empire in Italy, being long oppressed, and at length suppressed by the
Inundation of the Longobards and other barbarous Nations, who seated themselves
there, and divided these beautiful Courtreys amongst their Captains, and they
sub-divided the same to their Soldiers, for their Military service; and as
they were the authors of this new Right, so they did term it by a new and
barbarous name, Feudum, which the Germans call Fiff, and we with the English
call a Fee; concerning which, there was no common written Law, but the several
Provinces had their diverse Customs, as they thought most suitable to the
nature of this Right, and their own utility. These Books annexed to the Civil
Law, called Libri Feudorum, though they have great respect amongst Lawers, yet
they are but the observations of private persons, and so not a written public
Law.

By the Irruption which happened in the sixth Century, the Civil Law was sopit
for five hundred years, it was revived in the eleventh Century, and did take in
with it the Feudal Customs, which have been propagat through the most civil
Nations in the World, not only for strengthening them toward War, but because
Sovereigns had thereby a new interest over their Subjects and Inferiors,
thereby becoming their Feudatars and Vassals, owing always to them fidelity,
and oftest following as their Clients and Assecles, acknowledging them as their
Lords, Superiors, and Paramount in their Lands and Heretages, which are all
derived, mediatly or immediately from the Sovereign authority, as the common and
supreme Superior of all the Subjects, who have any more then the right of
unfixed Movables.

2. And thereby also arises the Feudal Jurisdiction, whereby not only the
Sovereign power, but all Superiors do by the advice and assistance of their
Vassals, who are called Peers of their Court, order and determine all things,
not only relating to themselves and their Vassals, but to all others who are
locally within their Territories, both in Civils and Criminals, in so far as
they derive Jurisdiction Civil or Criminal from the Sovereign power, immediately
or mediatly; no Nation is more exact in this then Scotland, wherein the King as
Supreme Superior, rules by His Vassals assembled in Parliament; in which, at
first, all were personally present, who held Lands immediately of Him, as Barons
great and small, Freeholders and Prelates for Church Lands; the free Burghs
were also represented in Parliament by their Commissioners, as holding their
Burgage Lands, and their Freedoms and Privileges of Burghs, as Feudaters of
the King; so that there was not one foot of ground in Scotland whose Lord was
not present in Parliament.

But when Fees holden of the King became sub-divided, or multiplied, two or
more Commissioners were admitted in Parliament, in name of the meaner Barons
and Freeholders; all were accounted great Barons, who held an hundred merk
Land or above of the King, and the rest meaner Barons, Par. 1503. cap. 78. So
also other Superiors have their Courts, consisting of their Vassals, who are
obliged to answer suit thereto, who as a Jury, gave Doom and Judgment of old,
when all matters proceeded by Jury or Inquest, as it was also in the Kings
Court by Sheriffs, Bailzies, etc. of which the shadow or formality yet
remains, of having a Doomster as a member of Court to pronounce sentence,
though Inquests be in most things laid aside through custom.

3. The very right of Superiority carries this right of Jurisdiction over the
Vassals, unless by their Infeftments, or Prescription, they be exempted.

Our Learned Countryman, Mr. Thomas Craig Advocat, has largely and learnedly
handled the Feudal Rights of this and other Nations, in his Book de Feudis; and
therefore, we shall only follow closely, what since his time by Statute or
Custom has been cleared or altered in Feudal Rights, which is very much, for
he having written in the year, 1600. there are since many Statutes, and variety
of cases, which did occur, and were determined by the Lords, and have been, de
recenti, observed as they were done by the most eminent of the Lords and
Lawers, as by Haddingtoun who was President of the Session, and by President
Spotswood, and by Dury, who continued in the Session from the year, 1620. until
his death in the year, 1642. And though these Decisions have been intermitted
since that time, till the Kings return, the loss is not great, these times
being troublesome, and great alterations of the Lords; but the Decisions of the
Lords have been constantly observed since the Kings return, by which most of
the Feudal Questions are determined; and these things which Craig could but
conjecture from the Nature of the Feudal Rights, the Customs of neighboring
Nations, and the opinion of Feudists, are now commonly known, and come to a
fixed Custom; neither does he observe any Decisions particularly by the time,
further then his own time in which our Feudal Customs could little be
determined, seeing the Lords of Session were mutable and ambulatory, till the
year, 1540. in which, King James the fifth did perfect the establishment of the
Session in a College of Justice, who at first, could not be so knowing and
fixed in their forms and customs; and therefore, it cannot be thought strange,
if the Feudal Customs as they are now settled, do much differ from what Craig
did observe; he has indeed very well observed the origin and nature of Feudal
Rights, and the Customs of Italy where they began, and of France and England,
whence they were derived to us; and therefore, we say little as to these: And
so much only of the Rights themselves as must necessarly be introductory to our
fixed Customs; in which, we shall follow that same Method (as most accommodat
to the matter) which we observed in the former Title of real Rights: But there
being in Feudal Rights, nothing of that original Community which is therein,
being only a promiscuous property of Incorporations or persons; or otherways a
servitude of common Pasturage, etc.

Therefore, we shall first speak of the Right of property in Fees, both in
relation to the Superior and to the Vassal. Next of the Servitudes competent
in Fees, which comprehending all Rights, not reaching the alienation or
substance, but the lesser interests, extending only to the profits or use of
Hereditaments, must comprehend both the interest introduced by Law, as Teinds,
and these that are by consent, by Infeftments or other grants, or long
possession, whether they be personal as Liferents, Conjunct-fees, Terces, and
the Right of Courtisie, Annualrents, Pensions, Rentals, Tacks, etc. Or whether
real Servitudes, as Thirlage, Pasturage, etc. And last, Feudal Pledges, which
are called Wodsetts. But in all, we are only here to speak of the constitution
of Feudal Rights, leaving the transmission thereof to Heirs, or singular
Successors, to the next part, Vide Title 24. and 27.

4. The property of all Lands and Immoveables, or Hereditaments, are either
Allodial or Feudal; Allodial is that, whereby the right is without recognisance
or acknowledgement of a Superior, having a real Right in the thing, thus are
Movables enjoyed; and Lands and Immoveables were so till these Feudal Customs;
and now there remains little Allodial: For Lands holden Feu or Burgage, or
Lands Mortified, are not Allodial, seeing they acknowledge a Superior, having
the direct Right of property, and to whom, there must be some Rent or return,
though they be not so proper Fees, as Land holden Ward. Yet the Superiors
Right in the Sovereign power, is not Feudal, but Allodial here, though some
Kingdoms be holden of Superiors as Feudal. So also the Gleibs of Ministers seem
to come nearest to Allodials, having no Infeftment holding Rent or
acknowledgement, though they be more properly mortified Fees, whereof the
Liferentescheat befalls to the King only.

Kirks and Kirk-yards are only Allodial, without any acknowledgement of a
Superior, but they are destinat for pious Uses, and are ordained to be upheld
and repaired, Par. 1563. cap. 76. And the Parochioners of every Paroch ar
ordained to build and repair Kirk-yard-dykes with Stone and Mortar, two else
high, and to make Kirk-styles therein, Par. 1597. cap. 232. The manner of
reparing Kirks was remitted to the Council by the said first Act of Parliament,
and thereupon an Act of Council was made, which is ratified, Par. 1572. cap.
54. but is not repeated in the Ratification, but only in general, that the
Parochioners were warranted to name persons to stent the Neighbors.

A Fee signifies either the right it self, or the thing affected with the
Right, whether it be corporeal, as Lands Lochs, Woods, Fortalices, Milns; or
incorporeal, as Annualrents, Fishing, Jurisdiction, Pasturage or the like, and
at the first, it was freely granted for Fidelity and Military service of the
Vassal.

5. And therefore it employed, first, That it was a free and gratuitous
Donation, as to Money or other anterior cause, and only for fidelity and
service. Secondly, None could succeed therein, but such as could perform that
service, whereby women were excluded. Thirdly, It could descend to none but to
the Male Issue of the first Vassals body, which ceassing, it became void, and
could not be transmitted to the Collaterals, or to the Ascendents of the first
Vassal. Fourthly, Whenever it was open or void by the death of the Vassal
Infeft, it returned to the Superior, until the Vassals Heir were capable of
Military Service, which was esteemed to be so soon as he attained Majority. And
while it was in non-entry, by the negligence of the Vassal, not demanding
Infeftment, but in his Minority, when he was unable to serve, both the Lands
and the Vassal were in the hands of the Superior, in Ward and Custody, or of
his Donatar as his Legal Tutor, who was to educat him for his own service, and
to intertain him, beside which he had then no other profit of his Fee. And if
he married without the Superiors consent, he lost a sum equivalent to that
Tocher, which were suitable to his Quality and Estate: And if contrary his
Superiors will, he refused a suitable Match, he forefaults the double of the
Tocher: The reason introductory of this was, because the Superior might be
concerned in the affinity contracted by his Vassal in his marriage.

In all Fees, fidelity by the Vassal to his Superior is necessarly employed,
and if any thing were acted contrary to fidelity and gratitude, against the
life and fame of the Superior, to the great prejudice of his Estate or nearest
Relations, the Fee became void; wherein is also comprehended the Vassals
disclaiming of his Superior, or owning another in his place; or Infefting
another Vassal without his Superiors consent.

Fees are not only unalienable without consent of the Superior, for the
reasons now adduced; but they are stricti juris, and there is no obliegement
upon the Superior to receive any stranger or singular successor, his Vassal,
except what the Law has introduced by Statute or Custom, in favors of
Creditors, for obtaining satisfaction of their Debts, by Appryzings or
Adjudication, whereby the superior may be compelled to receive singular
successors: Yet the Disposition procuratory, or precept of seasing before
Infeftment are asignable, and the superior may be compelled to receive the
Assigney, if the Disposition be in favors of Assigneys: But Infeftment being
once taken, he is not obliged to receive any Assigney or singular successors,
otherways then in obedience of Horning upon Appryzing or Adjudication, getting
a years Rent for accepting a new Vassal.

6. These being the ancient requisits of Fees; that is a proper Fee which has
them, and the want of any of them makes it Improperin so far, but most of them
might always, and now are changed by the Tenor of the Infeftment, as when the
Fee is granted to the Vassal and the Heirs of his body; it is so far improper,
that women may succeed. If it begranted to him and his Heirs simply, then his
Collateral Heirs or Ascendents may succeed: Or if to his Heirs male whatsoever,
much more if to the Heirs or Descendents of other persons in Tailzies. Fees are
also granted, not for Military service, or service indefinitly, but for some
definite particular service, as for carrying of a Sword or other Ensign of
Honor, before the Superior in solemn days; or not for service at all, but for
some Rent, which is either inconsiderable, as a mere acknowledgement of the
Superior, as a penny Money, or a grain of Pepper, a Rose, etc. Or, for a
Feu-ferm-duty in Money, or any Fungible, or other performance: Or, when the
avail of the Marriage, and profit of the Ward is taxed to such a sum.

Hence we may consider, what remains as to the essentials of Fees, and common
interests thereof, which are these.

7. First, there must remain a right in the Superior, which is called,
dominium directum; and withal, a Right in the Vassal, called, dominium utile:
The reason of the distinction and terms thereof is, because it can hardly be
determined, that the Right of Property is in either the Superior or Vassal
alone, so that the other should only have a servitude upon it, though some have
thought Superiority but a servitude, the property being in the Vassal; and
others have thought the Fee it self to be but a servitude, to wit, the
perpetual use and fruit, yet the reconciliation and satisfaction of both, has
been well found out in this distinction, whereby neithers interest is called a
servitude; but by the resemblance of the distinction in Law, betwixt jura and
actiones directae, and these which for resemblance were reductive thereto, and
therefore called, utiles.

8. The Superiors Right is called, dominium directum, and the Vassals utile,
and without these, the Right cannot consist.

Secondly, As there must be a right in the Superior, and another in the
Vassal, so the Vassal in his right must necessarly hold of, and acknowledge the
Superious, as having the direct Right in the Fee, otherways the two distinct
Rights without this subordination, will make but two partial Allodial Rights.

Thirdly, There is necessarly employed in Fees, some Rent or return to the
Superior for the Fee, which may be either service, Money, or other Fungible,
or prayers and supplications; as in Fees mortified to the Kirk, or other
performance, or at least the Vassals fidelity to the Superior, implying, not
only negative, that he may not wrong the Superior, but positive, that he must
reveal to his Superior any design against his Life or Fame.

9. Which fidelity, though it be not expressed, yet it is necessarly imported in
all kinds of Fees, and cannot be taken away by any paction to the contrary,
without destroying the very nature of this Right.

10. To come now to the constitution of the Property of Lands, in Fee and
Heretage, the Feudal Contract is of it self alienative as Loan, Sale, Exchange:
and the Contracts in Law, ealled, do ut des, and do ut facias: Of which two
last, the Feudal Contract is a kind, seeing thereby Land or other immovable is
given, for giving or doing something; therefore, as in others, so in it, the
will of the owner must constitute the Right in the Vassal; and seeing by the
Custom of Nations, some kind of Possession is necessary to constitute or
transfer property, the Superiors delivery of Possession to the Vassal, or
acknowledgement and approbation thereof in the Vassal, to be holden by him in
Fee, were sufficient to constitute and perfect the Fee.

11. And therefore, in the Udal Right of Lands in Orknay and Zetland, whereby
without any Infeftment, Investiture or other Right or Write, they enjoy Lands
and Hereditaments; it suffices them to instruct by Witnesses, that they have
possessed, as being holden and repute Heretable possessors of such Lands; but the
Law and Custom of Scotland, having, as in all other places, necessarly required
Write, not only for evidence of the Constitution of this Right, but as
Solemnities for the perfecting and solemnizing thereof, without which it
becomes not a complete real Right of the ground, except where such Writes have
been destroyed, or lost in times of trouble, and then proving the Tenor of
them, must be used: Or in some cases, the Heretor may be cognosced by an
Inquest, as Heretable possessor. But ordinarily Write is requisite, which Writes
are called an Infeftment, or an Investiture.

12. Infeftment or infeudatio, signifies the Right constitutive of a Fee, as
its Etymon indicateth: So also, Investiture is the same, more Metaphorically,
as we are said to be invested or endued with any right, as men are covered with
a Garment or Cloak, and denuded and divested thereof, when it is extinct or
transmitted: So both Infeftment and Investiture signify the Writes, which are
evidents, signifying the Act constituting the Fee; and these are two, the
Dispositive Will of the Superior, and his delivery of Possession by himself or
his Procurators in his Name.

13. Of a long time, Infeftment has required write as a necessar solemnity,
not only as a mean of probation, that the Superior did truly dispone to the
vassal, any immovable in Fee and Heretage, and that accordingly the vassal
attained Possession, Natural, Civil, or Symbolical; for if write were adhibite
only for probation, other probation might also be admitted, not only against
the Superior, or his Heirs by their Write or Oath, but even against their
singular successors, or other Competitors, by whose oath of knowledge or write,
the truth of the Infeftment, and of these two necessary Acts, to constitute a
Fee, might be proven; and albeit the Superiors oath would not prove against a
singular successor, yet his write anterior to that singular successors Right,
acknowledging, that he had at such a time invested such a person as his vassal,
and entered him in possession, which would prove against his Assigney; yet
neither of these ways would constitute a Fee, and supply a written Infeftment,
except where the peculiar custom of Fees without write has been immemorial;
and therefore sustained as sufficient: And albeit it be provided by ancient
Statutes, that the Heretable Possessors of Lands may be cognosced by inquest,
yet that was only upon consideration of Calamity and War, whereby Writes were
destroyed, and where no competition was by any pretending a written Infeftment,
and Possession conform. But the question being only betwixt the Superior and
his Vassal, who with his Predecessors had been in Immemorial possession, as
being holden and repute Heretable possessors, by performing the deeds proper to
Vassals of such Lands, and so holden and repute as Heretable Possessors by the
Neighborhood, which I have not heard to take effect; but as to the Kings
immediate Vassals, who claims property in no Lands as Supreme Superior; but
what is annexed to the Crown, or whereof the property is acquired to the King,
by the Casualities of his Superiority: Or by Acquisition from other
Proprietars; and therefore, he does never exclude the ancient Heretable
Possessors, though they have losed their Rights by public calamity, wherein-
not only Adminicles in Write, but the testimonies of Witnesses above exception
are received, whereby if the Right be not proven to be blench, or Feu by the
Exchequer Rolls, which bears all the Kings Property and the Reddendo's thereof;
or by Eque's made in Exchequer, the Fee will be held Ward, and according to the
probation and verdict of the Inquest, Charters will be granted by the King in
Exchequer, and there scarce can be pretendedany Fee, which has not been
already established by write.

14. The Write requisite to constitute a Fee, must contain the present
Dispositive Act of the Superior, by which he Dispons to the Vassal and his
Heirs the Fee, in whatsoever terms he expresses it, as if he gift, grant,
alienat, sell, or dispone, though the several terms expressed may import a
different Title and Warrandice; yea, albeit no Cause or Title be expressed or
employed, but only that the Superior Dispons; or though the Cause or Title
insinuat be not true, yet it was sufficient with Possession until the Solemnity
of Instruments of Seasine was introduced, and is still sufficient when Seasine
is rightly adhibit; for we follow not that subtility of annulling Deeds,
because they are sine causa, but do esteem them as gratuitous Donations; and
therefore, Narratives expressing the cause of the Disposition, are never
inquired in, because, though there were no cause, the Disposition is good: And
albeit neither tenendas, reddendo, or the modus acquirendi, be expressed, yet if
the property was the Disponers, and he do but express the Disposition to be in
Fee and Heretage, it is valid; for the reddendo is understood to be services,
accustomed in Wardholdings; and there will be carried (though not expressed) all
the parts and pertinents of the Fee.

And therefore any Disposition, de presenti, in Fee, is valid as to that part
of the Infeftment, although the Disposition contained an obliegement to grant
Charters; yet the not granting there of does not prejudge. And if Charters be
granted relative to prior obliegements, yet the Charter is good, without
necessity to prove these. Nor will it be sustained, for the Superior or any
competitor, that if the prior Obligation, Disposition or Contract were
produced, it would be found conditional, or have Clauses in favors of the
Superior, or that Competitor, whether generally or particularly alleged: But
if these were lost, the Charter is sufficient, and no more is understood to be
in the real Right, then what is contained in the Charter; yea, though the
Charter bear, according to the provisions and conditions contained in such a
Contract, Disposition, or Bond, which may import that the Superior by granting
the Charter without these, has not past from them; and therefore, he may
insist upon them as personal obliegements, and the Vassal will be obliged to
produce the same, ad modum probationis, by Exhibition as an incident diligence,
whereupon he must Depone, whether he has them or had them since the Citation,
or did at any time fraudfully put them away: But if without Fraud, they be
lost, the Charter is sufficient, and in no case does require the production of
any former ground.

Precepts of clare constat, are also sufficient, seeing they contain a Precept
to Infeft such a person as Vassal, which implys, the Dispositive. Will of the
Superior; and therefore, is valid in place of a Charter from its date, albeit
it (...) no effect against singular Successors, as to that Vassals Predecessors
Rights, which must be instructed by the Rights themselves, and not by the
Superiors acknowledgement.

And for the same reason, other Precepts of Seasine, not relating to particular
Charters or Seasines, but either simple, or bearing secundam cartam (...), are
sufficient, although these Charters be never granted: But there will be only
understood a proper Ward-holding gratuitous, without (...), extending only to
the Heirs of the Vassals Body, but not reaching to (...) or Ascendents, unless
the precept express or insinuat an onerous Title, (...) Vendition, Excambion,
etc.

But since Write became to be an essential solemnity of Fees, the Superiors
(...) Dispositive Act must be in Write, but his preterit Declaratory Act,
acknowledging such a person and his Predecessors to be Vassals, and have the
Fee, (...) his obliegement to grant the Fee, though never so express, which
relates but to a Disposition, de futuro, will not supply a Charter, though
clede with (...) Possession, or having Seasine by Instrument, bearing to be
propriis (...), though by these the Superior may be compelled to grant
Charters (...) and complete, bearing expressly, all the ordinar Clauses in such
Rights: Yet (...) cases, Adminiculation of a Seasine will suffice, as in the
Liferents of (...), being proportional, or in very ancient Rights; or where in
Competition no better Right is shown.

Much less is it necessary to have formal and ample Charters in the best style
upon Parchment, in Latin, sealed and subscribed, albeit Vassals are obliged
to accept no other, and the Nottars, drawers of such Charters may be deposed
and censured yet the Right will not be annulled, or postponed to posterior,
more formal and solemn Rights, for want of these formalities.

15. The formal Tenor of Charters is different according to the several kinds
on Infeftments, whereof some are original Infeftments, by which the Fee was
first constitute, and therefore are most plain and simple, containing the
dispositive Clauss, relating or insinuating the Title or original of the Right,
if it be an original Charter from the King, it begins with His Royal Title,
Carolus Dei Gratia, etc. And bears the consent of the Thesaurer, and
Commissioners for the Thesaury, and bears a Narrative of the Motives, inducing
the King to grant the same; and if it be Ward or Blench, in Burgage or
Mortification, it bears, Damus, concedimus and in perpetuum confirmamus: But if
it be a Feu Charter, it bears, Arendamus, locamus in emfeuteosin dimittimus and
in perpetuum confirmamus; And then follows the Clause, Tenendas, and the
Clause, Reddendo, which if it be Ward, bears, Servitia debita: If Blench, the
particular Blench Duty, nomine Albae firmae: If Feu, the particular feu duty,
and sometimes the duplication thereof, and the marriage of the Heir: If
Burgage, it bears, Servitia Burgalia: If in Mortification, it bears, Preces and
supplicationes. And ordinarily Warrandices, which, though very ample has no
effect; for if the Right prove invalid, there is no Action against the King,
who does always Dispone, plenissimo jure; but periculo petentis, especially
when he Dispones as Supreme Superior, by the Right of His Crown: But if he
dispone for a price or cause onerous, as for sums of Money, or by Excambion.
Lands acquired by him, being no part of the Revenue of the Crown, or annexed
property; in these, utitur jure privato, and his warrandice may have effect, as
to his private Patrimony, and not as to the Patrimony of the Crown.

Charters granted by the King of Fees by progress, are either upon Resignation
or by Confirmation, or upon Apprizing or Adjudication, which differ from
original Charters, in their several specialities, as Chartersupon Resignation,
after the Dispositive Clause, bear the conveyance, that the Lands or others
were resigned in the hands of His Majesty, or His Commissioners, by a
Procuratory of Resignation apart, or in a Disposition or Contract expressing
its date in favors of the Acquirer, his Heirs or Assigneys, whereupon
Resignation being made in the Resigners Life, the Charter will be granted to
him or to his Heirs, served generally, or to his assigneys, having right by
Assignation to the Procuratory of Resignation.

Charters of Confirmation do deduce the Right to be confirmed, which, if it be
a Charter a se, bearing, to be holden from the Disponer of the King, and
expressing the Tenendas and reddendo. The Kings Charter does in the like style,
generally relate the Charter to be confirmed, and then Ratifies, Confirms, and
approves the same in all the Heads and Articles therein, and then subjoyns the
Tenor and Words of the Charter.

These Charters of Confirmation whenever granted, are drawn back to the date
of the Charter Confirmed (which were absolutely null till Confirmation) unless
there be a medium impedimentum, as a prior Infeftment by Confirmation, or upon
Resignation by the Superior; yea, though the Infeftment by Confirmation be
after the death of the granter of the Charter to be Confirmed, if the Superior
do Confirm, it is drawn back, and will import the Superiors passing from any
Casuality, falling by the death of the Author, unless these be reserved,
wherein the neglect of the Kings Officers may not be imputed in his prejudice;
albeit Craig relates a case betwixt Kirkaldie of Grange, and Ker in the
contrary, l. 2. Dieges. 4. and adds this reason, that the former Vassal granter
of the Charter to be Confirmed, dying before Confirmation, it might be truly
said that he dyed last, Vest and Seized as of Fee; which, the subsequent
Confirmation cannot make false, yet this being fictione juris; these fictions
may do much more then this change, and there is nothing more frequent, then to
Confirm very old Charters or Dispositions.

There is another kind of Charter of Confirmation by the King, of Charters
granted by his Vassals to their Sub-vassals, not to be holden a se of the King,
but de se of the Disponer. The effect of which Confirmation is to secure the
acquirer against the forefaulture, or Recognition of his Superior.

Charters by the King upon Appryzing or Adjudication, do either Narrate the
Appryzing or Adjudication, before the Dispositive Clause: Or otherways after
the Dispositive Clause, by the Clause beginning, Quae quidem terrae perprius
haereditarie, pertinuerunt, ad A. B. etc. Which Clause, is also next to the
Dispositive in Charters upon Resignation, and does express the Resignation made
either personally by the Vassal, or more ordinarily by his Procuratory, and then
bears, the procuratory of Resignation and the date thereof: But if it be upon
Appryzing or Adjudication, it bears, that the Lands and others in the Charter
were Appryzed or Adjudged from the former Vassal or his Apparent Heir, lawfully
Charged to enter Heir in special; and expresses the date of the Appryzing or
Adjudication, and the sums therein-contained, and bears, in the Reddendo, the
duties and services, due and accustomed before the said Appryzing or
Adjudication. The Kings Charters bears as witnesses, several Officers of State,
and director of the Chanclery.

The Kings Charters must pass in Exchequer upon a signature signed by the King,
or by his Thesaurer or Commissioners of the Thesaury, and a quorum of the
Exchequer; which signature is recorded in the Books of Exchequer, and then
passes under the Signet, and then under the Privy Seal, whose Warrant is the
Signature, and last under the Great Seal.

Charters by Subjects in most things agree with the Kings Charters, but differ
in these points, that they begin not with their Titles, but thus, Omnibus hanc
Cartam visuris vel audituris; and then follows the Superiors Title or
Designation. And in original Charters, the special Cause is Narrated, as for
Implement of a certain contract, Disposition or Obligation, in them also the
warrandice is more particularly expressed, because it is effectual according to
its Tenor.

In the Charters granted by Subjects, the Precepts of Seasine were ordinarily
engrossed, and now by the late Act of Parliament, 1672. cap. 7th. Precepts of
Seasine are appointed to be insert in the Kings Charters, which before could
only pass by a Write, under the Quarter Seal, or testimony of the Great Seal.

In all Charters, both by King and Subjects, the Clause Tenendas uses to be
insert, expressing the Lands, or others by their ordinary Designations, and
then adding, Per omnes (...) metas antiquas and divisas, pro ut jacent in (...)
and latitudine, cumdomibus, AEdificiis, boscis, planis, moris, maresiis, viis,
(...) aquis, rivolis, stagnis, pratis, pascuis, and pasturis, molendinis and
multuris, and eorum sequelis, aucupationibus, venationibus, piscationibus,
petariis, turbariis, cuniculis, cuniculariis, columbis, columbariis, hortis,
pomariis, fabrilibus, brasinis and brueriis, genestis, sylvis, nemoribus and
virgultis, lignis, lapicidiis, lapide and calce, cum curiis and earum exitibus,
herezeldis, (...), and mulierum merchetis, libero (...) and exitu, ac cum
omnibus aliis libertatibus, commoditatibus, proficuis, astamentis, ac justis
suis pertinentiis quibuscunque tam non nominatis quam nominatis, tam subtus
quam supra terram, procul and prope ad praedictas terras spectantibus, seu
spectare valentibus, quomodolibet in futurum, libere, plenarie, quiet,
integre, honorifice, sine aliquo impedimento, revocatione, contradictione, aut
obstaculo qualicunque.

In the Charters by the King or Subjects, there may and uses to be insert a
Clause, de novo-damus, which does Dispone the Fee, as by an original Right, in
case the Disponers Right should be found defective, and to secure against any
Title proper to the Superior, either as to the property, or any servitude or
casuality; which Clauses use to be very full, and to express all Nullities,
Title, or Interest in the Superior, with supply of all defects; and bearing
all the particular Casualities, with which the Fee might be burdened, which are
effectual, and extended to the full against Subjects. But as to such Clauses in
the Kings Charters, they are fully extended as to all Interest in the King,
relating to the Property, such as Nullities, Forefaulture Recognition,
Purpresture, Disclamation: But the general words, Pro omni jure titulo and
interesse, are not extended against the King, to any Casuality of Superiority,
not reaching, but burdening the Property, except such only as are particularly
expressed; and therefore, a novo damus, in a Bishops Charter from the King,
Disponing a Patronage, pro omni jure, was found to give the Bishops Successor
right to that Patronage, though it was a Laik Patronage, without necessity to
instruct that the Bishop had any pretense of a Title thereto before, but that
the novo damus was as effectual as an original Right, February 19. 1680. Sir
John Scot of Ancrum contra Archbishop of Glasgow. But a novo damus by the
King, bearing, pro omni jure titulo and interesse, and expressing Ward, found
not to exclude the Kings Donator from the Marriage, as being a Casuality
differing from the Ward, which uses to pass by a several Gift 17. day of July
1672. Lord Hatton contra the Earl of Northesk.

The reason of the different extention of the Clause, de novo damus, as to the
King and Subjects is, because Subjects are presumed to take special notice of
all Clauses, that they insert in their Charters, which in dubio, are interpret,
contra proferentem. But these Clauses do more easily pass by inadvertence in
Exchequer; and therefore, their Gifts are more regulat by their Acts, then by
the common Style thereof. For though Gifts of Ward comprehend Non-entry, ay and
while the Entry of the righteous Heir: Yet by act of Exchequer, it is only
extended to three Terms after the Ward, though the old Style be still continued.

Charters do also comprehend several conditions and provisions, of which
hereafter. And some Charters do express a bounding, which is ordinary in these
within Burgh. And some do express a particular enumeration. And some have only
the general name of Barony, or Tenendry, or some other common Designations,
under which, there may be particular Designations comprehended. And some
Charters bear, Infang-thief, outfang-thief, Pit and Gallows.

These Charters, or other Writes in place of Charters, though they do never so
fully comprehend the Dispositive Will of the Superior, yet they never become a
real Right, till they be completed by seasine, which imports the taking of
Possession for seasine and seasure are from the same original, signifying
laying hold of, or taking possession: And disseasing is dispossession; and
therefore, it is a needless question, whether Seasine or Possession were
distinct, and which were most effectual; for till the solemnity of Instruments
of Seasine was introduced to accomplish the real Right of Fees, Possession was
necessary to be joined to the Disposition: Which Possession might either be
natural by actual Inhabitation, Manuring or Stocking the Ground, positione
sediuni: Or might be Civil, by uplifting the Fruits and Duties: Or it might be
Symbolical, positione pedum, by entering upon the Lands as Vassal upon the
Superiors Warrant. But if this Symbolical Possession were retent a possessione
naturali, the Superior disponing to another who first attained the natural
Possession, be would have been preferred to the Symbolical Possession, as being
suspect and simulat, retenta possessione: Therefore, till the time of King
James the first, any Charter, Disposition, or Precept from a Superior to a
Vassal, mentioning his Heirs, or an Heretable Right, with true and real
Possession, without simulation, was sufficient to complete the Fee. So a
Charter with natural Possession was sustained, being in the Reign of King
Robert the second, June 24. 1625. And also before the Reign of King James the
second, Hope, seasine, Earl of Mar contra Bishop of Aberdeen.

16. But King James the first having been long detained in England, being taken
in his Voyage coming home from France, did thence bring in the Solemnity of
Seasines by the Instrument of a Nottar, about the year, 1530. as Craig
relates, l. 2. dieges. 7. near the beginning, and yet says, that long
thereafter, even near to his time, the Bailies Seal upon the Superiors
Disposition, Charter, or Precept, was sufficient to instruct Delivery of
Possession.

Neither was there necessity in any case to prove the delivery, or the
Superiors Entering the Vassal in Possession, but that was presumed from the
Possession it self; and therefore, it needs not be debated how the Vassal
entered in Possession, or what warrant the Bailzie had to give him Possession,
or what warrant the Person who received the possession for the Vassal had, as
his Procurator or Acturney; for if the Vassal were in the Natural and Civil
Possession; all these powers were presumed. Neither were Precepts of Seasine,
or Acturneys then in use; for as this solemnity of an Instrument of Seasine was
introduced from England, so was the name of Acturney, which is frequent there,
but seldom usedhere, but in cases of Seasine.

After Instruments of Seasine became in use, they were not only sustained as
the mean of probation, that Possession or Seasine was given or taken, but they
were the necessary solemnities to accomplish the right which could not be
supplied by any other mean or probation, though the Superior with a thousand
Witnesses, should subscribe all the Contents of a Seasine.

It would be of no effect to make a real Right without the attest of a Nottar,
in which sense, the vulgar maxim is to be understood, nulla sasina nulla
terra, which is not only necessary to the first Vassal, but must be renewed to
all his Heirs and Successors; although by the custom of France, the Vassal
being once Infeft, his Heirs need not be Infeft, but do continue to possess by
his Right, as the Heirs of Tacks-men do with us: But every Heir must be Infeft
in Fees, otherways, if they die uninfeft, they never attain the real Right, but
only a possessory Title to the Fruits and Rents, which will belong to their
Executors, in so far as unuplifted from their Predicessors death, till their
own death, or renunciation to be Heir, and will be affected for their proper
Debts, which will not affect the Heritage, or the next Heir entering, who must
enter to the Defunct, who died last Infeft, and will be liable for his debts,
but not for the debts of his appear and Heir, who was never Infeft.

17. Let us then consider the formal Tenor of an Instrument of Seasine and the
meaning thereof, and then consider the essentials and necessary requisites
thereto, and how far unformal seasines have been sustained.

A formal Seasine is the Instrument of a Nottar-publick, bearing the delivery
of Symbolical Possession, by the Superior or his Bailzie, to the Vassal or his
Acturney, by delivery of Earth and Stone, and other Symbols accustomed upon the
Ground of the Fee, which should contain the Name of God, as its initial Words,
In Dei nomine, Amen, that may keep the Nottar in remembrance of his faith and
trust, deterring him to take the Name of God to a falsehood or lie.

Secondly, It should bear the date by the day, month, and year of God, and was
accustomed to have the indiction and Name of the Pope, which since the
Reformation has not been in use: But it should contain the Name of the King,
and the year of His Reign.

Thirdly, It bears, the appearance of the Vassal, or his certain Aucturney,
which is sufficiently instructed, by having of the Precept of Seasine in his
hands, which is but presumptio juris, and does not exclude a contrary
probation, especially as to the Heirs of the first Vassal, who, by taking
Infeftment, becomes liable for all his Predecessors debts; and therefore, if
the Superior should grant a Precept of clare constat, the bearer whereof, as
Aucturney for the appearant Heir, taking Seasine, would involve the appear and
Heir in all his Fathers debts; and therefore, it may be proven by the Superior
and Aucturneys oath, that the Precept of Seasine was without warrant from the
appearant Heir, and so was fraudulent and collusive, to involve him in his
Predecessors debts, in an overburdened and hurtful succession.

Fourthly, It must bear the delivery of the Precept of Seasine to the
Superior, if he be present, or in his absence, to his Bailzie, whose warrant
is secured, because there is a blank left in the Precept for his Name, in which
blank, any persons name being filled up, he is sufficiently authorized as
Bailzie in that part, specially constitute.

Fifthly, It bears, the Bailzies accepting of the Precept, and delivering of it
to the Nottar in presence of the Witnesses.

Sixthly, It must bear the Nottars reading of the Precept, and exponing it if
it be in Latin, and then the words of the Precept should be Engrossed.

Seventhly, It bears the Superior or the Bailzies delivering of Earth and
Stone of the Land to the Vassal, or to his Aucturney, bearer of the Precept; Or
delivery of any other accustomed Symbol, as a penny for an Annualrent, a Net
for Fishing, a Clap for a Miln.

Eighthly, It bears the Aucturneys requiring Instruments.

Ninthly, It must bear, that these things were done upon the ground of the
Land, or other Hereditament, and the hour of the day, before two Witnesses, at
the least, required thereto,

And last, The attest of the Nottar, bearing the auctority of his Creation, and
that he was present with the Witnesses, and vidi, scivi and audivi, that the
things contained in the Instrument, were so done as is expressed therein, and
that he took a Note thereof, and thereupon drew a formal Instrument, and insert
the same in his Protocol, whereunto are adjoined his Sign, his Motto contained
in his Commission, relating to his faithfulness and trust, and his name or the
initial Letters thereof.

18. If any of these be omitted, the Nottar may be exauctorat and punished by
the Lords; but the essentials are much sewer: Yet the Seasine must contain the
delivery of symbolical Posession, by the Superior or his Bailzie to the Vassal,
or his Acturney upon the Ground of the Land, or other Tenement in presence of
the Nottar and Witnesses, with the date and subscription of the Nottar. But the
delivery of the symbol of an Office, having no particular place or ground, is
sufficient any where, as a Batton for a Military Office, or a scrol, Book, or
Cape for a Civil Office. But where the Fee has a particular ground or place,
there it must be taken upon the ground, and it will not be sufficient to be in
view of the ground, yet Law or Custom may otherways order in case of necessity:
As the Infeftments of Lands, in Nova Scotia, were appointed to be taken at the
Castle-hill of Edinburgh. And when Lands are rightly Unite or Erected in
Barronries, Seasine taken upon any part thereof suffices for the whole; and
without Union, Seasine taken upon any part of the Lands, will serve for all the
Lands in the Infeftment lying contigue. Craig relates, that a Seasine was found
null and false, where it bore, These things were done upon the ground of the
Land, albeit the parties had put, of the ground of the Land on which they
stood, within their Shoes, but were not upon the fixed ground thereof.

The Instrument of Seasine must be taken by a public Nottar, lawfully
authorized, at the least so holden and repute; for though the Nottar be
deprived, it will not vitiat his Instruments, taken bona fide, by persons who
knew not his deprivation, till it be commonly known, or Letters of publication
intimat at the Market Cross. A Seasine was also found null, because it wanted
these words, vidi, scivi and audivi, Hope, Seasine, Primrose contra

In ancient Rights, or where there is not a more Solemn Infeftment, Seasines
have been sustained, though with considerable defects, as where the Seasine
bore not delivery of Earth and Stone, but only actual and real Seasine, June
17. 1630. Earl of Wigtoun contra Earl of Cassils. But not where the Seasine
wanted delivery of Earth and Stone, and the name of the Aucturney, Hope,
Seasine, Lord of Lie contra Earl of Callender. A Seasine was sustained, though
it did not repeat the Precept, and did not bear delivery of Earth and Stone,
but only of the ground of the Land, yet was preferred to a posterior formal
Seasine, taken after the matter was Litigious, October 23. 1680. Lady
Lambertoun contra Lord of Polwart. And a Seasine, being the Title in a
Reduction, was sustained to infer Certification, though it bore not delivery of
Earth and Stone, nor Instruments taken, nor the hour, nor being conform to the
warrant; but bearing only, according to the custom in such cases; but the
defender thereafter, having made a production of his Right, certification was
not granted, contra non producta, March 20. 1632. Lord of Lie and Stuart
contra Earl of Lunderdail. Aand Seasine of Land and a Miln, was sustained,
bearing delivery of Earth and Stone of the Land and Milne, with all solemnities
requisite, March 15. 1631. Lord of Swintoun contra Vassals of Dumfermling.

19. Seasines being but the assertions of a Nottar, do not prove or instruct a
real Right, unless they be astructed by a Warrant or Adminicle in write, except
that it be against Tenants at the instance of their Master, who is known to be
in Possession: or that Prescription has run by one or more subsequent
Seasines, and 40 years peaceable Possession. And albeit the most ordinar
warrant of Seasines be the Superiors Precept Engrossed or related to in the
Seasine, yet after 40 years Possession, there is no necessity to produce
Precepts of Seasine, Procuratories, or Instruments of Resignation, even in the
Case of Reductions of Infeftments for want of these, Parliament 1495 cap. 214.
In which there is not required peaceable possession, neither yet continued
possession, as is required in the Act of Prescription, so that Interruptions as
to this point, will not alter the case: but there is no necessity to produce
any more for instructing an Infeftment, but the Seasine and a warrant thereof,
such as a precept of Clare Constat, a precept out of the Chanclery, a
disposition or contract of Alienation, according as the Seasine does relate to
the one or the other. As if the Seasine bear, to proceed upon a precept
contained in a Charter ter, Disposition, or Contract of Alienation, these must
be produced specifice as they are related; not only passive to defend in
Reductions, but active, as Titles of Reductions, Declarators, and all other
Processes, except against Tenants or naked Possessors, or where prescription
has run, because the Charwhen it is related to, is a part of the Investiture,
making up the real Right: and therefore (as has been now shown). 14. there is
no necessity to produce a Disposition, Contract of Alienation, or Bond, though
the Charter relate thereto. But if the Seasinebear, to proceed upon a Precept
contained in a Disposition, Contract of Alienation or Bond, then these are
parts of the Infeftment, and make up the real Right, and so must be produced,
that the Defender may except or defend upon any clause therein contained, in
favors of himself, his predecessors or authors, unless the Infeftments be
ancient, and clede with long possession; in which case, it is like the Lords
would extend the foresaid Statute, and would sustain a Disposition, Contract or
Bond, as a sufficient Adminicle of the Seasine, though it related not thereto.
And albeit this Statute mentions only, that Charter and Seasine shall be
sufficient, under which a disposition or Contract of Alienation must be
comprehended when the Seasine is immediately taken thereupon, and not upon a
formal Charter, for then they are the real Charter: yea, it is not like they
would reject a Bond, obliedging to grant such Infeftment, albeit it do not de
presenti dispone, as a sufficient adminicle to sustain a seasine, where they
had been 40 years possession, although prescription was not completed by
immediate subsequent Seasines, or uninterrupted possession, the Party making
faith, that he did not keep up, or conceal any other part of the Investiture,
which would sufficiently take off the presumption of Fraudful concealing or
away-putting the immediate warrant of the Seasine, which might afford defenses
to the other Party. For even in a recent Case, of the Infeftment of a Wife in
Life-rent, her Seasine was sustained upon Production of her Contract of
Marriage, albeit the Seasine proceeded upon a Bond granted for the same cause,
January 29. 1665. Mr. George Norvil Advocat, contra Margaret Sunter, where
nothing was alleged of long possession. See what was found November 22. 1628.
Clappertoun contra Hoome, Hope, Seasine, Murray of Philliphaugh contra Schaw,
Gray contra Finlayson, there could be less question if the Seasine related to a
precept apart, and did not bear, whether the precept proceeded upon a Charter,
Disposition, Alienation, or Bond, for then the production of any of these,
would adminiculat the Seazine.

Seasines within Burgh, for serving of Heirs by Hesp and Staple, by the
immemorial Custom and Privilege of Burgh, being given by the Town Clerk, do
prove sufficiently both the propinquity of Blood, that the same was Cognosced
and Seasine given accordingly, without necessity of any warrant or adminicle,
but in Seasines of Original Rights, of conveyances to singular Successors, will
not be sustained by Seasines by the Town Clerk, without Adminicles as to
Tenements within Burghs, as was found in an Infeftment from a Father to his
son, bearing to be upon the Fathers Resignation, February 11. 1681. Francis
Irwing contra Corsan, June 21. 1672. William Mitchel contra Thomas Cowie.

Seasines propriis manibus, when either the Superior himself does give Seasine
to his Vassals Acturney, or when the Superiors Baily by his Precept, gives
Seasine to the Vassal, himself being present, and accepting; or when the
Superior immediately gives Seasine to the Vassal, in these Cases, the Nottars
warrant is sufficiently instructed by the Seasine, and by the Disposition,
Contract of Alienation, or Bond: Or when the Seasine is propriis manibus
secundum Cartam Conficiendam, if a Charter thereafter made beshown, as a
Seasine propriis manibus, by a Father to his son, reserving the Fathers
Liferent, was found valid against a second Wises Infeftment, granted for a
competent Tocher, being adminiculat by a Bond granted by the Father of the same
date, with the Seasine, obliedging him to warrant the same, February 11. 1669.
Buchan contra Tait yea a Seasine propriis manibus by a Superior, containing
Resignation, accepted by the Superior, and immediately Seasine given, propriis
manibus was sustained without any warrant, subscribed by the Superior, but by
the Vassals Disposition, containing Procuratorie of Resignation, there being no
more solemn Infeftment in competition, Januarie 17. 1672. John Young contra
Thomson.

But as to Seasines propriis manibus by Husbands to their Wives in
Contemplation of Marriage, either before Marriage, where Marriage followed, or
after Marriage, having no adminicle but the Marriage; The Lords according to
the different Cases, have sometimes sustained them when they were suitable to
the parties, and not exorbitant, and where the question was only with the
Husbands Heir, Nov. 22. 1628. Clappertown contra Hoom. June 19. 1668. Relict of
Wallace of Galrigs Contra his Heir, in which case it was instructed, that about
that time the Wife had disponed to her Husband her Jointure by a former
Marriage. But such Seasines are easily improven, if they be not asserted by the
Witnesses insert. As in the last case, the Heir insisting in improbation, there
being four witnesses in the Seasine, two of them deponed they were not
witnesses thereto, the third remembered not, the fourth was positive for it, and
the Nottar offered to depone that it was true; yet having no adminicle, his
oath was not taken, and the Seasine was improven; but if there had been an
adminicle, the Nottar and one of the Witnesses being positive, the Seasine
would not have been improven: for where there is a warrant mediat or immediate,
providing a Seasine to be given, Quid fieri debet facile (...). And therefore
the witnesses not remembering, would hardly improve such Seasines, unless their
Testimony were positive, giving special circumstances of their remembrance, as
being in such another Country or far distant place at that time, if the truth
of that were otherwise astructed. But the general denial to be witnesses could
import no more but non memini: and therefore an adminicle in write, with the
protocol or oath of the Nottar, if he were alive, and especially if possession
followed for some time: these would stronglier approve, then the not
remembrance or general denial of the witnesses insert would improve. But this
dipping upon a general Question, de side instrumentorum, we shall say no more
of it in this place, nor of the Admission and Qualification of Nottars, as to
which, Craig relates the customs of France, which were not then, nor have not
yet been here allowed; but certainly more exactness ought to be in the
admission of Nottars, not only as to their skill, but as to their reputation of
Honesty and Fidelity, and the least want or weakening of these should turn them
out. For the Introduction of the Solemnity of the Instruments of Nottars, was
not only because of old few could write, and the impression of Seals were
easily imitat: yea even such rude Subscriptions, there being some in
Justinian's time, who could so artificially imitat another hand write, that
himself could not know it, or durst swear it was not his write. And therefore
he introduced two remeeds, that private writes should not prove by the
Subscription of the party, unless that there were three subscribing Witnesses,
knowing he Parties Contracters; or that there were three Witnesses who depone
anent the truth of the Deed, or otherwise, that writes were made in public by
a public person, which at first was only done Judicially, but thereafter
Extrajudicially by a Nottarpublick; but our Custom has returned to private
write, and (...) not the Instruments of Nottars, but where they are adminiculat
by (...), (...) in the case where parties cannot write: and then in matters of
Importance, two Nottars and four Witnesses are necessary by special Statute.
But this is not extended to seasines, but only to the subscriptions of Nottars
for parties, February 11. 1669. Buchan contra Tait, Julie 5. (...). Bishop of
Aberdeen contra Viscount of Kenmuir. Yet in some cases of small importance,
Instruments of Nottars are probative: and in all cases where witnesses would
prove, it does much fortify the same, that they were Witnesses required, and
Instrument of a Nottar taken thereupon. For then the Instrument of the Nottar,
astructed by the witnesses insert, make a strong probation.

To return to Seasines propriis manibus by Husbands to Wives without warrant or
adminicle in write, they are not generally probative, except in such cases as
have been now expressed, Hope, Seasine, Bell and Morison contra Thomson, Lord of
Coldingknows contra Dam Helen Hereis.

20. But for the further securing of Infeftments and Land-rights, that
excellent Statute which before was attempted, was at last perfected, Par. 1617.
cap. 16. whereby all Seasines, Reversions, Regresses, Bonds or Writes for
making of Reversions, and Regresses, Assignations thereto, and Discharges
thereof, Renunciations of Wodsets, and grants of redemption, not being
Registrat in a peculiar Register, appointed for that end, or in case of
Consigning Renunciations, and grants of redemption in Process, within 60 days
next after the Decree, ordaining the same to be given up to the parties having
right thereto, or at least within 60 days after Seasing taken of the Lands or
Rights, to which the reversions relate. It is declared, that the said Seasines
and other Writes, shall make no faith in Judgment by Action or Exception, in
prejudice of a third Party, who had acquired a perfect and lawful right to the
said Lands and Heritage, without prejudice to make use of these rights against
the granter and his Heirs: But there are excepted Reversions contained in the
body of the Infeftment, and all Seasines, Reversions, etc. Of Tenements within
Burgh.

21. And to make Land-rights yet more secure, because the former Act did not
require Registration of Instruments of Resignation in the Superiors hands,
adremanentiam, whereby purchasers were not secure, but that the Lands acquired
by them, might have been resigned or renounced to the Superior, whereby their
Authors Fie became Extinct, without necessity of new Infeftment, being
consolidat with the Superiority, whereby the Superiors Infeftment carried both
Superiority and Property. Therefore, Instruments of resignation not being
Registrat are declared null, yet with exception of Tenements holding Burgage,
And therefore a Seasine within Burgh was sustained, though not found in the
Towns books, June 30. 1668. Mr. Robert Burnet contra Swan, February 11. 1681.
Francis Irwing contra Corsan.

Upon Consideration of this Case, the Lords by act of Sederunt ordained the
Burrows, to take sufficient Caution oftheir Town Clerks present, and to come to
insert in their books, all Seasines given by them of the Tenements within Burgh
and all reversions, or Bonds for granting reversions, assignations thereto, and
discharges thereof, renunciations and grants of redemption, and that within 60.
days after the giving of Seasine, or presenting to them of the reversions or
others foresaids, and that under the pain of the damnage of any Party acquiring
bona fide for onerous Causes by such Latent rights, though prior, declaring
that they will hold all such Seasines, reversions, etc. to be given hereafter,
and not insert in the Towns books in manner foresaid, to be Latent and
Fraudulent, kept up of design to ensnare lawful purchasers. But there is now
an Act of Parliament, requiring the inserting of Seasines within Burgh, in the
Town-Clerks Books in the same manner, and under the same certifications as is
required to the Registration of Seasines without Burgh.

22. And for the further security of Land-rights, because Apprysing, or
Adjudication, with a Charge of Horning thereupon against the Superior, makes
for some time, a real right; Therefore, an abbreviat of Apprysings contained in
the allowance thereof, written on the back of the same, and signed by two of
the Lords, was ordained to be Registrat in a particular Register for that
purpose, within 60. days after the date of the Apprysing; with certification,
that any other Apprysing, though posterior in date, yet first allowed and
registrat, shall be preferred, Parliament 1661. cap. 31. which is extended to
Adjudications, Parliament 1672. cap. 19. But this relates only to the new form
of Adjudications then introduced in place of Apprysing. But for the old
Adjudications, upon there nunciations of Heirs or implement of Dispositions,
neither Statute nor Custom have yet cleared, whether these will be effectual
against singular Successors from their Dates, or from the Charge against the
Superior, or only from the Seasines thereupon; which, as all other Seasines,
must be registrat. And if the Lords do sustain these from the Charge, it will
make a defect in the security of Land-rights, till it be supplied by act of
Parliament. And for further security of Land-rights, because they might be
reduced upon Inhibition, or Interdictions; Therefore these, if not registrat,
are also null. And in respect Horning, continuing unrelaxed year and day after
the denunciation, the Superior has the Fee, during the life of the Vassal
denunced, therefore horning, if not registrat, is also null, and the act of
Prescription excludes all prior rights, preceding 40. years, unless they have
obtained Possession, or done digence therefore by interruptions, which must be
repeated every five years, or else they are null, and must also be execute by a
Messenger; so that where before a Citation made interruption, which continued
for forty years, which might much insecure Purchasers, they can now last but
five years, in which short time the noise thereof may readily reach purchasers,
so that if purchasers get a progress of Infeftment for forty years, he may by
the Registers know it there be any real Right that can affect the Fee within
that time, and has no more to enquire, but as to interruptions within five
years, which if the Lords appoint to pass only upon Bills, it may be found at
the Signet: So that upon the whole matter, no Nation has so much security of
irredeemable Land-rights as we have. It is true, redeemable rights are not so
secure, because they may be evacuat by order of redemption, which proceed by
Instruments of premonition and Consignation, which require no registration; and
therefore, purchasers of Appryzings or Adjudications, during the legal
reversion, are in hazard of any order of Redemption, or Summonds for Count and
Reckoning; and likewise, these who purchase Wodsets or Infeftments of property,
or annualrent for security of sums, run the hazard of satisfaction and payment
of these sums by intromission, or otherways, wherein there is little
inconveniency; for no man should purchase a redeemable right, without consent
of the reverser, but upon his hazard; or if there be any reversion,
reservation, or real burden in his authors right, sibi imputet, it is his fault
and negligence, if he did not see it, and secure himself against it.

The Question may occur here, if the Keeper of the Register of Seasines do
according to the Custom, mark the Seasine Registrat, and attest the same by his
subscription, and yet by negligence or fraud, shall not insert it in the
Register; whether in that case a purchaser, bona fide, for causes onerous,
though Infeft thereafter, will be excluded by that prior Infeftment, marked by
the Clerk, not recorded, though nothing has been observed in this case: If
Seasines marked Registrat, though not found in the Register, were found
sufficient against singular Successors, purchasing thereafter, the design and
tenor of this Statute would be eluded; for the Statute bears, if they be not
Registrat, (which must import, there being insert in the Register) they are
null; and therefore, though the Keeper of the Register has attested such
Seasines to be Registrate, yet truly they are not Registrat. And no purchaser
could be secure by inspection of Registers, if a false attest of a Clerk could
exclude him, who oftimes is insolvent. But the not inserting of Seasines within
Burgh, in the Towns Books, does not annual them; Seasins within Burgh being a
total exception from the whole Act; for Registration and the Statute being
defective in that point, the Lords did very fitly supply it by these two
remeids; that the Seasins within Burgh, not being in the Towns Books, should
not be found null, yet they might be reduced as latent and fraudulent: And if
the Town Clerks were put to find Caution for the damage, real Rights within
Burgh would be fully as secure as these without Burgh.

23. Seasines, as all other Instruments, must have the attest and subscription
of the Nottar, giver thereof, bearing the names and designations of the
Witnesses insert, whereof two will be sufficient, because the Seasine must have
a warrant by a subscribed Write, by the author of the Infeftment, and so needs
not two Nottars, and consequently requires not four Witnesses, as other
principal Writes of importance, subscribed by Nottars, July 5. 1680. Bishop of
Aberdene contra Viscount of Kenmure. Neither was a Seasine found void, because
taken in the night, nothing of latency or fraud being qualified, but Possession
conform, Margaret Arnot and Patton her Spouse contra Mr. Archibald Turner.

24. If a Seasine be only extracted out of the Register of Seasines, it will
not be sufficient, because that Register is only for publication: As also the
Register of Hornings and Inhibitions, and not for conservation, for the keeper
of the Register does not keep the principal Seasines, but gives them back
marked: But if the principal Seasine marked as Registrat, be wanting, if the
Nottar who gave it be alive, he may renew it out of his Protocol, and the
keeper of the Register of seasines may attest it Registrat, upon the day
mentioned in the Register; and therefore, the Lords upon supplication, ordains
the keeper of a Register, so to mark a seasine, January 2. 1678. Sir Andrew
Ramsay Supplicant.

25. But if the Nottar who gave the seasine be dead, there remains yet this
remeid, that a transumpt may be made upon production of the Protocol and
Citation of the Author, or his Heirs, or any other party having interest; which
Transumpt is sufficient in place of the principal seasing, and may bear, both
the Transumpt of the Protocol, and of that part of the Register, where the
seasine was Registrate. But the Instrument of a Clerk, containing the Tenor of
a seasine will not be sufficient without Citation of the parties.

If both the principal seasine and the protocol be wanting, the Tenor of the
seasine may be proven upon Citation of the same parties, as in a Transumpt, if
there be sufficient adminicles in Write, and Witnesses who saw the seasine,
wherein the Extract of the seasine out of the Register is a good Adminicle.

Seasines taken out of the Towns Books, not by the Town Clerk who gave the
seasine, but by his successor, will not serve for a principal seasine; the
Towns Book being but the Protocal of the Town Clerk; and therefore, either must
the Towns Book be produced, that the Seasine may be transumed, or Commission
granted for inspection, or collation, which being returned, was found to
suffice as a Transumpt, February 11. 1681. Francis Irving contra Corsan.

26. Infeftments do sometimes express the meithes or marches of the Lands and
Tenements, which thence is called a bounding Infeftment, giving right to all
within the bounds, if the giver of the Charter had right; or if the Vassal have
by that Infeftment had peaceable Possession till prescription; otherways
bounding Charters prejudge not, Par. 1592. cap. 136. Yet prescription will
adject that which is within the bounding to another Tenement, which will not be
elided by possessing the major part of that Tenement: But no prescription can
give right to what is without the bounding, as part and pertinent, November. 14.
1671. Walter Young contra Bailzie Carmichael. But where there is no bounding,
possession clears the parts and pertinents of every Tenement; and in
competition, where any ground is claimed as part and pertinent of several
Tenements, witnesses are allowed to either party, for proving the Possession
and interruptions, unless it be alleged that that ground is separ (...)
tenementum, having a distinct Infeftment of it self, which will exclude the
alledgeance of part and pertinent, if the several Infeftments be not excluded
by prescription, as was found in the said case, Young contra Carmichael. But
though the one Infeftment contain the ground in question, per expressum, in the
enumeration of the parts of a Barronry or Tenement: And though the other
Infeftment contain no enumeration, or in the enumeration, mention not the
ground in question, but the same is alleged to be part and pertinent
comprehended under the common Designation, or under some of the parts enumerat,
if both flow from one common author, as original Rights, the first is
preferable, otherways, both will be allowed Witnesses for proving Possession
and interruption, and in paricasu aut dubio, the express Infeftment will be
preferable.

27. But the main question is here concerning Infeftments holden of Subjects,
not being past upon the granters resignation, by the Superior, or the Superiors
Confirmation, or by his obedience upon Decreets of Appryzing or Adjudications,
which therefore are called base Infeftments, and private Infeftments, because
they proceed in a more private and ignoble way, being done by the granter and
receiver thereof, without the interposition of the Superior.

The doubt is, whether such be complete real rights, carrying the property of
the ground by the Charter and Seasine only, or not until possession of the
Hereditament be obtained: The ground of this distinction betwixt Infeftments,
and of the doubt as to base Infeftments, is from the Act of Parliament, 1540.
cap. 105. Whereby it is clear, First, Before that Act, Infeftments holden of
the Disponer, without Resignation or Confirmation, were valid without
possession, and preferable to all posterior Infeftments, though proceeding upon
Resignation, or by Confirmation, for it is for remeid of this, that this
Statute is enacted.

Secondly, By the Letter of this Statute, posterior Infeftments upon
Resignation, or by Confirmation, are only preferred to prior private
Infeftments, when the obtainer of the posterior Infeftment, brooks the Lands
peaceably, by Laboring, Manuring, and uptaking of the Mails, Profits and
Duties, and so are known Heretable Possessors thereof, year and day. And when
such Infeftments are for Causes onerous, or do contain or import warrandice;
neither is there any thing mentioned in the Statute, as to the competition of
Infeftments, upon Appryzing or Adjudication, with prior base Infeftments, nor
of the competition of one base Infeftment with another: Yet Custom since that
Statute, has cleared and determined the competition of public and base
Infeftments, and has restricted this Statute in some points, and extended it
in others.

First, Custom has preferred all public Infeftments upon Resignation or
Confirmation, or upon Appryzing or Adjudication to base Infeftments, though
prior, if the base Infeftment has lain out of all kind of possession; and
likewise, has preferred posterior base Infeftments, first clede with
Possession to prior base Infeftments without possession, especially in
consideration, that such base Infeftments are fraudulent or simulat, retenta
possessione; for the retaining of Possession is a pregnant ground of
simulation, not only of Infeftments, but many other Rights, as when Movables
are disponed and delivered, but presently taken back, and the natural
Possession continued in the Disponer, though Instruments be taken upon the
delivery; yet other Dispositions or legal Diligences, attaining and retaining
Possession are preferable, because the other Dispositions are presumed
fraudulent and simulat. And gifts of single Escheat or Liferent Escheat, are
presumed to be simulat, if the rebel or his conjunct and confident persons, be
long suffered to retain the Possession; and therefore, base Infeftments,
retenta possessione, are also presumed fraudulent and simulat, and that not
only presumptione juris, by this and other Statutes; but presumptione juris and
de jure, admitting no contrary probation: For certainly, base Infeftments, may
be, and oftentimes have been without simulation, and for onerous causes; and
yet these have never been sustained or admitted to probation, to validat such
base Infeftments: And albeit long retention of Possession may raise
presumptionem hominis, that public Infeftments are simulat or without cause
onerous, yet that presumption has not been owned by Law.

Secondly, Custom has preferred posterior base Infeftments, attaining
possession or using diligence to attain it, to prior base Infeftments, not
attaining Possesion, nor using diligence to attain it: And albeit the
superveening Statute for Registration of Seasines be designed for publication
thereof, that purchasers thereafter may not be ensnared or disappointed,
whereby it might seem that the difference betwixt private or base Infeftments,
and public Infeftments, might have been laid aside, since the Act for
Registration of Seasines, whereby the uncertainty of real Rights, by proving
base Infeftments, cled with Possession by Witnesses (wherein our Law is so
justly Jealous and Cautious, that they are not admitted in cases where Write
uses to be adhibit) might be avoided: Yet the preserence of public
Infeftments, to prior base Infeftments, not cled with Possession, being fixed
by Custom from this Statute, before the Act for Registration of Seasines, by
the space of threescore seventeen years, has been still continued. And such
Infeftments as are without consent of the Superior or order of Law, have still
retained the name and nature of base Infeftments; and albeit the alledgeance
uses sometimes to be proponed against base Infeftments, that they are null,
not being cled with Possession, yet it is no simple nullity, but only a
preference of a more solemn right, for pursuits for Mails and Duties,
Removings, yea, and Reductions are sustained thereupon, and will not be
excluded upon pretense of want of Possession, as thereby being null, though
they had lain long out of Possession. So a base Infeftment without Possession,
was found a sufficient Title in a Reduction to enforce production of all other
Infeftments, base or public, albeit the Superior did not concur, Spots.
Kirk-men, Douglas contra the Earl of Home: And such Infeftments do always
exclude posterior Arrestments: They do also exclude the Terce of the granters
Relict, January 27. 1669. Bell of Belford contra Lady Rutherford.

But base Infeftments do not exclude the Liferent Escheat of their author,
unless they attain Possession in cursu rebellionis, March 19. 1633. Lord of
Rentoun contra Lord of Blackiter. February 21. 1667. Robert Milne contra
Clerkson.

Where there is no further ground of Simulation then the want of Possession,
very little Possession or Diligence, for Possession will prefer base
Infeftments to Posterior public Infeftments, or to posterior base Infeftments,
cled with Possession; as the lifting of one Terms Rent did prefer a base
Infeftment to a posterior public Infeftment cled with many years Possession,
Hope, alienation, Hamiltoun contra Mcadam. And the payment of a small part of
Annualrent, far within a Terms Annual, was sustained to prefer a base
Infeftment of Annualrent, and it was also preferred, because there was a
Decree of Poynding of the Ground, though not put to Execution, February 26.
and 27. 1662. Creditors of Kinglassie competing. And a citation for attaining
Possession was found sufficient, February 13. 1624. Corse contra July 2. 1625.
Raploch contra Tenants of Lethem. June 26. 1662. Wilson contra Thomson. January
24. 1679. Hamiltoun contra Seatoun. Yea, a base Infeftment of Annualrent was
preferred to a posterior base Infeftment of property, which interveened before
the first Term, at which the Annualrent was payable, and cled with Possession
before that Term; so that the Annualrenter did not lie out of Possession, but
could attain none, July 26. 1676. Captain Alison contra Bailzie Carmichael. And
an Infeftment of Annualrent being out of discontiguous Lands in several Shires,
was preferred as to both Tenements, by getting payment of Annualrents from the
Heretor or Tenants, of either Tenement, November 6. 1673. Mr. Alexander Miln
contra Mr. Thomas Hay. And Possession by an Infeftment for Corroboration of an
Annualrent, did prefer the principal Infeftment of Annualrent, having no other
Possession, July 9. 1668. Alexander contra (...). And an Infeftment of
principal Lands, and Warrandice Lands, being cled with Possession of the
principal Lands, these being evicted, was found to make the Infeftment of the
Warrandice Lands effectual from its date, and preferred to a posterior public
Infeftment of the Warrandice Lands, though cled with long Possession, January
9. 1666. Elizabeth Brown contra John Scot. Yea, base Infeftments to Wivesupon
their Contracts of marrage, (...) prefer to all posterior Infeftments, and
the Husbands Possession is accounted the Wives Possession, though he be common
author to both, November 23. 1664. Elizabeth Nisbet contra Patrick Murray. And
though the Husband did not (...) himself, but Wodsetters deriving right from
him, June 18. 1667. Lady (...) contra Sir John Strachan. And where the Husbands
Mother did (...) by a Liferent flowing from the Husbands Father, to who (...)
he was Heir, it was found sufficient to cloth his Wifes Infeftment with
Possession, February 21. 1672. Mr. James Reid contra Countess of Dundee.

But a base Infeftment of a Wodsett, with a back-tack to the granter, is not
held cled with Possession by the granters Possession as Tacks-man, till some
further possession be attained.

Where there is any further ground of suspicion or simulation, there must be a
clear possession, as a base Infeftment by Fathers to their Children, was not
sustained by the Fathers possession, whose Liferent was reserved therein, June
26. 1634. Dury contra Bruce. But a posterior base Infeftment to the Wife was
preferred in this case, as being cled with the Husbands possession, though
common author to both the Son and Wife. The like of a base Infeftment granted
by a Goodsire to his Oy, reserving the Goodsires Liferent, July 3. 1624. Earl
of Annandale contra Johnstoun. And an Infeftment by a Father to his Son, was
not found cled with possession by the Fathers possession, though he had a
Factory from the Son; but it was not alleged that the Father had granted
Discharges, expressly relating to the Factory, July 10. 1669. Gardner contra
Colvil. Yet in the competition of two base Infeftments, the former being
granted to a stranger for relief of Caution, and the latter granted to a Son
and appearand Heir for relief of his Caution, exceeding the value of the Lands,
the Sons base Infeftment, though posterior, having first attained possession,
and being without all suspicion of Simulation, was preferred. And it was not
found, that Infeftments for relief, were in the same case with Warrandice
Lands, where the possession of the principal Lands is fictione juris, a
possession of the Warrandice Lands; These Infeftments being less subject to
fraud or uncertainty, then Infeftments for relief, which relate to personal
debts, and oftimes generally to all debts or Cautionries contracted or to be
contracted, which debts may be retired and kept up, and made use of by the
Infeftment for relief, June 26. 1677. Mr. John Inglis contra Tennents of
Eastbarns.

Infeftments base to Wives, not being upon their Contracts of Marriage, or in
place thereof, are not holden as cled with Possession by the Husbands
Possession.

28. Infeftments by Confirmation, do not only require a Charter from the
Disponer, bearing the Lands to be holden of the Superior, and Seasine
thereupon, but require also the Superiors Confirmation, till which it is no
real Right, but null; but whenever the Confirmation is added, the Right
becomes valid from the date of the Infeftment Confirmed, as to the right of
property, and as to the Superiors Casualities; and therefore, an Infeftment,
ase, not confirmed, was found null by exception, though cled with some years
possession, December 4. 1623. Patton contra Stuart, and found null, though the
Confirmation was past the Privy Seal, Hope, Confirmation, Hunter contra
Dalgleish. And also found null in an Annualrent, holden from the Disponer, not
Confirmed, Hope, Confirmation, Lord Balmerino contra Coatfield. But if there
were any mid impediment betwixt the Charter Confirmed, and the Confirmation; it
excludes the Confirmation and whole right, as an Appryzing and Infeftment. But
Confirmation of a right, not bearing to be holden of the Superior, but of the
Vastal, makes it not a public Infeftment, nor takes it away the Superiors
ordinary Casualities, as Ward, but only Recognition and Forefaulture, Hope,
Confirmation, Lady Cathcart contra Vassals of Cathcart, November 17. 1627.
Lord of Clackmannan contra Balnamoon. Hence it is, that because Confirmation
constitutes Rights holden of the Superior, that the first Confirmation makes
the first Right, though it confirm a posterior Infeftment from the Vassal, as
is clearly determined in the case of double Confirmations holden of the King,
Par. 1578. cap. 66. which is not introduced, but declared by that Act, and
holds alike in other Confirmations.

It does of times fall to be doubtful, whether a Confirmation makes an
Infeftment public or not, when Seasine is taken upon a precept of Seasine in a
Disposition? Which Disposition contains obliegments for Infeftment, de se and
ase, by Confirmation. But the precept of Seasine relates not specially to
either obliegement, and Seasine is taken thereupon, and is afterward confirmed:
The question comes, whether this be only a Confirmation of a base Infeftment,
to exclude Forefaulture or Recognition, or if it does make the Infeftment
public? it is generally constructed as a public Infeftment, as was found,
July 5. 1680. Bishop of Aberdeen contra Viscount of Kenmure.

29. Infeftments upon Appryzing or Adjudication, when formally perfected, do
require Charters to be granted by the Superiors of the Appryzed Lands, or
other real Rights, the Tenor whereof is already set down in this Title, and
Precepts and Seasines thereupon, which have little peculiar differing from
other Infeftments, as to their Tenors and Effects, but that their reddendo is
ordinarily general, when the Appryzer or Adjudger cannot prove or instruct the
Tenor of his authors Right; and therefore, do bear such duties and services, as
were contained in the Authors Rights, which the Superior may be charged to
renew and make special, so soon as the Authors Rights are produced; and if they
be not so renewed, they are understood as Ward-holdings: But for Renovation
thereof, the Appryzer or Adjudger will get Letters of Horning summarly upon the
allowance of the Appryzing or Adjudication, which will not be excluded,
although the Superior have already granted Infeftments in general terms as
aforesaid, but he must renew the same according to the special Tenor of the
Authors Right produced, and that without any new composition; yea, the
Appryzers Heirs upon supplication, will obtain Letters of Horning summarly for
renewing the same, and so will his singular Successors, but they must pay a
years Rent for their Entry, whether their Title be Appryzing or Adjudication
against the former Appryzer or Adjudger; in which case he may make use of
Letters of Horning, upon the allowance of his own Appryzing; and though his
Title be a voluntary Disposition, he will get Letters of Horning, as succeeding
in the place of the former Appryzer or Adjudger, to renew and make special the
former Infeftment to his Author upon payment of a years duty. But Appryzing and
Adjudications being legal Dispositions, and conveyances of the Authors
Infeftment, we shall say no further of them in this place, but leave them to
the Title twenty four, where they are considered amongst Dispositions.

We shall only add here, that before the year, 1624. Appryzings were left at
the great Seal, by warrant from the Lords, whence Precepts were issued
thereupon against the Superiors to Infeft; which if they obeyed not, Charters
were granted by the King to supply their Vice; but since, they are retained by
the Appryzer, and he may have Letters of Horning summarly Charging the
Superiors to grant Charters and Precepts of Seasine, as is aforesaid.

30. This also is singular in Appryzings and Adjudications, that a real Right
of Fee is constitute thereby, by a Charge of Horning against the Superior,
without Charter or Seasine: For such Appryzings or Adjudications are declared
effectual by the Act of Parliament, 1661. cap. 62. ordering the payment of
debts betwixt Creditor and Debtor: For after that Charge, no Infeftment upon
voluntary Disposition, or upon any other Appryzing or Adjudication can be
granted by the Superior, prefering any other Vassal to the Appryzer, or
Adjudger, whom he has unwarrantably refused to Enter, if the Appryzer or
Adjudger insist in his Appryzing or Adjudication for Possession; but he may
forbear to make use of the Appryzing or Adjudication, and if hely long out
without further diligence, he will be presumed to have relinquished his
Appryzing or Adjudication, and posterior Rights and Diligences will be
preferred: But if he enter in Possession, no posterior Infeftment or Diligence
will exclude him, although he insist no further but the Charge of Horning: and
it has not occurred to be determined, how long that Right will subsist without
infeftment; but it has been found, that the Superior will not be excluded
from the Casualities of Superiority by his former Vassal, if he have not been
in the fault, in refusing to Enter when the Appryzer or Adjudger offered him a
Charter with a years Rent of the Land, or Annualrent of the sum adjudged or
appryzed, for this was in the case of Ward, February 9. 1669. Black contra
David Trinch. Neither was a Superior found to have interest to exclude an
Appryzer from Possession, till he paid a years Rent, but that he might possess
during the legal, if he insisted not for infeftment, which insinuats, that
after expyring of the legal, the Superior might hinder the appryzer or
adjudger to continue in possession till he take Infeftment, and pay a years
Rent; but during the legal, the appryzing or adjudication is but as a legal
assignation to the Mails and Duties, so that the appryzer cannot be forced to
take Infeftment, till the legal expyre, and the Land become irredeemably his
own, and then he is to pay a years Rent; but in this case there was no Charge
upon the appryzing, December 3. 1672. Mr. Hendry Hay contra Lord of
Earlestoun. Albeit in the case of Johnstoun contra the Tennants of Auchincorse,
July 22. 1665. the appryzer having charged the Superior, though he did not
then obey; yet appearing in the Process of Mails and Duties, he offered now to
receive the appryzer; and therefore, the appryzer was excluded till he paid
the years rent, which being under consideration of the Lords, in the posterior
case of Mr. Henry Hay, they resolved to give the apyryzer his option within the
legal to take Infeftment or not, so that the Charge does only hinder others to
preveen, but does not exclude the Superior from any Casuality of the
Superiority, falling by his former Vassal, unless he had been in culpa,
refusing the appryzer Entry, insisting orderly to be Entered, which is a great
advantage, both to debitors and creditors, not to have the accession of a years
rent, till the ancient Rights may be discovered, and that it may appear whether
the appryzing becomes an absolute Right.

The main division of Infeftments is in relation to the holding is in Ward,
Blench, Feu, Burgage and Mortification.

31. An Infeftment Ward has its denomination from Ward, which is the chief
Casuality befalling to the Superior thereby, it is the most proper Feudal
Right we have; and therefore, wherever the holding appears not, or is
unclear, there Ward-holding is understood; it is ordinarily expressed by
rendering service, used and wont: and if the reddendo be not express in name of
blensh, or Feu Ferm, though it bear payment of some Duty, yet Ward is inferred,
as by a Charter, bearing, sex dinarios nomine cana, with a taxed Marriage: So
also it was inferred by a reddendo, bearing a particular Duty, payable at
Whitsunday and Martimass, cum servitiis in curiis, nostris and alibi debitis,
and consuetis, Hope, de feudi renovatione, Williamson contra Thomson.

The main importance of a Ward-holding was indefinite service to be performed
by the Vassal to his Superior, and especially in War; but that being now
little in use, the main effect of it is, the Ward and Marriage of the Vassal,
of which hereafter.

32. Ward Lands according to the nature of proper Feudal Rights, might not be
alienat by the Vassals, granting any subaltern Infeftment thereof: otherways,
not only the subaltern Infeftments were void, but the Vassal granter thereof,
his own Infeftment became void by Recognition; yet by Act of Parliament, 1457.
cap. 72. all Feus to be granted by the King, Prelates, Barons, or Freeholders,
are allowed and declared not to fall in Ward, as being but Heretable
assedations, as the act bears, paying to the Superior, during the Ward, the
Feu-duty, providing the Lands be set to a competent avail, without prejudice to
the King, which is ordinarily interpret to be the retoured duty; the same is
repeated Par. 1503. cap. 91. and extended not only to subaltern Infeftments
Feu, but also of annualrents, so that it be without diminution of the Rental,
which in Lands holden of the King by secular men, is the retoured mail, and in
the Kings property, and in Kirk-lands is the full rental, they should happen to
be at the time of the subaltern Infeftments, which therefore, the Feus may not
diminish, and the annualrent may not be so great as to exhaust the Land, that
the rental remain not free: This last Act was temporal for that Kings life; and
therefore, the extention as to annualrents cease, though the first Act
expresses, that the King will ratify all Feus granted by the Kings immediate
Vassals; yet the Act bears, that the King thereby will give good example to the
rest, viz. to other Superiors; and therefore, a Feu of Ward-lands granted by a
Vassal, holding Ward of a Subject, before the Act of Parliament, 1606. was
found valid, though without the Superiors consent, June 24. 1668. Stuart of
Torrence contra Feuars of Ernock.

This privilege was taken away as to all Superiors and their Vassals, except
the Vassals of the King, who only might grant subaltern Infeftments of their
Ward lands, Par. 1606. cap. 12. whereby all such subaltern Infeftments of their
Ward-lands, are declared null by exception or reply, unless the Superiors
consent were obtained; and therefore, the Superiors consenting in the
Disposition by a Vassal to a Sub-vassal, was found to exclude the Vassals Ward
so far as concerns the Sub-vassal, though it was a redeemable Feu, July 2.
1672. Earl of Eglintoun contra Lord of Greenock. The same was extended to the
Vassals of the King and Prince, who were thereby also excluded from setting of
Feus of Ward-lands to Sub-vassals, Par. 1633. cap. 16. but the Vassals of the
King and Prince were restored to their former privilege, and the said Act
1633. wholly repealed, Parliament 1641. cap. 58. which now is rescinded, Par.
1661. cap. 15. Yet the Lands set in Feu, during the time of these several Acts
now repealed, are valid. So Ward-lands holden of the King or Prince, may not be
set in Feu, nor of any other Superiors, except Bishops and their Chapters; for
these might set Feus for a Feu-duty, equivalent to the retour, Par. 1621. cap.
9. But this Act was only temporary for three years; and therefore, subaltern
Infeftments granted by Vassals, if of the most part of the Ward-lands, infers
recognition thereof in the Superiors hands, but if within the half, they are
not null as to the Vassal, but are null as to the Superior, and exclude him
from no Casualities of his Superiority, as Ward, etc. But as the half may be
sub-sett, so any other right less then the value of the half, is sustained as
an Infeftment of warrandice, March 6. 1611. Cathcart contra Campbel. The like
holds of Infeftments of Liferent, but if the Disposition or Infeftment be
granted to the Vassals appearand Heir, in linea recta, it infers not
Recognition, bebecause the Superior is not prejudged by change of his Vassal;
but recognition was found incurred by a Disposition and Infeftment to the
Vassals Brother, though his appearand Heir for the time, seeing there remained
hope of issue in the Disponer, and so his Brother was not alioqui successurus,
Spots. recognition, Advocat and his Son contra the Earl of Cassils and Collane.

Feus of Ward-lands granted by the Kings Ward-vassals, after the Act of
Parliament, 1457. and before the Act of Parliament, 1633. were found not only
to be free from the ward-liferent-escheat, or recognition of the Kings Vassals;
but also that the Sub-vassals Feu did not fall by his Superior the Kings
Vassals forefaulture, because the Act of Parliament expresses a Confirmation
of such Feus, which therefore needs not be past in Exchequer, without which
there is no doubt but Ward and Non-entry are excluded: And by a Confirmation in
Exchequer, Forefaulture would be excluded without question, even after the Act
of Parliament 1633. and therefore, the ratification and approbation of Feus by
the Act, 1457. when it was in vigor, must also secure against Forefaulture of
the granter of the Feu, as was found, February 12. 1674. and January 23. 1680.
Marquess of Huntly contra Gordoun of Cairnborrow, whose Feu being granted after
the Act of Parliament, 1457. and before the Act 1606. was sustained against a
Donatar of his Superiors Forefaulture. The like, though the Feu was renewed
upon Resignation, in favorem, not being ad remanentiam, November 16. 1680.
Campbel of Silver-craigs contra Lord of Achinbreck and Earl of Argyle.

33. Infeftments blensh are such, whose reddendo is a small elusory Rent, as
being rather an acknowledgement of, then prosite to, the Superior; and
therefore, ordinarily it bears, si petatur tantum, as a Rose, penny Money or
the like, and these are not counted blensh Rights, unless they bear, in name of
blensh Ferm; or if they bear not, si petatur; or if it be a yearly growth or
service, it is not due, and may not be demanded at any time, unless it be
demanded within the year, at the Term, as a Stone of Wax, or a Pound of Pepper,
February 16. 1627. Lord Semple contra Blair. Where the like is observed to have
been before, June 18. 1611. Bishop of St. Andrews contra Galloway. The like
found, where the reddendo bore, si petatur tantum, June 15. 1611. Bishop of St.
Andrews contra Tersons. So Blensh Duties of Lands holden of the King or Prince,
are declared only due, if they be asked yearly, and no price can be put
thereupon by the Exchequer, Parliament 1606. cap. 14. Yet seeing by Act of
Parliament, the King is not to be prejudged by neglect of his Officers, who
ought yearly to call for his Blensh Duties, whereof many are considerable;
therefore the Exchequer continues to exact the Kings Blensh Duties, though not
demanded within the year. There is another part of the Act excluding all
Liquidations of Blensh Duties in specie, which therefore should be so exacted,
though not within the year, unless the Vassals voluntarly offer a price; in
these Blensh Ferms, there is no ward and marriage befalling to the Superior,
in which it differs mainly from ward.

34. Infeftments Feu, are like to the Emphyteosis in the Civil Law, which was a
kind of Location, having in it a pension, as the hyre, with a condition of
Planting, and Policy, for such were commonly granted of Barren Grounds; and
therefore, it retains still that name also, and is accounted and called an
Assidation or Location in our Law: But because such cannot be Hereditary and
perpetual, all Rentals and Tacks necessarly requiring an Ish; therefore, these
Feu-holdings, partake both of Infeftments, as passing by Seasing to Heirs for
ever; and of Locations, as having a Pension or Rent for their reddendo, and are
allowed to be perpetual, for the increase of Planting and Policy.

35. In what cases Feus are allowed of Ward-lands, has been now shown; in
other cases, they are ordinarily allowed, where they are not prohibit; so we
shall only need to speak of cases, wherein they are prohibit and void; and that
is, first, In the Patrimony of the Crown, which is annexed thereto, and cannot
be set Feu by the King, without consent of Parliament, by their Act of
Dissolution, bearing, great, seen and reasonable Causes of the Realm, by
Sentence and Decree of the whole Parliament. But Ratifications, which pass of
course in Parliament, without report from the Articles, will not supply the
dissolution of the annexed property, or validat Infeftments thereof, even
though the Ratification bear, a Dissolution: Upon which ground, the Earl of
Mortouns Right to the Earldom of Orkney was reduced, February 25. 1670. Kings
Advocat contra Earl of Mortoun. Neither can the annexed property be disponed by
the King, but only in Feu, after the Act of Parliament, 1597. cap. 234. And all
Infeftments, Tacks, Pensions, Gifts, Discharges granted before lawful
Dissolution in Parliament, or after Dissolution, yet contrary to any of the
conditions of the same, are declared null of the Law, by Action or Exception,
as well as to by gones, as in time coming, Par. 1597. cap. 236. Par. 1455. cap.
41. which is confirmed and extended to Feus, not only to be granted of Lands,
but to Feus granted of the Feu-Ferm-Duties, which was a device invented, to
elude the Law, Par. 1597. cap. 239.

36. Secondly, Feus of the annexed property, after Dissolution, may not be set
with diminution of the Rental; the Feu-duty not being within the new retoured
Duty, Par, 1584. cap. 6. And that it may appear whether the Rental be
diminished or not, before they pass the Seals, they must be presented to the
Thesaurer and Comptroller, and registrate in his Register, and the Signature
subscribed by him, otherways they are null, Par. 1592. cap. 127. And such Feus
set without consent of the Comptroller, by his subscription, Registrat in his
Register, are again declared null, Par. 1593. cap. 171. The Comptrollers Office
has been of a long time adjoined to, and in the same Commission with the
Thesaurers Office, or Commission of the Thesaury.

What Lands and others are annexed to the Crown, appears by the several Acts
of Parliament made thereanent, consisting mainly of forefaulted Estates and
Kirklands, after the abolishing of the Popish Clergy; which because they were
presumed to have been most part mortified by the Kings of Scotland, therefore,
the intent of their granting ceassing by the abolishing of Popery, they return
to the Crown, as the Narrative of the Act of annexation of the temporality of
Benefices, Par. 1587. cap. 29. bears; and therefore, Benefices of Laick
Patronage, as having proceeded from these Patrons are excepted by the said Act:
and though after the restitution of Bishops and their Chapters, the Act of
Annexation, in so far as concerned their Lands, was rescinded, Par. 1606. cap.
6. Yet Bishops being abolished, Par. 1640. cap. 6. their Lands were again
annexed to the Crown, Par. 1649. cap. whereby all Erection of Kirk-lands in
temporal Barronies or Lordships, by which the King interposeth any person
betwixt himself and these who were formerly Vassals of Kirkmen, are prohibit
and declared null; this Act is rescinded in the general Act rescissory, 1661.
cap. 15. The annexed property after Dissolution, may not be granted in ward or
blensh, except upon Excambion, for as good Lands, Par. 1597. cap. 234.

37. Feus of Kirk lands by Prelates, or other beneficed persons being granted by
consent of their Chapters, with all requisite Solemnities, were esteemed Legal
Securities, without any particular Confirmation by the King or Pope, there
being no Statute nor Constitution obliging the Subjects thereto: and in case
any Confirmation had been requisite, the consent of the Prince, under his
proper Seal, and Subscription was sufficient, Par. 1593. cap. 187. Yet it was
the Custom, that the Kings, or Popes Authority was interposed to all Feus of
Kirk-lands, therefore, all Feus not Confirmed by the King or Pope; before the
8. of March, 1558. or being thereafter not Confirmed by the King, are declared
null by Exception. Par. 1584. cap. 7. The Reason hereof was, because in March,
1558. the Reformation of Religion began to be publicly professed in Scotland,
and the beneficed persons became hopeless to preserve their rights of their
Kirk Lands, and therefore endeavored to dilapidat the same: But this was
found, not to extend to an Infeftment of an Office, as the Office of
Forrestrie, though it had Lands annexed thereto, and a threave of Corn out of
every Husband Land of the Abbacy, seeing the Statute mentioned only Feus of
Lands. And this was but like a Thirlage, 20. of January, 1666. Lord Renton
contra Fevers of (...). It is also declared in the 7. Act Par. 1594. that the
old Possessors were to have their Confirmation, for payment of the quadruple of
their silver rent, or the double of their ferm: Providing they sought the same
within a Year after the publication of that Act; otherwise they were to pay
the eight fold of the Silver rent, and the triple of the Ferm, and the King was
thereby obliged to grant Confirmation to the old Possessors upon these terms;
and being so Confirmed, the same could not be questioned upon aleadged
Dimunition of the Rental, or Conversion in money, or any other cause of
Nullity, Invalidity or Lesion, or by any Law, Canon, or Statute, except
Improbation only. And it was declared, that Confirmations by the King, of
Posterior Feus should not perjudge the Anterior Feus granted by Prelates, and
their Convents, with their common Seals, and Subscriptions at any time, being
granted with consent of the Kings Predecessors, under their Privy Seal, though
without farther Confirmation by the Kings or Popes, Par. 1593. cap. 187. The
Reason hereof was, because in the time of the Reformation, most of the Evidents
of Kirk Lands were destroyed: And therefore the Ancient Possessors, were
presumed by their very Possessions to have Right: And for clearing who were the
Ancient Possessors, and what were Kirk Lands, it is declared by Act of
Sederunt, 16. of December 1612. that ten years Possossion before the
Reformation, or thirty years Possession thereafter, but interruption, should be
sufficient to stand for a Right of Kirk-lands, the same being possessed as such;
and Feu duty being paid to Kirkmen, before the Reformation or to the King, or
others having Right from them, after the Reformation therefore, it was so
decided, 5. of July, 1626. Lord of Kerse contra Minister of Alva, though much
stronger probation, of being part of a temporal Barronie, for longer time was
alleged in the contrary, Hope, Earl of Home contra Earl of Balcleugh, Spots.
Kirkmen. Mr. John Hamiltone Minister at Linton contra John Tweedie. Secondly,
Feus granted by Prelates were null, Except they were expede by the consent of
their Chapters, or Convents, Par. 1593. cap. 187. Thirdly, Feus granted by the
beneficed Persons, as of themselves they ought to have been without diminution
of the Rental, seeing the Property thereof was mortified to the Kirk, and the
incumbents were but as Liferenters, Administrators and Tutors, it was also
expressly declared, and statute, that any diminution of the Rental, or change of
Victual for Money, or any other Disposition, making the Benefice in a worse
Estate then at the Kirk-mens entry, should be null, Par. 1585. cap. 11.

38. Infeftments in Burgages, are these which are granted to the Burghs, by the
King, as the common Lands, or other rights of the Incorporation, and that for
Burgal Service, in Watching and Warding within their Burghs, etc. These can
have no Casualities, because Incorporations die not, and so their Land can
never fall in Ward, or in Non-entrie. These Infeftments in Burgage are held by
the Incorporation, immediately of the King for Burgal service, Watching and
Warding within Burgh, etc. And the particular persons Infeft, are the Kings
immediate Vassals, and the Bailies of the Burgh are the Kings Bailies: And to
the effect that such Infeftments may be known, it is declared, that all
Seasines of Burgage Lands shall only be given by the Bailzie, and common Clerk
thereof; otherwise the famine is declared null, (which seems to have given the
rise to the exception in the Act of Parliament, anent Registration of Seasins,
that it should not extend to Seasins within Burgh) Par. 1567. cap. 27.

39. Infeftments of mortisied Lands are these which are granted to the Kirk, or
other Incorporation having no other Reddendo, then Prayers and Supplications,
and the like: Such were the Mortifications of the Kirk-lands, granted by the
King to Kirk-men, or granted by other private men to the Provost, and Prebendars
of College Kirks founded for Singing; Or to Chaplains, Preceptors or
Alterages, in which the Patronage remained in the Mortifiers.

40. Of all these Mortifications there remains nothing now, except the
Benefices of Bishops, Deans, and Chapters, and the Manses and Gleibs of
Ministers, which are rather Allodial then Feudal; having no holding Reddendo,
or Renovatione; Yet are esteemed as holden of the King in Mortification: And
therefore, the Liferent of the Incumbent, by being year and day at the Horn,
falls to the King.

Manses, and Gleibs, did belong to Parsons, Viccars, and other Kirk-men before
the Reformation, after which they were prohibited to set the same Feu, or in
long Tack, without the Royal assent, and the Ministers were ordained to have
the principal Manse of the Parson, or Viccar, or so much thereof as should be
found sufficient. Whither the said Gleibs were set in Feu, or long Tack before
or not, unless a sufficient Manse be builded, by these who have right to the
Few, or long Tack, Par. 1563. cap. 72. Which was explained, Par. 1672. cap. 48.
That the Manse, either pertaining to the Parson, or Viccar, most ewest to the
Kirk, shall belong to the Minister, and four Aikers of Land lying most Ewest to
the said Manse, to be designed by the Bishop, or Superintendent at the
Visitation, by advice of any two of the most honest, and godly of the
Parochioners: For want of this Solemnity, a designation was found null, because
it bore not two honestmen by name, required to join with the Presbytery, or
their Commissionersthough it bore, that all the Elders of the Paroch were
present, and consented, but named none. Spots. Kirk-men, Minister of Lamingtoun
contra Tweedie, though Parsons, or Viccars Manses may be designed to be the
Manse of a Minister, yet no other house can be designed, though it were in an
Abbay, but the Parochioners must build one, 11. of February, 1631. Minister of
Innerkeithing contra John Kerr.

If there be no Manse, nor Gleib of old extending to four Aikers of Land, then
the designation is to be made of Parsons, Viccars, Abbots, or Priors Land, and
failing thereof, of Bishops Lands, Friars Lands, or any other Kirk-lands within
the Paroch; aye and while the four Aikers be complete, with freedom of foggage,
pasturage, fuel, feal and divet, Par. 1593. cap. 161. By which there is a
clear order of designation; First, of Viccars and Parsons Manses most ewest,
and failing thereof, of Parsons or Viccars lands; Failing these, Bishops Lands,
Friar Lands, or any other Kirk-lands, as Chaplanries, Prebendaries: Which order
was so found to be observed, 13. of July, 1636. Thomas Halyburton Minister,
contra John Paterson. And therefore a designation of a Manse, or Gleib out of
Abbots Lands was annulled, because there were Parsons Lands in the paroch,
though they were builded with houses, and feued, for which the Fevers were
obliged to acquire a Gleib, 24. July, 1629. Mr. James Nairn, contra Mr. James
Boswell: The like, though the Lands were fewed all before the Act of
Parliament, 25. of January, 1665. Parson of Dysart contra Watson. Yet Bishops
Lands were ordained to be designed before Abbots Lands, though they be named
after, in respect of their greater interest in the Cure. Nicol. de sacro sancta
Ecclesia, 2. of July, 1622. Nicolson contra Porteous: Where there is not arable
Land near the Kirk, the Geib is to be designed of pasture lands, sufficient for
16 soums most ewest to the Kirk, Par. 1621. cap. 19. The designation of Manses
and Gleibs, where they are not designed, or not a full quantity, or are become
unprofitable by Inundation, or other extraordinary accident, are ordained to be
out of the Kirk-lands most ewest to the Kirk, according to the order in the
Act. 1593. Burrowstoun Kirks being always excepted; yet a Gleib was found
competent to a Minister of a Burgh, having a Land-ward part of his Parochin,
Spots. Kirk-men, Mr. Robert Ruch. The Designation of Gleibs was committed to
Presbyteries, Par. 1644. cap. 31. which is declared to be by three Ministers
and three Elders, Par. 1649. cap. 31. Revived, Par. 1663. cap. 20. whereby
Designations are referred to the Bishop, or such Ministers as he shall appoint,
with two or three of the most knowing in the Paroch: In which Acts the power of
Designation is extended, not only to Kirk-lands, but where these are not, to
other Lands arable, or Grass, ewest to the Kirk, provided that the Heretor
thereof may offer other sufficient Lands and Grass, within half a mile of the
Kirk and Manse: And by the said Act, 1649. there is added to the Gleib
pasturage for a Horse and two Cows, which is found to be regulat as the Gleib
before, which is also revived, Par. 1663. cap. 20. with this alteration, that
if there be not Kirk-lands near the Manse, or are not Arable Lands, the
Heretors shall be liable to pay yearly to the Minister, twenty Pounds Scots,
for his Horse and Kines Grass, and this Act is declared to be as if it had been
made in March 1649. as to designations, after 1649. that Parliam. being
rescinded without reservation contained in the Act rescissory (as is in the Act
Rescissory of the other Parliaments) saving all private rights done thereby; but
there is no warrant in any of these Acts to design temporal Lands, where there
are any Church lands; and therefore, a Designation was reduced, because
temporal Lands were designed, and Kirk-lands past by, albeit the Minister had
been possessor, decennalis and triennalis, which gave him a presumptive Title,
because his Designation which was the true Title, was produced, February 6.
1678. Lord Forret contra Mr. John Matters.

A Gleib designed, was found to carry a proportional part of the common
pasturage following to the Lands designed, February 2. 1630. Hamiltoun contra
Tweedie. Designation of a Gleib was sustained, though it bore not the same to
have been four Aikers measured, in respect it bore, that the possessors
servants hindered the measuring; and therefore, it was designed according to
the common estimat, July 5. 1626. Kers contra Minister of Alloway. And also
sustained, though there were Lands nearer the Kirk and Manse, which were
Bishops Lands, seeing they were enclosed as a part of the Kings Park, February
13. 1629. Lady Dumfermling contra Minister of Dumfermling. Bat a Designation
was annulled, because there was an old Gleib possessed long by the incumbent,
being four Aikers, Nicol. de sacro sanct. Eccles. Minister of Aberdour contra
Brown and Ramsay. A Designation was sustained, though there was only a Nottars
Instrument without the subscription, of three Ministers Designers, December 17.
1664. Mr. Thomas Paterson contra Watson: Here the Ministers Designers, their
Testificat under their hand, was ordained to be produced before extract. A
Gleib being designed was sustained, though it was an united Kirk, the other
Kirk having a Gleib, January 22: 1631: Ministers of Innerkeithing contra John
Keir. A Designation was also sustained, though it proceeded upon warning out of
the Pulpit, or at the Kirk-door, after Divine Service, in respect of the custom
so to do, though some of the most considerable Heretors were out of the
Country, January 28: 1668: Ministers of Hassanden contra the Duke of
Bukcleugh. It was also sustained, though done but by two of the three
Ministers, named by the Bishop, without a quorum, unless weighty reasons upon
the matter, were shown to the contrary, February 7: 1668: Minister of
Cockburnspeth contra his Parochioners. Manses and Gleibs being designed as said
is, the Feuars, Possessors and Tacksmen have relief of the remnant
Parochioners, having Kirk-lands, pro rata, Par: 1594: cap: 199: which was
extended to a (...) Manse being Designed; and the other Kirk-lands, a part
where of were mortified to, and holden of a College, did bear burden, February
12: 1635: John Cock contra Parochioners of Auchtergivan. But where old Gleibs
are designed, there is no relief by other Kirk-lands except these who had Feus
of other parts of the same Gleib, seeing by the foresaids Statutes, the Feuars
of old Manses or Gleibs, are to suffer Designation, or to purchase new Manses
and Gleibs; so that these old Manses and Gleibs do not infer relief: This
relief is not debitum fundi, affecting singular successors, as was found, June
1675: Schaw contra Hamiltoun of Munckland. But when the Designation is of
Temporal Lands, the whole Heretors of Temporal Lands are to contribute for a
recompense thereof proportionally, Par: 1649: cap: 131: revived, Par: 1663:
Session 3. cap. 20. Gleibs are Teind-free, Parl. 1578. cap. 62. The like, where
they are Arable or Grass, Par. 121. cap. 10. And a Gleib was found Teind-free,
though lately mortified, voluntarly without Designation or Process; and though
not mortified to a Paroch Church, but a Chapel, seeing Divine Worship was
accustomed to be therein, June 9. 1676. Alexander Burnet contra William Gibb.

41. There is another division of Infeftments, into these which are granted to
one Person and his Heirs, and to more Persons and their Heirs, which are of
diverse sorts; sometimes as Conjunct-infeftments, and sometimes conceived in
favors of Fathers, and after their decease, to Children or relations therein
nominat.

Conjunct-infeftments are called Conjunct-Fees, whereby the Fee is disponed
jointly to more persons and their Heirs, which may be to three or more persons,
who by the Infeftment, become all Fiars jointly and equally; whence there
arises a Communion by which they do possess the Fee, pro indiviso, until
division thereof be made, which does not comprehend an Infeftment to an
Incorporation, as to a Town or College, or to the use of the Poor, who do not
thereby become joint Fiars, but have only a share of the benefit, according to
the distribution appointed. These Infeftments are not conceived to Heirs, seeing
Incorporations are perpetual and die not, neither does the public use fail;
therefore, such Infeftments require no renovation.

Superiors will not easily be induced to accept Resignations from their
Vassals in favors of Incorporations and public uses, by which all the
Casualities of their Superiority cease; or to grant Confirmations thereof,
having the same effect: Nor can they be compelled to grant such Infeftments
upon the Vassals Bonds, granted of purpose, that Adjudication may be used
thereupon, that thereby the Superior may be compelled to receive the
Incorporation; yea, though without design, an Incorporation should become
Creditor to a Vassal in a debt truly borrowed, either from the Incorporation or
their Cedent; The question is, whether an Adjudication thereupon might force
the Superior to receive the Incorporation for a years Rent. Craigs opinion is
in the Negative; and I have not heard such a case come to be debated. And
though Custom has obliged Superiors to receive man and Wife in Conjunct-Fee,
which abate their Casualities, during the life of two persons, the consequence
would not be good, to reach to an Incorporation that never dies, though the Act
of Parliament introducing Appryzings and Adjudications, be generally in favors
of all Creditors: It were more just, that Incorporations should pitch upon a
person, and assign their debt to him expressly, to the effect, that the Lands
might be adjudged to him and his Heirs, for the use and behove of the
Incorporation, or such other uses as were designed, which would be effectual
against all singular Successors, especially, if the Trust were expressed in the
Seasine; but the Superior would have all his Casualities by the death, neglect
or delinquence of the Trustee and his Heirs. I shall not pre-determine my self
or others in the case, but leave it to public determination.

Conjunct-Fees, by the Custom of England, are always so understood, that the
survivers have the whole benefit, so long as any of them are alive; but we do
only extend this survivancy to Conjunct-infeftments to Husband and Wife, which
bears ordinarily to the longest liver: But though that were not expressed, it
would be understood as employed, and generally, it resolves in the Wife but as a
Liferent; and the Husband is understood to be Fiar, unless it be evident, that
the Right was originally the Wifes, and a Liferent only designed for the
Husband; and therefore, if no Heirs be expressed, or only generally their Heirs,
the Husbands Heir is understood in Heretable Rights, Nam potior est conditio
masculi; and the Wife is only Liferenter, but with greater power then by a
separate Liferent, June 24. 1663. Elizabeth Scrymzour contra Murrays. And a
Wife having charged, upon a Bond granted to her Husband and her, and the
longest liver, was found not to have right to uplift the sum, or to insist
therefore, without concurse of the man's Heir, or he being called, that if the
sum were insecure, it might be consigned to be re-imployed to the wife in
Liferent, and to the Heir in Fee, December 10. 1671. Katharine Ross contra
Lord of Hunthill. Yea, a Clause in a Bond, bearing, a sum borrowed from a
Husband and wife, and payable to the longest liver of them two in Coniunct-fee,
and to the Heirs betwixt them and their Assigneys, whilks failing, to the Heirs
and Assigneys of the last liver, was found to constitute the Husband Fiar, and
the Wife Liferenter, albeit she was last liver, whereby her Heirs of Line
(failing Heirs of the Marriage) became Heirs of provision to the Husband, and
liable to his debts, January 29. 1669. Graham contra Park and Gerdan. January
23. 1668. John Justice contra Mary Barcley his Spouse. And a Clause in a
Contract of Marriage, oblieging the Husband to take the Conquest to him and his
future Spouse, and the Heirs betwixt them; whilks failing, the Heirs of the
Man's Body; whilks failing, the Wifes Heirs whatsomever, was found not to
constitute the Wife Fiar, but Liferenter, and the Husband Fiar; whereby failing
Heirs of the Marriage and of the Man's Body, the Wifes Heirs of Line, were Heirs
of provision to the Man, February 20. 1667. Cranstoun contra Wilkison; For by
this Clause of Conquest, it is evident, the means were to come by the Man; yet
an Obliegement by a Man, bearing, that whatsoever Lands or sums of Money he
should purchase, during the life of him and his future Spouse (their present
debts being first paid) that the wife should be secured therein in
Conjunct-fee; and in case of no Issue, or Children, the one half thereof to be
disponed as the Wife should think fit, was found to make the Conquest divide
betwixt the Heirs of the Man and the Wife, and that her power to dispone the
half, was not a personal Faculty, but did make her Fiar in that half, and took
off the presumption of the preference of the Husband, seeing no mention was made
of the Heirs of either party, June 27. and 28. 1676. Earl of Dumfermling contra
Earl of Callender. Conjunct-Fees to Husband and Wife, and the Heirs of the
Marriage, do imply a restriction upon the Man, not to alter the succession,
without a necessary or just consideration, and so do exclude deeds fraudulent,
or merely gratuitous, which might evacuat the effect, as to the heirs of the
Marriage; so that if there were heirs of the Marriage, and also heirs of
another Marriage, the Father could not alter the Succession, in favors of the
heirs of another Marriage, because of the interest of the Wife, and the Tocher
she-brings: But it does not hinder the Father to give competent portions to the
Bairns of another Marriage, June 19, 1677. Murrays contra Murrays. Neither did
such a Clause of Conquest during the Marriage, exclude a competent Liferent,
constitute to Wife of a subsequent Marriage, albeit there were Bairns of the
first Marriage, June 16. 1676. Katherine Mitehel contra Children of Thomas
Littlujohn. Yet where there survived no heirs of the Marriage, a provision in a
Contract of Marriage, that such a sum, the future Spouse then had, and all they
should acquire during the Marriage, should be taken to themselves in
Conjunct-Fee, and to the heirs of the Marriage, whilks failzing, the one half
to the Man's heirs, and the other half to the Woman's heirs, found to constitute
the Man Fiar of the whole, and that he might provide both the first Stock and
all the Conquestro his Children of a posterior Marriage, which was found no
fraudulent (...) merely gratuitous deed, December 1. and 21. 1680. Alexander
Anderson contra Androw Bruce.

42. Infeftments to more persons subordinat, are such as are taken to Parents,
and after their decease to such Children and other persons named, whereby the
Parent is understood to be Fiar and not Liferenter, and the Children or others
to be Heirs substitute, albeit both the Father and the Bairns named, were
Infeft, July 23. 1675. Lord of Lambingtoun contra (...) of Annistain. But
where the Band did bear, a sum lent by a Father for himself, and as
Administrator for his Son, and that the Money was the Sons, and payable to the
Father, and after his decease to the Son, was found to constitute the Son
(...), and the Father only liferenter, February 14. 1667. Campbel contra
Constantine.

43. The third division of Infeftments, is in respect of the succession, and
they are either simple or Tailzied: Simple Infeftments are these which are
taken to Heirs whatsomever; for by that expression we express the lineal Heirs,
who according to Law, would succeed in any Heretable Right: But Tailzied
Infeftments are, where the Lands are provided to any other then the Heirs of
Line, as when it is provided to Heirs Male, or Heirs Male of the Fiars own
Body, or to the Heirs of such a Marriage, or to the Heirs of Titius, whilks
failzing, to the Heirs of Seius, etc. Of these Tailzies, there are many several
ways as the Fiar pleases to invent, and ordinarily in them all, the last
Member or Termination is the Heirs whatsomever, of the last Branch or Person
substitute, or the Disponer, and when that takes effect by succession, the Fee
which before was Tailzied, becomes simple.

A Tailzie must necessarly be a part of the Infeftment, for no write apart can
constitute a Tailzie, though Bonds or Contracts of Tailzie as personal or
incomplete Rights, may force the Contracter or his Heirs to perfect the same.
They must also be constitute by the Superior, being a part of the Infeftment
granted by him, either originally in the first Constitution of the Fee, or
thereafter by Resignation or Confirmation; and as a Superior is not obliged
to alter the Tenor of the first Investiture, or to accept a Resignation, or
grant a Confirmation in any case, except where it is provided by Law, whereby
he is necessitat to receive Appryzers and Adjudgers: So neither in that case is
he obliged to constitute a Tailzie, but only to receive the Appryzer or the
Adjudger, their heirs whatsomever, unless the Debt and Decree, whereupon the
same proceeded, be conceived in favors of Heirs of Tailzie; in which case, the
Appryzing or Adjudication, and Infeftment thereupon, must be conform, unless it
be otherways by consent of parties.

Tailzies also being Constitute, are broken or changed by consent of the
Superior, accepting Resignation in favors of other Heirs, whether the
resigner resign in favors of himself, or his heirs whatsomever; or in favors
of any other and their heirs: But most ordinarily by Appryzings or
Adjudications, whereby the Superior is necessitat to receive another Vassal
and his heirs, though perhaps he be substitute himself as an heir of Tailzie,
as if it be provided, that failzing other heirs there mentioned, the Fee return
to himself. But Infeftments holden of the King, have this privilege, that they
are not refused, either upon Resignation or Confirmation, as the Fiar Purchaser
pleases: Yea, it is declared by several (...) of the Privy Council, that the
King or his Commissioners ought not to deny his Confirmation upon the
reasonable expenses of the party; which Ordinances are repeated in the Act of
Parliament; and though the design thereof gives not occasion to ratify the
same, yet they are contained in the Narrative, as Motives of that Statute; and
therefore, are not derogat, but rather approven, Parl. 1578. cap. 66. And
though several Kings have revocked Infeftments granted by them, from heirs of
Line, to heirs Male and of Tailzie; yet the effect of such Revocations has
never been tried by Suite or Decision.

Conjunct-infeftments to Husband and Wife and their heirs, are also Tailzied,
and though, if the heirs of that Marriage be a Son, and of a first Marriage, he
may be both heir of Line, and heir of the Marriage, yet may he enter as heir of
the Marriage; and if the Defunct had other Lands provided to heirs whatsomever,
he may renunce to be heir in these Lands, to the effect, they may be first
burdened with his Fathers Debt, and he or his Lands provided to the heir of the
Marriage, can be but burdened in the second place, in subsidium, of what is
wanting by the Executors, or Heretage befalling to heirs whatsoever; much more
are Infeftments Tailzied, which are granted to Husband and Wife, and to the
Bairns of the Marriage, whereby Male and Female come in pari passu.

Bonds taken to Parents, and after their decease to such a Child, nominatim,
whereupon Infeftment followed, makes a Tailzied Fee; but these are rather
called heirs of provision, and these are most properly called Tailzied Fees,
where several Branches are specially substitute, one failzing another. But
seeing heirs of Tailzie fall under consideration in the transmission of Rights
by Succession, we shall insist no further thereon in this place, but shall
proceed to consider the Clauses which are adjected in Infeftments, not being of
the Substantials or Solemnities thereof, and how far such come in as parts of
the real Right, affecting singular Successors, and how far they are only
personal, affecting alone the heirs of the Superior or Vassal: And last, we
shall consider the effects of Infeftments themselves.

As to the first, beside the Solemnities requisite in Infeftments, there uses
to be many Clauses insert therein, all which, we cannot follow, but shall
insist in the most ordinar and and important; These are Union, Erection,
Warrandice, Reservations, Provisions, Conditions, and Clauses irritant.

44. Union is the Conjunction, or Incorporation of Lands or Tenements, lying
discontigue, or several kinds unto one Tenement, that one Seasine may suffice
for them all; in which there is sometimes expressed a special place where Seasine
should be taken; and when that is not, Seasine upon any part is sufficient; for
the whole Lands lying contiguous are naturally Unite, and needs no Union, so
that Seasine taken upon any of them, extends to the whole: But where they ly
discontiguous, other Tenements being interjected, there must be Seasine taken
upon every discontiguous Tenement, which must be all particularly so expressed in
the Instrument of Seasin, whereof one will serve for all the Tenements; or
otherways, when they are Tenements of several kinds, as Lands, Milns,
Fortalices and Fishing; all which are several kinds of Tenements, and require
several Seasines, and pass by several symbols or tokens, as Lands, by Earth and
Stone, Milns by the Clap, Fortalices by the Entry at the Gates, and enclosing
the person possessed, and excluding the granter of the Possession solemnly,
conform to the Charter or Precept.

Union can be Constitute originally by no other then the Sovereign Authority,
conceding the same, January 16. 1623. Mr. Hendry Aikin contra Greenlaw. Or
Confirming the same, January 16. 1623. Aikin contra Stuart. And therefore,
Union being Constitute by a Subject, not having the same from the King, was
found null by Exception, at the instance of the Possessors, though pretending
no Right, December 16. 1628. Lady Borthwick contra Scot of Goldylands. And when
there is a place for the Seasine of the Union, a Seasine taken elsewhere,
reaches none of the Lands lying discontigue, March 19. 1636. Lady Dunipace
contra Lord of But if the Lands united by the King be Disponed wholly together
by the Vassal to others Subalternly Infeft, the Union stands valid, July 12.
1626. Stuart and Douglas contra Cranstoun Home; repeated, Jan. 5. 1627. which
for the same reason ought to be extended to Subaltern Infeftments of an
annualrent of a Barrony or United Tenement, which was found to extend to a
Miln, and to Lands lying discontigue, though not taken in the place designed in
the Union, Spots. Executors, Lady Ednem contra Tennents of Ednem.

45. Erection is, when Lands are not only Unite in one Tenement, but are
Erected into the dignity of a Barrony, which comprehends, Lordship, Earldom,
etc. All which are more noble Titles of a Barrony, having the like seudal
Effects; and whenever the Tenements are granted as a Barrony, Union is
comprehended as the lesser Degree, though not expressed; and therefore, one
Seasine carries the whole Barrony, and all Milns and Fortalices thereupon, and
fishing adjacent thereto.

Erections can be only granted by the Sovereign Authority, and are not
Communicable by the Subaltern Infeftments, though the Union employed therein may
be Communicate. Erection was found to be instructed by the Kings Confirmation of
a Charter, Designing the Lands a Barrony, though it was not a Barrony before,
but the half of a Barrony, wherein the Barron Infeft his Son, in Libera
Baronia; which Infeftment being Confirmed by the King, did Constitute it a full
Barrony, whereby an Infeftment of annualrent taken upon a part of the Land,
affected the whole, November 16. 1630. Lord of Clackmanan contra Alardice.

Erections of Kirklands in Temporal Barronies or Lordships, whereby the Lords
of Erection were interjected betwixt the King and the Feuars, are prohibit,
Par. 1592. cap. 119. and Par. 1594. cap. 195. for all these Lands are annexed
to the Crown, Par. 1587. cap. 29. and Par. 1633. cap. 10. The Reason whereof is
evident, that such Erections are prejudicial, both to the King, who loses his
Casualities of the Feuars, and to the People, who must accept another Superior
in stead of the King; and though they had formerly but Subjects to their
Superiors, yet Churchmen were much more easy then secular persons, as
requiring little service, and being ashamed to demand rigorous Rates; but any
man may obtain the Lands he has in property, holden mediatly of the King,
which were Kirk-lands, Erected in any dignity the King pleases to grant.

There are many exceptions in the Acts of Annexation of the Temporality of
Kirk-lands, and in the Acts against Erections, by which the Kirk-land excepted,
are validly Erected; and all the Erections are so far allowed, as to give the
Lords of Erection right to the feu-duties, or fruits of the property of
Kirklands, feued till they be redeemed by payment of ten per cent. and the
Infeftments granted to the Vassals, medio tempore, are valid; but the
Casualities ought still to belong to the King. It has been sometimes
questioned, whether the Union and Erection of Lands be dissolved, and lost by
an Infeftment of a part thereof, from the Vassal holden of the Superior by
Resignation or Confirmation, Craig, l. 2. Dieges. 7. is for the affirmative,
confirmed by the resemblance of a Sheaf of Arrows, bound with one Ligament, for
if one Arrow be pulled out, all become louse, and so the Union of the whole is
dissolved, unless the Superior give the new Infeftment, but prejudice of the
rest. But though such cases frequently occur, whereby Infeftments of
discontiguous Lands would only be valid, as to the contiguous Lands upon which
they were taken; yet in no competition or other Process, has it been observed
by any to be drawn in question or decided. so that we have ever rested in the
Negative, and the consequence from that resemblance is not sufficient; But on
the contrary, he who unites many Discontiguous Lands, unites every part of them
to every part, so that the taking off of one part dissolves only it self, the
rest remaining unite. But Union or Erection does not change the Jurisdiction of
the Lands unite, as to the Shires and Bailziries where they naturally ly, Vide
Tit. Confiscatione,. Horning.

Barronies and United Tenements, when they are originally granted, ought to
express the several Tenements, according to their proper Designations, and so
expressly Unite them: But when these are acknowledged to have been Baronies, or
otherways Unite, or are named, or defigned as such by these who have power to
Unite, then the common Name of the United Barony or Tenement, is sufficient to
carry all that is holden and repute, as part and pertinents thereof; which was
extended to Lands, as parts of a common Designation, though some particulars
were named, and the Lands in question had also proper names, and were expressed
in the ancient Infeftments, the right in question being an Appryzing, March 23.
1622. Gallowsheils contra Lord Borthwick. Union and Erection are as qualities
of the real Right, and pass unto singular Successors, as is before expressed.

46. Warrandice is either real, when Infeftments is given of one Tenement in
security of another, or personal, when the Superior obliegeth himself to
warrant the Infeftment; as to the warrandice by Disposition and Resignation, it
is unquestionably personal, and comes not within the Infeftment; but though it
be granted by the Superior in the Infeftment, yet it is but a personal
obligation, no ways co-hering, nor carried with the real Right; and therefore,
the singular Successor of the Superior or Author, is not obliged in the
Warrandice, neither does the Disposition or Infeftment from the Vassal, carry
to his singular Successor, the right of the Warrandice, unless it be assigned
specially, or generally in the Assignation of the Rights and Evidents.

Warrandice is a common obliegement, both in Infeftments and other Rights, and
it is sometimes expressed, and then it is regulat according to the Tenor of it,
whether it be absolute Warrandice, or from fact and deed, or from future or
voluntary fact and deed. But oftimes when Warrandice is not expressed, it is
employed as Rights are to be warranted, which are granted for an Equivalent
Cause onerous: But in that Case, where the Disposition was only of all right
the Disponer had, the Clause inferred not absolute Warrandice, but only from
the Disponers future voluntary Deed, Hope, Warrandice, Lord Sinclar contra
Creighton. Absolute Warrandice is also employed, where the Disposition or
Infeftment bears ( Vendidit) because that imports an equivalent Price, Spotss.
Warrandice, John Stewart contra Fivie. But not so, if it were expressed under the
terms of Alienation, which is common to both gratuitous and onerous
Dispositions.

Warrandice from the future fact and deed of the Disponer and his Heirs, is
employed in pure Donations, Hope, Warrandice, Veatch contra Dauling, Mr.
Partrick Schaw contra Sir James Durham, and was extended to a Legacy rei
alienae scienter legatae, June 16. 1664. Murray contra the Executors of
Rutherfoord: But ought not to be extended to future necessar deeds, preceding
the gratuitous Disposition, which the Disponer is, or may be, compelled to
fulfill; neither upon any anterior deed, because, he who disponeth freely, is
presumed but to dispone such right as he has, but posterior deeds are
fraudulent. It is Craig's opinion in the forecited place, that though
Warrandice from fact and deed be expressed, that it does not extend to prior
deeds: And that in any Case, if the Cause of the Disposition be for service
done, for gratitude, or merit, that Warrandice is employed; much more, if for
future Service, or for a feu Duty, or Rent: Yet, if beside these, there be not
an Anterior Cause in Money, or Value, such Dispositions cannot be accounted
onerous; for former merit or gratitude, infer no civil Obligation, and so no
burden which could receive Legal compulsion. And as to annual Prestation in
Services, Feu-duties, or Tack-duties, if they bear no Money received, or
equivalent Value, they are presumed to be gratuitous in favors of the
receiver, who may reject or renounce them when he pleases, if they be not by
mutual Contract: And when they are evicted, the Vassal is free of these Duties,
and has no loss; and therefore they ought to import no more Warrandice, but
from future voluntary fact and deed; But whatever Warrandice be expressed, must
be accordingly observed: But Craig's opinion being, that naked Pactions were
not effectual with us, and that a Charter was but a naked Paction; so
Warrandice in an Innominat Contract, such as a Fee, could be but a naked
Paction, importing no further then what would arise from the nature of the
Right. But our constant Custom allowing all Pactions and Promises to be
effectual, does both make Charters without Seasine effectual against the
granter, and likewise Warrandice, and all other Clauses-therein; yea, the
paction, that nothing should be demanded in case of Eviction, is for the same
Cause effectual, that the Money paid for the Right evicted, cannot be
recovered: Yet Craig does there report a Decision of the Lords, betwixt Samuel
Cockburn and Sandielands of Calder, that a Charter without Seasine, and not
delivered in the Granters Life, but recovered out of the Charter-chest of
Torphichen, was found effectual to make the Granters Heir perfect the same with
Seasine; but it did not remain in the hands of the Granter, and thereby it
appears, that the Lords did not then look upon Charters as naked Pactions.

The Effect of Warrandice is, the upmaking of what is warranted, in so far as
it is evicted, and the ordinar procedure in it is, when any Suit is moved,
whereon Eviction may follow, Intimation is made to the Warrant of the Plea that
he may defend: And if Eviction follow, and distress thereby, Declarator of
distress, and action of Warrandice for relief is competent. Also it is
effectual for decerning the Warrant to free the thing warranted of that which
will undoubtedly infer a distress, though it has not actually done it. In this
case Execution was superceeded for a time, that therein the ground of the
distress might be purged, July 1. 1624. Lord of Frendraught contra Balvenie.
The like upon a Production of a Seasine of the Lands warranted, granted by the
warrands Author before the Right and Inhibition, though there was no distress,
Nicol. de evictione, Fisher contra Fleeming. The like, July 17. 1666. Alexander
Burnet contra Johnstoun. February 17. 1672. Smith of Braco contra Ross of
Balnagoun. Warrandice had also effect upon production of a Decree of removing
against the Buyer and Seller, Nicol. de evictione, Johnstoun contra Johnstoun.
Yea Warrandice will take effect where there is an unquestionable ground of
distress, though the Fiar transacted voluntarly to prevent the distress.
Intimation of a Plea is sufficient without an Instrument, it being proven by
the Warrands Oath, that the copy of the Citation was delivered to him as an
Intimation, Nicol. de evictione, Lyme contra Dunlop. But though no Intimation
be made, yet the Warrandice takes effect, unless the Warrant had a relevant
defense and could instruct the same, Nicol. de evictione, Boyd contra Stark.
But in that case, the Warrandice has no effect, ibidem, Cairncorss contra
Murray. Glendinning contra Gordon.

Warrandice has no further effect then what the Party warranted truly paid
for the Right, whereby he was, or might be distressed, though less then the value
of the Right warranted, July 1. 1634. Robert Glendinning contra Barnbarroch.
The like upon repayment of the sum given out, and the Annulrent thereof, Hope,
Warrandice, Lord of Craicklaw contra Lord Herris. January 26. 1669. Boil of
Kelburn contra Mr. John Wilkie. February 28. 1672. Earl of Argyl contra Lord
of Aitoun. This will not hold in Warrandice of Lands, as to which Lands of
equal value, or the whole worth of what is evicted, as it is the time of the
Eviction is inferred; because the Buyer had the Lands with the hazard of
becoming better or worse, or the rising or falling of Rates, and therefore is
not obliged to take the Price he gave. Neither is Warrandice a full security,
being but a personal Obliegment; and many times the Price is not known. And if
the Warrandice be not absolute, the Purchasers hazard was the greater: But in
Warrandice of personal or redeemable Rights, the matter is ordinarily liquid,
and there is no design of hazard but an absolute relief. But Warrandice has no
effect where there is Collusion, by being holden as confessed, Nicol, de
evictione, Aikenhead contra Blackwood. The like was found by suppressing the
Warranders Right, and receiving considerable Sums therefore: whereby the Right
warranted fell in consequence, February 18. 1679. Lord of Wedderburn contra
Sir Robert Sinclar. March 3. 1629. Murray contra Lord Yester. Neither where
Eviction falls through default of the party warranted, when having a
Disposition of Ward-lands, with double Infeftment he infeft himself, base
without the Superiors consent, and thereby the Lands recognosced, February 1.
1610. Maxwel contra Mowbrey. Neither inferred by the Forefaulture of the
Disponers apparent Heir, seeing the Fiar omitted to obtain the Kings
Confirmation, which would have excluded the Forefaulture, Hope, Warrandice,
Hamilton contra Lord of Nidderie. It is not so clear either in Reason or
Practice, whether Warrandice takeseffect upon any other ground then what is, or
may be, a ground of Eviction, to take away the Right of the Party by whom the
Warrandice is granted judicially; as when Lands are taken away by Innundation,
or are become barren: Or when a Right assigned with Warrndice becomes
ineffectual, because the Debtor is not solvendo; or when any accidental or
extrujudicial distress or damnage befalls to the party warranted, through
occasion of the ground of Warrandice, though not by legal Eviction, Secondly.
Whether Warrandice takes place, when the Right warranted is taken away, or
burdened by a subsequent Law. Thirdly, Whether Warrandice in general will
extend toward Releef, and it Or to Forefaulture of the warrands own Superior.

As to the First, Warrandice relates to the point of Right, and not to the
Matter of Fact, and therefore will not reach to Accidents, the hazard whereof
lies always upon the Acquirer and the Propriatar: Yea, a Clause of Warrandice
that Lands should be worth so much yearly Rent, was not extended to Desolation,
by famine, March 10. 1636. Lady Dunipace contra Lord of Rouiston. It was also
(...) that a Cautioner being conveened, and through occasion of Compearance was
made Prisoner in a Ship taken prize; had thereby no interest upon the Clause of
Warrandice to distress the Principal for this accidental Damnage, James Maxwel
contra James Nisbit of Ladytoun. So that unless some what more be concurring
then the naked Warrandice, either by the value of the onerous Cause, for which
the Right is granted, or Tenor of the Assignation, it reaches not the
sufficiency of the Debtor or the like points of Fact, as is Spotswoods
opinion, Tit. Assignation. And it was lately found, that where a Creditor had
given a blank Assignation to a Cautioner, who had paid him with absolute
Warrandice, that as to the Cautioner, to whom it was gratuitous for the
Creditor to give such a Warrandice, imports not the sufficiency of the
Debtor, July 16. 1663. William Hay contra Nicolson and Mitchel. It was also
found, that absolute Warrandice in an Asignation, bearing that the samine
should be good, valid and effectual, was not found to extend to the Solvency of
the Debtor; but only that the Debt could not be excluded by any legal
Exception, either from the cedents deed or otherwise; as if the write Assigned
had been false, the cedent not being accessory, null, or declared a public
Debt, November 24. 1671. Sir Rober Barclay of Pearstoun contra Robert Liddel,
which quadrats with lib. 4. ff. de haereditate et action vendita, Venditore
nominis tenetur prestare debitum subesse, Debitorem vero Locupletem esse non
tenetur prestare. As to the distress by subsequent Laws when these are by way
of Declarator of an anticedent Right, it is equivalent to a Judicial Eviction.
But when the Law is Statutory introducing a new burden, as Taxes, Augmentations
of Ministers Stipends, etc. It was Craigs opinion dieges, de evictione.. 6.
Which he reports as the Judgment of the Session, that in such Cases, the
Warrant should be liable in quantum lucratus est.

But Custom since has cleared the contrary, that Warrandice is never extended
to subsequent Statutory Laws, but that these are always upon the Purchasers
hazard: And therefore a general Clause of absolute Warrandice was not extended,
to a burden imposed by a subsequent Law, though there was an Anterior abrogat
Law to that same effect, July 12. 1667. Watson contra Law. Neither was extended
to the making up of a Gleib, though it was by virtue of a Prior Law; but the
Designation was after the Disposition, July 1. 1676. Lord of Auchintcul contra
Lord of Innes. Yea, absolute Warrandice in a Ladies Liferent, which is most
favorable was found not to extend to an Augmentation of a Ministers Stipend
thereafter, though grounded upon a Prior Law, March 27. 1634. Lady Dumfermling
contra her Son. But where a Clause of Warrandice did bear, that a Rental of a
Ladies Liferent should be so much worth yearly; it was found effectual to make
up an Abatment of the Rental by a Ministers Stipend; modified thereafter, July
28. 1635. Lady Cardross contra her Son. Or to the making up a Readers Stipend
imposed by a Posterior Law: For in these Cases it was the special tenor of the
Clause to uphold the Rental, which would have been effectual not only as to
Eviction in Jure, but as to distress in facto by Inundation, Devastation, or
the like.

The intent of Absolute Warrandice being only against legal eviction, it does
not extend to every burden that may affect the Land, as to a servitude of
Pasturage, Fuel, Feal or Divet, Or to a Thirlage of the Land to the Miln of
the Barrony, paying the ninteetnh Corn, June 21. 1672. Sandelands contra Earl
of Haddingtoun.

Absolute Warrandice is sometimes general, and sometimes special, against Ward,
Relief and Non-entry, etc. with a general Clause, and all other dangers, perils
and inconveniences whatsoever, as well not named, as named, etc. as to which,
the general Clause is not to be extended above the greatest of the special. But
the question arises, if such Clauses will reach subsequent Wards or Marriages
of the Superior, or to future Porefaultures, or Recognitions, Non-entries,
Liferent-escheats, etc., It is certain that whatever of these burdens besal by
the fault of the Warrant, he must be liable therefore.

Absolute Warrandice being much stronger then Warrandice from Fact and Deed,
which reaches not only to Facts of Commission, but even to ommission of
Duties; and therefore, if the Warrandice be but by the Author, and not by the
Superior, these subsequent distresses will not reach the Author, unless the
Clause bear expressly, such distresses past, present or to come; and so though
the fee were extinct by the Forefaulture or Recognition of the Superior, or
burdened by his Non-entry, or remaining at the Horn, these occurring after the
Disposition will be upon the hazard of the Acquirer, and not the Author
Disponer: But if the Warrandice be in the Superiors Charter, burdening
himself, it will be extended to all subsequent Distresses through his fault,
and so to Recognition, Liferent-escheat or Non-entry, but it will not extend to
the Forefaulture, or Recognition, or other fault of the Superiors Superior:
Neither will it extend to the Ward or the avail of the Marriage of the
Superior bound in Warrandice, failing thereafter, unless it be so expressed; for
no provident man is presumed to guard against these, unless it be so expressed;
and therefore, there is little advantage by special Clauses of Warrandice: For
the general Clauses reaches all Evictions from anteriour Causes, yea, the
effect is the same, though there were no Clause of Warrandice expressed, if the
Right warranted be for Causes onerous, viz. sums of Money, or equivalent value,
unless by the special Warrandice, future deeds inferring eviction, or which
would not infer, it ex natura rei, be expressed.

Warrandice is never inferred from Infeftments from the King, as Supreme
Superior, and though they were expressed, would have no effect; neither are the
Warrandices of Infeftments by Churchmen effectual against their Successors in
Office; yea express Warrandices of Feus or Tacks of Kirk-lands thereafter
annexed to the Crown, after the said Warrandice, does neither reach the
granters thereof nor their Successors, Par. 1587. cap. 29. and cap. 110. The
reason whereof is there rendered, because the Church Lands were annexed to the
Crown by subsequent Laws.

Infeftments do frequently bear Conditions, Reservations, Provisions and
Exceptions, which give great ground of debate, which therefore must here be
cleared.

There is no question but Infeftments may either be pure or conditional, some
conditions are employed from the Nature of the Right, and are effectual, though
they be not expressed.

47. As in Ward-holdings, the Vassal cannot alienate without his Superiors is
consent which, an effectual resolutive condition, whereby if the major part of
the fee be alienate, the whole becomes extinct and returns to the Superior as
he gave it.

48. Infeftments of Warrandice imply this condition, that they should take no
effect, but in the case of Eviction of the principal Lands. Infeftments for
relief of Cautionry, implys this condition, that they shall have no effect till
distress, and that they shall ceass by relief. Infeftments for satisfaction of
sums imply this condition, that the sums being satisfied, they are extinct, and
the Authors Infeftment revives and stands valid without necessity of Renovation.

49. Infeftment given for a particular Office, and bear not Assigneys, or
Substitutes, as to be an Ensign-bearer, Advocat, or Chaplain, with Lands and
Annual rents annexed, does imply this condition, that the Heir be capable to
exerce these Offices; and therefore, by his inability they ceass, unless they
be granted to Assigneys, with power of substitution, in which case they may be
performed by another.

50. Infeftments by Excambion do imply this tacit condition, that if the one
Tenement Excambed be evicted, there is recourse to the other Tenement with
which it was Excambed, for therein Excambion or Permutation differs from Sale;
this recourse is effectual, not only to the Heirs, but to the singular
Successors of both parties, whether by voluntar or Judicial Rights; and
therefore, regress was sustained against an Appryzing, prior to the Eviction,
without necessity to instruct that the Excamber had right when he changed, it
being presumed that he delivered his Rights to the other party; and therefore
an old Charter from the King, bearing, the Lands to have been Disponed in
Excambion for the other parties Lands, and expressing Regress, but without
mention of Assigneys, yet was found effectual to a singular Successor, July 14.
1629. Lord of Wairdess contra Lord of Balcomie. In this Process it was found,
that no person needed to be cited but the present Proprietar of the Lands
Excambed, and the Heir, or appear and Heir of the maker of the Excambion, July
2. 1629. inter eosdem; and that Regress was effectual against an Appryzer of
the Excambed Lands, it was so decided, December 21. 1623. Earl of Montrose
contra Sir George Ker.

51. The Law does also introduce Conditions in Infeftments, which do not arise
from their Nature, as in Feus, by the common Feudal Law, and by special Statute
with us, whereby if the Feu-duty be not paid by the space of two years hail
and together, that the Feu shall be extinct and lost, Parl. 1597. cap. (...).

It is therefore beyond doubt, that such Clauses are effectual, whether expressed
or not expressed in the Infeftment.

52. It is also incontroverted, that Liferents one or more may be effectually
reserved in Infeftments, which will pass therewith as a real burden to all
singular Successors, and needs no other Infeftment.

53. Infeftments are also sometimes burdened with the Exception of other
Infeftments, which Exceptions, if they be in the Dispositive Clause, as a
burden upon the Infeftment, they are effectual against singular Successors.

54. Infeftments are also frequently burdened with Faculties or Powers to
affect or burden the Lands, or others Disponed, and that either absolutely at
the Disponers pleasure, for such sums to Children or Creditors; which Clauses
are frequent in the Dispositions by Fathers to their eldest Son, and are very
amply Interpret against them and their Heirs, though the way of burdening might
have been defective, as by a base Infeftment, not cled with Possession, or by
Bonds of Provision, though no Infeftment follow, as was found in the case of
the Relict of Robert Earl of Carnwath contra Gavin Earl of Carnwath. And a
Disposition by a Father to his Son, witha power to burden with such a sum, a
Bond granted thereafter to his Daughter, without mention of that power was
found effectual against the Son, in so far as was not satisfied with the
Fathers Movables, June 24. 1677. Margaret Hopringle contra George Hopringle,
though these might be more strictly Interpret in the case of singular
Successors, acquiring for onerous Causes. And in the case of the Creditors of
Mouswal contra the Children of Mouswal, who having Disponed his estate to his
eldest Son by his Contract of Marriage, reserving a power to himself to burden
it with such a sum to his Bairns, having given them Bonds of Provision with a
base Infeftment, the same was preferred without Possession, by virtue of the
reservation to the posterior public Infeftments of the Creditors for prior
Debts, seeing he had then an Estate sufficient for all his Debts, and his Bairns
Portions.

It is no less certain that all the Clauses contained in Infeftments are not
real burdens, affecting singular Successors, such as Warrandice, which only
obliegeth the Warrant and his Heirs, and is merely personal; so then the
difficulty remains, what Clauses insert in Infeftments are real burdens,
effectual against singular Successors; First then, If the Infeftment bear a
provision that the person Infeft shall pay such a sum or do such deeds to a
third party, this will import but a personal obliegement, and will not affect
singular Successors.

55. But if the Dispositive Clause be expressly burdened with payment of such a
sum to the Author, or bear, that upon that condition the Infeftment is granted,
and no otherways, such a Clause was found effectual against a Singular
Successor, bearing only a Provision in the Dispositive Words, that the Lands
should be affected with such a sum, and was sustained against an Apprizer,
November 7. 1676. Caucham contra Adamson, here there was a Clause irritant in
the Disposition, but was not in the Charter.

56. Provisions or Conditions in Infeftments, impossible or unlawful, if they
be conceived as suspensive Clauses annexed to the Disposition, they annul the
same: But if there be Provisions otherways adjected, though they be in the
Terms of a Clause irritant or resolutive, they are void as not adjected.

57. Provisions also inconsistant with the Nature of the Right, are
ineffectual, as if it were provided that the Vassal should not owe fidelity to
his Superior, or that the Right should be valid by the Charter without
Seasine, these Provisions are inconsistent and null.

58. It is much debated amongst the Feudists, whither Clauses, de non
alienando, with an irritancy or resolutive Clause, or that the Fiars should
contract no Debt, by which the Fee might be alienat, or the Tailzie changed;
and they are generally for the Negative, that a Clause prohibiting contracting
of Debt, or simply not to alienat, are inconsistent with Property, albeit they
may be effectual if so qualified. That no alienation be made, or debt
contracted to affect the Fee, or alter the succession without consent of the
superior, or such other persons; but that being absolute, they cannot be
effectual against singular Successors, whereas these limited prohibitions
resolve but in Interdictions, and being contained in the Seasines registrate,
they are equivalent to Interdictions, published and Registrate, though many
such Clauses have been in Tailzied Infeftments, yet none of them have come to
be debated, but that which was in the Tailzie of the Estate of Stormont,
Tailzied to Annandails Heirs Male of his Body, whilks failing, to Balvaird and
his Heirs, with a Clause not to annalzie or to contract any debt, or do any
deed whereby the Lands might be taken from the Heirs of Talzie, otherwise the
Contraveener should ipso facto, loose his Right; and the next person who would
be Heir, should have Right, which being at length contained in the original
Seasine, and all the subsequent Seasines was found effectual to annual the
Right of James Earl of Annandail, who contraveened, and of all his Creditors
who apprized for his debt, Febru. 26. 1662. Viscount of Stormont contra
Creditors of Annandail.

Other Clauses irritant, consisting with the nature of the Right, are effectual
against singular Successors, as the taking the Name and Arms of a Family.

And generally, all real burdens of Lands contained in Infeftments, though they
give no present Right to these in whose favors they are conceived, nor cannot
give them any Fee of the Lands, yet they are real burdens, passing with the
Lands to singular Successors, though they bind them not personally, but the
Ground of the Land by Appryzing or Adjudication, as if Lands be disponed with
the burden of an Annualrent forth thereof, to such a person and his Heirs, this
will not constitute the annualrent, but may be a ground of adjudging an
Annualrent out of the Lands.

In all these cases, Purchasers by voluntary Disposition, are presumed and
ought to see their Authors Rights, at least a progress of forty years, whereby
they may know such Clauses and consider them in the price, or otherways secure
themselves against them.

But in the only Decision of this matter concerning the Tailzie of the Estate
of Stormount which did pass with great difficulty, the Lords being near equally
divided, special consideration was had, that the Clause irritant; de non
alienando, was expressly set down in the first and subsequent Seasines of Heirs,
whereby Creditors were certiorat of their hazard, if they should lend their
money, that they could expect no security threfore by that Estate, seeing
thereby the borrowers Right became void; and therefore, such Clauses or any
other Clauses irritant, or conditions that might evacuat infeftments, or deeply
burden the same, when they are not particularly expressed in the Seasine, may not
only be quarrelled by anterior Creditors, but also by posterior Creditors, as
latent and fraudulent Clauses to ensnare Creditors, who having no mean to know
such Clauses, do contract and lend sums of Money to persons whom they see
standing Infeft in considerable Estates of Land.

Clauses de non alienando, or non contrahendo debitum, are most infavourable
and inconvenient, specially when absolute; for first Commerce is thereby
hindered, which is the common interest of Mankind. Secondly, the Natural
Obligations of providing Wives and Children are thereby hindered, which cannot
lawfully be omitted. Thirdly, It is unreasonable so to clog Estates, descending
from Predecessors, and not to leave our Successors in the same freedom that our
Predicessors left us, whereby, though they have the shadow of an Estate, yet
they may become miserable, as if they should happen to fall into Captivity, or
in any Transgression that would infer a considerable fine, against which no
such Clause can secure, then being disabled to borrow, they behoved to be
denunced to the Horn, and thereby their Liferent Escheat fall to their
Superior, which no such Clause can prevent; and therefore, if any man have
ground to suspect the frugality of his Successor, he may provide a part of his
Estate by a Tailzie, disabling that Successor to contract debt without the
consent of such persons in which he confides, leaving some part of his Estate
to his diseretion.

For such a Clause irritant being in the Seasine published by Registration, may
be sustained as equivalent to an Interdiction; such Clauses are also much more
tolerable in Lands acquired by the Fiars own industry, wherein if there be
insert a Tailzie with a Clause, de non alienando, to be insert in the Original,
and all subsequent Seasines, and bearing Provisions for the Wives of
Successors, not exceeding such proportion of the Fee, and for Children only to
affect such a proportion of the Free Rent: Or if persons having no near
relations of value, prefer others of their Name or Kin to their Estates: Or in
case of mutual Tailzies, such Clauses limited as aforesaid, may be much more
tolerate.

But Clauses of that nature have never been attempted, but in proper Tailzies
where they are diverse nominat Branches, which are neither Heirs of Line, nor
Heirs Male to one another; and where the main design is to preserve the
Tailzie, for when all the Branches are of far relation, the preference of the
first is not much above the rest; and therefore, the other Branches have by
such Clauses, jus acquisitum, and are not simply Heirs, but partly Creditors to
the first Branch; and therefore, though there were no Clause irritant, they
might reduce alienations merely gratuitous or fraudulent, especially when done
not by the Heirs of Line or Heirs Male of him who constitute the Tailzie, for
these are always in every Tailzie in the first place, and while the Fee
continues in them, it is rather a simple Fee then Tailzied, as it becomes
again, when all the Branches of the Tailzie fail.

The perpetuities of Estates where they have been long accustomed, have (...)
their Inconvenience; and therefore, divices have been found out, to (...) them
ineffectual: Only the Majoratus of Spain has been most (...) and (...), that
the King Nobilitating a Person of Merit and (...), either by the Kings Gift, or
his own Right, that Estate can neither be alienate or burdened, but remains
alimentary for preservation of the Dignity of that Family.

But these perpetuities in England are now easily evacuat; First, by Warrands
to sell, purchased in Parliament, which pass without much difficulty; and if
they become frequent with us, it is like we will find the same remeid: they are
also evacuat by a simulat Action of fine and recovery, whereby the purchaser
pretends that he is unwarrantably dispossessed of such Lands by the present Fiar,
who coludes and is silent, having received a Price or other consideration, so
that these Sentences, though Collusive, must be irrevocable.

In Tailzies, the Heirs Male or Heirs of Line of every Branch, being the Issue
of the Stipes of that Branch, do succeed; and therefore, there is a good
Caution by the Law of England, that after the possibility of Issue is extinct,
the present Fiar, can do no more as to the Fee, but what a Liferenter could do.
The next Branch being ordinarily altogether strangers to that Fiar, little care
will be taken to preserve the Fee.

In the Tailzie of Stormount, the whole Estate was not comprehended, and it was
distinctly provided, that in case any of the Heirs of Tailzie for the time
should contraveen, that the Right should be divolved on that person who would
succeed, if the contraveener were dead: But in such Tailzies, formerly it was
not so clearly ordered, being only provided, that the contraveener should lose
his Right, and the next Heir of Tailzie should have place, whereby it remained
dubious, whether the next Branch of the Tailzie were meaned, so that the
contraveener losed his own Interest, and all descending of him: Or whether he
losed the Interest of all descending of that Branch: Or whether he losed only
his own personal Interest, wherein the design of the Constituter of the Tailzie
might be dubious enough.

59. To sum up this important Subject of Tailzies, let us consider the effects
thereof, according to the several ordinary Tenors of the same, and how far the
Fiar or his Heirs of tailzie is bound up thereby; we must then distinguish
betwixt Tailzies having Clauses not to alter, burden or alienat: And these that
are simple without any express restrictive Clause. Secondly, Betwixt Tailzies
made freely, and these that are made for onerous Causes. Thirdly, Betwixt these
that have Clauses resolutive or irritant, and these that have only such Clauses
by way of Obligation, Provision or Condition.

As to the first Case, It is a general Rule, that quisque est rei suae
moderator and arbiter, every man may dispose of his own at his pleasure, either
to take effect in his life, or after his death, and so may provide his Lands to
what Heirs he pleases, and may change the Succession as often as he will, which
will be completed by Resigning from himself and his Heirs in the Fee in
favors of himself, and such other Heirs as he pleases to name in the
Procuratory, whereupon Resignation being accepted by a Superior, and new
Infeftment granted accordingly, the Succession is effectually altered; yea any
obliegement to take his Lands so holden, will obliege the former heirs to
enter, and to denude themselves for Implement of that obliegement, in favors
of the heirs therein expressed; and if the Superior refuse to accept the
Resignation, altering the Succession, a Bond of borrowed Money, though granted
only upon design to alter the Succession, will be the ground of Adjudication of
the Land, and being assigned to the Fiar himself, and to such heirs as he
pleases, the Superior will be forced to receive him accordingly; so that the
first constituter of a Tailzie, or any heir succeeding to him may change it at
their pleasure, unless the Tailzie be for an onerous Cause, as when Tailzies
are mutual, then the first constitutors of the mutual Tailzies cannot alter the
same, although their Debts may affect the same; yet no fraudulent or gratuitous
deed can alter or evacuat such Tailzies; and therefore, a mutual Contract
betwixt two brethren, oblieging them, that what Lands they should succeed to,
or acquire, should be taken to the Heirs of their body, whilks failzing, to the
Brother and the heirs of his Body, etc. though thereafter either Brother took
their Lands, otherways to their heirs whatsomever, whereby Sisters having
succeeded to one of these brothers, they were decerned to denude themselves in
favors of the other Brother, January 14. 1631. Mr. John Sharp contra Helen
Sharp.

But if the Cause onerous be of less import, then to grant and continue a
Tailzie, it will import no more then once perfecting the Infeftment by such a
Tailzie, whereby the hope of Succession arises to these parties in whose
favors the fiar is obliged to take the Tailzy, but he was not found obliged
to continue the same, but that he might alter it thereafter, without refounding
the Money he got for granting it, being but of that value, as was equal only to
the hope of Succession, which behoved to be understood of alteration, sine
dolo, July 15. 1636. Mr. David Drummond contra Drummond.

Heirs of Provision by Contracts of Marriage, are in part ouerous, being
granted for a Tocher, and the interest of the Wife concerned; therefore, they
cannot be alterred by the Husband at his pleasure, but do exclude all
fraudulent, or merely gratuitous alterations, as has been shown, Section
forty three.

But if there bean express Obliegement not to alter the Tailzie, albeit that
will not give Title to the Heirs of Blood of the present Fiar, to quarrel his
deed or alteration; yet it will give interest to any other Branch of the
Tailzie, whether to the person nominat or his heirs, to quarrel and reduce such
alterations, though it will not exclude alterations by Appryzing or
Adjudication, for debts truly borrowed by the Fiar; and therefore, a Tailzie of
a sum of Money, lent in their terms, to be paid to the Creditor and the heirs
of his Body; whilks failing, to the Father and the heirs of hsi Body; whilks
failing, to a person named and his heirs and assigneys whatsomever, with a
provision, that the Creditor and his heirs should do no deed hurtful to the
Tailzie, nor the Debtor should not pay without consent of the heir of Tailzie
named, was found to give interest to that person as heir of Tailzie, to declare
that the sum was unwarrantably uplifted, or paid without his consent or order
of Law, by consigning it to be employed in the same terms, and that though he
was heir of Tailzie to the uplifter, that he was not obliged to fulfill his
deed or warrant his Discharge, being contrair to the terms of the Tailzie; as
to which terms he was Creditor, reserving always to lawful Creditors, how far
they could affect the sum for the Fiars Debt, February 3. 1674. Drummond contra
Drummond. And a Clause in a Bond, whereby a Woman obliged her self to resign
Lands in favors of her self and the heirs of her Body, whilks failing, to the
heirs of her Father, and oblieging her self to do nothing contrary to that
succession, whereupon Inhibition was used before her Marriage, was found
effectual against her and her Husband whom she Married thereafter, and Disponed
the Lands to him and his heirs, asbeing a voluntary deed, without an equivalent
cause onerous, albeit the Fathers heirs behoved to be the Woman's heir of
Tailzie, January 28. 1668. Alexander Binnie contra Margaret Binnie.

Yet these restricting Clauses without irritancy, though conceived as
Provisions or Conditions, if they be not in the Investiture, albeit they be in
prior Obligations, Dispositions or Contracts, there is no pretense thence to
affect the Fee as a real burden, and even though they be contained in the
Investiture, seeing Clauses irritant uses to be added thereto, they are
understood to be but personal Obliegements, whereupon no diligence having
followed, they cannot be effectual against singular Successors, whether by
Legal or Voluntary Dispositions: And as to such restrictions with Clauses
irritant, we shall add no more thereunto, then what has been said.

Property being thus Constitute by Infeftment, it is to be considered what are
the particulars it comprehends and implys, though not expressed, wherein this is
a general Rule, that Lands being Disponed with part and pertinent, all is
carried thereby that falls under the Denomination of the Lands Disponed, a
caelo ad centrum, and all that in the time of the Disposition was accustomed to
follow it, not only as servitudes, but even discontiguous parcels of Land which
were not known, as distincta tenementa, or parts of any other Tenement, except
what the Law reserves, or the express provision of the Superior.

60. The Law reserves all these things which are called regalia, or Jura
publica, which the Law appropriateth to Princes and States, and exempeth from
private use, unless the same be expressly granted and Disponed by the King; and
if the Superior be a Subject, if he have any of these Regalia from the King,
they remain with his Superiority, unless he expressly Dispone them to his
Vassal, the Superior may have them from the King, either expressly in any
Tenement holden of the King, or tacitly, when Lands are erected by the King, to
him in a Barrony, or any higher Dignity, whereby many of these regalia, are
comprehended. Barronia being nomen Universitatis, yet that will not comprehend,

First, Mines and Minerals of Gold or Silver, or Lead of that fineness, that
three half-pennies of Silver may be fined out of the pound of Lead, which Mines
are declared to belong to the King, wherever they can be found, Par. 1424. cap.
12. But Mines of Iron, Copper and Lead of less fineness, belong to the
Proprietar, and are not accounted with us Regalia, though in some other
Countries they be.

Secondly, Neither do Treasures found in the Ground belong to the Kings
Vassals, though their Lands be erected in Barronies, unless they were expressed.
A Treasure is Money hid in the Ground, the owner whereof is not known.

Thirdly, Though all Proprietars have the privilege of Fowling within their
own Ground, yet Swans are peculiarly reserved to the King; and therefore, the
privilege to kill Swans, is not carried under the name of Barrony, unless they
were particularly expressed.

Fourthly, Confiscat Goods are not carried, even under the name of Barrony,
unless they be expressed.

61. Yet there are other regalia, which are carried under the name of Barrony,
though not expressed, as Jurisdictions and Courts, Fortalices, Salmond Fishing,
Forests, and Hunting of Deer; and Ports with their petty Customs, established
by the Kings grant, or long Possession, for repairing and upholding these
Ports; which therein differ from Creiks or Stations, which are natural; but
Ports are builded artificially, and need reparation.

62. Jurisdiction and Courts are comprehended in Barrony, in so far as concerns
Civil Jurisdiction and Blood-wits, or lesser Crimes, but will not reach to
Capital Punishment, unless the same be expressed, as it uses to be when the
Privilege of Pit and Gallows are expressed, or Out-sang and In-sang Thief, which
seems to extend to the punishing of no more Crimes but Theft; and these who
have only In-sang Theft, can only punish Thieves taken in the Fact.

Though Courts be expressed, they will extend to nothing Criminal, no not to
Blood-wits, unless these be expressed; but only to Civil Debates requisite for
the Propriatar, as to determine differences amongst his Tenants, Neighbourhead,
Multars and smaller Matters; or to constitute a Baily, who may judge betwixt
the Propriatar and his Tenants, as to his Rents, Duties and Services; and also
may determine differences amongst his Tenants.

But all Jurisdiction is Cumulative with, and not Exclusive of the Superiors
Jurisdiction, so that there is place of Prevention. The first Atatcher, if he
proceed is preferred: and if the Superior and Vassal atatch together, the
Superior is preferred.

63. The Courts of Vassals, though they be Barrons, and have the Privilege of
Capital Punishment, are not of the same Extent and Importance, as the Sentence
of the Judges ordinary of the Kingdom; such as Sheriffs, Stewarts, Bailiffs of
Royalty, Regality and Burghs. For first, The extent of their Jurisdiction is
not so ample. Secondly, The Jurisdiction of all Barrons and Free holders, was
of old subordinat to the Sheriffs and other Judges ordinary, within whose
Jurisdiction the Lands lay, Par. 1503. cap. 95. And then there was place for
falsing of Doom, or appeal to the Sheriff-court, who was to warn the Parties
upon fifteen days, and make the Suitors of the Sheriffdom Ward thereupon.
Whereby it appears, that the Freeholders of the King, who owed Suit to the
Sheriff-court; at least an Inquest of them were to concur with the Sheriff in
discussing the appeal from the Baron or Freeholder: But now these Appeals or
falsing of Dooms from any Court to another, have been antiquated, and wholly in
desuetude since the Introduction of Advocati ons, which is a far more excellent
remeed; for thereby Causes are not stopped at the choice or humor of parties:
But the reasons of Advocation are specially considered by the Lords, whether
they be relevant, and have such Instructions as can be expected before
discussing; and the Subjects are further secured by the late Act of Parliament,
that poinding cannot proceed without a charge be given and expired, which in
all Decreets, proceeding upon Citation, requires fifteen days: In which,
address may bemade to the Lords. Thirdly, Decreets of Barons have no Execution
by Horning, which goes of course upon the Decreets, Precepts and Executions of
other Judges ordinary; so that all the Execution upon their Sentences, is only
poinding, or corporal Punishment. As to which, if there be any process for
Capital Punishment, the Lords will very easily grant Advocation, as they do
advocat Causes from Inferior Judges, not only upon Incompotency, but upon
Intricacy and Importance: So there being nothing more Important then the life
of Man, they would easily advocat such Process, wherein Barons should not
proceed summarily to Execution. But both they and other Inferior Judges
ordinary, should after Sentence at least abide Terms of Law by the space of
fifteen days, that the Lords may give remeed by Advocation or Suspension of
Execution: For though the Lords have not Criminal Jurisdiction, they do
ordinarily advocat, and by the same reason may suspend Criminal Process, to the
effect the same may be remitted to competent and unsuspect Judges; so that if
there were any doubtfulness in the case, the Lords would remit the Cause to the
Justices. Fourthly, The Courts of Barons or Freeholders are not Courts of
record, in which writes use to be registrat.

64. As the Courts of Barons and Freeholders have these Restrictions more then
the Inferior Judges, so they have this advantage ordinarily, that all the
Profits and Issues of their Courts belong to themselves; whereas, Sheriffs,
Stewarts and Baliffes of Royalty are countable to the King, seeing these are
the Kings Courts: But Baliffes of Regality are not countable, because though
they be the Kings Courts, yet the King has gifted the Profits of the Court by
the Erection of the Regality. If then an Infeftment contain Courts, the
Profits thereof are carried therewith, though not expressed; but ordinarily they
bear cum curiis earumque exitibus. And therefore the Amerciaments of Courts, or
there other Issues, or there Privilege on the breakers of Arreeistments,
loosing their Tacks to their Masters within their Barronies are not
comprehended within public Confiscations reserved to the King.

65. Fortalices are also inter regalia, and are not carried by the Fee, unless
expressed, or at least the Lands be erected in Barrony. By Fortalices are
understood, all Strengths built for public Defense; whether that appear by
common Fame, or Reputation, such as all the Kings Castles, whereof many are now
in private hands, as Proprietars, or Heretable Keepers thereof, or Constables of
the same; such are the Castles of Dunstafnage, Carrick, Skipnes, and others
belonging to the Earl of Argyl; the Constabulary of Forfar, belonging to the
Earl of Strathmore; the Constabulary of Dundie, now belonging to the Lord
Hattoun: And when these Castles are disponed, either in Property or custody,
the Infeftments thereof carry therewith, not only the Bounds of the Castle, but
the Dependencies thereof, as Gardens, Orchards, Parkes, Meadows, and other
ground possessed by the King or Keeper for the use of the Castle, and all Rents,
Annuities, Jurisdictions and Privileges thereunto belonging; which may be
instructed by their Charters, their Court-books, or other Writes or
Instruments, and even by Witnesses, proving long Possession; albeit the
Infeftments of Constabulary, bear only in general, Officium constabularii cum
feodis and divoriis ejusdem, which was found to extend to the proclaiming and
riding of Fairs, anterior to the Constitution of the Office, and exercing
Criminal Jurisdiction in the Town where the Fairs were held, during these
Fairs, but not to extend to other Fairs recently granted by the King, or to
Jurisdiction at other times, July 18. 1676. Earl of Kinghorn contra Town of
Forfar. The like was done in the Process, betwixt Hattoun and the Town of
Dundie, in anno 1679. wherein multitudes of Witnesses were examined upon either
part. And the Emoluments, Privileges, and Jurisdiction of the Constabulary,
were decerned according to the Probation; and Particularly, 20 shillings
Sterling yearly, for which the Town of Dundie counted in Exchequer, as
belonging to the Constable, which was found to belong to the Office, albeit
there was a Discharge thereof granted to the Town by Scrymzour, Constable of
Dundie, which was not found effectual against Hattoun, his singular Successor
in the Office by Apprysing, December 9. 1679. inter eosdem.

66. The Case is more doubtful as to other Fortalices, which are not repute to
have been the Kings Castles. Craig's opinion is, that all strong holds are
presumed to have been builded for public Defense, and not for private Safety:
wherein turris pinnata is comprehended, having Turrets or Rounds upon the
Angles; from whence, Shot may be directed along all the Walls. And therefore
much more may Castles with Bartizens or Bands, that is strong and high Walls
surrounding the Castle: Or if the Castle be built upon a place naturally
strong, which may give suspicion to the King to be an occasion of Rebellion,
and not to be patent and accessible at his pleasure; and most of all, if there
were regular Fortifications of Stone or Earth. Certainly such Fortresses or
Fortifications, whereby places are made of that strength, which is accustomed
to secure against public Enemies in War, may not be builded without the King's
Warrant; and if otherwise built, may be demolished, and the Builder punished:
but long possession presumes a Warrant. And as such Fortalices may be presumed
to have been at first the Kings, from the very Inspection of the Fortalice and
its proper use, so long Possession may take off that Presumption: and that they
have been built mainly for private use in times of trouble, with the Kings
consent. But we need not insist in these Questions, seeing Towrs and Fortalices
do now pass in course in Charters: Yet, though these were expressed, if it appear
the Fortress has belonged to the King, and can be comprehended in the annexed
Property, the Right of them will only resolve into an heretable keeping: so
that the King in time of War or Insurrections, may make use of such strong
holds, and put Garrisons therein, seeing keeping does not exclude the Kings own
necessary use: neither will the expressing of Fortalices generally, empower the
Vassal to build such Strengths as are proper for public War; because the
Clause can only import such Fortalices as then were built.

But I see no ground to extend Fortalices to all houses, with Batlements, or
with Turrets, or Rounds, which can only infer private safety against Robbers,
Plunderers, or flying Parties; but nothing proper for a Seige, or public
Defense of a Kingdom: and therefore these may pass as Houses or Pertinents.

And as to that ground Craig adduces, That it is Treason to hold any Fortalice
against the King, or to deny Him, or these commissioned by Him access by armed
force: and yet delivery of any other private Right may be refused to the King
without hazard. Whence he infers, that the King must have greater Right and
Interest in all such Fortalices than in other things. This consequence is not
good; for that which infers Treason, is the holding out of the House, and
denying access to the King by armed Force, which will be treasonable in any
House, whether it have Battlements or Turrets or not; but cannot infer that all
Houses with Battlements or Turrets, were built for public defense, and did
once belong to the King; which recent Custom does further clear, there being
nothing more ordinary, then to build Houses with Turrets or Rounds upon the
Angles, without Warrant, Quarrel, or Suspicion; these being rather for Ornament
then for Strength.

67. Forests are likewise inter Regalia, being places destinat for Deer for
the Kings use and pleasure in Hunting, which cannot be extended generally to
Woods, but only to such where Deer have been kept: for certainly, Woods are
parts fundi privati, and are not inter Regalia, in any Nation, but Forests
for keeping of Deer, remain inteir Regalia, although the Wood should fail: And
wherever Deer are kept as proper, and others debarred from Hunting there, it
is presumed to have been a Forest proper to the King. And though the Lands
being in Baronia, may carry the Privilege and Office of Forrestry, which gives
the Baron right to hunt, kill, and make use of the Deer: Yet he will be but
held as Keeper, or Forrester, which will not exclude the King to hunt and kill
the Deer for his own proper use; for the property of the Forest will never be
understood, if it be not very expressly granted.

Forests have great Privileges, and peculiar Customs; for whereas no man is
obliged to herd his Cattle off other men's ground or Corns, or to be answerable
for the Skaith they do, longer then in hayning time, while the Corns are upon
the Ground: And if any man have a mind to keep his neighbors goods off his
Ground, he may do it; But he must herd his Ground, and may turn off his
neighbors Goods without wronging them, but cannot put them in Pondfold. Yet if
any man's Goods be found in Forests, they become escheat, and are confiscat;
two thirds to the King, and one third to the Forrester: And if any Baron or
Landed-man, have hained Woods, or Forests of their own, they may escheat all
Goods that bees found therein to their own use, Par. 1535. cap. 12. Where
private Forests of Subjects, are only understood such as are enclosed with a
sufficient Dyke: The words of the Statute bears, Hained Woods or Forests,
which cannot be hained without enclosure; but the Kings Forests are large
tracts of Ground, which neither have been, nor can be enclosed: and therefore
all the neighboring Heretors and Possessors, must either herd their Goods off
these Forests, or loss them. Upon this account it was, that the King having by
a Signature under his hand, grantend a Forrestry to the Lord of Fascally; the
Exchequer, before passing thereof, desired the Lords of Session to consider and
report what by Law was the Privilege, Convenience, or Inconveniency of
Forests: and they having heard the Obtainer of the Forest, and the
neighboring Heretors, did declare the Privilege of a Forest to be as
aforesaid, June 21. 1680. Whereupon the Exchequer did represent to the King,
the Inconveniency to grant new Forests.

The Comptroller had the Inspection of the Kings Parks and Forests; and it was
lawful to the Comptroller, or any having the Kings Warand, to intromet with all
Goods in the Kings Forest, not put in by the Comptroler, or these having power
from him, and to apply the whole to the Kings use, Par. 1592. cap. 198. And by
the former Statute, the Forrester or Keeper is prohibit to put any Cattle in
the Forest belonging to himself: So that if the Keeper first seize upon Goods
in the Forest, he has the third; but if the Comptroller, or these having
Warrant from the King, does (...) seize, the Keeper has no share.

There are many more Customs and Privileges of the Kings Forests and Chaces
in England, where the Forrester or Keeper has only the Branches of Trees, and
the Bark thereof, and such as are fallen or decayed: and as Skeen observes,
that he may take a Tree as high as his head; but our heretable Keepers have
much more Privilege, and may make use of the Wood and Deer, so as not to
destroy either, and with a reservation for the Kings proper use.

68 The hunting or killing of Deer seems to be inter Regalia with us, except
these who have them within proper enclosures, for otherways the Kings Forest
having no enclosure, the Dear by straying abroad, would easily be destroyed;
and therefore, though every man may hunt them off his Ground, by which they
will be forced back to some Forest, yet they may not kill them.

69. Salmond Fishing is also inter regalia; and therefore, passes not
ordinarily as pertinent, and ought to be expressed in the Infeftment; yet in some
cases Salmond-fishing has been found constitute without special expression,
but only by the common Clause, cum piscationibus, and long Possession, June 29.
1593. Lesly of Creik contra Forbes of Thainstoun; in which case it was found,
that Salmond-fishing is only inter regalia, as it is a Casuality, fluminis
publici, such as are Navigable Rivers, wherein there is a common use of Passage
and Transportation, in like manner, where Lands are Erected in a Barrony, or
any other dignity, Salmond-fishing may be carried by the the common clause, cum
piscationibus, as when it bears Fishing in salt and fresh water, though without
mention of Salmond-fishing, Hope, Fshing, Lord of Glenurchy contra Alexander
Cambel. So an Infeftment to a Burgh-royal, bearing, cum piscationibus and
piscariis, with immemorial Possession, was found to give them right to
Salmondfishing and Cruives, though none of them were expressed, January 26. 1665.
Heretors of Don contra the Town of Aberdene. January 13. 1681. Brown of Nuntoun
contra the Town of Kirkcudbright. It was also found constitute by the
Infeftment of a Sheriffship, and forty years Possession, though the
Infeftments bore only Emoluments in general, December 13. 1677. Earl of Murray
contra the Fevers upon the Water of Ness, Marquess of Huntly and Town of
Inverness. It was also found Constitute by a Bishops Charter of Londs, cum
piscariis, bearing a reeddendo of Salmond, though th Bishops right from the
King, was not produced, but presumed, and being a Dignity prefected by long
Possession of his Vassal, January 13. 1680. Brown of Nuntoun contra the Town of
Kirkcudbright. And likewise, long Possession by the space of forty years, was
found to give right to a Salmond-fishing upon both sides of the Water, and
drawing the same upon both sides, though the Infeftment bore, but fishing upon
one side, Hope, fishing, Lady Monymusk contra Forbes of Barns. A Clause, cum
piscationibus, was found to be a Title for Prescription in Baronia, and that
forty years uninterrupted possession constitutes the right of Salmond-fishing,
February 7. 1672. Fullurtoun contra Earl of Eglintoun: It is more dubious what
the meaning of the Clause, cum piscationibus, simply or of fishing in salt
Water can Import, seeing there are common freedoms of every Nation to Fish into
the Sea, or into Brooks or Rivers for common fishes; and therefore, needs no
special Concession from the King or other Superior, but the use thereof may be
first; that it may be the Title or foundation of prescription of
Salmond-fishing, not only in fresh water, but in the Sea, at the Water-mouth
where they are frequently taken: And also, that in other fishings, if a
prescription run of interrupting and hindering others to fish whatsoever sort
of fish, it will constitute a property thereof, which could not consist without
this clause or the like, as a Title; neither could it be comprehended as Annex,
or Connex of Lands, or as a Servitude, being a distinct right, having so little
respect to Land.

70. There is a special way of fishing by Cruives or Zaires, both in fresh
water and salt, all such Cruives are absolutely prohibit to be set within
Rivers, in so far as the Tide flows, as being destructive to the frey of all
fishes. Parliament 1424. cap. 11. renewed Par. 1477. cap. 73. Par. 1581. cap.
111. And as to other Cruives in fresh water, they are also prohibit by the
said last Statute, except such as are Infeft in Cruives, Lines, or Loups,
within fresh water, who are to enjoy the same according to their Rights,
keeping Saturdays Slop, and the due distance betwixt the Hecks, the distance of
the Hecks by the Act of Parliament, 1477. cap. 73. is expressed to be three
inches conform to the Statute made by King David; but the Act of Parliament
1489. cap. 15. expresses the distance to be five inches, conform to King
David's Act: And in both these Statutes, besides the distances aforesaids,
Saturdays Slop is appointed, and likewise, that the mid-stream by the space of
five foot be always free; and that no Cruives be made use of in forbidden time
of year, when Salmond may not be taken, which is declared to be from the Feast
of the Assumption of the Virgin Mary, unto the Feast of Saint Andrews in
Winter, Parliament 1424. cap. 35.

Few debates have occurred concerning Cruives, notwithstanding the great notice
thereof by so many of our Kings, One did lately occur, and was fully debated,
in presentia, betwixt the Heretors of the Water of Don and the Town of
Aberdene, which was mainly decided on January 26. 1665. The case was thus, The
Town of Aberdene having changed a Cruive-dyke to another place within their own
bounds, and built the same there again of new, whereupon the Heretors who had
right to the Salmond-fishing upon the Water of Don, above these Cruives, raised
a Declarator against them, wherein, after large disputes concerning Saturdays
Slop, and the mid-stream, and the distance of the Hecks, and the height of the
Cruive-dyke, and whether it ought to be built sloping or perpendicular, and
whether it might be changed to the prejudice of the Heretors; The Lords found,
that the Town of Aberdene might change the Cruive-Dyke, keeping it within their
own bounds, and having no more Dykes but one; but found, that seeing they had a
Cruive past memory without interruption, which had determined the height and
frame thereof, they found that the new Dyke behoved to be built in all things
conform to the old, and with no more detriment to the said Heretors fishing,
then was formerly before the water had pooled at the old Dike; and so it was
not determined how high a Cruive-dyke might be, or whether it behoved to be
sloping or not, where prescription had not determined, which is very seldom: It
was also found, that the distance of the Hecks ought to be three inches,
conform to the Act of King James the third, Par. 1477. cap. 73. and not five
inches, according to the Act of King James the fourth, Par. 1489. cap. 15.
which mentions five inches, which the Lords found to be a mistake in the
Transcribing, or Printing of the Act of Parliament, in respect that both this
and the former Act relates to the Statute of King David as the pattern thereof,
which mentions but three inches, and that Hecks of five inches wide will be of
no use, nor hold in any Salmond; The Lords also found, that the Saturdays Slop
behoved to be observed, not only in one Cruive, but in all the Cruives of the
Dyke, and that by pulling up the Hecks of each Cruive by the breadth of an ell,
to continue from Saturday at six a Clok, till Monday at Sunrising; and the
Lords found, that part of the Statute concerning the mid-stream, to be indeed
distinct from Saturdays Slop, but they found that part of the Statute
concerning the mid-stream to be in desuetude, in all the Cruives of the
Kingdom, and that it is not repeated by the Act of King James the sixth, Par.
1584. cap. 111. and therefore, found the same not obligatory, notwithstanding
that in the late Act of Parliament, 1661. there is an Act Ratifying all the old
Statutes concerning Cruives, which was alleged to revive that point of the
mid-stream, which the Lords did not respect as a general Law, albeit the
Confirmation did run in these terms, because it past the Parliament without
notice, as an ordinary Confirmation, at the impetration of their pursuers, and
did not pass the Articles, and was not appointed to be Printed as a public Law.

71. Milns are not carried as part and pertinent, because they are esteemed as
separata tenementa, requiring a special Seasine, unless the Lands be in
Barronia, for then Infeftment in the Land, carries the Milns thereon; yet a
Miln being built upon a Liferenters Land, after her Infeftment, bearing, cum
molendinis, was found to belong to the Relict, though Milns was not in the
Dispositive Clause; Nor was she in Conjunct-fee of a Barrony; but she was not
found to have right to the astricted Multures of any Lands, but her Liferent
Lands, February 16. 1666. Lady Otter contra Lord of Otter.

72. The Privilege of Brewing being designed for public use, for common
Hostlaries, the inspection whereof is committed to the Judges ordinary,
Magistrates of Burghs, Sheriffs, Bailies and Barrons, who are appointed to
settle Hostlaries in convenient places, and to visit their measures if they be
sufficient, and the goodness of their Ale, Par. 1535. cap. 17. And the said
Magistrates to Burgh or Landward, are ordained to see reasonable prices for
Meat and Drink in Hostlaries, with power to deprive them of their privilege,
if they transgress, so that a Barrony carries that privilege, though not
expressed; but Infeftments of other Tenements carry it not, unless it be expressly
granted by the King immediately or by progress, that is, that all the Superiors
interveening betwixt and the King, have that privilege, July 25. 1626. Stuart
contra Brewers; but in possessorio, the Proprietars Infeftment bearing, cum
brueriis, will be sufficient, and presume the progress, unless that privilege
be craved to be reduced, wherein the Superiors must be called.

73. All other interest of Fees are carried as part and pertinent, though they
be not expressed; and albeit Woods and Lochs, use often to be expressed, yet they are
comprehended under parts and pertinents; and therefore, the Master of the
Ground has not only right to the Water in Lochs, but to the Ground thereof,
and may Drain the same, unless servitudes be fixed to Water-gangs of Milns, or
other Works, and the Ground of the Loch, and all that is upon it, or under it,
is a part of the Fee: But if the Loch be not wholly within the Fee, but partly
within or adjacent to the Fee of another, then unless the Loch be expressed, it
will be divided amongst the Fiars whose Lands front thereupon.

The parts of Fees are only expressed in bounding Charters, but in all others the
parts are only known by the common reputation of the Neighborhood, what they
comprehend under the Designations expressed in the Infeftments, and by
Possession, as part and pertinent of the Lands Designed in the Infeftment,
whether they have but one common Designation, as such a Barrony or Tenement, or
if there be an enumeration of their parts, by distinct Names, which does not
exclude other parts, though belonging to none of the parts enumerat; there is
only this difference, that express Infeftments are preferable to these which
allege but part and pertinent, much more if it be alleged to be separatum
tenementum, requiring a distinct Infeftment; and yet prescription, as part and
pertinent, will exclude an Infeftment as a separat Tenement: But where there
are March-stones set, it is a great convenience to preserve peaceable
Possession; and though it cannot be proven when these Marchs were set, yet
their being repute as March-stones, will be sufficient to defend at any time,
within prescription: But Lands are oftimes so large, comprehending Mures and
Mountains, that March-stones cannot be set; for remeid whereof, the Lords of
Session by an Act of Sederunt, 1580. Ratified in Par. 1587. cap. 42. Ordained
all Molestations in Property or Commonty, in possessorso, to be before
Sheriffs, Bailies of Regalitie, and other inferior ordinar Judges where the
Lands ly, and for that effect, the Lords will direct Letters of Cognition to
proceed upon fifteen days warning, by an Inquest of persons who best know the
Matter, the most part thereof being Landed-men, having at least, four Ploughs
of Land, or three hundred merks of irredeemable Rent, and the rest substantious
famous Zeamans of the same Paroch, and failing thereof, of the Paroch nearest
adjacent; and if both parties have Cognitions raised before Litiscontestation
on either, the half of the Assyzers shall be taken of these summoned for either
party; or in case there be not a sufficient number of them habile, the Judge
shall supply the same, and the odd man to be chosen by lot: which Inquest
shall visit the ground, and shall return their verdict upon oath, both upon the
Clames and exceptions of the parties; and in case the Judge ordinar be suspect,
or that the Lands ly in diverse Jurisdictions, the Lords are to appoint
unsuspect Judges to be past under the quarter Seal There are only excepted the
actions belonging to the members of the College of Justice, which are to be
before the Lords; yet the Lords are accustomed to grant Commissions to some of
their own number, where questions arise concerning the parts or Marches of
Tenements, to visit the Ground, and there to receive witnesses, hinc inde, both
as to Possession and Interruption, which the Lords do advise, and determine
without an Inquest.

Parts of Tenements in possessorio, are sustained by the present peaceable
Possession for some time; for seven years peaceable Possession will sustain the
Right of the whole till Reduction: And forty years Possession as part and
pertinent, is sufficient, in petitorio, for the point of Right, and will
exclude an Infeftment express, yea, though it be an Infeftment, as distinctum
tenementum, November 14. 1671. Walter Young contra William Carmichael: But if
there be interruptions, and that either party has had some Possession, the
express Infeftment will be preferable, and any lawful Interruption will
preserve an Infeftment of a separate Tenement; but if neither party be expressly
Infeft in the Lands in question, interruption by either party will not exclude
prescription, because there is not a prior special Right, valid of it self,
without Possession; and therefore, if both parties have had mutual or
promiscuous Possession, each Possessing when they could, and turning off the
other, that part of the Land so possessed, will continue as a promiscuous
Commonty, which frequently falls out about the Marches of large Tenements, and
was so determined betwixt the Lord Strathoord and Sir Thomas Stuart of
Gairntully; if neither party have an express or several Infeftment,
Discontiguity will not exclude part and pertinent, though, if the question be
with him, to whom the Land is Contiguous, less Probation will prefer him, Craig
l. 2. Dieges. 3. relates a case in his time betwixt the Earl of Angus and Hoom
of Polwart, where Discontiguity did not exclude part and pertinent, not being
known as a distinct Tenement.

Pertinents comprehends all the Natural Fruits, for Corns are accounted as
Moveable, and as no part of the Ground, as has been shown in the former Title,
Section second. And also all servitudes; so a servitude of a Pasturage, in
another Heretors Wood, was sustained as a Pertinent by long Possession, Spots.
Servitude, Lord of Knockdolian contra Tennents of Partick. And Part and
Pertinent being expressed in a minute of Sale, it was found to carry common
Pasturage in a Mure, which was a Commonty to a Barrony, whereof the Lands sold
was a part, February 14. 1668. William Borthwick contra Lord Borthwick. And in
the case betwixt the Lord of Haining and Town of Selkirk, decided February 15.
1668. A Barrony of the Kings, cum pertinentibus and cum pascuis and pasturis,
was found to carry common Pasturage in the Mure of the Barrony, and that the
last forty years Possession did presume the like Possession in the Feuars,
from the obtaining their Feues; and that interruptions by the Town whose
Infeftment was but general, cum communiis, did not exclude the Pasturage of the
Fevers, who had also made interruptions against the Town.

74. Craig, l. 2. Dieges. 8. Debates this question, whether Wood and Coal be
parts of the Ground, or only Pertinent as Fruit thereof, for if these be parts
of the Ground, Conjunct-feers or Liferenters will have no share thereof, nor
Donatars of Ward, Non-entry, or Liferent-escheat, so that the question is very
important, wherein he relates two Decisions, one betwixt the Lord Seatoun and
his Mother, who being served to a Terce, was found to have right to the third
of a Coal-work, constantly going for sale in the Defuncts time; and another
betwixt Ramsay of Dalhousie and Mary Ballantine his Predecessors Relict, in
relation to a Wood which the Fiar was found to have the only Right to Sell, and
his opinion is, that both are parts of the Fee, and that no Conjunct-fiar,
Tercer, Superior or his Donatar has any interest therein, as being no part of
the Fruits; he pursues the same question as to Wodsetters, who are Infeft in
Fee but under Reversion, to whom he attributes a greater interest, that they
may make use of Coal as their Author did, yet only for their proper uses. and
as to an Appryzer, he relates the case of Sir James Hamiltoun, who having
Appryzed the Estate of Camnethen, and cut down all the Woods, he was found to
have no Right to the Woods during the Legal, for then Appryzing were not
satisfied by intromission, so that during the Legal, they had nothing but the
Fruits, for which they were not countable: Now the case is altered by the Act
of Parliament 1621. whereby the Appryzers Intromission in so far as exceeds his
annual, is imputed to the principal sum; and therefore, he may continue in the
profit of Coals and Woods, as his Debtor was accustomed.

But as to Liferenters by Terce, or by distinct Liferent by provision, where
the Husband himself did not preserve the Wood, to be sold together, as Sylva
cedua, but cutted parts of it for his own and his Tennents use, for Reparation
of their Houses; Liferenters and Tercers may do the same. And where Woods are
divided in so many Haggs, that they yield a yearly profit, in that case the
Heretor has rather used them as Fruits, then as Parts; so that Liferenters,
Tercers and Donatars, many claim the same; yea, if a Coal be a constant going
Coal without apparent hazard of exhausting, it is like Conjunct-fiars, Tercers,
or Donatars, will not be excluded therefrom, not exceeding the measure and
method accustomed by the Fiar: But otherways, Coal is to be considered only as
a part, and is carried as a part, though not expressed, nor in Barrony, as Craig
in the forecited place observes, to have been decided betwixt the Sheriff of
Air and Chambers of Gadgirth. And a party first Infeft in Land with the
pertinents, without mention of Coal, was preferred to an express Infeftment
only of the Coal-heughs of that Land, January 30. 1662. Lord Burley contra John
Sim.

75. Let us now express the meaning of the Specialities, ordinarily insert in
Infeftments, cum domibus aedificiis, comprehends all Houses and Buildings, as
Dykes of Yards or Parks, which though dry, unsemented Stone cannot be altered
by the seller, after the vendition. And there is a new privilege for
encouragement of enclosing, that where the Inclosnr falls to be upon the March
of any other Inheritance, the other Heretor, though making no Enclosure, shall
be at equal expense of that part of the Dyke which Marches both, Par. 1661.
cap. 41. which was sustained, though the March was a Stripe of Water, being
sometimes dry, July 21. 1669. Earl of Crawford contra Rig. But how far this
Clause will be extended to Fortalices, has been now showen. And though
Charters do frequently bear, Mannor-Places, yet both is carried under the name
of part and pertinent.

Cum mollendinis multuris and eorum sequelis, Milns and Multures have been
spoken to already: But as to Multures, they are to be considered amongst
Servitudes real, Title 17. under Thirlage.

76. Cum aucupationibus, venationibus, piscationilius, Signify Privileges, to
kill Fowls, Fishes and wild Beasts, upon the Fiars own Ground, from which he
may debar others, indirectly by hindering them to come upon his Ground, except
upon the public highways, or such private ways only in favors of those to
whom they are granted, which is seldom done, but ordinarily permitted; yet if
Laborrows were used, these might infer a contravention; but by this Clause, the
Vassal has no Property in the wild Beasts, Fowls or Fishes, which belong to
none, but become proper to these who take them, except Fishes enclosed in
Ponds, Deer in Parks, or Fowls in Vollaries, for these are proper, only by
excluding of others to come upon their Ground: The Vassal has the sole
occasion of taking such as are found there; neither does this Clause extend
generally, for thereby Swan or Deer may not at all be killed or taken, nor
Salmond, or their Fry, unless that power be expressed, or that the Land be in
Barrony: Nor can Fowl or Hares be taken in the time or manner prohibit by Law,
and albeit some do adject Fishing in salt Water, and in fresh, yet that imports
nothing, no man being excluded from Sailing and Fishing upon the Sea, which
even in Lochs and Creiks is public to all that Kingdom or Nation; albeit other
Nations may be excluded from Fishing, so far as any bound can be perceived in
the Sea, for in so far, Kingdoms and Nations have appropriat the Sea, and made
it public peculiar to themselves, as to Fishing and Profits thence arising,
though passage cannot justly be denied upon the Land, as upon the Sea, except
to enemies. Yet Salmond-fishing in salt water and fresh, gives not only
privileges within Rivers, but at Water-mouths in the Sea.

Cum petariis, turbariis, signifies the privilege of Fuel, by Peats and Turss
in Mosses and Mures.

77. Cuniculis, cuniculariis, Cunnings and Cunningares, Craig doubts, whether
these may be made indifferently by all Vassals, except a privilege be derived
from the King, because of the great damage the Cunnings do to the
Neighborhood: But there is with us no restraint, but upon the contrary, a
Command that every Lord and Lord make Cunningares, Par. 1503. cap. 74.

78. Cum columbis columbariis, Doves and Dovecoats, though they are carried as
Pertinents, yet are they restrained by Act of Parliament, 1617. cap. 19. to
such as have two Chalders of Victual in Rent or Teind within two Miles of the
Dovecoat.

Cum fabrilibus Brasinis, are Smiddies and Kilnes for making of Malt.
Genestis, are Whins or Broom. Sylvis nemoribus, Virgultis, Lignis, are several
kinds of Woods or Timber.

Cum lapicidinis lapide and calce, are all kinds of Stone, and Quarries thereof.

Of Courts and their Issues we have spoken already, and likewise of Bloodwits.

79. Cum libero introitu, and exitu, does not only signify the passage by the
highways, but such other passages as are necessary and convenient for the
Fiar, through the ground of the Superior, or any other where ways are
Constitute, by Concession or Prescription.

80. Herzelds also being the best aught, as the best Horse, Ox or Cow of the
Tennent dying upon the Ground, is introduced by custom, derived from the
Germans, as the word of their Language, expressing the same evidenceth; which
signifies the gratuity left by the Laborers of the Ground to their Master,
and which is due by custom, whether left or not; and therefore, rather from
custom, then from the nature of the Fee. And we have neither Rule nor Example
for paying it by any, but by the Laborers of the Ground, so that though it be
not expressed, it is not reserved to the Superior, but belongs to the Vassal, as
Skeen observes; but whereas he seems to make a herzeld due by Tennents,
possessing four Oxen-gang of Land, to their Masters going to the War, by poor
Tennents, possessing only four ongat of Land or less, such not being able by
reason of poverty, to go in person with him; yet the constant Custom lays
Herezelds most upon Tennents possessing more Lands, and generally upon all who
are not Cottars, not paying immediately to the Master, but to his Tennent
dwelling upon the Ground, and there is no difference whether he be Mailer or
Fermer, only due at the Tennents death.

The Herezeld was found due to the Lady Liferenter, though the Defunct had the
Room in Steelbow, Hope, Herezeld, Lady Tockrig contra Oliver Baird. But not
where the Defunct Tennent was warned and decerned to remove, Hope, Ibid. Walter
Callender contra his Tennents. And Craig observes, lib. 2. Dieges. 8. That a
Herezeld being taken, the Tennents Successor is not to be removed for a year,
so it was found, March 20. 1629. Auchnacloich contra Mathie.

81. Steelbow Goods set with Lands upon these terms, that the like number of
Goods shall be restored at the issue of the Tack, do not pass by Disposition of
Lands, as pertinents thereof, unless they were expressed, but do remain as
movables arrestable, December 4. 1638. Lady Westmerland contra Earl of Home.
January 28. 1642. (...) Dunda, contra George Brown; and so they fall under
single Escheat, and cannot be taken from the Tennent till his Tack run out,
December. 6. 1628. Lawson contra Lady Boghal.

Having considered the nature, tenor, and import of the several kinds of Feess,
it is now proper to consider the legal effects thereof, which are either,
injudicio possessorio, or petitorio.

82. In Possessorio, all Infeftments cled with lawful Possession, during the
time prescribed by Law or Custom, are valide and effectual, either in pursuit
or defense, ay and while they be reduced, and thereby not only is the Fiar, or
these deriving right from him, secure to possess, and cannot be impeded, or
disquicted by any other right, though it would be a prior and better Right, in
petitorio; but thereupon all Possessory Actions, may effectually proceed for
Mails and Duties for removings of Tennents or Possessors, for Perambulation or
Cognition of Marches, much more for Intrusion, succeeding in the vice of
removed Tennents, or Ejection, as to which, Possession alone is sufficient.

The motive Introductory of this Privilege in possessory Judgments is, because
Infeftments are ordinarily granted subalternly, there being many Superiors
betwixt and the Supreme, and each Superior keeps his own Infeftments, and
gives to his Vassal out a Charter and Seasine holding of himself: and therefore
no perfect right of the Ground can be instructed, but by a Deduction from the
King the suprem Superior, or by Prescription; And therefore in Petitorio,
whereby the full Validity of the Right is declared or decerned, before a full
Issue, all the interveening Superiors must be called to produce their Rights
till the common Superior, from whom both Parties derive right; so that neither
Party can quarrel his (...), which requires a long course of time. And
therefore, he who by Infeftment is suffered to possess for a considerable
course of time unquarrelled, the Law presumes his Right is good, and he is not
only secure, not to be comptable for the Rents and profits he has enjoyed,
which require no course of time, but bonae fidei, Possessor facit fructus
conjumptos suos, Of which in the former Title,. 28. But he is even secure, for
all that he shall enjoy, until in a petitory Judgment by a Declarator or
Reduction, he be put in mala fide by the Production of another Right, appearing
evidently to be better and exclusive of his, till which, he is not to doubt of
his own Right, but may safely and quietly enjoy and spend the Fruits. The time
required by Law or Custom for attaining this Privilege was undetermined, and
in arbitrio judicis at first; but it was not sustained upon two years
possession, July 17. 1610. Auchterlony contra Annan. It was sustained upon
fifeteen years possession ordinarily; and then upon fourteen years possession,
July 16. 1623. Sybald contra Stuart And upon ten years possession, November 19.
1623. Hamilton contra Dick. March 29. 1624. Monnypenny contra Tenants. It was
also sustained upon seven years, possession, December. 10. 1623. Irving contra
Gordon, Hope, confirm. Earl of Arran contra Tenants of Camely, and Earl of
Seaforth. And it was once sustained upon six years possession, March 13. 1627.
Feurd contra Stivenson. Yea, once upon three years possession, Hope,
Possession, Murray of Lochmaben contra his Tennents. But now of a long time, it
has been fixed to seven years possession; and it was not only sustained as to
Lands, either as to the Fiars or Liferenters, but also to Multures, where the
Lands and Quantities of Multures were particularly expressed: But it was not
sustained upon an Apprizing without Infeftment or Charge, Feb. 6. 1668. Mr.
George Johnstoun contra Charles Erskin. Neither was it sustained upon obtaining
Decreets, or lifting of seven years Rent together, but continuing in possession
by the space of seven years, by laboring or uplifting the Rent, January 25.
1672. Harper contra Armor. Neither upon possession as part and pertinent, the
possession being vicious and violent, June 25. 1674. Mr. Heugh Maxwel contra
Ferguson. The like where the possession was interverted, June 24. 1679. Menzies
of Sckian contra Campbel of Torerick. Neither upon Apprizing and Infeftment,
against an other Apprizer within year and day, July 17. 1675. Balie Baird
contra Bailie Justice. Neither was it sustained against an Apprizing, for the
avail of a Marriage being debitum sundi, December 17. 1673. Patrick Hadden
contra John More. Neither against the King nor His Donatar, seeing the King
needs no Reduction, and cannot be prejudged by the neglect of His Officers not
pursuing in seven years, January 28. 1679. Lord of Blair contra Lady
Heslehead. Neither against a Liferenter, unless the Possession had been seven
years after her Husband's death. Neither against recourse upon Infeftment of
Warrandice after Eviction, which requires no Reduction, January 9. 1666.
Elizabeth Broun contra John Scot. The like, unless there had been seven years
possession after the Eviction, February 20. 1668. Mr. John Forbes contra Innes.
Neither is it ever sustained against Infeftments of Annualrents, Feu-duties, or
other debita fundi, June 29. 1662. Adamsons contra Lord Balmirrino. Neither
have Annualrents the benefit of Possessory Judgments for them, more then
against them. But it was not found relevant to exclude a Possessory Judgment,
that there was Interruption by Citation, not being within the last seven years,
July 15. 1668. Earl of Wintoun contra Gordon of Letterfary. Nor because the
matter became litigious by a Denunciation and Apprising, June 17. 1678. Sir
William Stuart contra Murrays.

It uses to be contraverted, whether seven years possession be relevant,
against an Infeftment cled with possession immediately before the seven years:
As to which, there have been Decisions upon both parts, wherein the
Reconciliation may be, that if the seven years possession entered not by order
of Law, or by consent of these who were then possessors, but entered in the
void possession, or obtained the Rents from the Tennents of consent; such
possession was vicious, because the former possessor continued to possess
animo; but if the former possessor had long forborne to possess before the seven
years, or that the subsequent possessor entered by authority of Law, or consent
of the former possessor, there is no reason to make difference, whether his
Competitor was in possession before or not.

83. Charter and Seasine are sufficient, both for pursuit and defense, where
there is not another Infeftment that comes in competition But when two
Infeftments of the same subject compete, if neither have had seven years lawful
and peaceable possession; then the point of Right comes to be debated without
Reduction, and either party must propone their alledgeances upon their Authors
Rights, in the same way as in Declarators of Right; and whatsoever points are
found relevant for either party, or where the Rights alleged on are ordained
to be produced before the relevancy be discust, terms will be assigned to
either party, and they will get incident diligences by Exhibition against their
Authors to produce, and ordinary diligences for producing their own or their
predecessors Rights: and whatever the event be, either party will be secure, as
to the bygone Fruits consumed, bona fide.

The effect of Infeftments in the point of Right is, that by the first
perfected Infeftment, with the several requisites aforesaid, granted by him who
had power, the Property is established, and the Proprietar will be preferred,
at least in petitorio to all posterior Rights; but if the granter have no
power, as not being validly insest himself, or being impeded by Inhibition or
Interdiction, or by anterior diligence making the matter litigious, he cannot
validly confer a Right.

Concerning Interdictions we have spoken before, Tit. 6. Litigiousness falls
in amongst the effects of legal diligence. But it will be proper here to speak
of Inhibitions, seeing the effect thereof reaches only as to heretable Rights,
and comes not so properly elsewhere under consideration.

84. Inhibition is by Letters under the Signet, prohibiting the party inhibite
to dilapidate or dispone any of his Lands, Heretages, etc. Which is understood,
till the cause, for which the Letters were direct mentioned therein, be
satisfied. It proceeds summarily upon Supplication, and production of any
ground thereof, whether Obligation or Process: and though it pass of course,
yet sometimes is refused, as to a Wife upon the Contract against her Husband,
Jan. 11. 1625. Hamiltoun Supplicant. And to an appearand Heir, against his
Father upon his Fathers Contract of Marriage, whereby it was provided, that his
Father should be interdicted to certain persons then dead, January 16. 1622.
Silvertoun-hill Supplicant; but being past of course against an appearand Heir,
it was found valid, because he was entered before the debate thereupon, July 5.
1623. Kirkwood contra Belshes. It was refused upon the warrandice of a
Discharge from the dischargers fact and deed only, unless the Supplicant show a
particular hazard, February 4. 1623. Patrick Forbes contra William Dick.

The effect of Inhibitions reaches only deeds done by the Persons inhibite
after the Inhibition, and does not reach any deeds done thereafter by his Heirs
and Successors; but these must be of new Inhibite, Hope, Inhibition, John
Pirycon. Secondly, it has no effect against movables, albeit growing upon the
Ground the time of the Execution of the Inhibition, though the Style thereof
bear not to dilapidat Lunds, Heretages, Goods or Geir, March 22. 1623. Lord of
Braico contra Ogilvie. Hope, Inhibition, Aikin contra Anderson; yet it will
reduce a moveable Bond, in so far as it is the ground of an Appryzing, but
prejudice of personal Execution, or against movables, July 2. 1630. Douglas
contra Johnstoun. But it may proceed upon a moveable Bond, Ibid. July 2. 1625.
Porteous contra Elliot, where reduction was sustained, to the effect, Appryzing
may proceed upon the moveable Bond, though no Appryzing or other real right had
then followed upon the said Bond.

Inhibition is only effectual against posterior voluntary rights, granted by
the person Inhibite, but not against Appryzings, Adjudications and Infeftments
thereupon, though posterior to the Inhibition, if they procced upon a debt
prior to the Inhibition; yea though the date of a Disposition was prior to the
Inhibition, yet the same being granted to the Purchaser for himself, and to the
behove of others; That Clause being filled up with another hand, was presumed
to be filled up after the Inhibition, unless the contrary were proven, to have
been filled up before the Inhibition by Witnesses, above exception, Jan. 15.
1672. Lady Lucia Hamiltoun contra the Creditors of Monkcastle. Neither will it
be effectual against an Infeftment after the Inhibition, proceeding upon a
Disposition prior thereto, or upon an obliegement to grant such an Insestment,
being prior to the Inhibition, Hope, Inhibition, Patrick Stirling contra
Tennents of Lethendy: Here the posterior Infeftment was of the property; and
the prior obliegement was to grant an Annualrent, which was to exceed the value
of the property: But where the prior debt bore an obliegement to Infeft in an
Annualrent generally out of the debitors Lands, the disposition of the property
was reduced as posterior, though upon a debt prior, Jan. 21. 1629. Scot contra
Turnbul. And an Inhibition was found not effectual against a postenor
Infeftment, though it proceeded upon a prior Bond, merely personal, and bore no
obliegement to Infeft, Hope, Inhibition, Lord of Tillibairn contra Lord of
Clunic. Inhibition was not found effectual against Dispositions posterior,
proceeding upon Bonds prior, bearing obliegements to Infeft generally or
particularly, July 22. 1675. Sir George Gordoun con. Seaton, Feb. 6. 1635 Ross
con. William Dick. But Inhibitions extend not to posterior Renunciations of
Wodsets, which are deeds necessary upon payment, though the Style of the
Inhibition bore, renunciation, July 16. 1667. Mr. John Elleis con. Keith,
whereby Creditors were much prejudged; for remeid whereof, the Lords by Act of
Sederunt, of the 19. of Feb. 1680. did declare, that Creditors using (...)
against their Debitors Infeft in Wodset, or Annualrent, if they shall make
intintation by Instrument of a Nottar, to the persons who have right to the
Reversions of the said Wodsetts or Annualrents, That the Wodsetter or
Annualrenter stands Inhibit at their Instance, and shall produce in presence of
the party and Nottar, the Inhibition duly Registrate, that they will not
sustain Renunciations or grants of Redemption, although upon true payment, not
being made bona fide; but after Intimation, as aforesaid, unless the Redemption
proceed by Process, whereunto the user of the Inhibition must be called.

Inhibitions must be execute by Messengers (as the Style thereof bears) against
the person Inhibite, personally or at his Dewlling Place, and against the
Leiges, at the Mercat Cross of the Head-burgh of the Shire where the person
Inhibite dwells, Par. 1581. cap. 118. and therefore, an Inhibition was found
null, because the Executions bore not a Copy given to the party Inhibite,
albeit it bore, a Copy affixed upon the Cross; though the Executions were
mended by the Messenger upon the Margent, bearing a Coppie given, not being so
Registrate, albeit it was offered to be proven by the Witnesses infert, that a
Copy was truly given, July 28. 1671. Sir John Keith contra Sir George
Johnstoun; and the Inhibition with the Executions, must within forty days
after the Execution thereof, be Registrat in the Register of Hornings, where
the Inhibite resides, or where the most part of his Lands lies, Act aforesaid;
but if the Inhibite person dwell within Stewartry, or Bailiery of Royalty or
Regality, the Inhibition must be execute at the Market Cross thereof, and
Registrate in the Clerks Books there: Otherways in any of these Cases, if the
said Acts be omitted, the Inhibition is null, Par. 1597. cap. 264. By the Act
265. Pa. 1597. Registration of Inhibitions, Hornings and Relaxations, are
ordained, to be either Judiciallie, or before a Nottar and four Witnesses,
beside the ordinary Clerk, and in case Registration be refused, the same may
be made in the Books of the next Sheriff or Bailie, or Books of Council. But by
the 13. Act, Pa. 1600. the foresaid Act is rescinded, and the registration in
the Sheriff or Bailies Books, or by the Clerk-register, or his Deputs, in the
Books of Council, are declared sufficient.

An Inhibition was found null by Exception, because the Letters bore only
Warrant to Charge the person at the Mercat Cross, as out of the Country; and
the Execution was against the party Inhibite personally, Jan. 24. 1627. Erskin
contra Erskin, and reduced upon the same ground; because the Execution against
the person Inhibite, was at his Dwelling House, and the Warrant was to have
been at the Mercat Cross; albeit it bore, to Inhibite at the Mercat Cross of
Edinburgh, and Pear and Shore of Leith, and all other places needful, March 19.
1628. James Lamb contra Blackburn; in which cases, it was found null, unless
truly execute, both against the Lieges and against the party, and that the
Execution at the Cross served not both, Hope Inhibition, Sym contra
Coldingknows. Hope Inhibition, Lamb contra Blackburn; and also found null,
because not Execute at the Head-burgh of the Regality, where the person
Inhibite dwelt, but of the Shyre; and that not only as to Lands within the
Regality, but other Lands within the Shyre, Jan. 30. 1629. Stirling contra
Panter; and found null, because not Registrat in the Shyre or Regality where
the Lands lay, though Registrat in the Shyre where the Inhibite dwelt, Ja. 20.
1632. Halyburtoun contra Monteith; but sustained, though Execute at the Cross,
where the Inhibite dwelt; and Execute a year thereafter at the Cross where the
Lands lay, and Registrate in both; although in the last, there was no Execution
against the party Inhibite, but only against the Leiges, Spots. Inhibition,
Heirs of the Lord of Fairnie contra Lord of Aitoun.

Seeing the effect of Inhibition is only for satisfying the ground, whereupon it
proceeded; therefore Inhibition raised upon a Bond, not to sell a Reversion
without consent of the Wodsetter, was found not to reduce a posterior
Assignation to the Reversion simply, but only so far as the Wodsetter was
interessed or prejudged, Hope, Inhibition, Turnbul contra Scot. Inhibition does
not only extend to the Lands that the Inhibited persons had then in the
Jurisdiction where it is published, but to these acquired after, it being a
personal prohibition, December 15. 1665. Mr. John Elleis contra Keith. February
27. 1667. inter eosdem. Inhibition extends not to Lands be falling to the
person Inhibit in other Jurisdictions, July 18. 1662. William Swintoun contra
Inhibition is effectual to reduce Rights posterior to the date thereof, by the
executions of publication, albeit before the Registration of the Inhibition,
the Rights in question were granted, July 22. 1675. Sir George Gordoun contra
Seatoun. An Inhibition was found null, because the Execution bore not public
Reading, and three Oyesses at the Market Cross, which was not admitted to be
supplied by probation of the witnesses, July 11. 1676. Stevinson contra James
Innes. But where the Executions bore, that the Messenger made lawful
Publication, and Reading of the Letters; the Lords upon inspection of the
Registers, finding that this last Style was frequent; whereas in the former
case, the Executions bore only generally, that the Messenger lawfully Inhibite
without Oyes or Reading the Letters, and that there was no such Style of
Executions; therefore the Lords admitted the witnesses insert in the Executions
of this last Inhibition, to prove that the three Oyesses were truly made
immediately before reading of the Letters, June 21. 1681. Innes contra Trotter.
And Executions of Inhibition at the Market Cross, are declared null, if there
were not a Copy left affixed upon the Cross, December 19. 1678. John Inglis
contra Haddoway. In this case an Inhibition was not found null, because the
Executions bore, to be at the dwelling house, without designing the same; the
Defender designing the dwelling house, and byding by the same as the true
Dwelling House, December 22. 1676. inter eosdem. The like, where the
Designation in the body of the Inhibition was Merchant Burgess of Edinburgh,
which was presumed his Residence, unless the contrary were proven, July 7.
1676. Quintine Findlay contra Little of Libertoun.

TITLE XIV. Superiority where, of its Casualities, Non-entry, Relief,
Compositions for Entries, Ward, Marriage and Liferent Escheat.
1. The Superiors Dominium directum. 2. How Property is established in the
King. 3. Superiors may exerce all acts of Property, except against their
Vassals. 4. How the Properly coming in the person of the Superior, is
established. 5. Superiors cannot interpose betwixt them and their Vassals. 6.
How far Superiors need to instruct their Title? 7. Superiors have personal
action against intromettors with the Rent of the Land, for their reddendo 8.
They have also real action for the same, by Painding of the Ground. 9.
Jurisdiction of Superiors. 10. Superiority carries to Heirs and singular
Successor, all bygone Casualities not separat by Gifts or Decreets. 11.
Superiors of Kirk-lands need not instruct a consent to the surrender. 12.
Superiors must receive Appryzers or Adjudgers, or pay the Debt. salvo juresuo.
13. He must receive the Kings Donatar upon presentation Gratis. 14. He must
receive his subvassal, whom his immediate Vassal refused to enter. 15. How far
Superiors may extend gifts of their own Ward against their Vassals. 16.
Superiors need not accept Resignation or Confirmation, and if they do, it is
salvo jure suo. 17. Superiority falling to more persons the eldest heir or
greatest interest only receives the Vassals. 18. Non-entry falls when
Inseftment is not renewed by every Vassals heir or singular successor or upon
Resignation. 19. Non-entry falls by Reduction or nullity of Infeftments, or
retours. 20. Burgage falls not in Non-entrie, as to the Burgh or particular
persons. 21. The effect of the general Declarator of Non-entry. 22. The effect
of Non-entrie, after Citation in the general Declarator. 23. Exceptions against
Non-entry, as to the Feu-dutie or retoured mail. 24. Exceptions against
Non-entrie, as to the full Rent. 25. Whether Non-entrie after Ward, requires
Declarator. 26. The Original of Relief. 27. The Custom of England and France,
as to Relief. 28. The quantity of Relief with us. 29. Whether Relief be due
during Nonentrie. 30. Whether Relief is due when the heir is entered, whether
the Fee be burdened with Conjunct-fee, or Liferent. 31. Relief stops not the
heirs Seasine. 32. Compositions for the Entry of Appryzers or Adjudgers. 33.
The Original of Ward. 34. The effect of Ward as to the heirs person. 35. The
effect of Ward as to the fee. 36. The restrictions of Ward. 37. The value of
the Marriage of heirs of Ward-vassals. 38. The true interest of Superiors in
the Marriage of their Vassals. 39. The single value of Marriage, not penal but
favorable. 40. Double value penal and unfavourable, with the exceptions
against it. 41. Single value found due where the heir was Married before his
Predecessor died by precipitation. 42. The quantity of the single value in
heirs male or female. 43. Marriage is debitum fundi. 44. It belongs to the
eldest Superior. 45. The Royal Prerogative prefers the King to all others, as
to the Marriage, of the Vassal. 46. Marriage is due by the heirs of Appryzers.
47. Exceptions against the value of marriage. 48. The rise of Liferent-escheat.
49. It extends to all kinds of Liferents. 50. Liferents of fees not having
Infeftment, or not owing fidelity to a Subject, belong to the King. 51.
Liferent escheat of sub-vassals, to whom they belong. 52. Liferent Escheat is
not excluded by voluntary Infeftments, after Denunciation, not being for
implement of a special Obliegement, to Infeft before Denunciation. 53. Liferent
Escheat is excluded by Appryzing for debts, anterior to the Rebellion, there
being Infeftments, or Charge, in cursu rebellionis. 54. Liferent Esche it
extends not to Burgage or mortification. 55. But extends to Ministers Stipends.
56. Liferent Escheat is made Effectual by Declarator.
HAVING now shown what is the interest of the Vassal in the Fee, it will be the
more easy to find out what the Superiors Right of the Superiority retains;
for what is proper to the Fee, and is not Disponed to the Vassal, is reserved
to the Superior, and it is either Constitute as belonging to the Superior
constantly, or casually.

1. The constant Right of the Superior stands mainly in these particulars;
First, Superiority it self is dominium directum, as the Tenentry is but
dominium utile (as before is shown) and therefore, the Superior must be
Infeft, as well as the Vassal, and that in the Lands and Tenement it self,
without mention of the Superiority which follows, but upon the Concession of
the Fee in Tenentry, though sometimes through the ignorance of Writers,
Infeftments bear expressly to be of the Superiority.

2. Only the Sovereign Authority, as the common Fountain of all Rights of the
Ground, needs no Infeftment, but has his Right founded in jure communi, and is
not Feudal but Allodial; and when the Right of Lands fall to the King, by the
Casuality of his Superiority, as Forefaulture, Recognition, Bastardry or last
heir, if the Lands be holden immediately of the King, they are ipso facto,
consolidat with the Superiority, and the Declarators required thereanent, do
not Constitute, but declare the Kings Right, without prejudice of what is
consumed, bona fide: But where they are not holden immediately of the King, the
Right thereof is perfected by Gift and Presentation, whereby the immediate
Superior is obliged to receive the Donatar by Infeftment, like to that of his
former Vassal; yet the Kings Right by the Casuality, though it be not
perfected, is real and effectual against all singular Successors, whereby
deeds of Treason and Recognition, being in Facts ordinarily proven by Witnesses:
Purchasers cannot be secured by any Register; and therefore, must secure
themselves by the Kings Confirmation, and novo damus. But where the King
succeeds in any Fee to a Subject, as to Property or Superiority, before he can
alienat the same, he must be served Heir in special thereunto; so King CHARLES
the first was served Heir to Queen Ann his Mother in the Lordship of
Dumfermling, in which King James Infeft her in Fee, to her and her Heirs, by a
Morning-gift, the first day after his Marriage with her; and King Charles the
second was served Heir to Charles Duke of Lennox in the Earldom of Lennox: In
which Service, the Chancellor and fourteen of the Lords of Session, were the
Inquest, the youngest Lord being left out, because there could be no more but
fifteen: But the King needs no Infeftment upon such Retours; but if he acquire
any Lands holden immediately of himself, the Instrument of Resignation must be
Registrat; and if holden of a Subject, there arises no real Right to a Donatar
till he be Infeft upon the Kings Presentation, and his Seasine Registrat; by
both which, the certainty of Land-rights is preserved.

3. Secondly, Superiority carries a Right to all Actions following the Land,
against any other then the Vassal; for seeing Superiors are Infeft in the
Lands, they can only be repelled from such Actions, by the Rights granted to
their Vassals, but by no others, and so may remove Possessors, who can show no
Right; this was found, though the Superiors Infeftment, bore him only to be
Infeft in the Superiority of the Lands, November 19. 1624. Lag contra his
Tennents.

4. If a Superior become Fiar by Succession, or Acquisition, for Establishing
the Property in his Person, he may either be Infeft upon his own Precept or the
Kings, November 26. 1668. Daughters of Mr. Robert Mortoun.

5. But a Superior cannot interpose betwixt himself and his Vassals, by
Infefting another in the Lands to be holden of himself, Such infeftment was
found null by Exception, January 30. 1671. Douglas of Kelhead contra Vassals.

Superiors must receive and Infeft their Sub-vassals upon the refusal, or
incapacity of the Vassal, and may at any time after, receive the immediate
Vassal, or his Successor; or another, if the immediate Vassals Right be
extinct, or acquired by the Superior, which is no unwarrantable Interposition,
which is repelled as contrary to the Nature of the Feudal Contract and Right,
it being inconsistent that the Superior should both give his Superiority to
another, and claim it himself, Dans and retinens nihil dat; And if that were
allowed, interposed Vassals might be infinitely multiplied, November 26. 1672.
Earl of Argyle contra Mcleod; in which case, the late Marquess of Argyle being
forefault, Mcleod who was Argyles Vassal, was retoured and Infeft in the Lands,
as holden immediately of the King, which did not hinder the King to Interpose
this Earl of Argile as Donatar to his Fathers forefaulture, seeing the King had
done no deed to accept Mcleod as his immediate Vassal; but that he was Infeft by
Precepts out of the Chanclery, passing of course.

6. Superiors nor their donatars need not instruct the Superiors Right; but
the Vassal must acknowledge it, or disclaim him upon his peril, so it was found
in the Casuality of Marriage, February 25. 1662. Arbuthnet contra Keiths, which
will not hold, if the Right of Superiority be newly acquired, and no Infeftment
given to the Vassal, or his Predecessors by virtue thereof.

The Superiors Infeftment gives him interest to pursue Reductions and
Improbations, against all parties, even against his own Vassals, who will be
forced to produce their rights, under the Certification, to be declared null;
or false and feigned, though, when they are produced, they may defend them.

7. Superiority carries a right to the Service and Duty contained in the
Vassals reddendo, and that not only personally against the Vassal, upon any
personal Obligation, or Contract in Write; but also by virtue of Intromission,
in meddling with the Fruits and Profits of the Land, for all such intromettors
may be pursued, and distressed personally for the Duties contained in the
reddendo, which being granted to Masters of the Ground, for their Tack Duty
against Tennents, and all intromettors with the rents, is much more competent
to the Superior, for his Feu-duty or other Service in kind; how far this will
be extended to Blensh-duty, has been shown in the former Title. And as to
Services which are annual, as winning and leading of Peats, etc. these are not
due, if they be not required yearly in due time, whether they be due by Vassals
to the Superior, or Tennents to their Master. January penult. 1624. Carnowsie
contra Keith. So Service of Harrage and Carriage in a Feu-duty, was found not
due, but when demanded within the year, June 27. 1662. Mr. David Watson contra
Mr. James Elleis.

8. But also the Superiority carries the right to the duty of the reddendo,
really against the ground of the Fee, for which he has Action of Poinding of
the Ground, against the Vassal and all singular Successors to him, whereby he
may appryze the Goods upon the Ground, or the Ground-right and Property of the
Lands, the said Duties being liquidat, upon repayment whereof, the Lands are
redeemable as in other Appryzings.

9. Superiority carries the Right of Jurisdiction over the Vassals Lands and
Inhabitants thereof, if the same be granted to the Superior in his own
Infeftment, either implicitly as being a Barrony, Lordship or Earldom, or
expressly, having the power of Courts and their Issues; and though the Superior
grant the same to the Vassal, yet that is not exclusive of his own right, but
cumulative therewith; how far Superiority carries the right of Thirlage of the
Vassals Lands to their Superiors Milns, when the Vassals have not granted to
them the privilege of Milns and Multars, will appear amongst Servitudes, of
which hereafter.

10. Superiority carries all the Casualities thereof, requiring Declarator to
Heirs and singular Successors, hoc ipso, that they have the Superiority
established in their person, and do not fall to the Executors of the Superior,
as to bygones, before his death, unless gifted or liquidat by Sentence, March
5. 1611. Douglas contra Captain Crawford. February 19. 1635. Cunninghame contra
Stuart. July 11. 1673. Robert Fa contra Lord Balmerino and Lord of Pourie. But
Feu-duties, or any Casuality may be separat from the Superiority, by Sentence
or Assignation; and therefore, a Disposition of the Superiority, was found to
imply an Assignation to the Feu-duties bygone, which being to the vassal
himself, needed no intimation, and was valid against a singular Successor
Infeft in the Lands in Superiority, December 14. 1676. Earl of Argile contra
Lord Mcdonald.

11. A Superior of Kirk-lands pursuing his vassal for his reddendo, was not
excluded till he instructed that he consented to the surrender, conform to the
Act of Parliament 1633. annexing the Superiority of Kirk-lands to the Crown,
reserving the Feu-duties to the Lords of Erection, who consented to the
surrender, which was presumed in possessorio, June 27. 1662. Mr. David Watson
contra Mr. James Elleis.

12. Superiors are obliged to receive Appryzers or Adjudgers for a years
Duty, albeit the Superior allege a better Right then the Appryzer; but the
Infeftment to bear, salvo jure cujuslibet and suo, July 4. 1667. George Shein
contra James Chrystie. Yet a Superior having received an Appryzer, was not
found excluded from any right to the Property, though he made no reservation
thereof, seeing his receiving was necessary, July 19. 1664. Hospital of Glasgow
contra Robert Campbel. But a Superior being charged to receive an Adjudger,
was found to have his option, either to receive him for a years Rent, or to pay
the sum adjudged, for getting Assignation to the Adjudication, being redeemable
by the Vassal from the Superior, and without any years Entry to be paid at
Redemption, seeing the Vassal was not changed, as is provided, Par. 1439. cap.
36. June 10. 1671. Sir Francis Scot of Thirlestain contra Lord Drumlanerk.

13. And a Superior is also obliged to receive a Donatar upon the Kings
Presentation, gratis, without present payment of the Non-entry duties, till
declarator, and if he refuse, he loses his Superiority during his Life, June
25. 1680. Lord of Blair contra Lord Montgomerie.

14. A Superior must also receive his Sub-vassal, whom his immediate Vassal
refused to Enter without further instructing of the Vassals Right, but by
receipt of the Feu-duty, by him as Superior, wherein the mediat Superior
supplet vicem, of the immediate salvo jure, June 28. 1672. Menzies contra Lord
of (...).

Yet a Superior cannot exclude an Appryzer or Adjudger within the legal, from
the Rent of the (...), till he pay a years rent, December 3. 1672. Mr. Hendry
Hay contra Earlstoun.

15. And if a Superior or any to his behove, take the gift of his own Ward, he
was found to have no interest to extend it further against his Vissal, Infeft
with absolute warrandice, then to a proportional part of the Composition and
Expenses, February 15. 1665. Boyd of Penkil cintra Tennents of Carslooth. The
like, where the Ward had fallen after the Vassals Right; for, if it had fallen
before, he could have nothing, December 1. 1676. Lord Lindsay contra Bargallon.

16. Superiors are not obliged to receive upon Resignation, or by
Confirmation, and having accepted Resignation, it did not exclude the marriage
of the Resigners Heir, there being no Infeftment upon the Resignation before
the Resigners death, November 14. 1677. Sir William Purves contra Strachan of
Kinadie.

17. Superiority falling to more Persons, does not obliege the Vassal to take
Infeftment of them all, but if heirs portioners, of the eldest, July 30. 1678.
Lady Lus contra Inglis. And by the same reason, if the Superiority fall to many
singular Successors, by Appryzing or otherways, the Vassal needs only take
Infeftment of the greatest Interest.

18. The first and most common Casuality of Superiority is Non-entry, whereby
the Fee being void, and no Infeftment renewed thereof, through the Vassals
neglect, being capable of Entry thereto, the Profits thereof belong to the
Superior. By the common Feudal Customs there was not only an Investiture
requisite at the Constitution of the Fee, but it behoved to be renewed, either
at the change of the Vassal, or at the change of the Superior, Guidilinus, de
jure nov. Pars 2. cap. 6. Zoesius, de feudis, cap. 12. But our Custom requires
no Infeftment at the change of the Superior, but only at the change of the
Vassal; for we require no oaths of fidelity, but fidelity it self is imported
due without an oath: But elsewhere that oath is required, and being personal,
it ought to be renewed, both at the change of the Vassal and of the Superior:
but with us there being no Fee without Infeftment, nulla sasina, nusla terra;
therefore, the Vassal must have the Infeftment renewed. The renovation of
Infeftment to Heirs in France and England is not requisite, but (...) sasit
(...), as they express it, by which a special retour perfecteth the Heirs right
in his Fee, with a great deal of ease, which is not consonant to the common
Feudal Customs, whereby, if the Vassal within year and day after his
predecessors death, require not to be Entered by his Superior, and offer his
fidelity, he forefaults his Fee, l. 2. Feudorum tit. 24. which severity we use
not, for the Vassal loses not his Fee by Non-entry, nor the whole Fruits of it
during that time: But our Custom is such, if by any means the Fee be void, the
Vassals right cease during that time, and the Fee is in the hands of the
Superior; and therefore, in retours to that Article of the Brieve; It is
answered, that the Lands are in the hands of such a man, Superior: And though
the Infeftment of the Predecessor against others then the Superior, be
sufficient to maintain the Right and Possession of the Vassal; as to his
Superior it has no effect at all, after special Declarator, till the Vassal
Enter.

The Fee may be thus void, first by the minority of the Heir, whereby he cannot
Enter by reason of Ward, but this is expressed by the name of Ward and Non-entry,
though it may signify the Fees, being void, whether necessarly or voluntarly;
yet it is appropriat to the latter, and contra distinguished to Ward.

The Fee becomes void by the voluntary outlying of the Vassals Heir, or by the
vassals Resignation in the hands of his Superior, for new Infeftment to be
given to himself, or to any other; for till that Infeftment be taken, the Fee
is also in Non-entry; for in that case, the Resignation puts the Fee in the
Superiors hand, upon whom there is an obliegement to renew the Infeftment, to
the person in whose favors the Resignation was granted, upon which he may be
compelled by a personal action so to do, and which is carried to that persons
Heir, by a general service as other personal Heretable Rights, or Dispositions.

19. Or by the Reduction or nullity of the Infeftment, or retour of any person
formerly Infeft, which is more rigorous then the rest, seeing the vassal had
thereby a colorable Title, and was bonae fidei Possessor, seeing Reductions use
not to be drawn back, adpraeterita: So reduction of retours was sustained at
the Superiors instance, to give him the benefit of Non-entry, July 12. 1625.
Lord Cathcart contra Lord of Kerse. Februany last, 1628. Earl of Nithisdail
contra Westraw, and therefore, it must be considered, what the nature of the
Right will import. If Non-entry had its rise from ingratitude or a penalty with
us, by the negligence of the Vassal, it could hardly take place in this case;
for unless such infeftments had proceeded upon the Fraud, or gross ignorance of
the Vassal himself, it could not be called voluntary Non-entry, which stood
upon some informality, unknown to the Vassal, or his Predecessor: But seeing the
ground of this Non-entry is from the Nature of the Right, which cannot consist
without Infeftment; therefore, by such nullity it must follow, that while there
was no Infeftment, or a null Infeftment, the Vassal had no interest, neither
will there be hazard of rigor; because, it can but extend to the retoured
Duties, and is eleided by all the ways that other Non-entries are, and
specially by the Superiors Homologation of the Infeftment, if the nullity were
in prejudice of the Superior, as when Lands are retoured to less retour mail
then the due; or Feu-duties, or other Duties in the reddenda, are diminished;
for it is not rare, that that which is null, as to some persons and cases, may
be valid as to others from these nullities being injuries to the Superior;
Non-entry will follow, if there be no valid Seasine; then Non-entry will take
place, though Charter and Precept be granted voluntarly, seeing Seasine was not
taken thereupon.

20. Non-entry takes place whenever the Fee is void, whether it be holden
Ward, Blanch, or Feu: But that which is holden in Burgage, or is mortified,
requires no Renovation of the Infeftment, because Societies and Incorporations
die not, which is extended to the particular Tenements within Burgh, holden
Burgage, which are thereby holden of the King, and the Magistrates of the
Burgh, give the Infeftment as his Bailies.

21. The effect of Non-entry is attained by a Declarator of Non-entry, the
Style whereof bears, that the Tenement is void by the death of such a person,
who died last Infeft, and ought to be so declared, and that the fruits and
profits thereof do belong to the Superior, by reason of Non-entry: Yet because
the case of the Vassal is favorable, Decree is only granted, declaring the
Non-entry, and finding only the Feu-duties due in Lands holding Feu, July. 19.
1631. Earl of Kinghorn contra George Strange: Or the retoured Males in Lands
holding Ward or Blansh, which have any such retour: Or otherways, the whole
Duties of the Fee are carried, the reason hereof is, because Feues are
Locations, and the Feu-duty is the Rent or Pension; and therefore, in
favorabilibus, that is interpret to be the Rent: So likewise in other Lands,
the retour was a valuation of the Lands, as they were worth and paid at that
time; The first whereof was called the old Extent, and it is expressed by
Merk-lands, or Poundlands. The other is the new retour, which though it be
different in diverse Shires; yet being once a Rent, in this favorable case, the
general Declarator reaches no further; yea, though there be no retour of the
particular parcel of Land in question; yet if there be a retour of the Tenement
or Barrony, whereof it is a part, that common retour will be divided according
to the present Rent, and a proportion thereof stated upon this parcel, as its
retour, as was found in the former case, Earl of Kinghorn contra Strange. The
like, Feb. 5. 1623. Mark Ker con. Scot of Hartwoodmires. Hence it is, that an
Annualrent, because it has no retour distinct, but it retoured, Quod
valetseipsum; therefore, if it be in Non-entry, it is carried by the general
Declarator, and the Non-entry was found to carry the whole profit of the
Annualrent by exception, in a poinding of the Ground without any Declarator,
March 23. 1631. Somervel con. Somervel of Drum: Yea, though the Annualrent be
due by the Superiors consent, yet it falls in Non-entry, though it be due
still personally by the personal obliegement; where there is any. In this
Declarator, the Superior producing his Infeftment, needs not instruct the
Defender, his Vassal; and though the Lands in question be not expressly in the
Superiors Infeftment, but claimed by him as part and pertinent, he needs not
instruct the same to be so, unless the Vassal disclaim him as Superior in that
part, Spots. Non-entry, Lord Yester con. his Vassals: Neither needs he instruct
that the Lands were void, since the time libelled, because that is a Negative
and proves it self, unless the Vassal instruct that it was full.

The (...) of general Declarator is not personal against the Vassal, to pay the
(...) Mails, etc. but is real against the ground of the Tenement, for granting
Letters to Poynd and Apprise, and so the calling of an appearand Heir is
sufficient, Spots. Escheat, Balmiranoch contra his Vassals. But if the
appearand Heir be not called, but a person notourly known to have no relation,
it is a relevant defense, competent to any Party called, though deriving no
right from that Defunct, Nicol. Non-entry Sir Mungo Murruy.

22. And though Craig insinuates, that the Action is real, and the ground may
be poynded for the whole Duties, yet posterior Decisions have upon good grounds
cleared, that as to these, the Superior is but as the Master of the Ground, and
as he is in the case of Ward, and therefore the Ground cannot be poynded.
Neither is any liable but the intrometters with the Fruits, Spots. Non-entry,
Gray contra Murray. Without this Declarator of Nonentry, the Superior or his
Donatar cannot enter in possession of this void Fie, and though he possess, he
is comptable to the Vassal for the Mails and duties, Hope, Nonentry, John Brown
contra Mcculloch of Barholme, Febr. 3. 1631. Thomas Ogilvy contra Murray of
Halmyro.

But after Declarator of Non-entry is obtained, the Superior may enter in
possession, any lawful way he pleases, and may dispose of the Fruits and
profits of the Tenements, by himself or his donatar, and as the proprietar
might out-put and in-put Tenants therein, and has the full profits and duties
thereof, which may be pursued as other ordinary Actions, though it uses to to
be pursued under the name of Special Declarator, which takes effect from the
date of the Summonds, whereupon the general Declarator proceeded; because the
Decree of General Declarator, is only for the bygone Mails as aforesaid, and
therefore reaches not after the date of the Summonds, after which the whole
Mails and duties are due, not only in Ward holdings and blench, but also in
Fews. As it was found, that before general Declarator, the Few-duty was only
due, so that after general Declarator, the whole profits, July 19. 1631. Earl
of Kinghorn contra George Strange, Julie 25. 1667. Mr. John Harper contra his
Vassals, Julie 11. 1672. Robert Fa contra Lord Balmiranoch, and Lord of Powrie.

23. Non-entry is excluded, first by the entry of the Vassal and his
Infeftment, during the time thereof, even though the same was granted by him
who was Superior, after his Predecessor was denuded four ages before, which
must be in respect, the new Superiors right was not known, as neither being
Registrat, nor any Intimation nor Action thereupon, Hope, Non-entry John Arthur
contra Lord of Blebo. And if the Vasal be Infeft upon a Charter from his
predecessors, to be holden of the Superior, if the Superior Confirm it, the
Infeftment is valid, and excludes the Non-entry from the date thereof and not
from the date of the Confirmation, being simple, Hope Non-entry, Bartoun and
Harvie contra Lord of Delspro. 2. Nonentry is excluded by Feus, terces of
Relics, Liferents of Husbands surviving their Wives, by the courtesy of
Scotland. These are effectual by Law, and are introduced without the Superiors
consent. It is excluded also by his express consent, by Liferents or conjunct
Infeftments holden of him, though the Vassal may enter to the Fee, yet the
Liferent excludes the profits; and therefore, during the simple Liferent, the
Superior cannot obtain Declarator of Non-entry. 3. By the Superiors con ent, it
is also excluded by precepts of clare constat, which acknowledge the person who
died last, Vest and Seized as of Fie, during whose time the Non-entry cannot be
claimed. And likewise, by receiving the Vassal with a novo damus, renouncing
expressly Non-entry, if it was granted by the Superior, before the right was
transmitted from him to the Donatar 5. It is excluded by the Superiors tacit,
or presumed consent, by granting subsequent Infeftments, for the space of 40.
years,, March 19. 1629. Earl of Angus and Douglas contra Earl of Annandale,
June 29. 1629. Sir Mungo Murray contra Lord of Inchmartine, Hope, Non-entry,
John Art^^r contra Lord of Blebo: for thereby it is presumed that the
Non-entry is relinquished, not being claimed nor reserved all that time; Which
Craig observes to have been found upon Infeftments, continued by the space of
36. years, but the best Term, as being ordinary and known in Law, is 40. years;
And this is not by reason of prescription, which would only cut off profits of
Non-entry preceding the 40. years, but this would take it away, during and
after the 40. years. The like is very rationally observed by Craig, to be
inferred by three Subsequent Seasines, having the same presumption as three
subsequent Discharges have to infer exoneration of all bygones; but these must
be of three subsequent Heirs, and not by receiving three singular Successors,
the Non-entry returning to the Vassal or his Heirs, they cannot make use of it
against the Subvassals, especially if they be liable to warrant the Subvassals
as to Non-entry or by absolute warrandice generally, for thereby the right to
the Non-entry is, jus superveniens authori accrescens successori; but the
Subvassals must pay their proportion of Expenses for the Gift. But Non-entry is
not excluded, because it was gifted to the appearand Heir of a Superior of a
Subvassal: which Superior was obliedged in warrandice to his Subvassal, seeing
he was not Heir, spots. Nonentry. The like though the appearand Heir consented
to the Subvassal before the Gift, Lord of Craichlaw contra Gordown of
Barnernie, and Mackie. Neither is it excluded by any base Infeftment, not being
Feu, though confirmed by the Superior, if it hold not of the Superior for such
Confirmations, import only a passing from Recognition. As is shown in the Last
Title, concerning Confirmations. But Fews exclude Non-entry, while they were
allowed by the Acts of Parliament, as there is also shown, neither is it
excluded by Tacts set by the Vassal, which though they stand as real Rights
against Purchasers by Statute, yet have no effect against Superiors in
prejudice of their proper Casualities: Neither is it elided by Charters or
Precepts granted by the Superior, though containing warrandice, till Infeftment
thereupon, March 20. 1630. John Hay contra Lord of Achnames. Neither was it
excluded by Apprysing and Charge thereupon, without offer of a years Rent of
the Land, or Annualrent of the Money, Feb. 3. 1681. Hendry Keir contra
Hendryson. Neither is it excluded, because the Vassal was not in mora, being
hindered by a Question of Bastardry against him, Spots. Nonentry, (...) contra
Naiper of Wrightshouses. Nor does the Vassals Minority stop Non-entry of Lands
not being Ward, nor restore the Minor as Lesed. For as has been now shown, It
is not the negligence of the Vassal, but the nature of the right that infers
Non-entry: yet there is no doubt if it be by the Superiors fault, it will be a
personal Exclusion against him, Non-entry is most favorable, when extended as
to the retoured duties. But as to the full Rents it is capable of many other
exceptions, and does not always run from the Citation in the General
Declarator, as if a Superior raise his Declarator, and also Reduction of the
Vassals Seasine, though he reduce the Seasine, he will not have the full Rents
till the Decree of Reduction and Declarator, November. 26 1672. Earl of Argyle
contra Lord of Macleud: yea if the Superior do not insist, but only use
Citation, which may be at the Vassals dwelling house, and never come to
knowledge; or the Vassal being a Pupil without any Tutor, it is not like the
Lords would sustain the whole Duties from the Citation, but from the time the
Vassal becomes contumacious. And Queensberry having interposed Kelhead, betwixt
him and his Vassals, who thereupon pursued Declarator of Non-entry, though the
Infeftment was found null, yet the Disposition was found to carry a Gift to the
Casualities of the Superiority, and the Vassals were only found liable for the
Rent after the Interloquitor, sustaining the disposition as a gift of Nonentry,
and where a Tailzie was found to exclude a second Branch, so long as there was
hope of a former Branch, the Lands were found in Non-entry, as to the retoured
Mail, but not as to the full Rent, seeing the Heir did not forbear to enter
through wilfulness, but of necessity, Julie 24. 1677. Lord Melvil and David
Melvil his Son, contra Sir William Bruce. And where a Singular Successor to the
Superior pursued Non-entry, it was not sustained till he produced his progress
from the acknowledged Superior. the full duties were not found due from the
Citation, Julie 18. 1680. Earl of Queensberry contra Irwin of Cove. And Craig
relates, that where the Defunct died in Battle, for his Superior, Non-entry
should have no place. We shall not here speak of common exceptions which
extinguish all Rights as prescription, homologation, or the privilege of these
who are absent, reipublicae causa. As to the Question, whether Non-entry
Subsequent to Ward, whereby the Superior or his Donatar, is in possession
requires any Declarator. Craig and Skeen upon the word Non-entry, are for the
negative; and since Had. and Durie observe, March 23. 1622. Lesly contra
Pitcaple, that the Lords found, that where the Superior pursued both for the
Ward, and subsequent Non-entry, that he or his Donatars, not being in
possession by the Ward, behoved to declare the Non-entry, which would only
carry the retoured Mails till Declarator.

The next Casuality of the Superiority is, the releef due by the Vassal to his
Superior for his entering him in the Fie, as the lawful successor of the
Vassal. And though relees be only considerable in Ward-holdings, and uses to be
subjoyned to Ward; yet all Fies which require Renovation, are liable to releef;
and therefore Releef is here immediately subjoyned to Nonentry.

26. Releef is generally treated upon by the Fewdists. The Original whereof
Cujace ascribes to the constitution of the Emperor Leo, extant in the Novels,
bearing it to be the custom of several places, that the superior should have
that years Rent, in which he receives a new Vassal in his Clientel, which
therefore, by most of the Feudal Customs, is extended to the singular
Successors of the Vassal, who in some places, pay for their Entry the fifth of
the price of the Fie, and a fifth of that fifth; whereby, if the price were
100. Crowns, the composition for the Entry would be 24. Crowns.

27. But by the Customs of England and France, the Heir of the Vassal, if he be
Minor, pays no releef, but he and his Fie are in the hands of the Superior, as
in Ward or Custody, whereby the Superior has the whole profits, more then is
fit for the Education and Intertainment of the Minor Valsal, which cease with
his Majority, and there is no releef due. But if the Vassals Heir at his Death,
be Major, his Fie is liable to his Superior for releef; which distinction is
mentioned in the English Magna Charta, the quantity of the releef by Heirs in
England, is in Ward-holdings or Military Fies 100. Pounds Sterling for an
Earldome, 100. Merks for a Baronry, and 100. Shillings for any other Military
Fie, which is obliged to maintain one Soldier. And if the Fie be less, and
liable only for a share of the entertainment of a Soldier it is liable
Proportionally.

Relief, by the custom of France, is for a Barrony, 100. Franks, and for any
other Military Fie, 15. But if it answer not to the entertainment of one
Soldier, it pays for every Aiker, 12. Deniers; but if it be not a Military
Fie, but that which the English calls Sockage, the Reddendo whereof is not
Military service, but some other payment or performance, which is doubled the
first year after the death of the Vassal, the one half thereof is, the releef
which is a real burden, for which the Superior may Poynd or distrenzie all
goods upon the ground.

But as to singular Successors, the most ancient Feudal Customs, making them
only to descend to the Issue of the first Vassal whose Collaterals had no
right, but were like our kindly Tenants, by the propinquity of blood: yet by
the favor of the Superior, they were oftimes admitted in the lie, and were
only liable for relief. If the Superior did receive a stranger upon the
resignation of his Vassal, he was to pay a relief, which in some places was the
fiftieth part of the Price. And by the Custom of France, it is the thirteenth
part.

From the Original of Relief, the reason of its name may be conjectured; and
these who appropriat it to Ward-holdings interpret it to be called relief, from
redeeming or Relieving the Fie out of the hands of the Superior. But relief
being a general Feudal name, and many Nations not allowing the Superior the
whole profits of the Fie, in the minority of the Heir, and giving a relief in
the case of singular Successors; that derivation must be too narrow. And it
seems most quadrant to the common Feudal Customs, that relief should import a
subsidy or aid to the Superior.

We have the more largely considered the rise and Customs of Nations concerning
relief, because though it frequently occurs with us, yet it has been alwise
kindly transacted betwixt the Superior and Vassal. And there is scarce a
contraversie or decision, observed about it by any since the Institution of the
College of Justice, so that we must rest in the common custom used betwixt
Superior and Vassal, the Nature of this Casuality, and the opinions of some few
of our Lawyers who have written upon it; Craig, lib. I. Dieges 20. handles the
matter of relief, and says, by our ancient custom, there was no relief due
after Ward. And that it was the common opinion of Lawyers at that time, that
relief had only place in Ward-holdings; And that it imported a years rent of
the Fie, being the full profits thereof, when the Superior or his Donatar were
in Possession by the Ward. But in other cases, only a years rent, by the
favorable account, that is one years new retoured duty of the Fie, as it is
retoured by it self, or the share of the retour of any Barrony or Tenement
whereof it is a part. But Craig, with good reasoa holds relief to be due at the
renovation of every Fie, to the Heirs of the Investiture, for the duplication
of the Feu-dutie in Feus, is due at the entry of every Heir. And that without
an express Clause in the Reddendo, by the Feudal custom, which is generally
acknowledged. And even when the Duplication is expressed, it does ordinarily bear,
secundam consuetudinent Feudorum: And Sir Thomas Hope, in his Title of Ward, is
of the same Opinion, in respect that the Precepts issued out of the Chanclery,
for Infefting of Heirs, even in Feues, or Blensh-holdings, it bears, capiendo
securitatem, for the double of the Feu, or Blensh-duty.

28. And as to the quantity of the relief, Hope in that Title, holds it only
to be the retoured duty, without exception when the Vassal or his Donatar was
in Possession. And Sir John Skeen in his Title, De verborum significatione,
asserteth the same. It is also provided by Act of Parliament, 1587. That the
full avail of the Relief be taken and counted for in Exchequer, by Sheriffs,
Stewarts and Bailies, without accepting any composition; and that Charges be
directed against persons who have gotten Precepts of Seasine, or the Sheriffs
or their Deputs, or both, to Poind for the sums contained in the Book of
Responde; which is a Book of Record in the Chanclery, drawn off the Precepts of
Seasine to all Heirs, and mentioning such a Sheriff or Bailie where the (...),
Respondere: That is, to count in Exchequer for the Sums, which by the Precepts
of Seasine direct to him, he is ordered to take security for which sums would
be Liquid, and known according to the new retour, and the Feu or Blensh-duty;
but could not be known otherways, then by a Process of Liquidation, proving the
full yearly Rent of the Fee, as to which the Sheriff might not compone or
Transact; and it is generally acknowledged, that when the full Rent becomes
due, there is no real execution, by Poinding of the Ground; but the Superior
has the full benefit of the Fee, as when it is in Ward; and therefore, the
relief which is debitum fundi, must only be the retour duty.

Conform to this Statute it was found, that the relief might be recovered,
either by real action of Poinding of the Ground, or personally against the
vassal, who had taken his Precept of Seasme out of the Chanclery, though he had
not taken infeftment there upon, March 12. 1678. Lord of Lauriestoun contra
the Sherif of Mearns; and therefore, though in Craigs time, relief was only
thought to affect the Fee, and not the personal Estate of the vassal, this
Statute clears the contrary.

29. Relief is not due while the Fee is in the Non-entry; seeing then the Rent
belongs to the Superior, the favorable Rent or retoured Duty, while the Fee
is void through necessity and negligence; and the full Rent when by contempt or
wilfulness, the Vassals appearand Heir being cited, does not enter: But I have
never heard of one retoured Duty demanded for the Non-entry, and another for
the relief, or any relief required where a years Non-entry was exacted: But if
the Vassals Heir be Entered after the next Term from the Defuncts death, the
relief may at least be demanded for the other subsequent Term.

30. If the Fee be possessed by a Relict Conjunctfiar, the Vassals Heir needs not
Enter during her life, for her Conjunctfee does exclude all Casualities during
her life: Or if it be in possession of a Husband by the Courtesy of Scotland;
yet these will not exclude the Fair, to Enter to the Property burdened with
these Liferents, and it is oftimes necessary for him to secure his Creditors;
in which case it is most favorable that the Superior should have a years
retoured Daty, as he would have gotten it after the Conjunctfiars death; and
therefore, much more where the Fee is wholly burdened with a Liferent, by the
constitution or consent of the Superior.

31. The capiendo securitatem will be in all Precepts, notwithstanding these
Liferents, and it will not stop the Seasine of the Heir, till he pay the relief
to the Superior, whether King or Subject; but security by sufficient Caution
must be received.

32. In place of the relief to the Superior by the Vassals singular Successor,
we have a Composition introduced by Statute, 1469. cap. 36. whereby Superiors
are obliged to receive Appryzers for a years rent of the Lands Appryzed: For
before that Statute, no Superior could be compelled to receive any other
Vassal, then the Heir of the First Vassal, provided by the Investiture; for
though in Dispositions, Lands are ordinarily disponed to the Purchaser, his
Heirs and Assignays; yet Assignays use not to be repeated in the Charters, and
the meaning of that Clause in Dispositions, has been several times Interpret,
that the Disposition may be Assigned or Transferred: But Infeftment being once
taken, Assignays have no farther interest; and that Clause does not save
Recognition, when the Ward-vassal Infefts any other in the Fee then his Heir
apparent, as was found in the case of the Lady Carnagie con. Lord Cranburn. And
though a Disposition have no mention of Assignays; yet before Infeftment, while
it remains personal, it is assignable, and a Superior who granted a
Disposition by a minute, was discerned to receive the Assignay to the Minute,
though he was not in Freindship with him, Jan. 29. 1623. Ogilvie contra Kinloch
of Bandoch. This Statute was by Custom extended to Adjudications, being the
same in effect, but different in form from Appryzings; for the design of the
Statute being to Satisfy Creditors by a Judicial alienation of the Debitors
Lands, ex paritate rationis; it was extended against the Debitors appearand
Heir, who being Charged to Enter Heir, did not Enter; and therefore, Lands were
Adjudged from him, to which he might have Entered, either for his Predecessors
debt or his own; whereupon the Superior is descerned to receive the Creditor
Adjudger, whether for sums of Money, or for Implement of Dispositions, and
Obliegements to Infeft: But the Custom allowed not a years Rent to Superiors
for receiving Adjudgers, till the years Rent was also extended to Adjudications
by Act of Parliament, December. 3. 1669.

The Lords of Session have always taken latitude in the modification of the
years Rent, especially if the sum Appryzed or Adjudged for be small, and the
Lands he great; and they have allowed the Appryzer or Adjudger, his option
during the legal, to take Infeftment or not; and yet not to be excluded from
the Rents of the Lands, till he be satisfied, December. 3. 1672. Mr. Hendry Hay
contra Lord of Farlstoun, Vide Tit. 13.. 29. But the Appryzer runs that
hazard, that if the Debtor die before he be satisfied, if the Land be holden
Ward, it will fall in Ward, and relief by the Debitors death, and in Non-entry;
for there is no reason that the Casualities of the Superiority should neither
fall by the Appryzer nor by the Debtor.

There is not the like reason, that the Liferent-escheat of the Debtor should
exclude the Appryzer, if it fell after the Appryzing and Charge; for the
Liferent-escheat falls to the Superior, with all the burdens which affected it
by the Vassal, even with the burden of his Tacks; and therefore, Appryzing with
a Charge way be as effectual as these, July 24. 1632. James Rule con. Lord of
Billie.

The Superior can have only one years Rent from all the Appryzers or
Adjudgers. But now since Appryzers and Adjudgers within year and day, come in
pari passu, where one needs only to be Infeft or to Charge; there is less
reason to give an easy modification of the years Rent to the first Appryzer or
Adjudger, insisting for Infeftment then before; because one Infeftment serves
for all, and he who advances the same, gets relief of the rest, before they
have access to the Rents.

33. The prime Casulity of Fees is Ward, which is not competent to all
Superiors; Ward is only competent in Fees holden in Military Service which
have their Denomination from this Casuality, being therefore called
Wardholdings, and that not by the Tenor of the Investiture, which seldom
mentions Ward, but by the Nature of it; for when the Fee is holdeu for
Military Service, or as the English better express by Knight Service, extending
not only to following in War, but to Council and Assistance in Peace, then when
the Vassal is unfit for such Service, the Fee is open and remains in the
hands of the Superior, or his Donatar; and though this capacity might be in
some sooner; yet it is fixed in men to their majority, at twenty one years
complete; and in Women, till they become fourteen years complete; for then they
are capable of Husbands, who may do the Service required in the Fee, December. 20.
1609. and Jan. 27. 1610. Lady Kilbirnie contra the Heirs of Fairlie. What Fees
are holden Ward we have cleared in the former Title. It now remains, that we
hold forth the effect of this Casuality.

24. Ward reaches the Custody of the Person, and of his Lands holden Ward, it
has its denomination rather from the former; for Ward is as much as Guard or
Custody: The Superior or his Donatar is by the Nature of this Right, as a
Tutor to the Vassals Heir; Craig observes, that he is preserable to all other
Tutors, except only the Father of the Heir, whose Fee descends by the Mother,
or some other person; and that he is obliged as other Tutors, to pursue the
rights of the heir; but the course of time having turned this Right from its
ancient Institution, so that the Superior has less enjoyment of Service, but
more of Profit of the Fee: there is the less regard to the Pupils Education,
with or by the Superior, to the effect he might be fitted for his Service; and
therefore, other Tutors, not only for the administration of the Pupilsmeans,
but even for the Custody and Education of his Person will be preferred; though
of old, the Donatar of the Ward was preferred to the Tutor in Custody of the
Pupils Person, Sinclar, June 15. 1543. Lord Auchnames contra Lord of
Elphinstoun Ledingtoun. March 16. 1565. and July 12. 1566. Weir contra Lochart.
Yet later Decisions have favored Tutors more, and preferred them, Nicol. ubi
pupuli educari, Mr. James Chalmers contra Elizabeth Howstoun Lady Gadgirth.
Neither have I ever observed, that Superiors or their Donatars were made
liable as Tutors, for Administration of their Pupils Affairs.

35. The main effect of Ward then is, that thereby the Superior or his Donatar
have, during that time, the full fruits and profits of the Fee, and may remove
Tennents, and do all other deeds that the Proprietar might have done, and was
accustomed to do as to continue the profits of a Wood, if there be constant
cutting, as being divided in so many Hags, that the first is ready by the last
be cut: Or going Heughs, as they were accustomed by the Vassal; but he cannor
cut more then the accustomed yearly Hags of Wood, or put in more Coalziers then
the Vassal had at his death, and ordinarily before; and he may remove and in put
Tennents, and that without any preceding declarator or favorable account,
esteeming the retour Mail for the Rent, as in Nonentry; but he may immediately
pursue actions for Mails and Duties, removing, etc. unless the Ward be Taxed;
and then the Superior can have no more then the Duties to which it is Taxed.
But for it, he has not only the Vassal, and all Intromettors with the Fruits,
personally; But he may also Poynd the Ground for the Taxed Duty, as Craig
affirms in this Title.

36. Yet the reach of the Ward by the Nature of the Fee, cannot extend to
alienation, or consumption of the Substance of the Fee, or any part or
pertinent thereof, and this is cleared by the Statute, Parliament 1491. cap.
25. Whereby Donatars must find Caution not to destroy the Biggings, Woods,
Stanks, Parks, Meadows, or Dovecoats, but to keep them in such kind as they get
them.

Ward is also restrained by the Statutes confirming Feues, of which formerly;
and these stand valid against the Superior, during the Ward; so do also all
Infeftments holden of him, either by Resignation or Confirmation; but not
Infeftments to be holden of his Vassal, unless Confirmed by him; for albeit,
Confirmations by the King, which pass of course, do not take away the
Casualities of Ward, etc. of the Kings Vassals, which affect the Fee of the
Subvassals; yet the Confirmation of other Superiors of Sub-vassals rights,
does take off from him the Ward, if the right be Feu only generally, without
mention of the Ward, seeing the Act 1606. does only annul Feues set by Vassals,
holding Ward of Subjects without their Superiors consent, which was so found,
albeit the Feu was under reversion, that it was free of the Ward and Marriage
of the Vassal as to the subvassal fever, but did only affect the Vassals
interest, viz. the Feu duty, reversion and back-tack, July 2. 1672. Earl of
Eglintoun contra the Lord Greenock.

Ward is also restrained by the Terce and Liferent of Husbands, by the
Courtesy of Scotland, both which are introduced by Law, and are valid without
the Superiors consent.

But Rentals and Tacks set by the Vassal, have only this effect against the
Superior or his Donatar, that the Tennents or Laborers shall not be removed
till the next Whitsonday, after the beginning of the Ward, paying the old
accustomed Duty, Par. 1491. cap. 26. But then the Superior or his Donatar may
remove them, notwithstanding their Tacks be unexpired, which therefore sleep
during the Ward, but revive against the setter and his Heirs, and endure as
many years after the Ward, as they were excluded by the Ward, Sinclar, May 21.
1549. Lord of Durie contra Robert Steuart. Ledingtoun December 16. 1569. Kings
Donatar contra Tennents of Drorgan. July 4. 1611. Lord of Couter contra Where
also the Terce was found relevant to exclude the Superior; yet Ward is not
excluded by Annualrents holden of the Vassal, March 11. 1629. James Weyms
contra Kincraig. But now since the Act of Parliament 1606. Prohibiting Feues
without consent of the Superior; these did not exclude the Ward or other
Casualities of the Superiority, as to Fees not holden of the King, which was
even extended to the Fees holden of the Prince, Hope, Ward, Lady Cathcart
contra Vassals of Cathcart. And after the Act of Parliament, 1633. extending
the foresaid Act to Ward-lands holden of the King and Prince; Feues then
granted till the year, 1641. when the effect of that Act, being before
suspended by Act of Parliament, 1640. was taken away. And so Feues of Lands
holden of the King or Prince, were valid till the rescissory Act, 1661. whereby
the said Parliament 1641. was rescinded, Par. 1661. cap. 15. So that now Feues
of Lands holden of the King, Prince, or any other Superior, without their
consent, do not exclude it or other Casualities of the Superiority, except such
Feues as were granted the several times they were allowed by Law; but a Charter
upon an Apprizing did exclude the Ward, though no Infeftment was taken
thereupon, during the Vassals life, as Hope observes, Title Ward, Hamiltoun
contra Tenants of Newburgh; because the Superiors Charter without Seasine did
import a Gift of the Casualities, which might befall to the Superior; and he
there observes, that a Ward was excluded by Appryzing and Infeftment thereupon,
whereby the Defunct was denuded, albeit it was to the behove of his Heir, Lord
of Ley contra Lord of Barro.

During the Legal, the Superior or Donatar, as before the Infeftment upon the
Apprysing, they might pay the Appryzer, and take his right: So after, they may
redeem him and exclude him, it being against reason, that by Appryzing (suppose
of a great Tenement) for a small debt, the Superior should be simply excluded,
and it may be upon design; if an Appryzer Possess, his Ward falls, and not the
former Vassals, though the Legal be not expired; but after the Ward is fallen,
though the Superior received an Appryzer Appryzing from the Heir without
Protestation; yet it was found not to prejudge the Ward by the death of the
former Vassal, July 9. 1664. Hospital of Glasgow contra Robert Campbel. But a
Superior was not excluded from the Ward by his Vassalt death, because an
Appryzer had charged him to Enter him, during that vassals life, seeing that
Charge could not make the Apprizer vassal, by whose death, Ward would fall, and
thereby make the Superior lose this Casuality by the death of both the old
Vassal and the appryzer, unless the Superior had been in mora aut culpa, which
was not found, unless a years rent of the Land, or Annualrent of the Money: And
a Charter were offered, with a Bond to pay what further the Lords should
modifie, February 19. 1669. Black contra David Trinch.

If an Appryzing be satisfied or extinct by Intromission, the Ward-lands
appryzed become in the Superiors hands by Ward, till the Majority of the heir,
July 20. 1671. Lindsay of Mount contra Maxwel of Kirkonel: In which case, the
Appryzer was not found obliged to restrict to his Annualrent, to the effect,
that the Donatar of Ward might have the superplus, by the Act of Parl 1661.
cap. 62. betwixt Debtor and Creditor, whereby there is a power given to the
Lords of Session to cause Appryzers restrict to their Annualrent, which is only
personal, in favors of the debtor, if he demand it.

The benefit of Ward is also burdened with the Mentainance and Sustentation of
the Heir, by virtue of the foresaid Act, 1491. cap. 25 whereby a reasonable
Sustentation according to the quantity of the Heritage is appointed to the
Heir, if he have not Lands Blensh or Feu to sustain him, and that by the
Superior and his Donatar, and Conjunctfiars and Liferenters of his Estate; the
quantity whereof is to be modified by the Lords, according to the quality of
the Heir, and so found, not only when the Heir had no means, but though he had,
if it was not sufficient to entertain him, the superplus was modified out of
the Ward-lands, and Lands Liferented proportionably, March 16. 1622. Heirs of
Miltoun contra Calderwood.

We shall say no more of the Aliment of Heirs by Ward Superiors, or their
Donatars in this place; but you may see it in its proper place, Title 27.
Section third.

Thus it appears in what way the Casuality of Ward is excluded, burdened or
restricted, being always by Law, or by the consent and deed of the Superior;
but no private deed of the Vassal without the Superiors consent, or
appointment of Law, can burden the Fee when it is in the hands of the
Superior, by Ward, etc. So that Servitudes introduced by the Vassal, as
Thirlage, ways and the like, are not effectual against the Superior, or his
Donatar, when the Fee is in their hands; Unless such Servitudes be introduced
by Prescription of forty years, or immemorial Possession, whereunto all
parties having interest their consent is presumed; and therefore, in that case
there is more ground for sustaining of the Servitude, even against the
Superior, who might at least have used civil interruption.

Marches set by the Vassal of consent, or by Cognition, whereto the Superior
is not called, has no effect in his prejudice during the Ward, Feb. 8. 1662.
Lord Torphichen contra

As to the personal debts of the Vassal, whether Heretable or moveable, they do
not affect the Fee, though in Ward, albeit Craig Dieges. 20. relates, that of
old it was otherways, and that the Superior had the Ward, with the burden of
intertaining the Heir, and with the paying of the Annualrents of his Heretable
debts, and that the Custom of Wards in France is such: Yet there is no
appearance that the custom has ever been so with us, since the reign of King
Malcolm, who gave out all his Lands to his Subjects, and reserved only to
himself, for sustaining of the Royal Dignity, the Ward and Marriage of his
Vassals, which at that time were very considerable, when most of all the Lands
in Scotland were holden by simple Ward; but since, a great part has been
changed into blensh, or Taxed Ward, or given out in Burgage and Mortifications,
or in Feues.

The Casuality of Ward may be enjoyed immediately by the Superior, but is more
ordinarily gifted to Donatars, not only by the King, but by other Superiors;
which Donatars may do whatsoever the Superior himself might, because they Act
by his Right, and are in effect his Assigneys: So that if gifts be granted to
more Donatars, the first Intimation or Diligence will be preferred.

Gifts of Ward and Non-entry were accustomed of old, to be granted by the
Exchequer together, bearing, not only for bygones, but for time coming, till
the Entry of the (...) Heir or Heirs: And albeit Gifts of Ward run still in the
same Style; yet by the Acts and Customs of Exchequer, Ward and Non-entry are
several Casualities, and pass by several Gifts; and notwithstanding the
foresaid Clause, the Gift of Ward reaches only during the time of the Ward,
and three terms thereafter, if the Lands run in Non-entry; but ward was not
found to give right to three Terms full Rent, here the Donatar was not in
Possession during the Ward, November. 2. 1680. Lord of Dun contra Viscount of
Arbuthnet. And albeit the Gift contain relief, yet that Casuality, as Hope
observes, is always demanded by the Exchequer, and counted for by the Sheriff,
being but a small duty of the retoured mail, as the gratuity to the Superior
at the Vassals Entry: In that same place, he says, that under the Gift of a
simple Ward, is not comprehended Taxed Ward, which being Taxed, is as a Feu
duty, and rather as a part of the Kings ordinar Revenue, then a Casuality: Upon
which ground, the Earl of Kinghorn, as Tutor to the Earl of Errol, having
gotten a gift of his Ward, without mention of Taxt-ward, he was necessitat
again to take a new Gift for the Taxt-ward, and gave a considerable
Composition, and did not adventure to put the matter to debate before the Lords
of Session, whether his first Gift would have been extended to Taxt-ward or not.

37. The fourth Casuality of Superiority, is the interest of Superiors in the
Marriage of their Ward-vassals, which does arise from the Nature of the Feudal
Contract in proper Fees, whereby the Vassal owes the Superior, faithfulness
and Military Service, and is thereby in his Clientele, which could Import no
more then that he should not Contract affinity by Marriage, with any that were
in enmity with his Superior; for thereby his Fidelity might become suspect,
which would take place, not only in the first Marriage of the Vassal, but as to
any subsequent Marriage, though he had Succession by a former Marriage, and
might take place in the Marriage of the Vassals eldest Son, even in his life,
and might be considered as an Act of Ingratitude, if the enmity betwixt the
Superior and the Family with whom the Vassal was to marry, were known to him,
and might import a breach of his Fidelity, if the Superior did prohibit him to
match with that Family which was in open and known enmity to him: The Superior
might also have Interest in his Vassals Marriage, when he had the custody of
his Person, as a Tutorial Trust for the good of the Vassal.

38. But Time and Custom has given Superiors a far different interest in the
Marriage of their Vassals, here and in England, of which there is no mention in
the common Feudal Customs, nor is it in use in other Kingdoms; for albeit, by
the Custom of France, female Heirs in the Kings Custody, must require the
consent of the King or his Procurator, yet the not doing so, infers not the
value of their Marriage, as in England; and with us it is become a power in the
Superior, to exact out of his Vassals Fee, the value of a Tocher, suitable to
the whole means and Estate of the Vassal, if he Marry without his consent, and
the double value being solemnly required, to Marry a suitable person without
disparagement, if he does not obey, but Marry another; this Custom was
introduced in England, in the Reign of King Henry the third.

It is commonly held to have been introduced in Scotland, in the Reign of King
Malcolm the second, who gave out all his Lands in Scotland in Fee, and reserved
to himself, for the ordinar support of the Royal Dignity, the Ward and Marriage
of his Vassals, whence the marriage was designed as a profit to the Crown, and
by example was derived to the Subjects, who giving their Lands Ward, were
understood to give the same with the like Privilege of the value of their
Vassals Marriage, which does never take effect till the Vassal be Major; for
during his Minority, his Superior or his Donatar, have the full profits of
his Fee, over and above the expenses of his Education, and mentainance
according to the Vassals quality, if he have no other Estate which is not Ward,
the profits whereof may be sufficient to Entertain and Educate him; or in so
far as these profits come short; for no Minor is obliged to spend his Stock
upon his mentainance; nor may his Tutors or Curators securely do the same.

Therefore the true Interest of Superiors in their Vassals Marriage, should
now be the Tocher suitable to the Vassals Estate, Marrying after his
Predecessors death, if he had not been Married before; for the value of the
Marriage being due but once, and not for every Marriage, if the first Marriage
fall not after the Defunct Vassals death, it should not be demanded, nor any
account called for of the profit of the Marriage, falling before he could be
Vassal, though it has been claimed, where the Vassal was Widow at his
Predecessors death, having no Children of the former Marriage; but it came not
to be determined by the Session, though it was demanded by the Commissioners of
the Thesaury, from Sir Robert Barcley of Pearstoun.

And albeit the Vassal never marry, yet if he be solemnly required by
Instrument to Marry a suitable Person without disparagement, if he live to his
majority, though he never Marry, his Fee will be liable to the value of his
Marriage, albeit he willingly ly out uninfeft, not by the Superiors fault, but
his own; for though Creditors have a remeid by a Charge, to enter Heir within
forty days, with certification, that all execution shall pass, as if the
debtor were Entered; yet there is no Reason or Practice to extend the same to
Superiors, albeit Craig think that it may be so extended, and that the
Marriage is not due, unless by that means, the Heir required to Marry be
Entered, or at least charged to Enter; but by a solemn debate and Decision
betwixt French of Frenchland and Thorniedykes, upon the 11. of July 1622. the
Lords found that the Marriage was due, if the appearand Heir became
Marriagable, though dying in minority, when they were not Entered Heirs: But in
that case, the Heirs were Female; and it does not appear whether they were past
fourteen, at which time their Ward ceasseth, and they are in the same case as
men, when they pass twenty one; neither does it appear whether they were
required to marry or not; and therefore, we shall not thence conclude, that a
marriage is due by the appearand Heirs being marriagable, though dying uninfeft
and in minority, against which, Craigs opinion is very positive, l. 2. Dieges.
Yet from this Decision, and from that betwixt Dickson of Headrig and the Kings
Donatar, decided, November 14. 1635. we may conclude, that there may be more
marriages exacted by the death of one Ward-vassal, having several appearand
Heirs, of which none were Entered; and it being debated, whether the marriage
would be due, though the Vassal died unmarried and unrequired to marry, in the
case of Archibald Campbel contra Lord of Mcnaghtoun, December. 3. 1677. the Lords
proceeded no further, but did only determine, that the single value is not
penal but favorable.

39. And therefore, the single value of the Vassals marriage needs not be
pursued penally, because the Vassal married without the Superiors consent, or
being required, and living till majority, though not Entered by his fault, did
not marry; but may be pursued as a Casuality, and profit due to the Superior,
for the Vassals marriage, marrying after his Predecessors death: Or being
required to marry, did live unmarried past his majority, or married without his
Superiors consent; by which, all the unhandsome formalities, accustomed to
reach a double value, might be abated; for the single value would be due, if
the Vassal live to majority and never marry; and if he did marry without the
Superiors consent, the double would be due; and for obtaining the Superiors
consent, it would be necessarly consequent, that the Vassal should confer with
the Superior, and propose to him whom he inclined to marry, and if the
Superior consented not thereto, he should condescend upon his reasons, and
offer another fitter person.

40. All which being expressed by Instrument, the Session would judge who were in
the right, and would be very favorable in the single value, but would not
sustain the double, if the Superior did without reason refuse his consent,
without necessity of the ordinary form of Requisition, offering a particular
person, and opportunity of a visit and conference, and a day and place to
marry, not being within thirty days; and a second Instrument, bringing that
person to the place of conference; first to offer her consent, so that if the
Vassal at the first fight did demand of her if she would marry him, she behoved
immodestly enough to consent without acquaintance, without consideration or
affections; and then openly to appear at the Church, and offer her self again,
which no fit and modest person would be induced to do; and therefore, these are
mere formalities, without any design to offer a suitable person; so that there
is no reason the Superior should lose the single value, for any defect in
these formalities; nor that he should have the double value for using the same
without any just design, or desire of acceptance; and therefore, the double
value has been seldom found due, and so takes no place without the solemnity
of an Instrument of Requisition by a Nottar, observing all the formalities of
producing the Donatars Gift, if he do personally require, and both the Gift and
Procuratory, if he require it by his Procurator, and the offering of a person
by name, and an unsuspected place for view and conference, and another day and
Church for solemnizing the marriage, and at that day a new Instrument
presenting the Woman, and waiting for the Vassal till one of the Clock, wherein
there is the greatest exactness observed as to the double value; but there was
no necessity found to make the requisition to Curators, whose consent is not
required to the marriage of Minors; as was found in the case of the Heirs of
Thorniedike. But the double value was not found due, where the Superior or his
Donatar appeared not at the day appointed, for interview, Hope, marriage, Earl
of Angus contra Hugh Nisbit: Nor where the Instrument of requisition mentioned
not the Gift produced, though it was offered to be proven by witnesses, that it
was truly produced, albeit it was not called for, March 8. 1627. Earl of Rothes
contra Balsour, Hope, marriage, Drummond contra Lord of Manner. The double
value was not sustained, because the place appointed for interview, was the
Donatars Lodging, July 3. 1622. French contra Heirs of Thorniedike. Neither was
it found effectual till the Heir married another, and after the Ward was ended,
December 20. 1609. and January 27. 1610. Lord of Kilburnie contra Heretrix of
Fairlie. Neither was the double value found due, where the Heir remained
several years marriageable, and the Requisition was made after the Heir was
aggreed to be married with another, and the day of the marriage was set, albeit
the Contract of marriage was not subscribed, and separatim, because the woman
offered, was agreed in marriage with another man, and both were found probable
by the communers, Feb 22, 1678. Drummond of Machanie contra Stuart of
Innernytie.

And even when the double value is sustained, it makes but a small addition
ordinarily to the single value, which is two or three years free Rent, or
Annualrent, deducing Liferents; or Annualrents real or personal of the vassals
hail Estate, and the double value adds ordinarily but a fourth.

41. The single value is due though the vassal was married before his
Predecessors death, being by a fraudulent precipitation, the Predecessor being
then moribundus, and dying within some few days, and no previous Treaty or
Proclamation, February 20. 1677. Lord Thesaurer and Advocat contra Lord Colvil.
There are several cases to the same purpose, observed by Sir John Skeen.

42. There is no regard had in the modification of the value of the marriages,
what Tocher the vassal actually got, or any personal consideration, but only an
ordinary Tocher for such an Estate; it was modified to two years and an half,
in the case of Innernytie, and to two years in the case of Zeaman of Dryburgh,
July 13. and 28. 1680. in which case the vassals Rent, and Annualrent, being
referred to his oath, he did depone thereupon, Qualificate, that he had so much
debt, and such burdens, which was not sustained by way of quality, without
Probation.

Neither is the marriage of Heirs Female esteemed the worth of their Estate,
which ostentimes is disponed, nomine dotis, but only such a sum for them all,
as would have been modified for the Marriage of one man, as was found in the
case of the Heirs of Fairly and Thorniedikes, and so was found, June 14. 1673.
Mr. George Gibson contra Janet Ramsay.

43. But the Marriage of Heirs is debitum fundi, and the Tennents Goods may be
Poinded therefore, for their Terms mail; or otherways the Groundright and
Property may be Appryzed, both being done after the Ward is ended, which in men
is at the age of twenty one complete; and in Women, at the age of fourteen
complete. This Appryzing or Adjudication, will be drawn back to the time that
the marriage was due, and preferred to any legal diligence since that time; as
all Appryzings, super debito fundi, are, December 17. 1673. Patrick Hadden
contra John Moor. But it does not affect the appearand Heir personally, not
being in Possession, nor is the Tocher he got after his Predecessors death,
accounted as a part of his Estate, being marriageable before that time, but
only the Estate he had when he married, or was required to marry, January 5.
1681. Lord of Dun contra Viscount of Arbuthnet.

44. The value of the marriage is, jus indivisibile, and belongs not to every
Superior, of whom the Vassal holds Ward-lands, but to the most ancient
Superior.

45. The King by his Royal Prerogative has the Marriage of the Wardvassal,
whenever he becomes immediate Superior, if before the marriage fell due,
though the Lands holden of the King were Taxed to a small sum for the marriage,
July 19. 1672. Earl of Argile contra Mcleod. And though the Vassal hold some
Lands of the King simple Ward, and others Taxed Ward, the full value is due;
but the Taxed value is deduced as a part of it, February 24. 1675. Kings
Advocat contra Lord of Innernytie: Yea, a marriage was found due by a Vassal
in the principality, albeit he held Lands immediately of the King, Taxed Ward,
in respect of the nonexistence of a Prince; during which, the King acts not as
Administrator or Curator hareditatis jacentis, of the Prince, but proprio jure,
as Sovereign Prince, and Stewart of Scotland, Jan. 1680. Sir William Purves
contra the Lord of Lus.

46. A marriage was found due by the Heir of an Appryzer, who died Infeft,
albeit within the Legal, unless the Appryzing were proven to be satisfied in
the Defunct Vassals time, July 13. 1680. Kings Advocat contra Zeaman of
Dryburgh.

To come now to the exceptions exclusive of the value of marriage, it was not
found relevant, that the Vassal died in the War, by the Act of Parliament,
1641. seeing there was a pacification after that Act, and it was not renewed
thereafter, July 9. 1672. Lord Hattoun contra Earl of Northesk. Neither because
the Vassal died in the Kings Service, seeing the Acts to that purpose were only
temporary, January 20. 1681. Captain Paterson contra Tweedie of Whitehaugh.

The next exception is the consent of the Superior, which was not inferred by
the Superiors being present at the marriage, as was found in the case of the
Earl of Argile contra M`naughtoun: Nor by receiving a Vassal upon Appryzing:
Neither by Entering the Vassals Heir though without reservation; these being
Acts to which the Superior might be compelled by Charges of Horning upon
Appryzings, or on Precepts out of the Chanclery upon retours, even though these
were not actually used, but that the Superior gave Precept of clare constat;
yea, his subscriving witness in the Vassals Contract of marriage, after gifting
of the same, was not sustained, Feb. 25. 1662. (...) contra Keiths. So that it
seems no less then a consent as Superior, will exclude the marriage.

The most exceptions are upon the informalities of the Instrument of
requisition.

But the most ordinary and material exception is disparagement, which does not
consist in equality of Estate or Tocher, but in the inequality of Blood,
wherein if a Zeaman be offered to a Burgess, or a Burgess to a Barron, it is
commonly interpret disparagement; but a Barron to any Superior Dignity of a
Subject, imports no disparagement: Or if there be great disparity in age, or
that the party offered, has any considerable defect, as the want of a Member;
or have any loathsome or perpetual disease, which are all the grounds of
disparagement, mentioned by Craig; buthe thinks not Claudication to infer
disparagement, and it is like, as to the single value, the disparagement
behoved to be very gross; but as to the double value, any just ground of
aversion seems to be be sufficient, as deformity, even hardness of Favor; or
any vulgar reproach of Inchastity, Insobriety, or other Vice: It will also be a
temporal exception, if requisition be made before the Vassal be mariageable,
which is the age of fourteen complete in men, and twelve complete in women,
which may become an absolute exclusion, if the party so required die unmarried;
and though the party marry to another, it will but infer the single value.

The value of marriage is due to the Superior, if the Heir was not married at
his Predecessors death, whether minor or major, marrying without consent of the
Superior or his Donatar, or that being or becoming major, and required, they
marry not at all.

48. The last common Casuality of Superiors, is the Liferent-escheat of the
Vassal, when the Vassal is denunced Rebel, for disobedience of the Law, which
because it is intimate by three blasts of an Horn, is called Horning, if he
continue so unrestored, or unrelaxed year and day, his Liferent is Escheat, or
foresaulted unto his several Superiors, of whom he held his Fees; this may
seem a penalty for disobedience to Law, and is so as to Fees holden of the
King; yet if it had no other ground, the Liferent could not befall to the
Superior, but to the King, whose Command was disobeyed, as Forefaulture and
single Escheat do; but the original of it is, that Rebellion is like, Capitis
diminutio, or Civitatis amissio, amongst the Romans, whereby such person cannot
stand in Judgment, and they are civiliter mortui, and thereby their Fees
become void, and return to their Superiors, and so is declared, Parl. 1535.
cap. 31.

49. Liferent-escheat carries the profit of all Fees and Liferents, whether
constitute by Conjunct-fee, Infeftments, Terce or Liferent-tack, during the
life of the Rebel, having remained year and day at the Horn (though thereafter
he be relaxed) during his natural life, even though he be not infeft and
entered as Heir the time of his denunciation, July 3. 1624. Moor contra Hannay
and the Earl of Galloway. Yea, though there be no Infeftment, if by Contract or
Disposition, there be any heretable Right or Life-rent provided, even though
there were no Infeftment required, as a Terce by paction without service or
kenning, Hope Horning Maxwel and Gordoun contra Lochinvar. So Life-rent Tacks
of Lands or Teinds fall under escheat, without prejudice to these who have
right to such Tacks after the Life-renters, Parl. 1617. cap. 15. These Tacks
befall to the Master of the ground; and Life-rents by Terce or Courtesy, fall
to the Superior of the Land; for these Life-renters are his vassals during
life, and owe him fidelity and a reddendo.

50. Whenever there is not Infeftment actually expede, the denunciation makes
not the Liferent to belong to that person of whom the Liferent should have been
holden; but to the King, as an Annual-rent due by Contract or Disposition, to
be holden of the Disponer, December. 20. 1609. Hay contra Laurie; July 1, 1626.
Halyburtoun contra Stewart; January 22. 1675. Menzies of Castlehill, contra
Kennedy of Auchtifardel. So likewise, Life-rent Escheat of a Minister causes
his Stipend and Profit of his Manse and Gleib, though locally within Regality,
to fall not to the Lord of Regality; but if there be Infeftment, it falls to
the immediate Superior, albeit it proceed upon Disposition containing
obliegement for double Infeftments, and that not only till the public
Infeftment be taken, but even thereafter during the Vassals life, January 23.
1624. Meldrum contra Meldrum, seeing here the Life-rent was gifted and declared
before the public Infeftment was taken. And likewise an Annual-rent due by a
heretable Bond, bearing a clause to infeft the Creditor in an Annual-rent,
without mention of particular Lands or manner of Holding, was found to fall in
Life-rent Escheat to the Kings Donatar after year and day; but it was not
determined, whether if the Sum were paid or consigned, it behoved to be
re-imployed for the Kings Donatars use during the Creditors life; whereon, and
in the case of redemption of Wodsetts, most of the Lords were of a contrary
opinion, July 1. 1626. Haliburton contra Stewart. It was found to be
re-imployed for the Superior during the Wodsetters lifetime, June 29. 1661.
Tailfer contra Maxtoun and Cunninghame.

51. Life-rent Escheat of the Vassal carries the Life-rent of the sub-vassal,
falling after the denunciation of the Vassal, and being year and day at the
Horn, February 26. 1623. Clunie contra Bishop of Dunkeld, July 24. 1632. James
Ruel contra Lord of Billi; because then the Superior is in place of the
vassal: but where the sub-vassals Life-rent fell before the vassals own
Liferent, it was found carried by the vassals single Escheat, February 13.
1661. Symson contra Lord of Moncur.

Life-rent Escheat falls by the vassals Rebellion, and the year and day
subsequent is only allowed to purge the Rebellion by Relaxation, which being
used year and day after the Rebellion, has no effect as to the Life-rent
Escheat of such Lands as belong to the Rebel the time of the denunciation,
though it have effect as to his Movables: Therefore, the vassals voluntary
deed prejudgeth not the Superior of his Life-rent Escheat, not only such deeds
as are done after year and day from the denunciation, but which are done at any
time after the denunciation, if Relaxation be not used within year and day;
which is to be extended to these cases

52. First, no Infeftment, following upon a debt contracted by the Rebel after
the Rebellion, though the Infeftment be accomplished within the year, will
exclude the Life-rent escheat, or prejudge the Superior, if Relaxation be not
used within year and day, whether the Infeftment proceed upon the Rebels own
Disposition, or upon Apprising; for in both cases, it is the voluntar deed of
the Rebel that prejudges the Superior: For, albeit the Apprising be a deed of
Law and necessary, yet it proceeds upon a Debt voluntarily contracted after
Rebellion, such Debts will not exclude the single escheat, and therefore ought
not to exclude the Life-rent escheat, which was so found, though the Infeftment
was granted to a Son and his Wife for a competent Tocher, Spots. Escheat
Panmure contra Lord and Lady Ghight. 2. The Debts or Obliegements of the
vassal, though they preceed the denunciation, no Infeftment granted by him, in
cursu rebellionis, for satisfying these anterior Debts, will exclude the
Life-rent Escheat, unless he had been specially obliged to grant such an
Infeftment before the Rebellion; for then the granting of it after, is not a
voluntary, but a necessary deed, which he might be compelled to grant, January
23. 1627. James Vallance contra Thomas Porteous: In which case, an Infeftment
for an onerous debt before Rebellion, was not found sufficient to exclude the
Life-rent, seeing there was no anterior Obliegement to grant that Infeftment;
which is the more confirmed by the parity of the case of Inhibitions, which
annull Infeftments after the the Inhibition, though granted for satisfying
anterior debts: but if there was an anterior Obliegement, the Infeftment
conform thereto, though after the Inhibition, is valid, as not being a
voluntary, but a necessary deed, Vide Title Infeftments, Inhibition.

Thirdly, Dispositions and Obliegements to grant Infeftments anterior to the
Rebellion, and Infeftment thereupon posterior, do not exclude the Liferent
Escheat, unless the Infeftment be taken in cursu rebellionis; and so a Contract
of Wodset long before Rebellion, clad with thirty eight years possession before
denunciation, was not found sufficient to exclude the Life-rent Escheat,
December 3. 1634. Mr. James Lindsay contra Scot. Neither a Charter and
Inhibition thereupon, seeing there was not Seasine taken within year and day,
December 3. 1623. Jonet Herris contra Glendinning. Neither a base Infeftment
before denunciation, there being no possession thereon till year and day, March
19. 1633. Lord of Kentoun contra Blackcadder; February 21. 1667. Robert Miln
contra Clerkson.

53. Fourthly, Apprisings or Adjudications, though for a debt anterior to the
Rebellion, exclude not Life-rent Escheat, unless Infeftment or Charge against
the Superior be used thereupon within year and day after Rebellion; For
without Infeftment or Charge, Apprising is no real Right: And therefore, though
it were led before Rebellion against a vassal, if Infeftment or Charge follow
not in cursu rebellionis, it excludes not the vassals Life-rent Escheat to fall
to the Superior or Donatar, July 14. 1622. Rollo contra Lord of Kellie, albeit
Infeftment follow upon the Apprising before the Life-rent was gifted, Hope
Horning and Escheat, Sir Patrick Murray contra Adamson. Neither did an
Apprising upon a denunciation, begun in cursu rebellionis, but not perfected,
exclude the Life-rent Escheat, February 16. 1631. Cranstoun contra Scot. But if
Apprising or Adjudication be led for sums prior to the rebellion, and be
complete by Infeftment or Charge in cursu rebellionis, albeit they be deduced
after rebellion, they exclude the Liferent Escheat, as is insinuat in the
Limitations in the former decisions, and was so decided, February 13. 1611.
Tenants of Lochauld contra Yonmig and Sir George Arskine.

Liferent-escheat being one of the Casualities of Superiority, only introduced
by statute or custom, there is this difference of that which has been said of
Non-entry, Ward or Recognition, which are Casualities arising from the nature
of the feudal Contract, that Liferent Escheat flowing not thence, but upon the
Vassals rebellion and disobedience to Law, which is not against the Superior or
any delinquence against the feudal Contract, the Vassals Liferent Escheat gives
the Superior no more then the Vassal himself had the time of his denunciation,
and so all real Rights complete by possession, whether Infeftments or Tacks,
are not prejudged by the subsequent Life-rent Escheat, as was found, January
19. 1672. Mr. William Beatoun contra Scot of Letham. In Feues, so far as is
allowed by Law, the Vassals Life-rent will reach no more then the Feu-duties of
Feues set by the Vassal before his denunciation: But any subaltern base
Infeftment, not cled with possession before rebellion, is excluded by the
Life-rent, March 19, 1633. Lord of Rentoun con. Blackcader; Feb. 21. 1667.
Robert Miln con. Clerkson; in which case it was found, that possession not
being attained in cursu rebellionis during the year, it was not effectual. If a
(...) be set, without diminution of the Rental, for the old Tack-dutie, it will
not be excluded by the Life-rent, though it be set after denunciation, as was
found in a Tack after denunciation within the year, Hope, Horning, Charters
contra Mclelland; Spots. Escheat, Tillibairn contra Dalziel. The like of a Tack
set to a kindly Tenant, Hope, Horning, Paton contra Drumrash: For, in such
cases, setting of Tacks is a necessary administration for the good of both
Superior and Vassal, and to shun debate concerning prejudice and unanswerable
Tack-duties, as in other cases of administration of beneficed persons; so if
there Tacks be set without diminution of the Rental, they are good.

54. Liferent-escheat extends it self to all Fees, whether holden Ward, Blensh
or Feu, but not to Burgage and Mortification, because the Fiar is a Society and
Incorporation, which dies not; and therefore, have no Liferent-escheat: And
though Denunciation may be used against the persons administrating the same,
even for that which is due by the Incorporation, and as they represent it; yet
that being supposed their fault and negligence, does not prejudge the Society,
as Magistrates of Burghs, Masters of Colleges, Incumbents in common or
collegiat Kirks, Chapters or Convents, sede vacant.

55. But where a Beneficed person having a distinct Benefice, or a Stipendary,
is denunced for his own debt, his Liferent-escheat falls, and therewith the
profits, during his life or incumbency, because though the Fee be not in him,
yet he has a distinct Liferent thereof, which is not so in the former case,
where both Fee and profits are in the Society.

56. Liferent-escheat is made effectual by a general declarator, finding the
Vassal to be denunced, and year and day past by production of the Horning, but
there is no necessity to prove him Vassal, unless he be a singular Successor in
the Superiority, not acknowledged by the Vassal; or in case the vassal
disclaim, herein is no mention of profits; but this Declarator being obtained,
the Fee is void from the Denunciation; and the Superior or his Donatar have
access to the Mails and Duties thereof, and to set and remove the same, and to
do all deeds accustomed by the vassal himself, in the same manner as Ward: This
uses to be done by a special Declarator, which is now accustomed to be in one
Process with the general Declarator. As to the Profits, Vide Title 25.

TITLE XV. Annualrent where, of Pensions, and Poinding of the Ground.
1. Description of Annualrent. 2. Therise of Annualrent. 3. The manner of
constituting Annualrents. 4. The kinds of holding of Annualrents. 5.
Liferent-escheat of Annualrenters. 6. Kinds of Annualrents amongst the English.
7. The difference of Feu Annuals, Ground Annuals and Top Annuals. 8. Poinding
of the Ground. 9. The extent thereof. 10. Who must be cited in Poinding of the
Ground. 11. The effect of Poinding the Ground as to Ground rights. 12. The
Order of Poinding Movables, by several Annualrenters. 13. Annualrents are
effectual, personally against intrometters. 14. Annualrents are moveable as to
bygones. 15. Extinction of Annualrents. 16. Ecclesiastic Pensions affect the
Benefice: 17. Pensions by secular Persons, how far effectual. 18. The Kings
Pensions are not Arrestable.
WHETHER Annualrent by infeftment be a distinct Right of property; or whether
it be only a Servitude upon the ground, leaving the name of Property to the
ground Right, as Craig esteems, l. 1. Dieges. 10.. last. it is not worth much
Debate; but in either case it falls fitly here under Consideration, after
Property and Superiority, and before unquestionable Servitudes.

1. Annualrent is so called, because it returns to be paid every year at one
or two Terms; and therefore it is called Rent; and because it is yearly so
paid, it is called annualrent.

The English extend these Rents to Rents due by Lease or Tack; but with us,
annualrents are only Constitute by Infeftment; and though the Disposition or
provision thereof, may be sufficient against the Constituent or his Heirs, it
is not effectual against their singular Successors, and is no real Right of the
Ground.

2. The Rise of annualrents is from the Prohibition of Usury in the Canon Law,
which they extend to the taking of any annual, or profit for Money or any
other thing, in Lieu whereof those who were unfit for Trading, or mannaging the
Property of Lands, bought annualrents, either irredeemably, or under reversion,
it had the same effect with the personal obliegement for annualrent; and
therefore, it is still retained, where annualrent according to the rates
prescribed by Statute or Custom is allowed by personal obligation, and is not
Usury; and the Infeftment of annualrent, is in security thereof.

Annualrents may be constitute, either of Money, Victual, or other Fungible,
and that either in Fee and Heritage, or in Liferent; and either by a several
Infeftment, or by Reservations in Infeftments of Property: In which cases, the
Proprietars Seasine serves both.

3. Infeftments of annualrents in most things do agree with the Infeftments of
property, in the manner of Constituting thereof, by Charter or Disposition and
Seasine; in which the symbol and token of the Delivery of Possession of the
annualrent, when Money is, a penny Money; and when Victual, a parcel thereof.
Yet an old Infeftment of annualrent was sustained, though it bore, only Seasine
to be given, according to the solemnities used in such cases; albeit it was
given thirty six years before, and no Possession thereby, March 23. 1631.
Somervel contra Somervel of Drum. And being once validat by Possession, it was
not excluded by the Infeftment of Property of the present Heretor, though the
annualrenter show not the Infeftment of him who Constitute the annualrent, with
the Proprietar his authors Infeftment; so that it did not appear whether both
Infeftments flowed from one common author, seeing the Infeftment of annualrent
was prior to the Infeftment of Property, it was not excluded thereby, February
7. 1667. Smeitoun contra Tarbet.

4. Annualrent may be either holden Ward, or Blensh, or by Mortification, and
uses not to be holden Feu or Burgage, and is most frequently Blensh for a
Penny; but if no holding be expressed, it is held to be Ward; and therefore, the
Casualities of the Superiority befall to the Superior, according to the kind
of the holding, as in Property; so that being Ward or Blensh, it falls in
Non-entry, in the hands of the Superior, without Declarator, and so ceasseth
during that time, even though the constituent as Debtor, be Superior, though
he may be liable personally, upon any personal obliegement, for paying thereof,
March 23. 1631. Somervel contra Somervel.

Annualrents may be either base, or public by Resignation or Confirmation, as
to the requisits to accomplish it when base, it is fully shown before, Title
13.. Base Infeftments.

5. So likewise annualrent falling in Liferent escheat, belongs to the
Superior, during the annualrenters Life; and if it be redeemed, the Profit of
the Money comes in place thereof, as follows, a pari, from a Wodsett
redeemed, which was fallen in Liferent-escheat; and therefore, the Money was
ordained to be employed upon annualrent for the Superior, during the Life of
the Wodsetter, June 29. 1661. Tailziefer contra Maxtoun and Cunninghame.

6. The English distinguish Rent in Rent-Service, Rentcharge, and Rent-Seck;
Rent-service is that which is due by the reddendo of an Infeftment of property,
as a Feu or Blensh duty; this is a part of the Infeftment of Property, but has
the same effect by poinding of the Ground, as other Annualrents; Rentcharge is
that which not being by reddendo, yet is so Constitute, that the Annualrenter
may, brevi manu (his Terms being past) poind the Ground therefore, we have no
such Annualrent, for we admit of no distress without public Authority; but all
execution must proceed by Decree and Precept.

Rent-seck is so called, as reditus siccus, because it is dry, having no effect
without Sentence; such are our Annualrents.

7. There is a distinction of Annualrents mentioned, Par. 1551. c. 10. in feu
Annuals, Ground-annuals, and Top-annuals, which Craig thinks to quadrat with
the English distinction of Rents: But the consideration of that Act and
Ordinance, in relation to the Articles there expressed, will make it appear, that
the case being there of Tennents within Burgh, the Feu Annual is that which is
due by the reddendo of the Property, either of the Ground before the House was
built, or the Ground and House together.

Ground-annuals is a distinct several annualrent, Constitute upon the Ground,
before the House was built; and the Top-annualrent is out of the House, which
is the more clear, that when such Tenements were destroyed, the least abatement
was of the Feu-annual, or Feu-duty; and therefore, the Proprietar repairing the
Tenement, was to pay the Feu-annuals, with abatement of a sixth part; and the
Ground-annual, as being more ancient then the Topannual, suffered an abatement
of a fifth part, and the Top-annual of a fourth part.

8. The chief effect of Annualrents, either by reddendo in Property, or several
Infeftments, is by poinding of the Ground, upon which the Annualrent is
constitute, and that by an ordinary Action, whereby the Annualrenter pursues
upon Letters to Poind and Appryze all Goods upon the Ground, for payment of his
Annualrent; and also for Poinding and Appryzing the Groundright and Property it
self.

As to the first member, the English Custom extends it to all goods that
shall happen to be upon the Ground at the Term, if they have but lain down
thereupon.

And our ancient custom extends it to all Goods of the Possessors, and
invecta and illata, by them, without retrinching it to what the Tennent is due
to the Proprietar, Constituent of the Annualrent; and the Poinding in this case
was extended to purge a Spuilzie, November 21. 1628. Watson contra Reid. June
26. 1628. Lord of Ednem contra Tennents of Ednem, where the pursuit was rather
declaratory to establish the pursuers Right, then for present Possession or
Execution.

But thereafter the Lords have been accustomed to interpose with Chargers upon
Decreets of Poinding of the Ground, to restrict the same in favors of
Tennents, to their Terms mails from the Statute, 1469. cap. 36. bearing, that
the Cattle of poor men, Inhabitants of the Ground, shall not be poinded for the
Landlords debt, where the Mail extends not to the avail thereof; and though the
Act seems Correctory of an evil Custom, to poind the Tennents Goods for the
Masters debt, yet the same reason, equity, and favor of their Rusticity,
craves the Extension of it to these debita fundi; and therefore, it was so
restricted, the Tennents producing their Tacks, or offering to depone upon
their Rent summarly, without taking a Term; but it was not found requisite that
the Annualrenter should either lybel or prove the quantity of the Rent,
February 14. 1674. Lady Pitfoddels contra the Lord of Pitfoddels and Tennents:
In which case it was found, that if the Tennents the time of the poinding had
compeared and produced their Tacks, or had offered to make Faith what the Rent
was, if more had been poinded for, then equivalent to their Rent, it would have
been a Spuilzie; but they should not only depone what their Rent is, but what
is resting of it; for the poinding of the Ground, or the Brieve of distress, is
only restricted by the Act of Parliament, for remeid of that inconvenience,
that was sometime in use; that where sums are to be paid by the Brieve or
Distress against the Lord owner of the Ground, the Goods and Cattle of poor
men, Inhabitants of the Ground were taken and distrenzied for the Lords debt,
where the Mail extends not to the avail of the debt; and therefore, it is
ordained, that the Tennent shall not be distrenzied for the Lords debt where
the Mail exetnds not to the avail of the debt; further then his Terms Mail
extends to. And therefore, in so far as the Tennents Mails are resting, the
poinding may proceed: And likewise for the current Terms, though not yet come:
that is, if the Rent be Victual, payable all at one Term, the poinding may
proceed for the value of the victual, according to the Rate of the Victual,
communibus annis, in the several places of the Country, as men use to buy, or
Wodset, or by the feirs of that place: Neither cantacks absolutely secure the
tenants, if they be posterior to the Infeftment of Annualrent; in which case,
if they be within the true value of the Land, the (...) or others poinding, pro
debitis fundi, cannot be prejudged by Collusive Tacks, or such as are granted
with considerable diminution of the true worth: So that the poinding may
proceed for one year or Terms Mail, as the Lands are worth the time of the
poinding. But in this case the poinding cannot proceed summarly, till it be
cognosced by Declarator, or Reduction of the Tacks, which may frequently occur,
Tennents being often accustomed to suspend in Decreets for poinding the Ground.
Poinding of the Ground was found to take no effect against Corns, standing upon
the Ground, having been poinded before by a third party, for a Debt, Hope
poinding, Paterson contra Patrick Adam.

10. In poinding of the Ground, the Proprietar the time of the Summonds, must
be called, albeit his Infeftment be base, but not the Superior, January 19.
1636. Oliphant contra Oliphant. And is sufficient to call the Wodsetter without
the Reverser, February 1. 1631. Gilbert Williamson contra Hendrie Cunninghame.
The Tennents also must be called, in so far as concerns their Goods, but the
present Heretors, and Tennents being once Discerned, the Decree will be
effectual against all singular Successors, and subsequent Tennents without a
new Decree of Transferrence, Hope, poinding of the Ground, Forrester contra
Tennents. November 21. 1628. Watson contra Reid. June 26. 1662. Adamson contra
Lord Balmerino. But poinding of the Ground upon Annualrents may proceed
summarly, without declaring the Right in a petitorie Judgment, though the
Annualrenter has not been in possession for seven years; and a posterior
Annualrenter in possession seven years, was not found preferable, because
Annualrents being debita fundi, have neither prejudice nor profit by
Possession, as in a possessory Judgment, which is only competent upon
Infeftments of Property or Tacks, January 9. 1668. old Lady Clerkingtoun contra
Clerkingtoun and the young Lady.

And a poinding of the ground may proceed against the appear and Heir, without
a Charge to enter Heir, January 2. 1667. Oliphant contra Hamiltoun.

11. As to the Ground-right and Property of the Land, Appryzing upon Infeftment
of Annualrent is not only effectual against the Proprietar, but against any
other Appryzing for personal debt, and Infeftment thereupon, being after the
Original Infeftment of the Annualrent; though before the appryzing thereon,
Hope, poinding and appryzing, Tennents of Clunie contra Tarachtrie, Slowand and
Glendoning. And it is the singularity of this Right, that the Infeftment of
Annualrent being once Established, appryzing thereupon will be preferred to all
interveening Rights and Diligences, even though they proceed upon posterior
Infeftments and Annualrents. And though by the late Act of Parliament,
Appryzings within year and day, come in pari passu, there is an express
exception of Annualrents; and therefore, an appryzing proceeding upon a
personal Obliegement and Requisition, both for Principal and Annual, and within
year and day of other appryzings, the Appryzer was allowed to pass from his
appryzing, as to the Annualrents prior to the Appryzing; and these were
preferred to all the appryzings, and his appryzing was brought in, pari passu,
for the Principal sum and Annualrents after the appryzing, December 22. 1671.
Campbel contra Yea, an Infeftment of Annualrent being betwixt the first
effectual appryzing, and the subsequent appryzings within year and day, was
brought in, pari passu, with these appryzings, as to the whole right, as being
in a matter dubious, upon a new Statute, the Annualrenter having rested
thereupon, and not having appryzed for his principal sum; which if he had done,
he would clearly have come in, pari passu, February 6. 1673. Brown of Colstoun
contra Edward Nicolas.

There is a case proposed by Sir Thomas Hope, viz. If one having Right to some
years of an Annualrent by Liferent, or otherways should appryze for these
years, and that appryzing expyre, whether that appryzing expired will carry the
right of Property, not only from him who constitute the Annualrent, but from
the Fiar of the Annualrent himself, so that the Infeftment of annualrent should
become extinct, which seems to be resolved affirmatively, because of the nature
of the Right; for the Infeftment of annualrent, being jus sed ignobilius,
becomes extinct, if the annualrenter there upon do appryze the Property, and be
Infeft: and therefore, whoever appryzeth for years of the annualrent, the
Infeftment thereof, unless it be taken away by satisfaction, or redemption,
extinguisheth the Infeftment of annualrent, without distinction, whether the
appryzing be led for any years belonging to the Fiar, Liferenter, or any other:
and whereas the difficulty seems to be, that the Liferenter cannot prejudge the
Fiar of the annualrent, or appryze more from the Fiar of the Land than he had;
It is answered, the Fiar needs not be prejudged, because he has a virtual
Reversion, and might thereby redeem from the Annualrenter and take the
Liferenters Right: Neither does the appryzing exclude the annualrent it self,
as to years posterior, by the Tenor of the appryzing, but by the nature of the
right constitute to that very end, that an Apprising for any years of the
Annualrent is drawn back ad suam causam, viz. The original Infeftment of the
Annualrent; and so excludes all posterior Infeftments: and therefore,
extinguisheth not only these, but even the Infeftment of Annualrent it self
cease, by accession of the property, ut juris nobilioris; but if the Fiar of
the Annualrent were neglective in so dubious a case, it is like the Lords would
repone him, satisfying the Liferenter. In the case of competition, the
Infeftment of Annualrent it self will be preferred to the posterior Rights,
though no Apprising followed, January 29. 1635. Sir James Hamiltoun of
Brownhill contra Wilson. Infeftments of Annualrents have the privilege and
preference, though they be made use of by way of competition, without Apprising
thereupon: Yea, though requisition was made, and an Apprising led upon the Sum
whereunto the Annualrent was accessory, yet it was found, the Appriser might,
pro loco and tempore, pass from that Apprising, and upon the Annualrent it self
be preferred, January 24. 1663. Robert Graham contra John Ross.

12. But as to apprising of Movables or Rents, the Lords use in competitions
to give so much time to the first Annualrenter, and so to the rest after each
term, that they only may poind; and so they decerned the first Annualrenter to
poind within twenty days of each term, and the second within the next twenty
days, Feb. 15. 1662. Ladies Mouswall elder and younger, competing. The like
allowing the first Annualrenter forty days after each term, July 26. 1662.
Sir John Aiton contra Adam Wat. But as to the Apprising of the Property, the
first Annualrenter may apprise when he pleases, and then is preferable to all
others; but the regulating of the poinding of Movables is in favor of the
poor Laborers. The like, June 26. 1662. Adamson contra Lord Balmerino, where
it was found, that the Annualrenter might affect any part of the ground in
solidum, albeit now belonging to several Heretors; but so, as the Heretor of
the ground affected, behoved to have Assignation to the Decree for obtaining
relief.

13. Annualrents long ago had no effect but poinding of the ground, and could
not come in to hinder Arresters of the duties for the Proprietars debt, March
24. 1626. Gray contra Graham; but thereafter were ordained to be a sufficient
Title against all intromettors with the Duties personally, March 15. 1637.
Richard Guthrie contra Earl of Galloway. Annualrents were found liable to
public Burdens, proportional with the superplus Rent belonging to the Fiar,
June 23. 1675. David Bruce contra James Bruce. This annualrent was not for
security of a Stock. The like was found of a Liferent Annualrent, June 18.
1663. Margaret Fleming contra James Gillis.

14. Annualrents, as to bygones, are moveable and so arrestable, and belong to
Executors, December 15. 1630. Ogilvie contra Ogilvie: Yet it will be more
competent and suitable to pursue it personally against intrometters with the
Rents, or Postessors, then by a real Action of poinding the ground; Annualrents
are suppressed by Wodset of the Land, or other more noble Right in the person of
the Annualrenter, unless that Right were evicted.

15. An Infeftment of Annualrent redeemable, was found extinct by a
Renunciation registrat in the Register of Reversions, and that against a
singular Successor, though there was no resignation of the Annualrent, January
7. 1680. John Mcclellan contra Mushet. An annualrent was also found extinct, by
the annualrenters intrometting with the Rents of the Lands, out of which the
Annualrent was payable equivalent to the principal Sum, for security whereof
the annualrent was constitute; which intromission was sound probable by
witnesses, though it was silver-rent, Feb. 4. 1671. Wishart contra Elizabeth
Arthur. And therefore, singnlar Successors succeeding in annualrents, either by
voluntary Disposition, or by Apprising or Adjudication, cannot be secure by
inspection of Registers, as they may be for Lands; but they run the hazard of
satisfaction of the principal Sum for which the Annualrent is granted,
wherewith it falls in consequence: For, no provident man will buy an annualrent
given for security of a principal Sum, but either upon necessity, for
satisfying a prior debt, or upon great advantage; in both which cases, he
should take his hazard, Scire debet cum quo contrahit, as all Purchasers of
personal Rights must do.

Pensions resemble Annualrents, or the seuda ex camera or ex cavena, mentioned
by the Feudists; for thereby, a yearly Rent is constitute to be paid out of
the Constituents Lands, generally or particularly: Yet these Pensions, not
having Infeftment, have but the nature of Assignations, and so are not valid
against singular Successors.

16. Except only Ecclesiastic Pensions, constitute by Prelates, which are
valid against their Successors in Office, but not unless they be clothed with
Possession or Decreets conform, in the Constituents life, Par. 1592. cap. 137.
And so a Pension granted by a Bishop with power to assign, was found valid to
the Assigney, after the first Pensioners death, against the succeeding Bishop,
and to be no dilapidation, July 21. 1625. Minister of Kirklistoun contra
Patrick Whitelaw; yea, though the Pension bore a power to assign etiam in
articulo mortis, December 17. 1628. Chalmers contra Craigievar: But in this
case, the Pensioner granting Assignation, reserving his own Life-rent, or to
take effect after his death, whereby both might at once have interest therein,
the Assignation was found null by exception, though having Decree conform, and
thirty years possession. The like Hope, Assignation, Abernethie contra Lady
Drumlanerk. But now, by the Act of Par. 1606. cap. 3. Archbishops and Bishops
are disabled to grant Pensions to affect their Benefices, further then
themselves have right to the Benefice, but do not prejudge their Successors in
Office. Yet Pensions granted by beneficed persons, are not only due during
their life, but out of their annat after their death, February 28. 1628. Bairns
of the Bishop of Galloway contra Andrew Couper.

17. Pensions granted by secular persons, though they contain Assignations to
the duties of the Lands specially, and have Decree conform, were found
ineffectual against singular Successors in the Land, July 9. 1629. Urquhart
contra the Earl of Caithness, December 11. 1662. Andrew Clappertoun contra
Lord of Ednem; neither against the Lady Tercer of the Constituent, March 27.
1634. Countess of Dumfermling contra Earl of Dumsermling.

A Decree conform being obtained against the granter of a Pension, his Tenants
and Chamberlains, is effectual against subsequent Chamberlains, without new
Decree or Transference, yet must be transferred against the Constituents Heir
and his Chamberlain, though it would be valid, being an Ecclesiastic Pension,
against his Successor, December 7. 1630. Earl of Carrict contra Duke of Lennox,
Spots. hic, Alexander Weyms contra Chamberlain of the Duke of Lennox.

A Pension, bearing for love and special service done and to be done, was found
effectual, though the Pensioner removed and did not that service, his removal
being necessary by transportation, March 25. 1629. Doctor Strange contra Lord
Couper. The like of a Pension granted to an Advocat, for services done and to
be done, which was found valid during his life, though he left Pleading,
December 3. 1662. Mr. John Alexander contra Mr. Roderick Mcleod. The like of a
Pension, for service done and to be done, though the service was not done when
not required: nor was it excluded by the Pensioners pursuing Processes at his
own instance against the Constituent, upon a probable ground, though the
Constituent was assoiled, June 26. 1678. Mr. William Weir Advocat contra the
Earl of Callendar.

18. Pensions granted by the King are declared not arrestable in the Thesaurers
hands by Act of Sederunt, June 11. 1613. The reason thereof must be, because
such are ordinarily alimentary, and always for the Kings special service, which
would be impeded, by hindering payment of the Pension.

TITLE XVI. LIFERENTS, Where, of Conjunctfees, Terces, and Liferents by the
Courtesy of Scotland.
1. Servitudes personal by the Roman Law. 2. Servitudes personal by our Custom.
3. Clauses of Conquest, of Liferent, or fee of Lands acquired during marriages,
how far extended. 4. All Liferents must be salva rei substantia. 5. Liferenters
are burdened with aliment of Heirs. 6. Liferents without Infeftment are not
effectual against singular successors. 7. The effect of Assignations to
Liferents. 8. Liferents are not prejudged by Tacks or other deeds of the Fiar
being posterior. 9. What Terms do belong to Liferenters. 10. Conjunctsees. 11.
Liferenters by Conjunctsee have all the Casualities of Superiority. 12. Terce.
13. Services of Terces. 14. Kenning to Terces. 15. The effect of Terces. 16.
The extent of Terces. 17. Exceptions against Terces. 18. Burdens of Terces. 19.
Liferents by the courtesy of Scotland. 20. Public burdens.
FROM the Feudal Rights of Property, we proceed to Servitudes, burdening the
(...); these are either personal or real: Personal Servitudes are, whereby the
property of one is subservient to the person of another: Real Servitude is,
whereby a Tenement is subservient to another Tenement, and to persons; But as,
and while they have Right to the Tenement Dominant, as Thirleage, Pasturage,
Ways, Passages, etc. and the like.

Servitudes personal for term of Life, are therefore called Liferents,
Servitudes for an indefinite time are such, which either may or uses to be
Constitute for a longer or shorter time, such are Pensions Ecclesiastic,
Rentals and Tacks, which, though they be in their nature but personal Rights:
Yet by Statute or Custom, they have the effect of real Rights, of which
hereafter. Teinds also must come in as Servitudes, though they are accounted a
distinct Right.

1. The Roman Law divides personal Servitudes into Usufruct, Use, and
Habitation. Usufruct is the power of disposal of the use and fruits, saving the
Substance of the thing, which if it be restrained to these persons, and their
proper use, without making profit, or disponing to others it is called the
use; and because of some special Consideration in the Law of that use of
Houses, Habitation is a distinct Servitude from other uses.

2. All Servitudes with us come under some of the kinds before named. Personal
Servitudes are either constitute by the deeds of men, or by the Law, which
provideth a competent portion to either of the surviving Spouses out of the
Lands and Tenements of the other during the Survivers Life; as if the Wife
survive, she has the third of her Husbands Tenements: and if the Husband
survive, he has the Liferent of the Wifes whole Tenements, and that provisione
legis alone. But other Liferents constitute for surviving Spouses, or otherways
are provisione hominis: So may the Terce or Liferent by Courtesy be provided,
and some things altered from the course of Law; but oftener Liferents are
constitute by Conjunctfee, and most ordinarily otherways, which therefore retain
the common name of Liferents appropriat thereto, and distinct from Conjunctfees.

3. Liferents are sometimes provided particularly, and sometimes generally for
the whole, or such a share of the Conquest, during the Marriage, which though
not fulfilled by the Husband in his Life, is effectual against his Heirs, and
is not accounted a fraudulent provision, though it be the whole Conquest, even
amongst Merchants, yea it was found effectual for recovering the rents of the
Conquest Lands without Infeftment, against the Husbands Heir, in the case of
the Relict of Johnstoun Merchant in Glasgow. And where a Husband purchased
Lands in favors of his eldest Son, being then an Infant, and not to himself,
yet his Relict was found to have Right to her Liferent thereof, as being a
fraudulent deed in prejudice of the obliegement of Conquest, July 3. 1627.
Countess of Dumfermling contra the Earl of Dumfermling her Son. But these
provisions of Conquest do not hinder the Husband acquirer to denude himself
wlthout Fraud, for any onerous or just cause, as selling for a price, or
disponing to Children, whether it be the appearand Heir by ordinary Terms of
Contracts of Marriage, to younger Children, or to Wives of subsequent
Marriages, June 16. 1676. Katharin Mitchel contra the Children of Thomas
Litlejohn. And such a Clause being of all sums acquired during a second
Marriage, was found to annul an universal Legacy to the eldest Son of the
first Marriage, but not to annul competent provisions to the Bairns of the
first Marriage, June 19. 1677. Murrays contra Murrays. The like, January 3.
1679. Mr. Alexander Gibson contra Elizabeth Thomson. Yea, a Clause providing
the present Stock and all the Conquest to the Bairns of the Marriage; whilks
failing, the one half to the man's Heirs, the other to the wifes Heirs, was
found to make the man Fiar, and not to hinder him to provide his whole means,
which were very great to his Bairns of a subsequent Marriage, there being no
Bairns surviving of the former marriage, December 1. and 21. 1680. Alexander
Anderson contra Andrew Bruce. But as to such Clauses, Conquest is only
understood where the Husband acquired more then he had the time of the Clause,
but not when he sold some Lands and acquired others of no greater value, June
27. 1676. Earl of Dumfermling contra Earl of Callender: yea a Clause of
Conquest in a Wifes Contract of Marriage, who was otherways sufficiently
provided, was found to be with the burden of the Annualrent of a sum, which the
Husband declared under his hand to be a part of the price of the Lands
acquired, remaining due to the seller, December. 20. 1665. Lady Kilbocho contra
Lord of Kilbocho.

4. This is common to all kinds of Liferents, and involved in the nature
thereof, that they must be salva rei substantia, which by Statute is especially
extended to Conjunctfiars and Liferenters, that they must be countable, and
find surety not to wast or destroy the Biggings, Orchards, Woods, Stanks,
Parks, Meadows or Dovecoats, but that they hold them in such like kind, as they
receive them, Par. 1491. cap. 25. which is confirmed and declared to proceed
upon twenty one days by Sheriffs, Bailies of Burghs or Regalities, under pain
of Confiscation of the Liferent-right to the Kings use, Parliament 1535. cap.
14. And though the Narrative of the Statute expresses Conjunctfiars and
Liferenters, giving Caution as being most ordinary by provision of men; yet the
Statutory part is general, at least may be extended to Terces and Liferents by
the Courtesy. So a Liferenter was Charged Summarly to uphold the (...)
Liferented, and to leave it in as good case as she found it, without
precognition, how it was the time of her Entry, March 28. 1626. George Foulis
contra Isobel Allan. By Act of Parl. 1594. cap. 226. Anent ruinous Tenements
within Burgh, which being cognosced by an In quest to be ruinous, as become or
which may become within a short time uninhabitable, the same must be repaired,
by the Liferenter or the Fiar may enter in Possession, finding Caution within
the Burgh to pay the Liferenter the Mail thereof, as the samine gave or might
give the time of the precognition; but this Act was not found to derogat from
the former Acts, nor that Precognition was requisite before finding Caution,
except in Tenements within Burgh, decayed before the Liferenters entry, as was
found in the foresaid case, George Foulis contra Isobel Allan. Neither was the
Liferenter freed from Caution upon her offer to quite the Possession to the
Heretor for paying of the Rent, the Tenement not being ruinous at her Entry.

5. It is also common to Liferents and Conjunctfees, that the Liferent-right is
liable with the Superior of Ward-lands or his Donatar, for an Aliment to the
Heir, to be modified by the Lords proportionally according to the quantity of
the Land in Ward and Liferent, by the said Statute 1491. cap. 23. Vide Tit.
Heirs. 3.

6. Liferents are either Constitute by way of Reservation, in Infeftments of
Property, or otherways by a several Infeftment, but it cannot become a real
Right, and be effectual against singular Successors, without Infeftment;
though most Servitudes may be Constitute by Disposition and Possession.

7. Yea, though Liferents being Constitute by Infeftment, may be conveyed by
Assignation, because there can be no subaltern or renewed Infeftment of a
Liferent, which is only personal to the Liferenter, and the Right is
incommunicable, yet the Fruits and Profits arising thence are communicable and
assignable.

8. It is also common to Liferents, that nothing done after their Infeftment,
by the Constituent or his singular Successor, can prejudge the Liferenter: And
so an Appryzer from the Husband was found liable to the Liferenter, for the
true worth of the Liferent-lands, and not according as he set them, though they
were never set before, except the Appryzer had set the Lands wholly, or near to
the worth, March 9. 1631. Lady Huttonhall contra Lairds of Moristoun and Touch.

9. A Liferenters Executors was found to have right to the Mertimas Term,
though the Liferenter died upon the Mertimas day in the afternoon, February 16.
1642. Executors of the Lady Bruntoun contra Heir of the Bishop of Glasgow. And
they have right to the whole Cropped and Profit of the Land labored and sown by
themselves, or which was in Mansing and not set to Tenants, though the
Liferenter died before Mertimas, December 14. 1621. William (...) contra James
Nisbit. A Liferenters Executors was found to have right to the whole years Rent
of a Miln Liferented by her, she having survived Martimas, and that Miln Rents
were not due, de die in diem, but as Land-rents, not as house mails, though the
conventional Terms of the Miln Rent was after Martimas, viz. one Term at
Candlemess after the Separation, and the other at Whitsonday thereafter, July
20. 1671. Guthry contra Lord of Mckerstoun. But a Liferenter Infeft in an
Annualrent of Victual provided to be paid yearly betwixt Zule and Candlemess,
her Husband having died after Martimas and before Candlemess, she was found to
have no share of her Annualrent for that Cropped, January 12. 1681. Katharine
Trotter Lady Craiglieth contra Rochhead Lady Prestoungrange.

10. A Conjunctfee or Conjunct-infeftment, is that which is granted to more
persons jointly; which if it be provided to them and their Heirs simply, it
makes them and their Heirs to have equal right, pro indiviso; and they are all
equally Fiars. and after the death of any of them, their Portions belong to
their Heirs; but the Liferent of the Deceassing accresseth not to the
Survivers; but when Conjunct-infeftments are provided to Husbands and Wives,
the longest liver of them two and their Heirs: There the Law presumes, that the
Heirs are the man's Heirs; and by that Interpretation, the wife by the
Conjunctfee is but Liferenter; and generally Heirs of man and wife in all
things except Moveable Rights, are ever understood to be the man's Heirs,
propter eminentiam masculini sexus; so was it found in an Assignation to a
Reversion, granted to a man and his wife and their Heirs, that thereby the man's
Heirs (first these of the Marriage, and next his other Heirs whatsomever) were
understood, Hope Husband and Wife, Walter Collestoun contra Pitfoddels: Yet
though this be presumptio juris, it admits contrary more pregnant evidences, as
a Reversion granted to a man and wife and their Heirs, found to Constitute the
wife Fiar, because she was Heretrix of the Wodset Lands, Hope Liferent, Kincaid
contra Menzies of Pitfoddels.

But to prevent this question, the provision ordinarily is to the longest liver
of them two and their Heirs, whilks failing, to such particular Heirs expressed;
whereby these are commonly esteemed Fiars, whose Heirs what some ever are
substitute. And yet a sum provided to a man and his Wife, and the Heirs betwixt
them, whilks failing, to divide betwixt the man and wifes Heirs, was found not
to Constitute the wife Fiar of the half, but only Liferenter; and the wifes
Heirs of line to be Heirs of provision to the man, and that the sum was
Disposeable by him, and Arrestable by his Creditors, January 29. 1639. Graham
contra Park and Gerdon. So strong is this presumption, that there is no more
meaned to be granted to Wives, but their Liferent-right and no part of the Fee,
unless the provision bear expressly, a power to the wife to Dispone, and if it
be adjected at any time, during her life, the Fee will remain in the man, and
that power in the wife will rather be understood as a Faculty, like to the
power given to Commissioners to Dispone Lands, then an Act of Property, unless
that the provision bear, a power to the wife and her Heirs to Dispone; but a
Conjunctfee to future Spouses of Conquest, during the Marriage, in these Terms,
The one half thereof to be disponed upon as the Wife shall think fit, being in
a minut of Contract, expressing no Heirs, but being a short draught, the Lady
being of great quality, having about 22000. Merks yearly in Liferent, beside
Money and Movables; and the Husband being a Noblemans Son, having gained an
Estate of 7000. Merks yearly, in the Ware which he had lest; the Clause was
found to be understood, and extended so, as to make both future Spouses equal
Fiars, seeing the Conquest was mainly to arise out of the wifes Liferent, June
27. 1676. Earl of Dumfermling contra Earl of Callender.

If a Conjunct-infeftment be granted to two or more, the longest liver of them,
and express no Heirs, but a liferent to them all, the same accresseth to the
Survivers; or if it be a Right of Lands or Annualrents to a man and his Wife,
the longest liver of them two, and to their Son named and his Heirs; the man
and his wife are both liferenters, and the Son is Fiar only, unless the right
be for security of Sums of money, and then the person named is but as Heir
substitute, the Father is Fiar, even though the Son were infeft with the Father
and Mother, January 14. 1663. Thomas Bog contra Sir Thomas Nicolson, July 23.
1675. Moor of Anistoun, contra Lord of Lamingtoun.

11. The main difference betwixt Conjunct-fees and other Life-rents, is that
the Conjunct-fiar, though by interpretation Liferenter only, and so may not
alienat or waste; yet by the nature of the right and custom, they have the
benefit of all Casualities befalling during their life, and may dispose
thereof; which will not only be effectual during their life, but simply for
that individual casuality. So Conjunct-fiars may receive and enter the Heirs of
Vassals, and have the benefit of their Ward, Non-entry, Liferent-escheat, and
may grant Gifts thereof effectually, even as to the time after their death. So
also a Conjunct-siar, infeft with her Husband in Lands cum Sylvis, was found
thereby to have right to make use of the Woods for her and her Tennants use,
January 10. 1610. Hunter and others contra Relict of Gadgirth, Vide Title 13.
41.

Liferenters have not these Casualities of Superiority; yet a Baron having
disponed his Barony, reserving his Liferent, was thereby found to have right to
receive the Heirs of his Vassals, but not singular Successors, January 11.
1611. Crawfurd contra Lord of Glaspen. And there is reason, that the Fiar
disponing with reservation to himself, whereby his own Infeftment stands pro
tanto, should have greater power then a Liferent apart or by reservation, not
being before infeft, conjunctfees though public, as ordinarily they are; and
thereby, as to the Superior, the Fee is full, and the casualities of Ward and
Non-entry excluded: yet the Heir may enter to the Property, and compel the
Superior to receive him.

12. Terce is the third of the Tenements, in which the Husband died infeft, as
of Fee provided to his Wife surviving by Law or Custom, though there be no
provision or paction for that purpose. The original hereof, as has been shown
before amongst the interest of Marriage, is from that obligation upon the
Husband to provide for his Wife; which therefore positive Law has determined
to a third of his Movables, if there be Children in the Family, and if there
be none, to a half: but in either case, she has a third of his Tenements. And
though as Craig observes, by our ancient custom, Terce extended only to a
third of the Tenements a Husband had the time of the Marriage; yet since, it
extends to a third of those he stands infeft in as of fee the time of his
death; and so, when he is denuded before his death, the Terce is excluded. Yea,
a base Infeftment without possession, granted by a Husband to his Creditor, was
found to exclude his Wife from a Terce of that Land, January 27. 1669. Bell of
Belford contra Lady Rutherford. This provision of Law is more equitable and
proportionable, then ordinarily are their provision by Contract of the Husband,
who being carried with affection, does oft-times provide his Wife to the
prejudice of their Children, and ruin of their Estate, which this Terce
keeps always proportionable, and makes the Wife sharer of the Industry and
Fortune of the man, and therefore more careful over it; and upon the contrary,
giving out but small Provisions to their Wives at their Marriage, when
oft-times they do but begin to have Estates, which they increase not according
to the increase of their Fortune; but the Law does more fitly order the Wifes
Provision to be increased or decreased, according to the condition of the man.

13. The Terce takes place ordinarily, where the Husband died infeft as of Fee;
and it has no effect, till the Widow take Brieves out of the Chancelery,
directed to Sheriffs or Bailies to call an Inquest of fifteen sworn men, and
thereby to serve the Brieve; which has two Heads, the one, That the bearer was
lawful wife to the defunct; the other, that he died in fee of such Tenemnts.
This is a pleadable Brieve, and has no retour; but Service alone is sufficient
enough to give the Wife interest that other Liferenters have. It was specially
statute, That where the Marriage was not questioned in the Husbands life, and
the Widow was holden and repute his lawful Wife in his Time; no exception in
the contrary shall be sustained in the service of the Brieve, but she shall be
served and enjoy the Terce, till it be declared in a petitory judgment, That
she was not lawful Wife, Par. 1503. cap. 77.

14. The Brieve being thus served, the Sheriff or Bailiff must also, if it be
demanded, ken the Relict to her Terce, which is ordinarily done by the Sun or
the Shade; That is, whether the division shall begin at the east or the west,
and so the division of the Tenements proceed by Aikers, two befalling to the
Heir, and one to the Relict, wherein there ought to be Marches set, and
Instruments taken thereupon, which is as a Seasine; but this division being
most inconvenient, except the whole interest were used to be set in Aikerdale,
it is not exclusive of other divisions by the worth of the Lands or the Rent,
so many Rooms being designed for the Tercer, the rest remaining for the Fiar.
This way of kenning would be valid, and much better; but it is not necessary to
divide, at serving the Brieve, to constitute the Terce; for the Service gives
sufficient Title to the third of the Mails and Duties of every Room, March 5.
1632. Relick of Veatch of Dawick contra.

15. But that thereby she cannot remove possessors is, because she brooketh the
Terce pro indiviso with the Heir, till it be be kenned, or otherwise divided;
and the Terce being served, gives right not only to the years thereafter, but
preceding, since the Husbands death, November 20. 1624. Tennants contra
Crawford and Flemming: and so the Tercer may pursue the Heretor or other
intromettor, for all by-gones of the third of the Duty, not as they were at the
Husbands death, but as they were bettered by the fiar, Feb. 13. 1628. Countess
of Dumfermling contra Earl of Dumfermling, and that without deduction of
Factor-fee, March 27. 1634. inter eosdem. The Tercer being served, has
interest to pursue for Commission to cognosce pasturage Lands what Soums they
may hold, that she may have the third Soum, or else to divide, January 18.
1628. contra Mackenzie.

The division of the Terce from the two thirds, may be in the most convenient
way, wherein all Dwelling-houses, or Kilns and Barns, and other Houses for
service, will come in as they may be most conveniently divided. This is the
most ordinary way of Terces by Service, as said is, when the Husband died
infeft in Fee.

16. Terce takes place, not only in Lands, but also in Annualrents, wherein the
Husband died infeft as of Fee, November. 30. 1627. Tennants of Easthouses contra
Hepburn; but not to the Terce of Annualrents of Bands, whereupon no Infeftment
followed, June 24. 1663. Elizabeth Scrimzeour contra Murrays. It is also
extended to Infeftments of Teinds, Feb. 13. 1628. Countess of Dumfermling
contra Earl of Dumfermling: But it is not extended to Tenements or Lands within
Burgh or holden Burgage; neither to Superiority or Feu-duties, or other
Casualities thereof; nor to Tacks, ibidem; neither to Patronage or Advocation
of Kirks; neither does Terce extend to Reversions.

If the Fiar, whose Land is liable to a Terce, die, and his Wife have right to
another Terce, which is called the lesser Terce, though the Husband died infeft
as of Fee of the whole Tenement, she has not a third of the whole, but a third
of these two thirds, which were unaffected with the greater Terce, till the
former Tercers death, Craig, lib. 2. dieges. 22. proposes two cases, in which
the Relict will have a Terce, though the Husband died not infeft as of Fee; The
first is, if the Husband infeft his appearand Heir in his Estate, if there be
no Liferent provided to his wife by a Contract; in that case, the Relict will
have a Terce, which is most just, albeit it will not proceed summarly by a
Brieve, which bears only warrant for a Terce of the Tenements in which the
Husband died infeft as of Fee: But it may proceed by Reduction or Declarator,
and would not only have effect against the appearand Heir, but against any
gratuitous Disposition, reserving the Husbands own Liferent; for such deeds
would be found fraudulent, and contrary to the nature of the obligation of
Husbands to provide their Wives, unless there remained Tenements, out of which
a reasonable Terce might remain to the Relict, according to her quality. The
other case is, when a Father, by his Sons Contract of Marriage, is obliged to
infeft his Son in Fee in certain Lands; if the Sons Relict be no otherwise
provided, she may claim a Terce of these Lands, though the Father did not
perform his obliegement, which may be construed as fraudulent and in her
prejudice.

17. Terce is excluded by all ways whereby the Marriage was dissolved, upon
adultery or desertion; or by the death of either party, within year and day
without Children, or may be found null, of which formerly, amongst Conjugal
Interests, Tit. 4. And also, by whatsoever way the Husband is sine frande
divested, the Terce is excluded: as by a Crime inferring Forefaulture or
Recognition by the Husband or his Superior, though not declared before his
death, or by the Ward and Non-entry of his immediate Superior.

There was one decision observed by Spotswood and Hope, betwixt the Relict of
John Cranstoun and Crichtonn, That an Apprising without Infeftment, did exclude
a Relict from her Terce: it were hard to sustain that in all cases, even though
there were a Charge against the Superior upon the Apprising; which as it would
not exclude the Superior from the Ward, Non-entry or Relief, So neither should
it exclude a Relict from her Terce, unless she had a Conjunct-fee or Life-rent
by consent, equivalent to a tertia rationabilis: And though our custom has far
deborded from the ancient design of Terces, whereby a reasonable Terce was
appointed; and if any voluntary Liferent were granted, Craig observes, that it
was ever understood to be no more, but for clearing and securing the Tercer
against the trouble and difficulty of recovering possession by a Service, and
therefore was always retrenched unto the Terce. Yet now, not only real
voluntary Provisions are sustained, though of the Husbands whole Estate and
Conquest, albeit granted in aestu amoris, with this temperament only, That if
the Heir have no other Estate, the Liferenter must intertain and educat him,
according to his quality, by Act of Parliament, which is more extensive then a
simple aliment; but she is also liable, super jure Naturae, to aliment her
other Children, if they have no provisions. But Custom has so far proceeded,
as not only to allow voluntary provisions, how great soever, but therewith to
add a Terce of any other distinct Tenement, unless the voluntary Liferent were
accepted in satisfaction of the Terce, which indeed were reasonable in many
cases. The voluntary Liferent being oftimes small and suitable to the Estate
the parties have when they Marry, but cannot make a rationabilis tertia; if by
Conquest, their Estate should grow great, neither is it reasonable, that though
the voluntary provision be never so great, that a Terce should be given, though
little remained to the Heir, only because by Ignorance or negligence, the clause
in satisfaction were not adjected: Which satisfaction may not only be proved by
Write, but by Presumption, from the design of parties, in the Contracts of
Marriage, which are uberrimae fidei; For suppose, which is ordinary enough,
that a Liferent of Lands are provided by the Contract of Marriage; yet some
Lands are not mentioned, but there is a Clause adjected for the Liferent of the
whole Conquest, were it rationabilis terlia, to give the Wife a third of that
which is omitted, though she had a particular Liferent of more, and the whole
Conquest, though never so considerable; Yea, it came lately to be (...),
whether a Liferenter Infeft in an Annualrent, out of her Husbands Estate,
consisting of one Tenement, lying Contigue, the Annualrent being two thirds of
the Rent thereof, because it bore not, in satisfaction of a Terce. The Relict
did also claim a Terce out of that same one Tenement, which is yet sub judice.

But so far as I can understand by former Decisions, it has not yet been
determined, whether Relicts should have a reasonable Terce, according to the
Terms of the ancient Law, inducing Terces: Or whether she should have a Terce
proportionable, or suiteable, or not; though she be already suitably provided,
if she have not expressly accepted her former provision, in satisfaction of her
Terce: Which Terce, is most favorable when suitable; and therefore, takes
place in the two cases before mentioned, even beyond the Letter of the Law; and
therefore, if it were unproportionable, to the quality of the Husband and Wife,
who might have a great Estate in Money, and little Land, a voluntary Provision
out of any Tenement, should not exclude a Terce, out of the remanent of the
same Tenement, or of any other Tenement, unless the Relict were sufficiently
provided before. There is one Interloquter betwixt Jean Crightoun and Kirkhouse
her Son, wherein it was alleged, that she was sufficiently provided, to more
then a Terce of her Husbands Estate, which was repelled; but the Case was, in
possessorio, where the Relict was already served, and kenned to a Terce, and
was pursuing the Tennents; so that the Service and Kenning, being a standing
Sentence, does not determine what might be done, in petiterio; Neither was that
allegiance proponed, and offered to be proven, but only alleged informative;
whereas the Defense proponed was, that the Relicts provision was but a minut of
Contract, bearing, to be extended with all Clauses requisite, whereof there was
a Process of Extension depending, including the acceptance, in satisfaction of
the Terce, as being ordinary; but it was replied, that that Clause was omitted
in the full Contract already extended: But now by the late Act of Par. 1681.
cap. 1. there is no place for a Terce, where there is a provision for the wife
of liferent, unless a Terce be expressly reserved.

Craig proposes another case, whether the (...) would have a Terce of Lands
competent in Fee to her Husband, and so possessed by him, though by fraud or
neglegence, he never Infeft himself, which he says is the opinion of Litletoun,
and it is not without much ground, though it has not come to be decided with
us, voluntary Liferents in satisfaction being so ordinary; for though the
appearand Heir not entering, cannot burden the Fee with his debt, yet his jus
apparentiae, gives him or his Executors, right to the Fruits during all his
life, whereunto it would be suitable enough, that though his voluntary
provisions to his Wife could not affect the Fee; yet the legal provision of a
reasonable Terce might.

By the Custom of England Relicts loose their Terces, by falling in public
and atrocious Crimes, as Treason, Murder, Witchcraft, although they be restored
by the King, by way of grace, because thereby the memory of their husbands, and
fame of their Children are disgraced; I know no such Point to have been drawn
in question with us. Craig in the forecited place holds, that if the Fiar
Transact for his own or his Superiors Forefaulture, or Recognition, or obtain
a Gift thereof, it should accress to the Tercer, whose provision is onerous,
importing Warrandice; and therefore, might be effectual against the Fiar, if
he represent the Husband; and in all distresses, Relief does import what the
party distressed truly paid out.

A Terce of Wodset Lands, wherein the Husband died Infeft, was not found
elieded, because the Husband Required, or Charged for the Money, not being
denuded before his death, Feb. 16. 1642. Veich contra Veich of Dawick. But the
wifes third continues as to the third of the Annualrent of the Money in lieu of
the Lands Redeemed by the heir after his predecessors death.

Terce is not excluded by Ward, Non entry or Liferent-escheat of the Husband,
as has been more fully shown before, Title Superiority.

18. Terce is burdened proportianally by all, debita fundi, affecting the whole
Tenement as Annualrent, Thirlage, Pasturage, but with no other debts of the
Defunct, being personal, though they be Heretable and have provision of
Infeftment.

19. Liferent by the Courtesy or Curiliaty of Scotland, is the Liferent
competent to the Husband of the Wifes Lands and Hereditaments: It is introduced
by our Common Law, which is our most ancient Custom, wheroef no beginning is
known in the same way, as the Terce of the surviving Wife, whereby without any
paction or provision, (...) enjoys the third of her deceassed Husbands
Heretable Rights, wherein he (...) Invested as of Fee, during her life; so the
Husband Liferents the whole Lands and Hereditaments of the wife, wherein she
died Infeft in Fee, and that without any Service or Kenning, as in Terces, but
Summarly, by virtue of his having been Husband to the Defunct; neither is there
any difference, whether the Defunct wife had a prior Husband or not; or whether
her hereditament be Ward, Blensh, Feu, or Burgage.

The original of this Liferent by the Courtesy, as Craig observes, lib. 2.
dieges. 22. is from the Rescript of the Emperor Constantine, whereby the
Father had the Usufruct of the heretage of his Children, befalling to them as
heirs to their Mother; and therefore, the Courtesy takes no place but where
there were Children of the Marriage, one or more, which attained that maturity
as to be heard cry or weep,; for then the Law regards not how long the
Children live, or whether they do Survive their Mother, but hoc ipso, that they
are born at maturity, they are heirs appearand of the Fee; and the Liferent is
established in their Father: In this the Courtesy of Husbands differs from the
Terce of Wives; for the Wife has her Terce, if either the Marriage continue
undissolved year and day, or though it continue not so long, if a Child was
born of the marriage, heard cry and weep, though the Child had been begotten
before the Marriage, yea, though it had been born before the Marriage, being
Legitimat by the subsequent Marriage, how short soever it endured the wife
should have her Terce. But the Courtesy takes no place, unless a ripe Child
beborn, though the Marriage should continue for many years, so that the being
of Children procreat and born to maturity, is the chief motive introductory of
this Law.

Skeen in his Title, de verborum significatione, upon the word Curialitas,
limiteth the Courtesy to the Lands or Hereditament, into which wives succeed
as heirs to their Predecessors, whether before, or during the Marriage, which
Craig in the foresaid place does likewise follow, and does exclude the Husband
from the Liferent of the wifes Land; to which the wife had right by any
Contract, as titulo emptionis, which will not exclude the husband, where the
wises Predecessor Infefts her, per praeceptionem haereditatis. If a Father
should Infeft his Daughter, reserving his own Liferent, with power to Dispose,
she is not thereby heir active, nor is that Estate accounted Heretage but
Conquest; yet she is heir passive, and there is more reason that the husband
should enjoy his Liferent of that Estate, then if his Wife had been therein
heir of Provision or Tailzie, whereby failing her and her Issue, another
Branch, not nearest of blood to her, might readily succeed, so that if her
Children were dead before her self, her heirs of Tailzie would have much more
reason to question her husbands Liferent by the Courtesy, then his own
Children as heirs of line would have to contravert his Liferent of the Estate,
wherein she was Infeft by her Father or any of her Predecessors, to which she
was appearand heir; but there have been few Debates or Decisions, or
limitations thereof, which would clear this and other points thereanent.

The Law has well fixed the maturity of the Children by their crying or
weeping, and has not left it to the conjecture of witnesses, whether the Child
was ripe or not, both as to the Courtesy, Terce and Dissolution of the
Marriage within the year; in all which cases, the Law allows Women Witnesses,
as being necessary in the case of the death of the Children, at the time of
their Birth.

Liferenters were found free of the Reparation of Ministers Manses, by the Act
of Parliament 1662. cap. Ordaining Heretors to build or repair Manses to the
value of 1000. Pounds; whereof no share of relief was found due by the
Liferenters, they not being expressed, November 14. 1679. Minister of contra
Lord and Lady Beanstoun: Yet if the whole Estate were Liferented by
Conjunctfee, the Conjunctfiar might be liable as Fiar in that case, when the
Heretor had no profit of the Land; and if the whole were affected with a
separat Liferent, the effect would be the same, seeing what the Heretor would be
liable to, would diminish his Aliment, which behoved to be made up by the
Liferenter.

Liferent by the Courtesy has the same extensions and limitations sa terces,
it affects all the wifes Lands, not Acquired by a singular Title; it is not
excluded by the Ward, but it is excluded during the Non-entry, or by
Liferent-Escheat; and also by the Ward of the Superior, or the Forefaulture or
Recognition, either of the Superior or Wife, it is burdened with all real
burdens by Infeftment or Tack, and with the Aliment of the Wifes Heir, if he
have not aliunde; It is also excluded by the Dissolution of the Marriage within
year and day, by Divorce, or by the Husbands desertion of the Wife, though
Divorce followed not: Or by his Adultery, or other atrocious Crimes.

20. Amongst personal Servitudes may be numbered public Burdens, imposed by
the King and Parliament for public use, such as Taxations, which by the Acts
imposing them, are declared real, affecting the Ground, and that thereupon the
Ground may be poinded; and so consequently do affect singular Successors: The
extraordinary burdens of Mentainance; and Sess imposed by the Parliament,
during the troubles, had not that Clause therein of Poinding the Ground, and so
were not found debita fundi, but debita fructuum, nor do they affect singular
Successors, July 13. 1664. Grahame of Hiltoun contra the Heretors of
Clackmannan.

TITLE XVII. Servitudes Real.
1. Requisites to Constitute real Servitudes by consent. 2. How Prescription
Constituteth Servitude. 3. How far Servitudes are effectual against the
Superior. 4. Extinction of Servitudes. 5. Kinds of Servitudes. 6. Servitudes
of Support. 7 Stillicides. 8. Sinks. 9. Servitudes of Prospect or Light. 10.
Ways. 11. Watering. 12. Watergang. 13. Feualling. 14. Pasturage. 15.
Thirleage. 16. Several ways of Constituting Thirlage. 17. Several Cases in
which Thirlage is not Constitute. 18. The effect and extent of Thirlage. 19.
The import of several Clauses of Thirlage. 20. Invecta and illata, or tholing
Fire and Water. 21. Sequels. 22. Miln Service. 23. Privilege of Milns. 24. How
Thirlage becomes extinct. 25. In Multure, Seed, or Horse Corn, are to be
deduced, but no other expense of Laboring. 26. Thirlage Constitute by a
Vassal, not effectual against the Superior. 27. Deductions for insufficiency
of the Miln, breaking down of the Damn or Frost.
SERVITUDES are distinguished in Real and Personal, though neither of them be
personal Rights; yet these Servitudes whereby one Tenement is subservient to
another Tenement, and to persons only as having Right to, and for the use of
that Tenement, are called real Servitudes, as not being subservient directly to
persons, but to things: And the other are called Personal; because thereby the
Tenement is subservient directly to Persons, and not with respect to any other
thing, as Liferents, etc.

Before we come to the particular kinds of these real Servitudes, it will be
fit to enquire how such Servitudes are Constitute; and next how they are
Destitute and Ceass.

1. As to the first, these Servitudes require no Infeftment, though they may be
Constitute by Infeftments, yet there is no necessity of Infeftment, to their
Constitution.

Secondly, Real Servitudes cannot be Constitute by any personal Right, as by
Contract, Paction, Testament or Legacy, neither by Disposition or Assignation
alone; the reason is, because they are real Rights, and cannot be Constitute by
any personal Right, which though they be oftimes the remote cause of real
Rights, yet there is more requisite to their Constitution; and therefore,
though such personal Rights may be sufficient against the granters thereof, by
a personal Objection, whereby they cannot come against their own deed, yet they
are not sufficient against singular Successors, neither do they affect the
Ground.

Thirdly, All real Servitudes are Constitute by Possession or Use; for things
corporeal are said only to be Possessed; therefore Incorporeal Rights, as
Servitudes have rather use then Possession to Consumate them, which though it
be the last requisite to accomplish Servitudes, yet is not sufficient alone,
but must have another Title, either by the express consent of the Proprietar,
or by Prescription; there is no difference in what way the consent be adhibite,
so it be in Write; and the Obliegement to grant any Servitude with Possession,
is equivalent to the formal Disposition or grant thereof, as it is in the most
of these Rights, which do essentially require nothing else, but Consent alone,
or Consent with Possession, and not any other Solemnity, as Obliegements to
grant Assignations, Discharges, Renunciations, are equivalent to these Rights
themselves, when formally made.

2. The Civilians debate much, whether Servitudes can be introduced by
prescription, and whether in that case there be requisite a Title and the
Proprietars Knowledge, wherein we need not insist, seeing our Prescription being
only by Statute upon the course of forty years, in most cases presumes both a
Title and Knowledge, but theirs being upon ten years, against those who are
present, may require more, yet many, even of the learnedest of them, account
Prescription sufficient, without Title, or any other then presumed Knowledge.

With us, the Servitude of a way to the Kirk, was not found Constitute by
Possession thirty years, but by immemorial Possession, going and coming that
way uninterrupted, without any Write; for here the way was claimed at the
nearest to the Kirk; whether the Desenders Lands were under Cropped or not: For
though a way to the Kirk be due to all parties in the Paroch, without Consent
or Prescription, yet it must be with the least detriment to the interjacent
Lands, and so cannot always be the nearest way, but must go about Corns; and
though thirty or forty years Alternative, was not sustained to Constitute a
way through Lands, even under (...) yet forty years is equivalent, and always
(...) to immemorial Possession; in the same case, (...) gtoun observes, That a
convement way to the Kirk, without going through Corns, was sustained without
prescription; And the like would be sustained for Passage to Market Towns, or
(...) Ports. A servitude of laying over a Miln Damn upon another Heretors Land,
was found Constitute by Possession forty years, whereby the Heretor of the
Miln was found to have Right; that when the Water did wash away the Ground from
the end of the Damn, to lengthen the same upon the Servient Tenement, so that
it might be made effectual with the least detriment, and that he was not liable
for any damage by washing away the ground of the Servient Tenement, by occasion
of his Damn, July 20. 1677. Lord of Gairletoun contra Lord of Smeatoun. June
27. 1623. Gilbert Neilson contra Sheriff of Galloway. It must be adverted, that
when such Servitudes are said to be Constitute by sole prescription, without
Write, it is to be understood, without Write from the Proprietar of the
Servient Tenement; for ordinarily there is this much Title in Write for these
Servitudes, that the party having Right thereto is Infeft in the Tenement with
the Pertinents, under which Servitudes are comprehended. Or with common (...)
trage, by which he has not only such Pasturage as he has been long in
Possession of, upon the Lands of his Superior or Author, but forty years
Possession therewith, is sufficient against any other, who can be said in no
case to have done any deed for the Constituting of the Servitude; and it was so
found in the case of the Town of Pearth, concerning the Isle of Sleiples. But
this long Possession is not estimat by deeds done by the Proprietar of the
Servient Tenement, as he who brings his Grain to another man's (...), for (...)
so many years; these deeds of his do not Constitute a Thirleage upon his Lands,
unless he suffer the Proprietar or Tennent of the Miln, to cause him or his
Tennents either to bring their Grain by Process, or otherways: And he who opens
a Window in his Dyke or Wall, whereby his neighbor has a Prospect, does not
thereby put himself under a Servitude: But if he suffer his neighbor to break
a Window in his Wall, and enjoy it till prescription be run, his suffering
introduces that Servitude.

3. As to these who can impose Servitude, when they are Constitute by express
consent. They cannot be Constitute without consent of the (...) and if the
Superior consent not, they will not be effectual against him, if the (...) be
open and return to him by Right of Superiority, for a time, or for (...).
Liferenters cannot Constitute a Servitude, to have a real Right against
singular Successors, or beyond the endurance of that Liferent or Wodset; much
less can Tennents, yet both can begin or continue to make up Prescription.

But when Servitudes are Constitute by Prescription, the knowledge even of the
Superior is presumed, who though he had not the full Right, yet might have
interrupted.

4. Servitudes are extinct by the Proprietar of the Tenement dominant his
Renunciation, or contrary consent in Write, without any other Solemnity; and
there needs here no other Possession, then that Possession the Proprietar of
the servient Tenement has of his Tenement, whereby he may make free use
thereof; for he who Possesses Naturally or Corporeally, Possesses to all
effects and uses, unless there be impediment by any opposite standing Right.

Servitudes are also extinct by Prescription of Liberty; for as Servitudes by
Prescription take away the Liberty or free use of the Tenement servient: So
Liberty is recovered in the same way; for though in the short prescription in
the Civil Law, simple forbearance of the Servitude, will not import
prescription, unless some contrary Acts that may hinder the use of it, were
done by the Proprietar of the servient Tenement: Yet in our long Prescription
of forty years simple forbearance of the use may suffice, as presuming the
will of the party to be, to relinquish the Servitude, and to suffer Liberty to
be recovered; and when the Servitude is Constitute by Write, the same will be
the effect, seeing the Write and Obliegement prescrive not being used, or
acclaimed forty years.

5. To descend now to the kinds of Servitudes, there may be as many as there
are ways, whereby the liberty of a House or Tenement may be restrained in
favors of another Tenement; for Liberty and Servitude are contraries, and the
abatement of the one, is the being or enlargement of the other.

Servitudes, in respect of the subject matter, are either in reference to
City-Tenements, such as houses for Habitation, not for the use of Agriculture
or Pasturage, whether they be in Towns or Villages, or not: And in
Countrey-Tenements, such as Fields and Grounds, and all houses for the use
thereof, as Stables, Barns, Buyers, Kilns, wheresoever situate in Town or
Country.

Servitudes upon City-tenements are very many, whereof we shall point at the
prime; They are either positive or negative. A positive Servitude is that,
whereby the servient Tenement is not only restrained of its liberty, but is
constrained to suffer some things to be done to the behove of the dominant
Tenement, contrary to its Liberty. Negative Servitude is, whereby the freedom
of the servient Tenement is only restrained.

6. The prime positive Servitude of City-tenements is, the Servitude of
support, whereby the servient Tenement is liable to bear any burden for the use
of the dominant; and that either by laying on the weight upon its walls, or
other parts thereof; or by putting in Jeests or other means of support in the
walls of the same, which the Romans called servitutem tigni immissi; or
otherwise, this Servitude may be, by bearing the pressure or putt of any
Building for the use of the dominant Tenement, as of a Vault or Pend, or the
like: Such is the servitude of Superstructure, whereby any Building may be
built upon the servient Tenement; like unto which is now frequent in Edinburgh,
when one Tenement is built above another at diverse times; or diverse Stories or
Contignations of the same Tenement, are bought by diverse Proprietars, and
thereby the upper becomes a distinct Tenement, and has a Servitude upon the
lower Tenements, whereby they must support it.

The question uses to be moved here, Whether the owner of the servient
Tenement be obliged to uphold or repair his Tenement, that it may be
sufficient to support the dominant Tenement. There are opinions of the learned
and probable reasons upon both parts; for the affirmative makes the common
rule, that when any thing is granted, all things are understood to be granted
therewith that are necessary thereto: So he who constituteth upon his Tenement,
a Servitude of support, must make it effectual. And for the negative,
Servitudes are odious, and not to be extended beyond what is expressly granted
or accustomed, to which we incline; and therefore, it would be adverted how the
Servitude is constitute, that if it appear, the Constituent has granted this
Servitude, so as to uphold it; or if by custom, he has been made to uphold it,
not upon the account of his own Tenement, but of the dominant, he must so
continue; and it is not only a personal obligation, but a part of the Servitude
passing with the servient Tenement, even to singular Successors: But if it
appear not so constitute, it will import no more then a Tolerance, to lay on or
impute the burden of the dominant Tenement upon the servient, which therefore
the owner of the servient neither can hinder nor prejudge; but he is not
obliged to do any positive deed, by reparation of his own Tenement, to that
purpose, but the owner of the dominant Tenement has right to repair it for his
own use, by reason of his Servitude, and the owner of the servient Tenement
cannot hinder it; yet in what he thereby advantageth the servient Tenement, he
has upon the owner thereof the obligation of recompense, in quantum lucratus.

If it be objected, that within Burgh, the owners of the inferior and
supporting Tenements are obliged to repair for the behove of the superior
Tenements, the owners whereof may legally enforce Reparation; yet, it infers
not this to be the nature of the Servitude, but a positive Statute or Custom of
the Burgh for the public good thereof, which is concerned in upholding
Tenements. But mainly, the reason of it is, because when diverse owners have
parts of the same Tenement, it cannot be said to be a perfect division, because
the Roof remains Roof to both, and the Ground supporteth both; and therefore,
by the nature of communion, there are mutual obligations upon both, viz. That
the owner of the lower Tenement must uphold his Tenement as a Foundation to the
upper, and the owner of the upper Tenement must uphold his Tenement, as a Roof
and Cover to the lower: Both which, though they have the resemblance of
Servitudes, and pass with the thing to singular Successors; yet they are rather
personal obligations, such as pass in communion even to singular Successors of
either party.

7. The next positive City-servitude is, of Stillicides or Sinks: Stillicide is
the easing-drop which falls off any house or building, or the rain turned off
a Tenement either by dropping or by spout; concerning which, consider what may
be done freely without any Servitude; for thereby it will easily appear, what
Servitudes are competent herein. The main question is, Whether the owner of any
Ground may build Houses or Buildings closs to the march of his own Ground,
whereby his easing-drop will fall upon his neighbors Ground, or if by spout,
he may make the rain that falls upon his own Tenement, run over upon his
neighbors. And though it may appear from that common rule, Cujus est solum,
ejus est usque ad Coelum, that thereby the owner may build upon any part of his
own Ground what he will, even though it be to the detriment of his neighbors
prospect or light: yet, no man may dispose so upon his own Ground, as to put
any positive prejudice, hurt or damnage upon his neighbors; as if he should
alter the course of any River or Water, running within his own Ground, so that
it cause an alteration thereof in his neighbors Ground, or by damming of the
water, make it run upon his neighbors: And therefore, he may not so build upon
his own ground, as by gathering the water from its natural way, he should make
it fall together upon his neighbors ground; otherwise, any neighbor might
take away both the Profit and the Pleasure of his neighbors Tenement, or
closs, by Spouts or Kennels carrying in the rain water thereupon in abundance.
And albeit it be not so palpable in the Easing-drop as in Spouts, what the
neighbors detriment may be, yet the very Roof of the house is a considerable
gathering of the water: and therefore, every man ought so to build, as that the
drops of the building may fall upon his own Ground, which commonly in
neighborhood is counted two foot and a half within the Marches, according to
the ancient Roman custom, auctore Marciano. If it were not so, but that the
first builder might build to his March, no question the second might do the
like; and so there should be no way to convey the drop, without much detriment
to both. And though either might, by a Spout, keep the water from falling upon
his neighbors ground; yet, that Spout might fail, and at least his neighbonr
be put to the trouble of an Action, to cause him keep it right, which his
neighbor cannot enforce upon him. But, as the Romans account it as a
delinquence, and damnum infectum, as a damage like to befall, though not
befalling when any thing was built, to hang over the high way, or whereby a
neighbor might have probable damage: and therefore, either caused the doer to
demolish it, or to find Caution not to damnifie his neighbor: So from that
same ground of equity and expediencie, it ought to be in this case. There is an
exception here of Towns and Villages, which for common convenience, do allow
Houses to be built closs together, which is tacitly imported in the
incorporation of Towns, or union of Villages, in which, the custom of the place
must be the rule.

8. What has been said of Stillicides, holds more apparently in Sinks,
either for conveying of water-filth, or any thing else, upon or through the
neighbors Tenements, which cannot be done, unless there be a Servitude
thereupon either by consent or prescription.

9. Negative Urbane Servitudes, do chiefly concern the light view or prospect
of Tenements; for the owner of every Ground may build thereupon at his
displeasure, though thereby he hinder the view and prospect from his neighbors
Tenement, or the coming of the Sunbeams or light thereto, which being but in
relation to the extrinsick benefit of that which is not in, but without the
Tenement, is not accounted a positive damage, from which the owners of
neighboring Tenements must abstain, as in the case of Stillicides and Sinks,
and so much the rather; for common utility would be highly impaired, if the
first builder might hinder his neighbor to build upon his own Ground, upon
pretense that thereby his light or prospect were hindered; So that it is free
for the owner to build what he will, though thereby he darken his neighbors
Tenement. For helping the inconveniency that may ensue by this liberty of
building, two Servitudes use to be introduced, both restraining the owners
liberty; the one is, by giving light or prospect to the dominant Tenement,
whereby the building upon the servient Tenement may neither be lifted higher,
nor any building where there are none, or any Window or Inlet, whereby there
may be prospect from the dominant Tenement to, or through the servient, may be
marred or altered: the other is, whereby the prospect or view of the servient
Tenement is restrained, in that there may be no building thereupon, or Windows
opened therein, which may look to the House, Closs or Garden of the dominant
Tenement.

These Servitudes of light or prospect cannot be introduced by the enjoyment
and use thereof, though time out of mind: but there must be either consent or
prescription, by hindering the owner of the servient Tenement to use his
freedom; for the first builder, though he have light or view for an hundred
years through his neighbors ground, does not thereby nut a Servitude upon his
neighbor; but if he have been in use to hinder his neighbor to take away that
prospect in any lawful way, by reiterat acts during the time of prescription.
And therefore, though two Purchasers bought Houses from the same Owner, neither
of them was found to be astricted not to build as high as they pleased, albeit
to the prejudice of the light and view of the other, Hope Servitudes, Somervel
contra Somervel.

The Predial or Country Servitudes, whereby one Ground or Field is subservient
to another, may be as manifold as the free use of the one may be restrained or
impaired, for the profit or pleasure of the other; the chief of which in use
with us are Ways, Watering, Watergangs, Fewelling, Pasturage, Thirlage.

10. Ways are a part of the reservation from Property, and the necessary
vestige of the ancient community of the earth: Of which before, Tit. 12. 16.
and, which are understood as the common pertinents of all grounds, free Ish and
Entry are employed in the very right of Property, though not expressed: but that
does not infer Ways or Passages from every part of the dominant Ground, through
every part of the servient, which would make both unprofitable, but it must be
in the way, lest hurtful to either. And now by long custom it is every where
determined, and can be no further claimed, then according to ancient custom:
and it is a necessary effect of Property, rather then a Servitude, seeing it is
mutual and equal to either ground, whereof the one cannot be called dominant
and the other servient, until custom or consent have so determined, that the
ways which are constitute are more profitable to one Tenement, and more
burdensome to another, whereby this becomes the servient, and that the dominant.

Ways are distinguished by the Romans, according to the measure or
burdensomness of them in three kinds: The first and least is, a Road for a man
to walk or ride by, which they call Iter; the second called Actus, is a way for
Carts; the third which retains the common name, is, whereby droves may pass.
Of these, the greater comprehends the lesser; our custom sticks not to this
distinction, but measures the way according to the end for which it was
constitute, and by the use for which it was introduced, as having only a
Foot-road, or only a way for leading of Loads upon Horseback, or a way for
leading of Carts, or a way for driving of Cattle; It is observed accordingly.
There is another Distinction of Ways amongst the Romans; and with us, in
public and private Ways; public Ways are these which are constitute for
public use, and which go from one public place to another, as from one Burgh
to another; or from a Burgh to a public Port; This is called a a Highway, And
by the Romans, an Imperial or Pretorian way: And with us, the Kings Highway,
for preservation whereof, there are express Statutes, Parliament 1555. cap. 53.
Par. 1592. cap. 156. And this is patent to all the Leidges, without respect to
any Land, yea and to all Strangers having freedom of Traffic.

Private Ways are these which are Constitute by private Parties, for private use,
whereof both are, or at least one end is to a private place, and is a proper
Servitude to the use of that place for which it is Constitute; So a Way, the
one end whereof is at a public Place; may be a private way, if the other end
thereof be from, or for the use of a private place; as a Way from a private
place to a City or Church, which does not fall in to any public Way; for in so
far it remains private, and cannot be made use of, but for the behove of the
place or ground from which it comes; but it is not the largeness or latitude of
the Way, that makes a public or private Way: For a private Way may be as large
as a public. Private Ways are Constitute as other Servitudes by Prescription,
by going and coming that way uninterrupted, time out of mind, or forty years
without Write, or any other Right.

Private parties may repair these Ways becoming difficult; so an Heretor having
a Way to the Kirk, and to a Royal Burgh, at a Foord where there was an old
Bridge, was found (the Foord becoming difficult) to have right to rebuild the
Bridge, though the one end of it was but upon his Land, and the other end upon
his neighbors who withstood it, Nicol. de servitudibus, Sir James Cleiland
contra Cleiland.

11. Watering is a Servitude of taking water, proper to one Ground for the use
of another, whether it be for the Cattle of the dominant Ground, which is most
ordinary, or for other uses thereof, and it does ordinarily carry, a way for
these Cattle to come to that Water through the Servient Ground; but if it be
only a Way to public Water in Rivers or public Lochs, it differs nothing
from the Servitude of a Way, unless with the Way, there be also the making use
of the private Water in the Fountains, Ponds, or other places proper to the
servient Ground.

12. A Watergang is a Servitude, of conveying Water through the servient Ground,
for the use of the Dominant; and if the Water be proper, and belong to the
Servient Ground, the Servitude is the greater, but has no different name; such
are the Aquaeducts to Milns and other uses; for without such a Servitude, Water
may not be altered or diverted from its course, as was found, where the
Watercourse was the March betwixt the Heretors, that the one could not change
its old Channel (though it returned thereto again) without consent of the
other, though he alleged no prejudice, but the want of the pleasure of the
Water, and Fishing of Trouts, and that thereafter he might make use of it upon
his side, June 25. 1624. Ballantine contra Cranstoun. It was also found, that
an Heretor might not divert the Water from its own course upon his own Ground,
to the prejudice of others having the right of Fishing therein, Hope, de
actionibus in factum, Bairdie contra Stonehouse.

13. Feweling is a Servitude of suffering Fuel to be taken from the servient
Ground for the use of the Dominant and Inhabitants thereof. And it is ordinarily
in Peats, Turffs and Heather; and it does necessarly import Fields to win the
Feuel upon, and a way to bring it away, though these be not expressed. This
Servitude is sometimes Constitute indefinitely upon a whole Moss or Muire, and
sometimes upon a particular place thereof, and accordingly it is to be regulate
by the consent or custom which did Constitute it. The like is in the Way for
carrying the Feuel, which sometimes is a Cart-way, sometimes only a Load-way.

Feweling is presumed to be comprehended under Pasturage, though not expressed;
as the Minor Servitudes are involved in the Major, yet this presumption is
taken off by contrary Custom, or express paction, for they are not inseparable,
asiter and actus, are under via, there being no end nor Interest to hinder a
man to go or ride, where a Cart or Drove does pass; but where common Pasturage
is Constitute, it is a several and separable Interest to break the ground for
Fuel, Feal or Divet, which in so far exclude the other party, and appropriats
that part of the Grassto the Feweler; and so it was found, that a Servitude of
Pasturage introduced by forty years peaceable Possession of the Pasturage, was
not to be extended to Feal and Divet, seeing the Acquirer was interrupted in
these, February 15. 1668. Lord of Hayning contra Town of Selkirk. And where
the Servitude was only Constitute for Feal, Divet, Clay and Stone, in a large
Muir indefinitely, it was not found to hinder the Proprietar to rive out a part
of the Muire, leaving enough that might serve that Servitude for ever unplewed,
and with condition, that if that sufficed not, more of the Muire should be left
Lee again, wherein respect was had to the public utility of making a large
Muire to be profitable, June 21. 1667. John Watson contra Fevers of Dunkennan.
The like was found in a Servitude of Fewelling upon a Muire of vast bounds,
that it did not hinder the Proprietar to Plow: But the most convenient places
for Fewelling were appointed to be laid aside, as they were adjacent to the
Dominant Tenements, so that they might be secure of perpetual Feweling, which
the proprietar might never plow, January 20. 1680. Earl of Southesk contra
Melgunt and others. But in all these by the nature of the Servitude, they
should not be extended further then for the use of the Dominant ground, and so
not applicable by the Heretor of the Dominant ground, to any other not
inhabiting the Dominant Field; yet if Custom and Prescription has been to the
contrary, it overrules all; and so it was found, that an Heretor or his
Tennents, having right to a common Muire, not only might win Fuel there for
his own use, but sell it to others, June 21. 1611, Moniemusk contra Pitfoddels.

14. Pasturage is a Servitude, whereby the Grass of the ground servient, is
applied to the use of the ground Dominant, and this sometimes reaches to the
full benefit of the Grass; so that the Proprietar has no share thereof, but
the benefit of the Tillage and other pertinents beside the Grass, whereby he
may Till when he pleases, or open the Ground for other effects of Property, as
to win Coal or Stone, unless by consent or Custom it be otherways regular; but
so far as remains Grass, belongs wholly to the other. But most ordinarily
Pasturage is in common, either to the Proprietar and him that has the
Servitude: Or to many having acquired the Servitnde promiscuously, though with
exclusion of the Proprietar from Grassing; and that again is either for an
indefinite number of sums, or definitly for a certain number expressed.

Common Pasturage is ordinarily Constitute by the Charter of the Dominant
ground, expressing the Clause (with common Pasturage) which, when general, has
no other effect then the common Clauses of Charters, to give the Right of any
pasturage belonging to the Fee (if any be) But if it be cled with immemorial or
forty years Possession, by the Act of Prescription, it carries unquestionably
the Right of Pasturage, upon any ground belonging to the Superior, and upon
which he might, the time of the Charter, have Constitute a Pasturage: Yet it is
more dubious, whether long Possession can introduce Pasturage upon ground not
belonging to the Superior, granter of the Charter; and it has been found that
it has been so Constitute; yea though the Clause of common Pasturage be not in
the Charter, but only the Land Disponed with parts and pertinents, with long
Possession, Spots. Servitudes, Knockdolian contra Tennents of Partick. The like
was formerly found in the case of the Town of Pearth anent the Isle of Sleiples.

Pasturage may also be constitute by a Contract cled with Possession, without
any Seasine, which is effectual, even against singular Successors, Jan. 26.
1622. Turnbul contra Lord of Blanernie.

Pasturage being constitute in reference to the Dominant ground, though it be
indefinite and promiscuous, must be regulate and proportionat according to the
use of the several Dominant grounds, having right thereto proportional to the
Rent thereof, or the Goods it may hold, and Fodder in Winter. Thus a Comontie
was ordained, to be visited and soumed, and proportionat to every Room, having
privilege therein, Nicol. de communi, the Lord of Sessnock contra Nimnto,
absent. And though the pasturage has been never so long promiscuously used,
without any determinat soums, but that all have put to it what they pleased,
that cannot be constitute by prescription, as a right being contrary to the
very nature and substance of the Servitude, whereby the pasturage would be
destroyed and unprofitable to all, if not regulable and restrainable to what it
might hold, and that by proportion; for though some have been in use to put
more Goods, and some fewer; yet unless the quantities had been determinat and
fixed, others could not be excluded from their proportion, but such as by
forty years forbearance, are wholly excluded.

It is accustomed in some places, to regulate common pasturage by souming and
rouming, which is the determining of the several soums it may hold by
particular proportion to every Room of the Dominant Tenement, but none of the
parties interressed can compel the rest to divide, seeing it would be frequently
to the disadvantage of severals of the parties Interressed, as when common
pasturage is in a common Muire, enclosed with a Dyke, and so needs none, at
least but one herd for them all, which if it were divided, of times the several
proportions of most interressed, could not be worth a several hird, especially
when the property remains in another, though burdened with this Servitude, even
though the proprietar retain a share in the common Pasturage, yet he alone is
proprietar; and if any Stone or Coal were found there, it would belong to him
alone: But it is otherways in the Community of the full property, where, after
division any party may Till and use all Acts of Property. A Servitude of
Pasturage of a definite number of Sheep upon large Muirs, was found not to give
Interest to cause the Heretor or Tennents soum the same, that the ground might
not be overflocked, to the prejudice of the Servitude, January 23. 1679. Mr.
Alexander Dunlop contra Lord of Drumelzier.

Where Pasturage is Constitute upon ground, a part of which has been plowed
before the Constitution, it does not hinder the Master of the ground to Plow
other places, then what was formerly Plowed, but he may Plow as much as he
pleases, yet so that whenever the Plowed ground lies Lee, the pasturage will
reach the same, Jan. 20. 1680. Earl of Southesk contra Melgam and other
Heretors about Munrew-mount.

15. The chief and most frequent Servitude in Scotland is Thirlage, or a
restriction of Lands to Milns, wherein the Miln is Dominant, and the Lands
astricted are servient. For as has been shown before, a Miln is a distinct
Tenement from Land, and is not comprehended under the name of part and
pertinent thereof, unless there be an Erection in Barony, Lordships, etc.

Milns at first were built, as sometimes they are yet, without any astriction
or Thirlage, but only to gain by the Work thereof, an equivalent hire, and so
it is a voluntary personal Contract of Location and conduction, none being
obliged to grind their Grain thereat; but such only come as please, and for
such hire as parties do accord: Yet these who come to a Miln without
astriction, and without express paction, are understood thereby to agree to the
ordinary Multures of Corns not astricted, which are called Outen-Town-Multures:
But now most Lands are astricted to certain Milns, and for a certain quantity
of Multure, far beyond the value of the work or grinding of the Corns; but upon
other considerations, whereby it is a part of the Rent of the Lands astricted,
as when an Heretor astricts his own Tennents to his own or another Miln, it is
a part of their Rent, for the more Multure they pay, they pay the less Rent;
and so it is alike to them, whether it be great or small, or otherways. When a
Superior gives out Lands upon condition of Thirlage, the Multures are a part
of the reddendo or price: and it is a general rule, that none can thirle Lands
but he that is Fiar, and has power of disposal thereof; and therefore,
astriction though it be not favorable, but has the ordinary odium that other
Servitudes have, yet it is not to be accounted an unjust and intolerable
Bondage.

16. There are many questions about Thirlage, which may be reduced to these two
heads; first, How Thirlage is constitute and instructed. Secondly, How far it
is to be extended; As for the first, we shall proceed from the ways more
evident to these, which are more dubious; and first positively, and then
negatively.

The first and most unquestionable way of constitution of Thirlage is, when an
Heretor Thirleth his own Lands to his own Miln, by consent of his Tennents,
whereby the Multure becomes a part of the Rent. Secondly, When an Heretor
dispones his Lands with express condition of Thirlage thereof to his Miln, or
to any other Miln. Thirdly, When the Heretor of Milns or Lands, Feues and
dispones the Miln with the Multure of his own Lands, per expressum, all these
ways are not contraverse constitutions of thirlage, whether they be in an
Infeftment, Contract, bond, or other personal right, for these being cled with
Possession, are sufficient to constitute a Servitude, though the right of the
Miln, being a separate Fee. (...) Infeftment, Fourthly, When the Heretor of the
Miln (...) or Dispones the same with the Multures used and wont, though he do
not express out of what Lands, it is sufficient to constitute a Thirlage upon
the Lands, which were wont to pay in Towns Multure, being then his own Lands;
or to convey the right of the Multures of other Lands, being formerly
astricted. But where a Barrony was principally disponed with the Miln thereof,
and the Multures of the Miln used and wont; it was not found to extend to the
Multures of another Barrony, holden of another Superior, though in use to come
to that Miln, December 11. 1666. Earl of Cassils contra Tennents of Dalmortoun
and John Whiteford. Fifthly, Thirlage of a whole Barrony is inferred by
Infeftment in the Miln of the Barrony, with the Multures of the said Miln being
granted by the Heretor, both of the Miln and Barrony, whereby these parts of
the Barrony that were not in use of astricted Multures before, were thereby
astricted, and that according to the use of the rest of the Barrony, Jan. 31.
1611. Wilson contra Warrock, here the constitution bore not, used and wont, but
Multures of the Miln generally. The like where the Infeftment bore only, the
Miln of the Barrony, with astricted Multures, not repeating Multures of the
Barrony, July 9. 1611. Alexander Moncrief contra Borthwick and Pittinweem.
Sixthly, Thirlage is constitute without Infeftment, or any Write subscrived by
the Heretor of the Lands astricted, but only by an Act or Rolment of Barron
Court, bearing, the Heretors consent, and forty years possession conform,
Hope, Milns and Multures, Earl of Murray contra Earlesmiln. The like by Decree
against the Possessors, their Master not being called, or consenting, but his
Bailie inacting them to pay Multure with long possession, Ibid. Mr. Andrew Miln
contra Patrick Falconer. Seventhly, A dry Multure was found constitute and
instructed by use of payment, forty years without any other adminicle, because
it could not be constructed as a free or voluntary deed, as other Multures may
be, Hope, Milns and Multures, James Dog contra Maxwel and the Tennents of
Prestoun. July 23. 1675. Sir George Kinaird contra Mr. John Drummond. Eighthly,
Thirlage is inferred of Lands within Barronies of the Kings Property to the
Milns, holden and repute to be the Milns of that Barrony, only as being in use,
past memory of man to do deeds of Thirlage, as paying of Multures, laying in of
Damns, February 5. 1635. Dog contra Mushet. January 8. 1662. James Stuart
contra Feuars of Aberlednoch. January 4. 1662. John Nicolson contra Feuars of
Tillicoutrie. Nor was it found relevant, that the Feuars had right, cum
molendinis, in the tenendas, which was but past of course in Exchequer, in the
common Clause, as was found in the foresaid case, January 8. 1662. James Stuart
contra Feuars of Aberlednoch. The reason hereof is, because the Kings Rights
are Constitute, Jure Coronae, without Infeftment or other Write, which is not
requisite, or accustomed to be kept; and therefore, the presumption from long
possession is sufficient, Craig, l. 2. Dieges. 8. Relates it as the opinion of
some, that immemorial Possession is sufficient to instruct the Thirlage of
Kirklands, in the same way as of the Kings Lands, to which he assenteth not;
but the reason seems much to be the same, especially after the Reformation,
when the Evidents of the Kirk were lost or destroyed: So that long possession
has been sufficient to instruct the right of Propperty of Kirklands; and may
much more instruct this Servitude, unless Milns and Multures had been granted
to the Feuars anterior to the Feu of the Miln. But unquestionably, Thirlage is
easilier sustained in Kirk-lands then others, as it was sustained, being by an
infeftment of a Miln, cum Multuris generally; and the Bishops Precepts to his
Tennents to pay their Multures to that Miln, with long Possession, though
without consent of the Chapter, December. 7. 1665. David Veatch contra John
Duncan.

17. As to the negative, first, Thirlage is not inferred by use of coming to
the Miln, and paying Multures there at, though immemorial, even though the
Multures paid were as great as the thirle Multures, March 13. 1635. Gilchrist
contra Menzies. The reason hereof is, because such payment is but voluntatis,
non necessitatis; and therefore, can no more infer a Servitude, then they who,
past memory, came such a way to a Town, were astricted only to come that way:
But Infeftment in a Miln, with the astricted Multures of such Lands per
expressum, and forty years possession of paying the insucken Multures, was
found to constitute the Thirlage, though the Feuars were infeft cum molendinis,
before the Feu of the Miln, and sometimes went to other Milns, which not being
frequent, and for some whole years, was found but clandestine, and such as
occurs in all Thirlages, and no legal interruption, June 29. 1665. Heretors of
the Miln of Kythick contra Feuars.

Secondly, Thirlage is not inferred, because the Lands are a part of the
Superiors Barony, having a Miln of the Barony, where the Vassals Infeftment
contains cum Molendinis and Multuris, or a Feu-duty pro omni alio onere, or
such a Feu-duty allanerly, November. 26. 1631. Oliphant contra Earl of Marshal.
But where the Barons Disposition contained not these Clauses, his giving a
subaltern Infeftment of a part of his Barony, which part was thirled to the
Miln before, it was not found liberat, but continued thirled to the Miln of the
Barony, though the Miln and Multures of the Barony were disponed thereafter to
another, July 17. 1629. Newlistoun contra Inglis. For, if the Vassal had
acquired that part of the Barony with the Multures, it would have been expressed
particularly or generally, seeing thereby the seller behoved to diminish the
rental of his Miln.

Thirdly, Thirlage of a Barony or any part thereof, was not inferred by a
Disposition or Infeftment of a Miln granted by the Baron, though it be the only
Miln of the Barony, seeing he expressed not it to be so, nor expressed any Lands
nor the Multures thereof, but only dispo ed the Miln with the pertinents, July
12. 1621. William Douglas contra Earl of Murray. In this case, there were
several acts of Court thirling the Tennants, and long possession, which was not
insisted on, but only the act of Court, which was not found sufficient, seeing
it was only by a Bailie, without warrant or consent of the Heretor, albeit cled
with forty years possession. But, a Decree against the Tennants for astricted
Multures, and immemorial possession, was found to constitute Thirlage to the
Miln of the Barony, albeit the defender was infeft cum molendinis, prior to the
Infeftment of the Heretor of the Miln, and did sometimes go to other Milns, but
clandestinely, and sometimes was brought back by force, June 24. 1665. Colonel
Montgomery contra Wallace and others which did not import Interruption, which
was not found by clandestine abstraction, but by paying no Multure, at least
for a whole year.

Fourthly, Thirlage is not inferred by any deed of Tennants, Possessors,
Wodsetters, Liferenters, or any other but the Fiar; and therefore, there will
be no Process sustained against the Tennants for Multures, unless the Fiar be
called, February 9. 1628. Lord of Wardess contra Lord of Dunkincie or at
least, that there have been prior Decreets wherein he was called, constituting
the Thirlage, and all (...) and Acts otherwise are null by exception, if
quarrelled within prescription.

Fifthly, Thirlage of Lands to another man's Miln, does not infer a Thirlage of
the Teinds of these Lands, though acquired by the Heretor who thirled the
Lands, July 7. 1635. Lord of Innerweek contra Hamiltouns. The like in
molendino Regio, where no write was shown, but possession, to consttute the
Thirlage, which was found not to extend the Teinds, January 8. 1662. James
Stewart contra Feuars of Aberledno. The like where the Clause of thirlage bore,
omnium granorum crescentium super terris suis: Here the Heretor of the Lands
thirled had no right to the Teind, Spots. Milns and Multures, Lord of
Wauchtoun contra Hoom of Foord. The like where the Clause in a Charter, granted
by an Abbot to his Feuars, bore the astriction, omnium granorum, which was
found to extend to the Teinds which then belonged to the Abbot; and the Teind
was found thirled, when a Feu-duty was paid both for Stock and Teind, January
21. 1681. Greirson contra Gordoun of Spado. Nor will the exception of Teind be
sustained in Milns belonging to Kirkmen, having right to both Stock and Teind.

18. The next point proposed, was the effect and extent of Thirlage, being
constitute, which is exceeding various; for clearing whereof, advert, That
thirlage is either introduced and instructed by Custom and Prescription, or by
Paction and Write; when it is by Prescription and Custom, it is wholly regulat
by Custom, and the Heretor of the Miln and his Tennents, can get no more, and
will get less then they instruct to be their ancient custom, which holds where
thirlage is constitute by write, but generally with the multures, sequels, and
services used and wont, for then also custom must rule it, and the Heretor of
the miln will not be put to prove what the custom was before that Write, though
it relate to custom past; but long custom present will be sufficient
presumption and proof of what was that preterit custom, if the contrary cannot
be proven; and though it should be proven, yet forty years possession will
alter the case, and either increase the Servitude or the Freedom.

If the Servitude be constitute by Writ, special regard is had to the tenor of
the Writ, which therefore varieth thirlage accordingly; So thirlage simply
expressed in the Writ, without mention of all Grain growing upon the ground, was
found to extend to all Corns growing thereupon, abstracted to other Milns, or
sold, though they had paid no Multure past memory for sold Corns, June 26.
1635. Lord of Wauchtoun contra Hoom of Foord.

19. A Clause of thirlage bearing, Una cum Multuris omnium terrarum intra
Parochiam, found not to extend to other Corns bought-in, and not growing within
the sucken, Hope, Milns and Multures, Giles Murray contra Tennants of Drumsei.
A Clause of thirlage, thirling an Heretors tennants to another man's Miln, and
all the Tennants Grain growing upon the Land, found not to extend to that
Heretors Farm-bear, whether delivered to him, or sold by him to his tennants or
others, but that the same was Multure-free, but yet was thirled, and behoved to
come to the Miln and pay the small duties only, Hope, Milns and Multures, Lord
Keith contra Nathaniel Keith: Which is also observed, with this further, that
invecta and illata were not thereby thirled, Spots. de servitutibus. A Clause
of thirlage omnium granorum crescentium, was found not to extend to the
Heretors Farms who had so thirled his Lands, not being grund at any other Miln,
but sold or otherwise made use of: Neither to Corns not growing within the
thirle, though tholing fire and water, or garnelled there, July 11. 1621. Keith
contra Tennants of Peterhead. A Clause of thirlage granted by a Town to a Miln,
expressing invecta and illata, found to be extended to all Corns Kilned or
Steeped within the Thirle, though not brought to the Miln, nor use made of
within the thirle, Spoos. de servitute, Ruthven contra Cuthbert of Drakies.
Thirlage of invecta and illata constitute by a Towns Charter, found effectual
as to the Grain that grew in the thirle of that Miln, and was liable for a
greater multure, as grana crescentia, so that these Corns being bought by the
Town, fell to pay both the ordinary multure, as growing in the Thirle, and a
lesser multure by a several Thirlage by the Towns Charter, thirling, omnia
invecta and illata in their Town, to that same miln, seeing the Town might shun
the inconvenience of double multure, by buying only Corns, which grew not in
the Thirle of that miln, December. 11. 1678. Sir Andrew Ramsay contra the Town of
Kirkaldie.

20. In this case invecta and illata, was found to import malt made within the
Liberties of the Town, or Brewed within the same, but not to meal where they
did not buy the Corn, but bought the meal, though it was baken in the Town, in
respect it was so proven to be the custom, November 24. 1680. inter eosdem. But
the quantity of abstract multures being referred to the Towns men's oaths, they
were not found olieged to depone that they had paid the whole Multures of
years long bygone; but only if they knew and remembered, that any part of it
was not paid, and what that part of it was, December 12. 1679. inter eosdem:
But ordinarily, invecta and illata, or tholing Fire and Water is only interpret
of Steeping and Killing, but not of Baking or Brewing.

A Clause in Feuars Charters Thirling them to the Superiors Milns of such a
Paroch, whereof there were four, was found not to be put in the option of the
Feuars, to go to any of the four, but to keep to the particular Miln, to which
they were accustomed, in respect the Milns had several Suckens, and the Feuars
were in use forty years to pay Multures, and do all services thereto, as was
found, 1663. as to the Miln of Catharine. And the like found, as to the Miln of
Dalsangan, another Miln of Mauchlein about the same time.

Thirlage being constitute, or determined by custom, does ordinarily carry, not
only Multures of the Grain growing within the Sucken, but those that thole fire
and water within the same, by being kilned and steeped, and in some places
brown within the same.

The quantity of the Multure, if it be not determined by Write, is determined
by use of payment of the Barrony or Sucken, though a part thereof in question,
paid less formerly, which did only liberat them from bygones, July 20. 1610.
Neilson of Craigcaffie contra Tennents of Innermesson.

21. Beside the Multures Thirlage, is extended to Sequels, which being
expressed in Thirlage, is understood to be the Knaveship, Bannock, or lock
payable besides the Multures, to the Milners and their Servants for their
service, according to the use of the several Milns, though these be not
expressed, March 22. 1628. Adamson of Braco contra Tennents of Shallie. The like
before, even where the Corns were abstracted, Spots. Milns, March 22. 1628. And
where the Thirlage is by use and custom, these small Duties are accordingly due
beside the Multure.

22. Thirlage also carries service to the Miln, as carrying home of
Miln-stones, upholding the Damns, Watergates, and of the Miln-house, which are
Services diverse, and regulat according to the customs of the several Milns.

The Thirlage constitute by Infeftment of a Miln, cum mutturis and sequelis,
found to give right to the ordinary Miln Services to the Miln-damn and
Miln-stones, by paction or prescription, the same were taken away, February 27.
1668. Maitland contra Lesly.

In proving of the customs of these Duties to Milns, there is no necessity to
prove forty years constant custom, but diverse years custom, in (...), unless
a contrary custom be proven by the Thirled, Nicol. de servitute, (...) contra
Ballachan.

But it was found, that an Heretor of a Miln being Infeft, and in possession of
the Miln, with the Multures of the Lands in question, (...), he has the
benefit of a possessory Judgment, with seven years (...), and so it will
stand and be effectual, till it be reduced notwithstanding an anterior
Infeftment, cum mollendinis, June 28. 1636. Maxwel contra Maxwel.

23. Thirlage also is esteemed by some, to carry this privilege, that the
Heretor of the Miln may, brevi manu, cast down any other Miln bigged within the
Thirle: But Craigs opinion is in the contrary, in the forecited place, and it
was so found, where the Miln so bigged had gone fifteen days, Spots. Husband
and Wife, Lord of Ludquharn contra Earl of Marischal. But whether it may not
be hindered, while the new Miln is in building, is not so clear, at least it
may be civily interrupted, nunciatione novi operis. In respect of the favor of
going Milns; these are not to be destroyed, for the public use of the
Country; from which ground it is, that the Water-gang of a Miln, passing
through an Heretors Land, was not suffered to be stopped, though it was without
consent or prescription, not being to his prejudice, Hope, Milns, Lord of Bass
contra Lord of Balgown. But though Milns may not be stopped, brevi manu yet
building a Miln within the Thirle on pretense to get Voluntary Multure; and
that the builder will still bring his own Corns to the other Miln, is
unwarrantable, and contrary the common custom of destroying Querns, which might
have the same pretense, nor could it be known what were Clandestinely grund at
the new Miln, within the old Thirle; but Halyards being building a Miln near to
Breast-miln, who craved summarly to stop him, by Supplication to the Lords,
they did refuse to stop, because it was not clear that his Land were Thirled,
July 29. 1673.

Thirlage has also this effect in someplaces, that when any person is
apprehended, abstracting Corn, the Horse and Corn may be seized upon, braevi
manu, and the Corns confiscated to the Milner; and Craig relates in the
forecited place, that it is the ordinary custom in France, that Corns are
Escheat to the Lord, and may be seized summarly. It is related by Craig, l. 2.
Dieg. 8. out of the Statutes of King William, that there ought to be a Master
and two Servants in every Miln, sworn to be faithful to the Master of the
Ground and his men, and that the common Multure, not determined by Infeftment,
is the twentieth Grain; and that all Grain that shall be set down upon the
Ground of another Thirle, shall pay Multure there; and that when a Horse
carrying Grain, out of the Thirle is taken, the Grain is escheat to the Miller,
and the Horse to the Master; and that he who removes from the Thirle, shall
have his Seed Multure free: These are most part overruled by custom, as has
been before showen.

This far I find it amongst our customs, that the Spuilzie of a Horse was
elided, because he was seized upon, taking Corns out of the Thirle to another
Miln, as was the custom of that place, and that after carrying back thereof,
the Horse was offered that same night, January 22. 1635. Menzies contra Mckie,
Thirlage, omnium granorum crescentium, upon such a Tenement, found to extend,
not only to the Tennents, but to the Mains, July 29. 1673. Dundas of Breastmiln
contra Skeen of Halyards.

24. It remains that we confider how Thirlage being Constitute, is destitute or
taken off; and that is in the like manner as it was constitute, either by
prescription, whereby Liberty is recovered to the Thirled Lands, which needs no
positive Act to deny the Multures, but simple forbearance to lift or seek them
is enough, or otherways by any Discharge or Renunciation, without further
solemnity, for in that way also it is constitute; but the most ordinary way of
taking off Thirlage, is by granting a Charter, containing Milns and Multures in
the tenendas, which was not found good as to the Kings Feuars, because past in
Exchequer without notice, as the common Style, January 8. 1662. James Stuart
contra Feuars of Aberledno; which is more evident, when Milns and Multures are
in the dispositive Clause; it has the like effect when the Miln and Multure is
disponed to one party, and by a prior Disposition or Infeftment, the same Lands
which were of old of the Thirle, are granted to the Vassals thereof, cum
molendanis and multuris, for thereby the posterior Infeftment of the Miln and
Multures, is a non habente potestatem and ineffectual, November. 26. 1631. Mr.
William Olephant contra Earl Marischal.

25. In Thirlage there is only allowance or deduction of Seed and Horse-corn,
but nothing for Expenses of Laboring, Jan. 14. 1662. Nicolson contra Feuars of
Tillicoutrie.

26. Thirlage by a Vassal was not found effectual against the Superior, when
the Lands fell in his hands by Ward, unless the Superior had consented, December.
11. 1666. Earl of Cassils contra Tennents of Dalmortoun. Thirlage by a Vassals
Charter, found not to make him liable for the Abstraction of his Tennents, but
only the Tennents themselves, December. 10. 1667. Earl of Cassils contra Sheriff
of Galloway.

27. If it be questioned whether Multure be due when the Miln is unable to work
by Frost, breaking of the Damn, or otherways, it must be distinguished, that if
the insufficiency of the Miln or the want Servants be through the fault of the
Heretor, or his milner, these of the Thirle may go to other milns, and they
will not only be free of small duties, but they may retain for the Reparation
of their damnage; such Out-sucken multures as they paid at the miln they went
to, but if the insufficiency be by accident, without the milners fault, they
may go elsewhere with what is necessary for the Interim, and will be free of
the small duties thereof, but of no part of the multure, because as has been
shown before, multures are now a distinct Rent, and are not as the hire of the
work, but besides the multure, the small duties are the hire; and therefore,
the milners failzie can only take away these small duties, it was so found,
February 9. 1666. Heretrix of John smiln contra Feuars.

TITLE XVIII. TEINDS, Where, of Benefices, Stipends, Presentation, Collation,
Institution, Tacks, Annats, and Patronage.
1. Teinds affect all Intrometters, but not singular Successors. 2. The rise of
Teinds. 3. The first division of Parochs. 4. Whether Teinds be jure divino. 5.
Kinds of Teinds. 6. We have no personal Teinds and Viccarage, is local
according to the custom of the several places. 7. What Lands are Teind-free.
8. Teinds might not be Feued after the Lateran Council. 9. Teinds are not
annexed to the Crown. 10. Teinds included. 11. Surrender of Teinds to the King
and his Decree Arbitral, for valuing and selling thereof. 12. Commission for
valuating of Teinds. 13. Annuitie of Teinds. 14. The Rule for valuing Teinds.
15. Benefices. 16. Decimae debentur Parocho: 17. Consent of the Chapter,
Convent, or Prebend, how far requisite. 18. Diminution of the Rental of
Benefices. 19. Consent of Patrons. 20. Tacks by Colleges. 21. The present
condition of Teinds. 22. Drawn Teinds. 23. Spuilzie of Teinds and Inhibitions.
24. Rentalled Teind bolls. 25. The interest of Bishops in their Benefices. 26.
The interest of Ministers in Benenefices. 27. Kirks Patrimonial, or Patronate.
28. Presentation and Collation. 29. The effect of Possession as to Benefices
and Stipends. 30. Stipends Allocat, and unallecate. 31. Teinds change as the
Lands are in Grass, Corn or other Cropped. 32. Teinds are not debita fundi. 33.
The Legal terms of benefices and Stipends. 34. The Annat. 35. Patronage.
TEINDS being a burden, affecting Lands, and profits thereof; and being also a
disrinct Right from the Lands, do, most fitly fall under Consideration here,
and either as a Servitude subjoyned to the preceding Servitudes, or as a
several Right requires the same Order.

1. Teinds do affect all Intrometters with the Stock and Teind jointly, or with
the Teind severally; but though they be valued, they are not debita fundi,
affecting singular Successors, for which the ground can be poinded, February
20. 1662. Earl of Callender contra Andrew Monro. Neither do they affect the
present Heretor, while a Liferenter possesses, June 24. 1663. Menzies contra
Lord of Glenurchie.

Teinds, as the Word denotes, signifies the tenth of that which is Teinded;
and besides the civil Decimations that have been imposed by Sovereigns upon
their Subjects, as a Tribute for defraying of public Charges; there have been
anciently and frequently Teinds granted for Sacred and Pious uses; So Abraham
gave to Melchisedec, the Teind of the spoil of his Enemies, Genesis 14. 20. Jacob
voweth to God also the tenth of all that God should give him, Genesis 28. 22. And
it is evident that the Lord appointed the tenths of Israel for the Levites,
whom he had set apart for himself, who were to give a tenth thereof to the
Priests, who served at the Altar, Numb. 18. 26, and 28: The Teinds did so
continue till the alteration of the Jewish Church. The Heathens also did
Consecrate their Teinds to their Idols, and paid them to their Priests: Thus
Plinius, Cap. 14, and 19. observes: And Herodot observes in his first Book,
the like of Syrus.

3. Aristus Bishop of Rome, who was the first who divided the Ministerial
Charge by Parochs; the Church before not being so distribute to the several
Ministers; this Order being so convenient, that by appropriation of a fixed
Pastor to a certain flock, no Pastor might be idle, and no flock neglected. It
has run over the Christian World, and the Teinds of these Parochs have been
paid to the Pastors and Ministers of the Church.

4. From these and the like grounds, most of Papists, and some of Protestant
Divines, have concluded Teinds to be jure divino, as being Institute and
Consecrate by God himself, having a moral and perpetual foundation, that these
who are set apart from worldly affairs, to the service of God, should have a
competent Liveliehood from these for whom they serve, but the determination of
the Quota, to be the tenth part rather then any other proportion, is a positive
Law that God manifested, and was observed before the written Word; and was
retained by the Heathens, even after they had deviat from the true God: But
most of the Protestant Divines, hold Teinds to be the voluntary Dedication and
Consecration of men, for Pious uses, and to have continued in a tenth part from
the example of Abraham, the father of the faithful, and of the Divine
Constitution, in the Judicial Law; but there is no Divine moral Precept in the
Word for Teinds, of which there is no mention in the New Testament, even where
the mentainance of Ministers is purposely spoken to; but only that these who
serve at the Altar should live by the Alter. That these who sow Spiritual
things, should reap Temporal things, which does hold forth a moral duty of
Recompense, to provide a competent Liveliehood for these who are separat from
the World for our cause, but does not infer a tenth part or any other
determinat proportion, but what is convenient.

5. Teinds are defined by the Canonists, to be a tenth part of all profits and
increase; and they are of three kinds, personal, predial and mixed: Personal
are the Teinds of the profit of personal industry, as by Trading, Negotiation,
Artifice, Science: Predial are of the natural Fruits of the Ground or Water:
mixed are of the Industrial Fruits of the Ground.

6. But our custom allows of no personal Teinds; and of these predial and
mixed, such only which have been in use, according to the Custom of the several
places; such are Teind Fish, for which the buyers of the Fish were found
liable, because of that custom past memory, February 15. 1631. Brice Semple and
Schaw contra Brown. But where the Fishers were forty years in Possession of
Fishing, without Teind, in such a Bay, it was found sufficient to liberate
them, November 24. 1665. Bishop of the Isles contra the Lord of Greenock and
others: also in other places, there is no Teind of Fishes; in some places, Hay,
Staigs, Swine, Lint, Hemp are Teinded, in other places not, but generally,
Victual is Teinded, and Stirks, Lambs, Wool and Milk.

7. The Viccarage Teinds is local, according to the custom of every Benefice or
Paroch, and therefore, was suftained for the Viccarage of Salt, and so much out
of each Loom, but not upon thirteen years Possession, but only upon
prescription by forty years Possession, November 29. 1678. Mr. John Birnie
contra Earl of Neth^sda^^ and his Tennents: Yea, in the same Paroch there was
found diversity of the Viccarage, some places having no Viccarage of Cows and
other places paying Viccarage of Milk, and Wool for Sheep; and other places
paying Viccarage of Hay, Goose and Grice, July 7. 1677. Parson of Prestounhaugh
contra his Parochioners. And Viccarage was not found due out of Yards, which
were a part of the Chanrions Portions, unless it were proven that they had been
in use of payment of Viccarage before.

7. Some Lands also by long custom, are Teind-free, as Temple-lands, being out
of use of payment of Teinds for fifty years, were found free for all time
thereafter, Hope, Teinds, Earl of Wigtoun contra Lady Torwood. Gleibs and
Manses are also Teind-free. And the Teinds of Lands belonging to the Cystertian
Order, Hospitlers and Templers, were Teind-free, and so continue in their
Feuars, though the privilege was only as to what these Orders labored
themselves; yet the Teind was found to belong to their many Feuars, for what
the Feuars themselves labor, July 15. 1664. Thomas Crawford contra Lord of
Prestoungrange.

8. Teinds were prohibit to be set in Feu to Laymen, by the Lateran Council,
held by Pope Innocent the second, or any way to be alienate from the Church:
Though Church Lands might be set Feu, these being accounted but the
Temporality, and the Teinds the Spirituality, as flowing from a Spiritual
ground or Divine Right.

9. Teinds are also acknowledged with us to be the Patrimony of the Kirk, Par.
1567. cap. 10. and they are not annexed to the Crown, as the temporality of
Benefices are. Par. 1587. cap. 29.

10. Yet decimae inclusae are here excepted, for these are Feued with the
Stock, and can be only such, as time out of mind have gone along with the
Stock, and never have been drawn nor separate; and therefore, are so ordinarily
expressed, decimae, inclusae, nunquam antea separatae; and therefore, such are
presumed to have been Feued out with the Stock, before the Lateran Council, and
so consistent with the Canons: But if it can be proven that once they were
separate by Churchmen, though they had right both to Stock and Teind, and were
Feued with Teinds included, they are not valide decimae inclusae, which no
Churchman could Feu after the said Council. Neither can the King constitute
Feus, de novo cum decimis inclusis, so that these Teinds included, are estimate
as no Teinds, long custom being fufficient to make Lands Teind-free; and
therefore, they have never come in with Teinds or Benefices in any burden,
affecting Teinds by Law, as Ministers Stipends, etc.

11. About the time of Abolition of Popery in Scotland, the Popish Clergy did
grant more frequently long Tacks of their Teinds: the King also gave Donatives
of Teinds and erected them with Church Lands into Barronies and Lordships, so
that there remained little of them, no way able to entertain the Ministers; and
much Contraversie was like to arise about them, till all parties having
interest submitted and surrendered the same to the King. First, By the general
surrender of Erections and Teinds, Secondly, By a particular surrender of some
Beneficed persons. Thirdly, Of the Bishops. Fourthly, Of the Burrows. The King,
upon the 2. of September 1629. Ordered the whole matter to this effect, that
the whole Teinds should be consolidat with the Stock, being always affected
with competent Stipends to Ministers, etc. And that therefore, the Titular or
the Tacks-man of the Teinds, having perpetual or hereditable Right, should sell
the same to the Heretors, at nine years puchase; and where the Right was
temporary or defective, the price thereof should be made less accordingly.

12. And for that effect, a Commission was granted for valuation of Teinds, and
for disponing thereof as aforesaid, and for modifying and localling Stipendsto
the Ministers: His Majesty reserved to Himself only a yearly Annuity of ten
shilling Scots out of each Boll of Wheat and Barley, eight shilling of Pease
and Rye, six shilling of Oats where the Boll rendered a Boll of Meal, and
proportionally less where it rendered less: these Decreets were Ratified and
prosecuted by several Acts of Parliament, 1633. cap. 8, 15, 17, 19. And 1641.
cap. 30. Par. 1647. cap. 32. Par. 1649. cap. 46. Par. 1661. cap. 61. there was
an exception in the Act 1633. cap. 19, which ordained the Teinds of all
Abbacies and other Benefices, except the Teinds pertaining to Bishopriks and
other Benefices, which fell not under the submission; in which, there is a
Clause, that the said Bishops and Beneficed persons, should enjoy the Fruits
and Rents of their several Benefices, as they were possessed by them, the time
of the said Submission, and therefore, where they did draw the Teinds by the
space of fifteen years before the year 1628. or at least seven years of the
said fifteen years, or had the same in rentalled Bolls, they should so
continue and not be valued, which provision is repeated, Par. 1662. cap. 9. all
this proved for the most part ineffectual; for compelling Titulars and Tacksmen
of Teinds to sell their interest in other men's Teinds, to the proper Heretors;
because these Commissioners, allowing them an option to allocat whom they
pleased, for the payment of the Ministers Stipend; few ventured to pursue them
for Vendition, least they might be excluded be allocation, which they were
willing to avert, by giving the dearest Rates; but if the Stipend had been laid
proportionally upon all, the Kings favor had been more effectual and equal;
but buying of Teinds being thereby retarded, the great work of these
Commissioners was to value, modifie and allocat Stipends, when the Tack-duties
of the Tacksmen, were not found sufficient to make up theStipend; the
Commission did increass the Tack-duties upon the tacksmen, and in recompense
thereof, prorogat their Tacks, whereby they, though at first being but slender
Rights, by many nineteen years Prorogations became little less then Heretable
Rights.

13. The Annuities of Teinds not being annexed to the Crown, were disponed by
King Charles the first, to James Livingstoun, a Groom of His Bedchamber, to be
uplifted by him till he was satisfied of the sum of Which Right was purchased
by the Earl of Lowdoun, and did receive many stops, and took little effect till
the Kings return, who gave a Commission to the late Earl of Lowdoun, to
transact for the bygone Annuities, and to Dispone them with the full Right
thereof in all time coming, and his Disposition with consent of two Members of
Exchequer was declared sufficient Rights to the buyers, and were appointed to
be Recorded in the Books of Exchequer, that the sums gotten therefore might be
known, and imputed unto the sum, for which the Right to the Annuity was
granted; according to which, many have bought their Annuities. The Commission
did also give power to value the Teinds, that the Annuity might be known, and
to uplift and compone for the bygone, and the Current Annuities until they were
sold, and accordingly Collectors were appointed by the Earl of Lowdoun, in
several places of the Kingdom. The like Commission was renewed to James Earl of
Lowdoun, after his Fathers death, who did make some progress therein, in the
same way as his Father had done, but a stop was put thereto by the Kings
Warrant, in anno 1674. which does yet still continue: and with this stop, by a
Proclamation from the King, all the arrears of the Annuity before the year
1660. were simply Discharged.

14. The Rule prescribed by the King, for valuation of Teinds, to fix them to a
constant yearly duty, was this, that where the Teinds were severally known from
the Stock, and set by Tack or Rental, the same should be also valued severally,
deducing a fifth part for the ease of the Heretor, because frequently the
Churchmen had drawn the rate of the Teind above the just value, by their
Stocked and Rental Bolls: But where the Stock and Teind were not severally
known, the fifth part of the Rent was decerned to be for the Teind.

15. Teinds by the Canon Law, were all constitute into Benefices, which follow
the several Offices in the Roman Church, which were either Prelacies or
inferior to Prelacies: Prelacies were the sewho had Chapters and Convents, And
therefore, one had the Prelacy or preserence amongst the rest of their
Colleagues, such were Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Prioresses: Abbots
and Priors had the Prelacy amongst the Mouks, of several Monasteries, as the
Prioresses had over the Nuns.

There were also some few Monasteries which kept the name of Monasteries or
Ministries, and the Prelate was called Minister, of which there are four in
Scotland; the Minister of Fale, Peebles, Scotland-wall, and the Trinity-friers
of Aberdene: Next unto these, were the Provosts of Collegiat Kirks, instituted
for singing of Mess, specially for their Founders and Patrons; these Provosts
governing their Prebend, who were skilful in Music, and had their several
Stalls in which they sat, for the more orderly singing of their parts of
music, from which these Prebends were designed of the first, second, or other
Stall. Some of the Colledge-Kirks were founded by the King and great Families:
The Chapel-Royal is a Collegiat-Church, Governed by the Dean of the Chapel;
which Office is now annexed to the Bishop of Dumblain, under whom are the
Prebends of the Chapel-Royal. The Earl of Fife sounded the College Kirk of
Kirkheugh. The Earl of March founded the Colledge-Kirk of Dumbar. The Earl of
Bothwel, the Colledge-Kirk of Chrightoun. The Earl of Lennox, the Colledge-Kirk
of Dumbarten. The Earl of Ross, the College Kirk of Tain. Other Families
Erected Chapels, Officiat by one Chaplain: Inferior to these Prelacies, were
Parsons, Viccars, Chaplains, Prebendars, these had Patrons, whose advice and
protection, they used in stead of a Chapter and Convent which Prelacies only
had.

16. The general rule by the Canon Law was, that decinta debentur parocho de
jure, the Parsonage Teinds to the Parson; the Viccarage, or small Teind to the
Viccar; and where no other appeared to instruct Right, the Teinds were ipso
jure, due to parsons and Viccars, it was so found; and that the Kings Gift was
not sufficient to carry the Right of Teinds, from the imcumbents, unless
mortification thereof to any other Office or Benefice possession thereof by
another Office were instructed, June 27. 1665. Alexander Ferguson contra Stuart
of Ascog.

The Bishops and such Prelacies as had curam animarum, had Chapters; and the
Priors, Prioresses, Abbots, etc. had Convents, whose consent in all masters of
Benefices being Chapterly conveened, was necessary, and in evidence thereof,
the Seals of the Chapter or Convent were appended. Viccars were either such as
were substitute by Parsons and other Clerks, or such as had a distinct Office;
and therefore, were not changeable by their Constituents, and were called
Viccars of cure cum cura animarum; or perpetual Viccars: Chaplains were Clerks,
having curam institute for their accommodation who were far from ordinary
Churches; and therefore, were Erected upon the Expenses of the Founders, who
were therefore Patrons; and of all other Patrons supposed to have greatest
interest in these Benefice; so that after the Reformation, these Chaplanries
and Prebendaries, were declared to return and be disposed upon by their
Patrons, to Bursers of Colleges, Par. 1592. cap. 158. Likeways Prebendars were
such as had Prebendam or a Benefice, which was at first a common name, but was
made special by use to these Clerks, who had no other special name.

These Prebendars were either cum cura animarum, or sine cura, as Parsons
preparing for orders, most of them were Institute in Colledge-Kirks, for
singing of Mess, specially for the Founder and his Family, over whom was a
Provest, having the power of Prelacy; in these also the Patrons were held as
Founders, and had the chief Interest in the Benefice, which therefore, after
the Reformation, returned as void to them; the chief Prebendars were these of
the Kings Chapel-Royal; the intent of Constitution of these Offices, as
aforesaid, was mainly to secure the Benefice and Patrimony of the Church
against Dilapidation, the incumbents being Administrators, or at best
Liferenters, night other ways have wronged their Successors, in favors of
their Friends and Relations; and therefore, Prelates could do nothing of
moment, without consent of their Chapters or Convents, or other Beneficed
persons, without consent of their Patrons. Though these Offices were abolished
by the Reformation, there was no other way fallen upon, for managing of
Benefices, but by giving Secular persons the Designations of these Offices, who
therefore were called Titulars, because they had the naked Title without the
Office of Bishops, Priors, Abbots, Provests, etc. who in Lieu of the consent of
Chapters and Convents, appended only the common Seal thereof; and when Bishops
were set up again, and Chapters appointed for them, the consent of the major
part thereof was requisite, with the Seal; Yet it was not necessary that they
should be Chapterly conveened, Parliament 1606. cap. 3.

17. But before the Reformation, according to the Canon Law, there were these
Restraints upon Beneficed persons, in order to their Benefices, as to Teinds,
they could grant no Feus at all, neither could they grant Tacks without consent
of the Chapter or Convents of Prelates, the members whereof were found
sufficiently proven by Feues, and Presentations granted by Prelates, and
subscribed by these persons as members of the Convent, without necessity to
show the Erection or Foundation, or these persons Admission, and that there
were no more members of the Convent, then the eight subscribing several Writes,
June 24. 1623. Lord of Drumlanring contra Maxvel of Hills. Spots. Kirkmen,
Parson of Kinkel contra Lord of Coulter. The consent of most part of
Prebenders, was necessary, not reckoning the Prebenders, that were out of the
Country; this was also observed by the Earl of Haddingtoun, March 10. 1612.
inter eosdem.

The consent of the Chapter was found, not only necessary to the Deeds of the
Prelat, but to the Deeds of the members of the Chapters; and so a Tack set by a
Dean, though of Teinds mortified to a College, whereof the Principal was Dean,
was found null, for want of the Chapters consent, Spots. Kirkmen, College of
Aberdene contra Lord Frazer; where he observes, that the same was found twice
before, yet it was not found necessary to the Tacks of the several members of
the new Erected Chapters of St. Andrews, whereof many Ministers were of laick
Patronage, Hope, Teinds, Tennents of Craighal contra Mr. Walter Kinninmont. But
the old privilege of the Bishop of St. Andrews, which is yet ccontinued is,
that the appending of his Seal is sufficient, both for him and the Chapter,
without necessity of their subscription, Par. 1606. cap. 3.

18. Secondly, Beneficed persons were restrained from setting Tacks of their
Teinds, even with consent of their Chapters, with Diminution of their Rental;
and therefore, Ministers provided to Benefices, granting pensions, tacks or
feues of their Benefices, with Diminution of the Rental, they found at their
Entry, the same are declared null, and they to be deprived, Par. 1581. cap.
101. And also all Beneficed persons were ordained to find Caution to leave
their Benefices in as good case as they found them; and all Tacks, provisions,
or changing of Victual in Money. in Diminution of the Rental, which was at
their Entry declared null, Par. 1585. cap. 11. But by Act of Par. 1606. cap. 3.
It is declared lawful to the Bishops to set as many Tacks of the Fruits and
Duties belonging to their Benefice, either short or long Tacks as they please,
and for as many years as they think expedient; which may subsist of the Law
without Restraint or Limitation of any time; which Tack being once set, shall
be accounted, the Rental not to be diminished thereafter; but there is no
restriction in relation to any Rental, preceding the said Act; but it is only
recommended to the Bishops to set to a competent avail near the worth; but by
the Act of Par. 1617. cap. 4. Bishops are prohibit to set Tacks for longer
space then nineteen years: And all Pensions or Tacks of the thirds of
Benefices, which then belonged to the Church, set in Diminution of the Rental,
paid at the first assumption of the Benefice, were declared null, par. 1597.
cap. 240.

19. Thirdly, inferior Beneficed persons could set no longer Tacks of any part
of their Benefice, then three years without consent of the Patron, par. 1594.
cap. 200. which was extended to Deeds done by Provests and Prebendars, though
having a resemblance with Prelacies, seeing the Patron has so great Interest,
Hope, Patron, Lord of Drumlanrig contra Cowhil and others. And Beneficed
persons below Prelates, are discharged to set Tacks of any part of their
Benefice longer then their life, and five years after; and if these Tacks be
not Registrate in a Book kept by the Clerk-Register for that effect, within
forty days after the date thereof, they are null, par. 1617. cap. 4. Yet in
these long Tacks, the consent of the Patron is still necessary; and therefore,
a Tack of Teinds, without consent of the Patron, was only found valid as to
three years, and null as to the rest of the years contained therein, July 18.
1668. Mr. George Johnstoun contra of Howdoun. And a Tack of Teinds for more
then three years without consent of the Patron, was sustained by his subsequent
consent, having accepted a Right to the Tack, and obtained prorogation
thereupon, January 19. 1669. Earl of Athol contra Rohertson of Strouan.

20. A TackofTeinds set by an University for a definite time, with an
obliegement to renew the same in all time thereafter, was found not effectual
after the definite time, though the same Rent was received for years after,
which was not sustained as homologation, but as tacit relocation, July 13.
1669. Old College of Aberdeen contra the Town of Aberdeen.

21. To come to the condition of Teinds, as it now stands: a great part of them
is in the hands of the Heretors to whom the Stock belongs; a part also is in
the hands of Titulars and Lords of Erection, and tacksmen having right to other
Heretors teinds, who have ordinarily prorogation of their tacks; the rest
belongs to Ministers, or Royal Burghs, for the maintenance of their Ministers,
Colleges or Hospitals. Of these teinds which are not in the Heretors own hand;
some are drawn in kind, ipsa corpora; some are in old stocked rental Bolls;
some are in tack or use of payment, and others under Valuation. We need to say
nothing, as to teinds that are in the hands of Heretors to whom the Stock
belongs, about which there can be little controversy, except in the case of
new Erections or Augmentations; for teinds, through whatsoever hands they pass,
carry always along with them, as a burden affecting them, competent Stipends
for the Ministers who are or shall be erected. Neither is there any other
debate concerning teinds orderly valued, being thereby liquidate and clear; nor
concerning these teinds which are in tack during the tack, further then has
been said before of the Requisites for setting such tacks. It remains to
consider drawn teinds and rentalled teind Bolls, and conclude with the present
interest of Ministers and Patrons.

22. As to the drawn Teinds, the manner thereof is prescribed, Par. 1617. cap.
9. That the possessors may require the teind-master, once for teinding of Croft
or In-sield Corn; next, for teinding Barley; thirdly, for Out-field Corn,
within eight days after the shearing of these three several kinds of Corn; or
at least, when the same are shorn till about a tenth part, to come and teind
the same within four days; and the teind-master, if he dwell not within the
Paroch, is ordained to have a servant for teinding, and to intimat his name
publicly the last Sabbath of July, or first Sabbath of August: So that upon
requisition to the teind-master personally, or at his dewlling place in the
Paroch, or to his servant so designed, the possessor might proceed to the
teinding of his own Corns; and if the teind-master resided not in the Paroch,
nor had any servant designed, or if upon intimation they appeared not, the
possessor might before witnesses teind his own Corns, and was only obliged to
keep the teind skaithless for eight days after the separation; but if any
meddled with the teinds any other way, he is liable for wrongous intromission.

23. Spuilzie of teinds is only competent in the case of violence, where the
teind-master being in present possession and use of drawing the teind, does
orderly come to teind, and is debarred by force; or when the teindmaster, being
in use that same year or the former year to draw the teind, any other
intrometteth therewith. The former act is like Ejection, and this is like
Intrusion, especially if the Teind-master have used Inhibition by public
Letters, published at the Paroch-Church where the Teinds lie, as an intimation
to all parties having interest, to forbear meddling with the Teinds, otherwise
then by order of Law, which may be execute by any person as Sheriff in that
part, January 27. 1666. Earl of Eglintoun contra Lord of Cunninghamhead.

This Inhibition is the competent legal way to take off tacit relocation, when
Teinds have been set in Tack, and the Tack expired; and when they are in use of
payment of certain duty, and has then the same effect that Warning has in
relation to Tennants of Lands, and being once duly used, it interrupts tacit
relocation, or use of payment, not only for the years wherein it is used, but
for all other subsequent years, March 18. 1628. Lord Blantyre contra
Parochioners of Bothwel. But the Titular may not by force draw the Teinds after
Inhibition, but must pursue therefore where there was any pretense of title,
else it is a Spuilzie in him, January 27. 1665. Lord of Bairfoord and
Beanstoun contra Lord Kingstoun..

Upon Process, Spuilzie was sustained against the Heretor, receiving a joint
duty for Stock and Teind, March 16. 1627. John Inglis contra Gilbert Kirkwood:
But it is not effectual to infer Spuilzie against Tennants, continuing to pay
their Masters a joint duty for Stock and Teind, as they were in use before,
though the Inhibition was particularly intimat to the tennents, seeing they knew
not how to distinguish the proportion of Stock and Teind, having still paid a
joint duty promiscuously for both, December 12. 1627. Arbuthnet contra tennants
of Fairnieflat. But the privilege of tennants paying to their Masters for
stock and teind jointly, was not extended to a Merchant buying a whole Cropped
together, who was found liable for the teind, though he paid before any
diligence, June 24. 1662. Mr. Alexander Verner contra George Allan. In like
manner, Merchants buying the Herring where they were taken in the Isles, were
found liable for the teind by immemorial possession, so to uplift the
teind-fish from the Merchants, who bought whole boat-fulls of the Herring
green, December 13. 1664. Bishop of the Isles contra the Merchants of
Edinburgh. But, as Warning, so Inhibition of Teinds is taken off by accepting
the old duty thereafter, or of the ordinary taxation accustomed to be paid for
the tack-duty, Hope, teinds, Lord Garleis contra tennants of Whitehorn, or by a
small part of the old tack-duty, ibidem, Mr. Andrew Balfour contra Lord
Balmerino, John Glendinning contra tennants of Partoun.

24. Rentalled teind-bolls is, when the teinds have been liquidate and settled
for so many Bolls yearly by Rental, or old use of payment which presumes a
Rental. By this means, the beneficed persons gained an advantage of the
possessors; and therefore, by the Kings Decree Arbitral, such teinds which are
separat, and severally set or known from the Stock, had a diverse and dearer
valuation; and therefore, rentalled teind-bolls were found due by use of
payment immediately preceding the debate, though exceeding the worth of the
teind, till the teind in kind were offered, and intimation made that the party
would not continue the use of payment of rentalled Bolls, March 22. 1626.
Lennox of Branshogle contra tennants of Balfroon.

Teind-bolls were found due according to the old Rental, though a lesser
quantity was received by a Minister for several years: Here the Bishop to whose
Bishopric the Teinds of that Paroch were annexed, opposed the alteration of
the old rentalled Bolls, whereof a part only was allocat to, and received by
the Minister, July 3. 1630. Mr. George Summer contra Stewart of Balgillo. The
like where there was a Decree formerly for the Teind-bolls, but prejudice to
offer the Teind in kind in time coming, Feb. 20. 1633. College of Glasgow
contra Mr. James Stewart.

25. The interest of Bishops in their Benefices, is much alike with Ministers
as to their entry, which is regulat by their Consecration or Translation, which
if before Whitsonday, gives them the benesit of that year; and if after
Whitsonday, it gives them the half. During their incumbence, they have not only
the Fruits and Rents of the Benefice, but the power to set Tacks for nineteen
years, with consent of their Chapters, Vide 17. and to receive Vassals, and to
constitute Commissars; all which are effectual after their death or removal.
They have also the Quots of Testaments confirmed by all their Commissars during
their life, or within the time of their Ann after their death; but they have no
Quots of Testaments not then confirmed, although the persons died in their
life, or during their Ann, because the Quot is due for the Confirmation, as was
found, July 6. 1676. Bishop of Edinburgh contra Captain Wishart: and for the
same reason, they have not the Compositions or Duplications of Heirs, Apprisers
or Adjudgers, whom they do not actually receive in their life, which will not
belong to Executours, or fall within their Ann, but to the next Intrant, who
only can receive these Vassals.

26. The Interest of Ministers in the Teinds may be considered, either in their
entry during their incumbency, or after their removal. In all which, the
Ministers interest is of two kinds; for either he has the Benefice, Parsonage
or Viccarage, or has only a Stipend modified thereof; for these Benefices did
ordinarily belong to the incumbents of particular Paroches, and sollowed the
Office of serving the Cure there: and therefore, when these Benefices were not
erected in Temporal Baronies and Lordships, or otherwise so affected by
Titles, Tacks or new Erections, that the Ministers thereby could not have a
competency, they betook themselves to the Benefice, and had the same Right and
Privileges as to them, as beneficed persons formerly had, and might set Tacks
thereof in the same way, and with the same restriction, as is before declared.
But more frequently, the Ministers had modified Stipends, which were appointed
by the King and Parliament to be modified out of the Teinds, whatever the Title
or Interest of any other person were therein; which they could not reach, if
they took them to the Benefice it self, as they might have done by the Act of
Par. 1581. cap. 102. Ordaining, That all Benefices of Cure under Prelacies,
should be provided only in favors of able Ministers.

27. The Interest of Ministers was according to the nature of the Benefices
whereunto they were to have right, or out of which their Stipends were to be
modified; for all Kirks were either Patrimonial, or Patronat, and by clearing
Patronage, it will easily appear what Kirks are Patrimonial: For, this
distinction is taken from that of persons in the Civil Law, in these who are
ingenui or fully free, and libertini or become free, but with some
acknowledgements and services to the Authors of their freedom, who were
therefore called their Patrons: So there stood the like relation betwixt
Patrons and Kirks patronat, as betwixt Patrons and Libertines, the ground
whereof was an eminent good deed done by the Patron or his Predecessor to that
Kirk, especially these acknowledged in Law, Patronum faciunt, Dos, AEdificatio,
fundus.
Signifying the building of the Church, or giving of the Stipend, or of the
Ground necessary for the Church, Churchyard, Manse or Gleib, were the grounds
for constituting the Patronage, which were sufficiently instructed by custom of
the Kirks, acknowledging such a Patron.

It was lately contraverted who should be patron of a second Minister, whose
Stipend was constitute, not out of the Teinds, but by Contribution, and
engagement of a Town for the greatest part, and the Heretors of the Landwart
paroch for the rest; whether the patronage and power to present that second
Minister, should belong to the patron of the Kirk, having the unquestionable
power of presenting the first Minister, or the Contributers, in which
competition, the patron of the Kirk was preferred, because the contributers had
never been in possession of presenting, nor had reserved the patronage nor
power of presenting in the erection of the second Minister, which was only by
an Act of the Bishop and presbytry, bearing the shares contributed for a second
Minister; but neither Reservation nor protestation by them concerning the
patronage or power of presenting the second Minister; nor was any thing of
custom or possession to show the meaning of the parties, November 18. 1680.
Town of Haddingtoun contra the Earl of Haddingtoun. This case will not prejudge
Erections of second Ministers in most of other Towns in the Kingdom, where the
Erection does bear reservation of the patronage. But for clearing of the
derived Right from the first patron, especially to singular successors, the
patronage was ordinarily conveyed by Infeftments, carrying expressly, Advocation,
Donation, and right of patronage of such Kirks. Such Kirks then as acknowledged
no patron are fully free; and these are provided, not by presentation, but the
ordinar conveyeth, pleno jure, whereby the Incumbent has right to the
Benefice, and full Fruits: But in Mensal Kirks, the Incumbent has but a
Stipend, and these belong to the proper patrimony of Prelates, who have right to
the Fruits thereof, as a part of their own Benefice; and therefore, are called
patrimonial or mensal.

Patronage is also, either Laick or Ecclesiastic; Laick is that which belongs
to secular persons; Ecclesiastic, that which belongs to Churchmen, as when a
Bishop has the right of presentation to a Kirk, not in his own Diocese; there
he presents, but another must confer as Ordinar, and so he is but Ecclesiastic
patron.

28. Kirks patronat required for the entry of Ministers, a presentation of the
patron, presenting a person to the Church and Benefice, to be tried by
Churchmen having that power, and giving him the right of the Benefice, or
Stipend, being found qualified, and Collation of the Office and Institution
therein by Churchmen upon trial, without which, the Incumbent could have no
right; yet where the Bishop had the power of Collation and Institution and to
confer, pleno jure, a Gift from the Bishop, conferring and admitting, was found
sufficient without a distinct Presentation and Collation, July 4. 1627.
Minister of Sklate contra parochioners. But in Kirks not patronat, Institution
and Collation was sufficient. And of late, the Act of Ordination or Admission
of Ministers by presbytries, served for all: But in Benefices without cure, as
prebendries or Chaplanries, presentation is sufficient without Collation and
Institution, March 14. 1622. Scot contra Penman.

29. Ministers being thus Entered, have Right to their Benefices or Stipends,
during their incumbency, which they need not instruct by Write, but it is
sufficient to prove by Witnesses, that the Minister or his predecessors have
been in possession of that which is contraverted, as a part of the Benefice or
Stipend of that Kirk, and that is commonly holden and repute to be a part
thereof; for there being no competent way to preserve the Rights and Evidents
of the Kirk amongst successors in Office, as there is of other Rights amongst
other Successors. The Canon Law attributes much more to possession then the
Civil; for thereby possessor decennalis, or triennalis, nontenetur docere
detitulo: Which was not only extended to instruct that the thing possessed
belonged to the Benefice, but that the incumbent had sufficient right; and
therefore, liberated prebendars from production of their provisions, in the
case of improbation, Hope, improbation, Bishop of Galloway and Dean of the
Chapel-Royal contra the prebendars: This presumption would not be elided by any
extrinsick Right; Yea, it will liberate from preduction of any written Right in
Reduction and Improbation, where there is no Right extent: But if a Right be
found by the oaths of Churchmen or others, to be extent in their hands, the
same will be presumed to be the Right, by which they posses; and it may be
improven by a positive probation, but not by a presumptive probation, by way of
certification, concluding it false, because the possessors declined to produce
it, or to abide by it; when the Right is produced, any exception may be
proponed upon any thing contained therein; and therefore, an Annualrent of ten
Chalders of Victual, mortified by the King to the Chapel-royal was excluded by
a Redemption thereof, granted by the King voluntarly upon payment, when the
Bishops were suppressed, in respect the mortification boresuch a Right mortified,
which had therein a Reversion; and therefore, after, Redemption, thirteen years
possession could not relieve, the Right being Redeemed: Neither could the Act
of Restitution of Bishops, restoring them to the Rights and possession they had
before 1637. seeing that could not hinder another party to redeem, July 11.
1676. Bishop of Dumblain contra Francis Kinloch. A Ministers Stipend, as to the
use of payment and quantity, was found probable by witnesses without write, in
possessorio, as was lalely found, Ministers Relict contra Earl of Caithness. As
to the time sufficient to give a possessory Judgment in Benefices or Stipends
upon possession, without Evidents in write; but being holden and repute as a
part of the Benefice: The Canon Law, Regula Cancellariae, 33. determines it to
three years peaceable possession, which is rather as to the Incumbents Right;
that after three years possession, he cannot be questioned during his Life. I
find not our Decisions so clear in it, but it cannot exceed seven years
possession, which gives a possessory Judgment in Infeftment of property, etc.
it was so found, November 25. 1665. James Petrie contra John Mitchelson, The
like about that same time, Mr. Alexander Ferguson contra Lievtennant Colonel
Alexander Agnew.

Ministers also during their Incumbencie, may set Tacks according to the Rules
for setting of Tacks, by Beneficed persons before expressed, which are valide and
effectual, though the Incumbent be deprived or transported, par. 1592. cap. 115.

30. Ministers Stipend are ordinarily allocat out of the Teinds of particular
Lands, and when they are allocat, all Intrometters with the Teinds of these
Lands allocat are liable for the Stipend, not proportionally with other
Intrometters, but in so far as their whole Intromission can reach, even though
they made payment before they were charged by the Minister, which they alleged
was bona fide, to the Heretor or Tacksman, February 19. 1629. Kirk contra
Gilchrist. And if there be no Allocation, the Stipend is a burden, affecting
the whole Teind, out of which it is modified; and the Minister may take
himself, either to the Heretor or possessor, Spots. Kirk-men, Mr. Andrew Ker
contra William Gilchrist. December 3. 1664. Mr. J. Hutcheson contra Earl of
Cassils: In which case it was found, that the Minister might take himself to
any of the Heretors of the Paroch for the whole Teind, inso far as his modified
Stipend went, seeing he had no Locality, and that the Heretor distressed, behoved
to seek his relief proportionally from the rest. And a Minister was found to
have right to pursue an Heretor for his Stipend, paid out of his Lands; and
that accepting an Assignation to a part of the Tennents duties, did not liberat
the Heretor further then what the Minister received, unless the Assignation
bore, in full satisfaction, November 9. 1677. Mr. John Rutherford contra Murray
of Skirling. Yea, though an Heretor was but an Appryzer of the Stock and
Teinds, he was found liable personally, though he had not intrometted, and
though he offered to assign as much of the Rent, December 20. 1622. Sir John
Prestoun contra Sir John Ker. And though the intrometter was but a Wodsetter,
both of Stock and Teind, having no more but his Annualrent, and there being
sufficient Teind beside the Wodset, March 21. 1633. Mr William Keith contra
James Gray and others. But where a Liferenter possessed, she was only found
liable, not the Fiar, June 24. 1663. Menzies contra Lord of Glenurchie.

31. But Teinds before valuation, are only due according to the Cropped and
Goods, without restraining the Heretor in the free use of his Ground, who may
leave it all Grass, though it had never been so long Corn, and may Stock it
with yield Goods, which will yield no Viccarage; and therefore, having enclosed
a parcel of Ground, and sown it with Kail, Carrets, and Herbs, the same was
found Teind free, unless these were accustomed to pay Teind in that place, June
9. 1676. Alexander Burnet contra William Gibb.

32, Even after valuation, Teinds are not debita fundi, nor do affect singular
Successors, as to bygones before their Right, February 28. 1662. Earl of
Callender contra Andrew Monro.

33. The legal terms of Benefices and Stipends, whereby they are due to the
Incumbents, are Whitsonday at which the Fruits are held to be fully sown, and
Michaelmess, at which they are presumed to be fully separate; and therefore, if
the Incumbents Entry be before Whitsonday, he has that whole year, So if he be
Deposed or transported before Whitsonday, he has no part of that year, if
after Whitsonday and before Michaelmess, he has the half, July 24. 1662. Mr.
Patrick Weims contra Cunninghame. If after Michaelmess, he has the whole: But
if the Incumbent die he has further interest in his Benefice, even after his
death.

34. Ministers dying, their Wives, Bairns, or Executors, have the Annat of
their Beneficeor Stipends, which is acknowledged to be their ancient Right,
Parl. 1571. cap. 41. whereby it is declared, that Beneficed persons dying,
shall have right to the fruits of their Benefice upon the ground, and the Annat
thereafter to pertain to their Executors: But the question is, what the Annat
imports, there is a Letter concerning it written by the King to the General
Assembly, and ratified by them. All do agree, that if the Incumbent die after
Michaelmess, he has right to that whole year by his Service, and to the half
of the next year by the Annat: But if he die before Michaelmess, he has right
to the half of the Stipend, if he survived Whitsonday, proprio jure, And to the
other half, as the Ann which his Executors have right to; but all the question
is, when the Incumbent does not only survive Michaelmess, whereby he has the
half of the next year; but if he survive the last of Dec. whether he has right
to the whole Stipend of that year; as to which, that Rule has been sustained,
in favorabilibus annus incaptus habetur, pro completo; and therefore, the Ann
was the whose year, which was so decided, July 5. 1662. Executors of Mr. James
Fairlie contra his Parochioners; but the Anns of Bishops and Ministers, are now
brought to a much more equal way by Act of (...), August 23. 1672. whereby it
is Statute, that the Ann in alltime thereafter, shall be half a years Rent of
the Benefice or Stipend, over and above what is due to the Defunct for his
Incumbency, viz. if he survive Whitsonday, he shall have the half of that year
for his incumbency, and the other half for his Ann, and if he survive
Michaelmess, he shall have the half of the next year for his Ann; whereas
before if he survived Michaelmess, and lived but till the last of December, his
Ann was but the half of the next year; but if he lived till the first of
January, his Ann was that whole year, whereby the next Incumbent had nothing to
expect for a year, during which the Kirk was like to ly Vacant.

The Annat divides betwixt the Relict and nearest of Kin, if there be no
Bairns, and is extended to the profit of the Gleib, if there be no new
Intrant, July 19. 1664. Elizabeth Scrimzour Relict of Mr. John Murray contra
his Executors: But where there is an Intrant, the Gleib belongs to him, and is
not part of the Ann, nor did belong to the former Minister, unless it had been
sown by him, and the Cropped upon it, at the Entry of the Intrant, July 6. 1665.
Mr. John Colvil contra Lord Balnterino. Where it was also found, that the
Defunct had his Ann, though he had neither Wife nor Bairns.

35. To conclude this Title with the Interest of Patrons in Benefices, we have
already shown their Original and Kinds, their interest in the Benefices or
Stipends, is, first the Right of Presentation of a qualified person for the
Ministry, whom the Presbytrie behoved to try and admit, if he were qualified:
whereanent the Patron might appeal to the Synod, and thence to the General
Assembly; and if that person be still rejected, he must present another, which
must be done within six months after the Vacancy, may come to his knowledge:
Otherways the Kirk may admit a qualified person for that time, Par. 1592. cap.
115. Par. 1606. cap. 2. Par. 1609. cap. 12. Since the Restitution of Bishops;
Presentations must be directed to them in their several Diocesses.

Secondly, During the Vacancy without the Patrons default, but by the default
of the Presbytery, refusing to admit a qualified person, he had power (...)
detain the whole Fruits of the Benefice in his own hands, as is clear in the
said last Act, Par. 1592. cap. 115.

Thirdly, Patrons are Tutors and Guardians to their Church, without whose
consent the Incumbent can set no Tack longer then for three years, Par. 1594.
Cap. 200. Patrons had also an indirect interest in their own Benefices, where
the Ministers had an ordinary Stipend, settled to them by long custom or
modification, yet far within the worth of the Benefice.

The Patrons used to present them to the Benefice, but withal took Tack of them
to confident persons to their own behove, carrying the superplus of the profit
of the Benefice, over and above the accustomed Stipend of their predecessors,
which has not been quarrelled as a Symoniacal Paction or Dilapidation. It
seems also, that Patrons for resemblance of personal Patronages ought to be
Alimented out of the Benefice, if they come to necessity, according as their
Benefice may bear, though there has occurred no occasion to question or try
this point, but by the Act of Par. July 23. 1644. Session 1. c. 20. The power
of disposing of the vacant Benefice or Stipend, was taken from the Patron and
Stated in the Presbytrie and Paroch to be disposed upon for pious uses and by
Act of par. 1949. c. 39. The power of presentation is also taken away, yet
thetitle (...) unsitly design that Act an abolution of patronage, for there is
no more there taken away but the power of presentation: but on the contrary,
where the patron could have no Interest in the Benefice of Teinds, but
indirectly as aforesaid, that declares the Heretable Right of the Teinds, over
and above the Stipend, to be in the Patron, but with necessity to dispone the
same to the Heretors, for six years purchase, but these Acts are now Rescinded,
and patrons returned to their ancient Rights, but they are excluded from the
Fruits in the Vacancie, which are applied to pious uses, for seven years, and
thereafter during his Majesty's pleasure, par. 1661. cap. 52. and the Vacancies
for seven years after the year 1672. are applied to Universities, par. 1672.
cap. 20.

Ecclesiastical Benefices were so ordinarily patronat, that there were scarce
any free, but all were presumed o be patronat; and where the right of patronage
did not appear to be established in any other, the Pope was presumed patron
before the Reformation; and after the Reformation, the King is presumed patron,
jure Corona, where the right of another patron appears not. There are other
patronages belong to the King, jure privato, as when the King or his
predecessors acquired any rights of patronages from any private person; or when
the King or his predecessors founded or doted the Benefice; or when any Lands
or Baronies fall in the Kings hand as Superior, by recognition or
forefaulture, all such having annexed thereto, or comprehended therein, the
Advocation, Donation and Right of patronage of any Kirk, the King does thereby
become patron; all those patronages are at the Kings dispose, and transmissible
to any Subject by the Kings proper deed, either annexing or incorporating the
same in Baronies or Lordships, or by distinct Gifts, for the patronage does
ordinarily pass as annexed to Lands, Charters of Burghs, Baronies, or Lordships,
yet they may pass without Infeftments, as jura incorporalia.

But there are other patronages which by Act of Parliament, are annexed to the
Crown, either expressly, or when Baronies, Lordships, or Benefices are annexed
to the Crown, if therein patronages of any Benefice were comprehended, they are
annexed though not expressed; for Barony or Benefice are nomina universitatis,
being united and erected; and therefore, the Barony or Benefice, without
expressing Patronage, do carry the same by Resignation, Appryzing,
Adjudication, Recognition or-Forefaulture, as well as Salmond fishing or Milns:
But these Patronages being a part of the annexed Patrimony of the Crown, cannot
be disposed by the King, without a public Law, or by a special Act of
Dissolution for particular reasons of public good, anterior to the Kings Gift
and Ratifications in Parliament, which pass of course, and are accounted but
private Rights, which will not establish the same, though in the Ratification
there be a Clause of Dissolution, which is always understood to be as a private
Right and not a public Law.

The Patronages of all Bishoprics belong to the King, who designs the person
to be Bishop, and though the Chapter may use the formality of Election, they do
not refuse the Kings Designation: The order of this Election is prescrived,
Parliament 1617. cap. 1. where the Dean and Chapter are ordained to choose the
person, whom the King pleases to nominat and recommend, he always being an
uctual Minister of the Kirk, who being Elected, has sufficient right to the
Spirituality of his Benefice, but not to the Temporality, till he have a
Charter from the King, and do homage, and swear obedience to him; but the
Archbishop of Saint Andrews is to be elected by the Bishops of Dunkel,
Aberdene, Brichen, Dumblane, Ross, Murray, Orknay, Caithness, the Principal of
Saint Leanards College, the Arch-Dean of Saint Andrews, the Viccars of Saint
Andrews, Leuchers and Couper, or most part of them, Parliament 1617. cap. 2.
And by the same Act the Archbishop of Glasgow is to be Elected by the Bishop
of Galloway, Argile and Isles, and the ordinar Chapter of Glasgow, or most of
them, the Bishop of Galloway being Conveener of the Electors; and now the
Bishop of Edinburgh since that Bishopric was Erected, is by the Erection made
an Elector and Conveener.

The King is also Patron of many Laick Patronages, and there are several other
Laick Patronages belonging to Subjects, Ecclesiastic Patronages belong now
only to the Bishops, to whom some Kirks are patrimonial or Mensal, the Fruits
whereof are a part of the Bishops Benefice, and the several Paroch Kirks are
not distinct Benefices, but parts beneficii, but most be served by the Bishop
himself, or a Minister who is a Stipendiary, and by the 19. Act Parl. 1633. all
Ministers are appointed to be provided with sufficient Stipends, being eight
Chalders of Victual, or eight hundereth Merks at least, except in singular
cases, referred to the Commissioners for plantation of Kirks, who are
authorized as Commissioners of Parliament, to value Teinds, modifie Stipends,
and grant Localities for fixing thereof upon particular Lands.

The Bishops have the Patronage of some Kirks without their Diocies, and do
present to the Bishop of that Diocie, but if the Bishop should acquire any
patronage of a Kirk within his own Diocie, that Kirk cannot be Patronat, but
becomes free, and is conferred by the Bishop, pleno jure, for he cannot present
to himself, yet by the Collation, the person Collated is not a Stipendiar, but
is Parson or Viccar, and has the full benefit of the Fruits, except in so far
as they are restricted by Tacks, set lawfully by them or their Predecessors.

The common Kirks which were to be provided by the Bishops and their Chapters
in common, were not properly Patronat by Presentations, but by Nominations and
Collations, yet the Incumbents were not Stipendiaries, but enjoyed these Kirks
as Benefices. But after the Reformation, when Bishops and Chapters were
suppressed, these common Kirks were declared to be of the same nature with other
Parsonages and Viccarages, and to be conferred by Presentations of the lawful
Patrons and Collation, whereby they become then Patronate; the King, or these
to whom he gave right being Patrons; but after the Restitution of Bishops and
Chapters, Parliament 1617. cap. 2. these common Kirks were restored to their
ancient condition. College Kirks were Benefices, whereof the King was Patron,
except some few which belonged to Subjects, Chaplainries, and Altarages were
under Patronage of the Founders or their Successors.

Before the Reformation there were but few inferior benefices below Prelacies,
viz. Collegiat and common Kirks, Parsonage and Viccarages, which are but very
few, and many be found by the Stent Rolls, whereby eveny Parsonage and
Viccarage are Taxed apart, as distinct Benefices; the far greater part of all
the Teinds of Scotland did belong to Prelacies, such as Bishoprics and
Abbacies, and all the paroch Kirks which belong to them, are not distinct
benefices, but a part of their patrimony, and were served by themselves, their
Viccars, or their Substitutes, without any fixed maintenance, but ad placitum,
so that there was no patronages of all these Kirks, and the ordinar provision
thereof was, the Viccarage or small Teind, and sometimes Viccar pensions out of
the parsonage Teinds.

After the Reformation all monasteries being suppressed, they return to the King,
jure Coronae, as to their whole benefices, both the Teinds or Spitituality, and
Lands and Baronies or other Temporal Rights; but the King gifted the most part
of these benefices, both Spirituality and Temporality, to the Nobility and
Gentry, and Erected the same in Temporal Baronies and Lordships, but with
burden of competent provisions to the Ministers of all the Kirks, which were
parts of the patrimony of the said great benefices, whereby the Lords of
Erection, coming in place of these Monasteries, had right to all the Teinds of
the Kirks, which were the patrimony thereof; and the Abbots and Priors, did
nominate their Viccars in these Kirks, so the Lords of Erection did nominate
the Ministers to the same, and presented them to the Churchmen, to be tried
and admitted, and thereupon assumed the Title of patrons, though properly they
were not such, because the Ministers had no benefices, but were Stipendaries,
having no Rights to the Fruits till the year 1587. when the Temporalities of
all benefices belonging to Archbishops, Bishops, Priors, Prioresses, or
whatsomever Ecclesiastical benefit belonging to any Abbay, Cloister, Friars,
Monks, Channons, Common-kirks, and Collegiat kirks, were annexed unto the
Crown, with several exceptions, Act 29. par. 1587. and though that Act seem
only to annex the Temporality then belonging to these Churchmen, and not to
extend to the Temporalities already Erected to secular persons, yet by the
exceptions of the many Erections therein contained, it has been ever held as
an Annexation of all the Temporalities that did belong to these benefices: but
the Spirituality or Teinds, are declared not to be annexed, but by the Act,
115, Parliament 1592. Erections either of kirk-lands or Teinds in Temporal
Lordships, after the said Act of Annexation, are declared null, except such
parts and portions of the kirk-lands, already erected in Temporal Lordships, to
such persons, as since the Act of Annexation, have received the honors of
Lords of parliament, and have sitten and votted in parliament, as Temporal
Lords, whence the question arises, whether that exception derogates only from
this Act, or also from the said general Act of Annexation, but by the 195. Act
parliament 1594. all Erections since the said general Act of Annexation, not
excepted in the said Act, are declared null, which does also leave a doubt as
to to the Erections, preceding the said Act of Annexation; and by the second
Act, parliament 1606. Restoring bishops, it is declared for the better
satisfaction of His Majesty's Subjects and faithful Servants, whom His Majesty
has rewarded with Erections, Feues, patronages, Teinds and Confirmations of
Teinds, patronages and other Rights of Abbacies, and that they may not be put
in mistrust, therefore ratifies the hail Erections, Infeftments, Confirmations,
Patronages, Tacks, and other securities of Benefices, not being Bishoprics
given, disponed, and confirmed by His Majesty, during the Parliament, 1587.
before or sinsine, agreeable to the said Laws and Acts of Parliament, and
faithfully promits, in verbo principis, never to quarrel the same, which seems
to give further ground to Erections, though qualified with that provision, that
the said Erections be conform to the Acts of Annexation and Laws made sinsine,
whereby the same might only extend to the Erections, excepted and warranted in
the said Act of Annexation, which excepts several Erections formerly made, and
leaves some Kirk-lands to the Kings dispose, by subsequent Erection: In this
case did King James leave the condition of Kirk-lands, Teinds and Patronages.

King Charles the first coming to the Crown, and being informed of the great
Benefit His Father might have made by suppressing of Popery, and the Popish
Benefices, if He had not gifted them away before He consider, did resolve to
recover the same to the Crown; and therefore made a very ample Revocation of
all Deeds done in prejudice of the Crown, or any of His Royal Progenitors, and
in the year 1627. there was a Reduction intended of all Erections of
Kirk-lands, Teinds, Patronages, which did pertain to whatsomever Abbacy, Priory
or other Benefice, and Acts of Parliament Ratifying the same, with all
Infeftments of Heretable Offices or Regalities: Which Revocation and Process
having made a great noise, the King gave Commission to several Noblemen, and
others, to endeavor an agreement with these who had right to Erections, or any
right to Kirklands or Teinds, whereupon there was a Submission made by many
persons who had right to Kirk-lands and Teinds, containing a Procuratory of
Resignation in the Kings hands, ad perpetuam remanentiam, of the Superiority of
all Lands, and other Temporal Rights, pertaining to whatsomever Erection of the
Temporality of Benefices, reserving and excepting the Property of all the said
Lands, and others whereunto they had right, before or after; the said
Erections, paying the ancient Feu-duties to His Majesty, that were payable to
Kirk-men, and that such demains and mensal Lands of the said Benefices, as
were never set in Feu or Rental by the ancient Titulars, before the Act of
Annexation, nor by the King, and were then possessed by any of the Lords of
Erection, should be Feued to them and no others, for such Feu-duties as His
Majesty's Commissioners should appoint; they did thereby also submit to His
Majesty, what satisfaction He should give them for the Feu-duties, and other
constant Rent of the Superiorities Resigned; and all rights of Teithes that
they had, that His Majesty might appoint the quantity, rate and price thereof,
to be paid by the Heretors to the said Titulars of Erection, with a burden of
Annuity to the King, excepting the Teinds of the Surrenderers own proper Lands,
being always subject to His Majesty's Annuity: Which Submission His Majesty
accepted, and there followed thereupon an Instrument of Resignation at
Whitehall, May 14. 1628. There was also a Submission made by the Bishops, of
all Teinds belonging to them, or their Patrimonial Kirks, providing they be not
damnified in their Benefices, as they were then possessed, either in quantity
or quality, whether the samine were paid in Rental Bolls, or drawn Teind, so
that the Submission did only reach to Teinds that were in Tack, or other use of
payment, and whereof the Bishops or beneficed Persons, were not then in
Possession by Rental Bolls, or drawn Teind; this Submission was in Anno 1628.
There is also a Submission by the Burrows of their Teinds, in the same year;
and a fourth Submission, by several persons having right to Teinds, in Anno
1629.

The King did pronounce His Decree Arbitral, upon the Submission of the Lords
of Erection, upon the second of September one thousand six hundred and twenty
nine, whereby He Ordains the Lords of Erection to have ten years Purchase for
the Feu-duties; and all their constant Rents, consisting of Victual or Money;
the Victual being reckoned at an hundred Merks the Chalder, deducing so much of
the Feu-duties, as were equivalent to the Blensh-duties, contained in the
Infeftments of Erection, for which nothing was to be paid; and allowing the
Lords of Erection to retain the Feu-duties until they were redeemed: His
Majesty did also decern, that each Heretor shall have his own Teinds, that such
as have right to other men's Teinds, shall after valuation thereof, whereby the
fifth part of the constant Rent, which each Land pays in Stock and Teind, is
declared to be the Teind; and where the Teind is valued severally, that the
Heretor shall have the fifth part of the yearly value thereof, deduced for the
Kings ease; and the price of the said Teind for an Heretable Right, was made
nine years purchase: And for other Right of Teinds, inferior to Heretable
Rights proportionably according to the worth thereof, to be determined by a
Commission to be granted by His Majesty to that effect, and that both for Tacks
of Teinds and Patronages. There are also Decreets by His Majesty upon the other
Submission, to the same purpose, and by the tenth and fourteenth Act, Par.
1633. the Superiorities of all Kirk-lands are annexed to the Crown, except
these belonging to Bishops, with the Feu-duties of the said Superiorities,
reserving to the Lords and Titulars of Erections, who subscribed the general
Surrender of Submissions. Their Feu-duties till they be redeemed at ten years
purchase, and reserving to them the Property holden of His Majesty, for payment
of the Feu-duties contained in the old Infeftments, preceding the Annexation.

By the 12. Act Par. 1633. the King restricts his general Revocation in October
1625. Registrate in the Books of Secret Council, February 9. 1626. in a
Proclamation then emitted; and another, July 21. 1626. to the annulling all
pretended Rights to the Property of the Crown, as well annexed as not annexed,
whereof an account has been made in Exchequer, and of the principality
unlawfully disponed by His Predecessors, against the Laws and Acts then
standing; and to the annulling of Erections and other Dispositions of
whatsoever Lands, Teinds, Patronages, and Benefices, formerly belonging to the
Kirk, and since annexed to the Crown, and any other Lands and Benefices,
Mortified to pious uses, and of Regalities and Heretable Offices, and the
change from Ward to Blensh or Taxt-ward, since the year, 1540.

Upon this progress it may be questioned, whether the Patronages that formerly
belonged to Churchmen, and were annexed to the Lands, Burrows or Benefices,
and thereafter were erected in Temporal Estates, do belong to the King or Lords
of Erection. And next, whether these more improper Patronages of the
Patrimonial Kirks of Abbacies, whereby the Lords of Erection coming in the
Abbots place, do claim the Right of Presentation, or Nomination of Stipendiary
Ministers to these Kirks, do belong to them or the King.

As to the first, there seems less difficulty that the Patronage which did
belong to Abbots of Kirks, which were not of their Patrimony, but whereof they
had only jus presentandi, do belong to the King, because such Patronages are
annexed to the Crown, by the general Act of Annexation, which though it does
not mention Patronages, yet the Barony or Benefice wherein such Patronages were
comprehended, were expressly annexed: And Barony or Benefice, being nomina
universitatis, will comprehend Patronages Incorporate therein, or annexed
thereto, so that without Dissolution, no Subject can pretend right to the
Ecclesiastic Patronages of Abbots, Priors, etc. and as to the Lords of
erection, who fall under the exceptions of the general Act of Annexation, they
having submitted and surrendered all their Titles of erection to the King, and
particularly their Patronages; and thereupon the King having by His Decree
Arbitral, Ratified in Parliament, reserved only to them their Property, Lands
and Teinds, and Feu-duties till they be redeemed; and the Superiority being
again annexed, which is the dominium directum of these ecclesiastical Baronies,
the ecclesiastic Patronage of the Abbots comprehended, in nomine Barroniae, do
therewith belong to the King unless they have been Disponed after Dissolutlon;
or a Subjects Title to the Advocation, Donation, or Right of Patronage of such
Kirks, be perfited by prescription; for the act of prescription, 1617. has no
exception of the Kings Right, to which the prior act that the King should not
be prejudged by the neglect of His Officers, does not extend, but that
interruption within the forty year, is requisite even for the King, the form
whereof was ordered by the Lords of Session, and approven by Parliament, 1633.
cap. 12. But there is much more difficulty as to the other point concerning the
Patronage of these Kirks, that were parts of the Patrimony of the Abbots, which
before the Reformation were not Kirks patronat, but patrimonial; but thereafter
being dissolved, and declared distinct Paroch Kirks. The Abbots power of
nomination of Viccars in these kirks, became to be exercised by Presentations
to the Kirks, which Presentations were given by the King to some Kirks, even
where there were erections; but in most erections, the Lords of erection did
present, as coming in place of the Abbots, and did in their Original or
subsequent Right, insert the Patronage of some, or all of the Patrimonial Kirks
of these Abbacies; and where the Right of Patronage is not expressed, the Lords
of erection have but small ground to pretend to these; and where they are
expressed and perfited by Prescription, they are secure, so that the question
will remain as to the power of presentation, to the patrimonial Kirks of
Abbacies, where prescription has not cleared the question, but that sometimes
the King, sometimes the Lords of Erection have presented, which was largely
debated in November 1677. concerning the Patronage of the Kirk of Allan,
whereunto the Lord of Watertoun had presented as deriving Right to an erection
prior to the Act of Annexation, and having desired from the Council, Letters to
Charge the Bishop to grant Collation upon the foresaid Act of Parliament,
ordaining Bishops to try and Collate upon the Patrons presentation, the matter
was remitted by the Privy Council, to the Lords of Session, in respect that the
Officers of State, did claim right to that patronage, as belonging to the King,
whereupon the Lords did at first, sist any further progress in admitting either
the person presented by the King, or by Watertoun, till the matter were
discussed, but after hearing, the Cause at length in their presence, Wattertoun
having alleged that his Author had an erection, bearing the Patronage of this
Kirk, per expressum; and that such Patronages were not annexed to the Crown,
because they were not comprehended in the Abbots Rights; such Kirks not being
then Patronat but Patrimonial, and that the King in his Decrect Arbitral had
determined nothing anent Patronages, but that the Lords of erection had always
enjoyed the same, and that the Lords of erection retaining the right of the
Teinds, the patronage belong to them as consequent to the Teinds, out of which
the provisions for the Kirk is payable, and it being answered for the King,
that though the Abbots had not the formal Right of presentation, because the
Kirks were not then patronat, yet they had the right of Nomination, or
substitution of the Viccars who served in these Kirks, in place of whom are now
the Stipendiary Ministers; these new patronages arise form the Dissolution of
these Abbacies into distinct parochs, must belong to the King, and the power of
nomination or presentation of these Stipendiars, was comprehended in, and
annexed with these Benefices to the Crown, by the first Act of Annexation, but
especially by the Annexations, 1633. whereby upon the surrender of the Lords of
erection, of all their Rights, and specially of their Patronages; the King by
his Decree Arbitral, had decerned to them only ten years purchase for the
Feu-duty, and nine years purchase for the Teind, they could pretend to no more,
and so to no right of Patronage. Likeas the King in the Interruption made by
the 12 Act of Parliament 1633. did expressly declare, that he will insist in
his general Revocation, as to the particulars enumerat in the Act of
Interruption, whereof patronage is one: In this debate the Lords being desirous
that the matter might be determined upon the clearest grounds, and to know if
prescription had cleared the matter, and either party having alleged
possession, the Lords before answer, Ordained either party to adduce all the
evidence they could, whether the King or Wattertoun and his authors had been in
possession, how long and what way.

TITLE XIX. TACKS, Where, of Rentals, tacit Relocation and Removing.
1. The nature of Tacks. 2. How Tacks become as real Right, effectual against
singular Successors. 3. Who may grant Tacks. 4. How Tacks may be set. 5. The
tenor of Tacks. 6. The effect of obliegements to set tacks. 7. Tacks become
real Rights by possession. 8. Tacks in Wodests after Redemption become valid.
9. The extent and effects of Tacks. 10. Tacks-men in possession need not
dispute the setters right, disputing as Heretable proprietar. 11. The effect of
Tacks, whereof the Tack duty is payable to Creditors. 12. Tacks are good active
Titles for Mails and Duties. 13. The effect of Tacks set to Husband and Wife.
14. Kinds of Tacks. 15. Rentals. 16. The effect of Assignations or Subtacks of
Rentals or other Tacks. 17. The effect of Sub-tacks, as to Tutors and Donatars.
18. The effect of Rentals in Court Books, or Rental Books only. 19. The
endurance of Rentals. 20. The effect of Grassoums. 21. How far Rentals become
void by Alegnation, Assignation or Subtack. 22. Defect of Sub-tacks. 23. Tacit
Relocation. 24. How Tacks fall in escheat. 25. Tacks sleep during Ward and
Non-entry of the setter, and are valid against his LiferentEsheat. 26. Tacks
are Strictissimi juris, and extend not to Heirs, or voluntary Assignays, or
Sub-tacks, or Removing, but when expressed, except Tacks for Liferent or
equivalent. 27. Tacks without Ish are null. 28. How far Tacks to endure till a
sum be paid are valid. 29. Tacks are null without a Tack Duty. 30. Tacks are
valid though not expressing the Entry. 31. Tennents must labor and not waste
or open the ground for any Minerals. 32. Tacks become void by two years not
payment of the TackDuty. 33. Or for not finding Caution to pay the Tack-duty
bygome, and in time to come. 34. Or by the Tennents Renounciation. 35. By
contrary consent of both parties. 36. By deeds contrary to the Tack. 37. Or by
removing. 38. Summar Removing without warning, in what cases. 39. The old way
of Removing Tennents. 40. Warning of Tennents to Remove. 41. The active Title
in Removeings. 42. Exceptions against Removings, not instantly Verified, are
not receiveable till Caution be found for the Violent profits. 43. Defenses
against Removing and replys thereto. 44. Violent profits. 45. Succeeding in
the Vice of Tennents Removed.
1. ATACk of it self is no more then a personal Contract of Location, whereby
Land or any other thing having profit, or fruit, is set to the Tacks-man for
enjoying the fruit or profit thereof, for a hyre, which is called the
Tack-duty; which therefore did only obliege the Setter and his Heirs, to make
it effectual to the Tacks-man, but did not introduce any real Right, affecting
the thing set, and carried therewith to singular Successors.

2. But so soon as the thing set ceased to be the setters, the Tacks could not
reach it: Thus it was with us tillthe Statute, Par. 1449. cap. 18. whereby
purchasers and singular Successors were disenabled to brake the Tacks set to
the Tennents: By this Statute, Tacks become as real Rights, affecting the
ground: And because they cannot come the length to be esteemed as Rights of
Property, they are ranked here amongst Servitudes personal; for as
Liferent-rights are real Rights, putting a Servitude upon Hereditaments to the
person of the Liferenter, during life, whereof a Liferent-tack is a kind; so
other Tacks do subject the thing set to the Tacks-man for a time, and affect
the same, though it pass to singular Successors, albeit the Statute only
expresses, that buyers shall not break Tacks, and is in favors of the poor
Laborers of the ground, for whose security it was chiefly intended; yet it is
extended against all singular Successors, whether by Sale, Exchange, Appryzing,
Adjudication, or any other way, as the Statute bears, in whose hands soever
the Lands come; and also in favors of all Tacks-men, whether they be laborers
of the: ground or not; whereby Tacks are now become the most ordinary and
important Rights; and if the great favor of this Statute made them not in
other thingsto be strictly interpret, they would render Infeftments of small
effect.

That we may proceed orderly in this matter, we shall consider; First, The
constitution of Tacks. Secondly, The extent and effect of them. Thirdly, The
kinds of them. Fourthly, The restricstions and defects of them. Fifthly, The
avoiding and removing of them.

As to the First, Tacks are also called Assedations, as a setting or settling of
the Tenement in the Land, the English call them Leasses. Some Tacks are also
called Rentals, as being the constitution of a fixed Rent, and they are of
longer endurance then ordinary Tacks, being of one or more Liserents, and have
somewhat special in them, of which hereafter.

3. As to the Constitution of a Tack, consider; First, Who may Constitute it.
Secondly, Of what. Thirdly, How. For the First, to the Constitution of an
effectual Tack, the setter must not only have all the Capacities requisite to
Contract, but he must have right to the thing set, and power to administrate,
which being Tacks, may either be granted by Commission, if it be special, as to
the Tacks, or at least as to matters of great importance; and a general Clause
for others, or otherways by Tutors, Curators, or other Administrators of the
affairs of others, concerning whom Craig lib. 2. Dieg. 10. moves and removes
this doubt, whether Tutors, etc. may set Tacks for longer time then during
their Office, which he resolves negatively, even though it were without the
Minors Detriment, continuing the ancient Tack-duty, seeing he is so far hurt as
not to have the free disposal of his own: The subject whereof, Tacks are
ordinarily set are Lands; but it may be any other thing having fruit or
profit, as a Fishing, an Office, or a Casuality.

As to the manner of Constituting Tacks, they must be considered in themselves;
First, As personal Rights. Secondly, As by the Statute becoming real; as they
are personal Rights, the consent of the setter, and Tack-man agreeing in the
rent, is sufficient.

4. But as Tacks are become real Rights, there is a necessity of write, except
in a Tack of one year, which may be verbal, but if the agreement be for more
years, the setter may resile; and though the Tacks-man be in possession, if he
resile, it will have no effect as to subsequent years, July 16. 1636. Alexander
Keith Contra his Tennents; the like though the Tennent possessed and builded
Houses conform to the agreement, yet the penalty of paying a years rent by the
failzier to the observer, was found to stand, July 15. 1637. Mr. Andrew Skein
contra But if once there be a Tack, the setters promise not to remove the
Tennent during his life, was found effectual, and not to be resiled from,
Nicol. de migrando, Lumbsden contra Black.

5. The write requisite to constitute a Tack, requires not many Solemnities;
but if the thing set, the Parties, the Rent and the Time, be cleared, the Tack
will be valid: It was ordinarily granted by the setter to the Tacksman for such
a Duty, without any mutual obliegement upon his part, like unto a Charter; but
because the Tennent not being bound, might at the end of any year before
Whitsonday, renounce such a Tack and be free, as being in his favor, therefore
they are now ordinarily by Contract, whereby the Tacks-man as well as the
Setter, is obliged to stand thereto.

6. Craig says in the forecited place, Pactum de assedatione facienda, and
ipsa assedatio, parificantur, praecipue si possessio sequatur, which is
unquestionable as to the setter and his heirs; and was also found against a
singular Successor, by a personal obliegement in a Contract of Marriage,
providing Lands to a wise, and warranding the same free of all Teinds, except
such a quantity which was in use to be paid, whereby a posteriour Assignation
to the Tack of these Teinds was excluded, March 20. 1629. Lord of Finmouth
contra Weyms. The like of a Tack and Decree Arbitral, decerning a Tack to be
granted: This was in a Spuilzie, Hope, Spuilzie John Crawford contra

7. As a Tack becomes a real Right, it must necessarily be cled with
possession, but requires no Seasine or Instrument, or other solemnity, July
11. 1627. Wallace contra Harvie, January 22. 1611. Lord of Pitsligo contra
Philorth. The like, though the Tacks-man was in possession, yet not by virtue
of the Tack, but by virtue of a Wodset, though the Tack was renewed the time of
the time of the Wodset, Hope removing, Walter Ord contra Tennents of Fydie; and
therefore, a posterior Tack being first cled with possession, was preferred to
a prior Tack, June 23. 1627. Mr. John Mcmillan contra Gordoun of Troquhan.

8. Yet a Tack after redemption of Wodsett Lands, is valide against singular
Successors, as a part of the Reversion, though it attain no possession before
the setter be denuded: But it is contrary in a Back-tack, appointed to follow a
Redemption of an Annualrent for it, and (...) Lands are diverse, and the
possession thereof diverse, Nicolson removing, Gawin Hamiltoun contra Alexander
and others; but the prorogation of a Tack is the renovation of it, and has the
same effect, as a new Tack of that date, for the years in the prorogation.

9. As to the extension and effect of Tacks, they are little less then of
Infeftments, for thereby the Tacks-man is maintained against all parties having
interest till the Tack be outrun, and be warned, even though set by a
Liferenter, it will maintain the Tennent against the Fiar, either from removing
till warning, or from paying more then the Liferenters Tack duty, though it be
small, July 6. 1610. Mr. Robert Bruce contra Captain Bruce. Yea, though the
Tack-duty was elusory, set by an Appriser to a person being no labourer of the
ground, February 3. 1631. Blaues contra Winrham. The reason why Tacks by
Liferenters are effectual, for the year in which the Liferenter died; because
by Act of Parliament, Tennents can only be warned to remove forty days
preceding Whitsonday; So that if the Liferenters live till thirty nine days
before Whitsonday, their Tennents cannot be removed, but brooks per tacitam
relocationem, till the new time of warning.

10. A Tack has also the benefit of a possessory judgment upon seven years
peaceable possession, as an Infeftment, without necessity to dispute the
setters right, July 13. 1636. Bishop of Edinburgh contra Gilbert Brown, which
was found where the Tack did bear to be granted by the setter as heretable
Proprietar. Otherwise, a Tack by a Liferenter, Tennent or Donator, might claim
the benefit, December 1. 1676. Mr. Patrick Home contra Sir Laurence Scot. And
therefore, if it were alleged, that the setter or liferenter had any other
temporary title, it would be admitted without Reduction, if the Liferenter or
beneficed person granter thereof were dead.

11. A Tack set by an Heretor for a Tack-duty to be paid to his Creditors, was
found a real Right effectual to the Tennents; but whether it would be found a
real right in favors of the Creditors in the same cause, it was first
determined negative, and thereafter affirmative: But it is not like, the Lords
would continue it, not being the habile way to secure Creditors, and being a
great mean of insecurity to purchasers, February 13. 1627. Samuel contra
Samuel. The negative is also observed by Spots Tacks, James Morison contra
Brown of Nunlands.

A Tack was preferred to an Apprising, whereof the denunciation was fix days
after the date of the Tack, though the Apprising was led before possession upon
the Tack, March 25. 1628. Peter Blackburn contra William Gibsone.

12. A Tack is a sufficient Title for Mails and Duties, and against all
poffessors, and it is obligator against the setters Heir for the profit of the
Land, though the Tacksman was never in possession, nor used diligence therefore
during the setters life, which was a long time, July 13. 1610. Porterfield
contra Ker; and in some cases, it is a good title for removing.

13. A Tack set by a Husband and his Wife, whereof the duty was payable to the
longest liver of them two, found to give her right to the Tack-duty after his
death against his Heir, though she had no other right of the Lands, and was
otherwise sufficiently provided, February 14. 1637. Home contra Hepburn.

A Tack set to a man and his wife for nineteen years, found to belong to the
wife as Liferenter, if she survive, and not to be disposable by the Husband
without her consent, Spots. Marriage, William Gourlay contra Jean Megill.

14. As to the third point proposed, concerning several kinds of Tacks, they
are either verbal or by write. Liferent-tacks are for certain years; ordinary
Tacks or Rentals, principal Tacks or Sub-tacks, express Tacks or by tacit
relocation; and these which are set by Wodsetters to the granters of the
Wodset, are called back-tacks, amongst which there are few specialities but
what concerns Rentals, Sub-tacks or tacit Relocations.

15. A Rental is a Tack set to kindly Tennents, which are the Successors of the
ancient possessors, or these who are received by the Heretor, with the like
privilege as if they were ancient possessors: And therefore, when Tacks are
set to persons, acknowledging or constituting them kindly Tennents, they are
equiparat to these that are set expressly under the name of Rentals.

16. Such Tacks are understood to comprehend more kindeness and friendship in
the Tennent to his Master, then other Tennents; And therefore, the Rentaller
may not assign them, nor introduce a sub-tennent, unless the Rental bear
expressly that power, but may himself remain upon the ground as colonus, the
same being in his own labourage. And Rentals are strictly interpret as to this
point, but are more favorably extended then other Tacks, as to any other
point; because of the kindness and friendship designed to the Rentaller
thereby: and no Tack is accounted a Rental unless it bear so, or that the
Teunent is acknowledged as kindly Tennent. And albeit after the expiring of
Rentals, there successors have no right to maintain them in possession; yet
frequently of favor they are continued, and pay grass-sums at the renovation
of their Rentals, wherein they have ordinarily considerable ease.

17. And therefore, the ordinary Tacks must contain an express and terminat
endurance, otherwise they are null, not only as to singular successors, but
even as to the setter and his Heirs, because they are not constitute habili
modo. And therefore, if they have no time, they last but for a year; and if
they have no determinate time of ish, they last no longer; and they do not
ordinarily give power of Assignation or Sub-tack, unless this be expressed: Yet
the granting of them does not annul the Tack, but only the Assignation or
Sub-tack, without warrant annuls these, but they annul Rentals, like to the
alienations ofWard-vassals.

18. Rentals do require write, not only as a probation, but as a solemnity in
their constitution, and can be granted by none but the Heretor of the Ground;
but if they be renewed by Tutors for the accustomed Grassums, it may be
accounted as an Act of lawful administration, much rather then that Tutors
should have power to expel the kindly tennents. It has not come in
controversy, whether Donatars of Ward, Non-entry, or Liferenters may expel
kindly Tennents: Or whether their Title would not be relevant to defend in
removings against them, though not against the Heretor, wherein this would make
for them, that all these temporary possessors have not, plenum dominium, and
can but make use of the Fee as the proprietars did, though they may out-put and
in-put ordinary tennents.

The old Decisions have varied whether a Rental be sufficient, being in the
Heretors Court or Rental Book, though the Rentaller can show no original
subscribed by the Heretor; yet there are Decisions for it, more then against
it, July 5. 1625. Maxwel contra Grahame. Nicol. removing, Lady Lugtoun contra
hertennents.

19. Some old Decisions sustain Rentals only for a year, when they mention no
endurance, though they be set expressly as Rentals, which do not quadrat to the
nature and design of Rentals, whereby the Rentaller being entered, is only to
be understood to be for his Life; and his Successors ever to be in his Masters
power, to renew or not to renew, according to the Rentaler and his Successors
carriage, except the Contract be very clear and express; and therefore, a
Rental set to the Rentaller and his heirs, without expressing a certain number
of heirs, was found only to stand during the life of the Rentaller, July 5.
1625. Lord of Aitoun contra Lady Wedderburn. Hope rental, Lord Seatoun contra
his tennents. Nicol. removing, Lord of Corsbie contra Donaldson. And where a
rental bore to Heirs indefinitely, the right of the first heir wassustained by
the custom of the Barony, March 15. 1631. Earl of Galloway contra Burgesses of
Wigtoun. And a Rental bearing to the Rentallers heirs Heretable, ad perpetuam
remanentiam, was sustained as to the first heir of the rentaller, without
necessity to allege, custom so to set, March 13. 1632. Achannay of Kirkdale
contra Aitoun. Albeit the tenor of it was contrary the nature of a Tack, and
might have been excluded, as to any Heirs, and sustained only as to the
rentaller himself, unless the custom of the Barony had altered the case,
which, in dubio, is always to be respected.

20. Grassum do presume kindliness; and in some Baronies these are renewed,
both at the death of the Heretor, and at the death of the tennent; but more
ordinarily at the death of the tennent only; yet in either case if the grassum
be received from the tennent, and thereby he acknowledged by write, as a kindly
tennent, he cannot be removed by the Heretor or his heirs, even though he had
not a formal Rental, because the matter is not entire by receipt of the
Grassum; and therefore, there is no locus penetentiae, upon restoring thereof,
especially as to the Successors of old tennents, paying Grassum before; and
therefore, Rentals expressly so granted; or to tennents Constitute kindly
tennents, though they contain no Ish, should not be annulled for want of an
Ish, which is employed in the nature of a Rental to be a Life-rent; and it would
be far contrary to that favor, that in other cases is allowed them to sustain
them, but as verbal Tacks, lasting for a year; Upon this ground it is, that a
Rental granted to a man and his wife, not bearing, the longest liver, nor any
issue was yet found to Constitute them both Rentallers, during their life, and
their wife surviving to enjoy the same, February 20. 1629. Lord of Ley younger
contra Kirkwood.

21. Rentals do ordinarily contain a Clause, not to subset, assign, or annalzie,
which if it be contraveened, not only the assignation or sub-tack is void, but
the Rental it self, February 28. 1610. John Hamiltoun contra Thomas Boid. The
like being subset, as to a part, pro tanto, Hope rentals, Lord Douglas contra
Walkinshaw. But if the Assignation or Sub-tack was to the Major part, it did
annul the whole Rental, November 13. 22. Lord of Craigie Wallace contra his
Tennents. Yea, though the Subtack was only granted for certain years, and these
expyred before the pursuit, Hope rentals, Earl of Roxburgh contra Ker. This is
so far extended, as being in the nature of a Rental, without any such Clause,
that it falls in whole in the same manner, as Ward-lands recognosce by
alienating or subsetting the whole, or major part if Possession follow, and
that by exception or reply, March 15. 1631. Earl of Galloway contra Burgesses
of Wigtoun. Though the alienation was by Excambion, and was conditional, if the
Heretor consented, else to be null. The like where the Rentaller had given a
Disposition of the Rentalled Room, whereupon the acquirer was in possession,
which was found to annull the Rental, albeit it bore Assigneys and to exclude a
Sub-tack by the Rentaller to that same party before any contraversie moved,
February 21. 1632. Lord of Johnstoun contra Jamison. The like though the
Sub-tennents offered to repone the Rentaller, November 13. 1622. Bonar contra
Nicolson. The like upon an Assignation of an Rental, though it contained a
power to sub-set, and in-put and out-put Tennents, March 21. 1623. Lord of
Craigie Wallace contra his Tennents. But this takes no place if the Sub-tack
be set to the Rentallers eldest son who was to succeed, March 19. 1622. Earl of
Roxburgh contra Robert Gray. It will also be elided, if the Heretor receive
duty from the Assigney as Assigney, Hopehic, Lord of Craigie contra his
Tennents. But it will not be inferred by the Rentallers entering another in
Possession, without granting him a Right in Write, July 5. 1625. Lord of
Aitoun contra Lord of Wedderburn, last of January 1633. Lord of Cleghorn
contra Crawfoord; unless the Rental contain an obliegement to put no other in
Possession; and then it became null by granting tollerance, and that by
exception against the person having tollerance, without calling the Rentaller,
July 15. 1628. Maxwel contra A Rental setting the keeping of a House, Yard, and
others, to the Rentaller and his Heirs, as kindly Tennents, was not found null
by demolishing the House and Yard, whereby the Rentaller failed in his duty,
and in the cause of granting the Rental, January 29. 1628. Duke of Lennox
contra Houstoun.

22. A Sub-tack is that which is granted by the principal Tacks-man to his
Subtennent, who does not thereby become Tennent to the setter of the principal
Tack, this is competent to Tacks-men, where Lands are set to them or their
Subtennents, or that they have power to out-put and in-put Tennents; and it is
like a subaltern Infeftment, it has the same effect to defend the possession
as the principal Tack it self, if it be cled with possession, and cannot be
taken away by any Renounciation granted by the principal Tacks-man, though his
Tack bore not Assigneys (but though it be not observed, it has born either
power to in-put Tennents or Sub-tennents) July 14. 1625. Earl of Mortoun contra
his Tennents: Yea, when the principal Tack was reduced for not production, the
Sub-tacks-men not having been called, the Sub-tack was sustained as a defense,
notwithstanding the Reduction, seeing the Heretor had consented to the Sub-tack,
December 13. 1626. Earl of Galloway contra Meculloch: Yet otherways, the
Heretor is not obliged to know the Subtack, nor to call the Subtacksmen, in
the Reduction of the principal Tack, and it becomes null by exception, unless
the Substacks-man had appeared and produced his interest in the Reduction; or
in the second instance, can propone a defense sufficient for the principal
Tacks-man, or himself; after which it did not defend him, as bon a fidei,
possessor after Inhibition, or drawing the teind, December. 11. 1623. Earl of
Wigtoun contra Parochioners of Stobo; but otherways the Sub-tack would be
sufficient till warning.

This is the effect of a Sub-tack passive, but active, it is not a sufficient
title to pursue without instructing the principal Tack, unless it had been
acknowledged by the defender, or cled with possession, sufficient for a
possessory Judgment, March 29. 1622. Sir James Cleiland contra Tennents of
Arbuckle: For, in Intrusions or Ejections, Sole Possession is the Title.

23. Tacit Relocation is that which is presumed to be the mind of both
parties after expiring of a Tack, when neither the setter warns, nor the
Tacks-man renounceth, for other significations of the alterations of their
minds will not suffice these, being the habile way of voiding Tacks, which is
now much more strengthened by the Statute, Prohibiting tennents to be put out
without warning before Whitsonday: But where warning is not requisite, though
other competent ways of evacuating the Tack will be sufficient, as Inhibition
in teinds, or actions for removing, summarly from Fortalices, Coalheughts, etc.
Yea, though warning has been used, if it prescrive by three years not pursuing
thereupon, it has no effect even against tacit Relocation, July 6. 1610. Mr.
Robert Bruice contra Captain Andrew Bruice.

There is a kind of tacit Relocation, by taking the Rent before the hand,
during which time, as Craig observes in the forecited place, the setter cannot
remove the Defuncts Successor for the years ensuing, in both which cases he is
understood to relocate tacitly by these deeds.

Tacit Relocation has the same effect to maintain Possession, that the Tack
had even against singular Successors, and that not only to the Tacksmen, but to
the sub-tennents being Possessors, who alleged the principal Tacks-man was not
warned, and were not obliged to allege he had a Tack for terms to run, but
only that he was not warned, December 2. 1628. Mr. Walter Whitefoord contra
Johnstoun. But where the Sub-tennent was warned, tacit Ralocation alleged by
the Sub-tennent, was not sustained without producing a standing Tack to the
principal Tacks-man, January 30. 1663 Riccart contra Lord of Udnie. Here the
warning was by a singular Successor who is obliged to know or warn none but
the natural Possessor, which was not in the former case. And tacit Relocation
will be sufficient after a verbal Tack, or where the Tack is presumed upon use
of payment, though none can be shown or proven: Yea, tacit Relocation was
sustained for more years then the setter could expressly set; and is ordinarily
in the case of tacit Relocation, upon Liferenters Tacks, which continue still
after their death, till warning, and was so found in a Patrons Tack of teinds,
after the Patrons right to set, by the Act of Par. 1649. was rescinded, January
16. 1663. Earl of Errol contra Tennents of Urie.

Relocation is valide against the Donatar of a Ward, till Warning or Citation,
though the Tack-duty be elusory, and that the Tack then sleep, Spots. removing,
Lord of Lie contra Glen of Barn. But tacit Relocation is no relevant active
Title against any, but these who have right from the Tacksman, though they had
acknowledged the same by payment to him for years anterior, December. 12. 1621.
Lord of Lag contra Porochioners of Leymon.

By what has been said, it may appear that the force and effect of Tacks is so
great, by reason of the foresaid Statute and Custom, extending the same, that
it would swallow up all Heretable Rights, and make Infeftments useless, unless
Tacks had their own Retrincnments and defects, making Infeftments necessary.

24. First, Tacks not being Liferent-tacks, fall in single Escheat, but these
fall by Liferent-escheat, Par. 1617. cap 15.

25. Secondly Tacks have no effect against Superiors, but sleep during the
time of Wards, Non-entires, etc. For Infeftments Feu are then valide only in
some cases: Yet Tacks are valide against Liferent-escheat, which is a casuality
falling, not by the nature of Fees, but by Statute or Custom, Vide Title 14..
Liferent-escheat.

26. Thirdly, Tacks are strictissimi juris, and no further extended then is
expressed; and therefore, are not extended to Assigneys, unless expressed; and
therefore, Tacks granted to Women fall by their Marriage, which is a legal
Assignation, and cannot be annulled, yet may revive by the Husbands death,
unexpired, Vide Craig, lib. 2. Dieges. 10. Upon the same ground a Tack not
bearing to Assigneys, was not found to accress to a Relict, as infeft with
absolute Warrandice, as jus superveniens authori, June 18. 1680. Margaret Home
contra Janet Lyel, which is to be limited thus, that it does not exclude legal
Assignations by Appryzing and Adjudication: But only voluntary Assignations,
Hope hic, Lord Elphingstoun contra Lord of Airth. November 16. 1680. Drummond
of Carlourie contra Sir John Dalrymple. Liferent-tacks also may be assigned,
not mentioning assigneys, February last 1637. Home contra Craw. July 16. 1672.
Duff contra Fouler. The like when it is of more value then a Liferent-tack, as
being of many nineteen years, Spots. hic, Ross contra Blair.

The like holds in the power of making Sub-tacks, or out-putting and
inputting of Tennents, or Removings, which are not competent thereupon, unless
express, or unless it be against these who had the possession from the
Tacksman, except in Liferent-tacks, and these of greater importance.

27. Tacks cannot be perpetual; and therefore, necessarly must have an Ish, or
else they are null, what favor is herein granted to Rentals, is herein showen.

28. If there be no particular Ish, but to endure till the payment of a sum, it
has been variously decided, whether it be effectual against a singular
Successor negative, July 13. 1621. Lord of Mckal contra his Tennents. March 5.
1629. Lord of Lie younger contra Kirkwood. Affirmative, Hope hic, Lord of
Clackmannan contra Tennents of Balmaino. The like in a Tack set to a Smith so
long as he should work the setters work, July 11. 1610. Sir James Lundie
contra Smith of Lundie. This is unquestionable in Back-tacks, which have no
Ish, but during the Non-redemption. And in other cases the Affirmative is
stronger, both in reason and practice; but it holds not, if it be but an
obliegement not to remove the Tennent, until such a sum be paid, that is only
personal: And neither a Tack nor an obliegement for a Tack, unless it be
contained in a tack, bearing such a sum to be due to the tacks-man, and for
seourity thereof, the Lands to be set, and the rent to be as satisfaction of
the Annualrent, pro tanto, was found valide against a singular Successor, and
that the tack wanted not an Ish, because the payment of the Money was the Ish,
January 22. 1625. Isobel Ronald contra Strange. But the contrary was found,
March 5. 1629. Lord of Lie contra Kirkwood. A Bond assigning to the Ferms till
a sum were paid, was not found valid against a singular Successor, July 2.
1624. Mitchelson contra Law. So a tack set for seven years, for a certain
tack-duty expressed, with a Clause, that the tacks-man should retain a part of
the tack-duty for the annualrent of a sum, due to him by the setter, and should
not be removed till the sum were paid, was found valide against a singular
Successor for the seven years, because there was an excresce above the
annualrent, which remained for the Tack-duty, but not for the rest, being but a
personal obliegement not to remove, June, 15. 1664. Thomson contra Reid.
January 27. 1674. Peacock contra Lauder. The like where a Tack was set by a
Liferenter for four years. And while a sum were paid, found valide against the
Liferenters Assignayes the 18 of December 1668. Mr. Robert Smitoun contra Mr.
John Brown. The like was found in a Tack against an Appryzer, allowing the
Tack-duty for the annualrent of the sums, there remaining a several Tack-duty,
December 11. 1677. Charles Oliphant contra James Currie.

29. Fifthly, Tacks are not valide as real rights against singular Successors,
unless they have a Tack-duty; yea if they have one but in the Tack it self, it
be wholly discharged, yet the Tack is valide; neither will the discharge of the
Tack-duty be valide against the setters singular Successor, January 31. 1627.
Mr. James Ross contra Blair.

30. But the want of an Entry vitiats not a Tack; for when there is no Entry,
the date or the next Term is the Entry, December 4. 1629. Mr. William Oliphant
contra Mr. Heugh Peebles.

31. Sixthly, All Tennents are burdened with necessity to enter and labor the
ground, that the Master may have ready execution, February 27. 1623. Samfoord
contra Crombie, and not to rive out Meadow or Greens never plowed, or destroy
Mosses, or deteriorat the ground worse nor he found it, February 6. 1633. Lord
of Haddo contra Johnstouns: and must leave the Houses as good as at his entry,
February 27. 1610. contra All which are without express provision: Neither may
the Tennent open the ground for winning of any Mineral, Coal, or Clay for
Pipes, without that power be expressed, the 15. of February 1668. John Colqhoun
contra Watson.

Seventhly, Albeit Tacks be by Statute as real Rights, yet they are affected
with Back-bond granted by the Tacks-man, which are relevant againstthe
Tacksmans singular Successor, though neither Registrat nor Intimat, January 8.
1668. Margaret Forbes contra

It remains now to consider how Tacks are destitute and taken off; And first,
as to the point of Right. Next, as to Possession. As to the point of Right, we
shall not speak of the nullities of Tacks, by which they were never truly
Constitute, and so needs not be destitute: But when they have once a real
Being, they cease; First, By any deed contrary to the Tenor or nature
thereof, as has been before shown in Rentals, which is not so in ordinary
Tacks, unless there be a Clause irritant, and that be declared, and so is not
competent by exception, Spots. hic, Robert Stevinson contra Alexander Barcley.

32. Secondly, They become void by not payment of the Tack-duty, in the same
manner as a Feu Right by the delay of two years, unless the Tacksman offered
payment at such a time, November 23. 1629. Romanno contra Nisbit.

33. Thirdly, If the Tacks-man be pursued to find Caution for the Duties
resting, and in time coming if he find no Caution, the Tack becomes void and he
may be removed summarly without warning; this was also sustained against a
Back-tack in Wodsetts, though having no Clause irritant, Hope, Confirmation,
Sir Thomas Dischingtoun contra. Lord of Pitmeden, Idem, William Hamiltoun
contra Earl of Argile. It was also sustained, though the Duty was small, the
ground plenished, and but one year resting, February 27. 1627. Lawson contra
Scot. But it is not sustainable where there are no bygones resting: Neither was
it sustained, unless a year were resting the time of the Citation, at least at
Litiscontestation, albeit the tacks-man was Bankrupt, and in prison for Debt,
January 3. 1672. Lady Binnie contra Heugh Sinclar.

34. Fourthly, Tacks ceass by the expyring of the Terms thereof, and the
setters warning, or other deeds to take off tacit Relocation, or the Tennants
Renounciation; the form whereof is, the tennent forty days before Whitsonday,
subscrives and delivers to his Master a Renunciation of his tack and
possession, consenting that he enter braevi manu, without hazard of ejection,
whereupon there must be taken an Instrument of Renunciation in the hands of a
Nottar, as a Solemnity requisite, which is sufficient to instruct the
overgiving, astbeing the habile way approven in Law; albeit in other cases not
approven in Law; Instruments of Nottars prove not the deed of the party, in
this case it avoideth the tack, and is probable by Instrument, if the tack be
expired, but during the tack the Instrument will not prove the acceptance of
the Renunciation.

35. Fifthly, Tacks are taken off by the contrary consent of both parties,
though they be not expired, as when they are really left by the tennent, and
possessed by the Master: Or when by write they are renunced and accepted; for
verbal renunciations may be resiled from before they be perfected in write, in
the same manner as verbal tacks may, and much more promises to renunce; this
way of renunciation is express and direct.

36. Sixthly, Tacks are taken away by tacit and employed renunciation, and by
passing therefrom, as by taking a posterior tack for fewer years, and making
use thereof, albeit but a minute, not by Contract, nor subscribed by the
tacksman, nor in his hand, but his acceptance proven by witnesses, and by
paying conform, January 17. 1632. Earl of Lawderdail contra Waterstoun. By
accepting a posterior Factory of the same Lands, Hope, action of reduction,
Earl of Tillibairn contra James Dalzel. By paying a greater duty, February 27.
1610. Atcheson of Gossoord contra his Tennents. Lethem contra his Tennents. But
not by paying of more presents, Ibid, Robert Hamiltoun contra Tennents of
Melburn. Neither by Sub-tennents paying a greater duty, without warrant of the
principal Tennent, June 5. 1611. Lord of Phairnieherst contra Minister of
Innerkeithing. Also by taking an heretable right of the same thing; but it
holds not, if the heretable right were reduced, for then the Tack revives,
Spots. appryzing, Lord of Garthland contra Campbel. Neither is it taken off by
a posterior appryzing in the Tacks-mans person, seeing it was satisfied and
declared extinct against him, last of February 1623. Brice Semple contra
Tennents of Closseburn.

37. Tacks are taken off as to possession, by removing of the Tennents, either
voluntarly, as is before expressed; or more ordinarily, judicially by Process of
removing, which is most frequent and important; and therefore, is reserved to
be spoken of together in this place, though there be diverse kinds of
removings, having respect to diverse Titles; for though removing be competent
against all Possessors, whether possessing without any Title, or by an
insufficient Title, as an invalide Infeftment or the like, yet the rise thereof
is for removing of Tennents.

38. Removing is either summar without warning, or solemn upon warning; again
summar removing is either by paction or Law; By Paction when it is so agreed by
the Tack or other Write, that the Tennant shall remove at such a Term without
warning, which will be sufficient at that time, Craig hic. This will hold upon
Dispositions, whereupon the Disponer may be compelled to remove summarly
without any such express Clause, which was also extended in favors of
Appryzers, against their Debitors possessing a House, March 26. 1612. January
18. 1623. Earl of Lothian contra Sir John Ker and his Son. But it is more
questionable, whether it will be sufficient at any time thereafter, if the
Tennent be suffered to possess, per tacitum relocationem; especially, seeing the
Statute for warning is a public Law, introduced for the good of poor Tennents,
whose rusticitie is excuseable, if they advert not to anterior Pactions, Nam
pacta privatorum non derogant juri communi: Yet upon the contrary, cuique libet
(...) juri pro se introducto: Betwixt which, I conceive this temperament will
hold, that such pactions, though recent, may be effectual at the precise Term,
or at any Term or time thereafter upon intimation, if it be so agreed upon in
Write; for promises in this case may be resiled from (as before is shown) but
in either case the Tennent must have intimation before the Term, which will
suffice without the solemnities of warning; but it must be of that length, that
the tennent may provide for himself, and remove his goods, which will be in the
arbitriment of the Judge; and I suppose that they will walk most fairly and
safely, who shall intimate the same to the Tennent forty days before the Term:
Or otherways, all the effect is like to be, that he will be discerned to remove
at the next Whitsonday after the Process, without violent profits, as uses to
be done when there is any probable excuse for the Tennents not removing.

Summar removing is competent by Law without Paction, in all cases where the
Statute appointing warning, takes no place, which is chiefly regulate by the
reason of the Statute, that Tennents be not put at unaworse to seek their
habitations, or at an unseasonable time of the year; and therefore, it is not
necessary in several cases.

First, where the Possessor is not Tennent, but a vicious Possessor; or where
the Possessor has nothing but an insufficient Infeftment or tollerance: For
the Statute is only in favors of Tennents, who are liable for Mails and Duties.

Secondly, Warning was not found necessary for removing Possessor from a Tower
or Fortalice, though set in Tack, Hope hic, Lady Saltoun contra Mr. William
Livingstoun, or from a Coal, Ibid. Wolmet contra Niddrie. Or from the
possession of a Liferenters House or Land, after the Liferenters death, and
that upon suplication, it was obtained without Process, Hope Liserent, Prestoun
contra Cockpen. And this was competent at the instance of a Liferenter against
these who continued the possession of a former Liferenter, after her death,
January 12. 1622. Lady Kincaid contra her Tennents. The like, but to take
effect at Whitsonday after the Process, against a Liferenters servant,
possessing without a Tack in write, and also without violent profits, February
16. 1628. Thomson contra Merstoun. But if the possession from the Liferenter be
by virtue of a Tack, the possessor must be warned, as has been shown amongst
the effects of Tacks. Removing is also competent by sorce of of Law upon a
Process, to find caution for the rent, or to remove; of which before. As to
what is special in Tacks of teinds, has been considered in that Title.

The prime kind of removing is that which is solemn upon Warning; for clearing
whereof, we shall first consider the order pre-required. Secondly, The interest
of the pursuer. Thirdly The exceptions of the Defender. Fourthly, The effects
of removing.

39. The Order of removing of old was thus; The Master of the ground did only
verbally intimate to the Tennent to remove at the next Whitsonday; and the only
solemnity requisite was, that before the said term he appeared before the door
of the Tennent and broke a Lance there, as a Symbol of his breaking the tacit
relocation betwixt them; whereupon the second day after Whitsonday, he came
braevi manu, and expelled the tennent; or at least laid out some of his Goods
to complete the solemnity of his removing, Craig hic, Hence arose many
quarrels, violences and breaches of the public Peace; when the tennent had any
reason or pretense, for which not to remove, or otherways was unwilling, and
not compelled by Law or public Authority, but by private force.

40. For remeid whereof, that excellent Statute concerning warning and removing
of tennents was made, Par. 1555. cap. 39. prescriving the Order of removing
thus; That the Master of the Ground give a Precept of warning in write,
commanding his Officer (which may be any person he pleases) for whose name, a
blank is set in the Precept, to go forty days preceding Whitsonday, and
intimate to the tennent that he remove himself, his family, sub-tennents, goods
and gear, at the said term, and leave the tenement void and red, that the
warner may enter in Possession: this may be done either personnally or at his
dwelling house.

Secondly, The Precept must authorize the Officer to make the said
denounciation, forty days before the term upon the ground of the Land, leaving
a Copy thereof affixed thereupon, and by the same space, it must be done at the
Kirk-door, at the time of dissolving the Congregation, from the first Sermon,
leaving a Copy thereof affixed upon the Kirk-door; all which must be done
before two witness, required for that effect, and Executions made conform by
the Officer, which without any other Instrument or Solemnity does sufficiently
prove, unless it be improven, upon this order the pursuer has a privileged
action upon six days warning only, without continuation, Par. 1555. cap. 39.
and that because of the necessity of the dispatch, that the new tennents who
has taken may be put in Possession, and the Land not left waste, both to
public and private detriment: This Order must be used, though the term of the
Tack be not at Whitsonday but at Martimess or Candlesmess; and it will not
suffice to be made forty days before these terms, June 15. 1631. Ramsay contra
Weir. The reason hereof is, because the warning is appointed that the tennents
may timeously provide for themselves, which cannot be but before Whitsonday,
the ordinary time Lands use to be set, if the parties removed be out of the
Country, it will suffice to warn them upon the ground, and at the Kirk-door
upon forty days, but the Citation must be upon sixty days, which is
consequent from the Statute, which prescrives nothing different from the
ordinary course of Law; in the case of parties out of the Country it was so
decided, January 11. 1622. Lord of Faldenside contra Bimerside. February 20.
1666. Mebrair contra Sir Robert Chrightoun alias Murray. This Statute reaches
not warnings from tenements within Burgh, which are regulat by the custom of
Burgh: Thus the Town Officer by command of a Bailie, though without write,
warns only at the tenement, forty days preceding Whitsonday, and in
evidence thereof, uses to Chalk the Door, Craig hic, Nicolson removing, Andrew
Ker contra Euphan Moor: this was extended to a house within Burgh of Barony,
July 18. 1634. Mr. John Heart contra

Nor was warning before Whitsonday found necessary for removing a tennent from
a Soap-work, November 21. 1671. James Riddel contra Charles Zinzan.

41. We come now to the Tit. requisite for removing, which must be a real Right
of the ground, except the question be against a party who is personally
obliged to remove; And therefore, first, there needs no Title against such
parties, who had the possession from the pursuer, for these can never question
his Title, whose interest depends thereupon, but acknowledging him by payment
of Mails and duties, will not be sufficient without a Right in the pursuer.

Secondly, a personal or incomplete right is a sufficient Title for removing
against the granter of it, or his Heirs, if it contain a Clause to remove, or
put the pursuer in possession, expressly or by consequence.

Thirdly, Infeftment of property or Liferent is a sufficient Title in removing,
and that upon production of the Seasine only; where the Defender shows no
better Right, Nicol. removing, Adam Wat contra Ord: But the Seasine must be
both before the warning and the term, except first in the case of Heirs, this
being a possessory judgment, and a continuance of the predecessors possession;
so that the Tennent cannot be in doubt or hazard to quite the possession, as he
may be in other cases, where he may be liable, both for the rent and rendering
the possession to another party, and so it was sustained at the instance of an
Heir, though his retour and Seasine were after the warning, February 9. 1610.
Earl of Kingborn contra Arbuthnet. Hope hic, John Small contra Tennents of
Baltersaw, in the case of an Apprizer, whose Appryzing was before the Warning,
it was found valide, though the Infeftment was after, against the Debtor from
whom the Lands were Apprized, but to take effect at Whitsonday thereafter, and
without violent Profits, December 18. 1632. Dalrimple contra Douglas. And
removing was sustained at the instance of an Heir, Retoured and Infeft, pursued
upon a warning used by his Predecessor, though his Infeftment was after the
Term, July 28. 1637. Earl of Hadingtoun contra his Tennents. It was also
sustained at the instance of a Fiar upon a Warning made by a Liferenter and
Fiar jointly, November 27. 1629. Ramsay contra Hoom. But a removing was not
sustained upon a warning made by the Fiar, before the Liferenters death, no not
to take effect at the next Whitsonday without a new warning, June 30. 1669.
Agnew contra Tennents of Dronlaw.

Though Infeftment be the best Title for removing, yet it must be limited;

First, It takes no place being upon Infeftment, proceeding upon a Precept of
Clare constat, Hope hic, Stevinson contra Stevinson; and that in respect this
Precept is but the Assertion of the granter: Yet if either the Predecessor of
that Heir was in Possession, or the Superior himself, it would suffice.

Secondly, It holds not in base Infeftments, not cled with Possession, unless
the Authors Right be instructed or acknowledged, if the Defender have any Title.

Thirdly, A Tercers Service and Kenning to her Terce, is a sufficient Title in
removing.

Fourthlie, The Courtesy of Scotland is a good Title for removing after a
Wifes death, without any Seasine or Solemnity, or the Husbands jus mariti,
before her death, which will be effectual, though she die before Sentence or
Process, to the effect, that the Husband may get the benefit of the violent
profits, for the time preceding her death, though he cannot attain the
Possession.

Fifthly, An Executor may insist for a removing upon a warning used by the
Defunct, to the effect he may obtain the violent profits, due before the
Defuncts death.

Sixthly, a tack is a sufficient Title for removing, if it contain expressly
the power to out-put and in-put Tennents, or if it be a Liferent-tack, or for
nineteen years or above, as has been now shown amongst the effects of Tacks;
but this must proceed either upon the setters Right or a Possessory judgment
in the setter or Tacks-man.

Removing is not sustainable upon an incomplete right, as upon an Appryzing,
though the Superior be charged, and the Letters have been found orderly
proceeded against him, to infeft the Apprizer; and the objection only proponed
by Tennents, pretending no right, March 25. 1628. Bar Lockhart contra his
Tennents. Yea, though the removing was against the Debtor himself, February
20. 1629. Mr. John Galloway contra (...). Though it has been now shown that an
Appryzer being Infeft, obtained removing from an House, against his Debtor
without warning. The like holds in Adjudications, and in the case of the
Superiors pursuing upon the Vassals Liferent-escheat, it not being declared,
Hope hic, Patrick Butter contra Andrew Harvie. And so consequently in all other
rights of Superiority, where Declarator is required; and though the Superior
needs show no Title, unless the Vassal disclaim him; yet his Donatar pursuing
upon a Liferent-escheat, was not admitted till the Superiors Seasine was
produced, Hope hic, David M'call contra Tennents: And it is so in all cases
wherein the Superior or the Vassal are singular successors, and so have ground
to doubt, and cannot be put to disclaim.

42. We come now to the Exceptions against removing, to speak nothing here of
common Exceptions, or of thr pursuers want of a sufficient Title, which are
rather objections then exceptions, and are sufficiently cleared by what we have
said upon the Titles of Removing. It must be adverted, that before the Defender
can have any exception admitted to his probation, he must find Caution for the
violent profits, if he succumb: And that by the said Statute, 1555. Cap. 39.
justly introduced in respect of the contentiousness of parties to keep
possession; yet this will not hinder objections against the Titles or the like,
being instantly verified and not making delay, that being the motive of that
Act to prevent delays.

43. These exceptions, though they be many, may be thus Martialled; they are
first against the order and warning. Secondly, Upon deeds done by the Pursuer.
Thirdly, Upon the interest of the Defenders Master. Fourthly, Upon the
Defenders own interest. Fifthly, Upon obedience.

For the first, every point of the warning now related, is so necessary that
the omitting of any one affoordeth a sufficient defense; yer a warning was not
found null, though made at a Kirk-door, where there were no divine service
accustomed, being in the time that divine service used to be performed, and the
Kirk being known a distinct Kirk, Nicolson hic, Hoom contra

Removing may be excluded by deeds done by the pursuer, either by any personal
obliegement not to remove, or any deed importing the same, as a Disposition or
Obliegement to Infeft, which are sufficient against him, but not against his
singular Successors; or if he renunce or pass from the warning or action,
either directly or by deeds importing the same, as taking Rents before the
hand, or taking a Herezeld as to the year ensuing, March 20. 1629. Auchinleck
contra Mathie: Or by accepting the old accustomed Mails for Terms after the
warning, Nicolson de migrando, Irving contra French, Hope hic, Carnousie contra
Or by receipt of Taxation for Terms since the Decree of removing, ibid. Or by
accepting services contained in the Tack, for the Terms after the warning; but
this is not relevant, if the same be at the command of the pursuers Factor or
Grieve, without special order, March 5. 1629. Lord of Lie younger contra
Kirkwood. Neither by accepting presents, though accustomed, not being special
in the Tack, these being interpret gratuitous, as before is shown.

Removing is also elided by prescription, upon three years forbearance to
pursue; And that by the Statute, 1579. cap. 82. for thereby the pursuer is
presumed to pass from his warning; but these three years are not accounted,
anni continui, but anni utiles: from the warning without accounting the time
betwixt the warning and Term, but from the Term, to which the warning was made;
because none can be said to delay to pursue, before he be necessitate to
pursue, which is not till after the Term, it was so decided February 6. 1629.
Lady Borthwick contra Scot of Goldilands. But removing may be sustained before
the Term, that it may take effect precisely at the Term: Otherways many
Tennents may be disappointed, who take upon the warning of other Tennents,
their Rooms, and renunce their own, or are warned therefrom; and so removing
was sustained before the Term, to take effect then, November 21. 1671. James
Riddel contra Charles Zinsan. But the process being once intended, it continues
till the great prescription of forty years, except such as are not wakened
every five years, for such prescrive in ten years by the Act 9. Par. 1669.

The exceptions of removing at the instance of the Master of the ground, are
very frequent and various; for it is ordinarily proponed and sustained, that the
Defenders are Tennents by payment of Mail and Duty to a third party, who is not
warned nor called; neither are they put to dispute their Masters Right to be
valide, which holds, whether his Right be an Infeftment, Liferent-right or
Tack; and though the Tennent has been put to condescend what the Right is, and
that in specie, it is a valide Right, though he needs not dispute the
particular defects of it, nor the competition of it with any other Right: That
has been done, that the pursuer might know how to quarrel their Masters Right;
but I have never observed that Litiscontestation has been made, or a Term
assigned to Tennents, to instruct their Masters Right; therefore this defense
is but dilatory, and should not be sustained, unless instantly verified by
Tacks or Discharges from the alleged Master, which would be repelled, if the
Tennents have interverted the pursuer or his authors Possession; or if the
pursuer were singular Successor, not presumed to know any interest but of the
Possessors, if the Tennent, produce his Masters Seasine, with his Tack or
Discharge, it would instruct this Dilator, which is sufficient upon the not
calling the Tennents Master, for his not being warned is proper for himself to
allege, and the party will in the same Process get warrant to cite that
Master, who must defend himself upon his own Rights; and therefore, this
defense was sustained to Tennents, though they condescended upon no other Right
to their Master, but tacit Relocation, December 2. 1628. Mr. Walter Whitefoord
contra Lord Johnstoun. It has also been sometimes sustained, that the
defenders were Tennents by payment of mail and duty to an Appryzer, though not
Infeft, Hope hic, Crawfoord contra Brown.

This exception is also elided by this reply, that the defenders had
acknowledged the pursuer by payment of Mail and Duty, Nicol hic, Lady Evandale
contra her Tennents. It is also elided by alleging that the defenders Masters
Right was reduced at the pursuers instance, December 12. 1622. Spading contra
Fleming. The like where his right was reduced at the instance of the pursuers
author, Spots. hic, Maxwel contra Tennents of Glassock. Earl of Nithisdale
contra his Tennents.

The exceptions against removing upon the defenders own right; are either in
respect of his right to the Land in question, or to the other Lands brooked by
him, pro indiviso, with it; For the first, there are as many such defenses as
there are rights competent for defending possession; and they are either
founded upon the benefit of a possessory judgment, which how conpetent may be
seen at large, Title Infeftment, 13.. 82. which needs not to be repeated; Or if
that be not competent, the defender must found himself upon the point of right
which ordinarily infers a competition of rights; But in either case the defense
will not be sustained upon any right, if the possession was not attained there
upon, bat upon the pursuers right; which Possession must be restored, and the
defender left to his action, upon the others right, as accords, as if after
redemption of a temporary right, whereby the defender entered in Possession, he
should defend upon another right which will not be sustained in this possessory
judgdement, against him or his Successor, from whom he had the Possession,
November 22. 1677. Sir Archibald Stuart of Castlemilk contra Duke of Hamiltoun.

The exception pro indiviso, is very pregnant, and takes not only place in
solemn removings, but in the Action to find Caution for Mails and Duties, or to
remove, though the Excipient had taken Tacks from the Pursuer, December 6.
1623. (...) contra Carmichael. Yet it was not found relevant, to stop removing
from the pursuers part of a Coal-heugh in Lands undevided, because the Coals
are divisible by measure as they are raised out of the Coal-pot, Spots.
removing, Hugh Somervel contra Dickson. Neither was it found sufficient to
maintain a Relict in possession of a House, which could not be divided, whereof
she had a third part, and possessed the other two thir^s, pro indiviso; but the
Fiar having the two thirds, was to be preferred to the Po^^ession, paying her
the third of the Mail, upon condition that if he se^ the Tenement, she should
be preferred, giving as much Mail as another, January 26. 1665. Legan contra
Galbraith.

The last exception against removing is, obedience by voluntary removing,
conform to the warning, and leaving the Land void and red at the Term, without
necessity of a renunciation in write, March 2. 1637. Keith contra Simpson. The
like, the defender finding Caution to desist from the Possession, Nicol. de
migrando, Wallace contra Mitchel. But the alledgeance of obedience was not
found relevant upon an exception, bearing, that the Land was left void and red
at the Term, seeing that it bore not, that the Possession was offered to the
Charger; in respect that at the time of his removing, another party entered in
his Vice, January penult 1624. Greenlaw contra Adamson. But the obedience must
be full, according to the warning by the defenders removing himself, his
Family, Sub-tennents and Cottars, Goods and Gear; So that the pursuer may enter
in Possession; and therefore, Decree would be obtained against the principal
Tacks-man, and the Letters still put to execution against him, till all these
be removed; and if the pursuer please, he may pursue them to remove, without
other warning then what was made to the principal Tacks-man; So it was
sustained against a Son upon a warning against his Father, even after his
Fathers death, January 26. 1630. Hoom contra Hoom.

As to the last point concerning the effects of Decreets of Removing, it is not
only the attaining Possession of the Land it self, but sometimes also the Corns
growing thereupon, as being a part thereof, being a Possession violent, Hope
Spuilzie, John Elliot contra Lord Balcleugh. Yea, of the Hay of that Cropped,
though separate and Stacked by the person removed, Hope Spuilzie, Sir James
Balmuire contra Williamson. But the main effect is, the obtaining the violent
profits of the Land, until the possessors obedience, and that both against
these who are warned, and against these who succeed in the vice of warned or
removed Tennents.

44. Violent profits are so called, because they are such profits as are due
by, and for violent Possessioa, whatsoever way it be, by warning and removing,
ejection, intrusion, or succeeding in the Vice, and they are opposite to
ordinary profits, which were due by tacit Relocation, or were formerly
accustomed to be paid. Violent profits are pursued for by a several Action,
after the Decree of removing is obtained: Wherein the Decree of removing is
both a sufficient Title, and probation of the violent Possession, against the
parties removed therein, and their Possession needs not again be proven, and
their defenses hindering the pursuer to obtain Possession, would not be
sufficient, unless they offer to prove the pursuer himself was in Possession,
or others by his warrant, June 19. 1610. Hector Monroe contra Lord of
Balnagoun. Neither will any other thing but real obedience, by giving, or at
least offering the void Possession, take them away though the Land lie waste.

But violent profits were also found competent against these who were not
warned, against whom Decree of removing was not obtained, to wit, against any
who suspended the Decree, and thereby hindered the defenders attaining
Possession, Hope Mails and Duties, Ker of Fairnieherst contra Turnbul. Yea, a
party obtaining Possession by a Decree of removing, after Litiscontestation,
in the reduction of the Decree, was found a violent Possessor, and liable to
violent profits himself, Hope Possession, Gordon of Abergeldie contra Lord
Forbes.

As to the quantity of violent profits by the custom of Burgh, it is double
Mail of the Tenements within Burgh, Hope Mails and Duties, Christian Buchan
contra Marion Seaton. But in Lands, it is the greatest profits that the
pursuer can prove he could have made. And though in cases of violence, the
quantities and prices are ordinarily probable by the pursuers oath, juramento in
litem, because he ought to have, not the ordinary price, but praetium
affectionis, as that which themselves accounted to be their loss; yet here
probation must be used; But if it be not full, the pursuers oath may be taken.
Violent profits are also sustained against all Defenders in solidum, as in
Spuilzie; but when diverse compeared and proponed partial objections against
removings and succumbed, they were found liable for the violent profits of the
Lands, in the exceptions severally, Hope Mails and Duties, William Wallace
contra Alexander Blair. Otherways partial exceptions are not here competent,
Hope exceptions, Lord of Balnagoun contra Hector Monro. Neither will any
exception be admitted, which was competent and proper in the Decree of
removing, relative to Right or Possession. But Suspension or Reduction ought to
be intented thereupon. The like as to violent profits against successors in
the Vice, March 22. 1623. Lord of Hunthil contra Rutherfoord.

55. Succeeding in the vice is a kind of intrusion, whereby after warning any
person comes in possession, by consent of the parties warned: Or otherways,
against such there needs no warning but a summar Process, as in other
intrusions, having the same probation, for in both, the possession must be
proven, which with the warning is sufficient, but can have no effect till
Decree of removing be obtained against the Tennent warned.

Though Violent profits be the ordinary effect, both in removing and
succeeding in the Vice; These will proceed as to attaining possession, and no
violent profits be obtained, when there is any colorable Title which might
have made the warned party, reasonably doubt of the pursuers interest, or of
his own Right, Hope removing, Walter Ord contra Tennents. But this uses
ordinarily to be so provided in the Decree of removing, and will be hardly
sustained thereafter, by recanvassing the defenses competent in the removing;
that it may appear whether there were a probable ground in them or not, at
least the defender would protest for the reservation, as to the violent
profits; for if this were again sustained, it would bring over-head all the
many intricat defenses competent in removings; of which formerly. And therefore
in the removing pursued by the Earl of Argile contra Mcnaughtoun; the Lords
repelled the defenses, but declared that they would have consideration thereof,
as having probable ground to debate, and would modifie the excrescence of the
violent profits over and above the ordinary profits.

TITLE XX. WODSETS, Where, of Reversion, Regress and Redemption.
1. Infeftments for satisfaction of sums Principal and Annual, or for relief,
are proper Feudal Impignorations, consisting with the Disponers property. 2.
The Nature of Wodsetts. 3. The Nature of Reversions. 4. Kinds of Reversions. 5.
Solemnities requisite in Reversions. 6. The effect of Clauses irritant in
reversions. 7. Reversions are stricti juris. 8. Kinds of Wodsetts. 9. Proper
Wodsetts. 10. The effect of Tacks after redemption, containedin reversions. 11.
Improper Wodsetts. 12. Regress. 13. Discharges of Reversions. 14. Wodsets
become legally extinct by declarator of expiring thereof, or by the order and
declarator of redemption. 15. The order of redemption of Apprizings or
Adjudications. 16. The order of redemption by conventional reversions. 17.
Premonition. 18. Consignation. 19. Declarators of redemption. 20. The effect of
declarators of redemption. 21. Defenses against declarators of redemption. 22.
Requisition. 23. How far other rights may be reserved in redemptions, or
renounciations.
AWODEST, as the word insinuats, being the giving of a Wedd or Pledge in
security; it falls in consideration here as the last of Feudal Rights: For
Pledges are the last of real Rights, as before in the Title real Rights is
shown; where it was also cleared, what was the ancient custom of Impignoration
of Movables, which shall not be here repeated, but only what is proper to the
impignoration of Immoveables and Heretable Rights, by the Feudal Customs, and
our own.

1. That which does most properly agree to the nature of a Pledge or Wodset
with us, is where any Inseftment or security is granted. in security of a sum
of Money, or for relief of Cautionry, or any other sum, which bears expressly,
that the Land or Right is disponed for security or relief; and therefore needs
express no Reversion; for it is necessarly employed, that so soon as relief or
satisfaction is obtained, the Infeftment granted in security ceasseth; so that
if the granter of the Infeftment, or any other bound in the principal
Obligation, either make payment, or the receiver thereof by his intromission,
be satisfied, ipso facto, the Infeftment is extinct: Yea, if the debtor
granter of the Infeftment and Security should instruct compensation, as it
would extinguish the principal Bond, so would it in consequence the Infeftment
for security thereof. This Infeftment being really a Pledge, it is consistent
with the Infeftment of Property in the debtor, as two distinct kinds of
Rights, and thereby the debtor is not denuded, even although the Infeftment
for Security were public by Resignation; because it is not a Resignation
simply, in favorem, but ad effecsum, viz. for Security; and therefore, when the
debt is satisfied, the debtor needs not be re-invested, but his former
Infeftment of property stands valide.

Like unto these in all points are Infeftments upon Appryzing, which are truly
pignora praetoria, whreby the debtor is not denuded, but his Infeftment
stands; and if the Apprising be satisfied within the Legal, it is extinguished,
and the debtor needs not be re-invested; and therefore, he may receive Vassals
during the Legal; and if he die, the appearand Heir intrometting with the Mails
and Duties, during the Legal, does thereby behave himself as Heir, as was
found, February 21. 1663. Henry Hamiltoun contra William Hamiltoun. Which holds
olso in Adjudications, by the late Act of Parliament, come in place of
Appryzings.

But Securities for sums have Been of a long time, taken frequently in another
way, viz. by simple alienation, titulo venditionis, with a reversion, which is
but (...) de retro vendendo, ordinarily taken a part; that if the Creditor were
not satisfied, he might force the debtor to pass from his Reversion; and so
his Reversion stood absolutely, which gave the occasion to these Kinds of
Securities; and also because during Popery, all Annualrents for the use of sums
were discharged as Usury; and therefore, Creditors bought Annualrents, and gave
Reversions to the debitors, which was the same thing in another convoy. As to
these Wodsets in this place; and that first, as to the Constitution of Wodsets:
And next as to the destitution thereof.

2. As to the Constitution of a Wodset, it must be according to the thing or
Right impignorat for a Tack or Liferent: An Assignation to these or any other
cessible right may be given in Wodset for security, and under Reversion: But
the ordinary Wodset is by Infeftment of Property, or of Annualrent; the
conception whereof is not under the name of Impledging, Impignoration,
Hypothecation or the like, but in the terms of Disposition, or Infeftment,
whereby the property of the thing Wodset passes, and is established in the
Wodsetter: But under Reversion to the Constituent, whereby it has two parts,
the Infeftment and the Reversion. The Infeftment in Wodsets, is in all points
like to other Infeftments, whether they be Infeftments of Property or of
Annualrent; or whether they be public, holden of the Constituents Superior, or
base holden of himself; so that all the specialities of Wodsets resolve in
Reversion.

3. A Reversion is a paction and condition, or provision for redemption of any
thing alienat upon such Terms as are agreed upon, which of it self is no more
then a personal obligation, whereby the Wodsetter is obliged, until by that
excellent Statute, Par. 1469. cap. 27. It is declared, that the Reversion shall
be effectual, not only against the first Wodsetter himself, but all his
Successors in the Wodset Lands, whereby reversions are accounted as Heretable
and real Rights, affecting singular Successors, in the same way that Tacks are
made real Rights, by the Statute thereanent.

The English by reversion, do not understand a Right of Redemption, but a Right
of Survivancy or Succession; as the reversion of an Office is a Title to that
Office, after the removal of the present Incumbent. And that which we call a
Wodset, they call a Morgage; for a Gage is a Pledge which is really engaged:
And Morgage is a Pledge, the Redemption whereof dies, or is extinct, if it be
not used at the time, and in the manner agreed upon by the parties, of that
with them in their Morgages, not only Clauses irritant, or (...) legis
Commissoriae, are valide: But if the provision for Redemption, be for a
definite time, that being elapsed the Morgage becomes irredeemable by their
common Law, what remeid may be had in the Chanclery upon equity, I know not.

4. Before we come to the Solemnities requisite for Constituting Reversions, it
is necessary to distinguish the several kinds thereof: Reversions are either
Legal, arising from Law and Statute, and not from consent of parties, as are
the Legal Reversions of Appryzings and Adjudications; or they are Conventional,
by the consent of parties, which are either Incorporate in the body of the
Wodset-right or a part, they are also either principal Reversions or eiks to
Reversions; and they are either solemn and perfected, or only inchoat, such as
Promises, Bonds and Conditions for granting Reversions.

5. Legal Reversions require no other solemnity, then what is requisite to the
legal constitution of the right whereupon they follow. The common solemnities
requisite for Reversions and other Writes of old, was only the Seal of the
granter, without necessity of his Subscription. But by the Act of Par. 1555.
cap. 29. It is required, that all Reversions, Bonds and Obligations for making
of Reversions, be not only sealed, but subscribed by the granters own hand; and
if he cannot write, by his hand led at the pen by a Nottar; or otherwise, they
make no faith, unless the same by consent of parties be registrat in the Books
of a Judge Ordinar, or that it be a Reversion within Burgh, contained in the
Instrument of Resignation and Seasine of Lands by the Bailie and Town Clerk.
And by the Act of Par. 1579. cap. 80. Reversions, Assignations and Discharges
thereof, and eiks thereto, or other Writes of great importance, are ordained to
be subscribed and sealed by the principal parties; or if they cannot write, by
two Nottars before four designed witnesses, else to be null and of no faith.
But the matter of Reversion is perfected by the Act of Parliament, 1617. cap.
16. ordaining all Reversions, Regresses, Bonds or Writers for making
Reversions, Assignations and Discharges of the same, to be registrat in the
Register of Seasines and Reversions within sixty days of their dates,
otherwise to have no effect, save only against the granters thereof, but not
against their singular successors acquiring perfect and lawful Rights: But this
is not requisite in Infeftments of Burgage-lands within Royal Burghs, nor in
Reversions incorporat in the rights of Wodset. Upon consideration of the
inconvenience and insecurity of Burgage-lands, the Lords by Act of Sederunt,
ordained the Burghs to take sufficient Caution of their Town-clerks present and
to come, to insert in their Books all Seasines given by them of Tenements
within Burgh, and all Reversions or Bonds for granting Reversions, Assignations
thereto, and Discharges thereof, Renunciations and grants of Redemption, and
that within sixty days after the giving of Seasine, or presenting to them of
the Reversions or others foresaids, under the pain of the damnage of parties,
acquiring bona fide for onerous causes, that they may incur by such latent
rights; declaring, that such Seasines and Reversions, not insert in manner
foresaid, to be esteemed as latent and fraudulent, kept up of purpose to
ensnare lawful purchasers; which Act of Sederunt is dated, February 22. 1681.
So that, as by the first Act Reversions are made effectual, by this last they
are made evident, that acquirers may be secured against latent Reversions, and
by the registration, or being in the body of the Wodset, the necessity of
sealling is taken off, and for the most part in desuetude. It is also
consequent from this last Act, that not only formal and solemn Reversions in
the body of the Wodset or registrat, are effectual against singular successors,
but also Bonds and Writes for making of Reversions, otherwise there needs no
ordinance to registrate these for the purchasers security, if of themselves
they could affect purchasers: But promises of Reversion are no ways effectual
against singular successors, unless they have been brought into write, at least
by Decree before these successors right, because being only probable by oath
of party, the oath of the author will not prove against his singular successor.
Neither will Declarations, Back-bands or conditions of Trust, be comprehended
under Reversions; but they remain obliegements personal upon the person
entrusted, unless they contain express obliegement to re-dispone, which is a
reversion, albeit it be not formal; or if it bear, to denude himself in favors
of the disponer or any other; but if it be but in trust to his behove, though
thereupon, via actionis, he might be compelled to denude, yet is no reversion,
and however has no effect against singular successors, unless they be
registrate as aforesaid; except in so far as they may be grounds of reduction
against the parties entrusted, or their singular successors partakers of the
fraud.

6. It is also frequently provided in Reversions, That if the condition of the
Reversion be not performed betwixt and such a time, the reversion shall expire;
and sometimes it is provided so to be, ipso facto, without Declarator. This is
a clause irritant, irritating or annulling the Reversion, which in the Civil
Law is called, Pactum Legis Commissoriae in pignoribus, and is thereby rejected
and void as an usurary paction, whereby the Wodsetter gets more then his
just interest as a penalty: which therefore, as in other cases, ought to be
modified to the just interest; especially seeing indigent Debitors, through
necessity of borrowing money, will be easily induced to such Clauses. And
therefore, a Back-band for redemption of a Tenement, bearing such a Clause
irritant, was found null two years after the term, and after a Decree of
removing all meliorations being satisfied, July 8. 1636. Cleghorn contra
Ferguson. The like was found in an Assignation to a Bond under reversion of a
smaller sum, which was found penal and modified to the just interest, June 25.
1623. Mitchel contra Robson. Yet such clauses irritant are effectual upon the
failie committed, unless they be purged by performance, which is ordinarily
received when offered at the bar, in the Declarator of the expirie of the
reversion: So was it found purgeable at the instance of the Reversers
Creditors, 19. of March, 1631. Doctor Scot contra Dickson of Headrig. Yea,
though the payment be not present, a time will be granted before the Extract of
the Decree of Declarator of the expirie of the reversion, that in the mean
time, the failie may be purged, Feb. 7. 1628. Pringle contra Ker; but no such
time was granted, where the requisition was upon ninescore days; but Decree
was given, unless present payment were made, July 19. 1625. Nairn contra
Napier. But Clauses irritant in Reversions, are only thus qualified in real
Impignorations: but when the reversion is of a true sale, not in security, but
for an equivalent price, or where it is granted after the right related to, and
not for implement of a promise or condition made at that time, it is valid; for
only pactum legis Commissoriae in pignoribus, is rejected in Law.

And therefore, the Irritancie was not found purgeable before the Declarator,
where the Reversion was of Lands disponed for a competent price by a true sale,
January 17. 1679. James Beatsone contra Harrower.

A Bond bearing, that failing Heirs-male of the granter and of his Brothers
body, that the Heirs-female should denude in favors of a Sisters son, upon
payment of a certain sum, being registrat in the Register of Reversions, was
found valid against a singular Successor, as a conditional reversion, and not
as a substitution, albeit the Bond was granted by an Heretor, and that the Land
was never wodset, but became redeemable by this Bond, and was not prejudged by
a posterior Liferent granted by that Heretor in favors of his Wife, which
would have been effectual, if it had been a substitution; But the sum upon
which the Heir-female was obliged to denude, was ordained to be reimployed for
the Wife in Liferent, January 16. 1679. Lord of Lambertoun contra Lady
Blanergesk.

7. As to the nature of Reversions, they are stricti juris, and not to be
extended beyond what is expressed, and so not to be extended to the sAssigneys of
the reverser when not expressed, yea not to his Heirs, unless it be so expressed;
but where Heirs of the Reverser were not expressed, without adjecting the
ordinary clause of paying the debt to the Wodsetter by the Reverser, any time
during his life; and so Heirs were not found omitted dedita opera, but by
negligence they were not excluded, January 9. 1662. Earl of Murray contra Lord
of Grant. And a Reversion taken by a father disponing to his son, found to be
extended against the Heirs of the son, though Heirs were not mentioned, Feb. 6.
1630. Muir contra Muir. The like Spots. redemption, William Hamilton contra
Hamiltons. And therefore, the day of consignation being appointed eight days
after the term, the Consignation was not sustained at the term it self,
though these days were introduced in the Reversers favors, July 12. 1634.
Lord Balmerino contra Eliot of Stobs: Yet, where the Reversion bore, the
premonition to be at the Paroch-Church, it was sustained, being used only
personally, December. 11. 1638. Finlason contra Weyms. And where the Reversion
did bear consignation at the Creditors house in London, it was sustained, being
at his successors house at Edinburgh, Feb. 1. 1667. Creditors of Sir James
Murray contra Sir James Murray.

8. The constitution or nature of Wodsets being thus cleared, as to the kinds
thereof, Wodsets are either proper, or improper; and they are either public or
base.

9. A proper Wodset is, where the fruits of the thing Wodset are only given for
the annual-rent of the sum, and the hazard or benefit thereof, whether it rise
or fall, is the Wodsetters; and there has never been any case decided finding
such proper Wodsets usurary upon exorbitancy of profit: But by the Act of Par.
1661. betwixt Debtor and Creditor, all Wodsets before that Act, though proper,
are so altered, that if the person having right to the Reversion, offer surety
and demand possession, the Wodsetter must quite possession, or else restrict
himself to his annualrent, and count for the superplus, and that not from the
Act of Parliament or Citation, but from the offer of security; which was not
sustained at the instance of a singular successor in the right of Neversion,
not having produced his right to the Neversion at the requisition: and though
it was produced in the Process, the Wodsetter was not found obliged to
restrict or cede the possession, because he was in natural possession by
labourage, till he were warned before Whitsonday, Feb. 20. 1679. Bruce contra
Robert Bogie; though there was a Clause in the Wodset renuncing the Usurpers
Act, and all such Acts made or to be made; for that Exception in the Act of
Parliament, relates only to preceding Clauses thereof, and not to the Clause
anent Wodsets which is posterior, January 29. 1662. Lord of Lamingtoun contra
Sir John Cheislie; Feb. 21. 1666. Lord Borthwick contra his Wodsetters; Feb.
21. 1666. Ogilvie contra

10. But where in Wodsets, there is a condition of the Neversion, that a Tack
should be granted for years after redemption, that Tack was not found taken
away by the Act Debtor and Creditor; but that if it were in the terms of the
old Act Par. 1449. cap. 19. far within the true avail, it were usurary and
null, February 15. 1666. Lord Lie contra Porteous; February 17. 1672. Douglass
of Mortoun contra and Verner: In which case, the Tack was sustained, if it were
not much within the worth of the Land, as it was the time of granting the
Wodset, albeit it were much within the worth the time of the redemption,
because there is a just design in such Tacks to encourage the Wodsetter to
meliorat the Wodset Lands, and be at expenses therefore, seeing he will retain
the same after the Redemption, for the old rent they were worth when wodset,
and the rent expressed in the Tack will be presumed to be the true rent, unless
the contrary be proven. But such a Wodset granted to a Brother for his Portion,
wherein the Wodsetter was excluded from possession during a Liferenters life,
the Tack was sustained, Jan. 21. 1662. Lord of Polwart contra Home.

11. But if there be a Back-tack of the Land, granted by the Wodsetter to the
Reverser, or for his behove, or a Provision to count for the profits of the
Land, or to hold the Land at such a Rent, it is an improper Wodset.

12. A public Wodset, which is holden of the constituents Superior, requires,
beside the reversion, a regress, which is an obliegement upon the Superior to
receive and enter the reverser his vassal again upon the redemption: The
necessity whereof is, because by the Infeftment, though of Wodset, the
constituent is denuded, and the Superior has a new Vassal, in whose place he
is not obliged to accept any other but by his own consent. Craig, lib. 2.
dieges. 6. moves this question, Whether a public Wodset, being redeemed, and
the Reverser re-seased therein, it would be accounted Heretage or Conquest. And
though it seem Conquest, because it is a new Infeftment, and not the old, yet
he well resolves, that if it return to the person or heirs of him who was
first infeft, if it was Heretage before, it remains so; but if an Assigney to
the Reversion and Regress be insest, it is truly Conquest.

13. It remains now, to consider the destitution of Wodsets, and how they
cease, and this is either by consent or by Law; by consent, either when the
Reversion is discharged, whereby the Infeftment becomes irredeemable, and
cease to be a Wodset; which Discharge of the reversion is not effectual
against singular successors, unless registrat conform to the said Act of Parl.
1617. cap. 16.

Or otherwise by voluntary redemption of the Wodset, which must be registrat
by the said Act, or else it prejudgeth no singular successor: yet it is not
effectual to denude the Wodsetter, unless if the Wodset were base, there be a
resignation ad remanentiam in the reversers hands as Superior; or if it be
public, that the granter of the Wodset be re-seased, and a renunciation
without a new Infeftment is not sufficient, Hope, Alienations, Kinross contra
Durie, November 23. 1627. Dumbar contra Wilson. But if the reverser or his
predecessor was infeft, a renunciation may exclude the renucers Right, but will
not establish it in the person of the Reverser, but he must brook by his own
right, Hope, Alienation, Hamiltoun contra Mcaddam; where Wodsets are taken
holden of the Superior, Regresses are also taken from the Superior, and new
Infeftment thereupon to the granter of the Wodset. But when Neversions are
carried by Assignations, Apprisings or Adjudications to these who were never
infeft, they must not only have a renunciation from the Wodseter, but a
Procuratory of Resignation, that thereby they may be infeft; in which case, the
Wodset-right is not extinct, but conveyed, and the Wodsetter is their Author,
and may not resuse Procuratories of Resignation, or Charters for Confirmation,
upon the redemption. And if the wodset-lands be not ward, he must grnt Precept
of Seasine for infefting the reverser holden of the Wodsetter, and if
Infeftments follow thereupon, and the Seasine be registrate, there is no
necessity to registrate the renunciation or grant of redemption; so that a
renunciation or grant of redemption being registrate, excluding posterior Deeds
of the Wodsetters who yet continues in the Fee, and the Casuality will fall by
his Death or Deeds.

Voluntar Redemptions are not so safe, being used against Pupils and Minors,
whose Tutors and Curators ought to proceed Legally in Infeftments: So likewise
in a Wodset to a man and his wife, and their heirs: A voluntar Redemption by
the husband was not found sufficient to to prejudge the wife, who consented
not, July 14. and 17. 1610. Lord Cathcart contra (...).

14. Wodsets are taken off Legally, when the Reversion is Legally annulled, as
by declarator of expyring thereof; for thereby the Infeftment becomes
irredeemable; but is chiefly by a Legal Redemption, which does require an Order
of Redemption, and a declarator thereupon, which must be diversely used in
Legal-reversions, and in Conventional-reversions.

15. The Order of Redemption of Apprizings and Adjudications, by virtue of the
Legal Reversion, is valide by Premonition and Consignation, and Instruments
taken thereupon, wherein there is not appointed a determinat time upon which
the Premonition must be made, or a determinate place where the Consignation
must be made, nor the person of the Consignator; but the premonition may be
upon any number of days, sufficient for the Consignation: Yea, though it were
the same day of the Premonition, as Craig observes: But if the Creditor be
personally apprehended, the Consignation must be in the way most to his
advantage, which therefore he may prescrive, being either near the place of
Premonition; or the Lands Wodset, or the Paroch Kirk where they lie, which
Craig accounts competent places; or if he choose any other more advantages to
the Consigner, it will be sufficient: But if he choose none, the Premonisher
must either Consign that day where he finds the Creditor, or if not that day:
Or if he used Premonition at his dwelling house, he must Consign, either at the
Appryzers dwelling house, or Paroch Kirk where the Lands lie, as said is; if
the Creditor be out of the Country, or have no certain abode, Letters of
Premonition will be obtained from the Lords, periculo petentis; for Premonition
upon sixty days at the Cross of Edinburgh, and for Consignation to be made in
Edinburgh: Yea, the Order was sustained for redemption of an Appryzing near
expyring, albeit the Consignation was only at Edinburgh, and not at the Paroch
Kirk where the Lands lay, or at the debitors dwelling house, he being out of
the Country, Feb. 22. 1631. Murray contra Lord Yester: But where the party was
in the Country, this Order by summonds of Premonition and Citation, personally
taken thereupon; not being by Instrument of Premonition, was found void, July
22. 1622. Lord Deshmond contra Hay. July 11. 1623. Captain Crawfoord contra
Lord of Covingtoun, Where an Instrument of Premonition was found necessary,
though no determinate time be requisite; in these cases, the Legal has not
been near expyred; but that a new formal Order might have been used, yet the
exorbitancy of Appryzings has made the slenderest Orders of Redemption to be
sustained, as if the Appryzer had been in Possession, whereby a previous count
was necessary, to know what sums were to be offered or Consigned, a Summonds
for count and reckoning, and for accepting what was resting, being used within
the Legal, has always, been sustained, as was found, July 2. 1625. Doctor
Kincaid contra Halybruntoun. And a Consignation of a sum for redeeming of
several Appryzings made by a singular Successor against a singular Successor,
was sustained, because the Instrument bore an offer to Consign the sums in all
the Apprizings, whereto that party had then right, being performed in the
Process, February 12. 1631. Murray contra Lord Yester.

16. The redemption of Wodsets upon Conventional Reversions, is by an order of
redemption, consisting of Premonition, or Requisition and Consignation, whih is
made effectual by an Action of declarator of redemption thereupon.

17. Premonition is an act or deed, whereby the Reverser or his Procurator
premonisheth the Wodsetter, conform to the Tenor of the Reversion, to appear at
the place of Consignation, and receive satisfaction according to the Reversion;
and if it require the Wodsetter to come to the place of Consignation and
receive his Money, it is called a Requisition: And in either case, it must
necessarly be done by way of Instrument: This Instrument uses to bear,
Production of the Reversion: Yet a Premonition was sustained without that,
seeing the Reversion was contained in the Wodsetters own Seasine. And a
Premonition was not found null, though the Procuratory was was not produced,
where the Procuratory was not called for, January 18. 1662. Mr. John Veatch
contra Leyel of Bassandin. But a Requisition was found null, because it bore
not a Procuratory produced the time of the Requisition, albeit another
Instrument of the same Nottar did bear a Procuratory produced, and that in
respect the question was not by a Wodsetter and Reverser, neither party having
damage, but betwixt a Donatar of the single Escheat, and the Creditors of the
Wodsetter; so that if the Lords supplied the not production of the Procuratory,
the sum Consigned would become Moveable, and fall to the Fisk; therefore the
Lords refused to supply the Procuratory, and found the Requisition null, and
the Wodset unredeemed, January 12. 1677. Creditors of Wamphray contra Lord of
Calderhal. Which for the same cause would hold, if the question had been
betwixt the heir and Executor of the Wodsetter; for in either of these cases,
the formality of the Requisition have the importance of the whole Right: And
where the Reversion was in the Wodsetters own hand, and craved to be exhibit
the time of the Consignation, the Premonition was found good without it, Hope
Wodsets, Lord Yester contra Scot. The like in a Redemption at an Appryzers
instance, who Appryzed the Reversion, February 19. 1662. Children of Wolmet
contra Mr. Mark Ker. The like in a singular Successor to a Reversion redeeming,
February 17. 1663. Colonel James Montgomerie contra heirs of Halybruntoun.
Here the Reversion was in the Wodset Right, which was in the defenders own hand.

Premonition may be done, either personally, or at the Wodsetters dwelling
house. But it was found null, when the dwelling house was not designed,
December 13. 1626. Earl of Balcleugh contra Young.

Premonition must be used against the Tutors and Curators of Minors, either
generally at the Market Cross; or otherways to the Tutors and Curators
personally, December 17. 1629. Carnousie contra (...). And a Requisition was
found null, because not made to Tutors and Curators, by Letters from the Lords;
but only by an Instrument taken at the Market Cross, June 15. 1680. Gordoun
contra Earl of Queensberry. But where Requisition was made specially to one who
was repute Tutor, it was sustained, Hope Confirmation, Carnousie contra Frazer.

A Premonition was sustained, though the Reversion bore, that it should be done
at the Paroch Kirk, and it was done personally, which was accounted more,
December 11. 1638. Findlason contra Weims.

18. Consignation must also be done by way of Instrument, bearing the Tenor of
the Premonition, and the production of the Reversion and Procuratory in the
same way, as it is before said of he Premonition, and the coming to the place
and day, according to the Reversion and Premonition, which may be any time of
the day; and therefore, the Wodsetter must attend that day from Sun to Sun;
because the Reverser may come any time of the day: And upon the Wodsetters not
appearing, or not renuncing the particulars contained in the Reversion, are to
be Consigned according thereto, upon public intimation, by calling the
Wodsetter, if absent, at the most patent door, which must be done according to
the Reversion, in forma specifica, and not per aequipollens, Hope Wodsets, Lord
Frazer contra James Crightoun. It was sustained upon the Consignation of a
Discharge of the like sum due by the Wodsetter, in respect it was due by an
Article in the Contract of Wodset, in stead of Money, January 2. 1667. Hog
contra Hog.

Consignations use to bear, the numeration if the Money. Yet it was sustained,
bearing the production of all and hail the sum contained in the Reversion,
March 10. 1630. Grierson contra Gordoun of Troquhan. Here the Wodsetter did not
appear, or at least did not require Numeration. It must also contain an offer
of what is generally in the Reversion, and of what the defender can further
condescend and clear, whereof the Reverser was probably ignorant, as the dues
competent in Appryzings; and therefore a Redemption of Teinds upon Consignation
of the principal sum, and offer of what should be cleared, to be resting of
Teind Bolls, as the prices should be modified by the Lords, was sustained,
being made good at the Bar, February 21. 1623. Cunningham contra Walter Foster.
Yea, the order of Redemption of an Appryzing, was sustained, though the bygone
Annualrent and Penalty were not offered or Consigned, the same being offered at
the Bar, as they were found due and modified, Hope Wodsets. A Consignation was
also sustained, as made through the Wodsetters default, who offered not a
sufficient Renunciation, though the Consigner did not offer the draught of a
sufficient Renunciation to the Wodsetter to subscrive, albeit the Wodsetter
appeared, and was willing to receive the Money and offered a Renunciation,
which the Lords at discussing of the Cause, found not sufficient, and found the
Consigner was not obliged, even in that case, to offer the draught os such a
Renunciation as he required, July 12. 1634. Lord Balmerino contra Gilbert
Elliot.

19. The Order of Redemption being lawfully used, the action thereupon is a
declarator of Redemption, because it is the order that Constitutes the
Redemption and the Declarator, but finds and declares it to be orderly
proceeded, and decern-the Wodsetter to denuds himself conform thereto; and
therefore, though the Reversion be personal, excluding Assigneys, if that
person once use the Order he may Assign it, and Dispone the Lands as Redeemed;
and the Assigney at any time, even after his death, will have interest to
declare, July 29. 1623. Earl Marischal contra his Brother. March 3. 1630.
Murray contra Myls. July 30. 1650. Campbel contra Dick. Declarator of
Redemption was sustained upon an Order used against a defunct, and the
Declarator pursued against his appearand Heir, without a Charge to enter Heir,
or a new Order, December 11. 1638, Findlayson contra Weims. But in the Decree
of Declarator of Redemption against the appearand Heirs, they cannot be
decerned to denude, unless they were Charged to enter heir; yet the Declarator
it self would be sufficient to extinguish the Wodset against singular
Successors: But it would not convey the right of Wodset to the Redeemer; and
therefore, if he were not Infeft, or heir to a person Infeft in the Wodset
Lands, it would be necessary to charge the appearand heir to enter, to the
effect he might denude and dispone; and therefore, a declarator of Redemption
against an appearand heir, did bear, that the sums should not be given up till
the appearand heir were Infeft and Resigned, January 10. 1665. Campbel contra
Brison It was also sustained at the instance of an Appryzer of the Reversion,
without calling him from whom it was Appryzed, but only the Wodsetter, December
17. 1629. Carnousie contra Lesmore. In respect that the Appryzing was a Legal
Assignation of the right of Reversion granted by the Wodsetters author: And
there have been no interveening singular Successors, but in Redemptions against
singular Successors in Wodsetts, whose rights do not instruct that they are
derived from the granter of the Reversion, the pursuer must instruct that the
granter of the Reversion stood Infeft in Fee: Otherways that singular Successor
will not be obliged to acknowledge the Reversion; and because the Successors
of the first Wodsetter would have warrandice against the first Wodsetter or his
heirs, if they had disponed the Lands without reserving the Reversion;
therefore in that case, only the first Wodsetter or his heir, if he can be
condescended upon, having any visible Estate, have been of old accustomed to be
called; which is not necessary in other cases, and has been the ground of that
Decision, July 9. 1630. Fisher contra Brown. Where it was found necessary to
call the heirs of the granter of Reversion, if the defender could condescend
upon them; for the ancient custom has been to have more respect to the heir of
the granter of the Reversion, then to the singular Successor, present Possessor
of the Wodset, as Craig observes, l. 2. Dieges. 6. that sometimes Redemption
has been sustained upon Premonition and Citation, only of him who granted the
Reversion or his heir. But ever since the present Heretable Possessor of the
Wodset, must necessarly be Premonished and Cited, and but seldom the granter of
the Reversion or his heir, as where the granter of the Reversion was immediate
Author to the singular Successor, against whom the Order was used, as in the
former case, his own Rights behoved to acknowledge the right of the granter of
the Reversion, who was common Author and might intimate the plea to him, but
could not be obliged so to do, where his own right show no right from the
granter of the Reversion.

A Redemption being voluntary without Process, was sustained against a
Sub-wodsetters right, being a Liserent by the Wodsetter to his Wife, albeit it
was (...); yet the Redeemer was not found obliged to know it; but it was found
taken away without any Order against her, or Citation of her, July 27. 1665.
Lillias Hamiltoun contra her Tennents. Redemption upon a Rose-noble used upon
the Sabbath Day, albeit the Instrument of Consignation, did not bear, the
Reversion was shown, nor read, was sustained, Spots. Redemption, Lord of
Newwark contra his Son; but this would not be drawn in example amongst
strangers, where the Wodset is redeemable upon considerable sums. For though
Consignation upon the Sabbath Day by a Father against his Son, be sustained,
(...) non debet, sed factum valet: Yet the Wodsetter cannot be obliged to
attend and perform the requisites of Consignation, by numeration of Money,
perusal of Writes, and subscribing a Renunciation upon the Sabbathday.
Redemption was sustainedwithout necessity to the pursuer, to uplift the sums
Consigned from the Consignatar, and re-produce them at the Bar, unless it be
instructed he had taken them up, December 7. 1631. Grierson contra Gordoun.
Where the Extract was superceeded till the Consignatar was Charged summarly
upon Letters granted upon the Instrument of Consignation to exhibit the
Consigned Money, but no Annualrent was found due after Consignation.

A Redemption was sustained without production of the Reversion, the pursuer
being an Appryzer, and proving that the Reversion was in the Defenders own
hand, February 19. 1662, Children of Wolmet contra Mr. Mark ker. The like where
the pursuer was a singular Successor, February 17. 1663. Colonel James
Montgomery contra Robert Halybruntoun. Yea, an order used by an Assigney
sustained, though he show not his Assignation till the Process of Declarator,
yet so as the Wodsetter was not countable for the Rents, but from the
production of the Assignation, February 19. 1674. Lord Borthwick contra
Pringles. Yet Redemption was not sustained at the instance of an heir, not
being entered at the time of the Order, though entered before Declarator,
January 19. 1672. Lord Lovat and Kintail contra Lord Mcdonald. But if the
Redeemer uplifted the Consigned Money, he must produce the same with the
Annualrent, and will have right to the Rent during that time, Hope
Confirmation, Baikie contra, December 8. 1671. Forest contra Brounlie.
November 29. 1672. Duke of Buckleugh contra Scot of Thirlestain.

Redemption was not eleided, because the sums were Consigned in the hands of
the redeemers own servant, and taken up from him, seeing it was offered at the
Bar, and no special provision in the Reversion, anent the Consignatar, Hope
Confirmation, Lord of Drum contra Wishart. The like though there was an
Instrument of another Nottar contrary the Order of Redemption, July 18. 1610.
Earl of Kinghorn contra Kincaid.

20. The effect of Declarator of redemption is, that it makes the redeemed
Lands belong to the Redeemer, and makes the sum Consigned moveable and to
belong to the Wodsetters Executors, if he have accepted the Consignation or
Declarator, do follow in his Lifetime; but if Declarator do follow after the
Wodsetters death, the Consigned sums will not belong to his Executors but to
his heir, who remains Propietar of the Wodset: But if Declarator past in the
Wodsetters Life, it did take away the real right of Wodset, so the Money came
to be in the Property of the Wodsetter, as moveable, and fell to his Executor,
which till a Declarator was not so, seeing the Order might be passed from,
December 19. 1629. (...) contra Miller; where it was found, that the
Consignatar was obliged to re-deliver the Consigned Money to the Consigner,
his Heirs or Assigneys, passing from the Order, though the Wodsetter, to whose
use it was Consigned, was not called. The like was found, that till Declarator
the congned sums remain in the Property of the Consigner, and belong not to the
Executor of the Wodsetter, but to his heir: or where Declarator of Redemption
was after the Wodsetters death, January 21. 1673. Thomas Nicol contra Lourie.
June 18. 1675. Lord of Lie contra Forbes of Blacktoun.

Upon Declarator of redemption, Letters will be obtained summarly against the
Consignatar, to re-produce the Consigned Money, December 7 1631. 1631. Grierson
contra Gordoun. But though the Instrument of Consignation will instruct the
Consignation against the Wodsetter; yet it will not prove against the
Consignatar, without his oath, or write subscribed by his own hand, January 14.
1630. Lausree contra Miller.

21. Redemption was not elided by a singular Successor, obtaining Infeftment of
the Wodset Landsafter the Order, or at least the Infeftment being base, not
cled with Possession till after the Order, though it was cled with seven years
Possession before Declarator, Hope Confirmation, Earl of Errol contra Tennents
and Lady Seaforth.

22. Wodsets are also taken off by Premonition or requisition, requiring the
sums upon which the Wodset is granted, which makes the sums moveable and the
Infeftment of Wodset void, yet so that the requirer may pass from his
requisition, and the Infeftment revives, January 29. 1635. James Hamiltoun
contra Tennents of Calder.

The Requisition may be also past from indireclty, by uplifting the Duties of
the Wodset Lands, for Terms after the requisition, Hope Usury, Thomas Waliace
contra Lord of Edzel; or taking posterior Terms of Annualrent from Principal
or Cautioner.

Requisition requires also the same solemnities that Premonition requires; and
therefore it was not sustained, where the Procurator designed no time nor place
to pay the Money required, and the Instrument was mended at the Bar, as to the
reading of the Procuratory, and the truth of it referred to the defenders oath,
which the Lords admitted not, the Instrument being otherways produced in
Judgment; this was in expyring of a Reversion, for not payment upon
requisition. The like when the requisition bore that, February 7. 1628. Maxwel
contra Lord of Innerweek. The like where the requisition mentioned not the
production or the Procuratory, though it bore not it to be called, November 13.
1622. Lord of Bass contra Wauchop. This was in a requisition only to validat a
Charge; the contrary was found, where it bore, that the Procurators power was
known to him and the witness. January 18. 1665. Stuart contra Stuart: Here
there was an Apprising deduced upon the requisition. The like where the
Procuratory was not called for, and was in the Procurators hand, June 28. 1671.
Hellen Home contra Lord Justice Clerk.

23. Declarators of redemption, or renunciations, or grants of redemption, do
ordinarily bear, that the Wodsetter renunceth all right to the Wodset Lands; and
albeit he have a distinct right; it will not stop the Declarator, nor obliege
the redeemer to debate thereanent in that Process: Nor will it stop the entering
the redeemer in the Possession, in which he entered by the Wodset; but that
right will only be reserved, November 22. 1677. Sir Archibald Stuart of
Castlemilk contra Duke of Hamiltoun: And if the Wodsetter condescend upon, and
give evidence of any other right beside the Wodset, it will be particularly
reserved, or the renunciation will only bear, all right by virtue of the
Wodset, Hope Confirmation, Baikie contra July 2. 1623. Earl of Errol contra
Bukie.

And in the case of redemption of an Appryzing, the renunciation was restricted
to the right in question, February 22. 1631. Murray contra Lord Yester.
Declarators of redemption do descern the Wodsetter to renunce, and resign all
right to the Wodset Lands, unless a right distinct from the Wodset could be
instructed, which will be excepted, or an evidence given of such a right, which
thereupon will be reserved: But a general reservation of other rights was not
sustained, but a Declarator of redemption was found a species of Declarator of
right; after which, no right competent and omitted, will be sustained, which
was then known, February 2. 1676. Duke of Lauderdail contra Lord and Lady
Yester.

TITLE XXI. Extinction of Infeftments, Where, of Resignation ad remanentiam,
Recognition, Disclamation, Purpresture, and other Feudal Delinquences.
1. The form of Resignations, ad remanentiam. 2. They may be by Procurators, or
propriis manibus. 3. Instruments of Resignation prove not without a warrant in
write. 4. Resignations ad remanentiam, were valide without Registration, till
the year, 1669. 5. Resignations imply all burdens by the Vassal affecting the
fee. 6. Resignation by him who has no right, with consent of him who has
right, how far effectual. 7. How far Superiors may not reject resignations, ad
remanentiam. 8. How Infeftments become extinct by Succession, as heir, or
Singulari titulo. 9. The original of extinction of fees, not by the Vassalls
consent, but by his deed. 10. Recognition by alienation of the ward fee. 11.
Recognition by Infeftments, a se. 12. Whether recognition can be incurred by
deeds in minority, or on deathbed. 13. Whether recognition can be incurred by
Sub-feudation. 14. How far feues exceeding the half of the full rent, may
subsist without recognition. 15. In what cases other feues of wardlands, infer
not recognition. 16. Recognition by alienation, is only of Lands clearly ward,
simple, or taxed. 17. Recognition is not incurred, unless the major part be
alienate. 18. Recognition is not incurred by alienations to the Vassals
appearand heir. 19. Whether recognition be incurred by alienations, on
condition that the Superior consent. 20. Inhibition excludes not recognition.
21. Recognition is not excluded by the Vassals drunkeness, when he alienat. 22.
How the Superiors consent may be adhibite to alienations, to shun recognition.
23. How far the Kings Confirmation without a novodamus, takes off recognition.
24. How recognition is taken off by homologation. 25. Recognition excludes all
Infeftments, Tacks, or Servitudes by the Vassals deed, without the Superiors
consent, or authority of Law. 26. Servitudes by prescription are not excluded
by recognition. 27. In recognitions who must be cited and who may compear. 28.
The Title and Order in declarator of recognition. 29. Disclamation, how
incurred. 30. Purpresture, how incurred. 31. Feudal Delinquences adduced by the
Feudists for resolving fees. 32. Attrocious deeds against Vassals fidelity to
their Superiors, resolving their fees. 33. How far the ignorance or weakness
of the Vassal, excuses, with other exception for the Vassal. 34. Whether the
delinquence of the Sub-vassal infers recognition.
WE are not here to speak of the common ways of extinction of Infeftments, and
other rights, as the extinction of the Subject matter, Prescription,
Forefaulture, Homologation, or acceptance of incompatible Rights, neither to
these ways by which an infeftment is extinct as to one, but is conveyed to
another, which falls in consideration amongst conveyances of Rights: But of
these ways proper to extinguish Infeftments, and make the right toceass, and to
return to the Superiors, and these are two. either by consent of the Vassal,
or by Law.

1. Infeftments are extinct by consent, by resignation made by the Vassal, who
stands Infeft in the Lands to his Superior, ad perpetuam remanentiam, to which
there is necessarly required, as a solemnity thereof, an Instrument of
resignation in the hands of a Nottar, in the same way that their constitution
was perfected by an Instrument of Seasine, their distitution is consumate by an
Instrument of resignation, which no other write nor acknowledgement of the
Vassal, of the being thereof will supply, much less will the deeds done
otherways prove; and as in Seasines there must be a tradition or delivery of
Possession by some Token or Symbol, as by Earth and Stone, etc. So in the
Instrument of Refignation there must be a re-delivery of the Possession by an
accustomed Symbol, which ordinarily is by delivery of Staff and Bastoun; yet in
this they differ, that the delivery of the Seasine must be upon the ground of
the (...), naturally or by union; but the Resignation may be any where: And as
Seasine may be given, either to the Vassal or his Procurator; so may the
Resignation be either to the Superior himself or to his Commissioners,
authorized to that effect.

2. And though Instruments of Resignation use to be by Procurators, warranted
by a Procuratory of Resignation: Yet as there may be Seasines given by the
Superior, propriis manibus, so may there be Resignations by the Vassal.

3. But in both the Instrument of Resignation alone is not sufficient, as being
but the assertion of a Nottar; but they must have for their warrant a
Disposition, or other Adminicle; and therefore, it is Statute, Par. 1563. cap.
81. That where such Resignations are by Procurators, the Procuratories be
subscribed by the party or Nottars; and if the Resignation be propriis manibus,
that the Instrument be so subscribed, otherways to be null, because the
subscription of the Instrument is in that case the only probation of the
Warrant thereof: But if there be a Disposition or Obliegement to Infeft the
Instrument of Resignation, though not subscribed by the resigner, will be
sufficient as warranted by the Disposition or Obliegement. But Seasines and
Resignations did formerly differ in this, that Seasines must be registrate
within sixty days after dates, Par. 1617. cap. 16.

4. But so needed not Instruments of Resignation ad Remanentiam; for though by
that Statute, Renunciations of Wodsets are to be registrat, it was not extended
to Renunciations of irredeemable Rights ad remanentiam, these being either
omitted by inadvertency or of purpose, in the favors of Superiors, that
Rights may be taken with their consent: Yet in so far, that excellent Statute
was defective, till the late Act of Par. 1669. cap. 3. whereby Instruments of
Resignation are null, if not registrat within sixty days. By which, and others
to that purpose, purchasers in Scotland, may better know the condition of these
with whom they contract about Infeftments, and be more secure of lurking rights
then any where (so far as I can learn) in the World.

5. By this Resignation so made, the property is consolidate, as it was the
time of the Resignation, and is affected with all real burdens, or debita
fundi, that validly affected it before, as Feues, Tacks, Annualrents,
Servitudes. For, though all such burdens as are not warranted by the Superiors
consent, or by Law, cease when the Fee returns to the Superior, either for a
time by Ward, Non-entry, etc. or for ever by Recognition; yet when it returns
thus by consent, it comes cum suo onere, which is very just and fit, seeing else
such securities might easily be evacuat, by voluntar Resignations in the
Superiors hand. There is another Resignation, which is called in favorem,
being for new Infeftment to the resigner or some other, but thereby the Fee is
not extinct, but either renewed or transferred; and therefore, it shall be
considered hereafter.

6. Craig upon this head, very fitly moves and solveth this question, Whether
the Vassal may renunce and resign his Fee to the Superior, though he be
unwilling; and instances in two cases; First, in a Vassals holding a very
inconsiderable parcel of Land Ward, and did thereby become obnoxious to his
Superior for the value, his Tocher having relation to the whole Estate, which
Tocher did much exceed the worth of the Tenement: And yet a resignation thereof
being judicially offered, the Superior was suffered to refuse it, unless the
value of the Marriage were first paid. The other of a Burgess, offering to
renunce his Burgesship for shunning a great Taxation put upon him: and
therefore, solveth the case upon the common Axiom, Cuique licet renunciare
favori pro se introducto. And therefore, the Fee of its nature being gratuitous
in favors of the Vassal, may be renunced, but that will not prejudge the
Superior of any casuality befalling to him before the renunciation, but will
have only effect ad futura: and therefore, a Vassal judicially disclaiming his
Superior, was not admitted so to do, to exclude the Life-rent already fallen,
March 26. 1628. John Stewart contra Lord of Wedderburne.

No Contract, Obligation or personal Right, nor any less then an Instrument of
Refignation, will take away Infeftment; for though these may be sufficient
against the granters thereof, by a personal objection, whereby they cannot come
against their own deed: Yet truly, the real right stands in them, and they are
not denuded thereby; and so a Renunciation, without the solemnity of an
Instrument of Resignation, will not suffice to obliterat an irredeemable Fee,
though it may be sufficient to evacuat any personal right, as Servitude not
requiring Infeftment; yea, or a Liferent, though constitute by Infeftment,
because it is communicable to no other persons by Infeftment, and therefore,
passes by Assignation or Resignation. The reason hereof is, because by the
common custom of Nations, real Rights cannot pass by sole consent, without
artaining possession in the way prescribed by Law: and therefore, this
symbolical possession, which alone the Law allows as sufficient, either in
the constitution or destitution of Fees, must be adhibite, and the real
possession of the Tenement it self will not suffice in either case, as is
before instanced in Seasines by several decisions. So a Renunciation without a
formal Resignation, was not found relevant to take away the Infeftment renunced
against a singular successor, November 23. 1627. Dumbar contra Wilson.
Resignation cannot be effectual, if the resigner be not infeft; for he who is
not invested, cannot be divested, or if by his Infeftment, he has no valid
right.

7. Craig discusseth this question also in that place, Whether consent of one
who is infeft, and thereby has right, will validat the Resignation of another
who is not infeft and has no right: Which he determines in the affirmative,
with good reason; for though the consent alone would not be sufficient, yet
seeing the form of the resignation is done, though in the name of him who has
no right, yet by consent of him who has right, here is both the substance and
solemnity of the act; and it is alike, as if the Resignation had been by the
consenter, which I doubt not will hold, though the consent be but adhibit in
the beginning of the Disposition or Contract. And though the consenter, for all
right he has, does not dispone, as is ordinary, for further security; yea if
the consent be not repeated in the Procuratory of resignation, or mentioned in
the Instrument of Resignation; for being expressed generally in the entry of the
Disposition or Contract, it reaches to every Article thereof, and all done
conform thereto. Consent has the same effect in the constitution of Fees; and
so the consent to an Annualrent, by a party having right and infeft, was found
to validate the Annualrent, though the Disponer was not infeft; and so did
exclude a Tack set by that consenter afterward, December 15. 1630. Jean
Stirling contra

Yet, if more persons should dispone for their several rights, without
consenting one to another, if any of them be omitted out of the Procuratory or
Instrument of Resignation, in whom truly the right stands; Nonthing will be
validly done, though that party be also in the Disposition: And this is the
reason, why when many persons dispone or resign, they do it all with one mutual
consent; for thereby each of their rights does contribute to the deed of the
rest, though some of them were omitted to be repeated in the Procuratory,
Instrument of Resgination, or Infeftment following thereupon, the deed would be
valid: But it is safest to repeat their consent in the Resignation and
Infeftment.

8. Infeftments are also extinct, when the Superior adjudgeth or appriseth from
his Vassal; for thereby it was found, that the Property was consolidat with the
Superiority, Spots. Apprising, Stevinson contra Lord of Craigmillar. Or, if
the Superior succeed as heir to the Vassal; in which case, though the
Superior upon supplication obtained Precepts out of the Chancelary, to infeft
him in the Fee, it was thought, as Superior, he might have infeft himself as
Vassal: But he would not have been so secure by a Declarator of Consolidation,
upon the Superiors special Retour, as Heir to his Vassal in the Lands;
because, that way would make a defect in the security of Land-rights by the
Negisters, in which, Decreets of Consolidation are not required to be recorded;
whereas the Superiors Seasine, either on the Kings Precept or his own, behoved
to be registrat; and if the Superior acquire the property by Apprifing or
Adjudication, the allowance thereof must also be registrate. The The like
effect will follow, if the Vassal become Heir, or singular Successor to the
Superior, whereby being infeft in the Superiority, he may as Vassal resign to
himself as Superior ad remanentiam.

9. It is more disputable, how and under what consideration Fees are extinct,
otherwise then by consent: Some hold that they are extinct by the attrocious
delinquency of the Vassal against the Superior, as the penalty or punishment
thereof; and others conceive, that acknowledgement and fidelity being
necessarly involved in all Fees (as is shown before) though it be not expressed;
So this is employed as a legal resolutive or irritant Clause, that if the Vassal
failie in his duty, his Fee becomes void. And others hold, that Fees being of
their own nature gratuitous, even though there be a cause onerous, yet they
retain the nature of a Donation: and therefore, as all Donations are revocable
propter ingratitudinem; So are these, which soever of these be the ground, the
consequences and effects are much to the same purpose. But I incline to the
middle opinion; for unless it were evident by Law, that the penalty of that
delinquence were such and so applied, it would hardly be consistent upon that
ground, seeing otherwise, as we have shown before of delinquences, the
punishment is public, and would belong to the Magistrate: And therefore, for
several delinquencies, forfaulture of Fee is introduced, without benefit to
the Superior, who as a private party, can have no more but a reparation
equivalent to the damnage sustained by him; and so the alienation of the Fee,
without his consent or incroaching upon the border of his property, would not
infer, for its reparation, the return of the Fee, how great soever. And for the
last, though Fees of their nature be gratuitous, yet they are oft-times for an
equivalent price, and so the less ingratitude can be alleged; yea, though it
be true, Si ingratum dixeris, omnia dixeris, yet fidelity and trust is a much
stronger bond then gratitude: and the breach thereof has the most powerful
consequence, betraying of trust being most hurtful and hateful to mankind; and
therefore, seeing fidelity is necessarly and properly in all Fees, and is
essential thereto and inseparable therefrom, it looks likest the surest
ground from whence the eviction hereof may flow, And if it be truly gratuitous,
it is an aggravating circumstance, making the deed more odious. But whatsoever
it be, it is agreed by all, that the deed must be of knowledge, moment and
attrocity, though there be many such heaped up by the Feudists, yet many of
them have no place with us, where both such deeds are rare, and therefore the
decisions thereupon are few; and certainly our Fees being ordinarily onerous,
are not evacuated but by such as are either named and known in Law, or which
are very attrocious. There be three such ways of extinction, which have
peculiar names in Law, Recognition, Disclamation, and Purpresture. Of which
therefore in the next place.

Recognition is the Superiors returning to own the Fee; and therefore may be
extended to all the ways by which it returns through the Vassals infidelity,
as is hereafter expressed. But the least culpable, and yet most ordinary way of
incurring Recognition, is by the Vassals disponing irredeemably or under
reversion, his Fees holden Ward: for by this he renders himself incapable to
serve his Superior, and in a manner renunces and disclaims him. This kind of
Alienation makes recognition of Ward-lands, but Fees feu or blensh do not
recognosce by such Alienations, but by the attrocious infidelity of the Vassal.

10. The nearest cause of Recognition, is the Vassals alienation of the Fee
without consent of the Superior, which is a legal clause irritant employed in
the nature of proper Fees or Ward-holdings, though it be not expressed, that
though the Vassal alienat the Fee, it shall return to the Superior, whether
the rise hereof be from the personal obligation of fidelity, which the Vassal
owes to the Superior only, or from the obliegement of gratitude and service,
or from that peculiar choice of the person and race of the Vassal which the
Superior has made, contrair to which, a stranger cannot be obtruded upon him;
neither can the Vassal withdraw himself from the fidelity, or render himself
unfit for his service, or from all these; yet in this do most agree, that the
nearest cause of Recognition is the alienation of the Fee. So then, the main
difficulty is, what is meaned by that Alienation by which Recognition is
incurred, Craig, lib. 3. dieges. 5. declares, that this Alienation cannot be
by naked Contract or Disposition, till Seasine follow; for, these being but
personal and incomplete Rights, do not alienat the Fee from the Vassal, but
only constitute upon him a personal obliegement so to do. It is also clear,
that by Infeftment granted by the Superior upon resignation, there can be no
recognition, because the Superiors accepting of the resignation, imports his
consent; So that, the question will only remain, when the Vassal grants
Disposition or Charter a se to be holden of his Superior, and before the
Superiors Confirmation obtained gives Seasine: For, the Confirmation being
the express consent of the Superior, if the Seasine be after it, there can be
no hazard of Recognition, or otherwise, while the Vassal grants a subaltern
Infeftment to be holden of himself.

11. As to the first case, it seems there can be no recognition incurred by
Infeftments granted by the Vassal to be holden of his Superior, because, if
these be confirmed, the Right is null, and there is no alienation nor
transmission of property, but the Vassal granter of the Infeftment remains
still Proprietar. And therefore, such an Infeftment is equivalent, as if the
Vassal did alienat upon condition, that the Superior should consent; and if he
did not consent, the Infeftment to be null. In which case, most Feudists do
agree, that by such Infeftments there is no recognition; and this reason is the
more fortified, that Craig in the forecited place relates, that an Infeftment
null for want of Registration, was not found to infer Recognition, in the case
of the Kings Advocat against Kenneth Mackenzie and Bain.

For solution of this difficulty, it is not to be denied, that if a Seasine be
null by defect of any substantial, or essential, necessarly requisite to
Seasine or symbolical delivery of possession, there would follow no
Recognition, as if there were no tradition of earth and stone, or symbol
requisite or not, by the Superior or his Bailie or not, to the Vassal or his
Procurator or not, upon the ground of the Land naturally, or by union. But
though Seasine may be null, by defect of some accidental solemnity introduced
by Statute or Custom, and not necessarly involved in the nature of tradition,
as the indiction or year of the Princes Reign, though Law should declare the
Seasine null for want of these; yet, the Vassal performing such essential
requisites, the Feu falls in Recognition: and therefore, there seems no
ground to follow that Decision adduced by Craig, excluding Recognition upon the
nullity of the Seasine for want of Registration. But as to the case proposed,
the Superiors Confirmation is not essential to the Vassals Seasine; neither is
it so required by the common Feudal Customs, as with us: for thereby, if the
Superior did acquiesce, approve or homologate, the Seasine granted by a Vassal
to a stranger, the same would be valid without a formal Confirmation in write;
albeit by our Custom, such Infeftments till Confirmed are null, not only as to
the Superior, but as to all other third parties, and so is become as a
substantial of the Infeftment, not being truly essential by the common Fedual
Customs, it does not exclude Recognition; and as Craig in the forecited place
rendereth the reason, that Infeftments by the Vassal, a se, not Confirmed,
infer Recognition, is because he has done all that in him is to alienate the
Fee, there being no Act remaining to be performed by him or his Procurator; and
therefore, in the Declarator of Recognition, pursued at the instance of Lady
Anna Hamiltoun Lady Carnagy contra Lord Cranburn, upon the Earl of Dirletouns
Disponing of the Lands of Innerweek holden of the King Ward to Cranburn, and
Infefting him therein to be holden of the King; this Defense was not found
relevant, that the Seasine was not Confirmed, and so null, though done upon
Deathbed, accepted for a Minor absent and inscient, and recalling and reducing.

12. For in such cases as in rebellion or escheat, there is no privilege of
minority nor of deeds upon deathbed against the Superior, though done by a
minor, except the deeds upon deathbed, be in prejudice of the Heir and be
reduced by the Heir, ex capite lecti. But in this case Dirletouns Heir did not
quarrel the Disposition made by him, as done upon deathbed, but did take a
gift of recognition from the King. But where the gift of recognition was not
granted to the Heir-male, who was heir in the investiture; but to an heir
Female, the Heir-male proponing, that the alienation was upon deathbed, and so
null as to him: The Lords found, that if the Disposition was upon deathbed, the
Defense was relevant and competent by way of exception, the Declarator of
recognition not being a possessory Judgment: But where the Disposition was in
liege poustie, and was delivered with a Precept of Seasine simply, without
(...), not to take Seasine base upon the Precept, which imported a Warrant to
take Seasine thereupon; It was found, the taking Seasine when the Disponer was
upon deathbed, upon that precept subscribed and delivered in (...) poustie,
did infer recognition, July 20. 1669. Barcley contra Barcley.

13. It is much debated amongst the Feudists, whether by Sub-feudation,
Recognition be incurred, or whether it be comprehended under alienation;
because in libro Jeudorum, albeit alienation of Fees be expressly prohibit, yet
in the same place, as Craig observes, Sub-feudation is allowed; because by
sub-feudation, neither the personal right betwixt Superior and Vassal is
altered, seeing the Vassal continues Vassal, and liable to all these: Neither is
the real right and interest of the Superior in the Fee it self diminished, but
he has the same access thereto, as if there had been no sub-feudation; yet
Sub-feudation in all cases is accounted alienation: And where alienation is
prohibit, Sub-feudation is understood; and so Emphitiosis, or Feu-ferm, which
is at least a perpetual Location. For solving this difficulty, it must be
remembered, that feudalia are localia, regulable according to the custom of the
several places, and according to the Nature of Feudal-rights, and common
Feudal-customs, where special customs are not; and therefore, there is no
question of this point in France, or most places in Germany, where alienation
of Fees many ways is allowed: But in Italy and other Countries, where the
common Feudal Customs rule ordinarily according to the Feudal-books. The doubt
remains, which may be cleared thus: First, Though in some cases alienation be
extended to Location, yet it is not so by the common feudal Customs. Secondly,
If the Subfeu-dation be a real Feu-ferm, whereby the Feu-duty is considerable
and competent to intertain the Vassal; such Sub-feudation is thereby accounted
only Lacation; Nor does it infer recognition, being in effect no more then a
perpetual Location, whereby the Antinomy in the Feudal Law is sufficiently
reconciled, that such Sub-feudations are not alienations: But if the
Sub-feudation be Ward, Blensh, or in Mortification, or though it be under the
name of Emphyteosis; yet for an elusory, or an inconsiderable and
unproportionable Feu-duty, which by no estimation can be correspodent to the
profit of the Fee, but within the half of the true worth; in these cases the
Sub-feudation is alienation infers recognition.

14. As to our own Customs in this point, they do agree to the common Feudal
Customs, as to Subaltern Infeftments, Blensh, Ward, or in mortification, or
Elusory, or unprofitable Feus. But as to Feues by which the major part of the
profit of the Ward or Fee is not taken away, though such cases have not
occurred to be contraverted, they seem not to infer recognition; for if the
major part be not alienate, Subaltern Infeudations, though Blensh or in
Mortification, infer not recognition, when these rights are disjunctim of parts
of the Fee; There appears no reason, that the Subfeudation of the whole, with a
Feu-duty equivalent to the half of the true Rent, whereby in effect the half is
not alienate, seeing the dominium directum, of the whole, and the profit of the
half is retained, should infer recognition, especially now when generally Fees
are granted for Causes Onerous.

15. And by the Statute allowing Feues, Par. 1457. cap. 72. It is provided that
the Feu be set to a competent avail, which by the said Statute is cleared to be
without diminution of the Rental; and which is commonly interpret the retoure
duty, because it was the public valuation and rate at that time. And by the
said statute, such Feues are confirmed and declared not to be prejudged by the
Ward, without mention of the hazard of recognition, as not being consequent
upon such Feues. But this Statute being abrogate as to the Leiges, Par. 18. Ja.
6. cap. 12. All Sub-feues of Ward-lands, holden of Subjects without the
Superiors consent, are declared null and void: But there is no mention of
recognition to be incurred thereby. And Feues are only prohibited as being in
prejudice of the Over-lords, who are not prejudged if the major part be not
alienate, seeing all Subaltern Infeftments, not exceeding the half, are allowed
by Law; And albeit the Narrative of the Act respect Feues preceding it, yet
the Statutory part is only as to Feues granted thereafter.

And the like prohibition is appointed for the King and Princes Vassals, Par.
1633. cap. 16. The effect of this Act, as to the Vassals of the King and
Prince, was suspended till the next meeting of Parliament, and the Vassals
exempted therefrom in the interim, Par. 1640. cap. 36. And the said Act was
wholly repealed, Par. 1641. cap. 58. And so remained until all these
Parliaments were Rescinded, seeing the private rights of parties acquired
thereby, by the general Act Rescissory, Par. 1661. cap. 15. But it has been
found, that alienations during these Acts now rescinded, and during the
usurpation, when Wards were discharged, did infer recognition, seeing the Vassal
did not seek Confirmation after the Kings return, December 15. 1669. Maitland
of Pittrichy contra Gordoun of Gight. The like was found in the recognition at
the instance of Sir George Kinard contra the Vassals of the Lord Gray. The like
though the base Infeftment inferring recognitien, was in Anno 1643. when there
was a Statute then standing, allowing such Infeftments, seeing after rescinding
that Statute, no application was made to the King for Confirmation, January 7.
1676. Cockburn of Riselaw conira Cockburn of Chouslie. But recognition was
excluded where the Vassal required the Superior to confirm the subaltern
right, debito tempore, or did purge the same by procuring resignations, ad
remanentiam, to himself from the Sub-vassals, February 12. 1674. Viscount of
Kilsyth contra Hamiltoun of Bardowie. But recognition was not found against a
Pupil upon his Tutors taking Infeftment for him, during the Usurpation, July
15. 1669. Jack contra Jack. Whereby it is clear, that Feues have no effect
against the Superior, as to the Ward, Non-entry more then Tacks.

16. Whether the alienation be by Infeftment, holden from, or of the Vassal;
there is no recognition with us, except in Ward-holdings; yea, if the holding
be dubious, and soa probable ground of error of the Vassal, as being a payment
of Money in the Reddendo, with Service used and wont; which though truly Ward,
yet because the payment of Money may render it dubious, Craig holds in the
said Dieg. l. 3. that it would not infer recognition; yet this will not give
ground to think that alienation of Lands, Taxt-ward, would excuse from
recognition, because Ward is more clear, and expressed nominatim, in that case
in it self, for the Casualities thereof, being Taxed; as the Marriage and
Ward-duties: Which (...) is but a Liquidation, or Location of these casualities
when they occur, and no alteration of the nature of the Fee; and therefore in
the said pursuit, at the instance of the Lady Carnagie contra the Lord
Cranburn, it was not found relevant to exclude the recognition, that the Ward
was Taxed.

17. It is also clear, that alienation, whether by Infeftment holden of, or
from the Vassal, not exceeding the half of the Fee, infers not recognition,
so much being indulged to the vassals for his convenience or necessity; but if
together or by parcels, or by Annualrent, the major part be alienat, not only
that which then was in the vassals person falls under recognition; But as Craig
holds in the forecited place, Dieg. 3. l. 3. even the whole Fee; So that
parcels alienat validly, but without the Superiors consent before, become void
and return. But though the vassal grant Infeftments exceeding the half of the
fee; yet if some of them were extinct before others were granted, so that there
was at no time rights standing together exceeding the half of the sea,
recognition is not incurred, February 23. 1681. John Hay contra Creditors of
Muirie. But Deeds done by Predecessors and their Heirs or Authors, and their
Successors were in that case conjoined. Upon the same ground an Infeftment of
the sea in Liferent, would not infer recognition, because it exceeds not the
half of the value. Yea, recognition was found not incurred by granting an
Infeftment in Warrandice; for Warrandice is but a hazard in case of Eviction,
not equivalent to the half of the worth of the Lands granted in warrandice,
unless the right of the principal Lands were manifeftly defective, Feb. 21.
1623. Cathcart contra Campbel.

18. Recognition is not inferred by an alienation to the Vassals appearand
heir; by the ordinary course of Law, as by a father to his eldest son, because
the fee will befall to the son after the fathers Deceass. Neither was it
inferred by an alienation granted by a Grandfather, with consent of his son to
his oye, who was alioqui successurus, by the course of Law, Hope recognition,
Adam Rae contra Lord of Kellie. Yet recognition was found incurred by a
Vassals Infeftment to his eldest son, his heirs and assigneys, the son having
Disponed the major part to strangers, seeing the father who was Vassal, did not
bind up his son from Disponing, by a Clause irritant, neither did the son purge
the alienations made by him, during his fathers life, July 15. 1674. Sir
Charles Erskin contra Forbes of Achintoul. And recognition was found incurred
by the Infeftments of Ward-lands, by a Husband to his Wife in Fee, failing
heirs ofhis Body, albeit the Wife did not acept or make use of the same, but
brooked by a prior conjunct Infeftment, February 14. 1678. Knock contra Lady
Knock. And recognition was found to be incurred by an alienation by the Vassal
to his Brother, who for the time was his appearand heir, but not necessarly by
the ordinary course of Law, seeing the Vassal might have had Children of his
own, and so his Brother could not be called alioqui successurus, unless it were
by accident, Spots. recognition, Kings Advocat and his Son contra Earl of
Cassils and Collane. The like, July 29. 1672. Lord Hattoun contra Earl of
Northesk.

19. It is more questionable, whether recognition is incurred by a conditional
alienation, bearing, if the Superior consent, or saving the Superiors right,
Craig following Baldus in the said three Dieges.l. 3. declares, that if such
Clauses be insert bona fide, they infer not Recognition; But contrariwys, if
they be done fraudulently, as when the Vassal Seaseth and Possesses a powerful
Person, whom the Superior cannot easily Dispossess, or his Enemy concerning
whom there can be no doubt of the Superiors will, or if the Superior have
declared his will upon the contrary.

But for clearing further of the Point, distinction would be made of the Nature
and Tenor of the Clause, which may either be suspensive or resolutive of the
Property or Fee in the former case: Tradition is only made of the Possession,
but the Property is suspended till the Superiors will be known, as if the
Vassal Dispone and possess another without Seasine, there could be no
recognition; or though he Possess him by an Instrument ofPossession, bearing
expressly, that he should have no right to the Property till the Superiors
consent were obtained; this were a suspensive Clause, like to the addictio in
diem; in the Civil Law, by which only Possession and not the Property was
transmitted for that time; and so till the purification of the condition, it
could be no alienation: But when the Clause is only resolutive, not hindering
the transmission of the Property, but resolving or annulling the same, though
transmitted; in such an case, such Clauses do not exclude recognition, because
there is truly there an alienation, without the Superior consent, which is
only to be disannulled by his disassent; much less can such general Clauses as
Salvo jure cujuslibet, or Salvo jure Superioris, avoid recognition.

20. Recognition was found not excluded or burdened by Inhibition against the
Ward-vassal, before the gift and Declarator of the Deed, inferring recognition,
seeing the Creditors inhibiting did not pursue reduction before Declaratorof
recognition; December 16. 1680. John Hay contra Bethark and Lord of Balagarno.

21. Neither was recognition excluded, because the Deeds inferring recognition
was done when the Disponer was drunk, not being to stupidity, impeding reason,
July 29. 1672. Lord Hattoun contra Earl of Northesk.

22. To come now to the Superiors consent, it may be either antecedent,
concomitant, or consequent to the alienation; and it may be either express or
tacit, all which will be sufficient to avoid recognition, albeit many of them
will not be sufficient to make a valide Infeftment, if the same be granted by
the Vassal, to be holden from him of the Superior, which by our custom is null
till it be confirmed, whereunto an anterior consent or Homologation in any ways
will not suffice, Craig in the forementioned Dieg. 3. relates the opinion of
the Feudists, whereunto he agrees, that if the Vassals Fee be granted to him,
his Heirs and Assigneys whatsomever, that thereby there is granted, a general
antecedent consent, of the Superior to his Vassal, to and Assigneys
whatsomever, that thereby there is granted, a general antecedent consent, of
the Superior to his Vassal, to alienat or assign to whom he pleases. But the
contrary was found in the case of the Lady Cranagie contra Lord Cranburn, Feb.
5. 1633. And that the Disposition to Assigneys did only importa power to Assign
the Disposition, before Infeftment taken thereupon.

23. There is no question but the Superior Confirmation is sufficient, even
the Kings Confirmation, though without a novo damus, albeit it may pass in
Exchequer, without the knowledge and advertency of the recognition incurred; it
was found sufficient being done before the Donatar of recognition was Infeft,
Hope recognition, Rae contra Lord of Kellie. Which Confirmation does secure
against recognition, falling by thatInfeftments Confirmed, but does not secure
against recognition upon other subaltern Infeftments not Confirmed, which are
not considered to be known by the King or his Officers, without a novo damus,
and so imports but a passing from recognition by the Infeftment Confirmed, but
not to import an absolute Ratification, pro omni jure, February 6. 1673. Lord
Hattoun contra Earl of Weims. The like was found, February 23. 1681. John Hay
contra Creditors of Murie. And a Donatar of recognition, having granted Precept
of clare constat, acknowledging the Vassals right, was found thereby excluded,
albeit the Precept did bear, to be in obedience, of Precepts out of the
Chanclery, June 24. 1668. Andrew Gray contra Howison and Gray. But the
Superiors consent is not inferred by granting Charters for obedience upon
Appryzing, though before any Infeftment of the Donatar, Hope recognition, Lord
of Lugtoun contra Lord of Lethendie.

24. The Superior consent also by Homologation, is sufficient to avoid
recognition, as if it were express consent, as if the Superior require the new
Vassal or Sub-vassal, to perform the Services due out of the Fee, for thereby
he acknowledges him Vassal, as is observed by Craig, in the case betwixt the
Lord of Calderwood and Maxwel of Calderhead. Or if the Superior should pursue
the new Vassal for the avail of his Marriage, Liferent-escheat, or other
Casuality of the Superiority.

25. Recognition being incurred, so opens and returns the Fee to the
Superior, that no Debt or Deed of the Vassal, does burden the same, but these
only which before that time were established by consent of the Superior, or
Authority of Law, as Appryzings, Adjudications, Feu-ferms, conform to the
several Acts of Parliament. But even such being Constitute after the (...),
whereby recognition is incurred, albeit bona fide, for onerous Causes, before
any Diligence or Declarator of recognition; yet they fall in consequence with
their Authors right, February 8. 1610. Earl of Balcleugh contra Scot.
Recognition excludes all Tacks set by the vassal without the Superior
consent, whither prior or posteriour, unless such as are set for the utility
and profit of all parties interressed, having no advantage therein, as before
has been showen in the matter of Ward and Non-entry, for though Tacks be
Established by Acts of Parliament, against purchasers, yet not against
Superiors.

26. Recognition does also exclude servitudes upon the Fee, by the Vassals
consent without the Superiors, as Thirlage, etc. yet this will not reach
Servitudes, introduced by long custom or possession, and strengthened by
Prescription, wherein the consent of all parties having interest, is presumed,
that they can never come in the contrary; for though it was most proper to the
Vassal to look to his Fee, yet the Superior doubtless might have interrupted,
which would have been sufficient for his own interest. And Prescription being
introduced to secure Property, and put an end to Pleyes, will not be infringed
but upon evident ground.

27. Seeing Recognition is exclusive of all interests depending upon the Vassal;
therefore, all parties having interest may compear and defend, Hope, de
actionibus in factum, Lord of Lugtoun contra Lord of Lethendie. But there is
no necessity to call any save the Vassal, seeing all other Rights fall in
consequentiam, as was found in Subaltern-rights, in the said case, Earl of
Balcleugh contra Scot.

Though Recognition be ordinarily by way of Action declaring the Deed upon which
it is incurred; yet a Donatar of recognition being Infeft thereupon, was found
to have sufficient interest to pursue, succeeding in the vice, in respect of a
prior Decree of Removing upon the Donatars Infeftment upon the gift of
recognition without any preceding Declarator, March 22. 1623. Lord of Hunthil
contra Rutherfoord.

28. In Declarators of recognition, the Superiors gift is sufficient Title
without instructing the Superiors Right, unless he be disclaimed, or the
Vassals be singular Successors: But the Kings gift is absolutely sufficient,
and there will be terms assigned for proving the alienation of the major part,
and incident diligences against all havers for production of their Infeftments,
ad modum probationis, Feb. 17. 1671. William Gordoun contra Sir Alexander
Mcculloch. And whereas gifts of recognitions bear, the particular Deeds
inferring the vacancy and return of the Fee in the Kings hands, because general
gifts are not allowable. The extracts of Seasines were sustained, in initio
litis, to instruct these Deeds, but Warrant was granted to the defenders to
improve the Seasines, or Warrands thereof, and thereby to call for the
Principals, February 26. 1681. David Edie contra Thores and Dun. And Diligence
by Horning was granted to the Defenders of the improbation, for producing the
Seasines and Warrands, February 23. 1681. John Hay contra Creditors of Murie.
And Declarator was sustained upon production of the gift, though the Donatar
was not infeft; and though the Heir whose right was in question, was minor; and
though his Authors bound in Warrandice were not called: for the Privilege of
the minority has no effect as to the Superior, and the Defender ought to
intimat the plea to his Author, January 28. 1681. Lord of Dun contra Scot.

19. Disclamation is when the vassal denies his Superior to be his Superior,
which is Diametrically opposite to that acknowledgement, which is necessarly
employed in the matter of all Fees, as there is in it the greatest ingratitude;
and therefore, Disclamation, as being much more favorable upon the part of the
Superior, and odious upon the part of the vassal, then recognition is not
restricted to proper Fees by Ward-holdings, but takes place in all Fees, and
that not only when the vassal disclaimeth the Superior as to the whole, or
greater part; but if he disclaim him to be Superior in any part of the Fee, he
loses the whole.

Disclamation takes no place if it proceed through ignorance of the vassal,
upon any probable ground, which may several ways occur; First, as to the whole
Fee, when the case is not betwixt the first Superior and the first vassal, but
betwixt their Successors, as if the vassal should deny a person to be his
Superiors Heir in that Superiority, through any doubtfulness of his being
lawful Heir, or of his being that Heir, to whom the Superiority is provided, as
being to Heirs-mail or of Tailzie: But much more when the Superior is singular
Successor to the first Superior; in all which there be frequent and probable
grounds of doubt and mistake.

Secondly, The same ground of doubt may be when the question is about some part
of the Fee, and this much more, that there may be many grounds of doubt,
whether that which is in question be a part of the Fee or not, as when the Fiar
has several Conterminous Tenements, holden of diverse Superiors, if he affirm
any parcel not to be a part and pertinent holden of the Superior acclaiming,
but of the other; in that case the vassals not acknowledging the Superior,
will not be accounted Disclamation; and therefore, though ordinarily it be held,
that a Superior pursuing his vassal for any Duty or Casuality needs not
instruct that he is Superior, or that the Defender is his vassal, but that it
proves it self, unless he Disclaim, as was found, Hope Superior, viscount of
Stormont contra Andrew Grant: Yet that must be understood, when the case is
clear, and when he is directly Disclaimed, he may choose either to make use of
the Disclamation, or instruct his Title and so proceed, March 26. 1628. John
Stuart contra Lord of Wedderburn.

The main question is, whether Disclamation can be otherways then judicially;
(...) answers the case, as to extrajudicial words, that these are not ordinarily
noticed in most cases, as extrajudicial Confessions, and the like, but as to
extrajudicial deeds of the Vassal, as if he should take Infeftment from any
other then his Superior, it would be as real Disclamation as any verbal one
judicially could be, but under the same Limitation, if it were done of
knowledge and of contempt of the Superior; and therefore, in a dubious and
contraverse right, or in any case, if the right were taken with provision of
double Infeftment, and thereby the granter not accepted simply, as Superior,
but only in the interim it would not infer Disclamation.

30. Purpresture or Purprysion is the vassals going without his bounds, and
incroaching upon the Property of his Superior; for purpryses signify the
precincts and Marches, the ground of it is from the fidelity and gratitude the
vassal owes to the Superior; and therefore, should not invade his
Inheritance; but this is not extended to incroachment upon the Superiors
Commonty, as Craig relates the opinion of the Lawers in his time, in a
purprysion moved by the Constable of Dundee against the Town of Innerkeithing.
But where the Superior has the right of Property, burdened and barred with a
right of common Pasturage, acquired by the vassal by consent or prescription,
which though it marreth the effect of the Superiors Property, so that he
cannot Till or Manure the same in prejudice of the Pasturage; yet he remains
direct Proprietar; and if Coal were found in that ground, it would be his
alone: In which case, if the vassal should rive out and labor that ground
whereof he got common Pasturage, it would be purprysion, as is clear in the
case of the common Moors, disponed to none by the King in Property; and
therefore, belonging yet to His Majesty in Property, the riving out, or
appropriating whereof, is declared purprysion, Parliament 1600. Cap. 5.

Purpresture must also be a known and manifest incroachment, as if a vassal
should exclude a Superior from a whole distinct Tenement; but when he is about
Marches it is not sustained, unless they be clearly manifest by March Stones;
Or that there has been an antecedent Cognition of the Marches; and therefore,
the action is either turned into a Cognition, or at least before answer, a
Commission is granted to cognosce.

Purpresture is thought to be incurred by incroachment upon the Highways and
public Rivers, as belonging to the King; but it could be inferred against no
other then his Vassal, and it being so ordinary by course of time, to change
the Highways, or rather for the Highways to change, when there becomes any
impossibleness therein: There are other Statutes appointed for securing thereof
upon far less certification then Purpresture, so that I conceive it could
hardly be inferred upon that ground.

Purpresture was only competent to be cognosced by Barons, comprehending
Superior Dignities, but by none of their Vassals or Sub-vassals, Par. 1477.
cap. 79. But now it belongs only to the Jurisdiction of the Lords of Session,
as all other Recognitions do.

31. Craig has largely and learnedly Treated of the feudal Delinquencies:
adducing the Feudal Customs of the neighboring Nations, and the Opinions of
many learned Feudists thereupon, both generally and particularly, enumerating
the most ordinary Delinquences, for which they hold Vassals to lose their Fees;
He does also give his own opinion, how far these or the like would be sustained
with us, but adduceth little what had been sustained. But this much in general,
that mitiores pena nobis semper placuere: And in Conclusion, l. 3. Dieges. 6.
he makes Superiors lose their Superiority, and the same to befall to their
Vassals, for the same Delinquencies, for which the Vassals lose their Fee, to
their Superiors, except what concerns the honor and reverence due by Vassals
to their Superiors; which therefore will not consist with attributing the
Feudal Delinquencies to ingratitude, which can hardly be understood to give
rise to the Superiors losing his Superiority; and therefore, it must be from
that mutual friendship and fidelity betwixt the Superior and Vassal, arising
from the Feudal Contract, since his time there has scarce any thing been
observed in relation to Recognition, or ammission of Infeftments upon Feudal
Delinquencies, except what concerns alienation of proper Fees, or
Ward-holdings, without the Superiors consent, or what may concern Recognition,
as it is employed in foresaulture, so that we are yet much left to infer the
Feudal Delinquencies, resolutive of Infeftments from the nature of these Rights.

Though Craig has not gone near the length of Foreign Feudists, in assigning
the specialities resolving Fees; yet if we should go his length, there would be
found few unquarrellable Rights of Superiority, or Property in the Kingdom, but
which might in a considerable time, give ground enough to extinguish the Right,
either of the Superior or Vassal: And since no such thing has been moved upon
either part, the general acquiescence of the Nation must make these
Delinquencies resolutive of Infeftments, much narrower and much more upon the
Vassals part then the Superiors, for our Custom has never given the Vassalthe
right of Superiority upon the Delinquencies of the Superior.

All Fees, yea and Liferents by Infeftments, do necessarly imply an
acknowledgement of the Superior, and fidelity to him, and thence only, and not
from gratitude ought the Causes of disolving Fees be deduced, for though pure
Donations are disolved by attrocious ingratitude, yet the most proper Fees were
never pure Donations, but were from innominate Contracts, Do ut facias, and the
services due thereby, were not by way of gratitude, but by way ofspecial
Contract: And there is most of pure Donation in the most improper Fees, such as
Blensh and Mortification which are almost allodial; and yet the fewest
resolutive Delinquencies are in these, and Feu-ferms were at first granted for
cultivating Barren Grounds, and paying a Feu-duty, or Canon out of them, and
where they have a considerable Rent, they are far from being purely gratuitous,
and are rather perpetual Locations. And in most Fees of all kinds, there are
not only Casualities and Profits; but they are ordinarily granted by way of
sale for a competent price; and therefore, the Delinquencies resolving them,
should neither be extended nor esteemed equal, but should be much more
sustained in proper Fees, or Ward-holdings, importing personal or military
Service, then in improper Fees.

Yet all Infeftments being in the Terms and Tenor of Fees, they must have a
reddendo and acknowledgement of the Superior and fidelity too, not only as
obliegements, but as resolutive conditions employed therein; and therefore,
wilful and open disowning the Superior by Disclamation, or Infidelity, in
breach of Trust, should from the nature of the Feudal Contract resolve the same.

32. Though breach of Trust be a general Term, the extent whereof is not
determined; yet certainly it must import the Vassals being Actor or Accessory
in conspyring or taking away the life of the Superior, or mutilating or
wounding him, or in taking away his Right of Superiority: Under which accession
may be justly comprehended, the not revealing to him of these hazards; but this
would not reach to the revealing of any loss or detriment the Superior might
have in his other Estate, or the concurring or acting against him therein.

It may also be extended to Conspyring, or Acting, or not Revealing these
things which might infer upon the Superior, Infamy, equiparat to death or
wounds, but it seems not to import a duty in the Vassal to give Council to his
Superior, or not to reveal his secrets; neither inferring Life, Limb, nor
Fame; for though these be Acts of Gratitude and Friendship, yet they are not
employed in the Fidelity of all Vassals, but only such as owe Militar and
personal service: I shall not determine how far breach of Trust in improper
Fees, could extend to the Wife, Children, and Family of the Superior.

But proper and Military Fees by Ward-holding, do not only import Fidelity, but
Assistance and Council to the Superior, by which the Vassal can be accessory
to no attrocious Deed against the Life and Blood of the Superior, but against
any Infamy may befall him, or any great detriment in his Estate, and so will
reach to Deeds of hurt or disgrace to his Wife or Children by Adultery,
Fornication, or attrocious Violence upon their persons, or attempts thereunto;
and may also extend to the revealing of the Superiors secrets, or not
Defending him against his Enemies or such as attack him, or deserting of him in
that case; and in case of a necessary flight, by overpouring, in not crying for
help and relief; and in lawful War, in not concurring with him, or deserting
him, while with any probability of prevailing, he stood in fight, if the Vassal
were then near him, but it will not import his concourse, active in private
quarrels by force of Arms, which are not warrantable.

33. In all cases the ignorance of the Vassal not being affected, or his
weakness will excuse these Delinquencies, and whatever he acts in
self-defence, or upon provocation of the attrocious injury of the Superior, or
by public Authority, or in the service of his Prince, or anterior Superior in
Wardholding: Or unless the attrocious Deeds be past from by the Superior, by
owning his Vassal after the knowledge thereof, or by a considerable times
forbearance to quarrel the same, especially when in the mean time, either the
Superior or Vassal dies; for though death obliterats Crimes as to the
punishment; yet the righ arising to the Superior in the Fee, from the
Delinquence, as a resolutive condition is not excluded by the Vassals Death, if
the Superior were ignorant of the Fact, or not in capacity to vindicat the
same through public Calamity, or his Pupilarity or absence; but by the mutual
friendship and strict Union betwixt Superior and Vassal; small evidences will
import the passing by former Delinquencies, especially when not questioned,
during the life of both parties.

There are multitudes of specialities proposed by Craig, as Delinquencies
resolving Fees, not only in relation to the Superior, his Person and Family;
but also of invading his House, befieging the same, or entering it by force, or
invading his Property, which is the ground of Purprysion, acknowledged by our
Custom; or by denying or refusing to show the Superior the Marches of the Fee,
or denying any part of it to be holden of him, or not showing him his Holding
and Investiture, being solemnly called to that purpose (which take no place
with us; for our ordinary custom for Superiors as well as others, is to pursue
Improbations of their Vassals Rights wherein the Certifications is not the loss
of the Fee, but the presumptive falsity of the Writes) or the denying to do
justice to Superiors; but also in relation to the Fee, if he waste or
deterioat it: Yea, in relation to the Vassals own Person, as if he fall in
Incest, or if he kill his Brother, or commit any Paracide, or if he contract
friendship with the Enemies of his Superior: And generally, whatever may make
him unfit or unworthy to attend his Superiou, or to be in his Court, but none
of these are employed in the Fidelity of any Vassal.

There be special grounds of resolution or extinction of Fees by the particular
Nature or Tenor thereof, as Feues become extinct, ob non solutum canonem, and
other Fees are extinct by resolutive Clauses, as to both which we have spoken,
Title 13..

Craig does hold, that by the delinquence of Vassals, Conquest, or feuda nova,
become extinct and return to the Superior; but Heretage, or feuda vetera, do
but become extinct as to the delinquent Vassals and his Descendents but is not
returned to the Superior, but divolved to the next Collateral of the
delinquent Vassal descending from the first Vassal, who would have succeeded if
the delinquent Vassals had died without issue, and who must enter Heir to the
delinquent Vassals predecessor; but in this the interest of the Superior is
too far restricted; for we have no custom nor tenor to enter any person heir to
a Defunct, while a nearer heir is existent, whatsoever his delinquence be,
except Paricide.

He does also move this question, That if the Vassal have committed a Feudal
delict against the Superior, and a public crime inferring forefaulture,
whether the Fee would fall to the King, or to the Superior, or if the first
sentence of forefaulture or recognition would prevail: but does not determine
it. Yet the first deliquences, sufficient to extinguish the Fee, if insisted
in, must give the preference; for the sentence of forfaulture or recognition is
but declaratory, and has effect, not from the sentence, but from the deed
inferring it.

There is no difference, whether the delinquence inferring recognition, was
before the Vassal was actually entered or after; but it is more questionable,
whether recognition would be incurred by the deeds of the appearand Heir in his
predecessors life; which could have no effect as to Collaterals, who are not
alioqui successuri, seeing they may be excluded by a descendent, which in men is
always in hope: And if the heir apparent die before his predecessor, it can
have no effect to exclude either his Collaterals or Descendents; and it is more
probable, that though the heir apparent should survive, he would not be
excluded, seeing feudal delinquences are now so little extended.

34. It has been much and long debated, and is not yet decided, whether
Recognition can be incurred for ay attrocious deeds dne by sub-vassals, whereby
the Superior might claim the right of the sub-vassals. Fee to fall to him by
Recognition; Or, Whether Recognition can only be incurred by the deeds of the
immediate Vassal. The case in question was, where a subvassal rose in rebellion
against the King, whereby his Fee, as all his other Rights, were confiscate to
the King by forefaulture, which could but confiscate them as they were in his
person, with the burden of all real Rights of Liferent, Annualrent, or other
subaltern Infeftments of the forefaulted person: But if the forefaulture of the
sub-vassal did also comprehend Recognition, the sub-vassals Fee would fall to
the King and belong to his Donatar, without any real Right or Burden contracted
by the forefaulted person, except such as were confirmed by the King, either by
a special Confirmation, or by that general consent of the King, inviting all
his Subject to set their Ward-lands feu, by the Act of Parliament, 1457. cap.
72. which would preserve such Feus, being constitute before the Act of Par.
1633. rescinding that Act as to the Vassals of the King and Prince, as was
found, Feb. 12. 1674. Marquess of Huntley contra Gordoun of Cairnburrow;
November 16. 1681. Campbel of Silvercraigs contra Lord of Auchinbreck and the
Earl of Argyle. And therefore, if Recognition were employed in forefaulture, in
that case it behoved to infer a general rule, that Recognition might be
incurred by all attrocious deeds against gratitude and fidelity, omitted not
only by the immediate Vassal, but by all subaltern Vassals, and would not only
be competent to the King, upon deeds of treason committed against him by his
sub-vassals, but by all deeds of attrocity done against another Superior by
his sub-vassals; as if his sub-vassal should kill, wound or betray his
Superior. So that the question behoved to return, whether there were any
feudal Contract or Obligation of fidelity betwixt the Superior and his
Sub-vassals; for if that were, then Vassals might fall in Recognition by such
deeds, not only against their immediate Superiors, but against all their mediat
Superiors, though never so many. For, though the case in question be most
odious and unfavourable, being rebellion; yet it has its proper punishment
introduced by Law and Statute, whereby the rebel loses Life, Land and Goods to
the King, to whom all his Subjects owes fidelity, as Subjects, though all do
not owe the feudal Fidelity as Vassals; yet, if Recognition take place as to
the King, it must likewise fall to all other Superiors, whatever way the Land
be held, Ward, Feu, Blensh or Mortification, if they have not a confirmation or
consent of the Superior, anterior to the deeds inferring Recognition. We shall
not therefore anticipat the public determination of the question; if custom
has determined it, what will take place? for all feudal Rights are local, but
there has not yet appeared any case, by which a Donatar by his Gift and
Presentation, being infeft in the Fee of the Kings sub-vassal, forefault has
excluded these who had real Rights from the forefaulted person before the
treasonable fact, though much has been disputed upon the Act of Par. 9. cap.
2. concerning the quinquennial possession of forfaulted persons, especially
from the last clause thereof, bearing, that no person presented by the King to
feu Lands forefaulted, nor any Vassal of any Fever forefaulted, shall be
compelled to produce their Acquittances of their Feu-mail, or Annualrents of
their forefaulted Lands of any year preceding the forefaulture; which does
clearly acknowledge, that when the Fevers right is forefaulted, his Sub-vassals
right is not forefauted, yet it was alleged, that would not end the
controversy by the Act 72. Par. 1457. because these rights of the Sub-vassals
of the forefaulted Fever, might have been confirmed by the King, specially or
generally by the foresaid Act, 1457. But the general Confirmation from that Act
can have no effect, because the the sub-vassals whose Rights are preserved by
the Act, are not Feues granted by Ward-holders, but are subaltern Infeftments
granted by forefaulted Fevers. And without question, the King has given no
consent to any to grant Feues, but to Ward-holders only; for, though the Law
hinders them to grant sub-feues or Annualrents, yet there being no consent or
confirmation by the King thereto. Therefore, if the King his immediate Vassal be
forefaulted, all the ancient Feues granted by him of the Lands holden Ward,
will stand valid, as being consented to by the King by the foresaid Statute:
But the Feues granted by him of Lands holden Blensh or Feu, will fall in
consequence with his own Feu or Blensh, and cannot defend against forefaulture,
more then Annualrents or lucrative Tacks granted by him, which Law does allow,
and yet fall with his right, unless consented to, or confirmed by the Superior.

TITLE XXII. Prescription.
1. Prescription distinguished and described. 2. Usucapion. 3. The several
times required to Usucapion or Prescription, by the Roman Law. 4. Requisites to
Prescription. 5. Bona fides requisite to Prescription. 6. Whether he who
doubts of his authors Right, be in bona, or mala fide. 7. Evidences of mala
fides. 8. The Title requisite to Prescription. 9. The motives inductive of
Prescription. 10. Exception, where Prescription took no place by the Civil Law.
11. The common rule of Prescription with us. 12. The beginning of Prescription
of personal Rights, with the extensions thereof. 13. Prescription of Movables.
14. Prescription is reckoned de momento in momentum per tempus continuum. 15.
Prescription of Heretable Rights. 16. Prescription is not extended against the
right of Superiority. 17. Prescription runs not for Tennents against their
Masters. 18. Prescription runs not against Minors, but there is no exceptions
of Mortifications to pious uses. 19. In our long Prescription bona Fides is not
required. 20. The Titles requisite in Prescriptions of Heretable Rights. 21.
This long Prescription secures Wodsets, Infeftments for Security, Teinds and
long Tacks. 22. How far Teinds can prescribe. 23. This Prescription extends to
Patronage and Offices. 24. And to Thirleage and all Servitudes. 25. This
Prescription excludes all Action and Ground of Reduction and Declarator if the
Essentials of the Title appear. 26. The several ways of Interruption of
Prescription. 27. The way of Interruption by King CHARLES the first, as to
special rights of the Crown by Letters of Publication. 28. The annual
prescription of the privilege of appearand Heirs intra annum deliberandi. 29.
The biennial prescription of the preference of diligences of the Creditors of
Defuncts, to the diligences of the Creditors of the Heir. 30. Triennial
prescription of Spuilzie, Ejection, Intrusion and succeeding in the vice,
Merchants-counts, House-mails and Removings. 31. Quadrennial prescription of
the privilege to reduce deeds of Minors intra quadrennium utile. 32.
Quinquennial prescription of Arrestments, Ministers Stipends, Multures, Rents
of Tennents removed, and legal reversion of special Adjudications. 33.
Septennial prescription of old Apprisings and Summonds for Interruption. 34.
Decennial prescription of late Apprisings or general Adjudications. 35.
Prescription of twenty years of Holograph Bonds, Missives, and Subscriptions in
Count-books, without Witnesses. 36. No prescription runs in Minority, except
Removings, House-mails, and Merchants-counts.
1. PRESCRIPTION is the common extinction and abolishing of all Rights, and
therefore is reserved here to the last place; the name and nature whereof we
have from the Civil Law, wherein Prescription is sometimes largely taken for
any exception, but has been appropriat to the most common exception in all
cases, whereby all Actions and Causes are excluded by course of time; and so
Prescription had no further effect, then to maintain the possessor in
possession by exception, but not to recover possession, being lost, and could
not constitute the right of Property.

2. In this, Prescription did chiefly differ from Usucapion by the ancient
Roman Law, that Usucapion did constitute Property, and therefore is defined by
Modestinus, l. 3. ff. de Usucapione; Adjectio vel acquisitio dominii per
continuationem possessionis temporis lege definiti. To which, description the
name does agree; for, usu-capere est capere ex usu aut possessione, to take or
acquire by use or possession; But every possession was not sufficient, unless
it were a possession as Proprietar, or for the possessors own use only: So
detention of any thing in the name, and for the use of another, and for the
possessor only in security, as a Pledge or Wodset, cannot Constitute property.

3. As to the time appointed for Usucapion, Movables were acquired by
continual possession for one year, l. 10. ff. de usucapion. Inst. eod in
principio. And Immoveables being in Italy by the space of two years: Other
Immoveables by the space of ten years, against these in the same Province; and
twenty years against these out of the same Province, auth. mala fidei, C. de
prescript. longi temporis.

From which common Rule, some cases of greatest moment were excepted; As first,
public Rights belonging to Emperors and Kings, which (as all do agree,) cannot
be acquired by Usucapion or Prescription in less then thirty or forty years,
and many think by no less then an hundred years, or immemorial possession.

Secondly, Things belonging to Cities, which in some cases could not be
prescrived without an hundred years possession, at least without thirty or
forty years.

Thirdly, Things belonging to the Church, against which no other can acquire by
Prescription in less then forty years; and against the Church of Rome by
special privilege, by the space of an hundred years only.

The recent Roman Law has taken off all differences betwixt Usucapion and
Prescription, Tit. de usucap. trans. whereby in either case Property is
acquired: Yet in the ordinary acceptance, Prescription which is short in
Movables, is commonly called Usucapion; but we make only use of the name of
Prescription for both.

4. Prescription or Usucapion amongst the Romans, required three things,
continuation of Possession uninterrupted, bona fides, and a Title, besides the
kind of Possession, and time beforementioned,

As to the first, prescription is unquestionably interrupted by real
interruption or discontinuation of Possession; it is also interrupted by civil
Possession by Litiscontestation, Process, etc.

5. As to the bona fides, or innocent Possession required in Prescription, it
is commonly agreed, that it is requisite at the beginning of the Possession in
shorter prescriptions, but that it is presumed in the longest prescription. The
Civil and Canon Law differ in this, that the Civil Law requires only bonam
fidem at the beginning, so that if any person acquire any thing from him whom
he believes to be the owner thereof; and so believing begins to possess,
though thereafter he understand that his Author was not the true owner, yet
prescription does proceed: But by the Canon Law it proceeds not: But if at any
time before prescription ended, he knows the thing belonged to another,
prescription is impeded: Yea, though prescription were ended, if the right of
another appear. Most of the Canonists hold, that in foro conscientiae, the
possessor is obliged to restore, unless the knowledge and forbearance of the
owner, do infer or presume a Dereliction of the thing or consent, which takes
no place in the case of ignorance, or error of the owner.

6. In either case it is contraverted, whether he who doubts of his or his
Authors right be bonae fidei, or malae fidei possessor.

The common ground in which all agree, is that the possessors Credulity and
Belief of his own and his Authors Right makes bonam fidem, and his knowledge of
the Right of another malam, which seems to infer, that he who doubts, must
be in mala fide, because he believes not his Author to have had Right, doubt
and belief being contraries: And upon the other part, he who only doubts,
cannot be said to know the right of another.

The most rational Conciliation is by this Distinction, that doubting being
like the dubious Balance, when it enclineth more to the belief of the
possessors, and Authors Right, then of the right of the other. The Denomination
and effect is taken from the stronger, and he is said to believe his own Right,
and can no ways be said to believe the Right of another, whose doubtful opinion
does rather incline to his own Right then the others; and contrariwise, when
his opinion enclineth more to believe the Authors Right then his own.

7. These things being hidden Acts of the Mind, it is very difficult to know
who is in bona fide or mala fide; but bona fides is presumed, unless a contrary
probation, or vehiment presumption be for mala fides, of which Menochius, lib.
2. de arbitrar. Jud. quast. cas. 225. relates many, whereof these are chief;
First, He who possesses without a Title is ever presumed malae fidei
possessessor. Secondly, Common fame in the Neighborhood, that the thing
acquired belongs to another. Thirdly, If it be intimate or declared to the
Acquirer, before he acquired that it was another. Fourthly, The extrajudicial
confession of the Acquirer, or of witnesses that the thing belonged to another.
Fifthly, If the Acquisition be not with observation of the ordinary
Solemnities. Sixthly, If the Acquisition be from a Procurator, and the Acquirer
did not see his Warrant, albeit he had one. Seventhly, If the Acquisition be
from a prodigal person. Eighthly, If the Acquirer take unaccustomed ways of
Security. And last, By whatsoever the Acquirer is obliged to know by Law,
scire and scire debere aequiparantur in jure.

8. As to the Title requisite in prescription, thereby is not meaned a
sufficient valide Title, which needed not the help of prescription, but a
colorable Title is sufficient, as that which is acquired by Emption; the
Emption is Title enough for prescription, though the seller had no Right, or
that which descends from any other by Succession, Legacy, Donation, etc. And
generally, whatsoever way Property uses to pass, is sufficient for
prescription, though it be not sufficient alone to Constitute the Property, to
which there is requisite the Authors Right, and the transmission thereof; but
to prescription, the manner of transmission is enough for bona fides, and
continuation of possession supplieth the rest.

9. Prescription although it be by positive Law, founded upon Utility more then
upon Equity, the introduction whereof, the Romans ascribed to to themselves,
yet has it been since received by most Nations; but not so as to be counted
amongst the Laws of Nations, because it is not the same, but different in
diverse Nations, as to the matter, manner and time of it; and therefore,
Nations under no common Authority, do not prescrive properly against each
other, albeit by long patience and no contradiction, their consent may be
inferred, even by the Law of Nations.

The grounds and reasons of prescription, are first, public utility, Ne
dominia rerum sint incerta, neve lites sint perpetuae: And also because the Law
accounts it as a Dereliction of the owners Right, if he own it not, neither
pursue it within such a time. In the Civil Law though prescription reaches all
kinds of things, Moveable and Immovable, yet with these Exceptions.

10. First, These things that are not in Commerce, as they are not capable of
express alienation, so neither of preseription.

Secondly, Things stolen, whereunto for utilities sake to repress that
frequent Vice, the Law has stated an inherent and real Vitiosity, that passes
with the thing Stolen to all singular Successors; and therefore, though such
things be acquired by a just Title, though for a Cause onerous, and an
equivalent price, and by continuation of Possession bona fide; yet prescription
takes no effect because of the inherent Vitiosity. The like is to be
understood of Rapine or violent Possession: Yet the Fruits and Profits of such
things belong to the bonae fidei possessor, rather by that Right that follows
possession, bonae fidei: (Of which formerly in the Title, real Rights,) then by
prescription.

Thirdly, It runs not against Pupils by the Civil Law, though some think
that it is not to be understood of their Movables; yet it runs against
other Minors, but they may be restored if they pursue for Restitution, in the
time and manner prescribed in Law.

11. To come now closs to our Law concerning Prescription, our common Rule of
Prescription is by the course of forty years, both in Movables and
Immoveables, Obligations, actions, Acts, Decreets, and generally all Rights as
well against these absent as present, we have not these differences, which we
have shown were in the Civil Law; and because our Prescription is so long,
there is little question with us, de bona fide. But there must be continual
possession free from interruption, and in Lands and other Fees a Title, of
which hereafter.

12. By our ancient Custom, there was no place for Prescription in any case
which has been Corrected by our Statutes, both as to long and short
Prescription. First, as to personal Rights, in Par. 1469. cap. 28. and par.
1474. c. 54. it is Statute, that as to all obligations that should be pursued
thereafter, and that were not then depending in Law, before the making of that
Act; that if the Creditor did not follow or pursue the Obligation within the
space of forty years, and take document thereupon, the same shall be
prescrived and of no avail: Which Statute, though it mention only Obligations,
(that is to say, simple Obligations) was also extended to others, as Contracts
of Marriage, whereupon no Marriage followed, as may be inferred, argumenta a
contrario, from the Decision, February 26. 1622. Sir George Hamiltoun contra
Lord Sinclar: And afterward it has been ordinarily extended even to Contracts
of Marriage, wherepon Marriage followed, November 27. 1630. Lauder contra
Colmiln. December 23. 1630. Ogilbie contra Lord Ogilbie. It was also extended
to Testaments, June 19. 1627. Lundie contra Lord of Balgoum. And was also
extended to pursuites, for Tutor Counts, Hope, Prescription,

It was also extended to all Decreets, though in foro contradictorio, and this
ordained to stand as a constant Practick, July 26. 1637. Lord of Lawers contra
Dumbar.

13. Prescription of forty yeays was found sufficient to Constitute the Right
to a Bell in a Kirk-steeple against another Kirk, pursuing therefore, without
instructing a Title whereby they had the Bell, which is not necessary to be
instructed, but is presumed from Possession in Movables, December 7. 1633.
Minister and Session of Aberchirdo contra Parochioners and Kirk of Chanrie.

14. Prescription being odious, the forty years are accounted, de momento in
momentum: So that it is not the running, but the completing of the forty
years that makes Prescription; and therefore, a Write blank in the Month and
Day, expressing the year was reckoned from the last of December that year; and
because there was three quarters wanting of forty years before insisting upon
the pursuit, thereupon it was sustained, as not prescribed, Sep. 23. 1630.
Ogilbie contra Lord Ogilbie. But in regard of the length of this Prescription,
it is accounted ex tempore continuo, and non utili, and so no abatement for the
time of troubles, or surcease of Justice, even in the case of Mortification to
Bead-men, June 30. 1671. Bead-men of Magdalen Chapel contra Gavin Drysdale.

After this Statute there was no Prescription of Heretable and real Rights; and
therefore, not of a Decree of Poinding the ground, Hope Prescription, Sir
George Currier contra Lord of Louristoun. Only it was declared that no person
should be compelled to produce Procuratories or Instruments of Resignation,
Precepts of clare constat, or other precepts of Seasine of Lands or
Annualrents, whereof the Heretors and their Authors, or Liferenters, having
Liferents reserved in their Infeftments, were in Possession forty years
together, their Charters making mention of the Precepts, the wanting whereof
shall make no Reduction, the Charters and Seasine being extant, Par. 1594. cap.
214.

15. But Prescription of forty years is introduced of all Heretable and other
Rights, Par. 1617. cap. 12. where the Heretors their Predecessors and Authors,
possessed Lands, Annualrent or other Heritage by themselves, their Tennents or
others having their Rights (as by Liferenters) for the space of forty years
together, following the dates of their Infeftments without lawful Interruption,
that such shall not be troubled, pursued, or unquieted by HisMajesty and other
Superiors and Authors, their Heirs and Successors, uponany ground whatsomever
except upon falsehood, providing such Heretors show a Charter to them or their
Authors, preceding the said forty years possession, with the Instrument of
Seasine following thereupon: Or otherways, Instruments of Seasine one or more,
continued and standing together for the said space of forty years, either
proceeding upon retours, or precepts of clare constat; where, by standing
together, it is not meaned unreduced, but that either the Vassal lived and
brooked by one Seasine forty years: Or if he died, that the Seasine was
renewed to his Heirs; and so continued not only the Possession, but the Seasine
forty years: In which the continuation of Seasines cannot be reckoned, de
diein diem; because there must necessarly be an Interval betwixt the death of
the person first ceased, and the service of the Heir to whom the Law gives
annum deliberandi, to consider whether the Heretage will be beneficial or
hurtful, and accordingly whether he will enter or not, February 15. 1671. Earl
of Argile contra Lord of Mcnaughtoun. And also all actions upon Heretable
Bonds, Reversions, Contracts, or others whatsomever, Except Reversions
incorporat within the body of Infeftments, used by the Heretors for their
Title, or Registrat in the Register of Reversions: Which general Clause was
found to extend to Actions of Reduction of Retours, though if no other Heir had
been retoured, the right of Blood prescrives not, but any person may enter Heir
to his Predecessor who died hundreds of years before; yet if any other were
entered, he cannot after forty years quarrel or reduce the same by the general
Act of Prescription, though the retour was anterior to the special Act of
Prescription of Retours, Par. 1617. cap. 13. whereby Retours thereafter are
irreducible if not quarrelled within twenty years, November 28. 1665. younger
contra Johnstouns. In the former Statute it is declared, that Actions of
Warrandice shall not prescrive from the date of the Bond, or Infeftment
whereupon Warrandice is sought, but only from the date of the distress.

16. But this Prescription is not to be extended against Superiors, upon their
Vassals Possession forty years, though no Feu, Blensh, or other Duty or
Casuality be demanded by the Superior, because the Vassals Right acknowledges
the Superiors Right, and his possession is also the Superiors possession: Yet
all Duties and Casualities thereupon, not pursued within forty years,
prescrive without prejudice to these due within forty years of the pursuit,
December 15. 1638. Sir William Stuart of Gairntullie contra Commissar of St.
Andrews.

17. Which holds in Tack-duties, which prescrive as to the years preceding
forty, before the pursuit, but no other, March 10. 1627. betwixt two Glasgow
Men, Spots: Prescription, Stuart contra Fleeming. Yet Prescription by
possessing forty years, as part and pertinent by an Infeftment was not Elided;
because, before these forty years the Possessors Author had a Tack of the
Lands in question February, 20. 1675. Countess of Murray contra Mr. Robert
Weyms, though in this case the Land in question was separatum Tenementum, by a
distinct infeftment, but became part and pertinent by being so brooked forty
years.

By this Statute, Prescription of Heretable Rights, does not only exclude other
Infeftments in Property, but also Annualrents, Pensions, and all other Rights;
and so an Heretor possessing forty years, was found free thereof, July 22.
1634. Margaret Forrester contra Possessors of Bothkennel, where the Office of
Forrester and Fees thereof were found prescrived.

18. From this Prescription there are excepted the Rights of Pupils and Minors,
against whom the Prescription runs, not during their Minority, so that they
need not seek Restitution, in integrum, as in the Civil Law; which exception is
particularly expressed in the foresaid Statute, and is extended to all other
Prescriptions of personal Rights or others, Spots. Prescription, Duke of Lennox
contra the Executors of Alexander Beatoun. But there is no exception of Rights
mortified to pioususes, as Bead-men, June 30. 1671. Bead-men of
Magdillan-Chapel contra Gavin Drysdale.

19. In neither of the Statutes, introducing long prescription by forty years,
is there any mention or provision, concerning the manner of the entry in
possession, whether it was bona fide peaceable or lawful, but only that it have
a Title, and be continued without interruption.

20. The Title in heretable Rights, being ground-rights of Lands or
Annualrents, is very well distinguished, by the last Statute, betwixt Conquest
and Heretage; for, Heretage which has descended by succession, from a
predecessor, is content with a more slender Title, viz. Seasines without the
Warrands or Adminicles, but only bearing, that they proceed upon Retoures or
Precepts of Clare constat, providing that the possession has been by virtue of
these Seasines: So that not only there must be possession for forty years
together, but Seasines consecutive, proper to the several possessors during
that time: But purchasers must not only have for their Title, a Seasine
preceding the forty years prescription, but if they found upon their proper
right, they must also produce a Charter preceding the forty years. And
therefore, though a purchaser should possess forty years, and show his Seasine
anterior thereto; yet would it not be a Title for prescription, unless he
produce a Charter before that time, where, by Charter, must not be understood a
solemn Charter as it is distinguished from a Disposition or Precept, but as it
comprehends these; for many valid Infeftments have no Charter, but Seasine
proceeds upon the Precept of Seasine contained in the Disposition. And though a
Precept of Seasine were only shown as the warrant of the Seasine, the same with
forty years possession by virtue thereof, would perfect Prescription: for the
Seasines of themselves, without Warrant or Adminicle, are but the assertions of
Nottars, and not probative; yet they are sufficiently probative, not only by
the immediate Warrant or Precept whereupon they proceed, but upon the mediat
Warrant; as if a Seasine be produced with a Bond or Obliegement, to grant an
Infeftment conform to that Seasine, vide Tit. 3. 19. But purchasers may well
conjoin their own Title and their Authors; So that if he can show in his
Authors persons, consecutive Seasines for forty years, upon Retoures or
Precepts of Clare constat, and possession conform, it will be sufficient: or if
they cannot show such Seasines and Possession in their Authors for the whole
forty years; yet, if they show the accomplishment of forty years by their own
Seasines and Warrands thereof, and possession conform, these may complete the
Prescription.

21. This Statute does not only secure Rights, and Lands, and Annualrents, by
forty years peaceable possession cum titulo, but also other heretable Rights,
such as Wodsets; for, Registrat or incorporat Reversions being expressed as
exceptions, Wodsets must be comprehended in the Rule, and all Infeftments for
Security or Relief, which do imply a Reversion incorporat. It will also extend
to Infeftments of Teinds; for, though Teinds be separatum Tenementum from the
Stock, yet both are ground-rights or Infeftments of the Land; yea, Infeftments
of Life-rent, if possessed and unquarrelled for forty years, showing their
Seasine and the Warrant or Adminicle thereof, the same would make the
Liferent-right irreducible, or might perfect Prescription, being joined to
their Authors Rights; yea, this Statute has been extended to long Tacks of
Lands, Teinds or others.

22. A right to Teinds may be prescribed, as well as other Rights, by forty
years possession; but a right to bygone Teinds, being founded in public Law,
prescribes not, except as to the by-gones before forty years; and the
possessor cannot prescribe an absolute immunity and freedom from payment within
the forty years, and in time coming, seeing all Lands in Scotland by Law are
liable in Teind, but such as never paid any being cum decimis inclusis, or
belonging to the Cystertian Order, Templers and Hospitallers, or Gleibs,
February 7. 1666. Earl of Panmure contra Parochioners of

23. This Statute is also extended unto rights of Patronage, or Offices which
are heretable rights, though they be not always constitute or continued by
Infeftment; yet forty years possession by the original right in the first
acquirer, or by the continuation in their successors, does establish their
rights against all quarrelling by Reduction or Declarator. Yea, this Statue is
extended to long Tacks, which (if cled with forty years peaceable possession,
either in the Tacksman or his Assigneys, or their Heirs who need no service)
cannot be quarrelled, but stand valid, not only for these forty years, but for
all subsequent years unexpired: As was found in a Tack of Teinds, though set
without consent of the Patron, and the Bolls liquidate to ten shilling, July 7.
1677. the Parson of Prestounhaugh contra his Parochioners.

24. It is also extended to Thirlage and Multures, with any antecedent
adminicle; as by inrollment of Court, and generally to all servitudes, though
there be no more antecedent Title, but part and pertinent of the dominant
Tenement, either expressed or employed; as was found in the case of a pasturage
and sheilling, albeit there was produced an old Tack, bearing, to be granted to
the possessor or his predecessor, November 27. 1677. Grant of Ballindalloch,
contra Grant of Balvey. Whereupon it was alleged, that a Tennent possessing
by Tack from his Master, could not prescrive against him, which was not
respected in this case, nor in that of the Countess of Murray, contra Mr.
Robert Weyms, Feb. 20. 1675. The like June 4. 1675. College of Aberdeen contra
Earl of Northesk. But all annual prestations preceding forty years prescrive,
though constantly paid for thirty nine years, every year being a several
obliegement, though in one write, and prescrives severally, January 19. 1669.
Earl of Athol contra Lord of Strowan. It holds also in Annualrents, July 22.
1671. and Feb. 7. 1672. Blair of Balleid contra Blair of Denhead. But it cannot
be extended to prescrive against a Superior, for not payment of the reddendo,
because a right of Property cannot consist without Superiority, unless there be
a Right taken from another Superior.

25. Prescription does not only exclude the preference of other better Rights,
which if insisted upon within prescription, would have been preferred as
anterior, and thereby the posterior right a non habente potestatem. But all
ground of Reduction by the King, or other Superiors or Authors, is excluded;
So that the neglect of the Kings Officers cannot be obtruded by the Act of
Parliament, declaring that their neglects shall not prejudge the King, neither
any nullity in the titles of prescription, except it be in the essentials
thereof: So, prescription cannot sustain a perpetual Tack without Ish, which is
essential thereto; nor a Seasine without a Symbol, generally or particularly,
or not given upon the ground of the Land. But all requisites in Rights
introduced by Custom or Statute, and not essential thereto, are cut off by
Prescription.

26. The main Exception or Reply against Prescription, is Interruption, not
only by the discontinuing the possession of the whole, but also of a part,
which was found sufficient to interrupt the Prescription as to the whole; as an
Infeftment of Thirlage and possssion of Corns growing upon the Lands, was found
sufficient to exclude the prescription of the Multures of invecta and illata,
June 29. 1635. Lord of (...) contra Home of Foord. So likewayes, payment of
Annualrents within forty years, interrupts prescription of Bonds, and that not
only as to the party paying, but payment made by the principal Debtor was
found to interrupt prescription as to the Cautioner, who never paid, nor was
pursued during the space of forty years, December 18. 1667. Sir Thomas
Nicolson of Carnock contra Lord of Philorth; December 18. 1667. Gairns contra
Arthur. And an Annualrent constitute out of two Tenements, was found
unprescrived as to both, by uplifting the Annualrent out of either, though that
the one was now forty years in the hands of a fingular Successor, June 22.
1671. Lord Balmirrano contra Hamiltoun of Little-prestoun.

Prescription is ordinarily interrupted and excluded, by the dependence of any
action, whereupon the right might have been taken away or impeded, Hope,
Patronage Lord of Glenurchie contra Alexander Campbel; Idem, Tacks and
Tennents, Carnousie contra Keith, even though there was only the first Summons
without continuation, or second Summons, February 13. 1665. James Butter contra
Gray; yea, though the pursuer past from the Summons pro loco and tempore, Hope,
Removing, Sir Robert Douglas contra Lord Herreis; or by a Transferrence, though
reducible, because not proceeding upon the right Title, seeing the right Title
was also in the pursuers person, July 26. 1637. Lord of Lawers contra Dumbar.
The like though the pursuit might have been excluded for want of solemnity in
re antiqua, where the custom was not clear, November 25. 1665. White contra
Horn. Yea, an Annualrent was found interrupted by a poinding of the ground,
though therein the Heretor was not called, June 15. 1666. Sir Robert Sinclair
contra Lord of Howstoun.

Prescription was also found validly interrupted, by a Charge of Horning upon
the Bond in question, albeit proceeding only upon summar Registration by the
Clause in the Bond, and by no Citation, July 21. 1629. David Moris contra
Johnstoun. But Warning, whereupon nothing followed, was not found a sufficient
interruption of an old Tack-duty, Hope, possession, Mr. Robert Bruce contra
Captain Andrew Bruce; Idem, March contra Keir. Neither was it found sufficient,
to interrupt prescription in the first part of a mutual Contract, that action
was used upon the second, which saved the second from prescription, seeing the
party concerned in the first, neither used action or charge thereupon, nor
founded exception upon it, when pursued by the oaher party, November 27. 1630.
Lauder contra Colmill. Interruption was also sustained upon a Citation, at the
instance of a party not then entered Heir, being entered thereafter within the
years of Prescription. The like upon a Summons of Reduction upon Minority,
though it was not filled up within the forty years, being insinuat in the
Title of the Summons, that Minors have interest to reduce deeds to their
lesion, July 14. 1669. Earl Marishal contra Leith of Whitehaugh. But
Interruption was not sustained from the Citation in a Summons of Reduction ex
capite Inhibitionis, but from filling up of the reason, February 11. 1681.
Kennuay contra Crawford. And it was sustained upon Citation upon the second
Summons, being only a day before the year was complete, albeit the first
Summons should be found null, and though the Citation was at the Mercat Cross
upon a privileged Warrant, purchased upon pretense that non fuit tutus
accessus, past of course among the common Bills, and the reason of the
privilege was neither true nor instructed, and though the execution bore not a
Copy left at the Cross, the party adding that, and abiding thereby, as truly
done, be the executor of the Summons, July 6 1671. John Mackbra contra Lord
Mcdonald. Interruption was also sustained upon a Citation in a Reduction in
Anno 1630. (...) the Execution bore not the name of the pursuer or defender,
but the parties within mentioned: And were not written upon the back of the
Summonds, but upon a louse Shedul; and the Citation was in the last of the
thirteen years excepted from prescription, against a party of great quality,
against whom, many interruptions were like then to have been used: The user of
the Interruption Deponing that he received the same from his Father, or amongst
his Evidents, and knew not that they were the Executions of other Summonds,
Feb. 11. 1677. Lord of Rewallan contra Lawson, of Cairnmuire. But Interruption
was not sustained upon summar Registration, without Citation or Charge, January
12. 1672. James Johnstoun contra Lord Balheaven. And Interruption by warning
and Citation thereupon, was not found effectual in a Competition betwixt two
parties, both being then in acquirenda possessione, by prescription, and
neither having a sufficient Right Constitute before, unless the party warned
and cited, had discontinued his pessession for a year at least, January 1680.
Brown of Hunthil contra Town of Kilcudbright. Prescription as to the King, was
found sufficiently interrupted by the Kings Letters, published at the Cross of
the head Burgh of the Shire, where the Lands in question lie, without Citation
or Charge, March 30. 1630. Earl of Monteith contra

27. There was an Act of Sederunt, of the penult of March 1630. upon a Letter
from the King to the Lords of Session, bearing, that in respect by the Act of
Prescription, 1617. All Heretable Rights cled with forty years Possession, are
declared irreducible, unless they had been quarrelled within the space of
forty years (...) that Act; and liberty granted to intent Actions within he
space of thirteen years after the date of the said Act, to interrupt
Prescriptions, albeit there had been no interruption sor forty years before
the said Act; And His Majesty resolving to use Interruption within the space
of thirteen years, of Deeds done to the prejudice of the Crown, for
preservation of His Majesty's Right, and Actions competent to Him and His
Successors, for that effect, seeing a multitude that may be concerned therein,
cannot commodiouslie be summoned personally. or at their dwelling-places,
within the said thirteen years, which were to expire in June 1630. And it
being necessar that some solemn Act should be done, to testify; the Kings will
and resolution, to prosecute Actions, in His own time, which could not be more
properly and conveniently done, nor by inserting and publishing as follows,
Therefore His Majesty appointed His Declaration for prosecuting His Rights, to
be insert in the Books of Sederunt, and Letters of publication thereupon
directed, to be published at the Market Cross of Edinburgh, and other places
needful: And desired the Lords to declare the (...), to have the force of a
Legal and lawful Interruption, which the Lords enacted to be done accordingly,
as to the particulars therein-contained; and (...) Letters of publication at
the Market Cross of Edinburgh. and other market Crosses of the Kingdom, where
the Lands and Baronies lie, or where the persons interressed therein reside,
and at the said Market Cross of Edinburgh and Peer of Leith, for these without
the Kingdom: Which Act of Sederunt was ratified, Par. 1633. cap. 12. Which
Letter and Acts. extend to His Majesty's Annexed and Non-annexed Property,
whereof the Ferms, Duties, and Feu-ferms were counted for in Exchequer, since
the Month of August, 1455. and to the Principality and to the Erection of
Benefice, Spirituality or Temporality, Patronage of Kirks pertaining to His
Majesty and His Predecessors; Regalities and Heretable Offices, any of the
said particulars being unlawfully Disponed against the Laws and Acts of
Parliament; and likewise against changing of Ward in Blensh or Taxt-ward,
granted by the King or His Predecessors in their Minority, and not ratified by
any King or Prince in their Minority; and but prejudice to any person of their
lawful Defenses in Actions to be intented by His Majesty thereupon.

In prescription this is a general exception, contra non valentem agere non
currit praescriptio; and therefore, Bonds prescrive not from their dates, but
from the Term of payment, February 17. 1655. James Butter contra Gray. June 23.
1675. David Bruce contra James Bruce. And Inhibition prescrives from the Date
of the last execution, and not from the Registration, February 19. 1680.
Lutefoot contra Prestoun. So an obliegement by a Cautioner in a Contract of
Marriage, oblieging to impoly a sum for the wifes use, found only to run from
her Husbands death, July 5. 1665. Mckie contra Stuart. And likewise
prescription was not found to run against a party to take away his Infeftment,
seeing he had given a Liferent-right, which would have excluded him from any
Action that could have attained possession, and that he was not obliged to use
Declarator or Reduction in this case more then in the prescription of Bonds
from their dates, February 1668. Earl of Lauderdail contra Viscount of
Oxinfoord. The like, January 17. 1672. Young contra Thomson. February 15. 1680.
Brown of Colstoun contra Hepburn of Bear-foord. Yea, prescription was found not
to run against a party forefault, and sequestrat by the Usurpers, who possessed
his Right in question for eight years, which years therefore were deduced,
January 15. 1678. Duke of Lauderdail contra Earl of Tweedale. But where a party
was not forefault, but durst not appear during the Usurpation, he was not
found, non valens agere, seeing he might pursue by a procurator or assigney,
July 24. 1678. Colonel Whitefoord contra Earl of Kilmarnock. Yea. prescription
was not extended to the Liferent of a Wife, in a sum payable to her and her
Husband, the longest liver, though the Stock was prescrived against the
Husband, who neither insisted nor got annual for forty years, but not against
the Wifes interest in the annualrent, though the sum bore no annualrent, yet
the Wife was found to have Right to uplist the sum, and to reimploy it for her
Liferent use, July 22. 1675. Janet Gaw contra Earl of Weims.

Our Statutes have introduced several short prescriptions, as the Rights to
which they relate do require, which we shall shortly represent, not according
to the time they were introduced, but according to the time of their endurance,
most of them occurring to be considered in their proper places, with the rights
whereto they relate.

28. And first, Our Law has introduced the annus deliberandi, in favors of
Heirs, because if once they enter or immix themselves in their predecessors
Heretage, they become liable for their whole Debts, though far exceeding the
worth of their Heretage; and therefore, the Heir appearand has a year to
deliberate whether the Heretage will be profitable, during which, he may not
only enquire, but may pursue Actions of Exhibition, ad deliberandum, And if
they forbear they are free of all Actions against them or the Heretage during
that year; and therefore, that privilege prescrives in a year and day, after
the Defuncts death.

29. Secondly, by the Act of Par. 1661. cap. 24. There is a preference granted
to the Creditors of Defuncts preferring them to the Creditors of the heir or
appearand heir; so that all diligences by the Creditors of Defuncts, against
the Defuncts Estate, shall be preferred to the diligences, for Debts contracted
by appearand heirs, providing the said diligences of the Defuncts Creditors,
be complete within three years, after the Defuncts death; albeit the being
complete be not expressed in the Statute: Yet by the design thereof, it must be
so understood; for if Diligences inchoat in these three years, though prefected
thereafter would be sufficient, the preference would not be for three years,
but might come to be for thirty years.

Complete Diligences are Appryzings, or Adjudicrtions with Infeftment, or a
Charge against the Superior to Infeft, Poinding, and Decreets for making
Arrested sums or goods forthcoming: And by the said Statute, Dispositions by
heirs or appearand heris of the Defuncts Eltates, are declared not to be valid
against the predecessors Creditors, unless made a full year after the Defuncts
death, so that after that year the heirs Dispositions are not limited, though
they should prefer their own Creditors to the Defuncts; and therefore, the
Defuncts Creditors had need to use Inhibition, or Inchoat their diligence by
charge to enter heir, which may be within the year of deliberation, they may
also then Arrest, though they cannot Insist in pursuits upon any of these or
other grounds, till the year pass: For this Act does not prefer the diligences
of the Creditors of the Defunct to the voluntary Dispositions granted by the
heir to their own Creditors, but only to the legal diligence of their own
Creditors; therefore, this preference of the Defuncts Creditors prescrives in
three years, or rather in two years, because within the year of deliberation
they cannot pursue, unless the heir enter or immix; and therefore, this
privilege prescrives in two years after the year of deliberation.

30. Thirdly, There is a Triennial prescription of Spuilzies, Ejections,
Intrusions, which comprehends succeeding in the Vice of parties removed, par.
1579. cap. 81. This prescription by the Statute, runs not against Minors.

This prescription does not take away the Right, but only the privileges
thereof, as proceeding upon a short Citation, and the oath in litem, allowed to
the party injured, to declare his loss, and the violent profits; but hinders
not the Restitution, or Recovery of the thing, with the ordinary profits.

There is also a Triennial prescription of Merchant Counts, House Mails, and
the like, which is only as to the manner of probation, that if these be not
pursued within three years from the time they are due, witnesles shall not be
admitted to prove the same, but only write or oath of party: But in this
prescription, Minority is not excepted, par. 1519. cap. 83. which is not
extended to Rents of Lands in the Country, January 20. 1627. Gavin Ross contra
Fleming. In both these Prescriptions (if Actions be intented within the
prescription of three years) Custom has not limited these Actions to three
years, but they continue for forty years, which might have much more
conveniently been cut of by three years, for thereby the Action which is
accessory was more privileged then the principal Right to which it is
accessory, which is amended in part by posterior Statutes.

There is another Triennial prescription in removings, that if they be not
pursued within three years, there can never be purfuite thereafter upon the
same Warning, where in Minority is not excepted, par. 1579. cap. 82. This
prescription was not reckoned from the date of the warning, as being uncertain,
but from the Term to which the Warning was made, February 6. 1629. Lady
Borthwick contra Scot.

31. There is a Quadriennial prescription in favors of Minors, to reduce deeds
done by them in their Minority to their enorm Lesion, from their age of twenty
one complete, to their age of twenty five conpleat; but these Actions being
intented within that Quadriennium utile did last for forty years, till the
late Act of Parliament anent prescription and interruption.

32. There are several Quinquennial prescriptions; As first, all Arrestments
upon Decreets, prescrive five years after the dates thereof; and Arrestments
upon Dependences, prescrive in five years after Sentence, upon the dependence,
if the said Arrestments, be not pursued or insisted upon, during that time.

By this Statute Ministers Stipends and Multures not pursued for within five
years after they are due; and likeways, Mails and Duties of Tennents, not being
pursued within five years after the Tennents removal prescrive, unless the said
Stipend, Multures, Mails and duties, be proven resting by oath, or special
write, acknowledging what is resting; and that all Bargains concerning
movables or sums of Money, probable by witnesses, shall only be probable by
write or oath of party, if the samine be not pursued within five years after
the making of the bargain.

There is also a quinquennial prescription of the Legal Reversions of special
Adjudications whereby Lands are adjudged only equivalent to the sums, by the
Act of Parliament, September 6. 1672: cap. 19.

33. There was a seven years prescription of the legal Reversions of
Apprizings; And there is Septennial prescription of interruptions, which if
they be not renewed every seven years, prescrive by the Act of Parliament,
December 8. 1669. cap. 10.

34. There is likewise a Decennial prescription by the said Act of Parliament,
1669. cap. 9. of all Actions upon warnings, Spuilzies, Ejections, Arrestments,
or for Ministers Stipend, Multures, Rents of removed Tennents, which Actions
prescrive in ten years, if they be not renewed every five years, but prejudice
of any shorter prescription of the said Acts by former Acts of Parliament,
which gives ground to alter the former Custom anent the Triennial prescription,
that the Actions intented thereupon may prescrive in three years.

35. And by the same Statute, there is introduced a prescription of twenty
years of Holograph Bonds, and Holograph Missives; and subscriptions in Count
Books without witnesses, unless the verity of the said subscriptions be proven
by the defenders oath; by which manner of probation there is action competent,
till the long prescription of forty years.

36. All these short prescriptions are declared not to run against Minors,
except only the prescriptions of Removings, and Merchants Compts, etc. which
except not Minority, though they do immediately follow prescription of
Spuilzie, Ejections, etc. which do except the same, and so appear to be of
design omitted in the former Triennial prescriptions; and therefore, it is not
like the Lords will extend the exception of minority thereto, as they would not
appoint a years Rent to Superiors, in Adjudications as in Appryzings, because
it was omitted in the Act anent Adjudications, next unto the Act anent
Appryzings, in which it was expressed, until the late Act of Parliament, extended
the years Rent to Adjudications.

THE INSTITUTIONS OF THE LAW OF SCOTLAND, Deduced from its Originals, and
Collated with the Civil, Canon, and Feudal-Lavvs; and with the Customs of
Neighboring Nations.

The second PART.

By Sir JAMES DALRYMPLE of STAIR, PRESIDENT of the SESSION.

EDINBURGH, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, Anno DOM. 1681.

TITLE XXIII. Assignations, Where, of Arrestments, and Actions for making
Forthcoming.
1. The several Conveyances of Rights. 2. What Rights are not Transmissible. 3.
The rise of Assignations. 4. The Tenor of Assignations. 5. The conveyance of
blank Bonds, etc. 6. The rise and effect of Intimations. 7. The several ways of
Intimation. 8. What Assignations are perfected by possession, without other
Intimation. 9. Other supplies of Intimation. 10. Intimations to more, correi
debendi. 11. Intimation is not necessary to Rights Registrate, for publication,
as Reversions, etc. 12. Nor to orders of Merchants. 13. Nor to Judicial
Assignation, by Appryzing, etc. 14. Nor to the Legal Assignation, Jure Marid,
by Marriage. 15. Nor against the Cedent, his Heirs or Executors, even though
Creditors. 16. To what Rights Assignations (...) 17. Assignations carry
Inhibitions following on the rights Assigned, albeit not expressed in the
assignation. 18. In what cases the Cedents oath proves against his Assigney.
19. Assignations intimat before the Cedents death, gives summar execution
without Consirmation. 20. All exceptions against Cedents before Intimation, are
Relevant against assigneys, to personal Rights or Tacks. 21. The effect of
Back-bonds, Discharges, or Assignations of Dispositions, before Infeftment or
Apprysings, during the Legal. 22. Assigneys by Tutors have no execution till
the tutor Counts be made. 23. How far Assigneys to mutual Contracts may be
debarred till performance of their Cedents part. 24. Arrestment may be granted
by all Judges Superior or Inferior, and how far they are effectual before other
Courts. 25. The effect of Arrestments made in the debitors own hand. 26.
Arrestment is personal and does not burden the Successors of him in whose hands
it is made, but is valide against the Successors of the Debtor. 27. Arrestment
is not effectual for, or against Heritable sums by Infeftment, but against the
same, when made moveable, or any other moveable sums. 28. Rents or Annualrents
are always arrestable. 29. The effect of arrestment of Rents, Annualrents, or
other sums laid on before the Term of payment. 30. The effect of Arrestment
laid on in the hands of Factors. 31. Arrestment extends only to the debts due
by him, in whose hands it was laid on. 32. Arrestment makes the Subject (...)
33. The Order and Tenor of lousing arrestments. 34. In what cases Arrestments
laid on for sums due by Decreets, are lousable or not. 35. The effect of
lousing Arrestment. 36. The order of Actions for making forthcoming. 37.
Exceptions in the Actions for making forthcoming. 38. The effect of Arrestments
for making Moveable Goods forthcoming. 39. The effect of Arrestments of sums.
40. He to whom payment is made after Arrestment, is liable to Restore. 41. The
oath of parties in whose hand Arrestment is made, must depone specially what he
then owed, and when he paid. 42. The Decree for making forthcoming, does only
transfer the Right to the Arrester of the Goods, or sums Arrested. 43. But
Assignations do transfer the Right, when Intimat, without farther diligence,
and so is preferable to all posterior Arrestments, and respect is had to
priority of hours, if expressed in the Intimation. 44. If the Arrestment be prior
to the Intimation, it is preferable, not failing diligence. 45. How
Assignations are completed by Intimation, Citatien, Charge, Possession or
Corroboratien. 46. The preference of Arrestments in Competiticu.
HAVING now gone through all the several kinds of private Rights, both as to
their Nature and Constitution, and as to their Extinction and Distitution; We
are come to the second part of our Design proposed, the Conveyance and
Transmission of these Rights, which stand in force and are not exstinct; for
the extinction of a right is no conveyance of it seeing thereby it ceasseth to
exist.

1. Rights are Conveyed, or Derived, either amongst the living, or from the
dead; and in both, the Conveyance is different, in personal and real Rights:
And in Immovable and Heritable Rights, the Conveyance amongst the living, of
personal Rights, is by Assignation; of real Rights by Dispofition, and
promiscuously of both by Confiscation: Conveyance of Right from the dead, is by
Succession, in Movables by Executry; in Heritable Rights, by the succession of
Heirs, and other like successors; of which in order.

2. Personal Rights or Obligations, are sometimes incommunicable, and not
assignable, or transmissible, either by reason of the matter, such as most
conjugal and parental Obligations are, or where there is a singular
consideration of the person, as in Commissions, Trusts, etc. Most of these are
Intransmissible, even by the consent, both of Debtor and Creditor: Yea,
generally, all Obligations are Intransmissible, upon either part directly
without the consent of the other party, which is clear upon the part of the
Debtor, who cannot, without consent of the Creditor, liberate himself, and
transmit his Obligation upon another, though with the Creditors consent he may,
by delegation: Neither can a Creditor force his Debtor to become Debtor to
another, without his own consent, as when he takes him obliged to pay to him
or his assigneys.

3. Yet, that Obligations may become the more useful and effectual, Custom
has introduced an indirect manner of transmission thereof, without the
Debitors consent, whereby the assigney is constitute Procurator; and so as
Mandatar for the Creditor, he has power to exact and discharge, but it is to
his own behove, and so he is also denominat Donatar, and this is the ordinary
conception of Assignations. The like is done amongst Merchands, by an order,
whereby the Debtor is ordered to pay such a person; the debt, which indeed is
a Mandat, but if it be to his own behove, it is properly an Assignation; and in
savours of Creditors, Law has introduced judicial Assignations upon
arrestment, and by appyzing and adjudication.

Assignations are more frequent with us then any where, there is scarce mention
thereof in the Civil Law: It is also called, Cessio, which both there and with
us, is most applied to Cessio bonorum and actionum; where not only Obligations,
but property of things: and generally, all Rights are ceded from the Debtor to
his Creditor; from this Term the, the assigney is also called Cessioner, as the
assigner is also called Cedent.

Under Assignations are comprehended Translations, being Transmissions from a
prior assigney to a posterior; or Retrocessions, which are returning back of
the Right assigned from the assigney to the Cedent, which are also called
Repositions.

For clearing the matter of Assignations; First, consider the requisites to
make them perfect and valid Conveyances. Secondly, what are the effects and
extent thereof.

4. For the first, an assignation does necessarly require the clear expressing
of the Cedent assigney, and thing assigned; and though the ordinarily Style of
it be known, yet any terms that may express the transmission of the right
assigned from the Cedent to the assigney, will be sufficient, as if the Cedent
assign, transfer and dispone make over, set over, gift or grant the thing
assigned to the assigney, or nominat or constitute him his Cessioner, assigney,
donatar, or procurator to his own behove; and therefore, an assignation to a
Bond, was found valid, both against principal and Cautioners, both being in the
dispositive Clause, though the Cautioners were omitted in the Clause (with
power, etc.) which was not, though a necessary clause, December. 12. 1622.
Johnstoun contra Jack.

5. The conveyance of Bonds or other Writes, wherein the name of the Creditor
or Acquirer is left blank, have become of late very frequent, and have
occasioned many debates, as to the Conveyance of such Rights, and the effects
thereof: As first, Whether the leaving the name of the Creditor or Acquirer
blank be warrantable, or a fraudulent conveyance, to conceal and keep in the
dark, to whom the right belongs, that Creditors may not know to affect it by
legal diligence: The reason ordinarily given for taking Writes in that way, is
to shun the trouble of assignations, translations or intimations thereof, as
they pass from hand to hand, according to that Tenor of Obligation, frequent in
other places, whereby the Debtor obliged him to and perform such things,
latori presentium; by which he is obliged to pay to none, but he may get up
the Bond, and safely pay to any that has it.

There is another reason of taking blank Bonds to shun compensation upon any
debt due by the Cedent; for the Law allows compensation against the assigney,
upon any debt due by the Debtor to the Cedent, before the assignation was
intimate: But when the Debtor gives a Bond blank in the Creditors name, he is
thereby understood to pass from compensation, which has been sustained, Vide
Title 11. upon compensation, for it is a just personal objection against him
who granted the blank Bond, not to stop the effect or exccution thereof, upon
any other debt due by him to that party, to whom he granted the Bond. And
albeit such blank Bonds may pass amongst Merchants, where intimations are not
necessary upon Bills of Exchange, which are transmitted by the orders of
Merchants thereupon without intimation: and though such Bonds may pass amongst
persons of entire Credit, yet such conveyances, if they should be encouraged,
and pass currently without intimation, would be of dangerous consequence, and
give occasion to much fraud; for thereby Creditors should not know in whose
person such rights stood and how to affect them for just Debts: And although
the granter of such blank Bonds, or the haver, who so transmits them, may be
excluded from compensation: Yet others who may have interest to propone
compensation in the same way, as they may found upon a Discharge granted by the
receiver of the blank Bond to the Debtor therein, cannot be excluded from
alleging compensation, there being no personal objection against them. And
likewise, Conveyances without a Cause onerous, in prejudice of anterior
Creditors, by persons insolvent and fraudulent; so that if either the first
receiver of such blank Securities, or the posterior receivers thereof be
insolvent, and without an equivalent Cause onerous, do transmit such blank
Securities, only by delivering the same, the intermediat havers can hardly ever
be known, whose Creditors might affect the right while in their hands, etc.

Upon which consideration, the first occasion that occurred to the Lords, being
a blank Bond, granted by Marjory Sandilands, and delivered to Samuel Veatch, he
did deliver the same to Marion Geddess, who filled up her name in the blank
left for the Creditor, and registrate the Bond against Sandilands the Debtor;
yet Tailziefer who was Veatches Creditor, having arrested all sums in
Sandilands hands, due to Veatch in the competition, betwixt Tailziefer the
arrester and Geddess, whose name was filled up in the blank, and the Bond
registrate in her name before the arrestment, the sum remaining yet unpayed in
Sandilands hands, the arrester was preferred, in respect that albeit Geddefs
name was filled up in the blank Bond, and it so registrate before the
arrestment; yet the delivery of the blank Bond by Veatch to Geddess, being in
effect an assignation, was found to require intimation; and therefore,
Tailziefer the arrester was preferred: In this case Veatch, who was first
Creditor, was insolvent.

And albe it the Lords in the competition betwixt Thomas Hendrison and David
George, decided, Jan. 18. 1668. preferred Hendrison, whose name was in the Bond
as Creditor, and who offered his oath for clearing, whether the bond was blank,
ab initio and when filled up, yet the Lords did not leave it to his oath, but
took witnesses, ex officio, who proved that they saw the Bond filled up with
Henriesons name before the arrestment laid on by Thomas George, in the hands of
the Debtor, as due to Short his Creditor before the arrestment, yet there was
nothing adduced to prove that ever the Bond had been blank, or delivered to
Short. And likewise, a Bond blank in the Creditors name, being delivered by the
receiver of the Bond to a Creditor of his, in satisfaction of his debt, the
same was found relevant to be proven that the blank Bond was delivered before
the Declarator of Escheat of the party, to whom it was first delivered in
satisfaction of a Debt due by him before he was denunced, December. 19. 1676. and
Jan 17. 1677. Lord Bamff contra Grant of Rosasolis.

There has been nothing done since to take off the necessity of a formal
intimation made to the Debtor, of the filling up of the Creditors name upon
production of the Bond, it self showing that name to be filled up; and
therefore, any arrestment upon the Debt of the person to whom the Bond was
first delivered as Creditor, or to his own behove, or for the Debt of any other
person, in whose possession it came for his own behove, before the said
intimation will prefer the arrester.

As to the manner of probation, that the Bond was blank, ab initio in the
Creditors name, it is a strong evidence that it is written with a hand
different from the body of the Bond; for though blank draughts of Bonds be
frequently drawn up by Writers and Nottars, leaving the sums, the names of the
Debtor and Creditor blank, which are filled up by any that makes use of the
draught, yet at the subscription, the filler up of the sum, the Debtor and
Creditors name should be expressed; for these are more Substantial then all the
rest of the Bond, so that if the Creditors name be not filled up with the hand
that wrote the Bond, or of him who insert the date and witnesses; it will be
presumed to have been blank; in which case, the Debitors oath may be taken, to
whom he did deliver it for his own use, and that persons oath to whom he did
deliver the same, whereby the progress of it, till it come to him whose name
was insert, will be found out; and upon this ground a Disposition of Lands
bearing to be to two persons for themselves and other Creditors of the
Disponers after-specified, after which, there were several lines written with
another hand, inserting particular Creditors and sums, without mentioning of
the filling up there, or at the Date of the Write; therefore an Inhibition by a
Creditor of the Disponers, was sustained to reduce the right, of these
Creditors filled up in the blank, as presumed to be filled up after the
Inhibition, although the date of the Disposition was before the Inhibition,
unless it were proven by witnesses insert in the Disposition or others above
exception, that the blank was so filled up before the Inhibition, Jan. 15.
1670. Lady Lucia Hamiltoun contra the Creditors of Monkcastle.

These blank Bonds are so little favored, that when the Debtor depones that
he is only debtor by a Bond blank in the Creditors name; which he did deliver
to such a party for his own use, but knows not now who has the Bond; and
consequently to whom he is debtor, it will not liberat him from the debt of
that party to whom he did deliver it, though it may make him liable to double
payment to that party, and to him who has the Bond, it being his own deed in
delivering the Bond blank in the Creditors name, which infers that hazard: Yea,
if the Debtor should depone that the Bond was blank, abinitio, and delivered
to such a party, but afterward it was shown to the Debtor, filled up in the
name of such another party, before the arrestment, whereby he became debtor to
that party, and not to the first; it is not like that quality will be
respected, unless he depone that he had paid before the arrestment; for in
Veatches case, the filling up of Geddess name was unquestionably offered to be
proven, that the Bond was registrat in Geddess name, before the arrestment,
which is much stronger probation then the oath of the debtor.

A blank Bond being lost, and referred to the debitors oath, who confessed the
same, and both parties agreeing upon the date, sum, and witnesses, the debtor
was decerned to pay the sum to the pursuer, to whom he had delivered the blank
Bond upon Caution, to refound, in case he were distressed upon a Bond,
containing, the same sum, date, and witnesses, June 27. 1676. Elizabeth Gibson
contra Fise. The like was done at the instance of the Executors of the person
to whom the blank Bond was delivered, Jan. 4. 1678. Peebles contra Tennents of
Rossie.

6. The Assignation it self is not a complete valid right, till it be orderly
intimate to the debtor, which though at first (it is like) has been only used
to put the debtor in mala fide, to pay to the Cedent, or any other Assigney:
Yet now it is a solemnity requisite to Assignations, so that though the debt
remain due, if there be diverse Assignations, the first intimation is
preferable, though of the last Assignation. and that not as a legal diligence,
which can be prevented and excluded by another diligence, but as a full
accomplishment of the Assignation, Jan. 13. 1629. Hutcheson contra Kinloch:
Jan. 18. 1628, Lord of Halkertoun contra Falconer. But where both Assignations
were gratuitous, implying warrandice from fact and deed, the last Assignation
though first intimat was not preferred, because the Cedent was Debtor to the
first Assigney, by the employed warrandice against future Facts and Deeds, July
15. 1675. Anna Alexander contra Lundies.

7. Intimation may be by any legal Diligence, as by arrestment, by a charge or
process upon the Assignation: Yea, though the process be not sustained, because
all parties having initerest, were not called, it will stand as an intimation;
but it is most ordinarily by way of Instrument, either by the assigney himself,
showing the Assignation, or by his procurator, showing the same with his
procuratory, wherein the like solemnities will be requisite, as are in
Instruments of premonition and requisition: Of which, Title Wodsets. So an
intimation was found null by exception, because one person was both Procurator
and Nottar, July 3. 1628. Scot contra Lord Drumlanrig. Neither was an
Intimation found sufficient by an Inhibition, used by the assigney against the
Cedent upon the assignation, March 14. 1626. Nisbit contra Williamson. where
payment made thereafter to the Cedent, was found valid, and done, bonafide.

In this case it was also found, that Intimation will not be supplied by a
parties knowledge of the Assignation. The like, June 15. 1624. Adamson contra
Mcmitchel: Neither by the Debitors knowledge, though by a pursuit against him
upon the Write, containing the Assignation, but in relation to another matter
therein, this was in shunning the committing a Clause irritant, Novem. 30:
1622: Sir James Durhame contra Lady Wintoun.

But Assignations to annual, prestations as to Mails and Duties, Teinds or
Annualrents or Assignations to rights, requiring possession to complete them as
Tacks, are perfected by use of payment or possession, and need no other
Intimation, as was found in the case of the annualrent of an Heretable Bond,
where gerting payment of some years, preferred the assigney to a former
arrester, though there was no Instrument of Intimation, Jan: 18: 1628: Lord of
Halkertoun contra Falconer.

9. And any Write under the debitors hand, acknowledging the production of the
Assignation will be sufficient Intimation, as if he give a Bond of
Corroboration to the assigney, or give Discharges of annualrent, or any part of
the principal sum.

10. Where there are many, correi debendi, principal or Cautioners, Intimation
made to any will be sufficient as to all; yet this will not exclude payment
made by another of the Debitors, bona fide, to whom no Intimation was made; to
secure which, it is safest for assigneys to intimat to all the correi debendi.

11. Assignations to Reversions or Bonds, for granting Reversions,
Renunciations of Wodsets or grants of Redemption, being registrat in the
register of Reversions, conform to the Act of Par. 1617. require no Intimation,
that register being designed, not for conservation of these Rights, where the
principals are not detained, but for publication thereof, to all parties having
interest, which is a sufficient Intimation, as was found in the case of an
assignation to the Legal Reversion of an appryzing, December 5. 1665. Beg
contra Beg.

12. Intimation being by our proper Custom, so necessary a solemnity, holds not
in the Orders which stand for assignations amongst Merchants, Strangers,
especially qui utuntur communi jure gentium; and therefore, the first order by
a Stranger Merchant, direct to his debtor here, to pay the Debt to the
obtainer of the Order, was preferred to arresters and assigneys, using dilgence
before him though there was neither Intimation of the Order nor acceptance by
the debtor.

13. Neither is Intimation necessary to Judicial assignations by appryzings or
adjudications, March 25. 1635. Lord Yester contra Innerweel. Hope assignations,
Idem, appryzings, Bruce contra Buckie: So that if the debt remain due, the
first appryzing or adjudication, without Intimation will be preferred; but
seeing there is nothing to put the debtor in mala fide, payment made bona fide,
will liberat the debtor.

14. Marriage also is a legal assignation, requiring no Intimation for thereby
all the Moveable rights of the Wife are stated in the Hushand, Jute mariti,
without other Intimation then the Marriage: Yea, Intimation was not found
necessary to a Reposition of the assigney to the Cedent, seeing the assignation
was by a wife in her Contract of Marriage, which requires no Intimation but the
Marriage; and therefore the Husbands reposition to her needed no Intimation,
December. 2. 1674. Beatrix Craig contra Wedderly.

15. Though in the cases aforesaid, Intimation be a necessary Solemnity to
assignations, yet the assignation alone will be sufficient against the Cedent,
if he should quarrel it, because he is author thereof, and can do no Deed
contrary thereto: Yea, it was preferred to an Executor Creditor of the Cedents,
even as to his own Debt, July 27. 1669. Exeutors of Mr. Thomas Ridpeth contra
Home.

As to the extent and effect of assignations, the same extends to all personal
Rights, whether Moveable or Heretable, as to Bonds, Liferents, Tacks
Reversions, Mails and Duties, Annualrents, and to Dispositions of Lands and
others, till Infeftment follow, but is no valid conveyance of any Right
completed by Infeftment except Liferents, which can have no subaltern
Infeftment, as to the ground right it self, though it may extend to the profits
thereof, as to Mails and Duties, and annualrents, and to these no longer then
the right by Infeftment stands in the Cedents person, whence there arises to
him and to his assigney, a personal obliegement upon the possessors, which
fails, as to all Terms after Denunciation, December. 17. 1622. Kinbrachmount
contra Sir William Anstruther: and an assignation to such a sum yearly out of
Teinds was found excluded by an appryzing of, or assignation to the Tack of
these Teinds, Feb. 6. 1666. Watson (...) Pleming.

Assignations are effectual, not only of such rights as are granted to heirs
and assigneys, but generally to all Rights, though not mentioning assigneys,
which by their nature are transmissible; and therefore, an annualrent by a
Father to his Daughter, wherein his Brother and Sisters were substitute,
failing the heirs of her Body, without mentioning her assigneys, and wherein
the annualrent was redeemable, by payment of a principal sum, which she had no
power to require, unless she were Married; the annualrent was found to belong
to her assigney after her death, being principally constitute, and not
accessory to the principal sum, June 24. 1679. Sir William Stuart contra Sir
Thomas Stuart: and albeit Superiors be not obliged to receiye singular
Successors without appryzing or adjudication; yet before Infeftment, assigneys
to the Disposition, granted by the Superior, may compel him to receive the
assigney, which was so found, though the Superior alleged, that the Superior
was not in good Terms with him, December. 23. 1673. Ogilbie contra Kinloch of
Bandach. But Reversions and Tacks in most cases unassignable, unless they be
granted to assigneys; for albeit the Assignation being a procuratory, may give
them interest to act procuratorio nomine, for the Cedent; yet they cannot act
proprio nomine, as Procurators, in rem suam; therefore the oath of the Cedent
will always be competent against them, and they cannot obtain Declarator of
Redemption, in their own name or Decree, for denuding of the Wodsetter, in
their favors: Neither can Assigneys to Tacks enter in possession, by virtue
thereof: Yea, Liferent-rights by Infeftment or Tack, were so peculiar to the
Liferenter, that no assignation can state them in the assigneys person, but
only the profits thence arising: So that in the assigneys person, they are not
Liferents; and therefore, the Liferents of Wives, which belonged to their
Husbands, jure mariti, as a legal Assignation, fall not under the Husbands
Liferent-escheat, as they would fall under the Liferent of the Wife unmarried,
but under the single Escheat, Vide title (...) upon Escheat: Upon which ground,
Hope upon Assignations, observes, that Assignations to Liferent-tacks, make
them fall under the Assigneys single Escheat, in the case of Sir Robert ker
contra John Ker.

17. Thirdly, an Assignation to a sum, carries with it the Inhibition raised
thereupon, Hope Assignation, Walter Hay contra Mark Ker. The like, where only
all actions following thereupon were expressed generally, June 28. 1610. Blair
contra Gray. And an Assignation to a Bond, found to carry a Bond of
corroboration of the foresaid Bond, though not mentioned therein, albeit the
Assignation bore not, that ordinary Clause (with all that has followed, or may
follow thereupon) which is but an Explicatory Clause of Style of that which,
innest dejure, February 3. 1676. Bultie contra Earl of Airly.

18. Fourthly, The effect of Assignations is, that the oath of the Cedent
cannot prove against the Assigney, unless the matter has been litigious before
the Assignation or Intimation, as in the case after arrestment, has been laid
on; and therefore, a debtor having pursued the Cedent to annul the Band, upon
a reason to be verified by the Cedents oath, before the Assigney had Intimat
the Cedents oath was sustained, February 15. 1662. Pitfoddels contra
Glenkindie. And an Assigney pursuing in the Cedents name, and not in his own,
albeir he produccd his Assignation in the Process; yet there being no other
Intimation thereof, the Cedents oath was admitted against him, Feb. 12. 1678.
Firazer contra Frazer of Strichen, July 26. 1628. John Rule contra Lord of
Aitoun.

Or if the Assignation be gratuitous without a Cause onerous, the Cedents oath
will be competent in all cases against the Assigney, June 16. 1665. William
Wright contra George Sheil: June 13. 1668. Jack contra Mowat: But the oath of
the Cedent will prove against the Assigney in England, as to Assignations made
by residenters there, June 28. 1666. Mcmorland contra William Melvil.

19. Fifthly, Assignations being intimat during the Cedents Life, having summar
execution, and the Assigney got protestation against a Suspension raised
against the Cedent, after the Cedents death, without walkning or transferrence
and thereupon all execution would proceed summarly by Horning, Poynding,
Appryzing, even after his death, Hope assignation, Lady Craigmiller contra
Stevinson: Otherways it will yield but an ordinary action, Jan. 23. 1624. inter
eosdem. The same was found, and that there needed no confirmation, July 27.
1664. Mr. John Murehead contra Yea, though it was an Assignation by a Father to
his Son, of all his Goods and Debts; yet action was sustained thereupon without
Confirmation, June 25. 1663. James Halyburtoun contra Earl of Roxburgh. But
where there was no delivery, the Assignation of all the Goods was not found to
give action without Confirmation, June 23. 1665. Procurator-fiscal of Edinburgh
contra Thomas Fairholm. Or where there was reservation to the Disponer, to
dispone otherways during his life, July 4. 1665: Commissar of Saint Andrews
contra Hay of Bowsie. But since the Restitution of Bishops, and reviving of the
Quots: actions are sustained upon Assignations, not intimat in the Cedents
life, if they be special, the pursuer always confirming before the Decree be
Extracted.

20: Except in the Matter of Probation, all Exceptions competent against the
Cedent before the Assignation or Intimation, are relevant against the assigney,
as payment, compensation, etc. which was found, even as to assigneysto Tacks,
that the Tacks-mans Back-bond was sufficient against his singular Successor by
assignation, December. 18. 1668. Mr. Robert Swintoun contra John Brown: This is
clear, when exceptions relates to the matter in Question.

21. Assignations to incomplete real Rights, as Appryzings, Dispositions of
Lands before Infeftment, are affected with the assigneys Back-bond, if the
competition come in before infeftment, Inhibition be used, or legal diligence
that makes the matter Litigious; and therefore, the Back-bond of an asigney to
an appryzing, was found effectual against his Successors by translation, July
6. 1676. Sir Lodovick Gordoun contra Skeen and Crawford. But the Back-bond of
an assigney to a Disposition of Land, not drawn in question till the assigneys
singular Successor was Infeft upon his translation, was not found effectual
against the singular Successor, June 20. 1676. Brown contra Smith: For if
assignations, Back-ponds, or even Discharges or Renunciations of redeemable
Dispositions of Lands, were effectual against singular Successors in these
Lands, after the Rights were perfected in their own persons, or their authors
by Infeftment, it might in a great part disappoint the design of these
excellent Statutes for Registration of Land rights, therefore, unless
Inhibition were used, or the matter made Litigious upon these personal Rights,
before Infeftment, they are not habile to affect a real right, or a singular
Successor therein; but because appryzings within the legal, may be taken away
in the same manner as personal rights; therefore the assignations, discharges
and back bonds, by these who have right to the appryzing, being made within the
legal, are effectual, if thereupon the matter be made litigious before the
expyry of the Legal Reversion or Inhibition used thereupon, they will be
effectual against the singular successors, even after the Legal is expyred, but
after expyry of the Legal Infeftments upon appryzings are in the same case as
Infeftments upon Irredeemable Dispositions for they are the foundation of the
rights of most Lands in the Kingdom, and if personal Rights should make them
insecure after the expyry of the legal, it would be of great inconvenience.

22. Assigneys by Tutors to their Pupils Bonds, will have no execution till the
Tutors counts be made by the Cedent, December. 2. 1679. James Cleiland contra
Bailzie of Lamingtoun.

23. It is more dubious and has been diversely decided, when the exceptions are
personal against the Cedent, in mutual Contracts, the Contracter himself can
have no action unless he fulfill his part; but whether his assigney will be in
the like case is the question, which is at large cleared, Tit. 10.. 16. and
therefore shall not be here repeated.

Judicial assignations are oftwo sorts, according to the matter conveyed
thereby, which if it be moveable is conveyed from the debtor to his Creditor
by arrestment and decree, for making the arrested sums and goods forthcoming,
and if it be Heretable by appryzing or adjudication.

As to the first, that the progress upon arrestment may be clearly taken up; we
shall first consider the arrestment it self. Secondly, The lousing of it.
Thirdly, The action for making forthcoming.

Arrestment is a precept or command of a Judge, ordaining the thing arrested to
remain in the same case it is when arrested, till such things be done as are
prescribed in the precept, or Letters of arrestment: It is sometimes extended
to any preparatory Precept of a Judge, antecedent unto any further process, so
the first Citation or securing of persons till trial were made, or surety
found, its called an arrestment or attatchment, as appears in the force of the
Crowners arreftments of Delinquents, Par. 1487. cap. 99. Par. 1528. cap. 5. But
arrestment proceeds most ordinarily upon an Interlocutor sentence, as when
parties are contending for Peats, Turffs, or Corn upon debateable Land, these
use to be arrested till the matter be decided, whereby the thing arrested
becomes litigious, and any thing done to the contrary has the effect of breach
of arrestment, and is of the Nature of innovatalite dependente, which therefore
must be summarly restored and put in statu quo and brings no advantage but loss
to the actor.

24. But arrestment which we are now about, is Precept or Letters of
arrestment, arresting Debts or Goods in the hands of any party, haver thereof,
at the instance of the Creditor of him to whom the Debts or Goods belong to
remain under arrestment, until the debt whereupon the arrestment proceeds, be
secured or satisfied; therefore arrestments may be granted by all Judges
ordinar, Superior or Inferior; but the arrestment of an Inferior Judge was only
found effectual in Process before himself, and before no other Inferior Judge,
March 8. 1634. Smith contra Miller. But upon occasion of this debate, most of
the Lords thought an Inferior Judge might proceed upon the Lords arrestment,
passing in the Kings name, and there is not wanting ground to think that an
Inferior Judge may proceed upon the arrestment of another, seeing all of them
proceed alone upon the Kings authority, as if the defender change his Domicile.
An arrestment made by the Inferior Judge, where hedwelt before, ought not to
be ineffectual, nor he necessitate to pursue before the Lords, as was found in
an arrestment before the Admiral, March 22- 1637. (...) contra Gray. Yet an
arrestment upon the Precept of an Inferior Judge, was found null, because
execute without the Jurisdiction of that Judge, although the party in whose
hands it was made, dw eltwithin the Jurisdiction, December. 5. 1671. Mr. Andrew
Miller contra Orsburn, Crawford and the Lord of Bishoptoun. The reason hereof
was, no execution is valid, Extra tertitorium Judicis, which does not conclude
against the arrestment of an Inferior Judge, made within his own Jurisdiction;
but that it would be sustained against that party in any Process before the
Lords, or any Superior having cumulative Jurisdiction, or even before a
Co-ordinat or Inferior Jurisdiction, in which, if any question were made, the
Lords by Letters of supplement, would readily auctorize the same.

Arrestment requires no other solemnity but the execution thereof, by him to
whom the Letters are directed, which requires the like requisites as other
executions do: of which hereafter.

25. There has been an extraordinary form of arrestment, sometime used and
sustained, whereby Creditors did arrest the Goods of their Debitors in the
Debitors own hand, and thereupon did pursue such as bought from them, whereof
there is an instance observed by Dury, Jan. 10. 1624. betwixt the Lord of
Innerweek, John Wilkie and the Lady Bothwel, wherein Innerweek having arrested
a parcel of Wool in the Lady Botwels hand, upon a debt owing by her to him, and
she having thereafter sold the Wool to John Wilkie, who paid the price, he was
decerned to make forthcoming the true worth of the Wool to Innerweek, although
nothing appears instructed, that there was any Collusion betwixt the Lady
Bothwel and Wilkie, but what may be conjectured from the Lords allowing the
price of the Wool. This kind of arrestment has not been drawn in example, for
I have found no instance of it observed by any since that time; and as the
instance observed, is but the arrestment of one particular, if it were to be
allowed it might be extended to more particulars, even to all the moveable
Goods and Means of the debtor, and certainly it would be ordinarily so used; as
straitning the debtor more, that he could dispose of nothing, but to the use
of the arresting Creditor, and so it would become an Inhibition in Movables,
yet much more inconvenient, because Inhibition must be published at the Market
Cross, and registrat; whereas arrestment may be done most privately before two
witnesses: And though Inhibitions at first were designed to disable debitors,
not only to dispone or dilapidat their Lands or heritage, but their Moveable
Goods, as the style of Inhibition does still express, yet experience did early
show, that there was a necessity for current course of Movables, and that it
could not consist with Traffic and Commerce, that no man could securely buy
Movables without inspection ofregisters; and therefore, Inhibitions have now
no effect as to Movables, much less should arrestment of the debitors
movables in his own hand, which could with no reason affect the movables,
when disponed for a just cause to third parties, much less could it infer
breach of Arrestment against the buyers after Arrestment; and all the effect it
could have, were only to superad upon the Debtor, the penalty of breach of
Arrestment thereby to Confiscat all his Movables, whereas there are ordinarily
liquidat penalties agreed upon, of consent of Debtor and Creditor.

26. Arrestment being a personal Prohibition, used against him in whose hands
the Arrestment was made, if he die it is not extended to his Successors, but
they may dispose of the Goods or Sums Arrested, unless it be renewed in their
hands, in the same manner as an Inhibition, which is also a legal Prohibition,
extending to Heretable Rights as Arrestment does to Movables; but though the
Debtor whose Goods or Sums were Arrested die, the Arrestment ceasseth not, but
the debt being established against his successors, Processmay proceed upon the
Arrestment, Feb. 19. 1669: Isobel Glen contra John Home. Jan. 22. 1681. James
Riddel contra Mr. William Maxwel.

As to the effect and extent of Arrestments, they can only be laid on, and
affect moveable goods or moveable debts, and can only be made use of for
satisfying of moveable debts (what rights are moveable and what heretable, has
been shown in the Title real rights) wherein by heretable, not only these are
understood, which are properly so by Infeftment, but also such sums and deeds,
as are by destination such, as bearing obliegement for Infeftment or
Annualrent, even though the Bond did bear no Clause of requisition; yet it did
bear Annualrent, Arrestment, or Appryzing, had been found null thereupon,
unless it had been made moveable by a Charge, July 20. 1622. John Cranstoun
contra Lord of Eastnisbit. The like, Hope Obligations, Alexander Morison
contra Creditors of John Richardson. John Cranstoun contra Lord of Lugtoun,
Yet the contrary has also been found in Bonds, bearing Annualrent without
Clause of requisition, that Poinding, Arrestment and Appryzing, might proceed
without a Charge, July 10. 1629. Lord of Clakmannan contra Barronnie. Jan. 25.
1642. Johnstoun contra James Lotch: But the matter is now cleared by the Act of
Par. 1644. cap. 41. renewed, Par. 1661. cap. 51. declaring that all Bonds and
Sums, though bearing Annualrent, are Arrestable at the Instance of any Creditor
of that person, if Infeftment has not past actually thereupon; yet a sum
whereupon Appryzing had followed, was found not to be Arrestable by the
Appryzers Creditor; and therefore, an Appryzer from that prior Appryzer, though
posterior to the Arrester, was preferred Feb. 22. 1666. Lockhart contra Lord
Bargonzie. And though they do not so clearly determine upon what Bonds
Arrestment may proceed, as against what Bonds or sums it may proceed: yet it
bears equally for satisfying of any debt, which though it cannot be extended to
Heretable debt, upon which actual Infeftment, is till they be made moveable,
yet ought to be extended to all other moveable debts, upon which Infeftment
has not followed, that a pari, as such debts are Arrestable without a Charge,
so may they be Arrested for satisfying of the like debt, without a Charge upon
the debt to be satisfied, more then upon the debt arrested for satisfying
thereof.

27. Though no Heretable right, upon which Infeftment has past, can be
arrested till it be made Moveable: Yet the rents and profits thereof, are
Arrestable and moveable, December 15. 1630. Ogilbie contra Lord Ogilbie.

28. And so are the bygones of an Annualrent, constitute by Infeftment, for
these bygones are as to all effects moveable, though the right it self is
heretable, as Fruits falling from a Tree are moveable, though the Tree be not.

29. Yea, Arrestment of Annualrents, or Mails and Duties, is effectual, though
laid on before the Term, if the Debtor to whom they belong were not denuded
thereof before the Term, the Term being current when it was laid on, March 28.
1624. Brown contra Jan. 15. 1628. Hamiltoun contra Falconer: where it was found
that the Arrestment did only extend to the Term current against an Assigney,
though not intimating till long after, seeing he was a singular successor, and
had attained payment of some Terms Annualrent prior to the Arrestment; but it
will not extend beyond the subsequent Term, where the Rent is paid Termly, as
in silver rents, Hope arrestments, Mr. Roger Mowat contra Walter Dick.
Otherways it will extend to the whole year, in which it was laid on, as in
Ferms, which are paid together, Ibid. Thomson contra Captain Wishart. Yea, an
arrestment of rent laid on before the Term, was preserred to a posterior
appryzing, not having Infeftment before that Term, July 2. 1667. William
Litster contra Aitoun and Slich. And an arrestment laid on, currente termino,
was preferred to a posterior assignation to that Term, July 27. 1673. Creditors
of Andrew Scot compeating, arrestment is also valid, being laid on upon sums
before the Term of payment, Feb. 21. 1624. Brown contra Lord of Johnstoun,
eodem die, Rentoun contra Atcheson. But in all these, the execution was
superceded till the Terms of payment of the arrested sums were paid, July 3.
1628. Scot contra Lord of Drumlanrig. Yet arrestments ought not to be laid on
for satisfying of debts, whereof the Term of payment is not come; Therefore,
such an arrestment was excluded by an arrestment posterior, which was laid one
for satisfying a sum, whereof the Term of payment was come, when it was laid
on, July 17. 1678. Lord Pitmaiden contra William and Robert patersons. Yea, it
was extended to the price of Lands, though laid on before Write, but after
agreement, Hope arrestment Lord Dalhousie contra

30. Neither was arrestment effectual, being only laid on in the hands of the
debitors Factor, and not in their own hands for making the same forthcoming for
payment of his debt to whom it was due; because Factors are not Debitors but
their Constituents, Hope arrestment, William Muirhead and Mcmichael contra
William Wallace.

31. Arrestments have never been extended to future Debts or Goods for
arrestments, both by their name and nature, do only stop the Debitors goods or
debts arrested, to remain in the same condition they were in when arrested,
till Caution be found, or Sentence be obtained for making forthcoming. But
Inhibitions do prohibit the party inhibite, and whole Lieges to buy from the
person inhibite, till the debt be satisfied, which is absolute, and extends
against all buying or blocking with the inhibite, whether pro acquisitis, or
acquirendis.

32. Arrestment orderly laid on, renders the thing litigious, so that an
Assignation made thereto, though to a Creditor thereafter, hinders not the
arrester to prove the debt by the Cedents oath, December. 10. 1623. Douglas
contra Belshes.

33. As to the second point proposed, concerning the lousing of arrestments, it
has been said before, that the intent of arrestment, is the satisfaction of
the arresters debts, by the action, for making forthcoming, which is a judicial
Assignation to him, of that which is arrested, or otherways by security, when
he whose goods or sums are arrested, finds Caution, and thereby louseth the
arrestment, which is done by supplication to the Lords, and their deliverance,
which of old, gave warrant to the Messenger to receive Caution, and louse the
arrestment; but is well amended by the Act of Par. 1617. cap. 17. annulling
that way of lousing arrestments, and ordaining Caution to be found in the Books
of Session, before giving out of the Letters, which are not effectual, when the
arrestment proceeds upon a Decree; and therefore, the Letters express the
arrestment to be loused, unless it proceed upon a Decree.

34. But if the arrestment proceed upon production of the principal Bond
unregistrate, there being then no Decree of Registration, it may be loused,
Feb. 7. 1665. David Graham contra George Bruce and Doctor Martine: Or if the
Decree be turned in a Lybel, June 30. 1675. James Murray contra John Hall: Or
if the Arrestment was laid on after the Decree was suspended? Or if the Term
of payment of the sum, for which it was laid on was to come, Nov. 4. 1675.
Mosman supplicant: Or upon Consignation of the sum arrested for, June 18. 1675.
Hamiltoun supplicant: Or when the Decree upon which the arrestment was raised,
was turned to a Lybel, June 30. 1675. James Murray contra John Hall. But when
the arrestment was upon a dependence, though the Decree proceeded upon the
dependence before the lousing of the arrestment; yet it was found, the
arrestment was loused upon Caution, June 9. 1674. Sibbald of Rankillor contra
Sibbald his Son.

In lousing arrestments, no Juratory Caution was admitted, July 16. 1661.
College of St. Andrews supplicant.

35. Arrestment being loused, the party in whose hands it was made, is fred of
the action following thereupon, and may safely pay the sum, or deliver the
goods arrested to the louser of the arrestment, June 21. 1626. Balmerino contra
Lochinvar, Hope arrestment, Gordoun contra Brown. But if the sum remain
unpayed, the Arrester may proceed against the person in whose hands he
arrested, Feb. 7. 1665. Graham contra Bruce. In this case the Debtor who
loused the arrestment, had granted Assignation to the Debt arrested; yet the
arrester was preferred to the Assigney, in respect the Caution is insufficient
ordinarily, which comes in the place of arrestments.

Upon arrestment there arises two actions to the arrester, the one is against
the Cautioner, found in lousing arrestment; the other against the person in
whose hands the arrestment was made.

36. The other action for making sums or goods arrested forthcoming, is
ordinary; and for understanding the requisites of it, it would be adverted,
that arrestment may be raised upon production of the principal bond, without
Decree or dependence, March 5. 1628. Binnie contra Ross: Feb. 7. 1665. Graham
contra Bruce. Hope arrestment, Thomson contra Mcmorran. Secondly, It may be
raised upon an action depending. Thirdly, Upon a Decree obtained against the
Debtor, whose sums are arrested: But there can be no process for making
forthcoming, till the debt be Liquidat and established by a Decree at the
Arresters Instance, against him whose goods or sums are arrested, or against
some representing him, which was so done, though the principal Parties Advocat
compeared and consented, March. 13. 1628. Somervel contra Herriot. Hope
transferring, Lord of Lamingtoun contra Sir James Durham. And if that party die
before the Decree for making forthcoming, the Decree must be transferred
against these representing him: But if none will enter to be Heir, or Executor
to him, but renunce; yet the party that might succeed, must be called
Cegnitionis causa, Spots. de haereditariis actionibus, Murray contra Dalgleish;
and therefore, when the arrestment is upon a principal Bond, or upon a
dependence, the Bond must be regisrate, or Decree obtained thereupon, or upon
the dependence before the party in whose hands the arrestment was made, be
obliged to answer the party whose sums and goods are arrested, must not only
be called in initio litis, but to all the dyers of the Process, March. 17.
1637. Captain Stuart contra John Inglis. In this Process the arrestment was not
found instructed by extracting the Horning, containing arrestment, and of the
Executions, but that the principals of both must be produced, Spots.
arrestment, Stevin Boid contra Wilson.

37. As to the Exceptions competent in this action; First, it is not competent
to the party in whose hands the arrestment was made, to allege payment made by
the party whose Goods or Sums are arresied, that being justertij, competent
only to that party himself who must be called, December. 21. 1621. Mr. Patrick
Hamiltoun contra Dunlop. Neither will it be relevant to either party to allege
the debt; whereupon the arrestment is raised, is suspended; but the reason of
suspension must be repealed by way of defense, Ian. 25. 1642. Major Stirling
contra Mr. James Aikenhead. But it will be relevant to allege that the
arrestment is null, as being execute upon the Sabbath day, Feb. 3. 1663.
Charles Oliphant contra Douglas: Or that the arrestment not being upon a
Decree, was loused; and that the sums are paid: It is also relevant, that the
goods arrested were lawfully poynded by another Creditor of the party to whom
they belonged, because arrestment is but a begun incomplete diligence, and does
not transmit the right, till Decree be obtained thereupon: But others using
more complete diligence will carry the same, June 5. 1611. Wright contra
Thomson and Archibald Dick, which was sustained, albeit the arrestment was laid
on for Excise, December. 1679. Forrester contra the Tacksmen of the Excise of
Edinburgh: Yea, though the party in whose hands arrestment was made. suffered
the poynder to enter his Cellers, and poynd the goods arrested, March 11. 1635.
William Dick contra Spence and Thomson. In this case the haver voluntarly
opened his Celler by paction with the poynder which was not respected, seeing he
refused not entry to the arrester, if he had demanded it, Feb. 12. 1636. Lesly
contra Lady Ludquharn. But this exception will be elided by this reply, that
the party in whose hands the arrestment was made, colluded with the poynder,
and voluntarly exhibited the goods arrested to be poynded, not being passive
therein, but active to prefer the poynder, as was formerly found relevant, Hope
arrestment, Doctor Kinloch contra Halyburtoun. James White contra Robert
Blackater. Ian. 20. 1672. John Bell contra Fleming and Watson. It is also a
relevant Exception, that the ground of the arrestment or the sum arrested was
Heretable, before the Act of Par. 1664. Or since that Infeftment has passed
upon either, unlessit be made moveable; and therefore, arrestment being laid on
upon sums consigned, for a redemtion was not found effectual till Declarator of
redemption pass, which only makes the sums moveable; and during the dependence
of the redemption, these sums cannot be arrested, as belonging to the user of
the Order, because they come in place of the Lands redeemed, and can belong
only to the Wodsetter, or Appryzer, or any having right from them to the Lands
Wodset; but after Redemption, the sum consigned may be arrested and made
forthcoming for payment of the Wodsetters debt, Spots. Arrestment, Hepburn
contra Hay. It is also a competent exception, that the thing arrested is a
proper Aliment, Expressly Constitute, and not exceeding the measure of Aliment,
Novem. 19. 1622. Thomas Donaldson contra Kirkaldie and Barclay. And the Fee of
a Servant was not found arrestable, in so far as it was necessary for the
service he was in, but only for the superplus, more then was necessary for his
Aliment in such a service, July 9. 1668. Heugh Beg contra Robert Davidson
Preceptor of Heriots Hospital. The like holds in the Kings Pensions and Fees of
His public Ministers, Lords of Session, and others which are not arrestable in
the Thesaurers hands by Act of Sederunt, 1613. and was so found in the case of
Sir Robert Murray Justice Clerk, a part of whose Sallary was arrested, Feb. 8.
1662.

38. When pursuits are for making arrested Goods forthcoming, which are not
liquid, the party in whose hands arrestment was made, will not be decerned for
making forthcoming a liquid sum for the price: But if he offer the Goods ipsa
corpora, the Decree will contain a Warrant to the Magistrates of the place to
rope the Goods arrested, that the price thereof may be delivered to the
arrester, Novem. 12. 1680. Stevinson contra Sir John Paul.

Appryzing and Adjudication of Heretable sums, whereupon Infeftment has not
followed, being little in use, though competent since the Act of Parliament,
1644. We shall say no more of it in this place, but as we have considered these
several ways of Transmission of Personal Rights severally; we shall now
consider them jointly as they fall in competition, for preference amongst
themselves, and each with others.

39. In these Competitions it must be considered that arrestment does
constitute no Right in the Arrester, but is only a legal Prohibition to alter
the condition of the thing arrested, and to pay or deliver the same to the
Arresters debtor; but that it may remain in his hand for satisfaction of the
debt arrested for: And it is only general arresting all sums of Money or Goods,
in the hands of the party in whose hands it is laid on, due or belonging to the
arresters debtor, for satisfying of the debt whereupon the arrestment
proceeded; and therefore, cannot be of more effect, then a denunciation of
Lands to be appryzed, or a Citation on a summonds of Adjudication; and
therefore, does Constitute or Transfer no Right, but is a legal diligence,
rendering the subject matter arrested litigious, so that the party in whose
hands the arrestment is made, cannot alter any sums or debts belonging to that
debtor in prejudice of the debt arrested for, until the Arrestment be loused,
and Caution found for the debt or Decree, absolvitor or declarator be
obtained, excluding the arrestment: And if he do any thing in the contrary, it
infers breach of Arrestment, confiscating his Movables, and he is liable, as
if the sums or goods remained in his hand, pro possessore habetur qui dolo
desiit possidere: And though the Arrestment have no intimation to the Arresters
debtor, or any of his Creditors; yet if any of them recover the sums or goods
arrested by the Collusion or neglect of the party, in whose hands arrestment is
made, he will still remain liable; and if he have not acted bona fide, he will
incur the breach of arrestment; as if by Collusion and gratification, he or his
procurator (whose deed will be presumed his) oppose the arrester, and procure
delay to compear, and depone and acknowledge the debt, or he holden as confessed
to another arrester; neither will he be liberat by offering his oath, that he
gave no such Warrant, for the employing a Procurator is a sufficient Warrant
for all the common course of Process, and requires no special mandat: Yea, if
he pay or deliver to any other arrester, or even be poynded upon a Decree at
his instance, he will not be liberate, seeing he ought to have raised a Process
of multiple poinding, calling the debtor and all the arresters or assigneys to
dispute their several rights, that once payment to the party, found to have
best right, might liberate him; yet if he have paid, he does thereby without a
direct assignation, come in the place of the party to whom he has paid; and
if he can show that parties right, is preferable to the arrester insisting, he
will be heard thereupon.

And unless it be found that he proceeded warrantably, not only will he be
decerned to make forthcoming, though it infer double payment; but he to whom he
paid unwarrantably, will be compelled to restore and satisfy the arrester,
the subject having been litigious by his arrestment, before the other party
recovered the same, albeit he have recovered payment, bona fide, without any
fault in him, but by the litigiousness of the subject; For payment made
bonafide, with a preferable Right, relieveth only the payer, who was or might
have been compelled to pay, being conscious of no other Right: For it is not
relevant for the party obtaining payment, bona fide; nor will that ground of
Law secure him, qui suum recipit, licet a non debitore non tenetur restituere,
which holds only in voluntary payments, a non debitore, and where the subject
is not litigious.

Upon the same ground, albeit the party in whose hands arrestment is made,
collude not, but do equally passive, or equally oppose the Competitors: Yet if
the debtor collude and propone Defenses against some of the Competitors, and
not equally against all, and thereby procure delay, and Terms to prove, if he
succumb, though another pursuing in a several Process, before the same or
different Judge, obtain Decree and payment thereupon, yet he will be
necessitate to refound, if he had not a preferable Right.

41. If the party in whose hands arrestment was made, appear and offer to
depone, if the pursuer suffer him to depone generally, that the time of the
arrestment he had neither Goods nor Sums belonging to the Debtor in his hands,
the arrester will not, ex intervallo, obtain him to be more particularly
interrogate, ad vitandam frandem and perjurium; but if before, or at his oath
given in general, there be special interrogators offered by the party or the
Judge, whether at any time in his hands, sums or goods belonging to the
arresters Debtor, and how, and when he satisfied or delivered the same, he
will be holden as confessed, unless he depone particularly that he be not his own
Judge, as to the time when he was due, or when he ceased to be due; For he may
pretend or imagine, that the time of the arrestment, he was not debtor,
because he had paid to an Assigney, whose Assignation was prior to the
arrestment, albeit intimation was not prior, though he had promised payment
before intimation, yet he could not thereupon have been compelled to pay it, if
before payment an arrestment had interveened, because his promise could be but
understood to be according to the parties Right' to whom he promised, which he
could not quarrel; but if another did exclude that party, he could not be
liable to double payment, albeit he had given a Bond of Corroboration, unless
the Assigney had offered to intimate, and he had hindered the same, as
unnecessary, and promised payment; for then through his own fraud or fault, he
would be liable to pay both parties; and therefore, the promise of payment was
only found relevant to exclude an Arrestment, after the promise, to be proven
by the Oath, or Write of the Arrester, and not of the Promiser, or party to
whom he promised; yet if the Promise were not so proven, and thereby the
Arrester were preferred; the party promiser, in whose hands the Arrestment was
made, was declared free of the promise, unless there had been Transaction, or
that the promiser had undertaken the hazard, Mr. James Elphingstoun contra
George Home and the Lord of Steonhope, December 11. 1674.

22. That which Transferreth the Right, is neither the Arrestment, the
Citation, nor any thing in Process, but only the Decree for making
forthcoming, which is in the same conditions, as to Subjects, arrestable as
Appryzings, or Adjudications are to others, which do not import full
satisfaction of the Debt, and do not fully liberate the Debtor, but that other
diligences may be used for the same debt, unless he possess till the legal
expyre; and in the same way after Decree, for making forthcoming, the Arrester
may use other Diligences, but in competition with other Creditors using
diligence, he may not exclude them and keep up his own diligences, but has his
option thereof.

Seeing the Arrestment makes the Subject Arrested Litigious, it has the
common effect necessarly introduced by Law, in re Litigiosa, that Inchoat
diligence cannot be excluded, either by the voluntary deed of the Debtor, or
by any legal diligence posterior, unless the user of the first Inchoat
diligence become negligent, Nam vigilantibus, non dormievtibus jura subveniunt.

The application of these Grounds will easily clear the preference in the
competition of Arrestments with Assignations, or of Arrestments with
Arrestments.

43. And as to the Competition betwixt Assignations and Arrestments; an
Assignation duly intimate, is a full and complete Transmission of the Right
assigned, if by its nature it be assignable, and thereby the right of the
Cedent ceasseth, and the Assigney becomes Creditor, and has no necessity of
any further diligence to complete the Right: Therefore no posterior Arrestment
will be preferred to an Assigney, if the intimation be before the Arrestment,
which is accounted, not only by days, but by hours: But if the intimation and
execution of the Arrestment be both in one day, and express no hour, if the
Arrester be not negligent, they will come in, pari passu, because no priority
does appear, Spots. Debtor and Creditor, Mr. Cornelius Ainsly contra (...)
Edward, which will hold in the competition of diverse Arrestments, or diverse
Assignations, where no priority does appear; for we have little respect to the
anteriority of debts in competition, but to the anteriority of diligence, as is
evident in Appryzings and Adjudications.

44. But if the Arrestment be prior to the Intimation, the Arrestment is
preferable, if it fail not in diligence; and therefore, an Arrestment was
preferred to an Assignation intimate the same day, but two hours thereafter,
January 30. 1629. Davidson contra Balcanquel: Yea, an Arrestment upon a
dependence, was preferred to a posteriour Assignation, though intimate half a
year before sentence, upon that dependence, Hope Assignation: It must be in the
discretion of the Judge to determine, when Arresters fail in diligence.

45. And as to Intimations, they are inquestionable, if done by Instrument, or
by Charge of Horning, at the instance of the assigney upon the assignation,
because the Letters bears, that the assignation was produced to the Judge,
passer of the Bill: and there is little doubt, that assignations attaining
effect by Possession, will be in the same case, as if intimate by Instrument:
Or if Bond of Corroboration be obtained upon the assignation, or Discharges
instructing payment of a part of the debt assigned: Or if in Process, the
Assignation be Judicially produced; but the case is not alike, nor have I
observed it decided, if Citation before the Assignation be Judicially produced,
will exclude an Arrester, medio tempore.

46. As to the competition of Arresters, the first Arrestment, not failing in
diligence, is preferable; and therefore, the first Arrester was preferred,
though prior but by one day, though both obtained Decree upon the same day,
and both used full Diligence, February 1. 1666. Colonel Cuninghame contra
Layel. And likewise, an Arrestment by Letters from the Lords of Session, and
first Citation thereupon, being insisted in without negligence, was preferred
to a posterior Arrestment, though obtaining the first Decree, before a
Sheriff, in respect that Decreets before the Lords, cannot be so summarly
obtained, especially, seeing they must abide the course of a Roll, November 23.
1677. Sir Robert Montgomery contra Alexander Rankine. And a posterior
Arrestment was preferred to a prior, in respect the Term of payment of the sum,
for satisfying of which, the first Arrestment was laid on, was not come at the
time of the first Arrestment, but before the second Arrestment was laid on, the
Term of payment of the sum, for which it was laid on was past; albeit the Terms
ofboth sums were past before the competition came before the Lords by
Advocation, July 29. 1670. Charles Charters contra Cornelius Neilson: July 17.
1678. Lord Pitmaiden contra William and Robert Patersons. And for the same
cause, Arrestment upon a Decree may be preferred to a prior arrestment upon a
dependence; because the ground of the former has paratam executionem: and not
the ground of the latter: Yet an Arrestment upon a Dependence was preferred to
a posteriour Arrestment, obtained upon production of a Registrable Bond, before
it was Registrate, and so was not raised upon a Decree, Hope Arrestment,
Thomson contra Memorran. And arrestment laid on after the Term of payment of
the debt arrested, was preferred to a prior arrestment, laid on before the Term
of payment upon the debt arrested, July 5. 1673 Birnie contra Mowat and
Crawfoord. And an arrestment laid on verbally by a Towns Officer, was excluded
by a posterior arrestment, having an Execution before witnesses, albeit the
verbal execution was the custom of the place, July 19. 1678. Warrock contra
Brown. And a first arrester was not excluded for want of diligence, but was
preferred to a posterior Arrester, who had brought his Cause to be concluded,
at which time the prior arrester compeared, and produced an assignation, after
his arrestment from the common debtor, whereby he needed no further diligence,
July 19. 1673. Birnie contra Crawford: This (...) was found no voluntary
Gratification, seeing it preferred the first legal diligence: And upon the same
ground, an Assigney by a Bankrupt, was preferred to a posterior Arrester, in
respect the Assigney had used the first diligence by Horning, before the
arrestment, Novem. 20. 1677. Bishop of Glasgow contra Nicolas and Brown.

TITLE XXIV. Dispositions, Where, of Resignations, in favorem, Appryzings and
Adjudications of Real Rights.
1. Dispositions of Properly carry virtually all Lesser Rights. 2. How
superveening Rights, belonging to Authors, belong to their singular successors.
3. Dispositions descrived. 4. How dispositions are accomplished in equity. 5.
How by the Law of the Romans, and other Civil Nations. 6. Possession
accomplisheth real Rights. 7. Properly of Movables is presumed from
Possession. 8. Resignation in favorem. 9. Dispositions or Assignations, by
these who have no Right with consent of these who have Right, how far
effectual. 10. Procuratories or Infeftments of Resignation, after forty years
possession by Charters, needs not be produced. 11. Infeftments on Resignation
carries any lesser right in the disponer, though not expressed. 12. The effect of
resignations accepted by the Superior, before Infeftment follow thereon. 13.
Superiors are not obliged to receive the singular Successors of of the
Vassals after Infeftment expede, though it bear to the Vassals Heir and
Assigneys. 14. Appryzings can only proceed on liquid sums. 15. Appryzings
reaches al Heritable Rights though not provided to Assigneys. 16. Appryzings
carry all personal Rights, without Intimation. 17. The rise of Infeftments upon
posterior Appryzings. 18. Infeftments may be obtained summarly upon Appryzings
after the debitors death. 19. The effect of Appryzings as to Nonentry, Ward,
and Liferentescheat. 20. The denunciation whereupon Appryzing follows, renders
the matter litigious, and excludes posterior voluntary Rights. 21. Competition
of Appryzings. 22. The effect of Appryzings at the Instance ofSuperiours
against their own Vassals. 23. The effect of Appryzings, as to Removings,
Mails, and Duties. 24. Allowance of Appryzings. 25. Whether Superiors must
receive appryzers, not instructing their authors Right. 26. The quantity of the
Years Rent due to Superiors for entering Appryzer. 27. What course is
competent against contumacious Superiors. 28. The Legal Reversion of
Appryzings. 29. Appryzers may use other diligence for their payment, though the
Apprizings were expired. 30. Nullities of Apprizings. 31. Modification of
exorbitant Penalties in Apprizings. 32. Apprizing sustained without a charge
for the sum. 33. Apprizing sustained, though the Letters and Execuitons were
blank as to the Lands, the Messenger who denunced, being Judge to the
Apprizing, in which they were filled up, which was a more solemn Execution. 34.
An Apprizing sustained without producing the Letters of Apprizing, being long
before, but the Instructions of the debt were found necessary to be produced
within Prescription. 35. An Apprizing sustained, though by dispensation at a
private place, and the Court of Apprizing adjourned. 36. An Apprizing of
Rights, generally preferred to a posterior Apprizing of the Right in special,
being an Annualrent. 37. Apprizings become extinct by payment, and the debitors
Right revives without new Investiture. 38. In what cases Apprizers must
possess and how they are countable 39. What alterations in Apprizings are
Introduced by the Act of Parliament, 1661. cap. 62. as to the indurance of the
Legal, and coming in pari passu. 40. Now Apprizings coming in the person of the
Debitors appearand Heir, are satisfiable from him or his Trusties. 41. How
Apprizings against parties charged to enter Heir, are redeemable. 42. Legals
run not against Minors. 43. Apprizers continuing to possess after the Legal,
can use no other diligence, but the sums are thereby satisfied, though a part
of the Lands were evicted, the rest being worth the whole sum. 44. The rise of
Adjudications. 45. The Form of Adjudications on Renunciations to be Heir. 46.
Why Adjudications past at random, and may now be put to Instruct some Interest
in the Debtor. 47. What Rights are affected with Adjudications. 48. Superiors
must receive Adjudgers, paying a years Rent, unless they pay the Creditor, and
then the Superior will have no years Rent. 49. How Adjudications are
Redeemable. 50. Adjudications may be for the appearand Heirs own debt. 51. How
Adjudications become Extinct. 52. The form and effect of Adjudications to
perfect Dispositions. 53. The form and effect of the partial and total
Adjudications introduced by the Act of Parliament, 6. of September, 1672.
A DISPOSITION may, and sometime does signify the alienation of any Right,
whether real or personal, so the style and translations ordinarily bears, the
assigney to transfer and dispone, as assignation is sometime extended to the
disposal of real Rights, which are srequently provided, not only to Heirs, but
to Assigneys; yet these Terms are so appropriat and distinguished, that a
Disposition is applied to the alienation of real Rights, and Assignation of
personal Rights.

1. In both dispositions and assignations, the Disponer or Cedent is called
author, and the acquirer is called the singular successor, and in both, this
common Brockard takes place, jus superveniens authori accrescit Successori,
that is, what ever Right befalls to the author after his Disposition or
assignation, it accresseth to his Successor, to whom he had before disponed,
as if it had been in his Person when he disponed, and as if it had been
expressly disponed by him, whence arises the distinction; betwixt dispositions
and assignations, express and implicit, or tacit when the Right is not
expressly disponed, but tacitly or virtually, as he who dispones the property,
hoc ipso, does tacitly and virtually dispone any lesser Right, as a Reversion,
Servitude, Liferent, though no particular mention be of these, according to
another Rule of Law majori inest minis, so ary person Infeft in Property, and
his Seasine Registrat, will have right to a Reversion, if no more was in the
Disponers Person; albeit assignations to Reversions require special
Solemnities, as to be registrat in the Register of Reversions; yet the
Registration of this Seasine will be equivalent: so a Liferent Right, granted
by him, who had only right of Tack, was found to carry the right of that Tack,
during the Liferenters life, Hope Liferents, Lord Rossyth contra his Tennents.
The like of a Back-tack, Ibid. Lady Boyd contra her Tennents, Stuart contra
Fleming. The like found of a Liferent, which carried the Right of a Reversion,
quo ad, the Liferenters life, December. 5. 1665. Beg contra Beg.

2. There is no question of this accression, when the disponer disponeth for
all Right he has had, or shall acquire, which is a general assignation or
disposition, of any Right superveening, if the debate fall betwixt the disponer
and successor, there is also little question, if the Right disponed have
expressed or employed absolute Warrandice, as being for a Cause Onerous: In which
case, if the question be betwixt the disponer and successor, he who disponed
for an equivalent Cause, importing his acknowledgement of having an absolute
Right, cannot cloth himself with any posterior Right, which would infer
warrandice against him, if it were in another person; and therefore, that
personal objection excludes him, it being in his own person: Neither is it
questionable, that if the Disposition or Assignation be limited, as being only
to a particular Title, or generally, for any Right the Disponer has, or
bearing warrandice from his own Fact and Deed, then if he acquire a posterior
Right, he may make use thereof against that person to whom he disponed, much
more may any singular Successor of his; and therefore, in the case decided,
July 19. 1664. betwixt Dam Elizabeth Douglas and Sir Robert Sinclar her Spouse
contra the Lord of Wedderburn, anent the Teinds of Kello and Kimmergem,
whereof the Earl of Home, common author, gave a Tack to Wedderburns
predecessor, with warrandice from his own deed; and any right the Earl then had
being reduced, he did thereafter acquire a new Right from Coldinghame, and
thereupon granted a Right to William Douglas of Evla, to whom the said Dam
Elizabeth Douglas is: heir, which supperveening Right was found not to accresce
to Wedderburn, to defend his Tack, seeing he had not absolute warrandice, but
from his own deed only: But the main question is, when the contraversie is not
betwixt the author and the party to whom he dispones, but betwixt the singular
Successor of that author and that party to whom he had disponed before, in
which case the personal objection upon the warrandice, has no place; and
oftimes the right superveening, requires special solemnities, and cannot be
transmitted without these, as Resignation, Confirmation, Seasine, yet even in
these cases, reason and the Lords Decision extended the rule so, that the
superveening Right, ipso facto, accresces without any new solemnities; but if
the necessar solemnities have preceeded when there was no right, whenever the
Right superveens, it is drawn back, as if it had been in the time of the former
solemnities, fictione juris; and so if a Superior acquire the Right of
Forefaultry of his Superior, the same ipso facto, accresceth to the
sub-vassals, and cannot be made use of against them, Spots. Conjunctfees,
Malcolm Crawford contra Mordistoun. The like was found, Feb. 15. 16. 1665. Boid
of Penkil contra Vassals of Carsluth: In which case the Vassals were ordained
to pay their share of the Composition of a Ward: But where the superveening
Right befell to the Authors appearand Heir, and was by him disponed to another,
before he was entered Heir; in that case, the Authors appearand Heir, obtaining
gift of the Liferent-escheat of Lands disponed to Vassals, the said Liferent
was not found to accresce to the Vassals, because the appearand Heir was
denuded thereof, in favors of another, before he was Heir, July 5. 1611. James
Skeen contra Vassals of Athol; this Rule was so far extended, that a
supervenient Right, by Decree of Reduction and Improbation acquired by
Swintown, having right to the Lands of Brimstoun, was found to accresce to the
Earl of Lauderdail, being restored, July 13. 1664. Earl of Lauderdale contra
Heretor of Wolmet. But where a person having a disposition of Lands, did Insest
another in Liferent himself never being Infeft, did assign the Disposition to a
third party, who was thereupon Infeft, that Disposition was not found to
accresce to the Annualrenter, because his Author was never Infeft thereupon,
June 29. 1676. James Brown contra Smith.

It is the common opinion, that if a party grant Infeftment, before he be
infeft himself, and he thereafter Infeft, it accresceth to that party whom he
Infeft before, if the question be betwixt them, but I have not observed it
directly decided, quid juris; in these (...), if a person not infeft, do give
Right to two parties, and thereafter be Infeft, to which of the two his
superveening Infeftment will accresce: Or if he Infeft one, when he is not
Infeft, and thereafter another, when he is Infeft, which of these will have
right; but it seems the first Infeftment in both cases will be preferred,
because she common Authors Right accresceth, ipso facto: Yet if the common
Authors Infeftment proceed upon the diligence of any party, it may seem the
same will only accresce to him who is the procurer of it; yet even in that
case, it was found to accress to the first Right, with absolute warrandice,
June 21 1671. John Nielson contra Menzies of Enoch. But now to return to what
is special in Dispositions.

3. A Disposition is the transmission, or conveyance of real Rights from the
Disponer to his singular Successor, not in contemplation of the Disponers
Death, for such are comprehended among successions, from the dead as Legacies,
Donations, mortis causa, etc.

A Disposition is said to be a conveyance, and so it is taken, not for the
Dispositive act of the Will only, but whatsoever else is requisite to complete
the conveyance, as Tradition, Resignation, Possession, though a Disposition is
oftimes taken as distinct from these, for the more clear uptaking of
conveyances of real Rights; Consider first, what is requifite to transmit them
by the Law of Nature, without any positive Law or Custom: and next, what by
these is requisite to transmit the several Rights.

As to the first, it has been shown in the Title ( real Rights) how far
Dominion and Property is competent by the Law of rational Nature, and it cannot
be doubted, but that though there were no positive Law nor Custom, that the
rational Creature is naturally instructed how to Dispone and Alienate his own,
the power of Disposal being the Characteristick of Dominion, which is natural
to man, being created Lord of the Creatures.

The question then is, by what act men may naturally exercise the power of
Disposal, which can be no act of the Understanding, that being only
contemplative, and nothing active nor operative, for Constituting or
Transmitting of Rights, but it must needs be an act of the Will, for by it,
Rights are both acquired, Relinquished and alienate: There may be three acts of
the Will about the Disposal of Rights, a resolution to Dispone a Paction,
Contract or Obligation, to Dispone, and a present will or consent, that that
which is the Disponers, be the Acquirers. Resolution terminats within the
Resolver and may be dissolved by a contrary resolution, and so transmits no
Right; Paction does only Constitute or transmit a personal Right, or Obligation
whereby the person obliged may be compelled to transmit the real Right It must
needs then be the present dispositive will of the Owner, which conveyeth the
right to any other, which is expressed by such words, de presenti, Titius
Disponeth, Alienateth, or Annualzeth, Gifteth, Grants, Sells, etc. which
connot properly import an Obligation, having its effect in the future; though
there may be Obligations consequent as to delivery, warrandice, etc. But these
Terms do express something presently done, and not engaged to be done, and so
can be nothing else but Alienation or Transmission of the Right itself.

That the Dispositive will of the owner alone, without any further, is
sufficient to alienate his Right, without Delivery or Possession, is evident in
personal Rights, wherein the Dispositive Clause of Assignations or Translations
is sufficient; Intimation or Possession being introduced for expediency in some
cases, by our Custom, that the dispositive will is also sufficient to transmit
real Rights; it appears, because the will alone is sufficient to retain, not
only Rights, but even Possession it self, though there be no Corporeal act
exercised therein; and therefore, the act of the will alone, as it retains,
so may it relinquish that Right or Possession, whereby it ceasseth to be the
former Owners; and therefore, if the Will be not simply to Relinquish, but to
remit or transmit the Right to any other, hoc ipso, that other does become
dominus; Dominion being the power of disposal, which is a Faculty, and no
Corporeal thing, and may be fitly Constitute in the Acquirer, by the will of
the Disponer, unlels the Acquirer reject it, for the Disponer before having the
only power of disposal, and remitting that power to the Acquirer, the thing
cannot be said to be nullius, as being relinquished; and therefore, the
Dominion or disposal of it, must either be in the Disponer or the Acquirer; not
in the Disponer, because by his will, which is sufficient to Relinquish or
quite it, he has remitted it; and therefore, that power must be in the
Purchaser, unless he reject it: This is the more evident, that Positive Law and
Custom, which requires Delivery or Possession, rests in symbolical or
imaginary Possession, as by delivery ofEarth and Stone, for Land of a Penny for
Annualrent, and in some cases requires no Possession, so the Fisk acquireth
real Right without Possession; and the right ofLegacies, and others from the
dead, are transmitted without possession.

5. But for Utilities sake, not only the Romans, but almost all Nations require
some kind of Possession, to accomplish real Rights, that thereby the will of
the Owner may sensibly touch the thing disponed, and thereby be more manifest
and sure, so the Law says, Traditionibus and Usucapionibus, non nudis pact is
dominia (...) transferuntur, with which our Custom accords.

It uses here to be debated, whether Possession it self be sufficient to
accomplish Dispositions; or if there must be Tradition, or delivery of that
Possession, by the disponer to the acquirer, the forecited Law seems to require
tradition; or at least Usucapion, or Prescription, which doubtless are the most
proper ways to accomplish dispositions; yet Utiliter and Equivalenter
Possession, lawfully attained by virtue of the Disposition, although not
delivered by the Disponer, will be sufficient, as if the disponer were not in
Possession himself, and so cannot deliver it, yet the Acquirer may recover it
from the detainer, or the acquirer might have been in Possession before, by any
other Title, as by Custody, Conduction, etc. In which case, none require
delivery; yea, it is more questionable, whether the Possession would not
Consumate the disposition, though unlawfully attained, as if the disponer not
being in Possession, the acquirer attained the Possession from a third party,
vi aut clam, though he might be obliged to restore that Possession to the
third party; yet whether it would not exclude a posteriour disposition, though
more Legal Possession; It is a Question as probable in the Affirmative, as in
the Negative.

It remains then that Possession is the accomplishment of the Disposition of
real Rights, so that not the first Disposition, but the first Possession, by
virtue thereof prefers. This Possession is not alike in all cases, for in
some real, in others symbolical, Possession is requisite, which cannot be
supplied by real Possesson it self, as in Property of Lands or Annualrents by
Infeftment, wherein the disposition and natural Possession makes no real Right
without Seasine, July 12. 1628. Bennet contra Turnbul. Novem. 25. 1628. Mitchel
contra Wright.

Possession is requisite, not only to the conveyance of the Property of
Moveable Goods, but also of Liferent-rights, Tacks and Rentals, Servitudes,
Pledges; which Tacks, though they be truly personal Rights of Location, and
constitute only as real Rights by Statute, yet Intimation will not transmit
them; but there is necessity of Possession: and though Liferents be more
properly real Rights, because Constitute by Infeftment; yet seeing a Liferenter
cannot Infeft another as a Fiar can, Assignation or Disposition is sufficient,
but it must be cled with Possession: But Reversions, though they be accounted
as real Rights by Statute, require no Possession for Transmitting them, but an
Assignation duly Registrate, according to the Act of Par. 1617. is sufficient
as a public Intimation.

In Movables, Possession is of such efficacy, that it does not only consumate
the disposition thereof, but thereupon the disposition is presumed without any
necessity to prove the same, which was found sufficient to inctruct the
Property of a Ship from Possession, without vendition in Write, July 26. 1623.
Captain Hamilloun contra the Master of the Ship Stetine. And the property of
Money was inferred, from having the Key of the Chist in which the Money was
found sealed, unless a contrary probation were adduced, June 18. 1675. Tailzior
contra Rankine. And so a Creditor having poynded Goods from his debtor was
preferred thereunto to a third party, who offered to prove these goods to be
his own proper goods, bred upon his own ground, and set a grassing to that
debtor, the poynder instructing that the goods were milked, wrought, and the
offspring thereof enjoyed by the debtor for two years, without any possession
by the other party, during that space, which so far presumed his right, that
the Lords admitted not the contrary probation, Nevem. 24. 1624. Turnbul of
Symontoun contra Ker of Cavers. The like upon two years possession, June 17.
1625. Brown contra Hunterstoun. But restitution of a Horse was not excluded,
because the possessour offered to prove he bought him from one who then had him
in possession, in respect the pursuer then offered to prove that immediately
before he had set the Horse in hyre for a Journey to that person who sold him,
Novem. 18. 1680. William Forsyth Stabler contra Hugh Kilpatrick: So that it
will not be sufficient to any claiming right to moveable goods, against the
lawful possessor to, allege he had a good Title to these goods, and possession
of them, but he must condescend, quo modo desiit possidere, by Spuilzie,
Stealth, etc. Or that he gave them only in grassing and custody, and continued
to use Acts ofProperty; the reason whereof is, because in the Commerce of
movables, write uses not to be adhibite, and it would be an unseparable
labor, if the acquirer thereof behoved to be instructed by all the preceding
acquirers; as if one should instruct that he bought or bred such goods some
years ago, the present possessor behoved either to instruct a progress of
them, through all the hands they passed from the first owner, or lose them,
which being destructive to Commerce, Custom has introduced this way, that
possession being present and lawful, presumethproperty without further
probation, unless the pursuer condescend upon a clear probable way of the goods
passing from him, not by alienation, as if they were spuilzied, stolen,
strayed, etc. Feb, 3. 1672. Scot of Gorrenberry contra Eliot. In which case,
the Lybel was only found relevant to be proven by the defenders oath, that he
had not bought or acquired the goods, bona fide; Or that the goods were in a
Defuncts possession the time of his death, February 24. 1672. Semple contra
Givan; In which case a Defuncts goods were restored, albeit they were long
possessed after by his Wife, and impignorate by her, and her second Husband,
without Confirmation, the Children of the Defunct Husband, recovered the same
from the Acquirer.

The passing from the Proprietar must be so evidently instructed, that there
may no probability remain of their being recovered, and thereafter alienat:
Upon this ground it was, that Sir John Scot, pursuing Sir John Fletcher, for a
Book delivered to him, The Lords found the Lybel not relevant, unless it were
condescended, quo modo, the pursuer delivered the same, viz. by Loan, and would
not put the defender to prove gifted, but presumed his Title, unless the
contrary were proven by oath or witnesses, Jan. 27. 1665. And in a Process for
Jewels, at the Instance of John Ramsay contra James Wilson, who had them from
Mr. Robert Byres; the Lords found, that the presumptive Title of the defender
and his author was elided upon the contrary presumption, that Jewels of such
value, could not be bought, bona fide, seeing the seller was neither Merchant
nor Jeweller, nor the Jewels fit for his proper use, and because it was offered
to be proven, he took them at his own hand out of the pursuers possession to
whom they were impignorat by write, by the Proprietar, who immediately went out
of the Kingdom.

The most ordinary and important conveyances are of Lands and Annualrents,
which pass by Infeftment, for perfecting whereof, there must not only be a
Disposition, but also a Resignation in the hands of the Superior, and new
Infeftment granted by him to the Acquirer thereupon, or by Confirmation, or for
obedience upon Appryzing or Adjudication: For disposition of Lands to be holden
of the granter, do not transmit the granters Right, because he continues
Superior in the direct Dominion, but it becomes an Original Right,
constituting a new subaltern Infeftment.

Resignation is either in favors of the Superior himself, for consolidating
of the Property with the Superiority; and therefore, is called Resignation, ad
perpetuam remanentiam: Or it is a Resignation in the Superiors hands, in
favors of the Resigner himself, or infavours of an Acquirer; and therefore, is
called Resignation, in favorem. The first of these is no transmission, but an
extinction of the Fee, and has been spoken to in that Title.

The second is not properly a transmission, because it passes not from, but
returns to the Resigner; yet ordinarily under diverse Considerations, as when
he resigns from himself and such heirs, in favors of himself and other heirs,
or when he resigns a Ward holding, that it may be returned blench, or few; for
the right understanding of Resignations, in favorem, consider the solemnities
requisite thereto, and the effect which flow from the several steps thereof.

For the first, a Resignation must proceed upon a Disposition, or Procuratory
of Resignation, having in it the effects of a Disposition, which must be in
write, for the Instrument of Resignation being but the assertion of a Nottar,
will not be sufficient alone, without an adminicle in write, and though
Resignation propriis manibus, can have no Procuratory yet the Disposition
whereupon it proceeds, must be shown.

The second step in Resignation, is the Act of Resignation it self, which
necessarly must be by way of Instrument of a Nottar, expressing the warrant of
it, viz. the Disposition if it be done by the resigner, propriis manibus, or
the Procuratory if it be done by a Procurator, and that conform thereto, the
Resigner or Procurator compeared personally before the Superior or his
Commissioners, having special warrant to receive Resignations, and that the
Resignation was made in the hands of the Superior by Staff and Bastoun,
delivered by the Resigner or his Procurator to the Superior, as the token or
symbol of the thing resigned, and that the same was accepted and received by
the Superior, or his Commissioners, by taking the said symbol in their hands,
for new Infeftment, to be given to the Acquirer; and though the Resignation
uses to be made by the Vassal, or his Procurator on their knees, and so is
expressed in the Instrument, either generally or specially with all humility, and
that the superior or his Commissioner, use to deliver the Staff as the symbol
of the Fee to the Acquirer, which is also expressed in the Instrument; yet these
are not essential, but that without the being or expressing of the Instrument
will be valid.

The last step of this transmission by Resignation, is the Superior or his
Commissioners, giving new Infeftment to the Acquirer, the nature and requisites
of which Infeftment, has been expressed before in the Title Infeftments.

The Solemnities of Resignation are so effectual and necessar, that the
omission of any of them annulleth the Resignation; and therefore, Renunciation
without a formal Resignation, though it may be sufficient against the Renuncer,
yet it is not sufficient to take away Infeftment, renunced against singular
successors: Nor can it constitute any real Right in the person of the Acquirer,
unless he had, aliunde, another right standing in his person, in which case,
the Renunciation might exclude the Renuncer, or his Heirs, to quarrel that
right, Hope alienation, Hamiltoun contra Mcadam: The reason thereof is,
because, jura eodem modo destituuntur quo constituuntur; and therefore, as
Infeftments cannot be constitute without an Instrument of Seasine, so they
cannot be destitute without an Instrument of resignation, or at least another
Instrument of seasine, with the superiors Confirmation, or upon his Charter
for obedience, so that renunciation being personal, operats nothing, except in
the case of Wodsets, which are extinguished by a renunciation registrate by the
Act of Parliament, 1617. But even Wodsets cannot be transmitted without
resignation.

9. But where it is said that the resignation must be by the Vassal or his
Procurator, this question arises, if the Assignation be made by him who is not
truly Vassal, but with consent of the true Vassal, quid juris, Craig, lib. 3.
dieg. 1. shows, that in his time this question was not clearly determined, nor
is he positive in it, but this far, if the resigner had no Title, no consent
could be sufficient: yet if he had a colorable Title, the consent of the true
Vassal might validate it: If the true Vassal be consenter to the Procuratory of
resignation, either expressly bearing, that the disponer, with consent, etc.
constitute his Procurators: Or if he be consenter to the disposition, by being
expressed in the entry thereof, which is holden as extensive to the whole
disposition, and so as repeated in the same, will be as valide, as if the
consenter himself had granted the disposition, or Procuratory for the Act of
the disponer, though more express and amplified, is no more but his consent,
and so the other consenting, does the same materially, which he would do if he
were disponer, formally, but if his consent be adhibite after the resignation
is made, it is merely personal, and cannot have influence on the resignation,
which was before it; or if he but permit or give license to the disponer, or
which is alike, if he consent, that the disponer dispone in so far as may
concern the disponers right, these will not be sufficient warrant for the
resignation, but if he give warrant or consent to the resignation, it is
sufficient; neither is there neces sity to distinguish, whether the disponer
have a colorable Title or not, se ing it is the consent of the true Vassal and
the resignation as flowing from, and warranted by that consent, which
transmitteth the right; and therefore, an Infeftment of an annualrent, granted
by a person not Infeft, was found valide, because a consenter thereto was
Infeft, and so it did exclude a valide right flowing from that consenter to a
singular successor thereafter, viz. a Tack, December. 15. 1630. Jean Stirling
contra Tennents.

10. Resignation how necessar soever to transmit an Infeftment, yet because the
Procuratory and Instrument of resignation may be lost; therefore, the Vassal
possessing forty years, by virtue of an Infeftment, mentioning such a
resignation, the same will be valide without the production of the procuratory,
or Instrument of resignation, which therefore is presumed, thence presumptione
juris, Par. 1594. cap. 214.

11. As to the effect of resignation, there is no doubt, but when the same is
truly made, and Infeftment follows conform, the resigner is fully divested,
and the acquirer is fully invested, and if there be conditions or provisiions,
whether bearing express clauses irritant, that the acquirers Infeftment shall
be null, and the disponers Infeftment shall revive, or he have regress, how far
these are effectual, till by resignation or judicial process, the same be
recovered, is more fully cleared before, Title Infeftments.

It is no less evident, that before resignation be made the disposition or
procuratory, operats nothing as to the real right, which notwithstanding
remains fully in the disponer, though he be personally obliged to perfect it,
albeit there be no such express obliegement in the disposition; yet by the
nature thereof, the disponer is obliged to Infeft himself, if he be not
Infeft, and to Infeft the acquirer, Hope alienations, William Gladstanes contra
Lord of Mckerstoun: Yea, the disposition of property being accomplished,
carrysall real right of the Land, or Bonds for granting real right, in favor
of the disponer, or his authors, neither assigned nor mentioned in the
disposition, July 1. 1623. Craigy Wallace contra John Chalmers. Yea, a liferent
carries the reversion in the disponers person, as to the Liferenters Liferent
use, that there eupon he might redeem a Wodset: So likeways a disposition of
Lands immediately before a Term, not expressing an Entry, nor Assignation to the
rent, was found to exclude the disponer therefrom, though Infeftment followed
not, till after the Term, Spots. Mails and Duties, Andrew Caldwal contra Robert
Stark. And generally, it carrys Mails and Duties, as including virtually an
Assignation thereto, July 15. 1629. Inter eosdem: And though the Disposition,
or Procuratory, cannot constitute a real right, yet it does sufficiently
exclude the Disponer or his Heirs, from troubling the Acquirers Possession
thereupon.

12. The Main question then is, what is the effect of a resignation, when done
and accepted by the Superior, and no Infeftment following thereon, where, in
that case, the right stands, whether in the Disponer, Acquirer, or Superior,
and whether the resigner be fully thereby denuded, or if he may not grant a
second resignation, whereupon the first Infeftment being recovered, will be
effectual: This is very learnedly debated by Craig in the forementioned place,
where he shows, that the common opinion was, that the second resignation,
with the first seasine will be preferred, though the Lords had decided
otherways, in the case of a Citizen of Perth, who making a second resignation
in favors of his Son, though after the first resignation by the space of
twenty years; yet Craig approves the old opinion concerning the resigner,
never to befully divested, till the acquirer were invested; this is clear, that
by the resignation, the Fee falls in Non-entry' and is in the superiors hands,
and while the resigner resigning in his own favors, bereceived, or the
resignation past from: Or otherways, the acquirer be infeft, the superior has
the Non-entry duties of the Lands resigned, if the Infeftment be not delayed,
through his own fault. It is also clear, that by the superiors acceptance of
the resignation, in (...), there is upon him a personal obligation to Infeft
that person in whose favors the resignation was made; and therefore, though
the resigner dieuninfeft, his heir by a single service, has right to that
asother personal rights, and thereupon may compel the superior to infeft him;
yea, as Craig observes in the forecited place, the Lords upon supplication,
without Citation, will grant Letters summarly upon sight of the Instrument of
resignation, and warrant therefore, to charge the Superior to Infeft the party
in whose favor it was made, who may not receive another resignation, or nfeft
an other party, or else his obliegement may make him liable to the obtainer of
the first Resignation, pro (...) and inter esse, if he be not in mora, in doing
diligence to get his new Infeftment expede, recenter; but the real right will
be carried by the first Infeftment, though upona posterior Resignation; and so
posterior Decisions go along with Craigs opinion, not only in the case of the
first public Infeftment, upona second Resignation, but which is much more,
after a Resignation, made a base Infeftment, flowing thereafter from the
Resigner, and being but a short time before the public Infeftment, upon the
Resignation, yet was preferred thereto, as Dury observes, but expresses not the
parties, July 22. 1626. As to the contrair Decision observed by Craig, it says
nothing, seeing the first Infeftment upon the last Resignation, was in favors
of the resigners Son, and so inter (...), was fraudulent, which would not hold,
so if that Son had been a stranger, acquiring bona fide, for a cause onerous,
so then the Resignation, in (...), does not denude the resigner of the real
right, but is incomplete till Infeftment follow; and therefore, a personal
renunciation of him in whose favor it was, will fully evacuat the Resignation,
and make the resigners Infeftment as entire as at first, which could not be
without a new Infeftment, if the resigner had been divested, as in the case of
a Resignation ad remanentiam, the Superiors simple renunciation or discharge
thereof, could not revive the Vassalsprior Infeftment, but he behoved to be
Infeft, de (...), and though after the Resignation, till it be past from, or
Infeftment follow, the Lands be in Non-entry, it will not conclude that the
resigner is denuded, and the Fee is in the Superior, more then other
Non-entries, which give not the Superior the property, but a Casuality of the
Fee.

In what case Dispositions of Movables or Lands, are holden to be simulate or
fraudulent, has been shown before, Title Reparation (upon Circumvention or
Fraud) wherein retention of Possession in Movables is a main ground for
presuming simulation, especially in gifts of Escheat; yet if the Disposition of
Movables bear expressly to take effect after the Disponers death, retention of
Possession will not annul it, neither will it be esteemed as a Legacy, or
donatio mortis causa, if death be the Term, and not the consideration of it,
and it was not found ptejudged by the Disponers universal Legacy, March 8.
1626. Traquair contra Traquair.

13. So much for Conventional Conveyances of real Rights; Judicial Conveyances
of real Rights, are competent, not by the nature of the right, which cannot be
alienate without consent of the owner, and in the case of Infeftments, holden
of the Superior, without his consent, who is not obliged to receive any to be
his Vassal, but the Heirs and Successors of the first Vassal, provided in the
first Investiture; and though the Investiture bear also, the Vassals Heirs and
Assigneys, yet the Superior cannot thereupon be compelled directly to receive
a singular Successor, Assigneys being only meaned such Assigneys to whom the
Dispositions should be assigned before Infeftment thereon, as was found in the
case of recognition, Lady Carnagy contra Cranburn. February 5. 1663. But Law
has introduced in favors of Creditors, Judicial Conveyances, requiring no
consent, but authority of Law, which has also its Foundation in natural
equity, by which, as Obligations are effectual for exaction of what is thereby
due: So is there were no positive Law norCustom, the Creditor might exact,
either what is due in specie, or the equivalent; and therefore, reprysals
betwixt Nations not governed by one common Authority, are lawful: And by the
custom of Nations, extended not only against the party injurer, who is obliged
to repair, but against all the Subjects of his Sovereign, if he do not cause
reparation to be made. The Judicial transmission of Movables, is by poynding,
which being a legal execution, we shall leave it to that place. Arrestment and
the action for making for the coming, do also transmit movables; but is rather
proper to personal rights, and so is competent against the havers of Movables,
by reason of that personal obligation of restitution, which is upon the haver
to the owner, beside his own property.

Of old, alienations of Lands for money, were very rare in Scotland, or the
contracting of considerable debts, for the Nobility and Gentry did then live in
a plain and sober way, contenting themselves with that which their own Estates
did afford: And there was then known no legal execution for Debt, against Lands
or Heretable Rights, but only against Movables, by the brieff of distress or
Poynding; by which, not only the Movables of the Debtor were poynded for his
debt; but all the Movables upon his Lands belonging to his Tennents, as
appears from Act 36. Par. 1469. bearing this Title, That the poor Tennents
shall pay no further then their Terms Mail for their Lords Debt, by the Brieff
of distress, which is correctory of the former custom, whereby the goods and
cattle of the Inhabitants of the Ground were distrenzied for their Lords debts,
though their Mails extended not to the avail of the debt, and that not only for
real debts affecting the ground by Infeftments of Annualrent, Feuduties, or
Casualities of Superiority, or other debita fundi, for which the Movables of
the Tennents and Possessors, may yet be poynded for the Lords debt, not
exceeding their Terms Mail, which is ordinarily in their hand, or if paid, may
be allowed in the next Term, but for the Heritors personal debt; for by the
Act, the Debitors movables in that, or any other Barony or Shire, are
appointed to be poynded for satisfying of the Debt; but debita fundi, can only
reach the Movables of the Barony or Tenement affected therewith, and though
that this Act, by its Tenor, would yet extend to poynding of Tennents Movables
for their Masters personal debt, custom has restricted it only to real debts,
and it is entirely in desuetude, as to personal debts, which cannot burden
Tennents, but upon arrestment, in so far as they are then debitors to their
Masters.

Before this Statute in the year 1469. there is no mention in our Law or
Customs, of Appryzing or Adjudication: But Appryzing was thereby introduced in
this manner, that where the debtor has not Moveable Goods but Lands, the
Sheriff shall cause sell the Lands to the avail of the debt, and pay the
Creditor, which shall be redeemable by the debtor within seven years, and if
he cannot find a buyer, he shall appryze the debitors Lands by thirteen persons
of the best and worthiest in the (...), least suspect to either party, and
assign to the Creditors Lands to the avail of the sum, and the superior shall
receive the Creditor, or any oath buyer, for a years Rent, as the Land is set
for the time; or otherways shall take the Land to himself, and undergo the
debt. According to this Act, Appryzings did proceed by Sheriffs and Baihes, who
for satisfying of debts, Liquidat by Decreets, issued Precepts for denuncing
such Lands to be appryzed upon fifteen days warning, conform to the act of
Parliament, which denunciation was publicly read upon the ground of the Land,
before witnesses, and a Copy thereof left fixed thereupon, and also at the
Market Cross of the head Burgh of the Jurisdiction, where the Lands ly, and to
the debtor whose Lands were to be appryzed, expressing the Creditor, sum, day
and place of appryzing, that all parties interested might appear, persons of
Inquest and Witnesses were also summond to the same diet; and ordinarily the
place was upon the ground of the Lands, that the value and worth thereof might
the more clearly appear, where, after discussing of the Appryzers Claim, the
hability of the persons of Inquest, and Witnesses, so much Land was appryzed
and adjudged as was worth the sum, the years Rent to the Superior, and
expenses of Infeftments; and if the Lands were burdened with any former
annualrents, whereby a proportion of Land could not be appryzed, free of
burden; there was appryzed an annualrent forth of the Lands, effeirand to the
sums, and expenses foresaid, and redeemable in the same manner; which was
sustained by the meaning and intent of the Statute, though by the words of it,
appryzing of Lands was only mentioned, it was ever extended to all Heretable
Rights; thus it continued till the Lords of Session, upon exceptions against
the Sheriff, upon his interest, relation, or enimity, or upon the lying of
Lands in diverse Jurisdictions, for preventing of expenses by many appryzings,
where the Lands in one Jurisdiction sufficed not, did grant Letters of
appryzing under the signet, direct not to the ordinar Sheriffs, but to sherifts
in that part, which being frequent, did come to run in course to Messengers, as
sheriffs in that part, etc. And thereby the appryzer, in respect the Letters
had a blank for inserting the Messengers name, did choice the Messenger, who
did denunce all Lands and other Heretable Rights, which the appryzer pretended
to belong to his debtor: And in respect the Letters bore dispensation of the
place, did apprize, at Edinhurgh, all that the appryzer clamed, in satisfaction
of the debt, without knowledge or consideration of the value of the Lands, or
others appryzed, or proportion to the sums appryzed for, and thereupon was
Infeft in the whole, and paid to the superior a composition for a years Rent
of the whole, which was a considerable accession to the Debitors debt, and
behoved to be paid by him, and by the said appryzings, the appryzer might,
and oftentimes did enter in possession of the whole Lands, without being
countable for the rents thereof, of what quantity soever: By this abuse, the
intent of that excellent statute for appryzings, was enervat, and the same
turned in a mere Formality, until the Par. 1621. cap. 6. which began to correct
that exorbitant abuse, and declared appryzers countable for their
intromissions, in so far as exceeded their Annualrents, to be imputed in their
principal sums, pro tanto, and that they being thereby satisfied of their sums,
principal and annual, composition to the superior, and expenses of appryzing
and infeftments, that thereby the appryzing should expyre, ipso facto, and it
is also declared, that if the Lands appryzed be not worth of free rent,
effeirand to the annualrent of the said sums, that before redemption he shall
be satisfied of the superplus. By which Act it is declared, that Minors may
redeem Lands appryzed from them at any time, within their age of twenty five
years complete, yet so, that after the first seven year, the appryzer shall
have the benefit of the whole Mails and Duties till he be redeemed, which has
always been extended to Lands appryzed from persons being Major, if a Minor
succeed, during the Legal; and if a person being Major succeed to him who was
Minor, he has the benefit of Reversion of seven year, in so far as was not run
in the Minors life, and if less remain then a year, at the Minors death, the
Major has a full year to redeem after the Minors death; and by the Act 1669.
of the abrogat Parliament, 1641. appryzers were declared countable for the
rents of appryzed Lands intrometted with by them, during all the time of the
Legal, whether competent to Minors or others.

And because of another great abuse, by the debording of Appryzings from the
first institution. that the first appryzer, appryzing the whole Estate, the
other Creditors had no more but the Legal Reversion, which did ordinarily
expyre, the subsequent Creditors not being able to raise money to redeem the
anterior appryzer, whereby the first appryzer carried the whole Estate, and
excluded all the rest, and being ashamed to take so great a Legal advantage,
and sometimes not daring to make use of it, did ordinarily compone with the
debtor, his appearand heir, or some confident to their behove, whereby the
debitors heir recovered his whole Estate, by satisfying one Creditor, and
excluding all the rest; therefore the Par. 1661. by their Act 62. anent debtor
and creditor, declared that all appryzings deduced since the first of January
1652. or to be deduced in time coming, within a year after the first appryzing,
which became effectual by infeftment or Charge, should come in pari passu, as
if one appryzing had been led for all the sums, and thereby the legal was
extended to ten year; and it is declared, that whenever the appearand heir or
any to his behove, shall acquire right to any expyred appryzing, that the same
shall be redeemed from them within the space of ten year, after their acquiry,
by posterior appryzers, upon payment of what they truly paid, in so far as
shall not be satisfied by their intromission.

But neither did this statute cure the abuse of appryzings; and therefore the
Act of Par. of the 6. of septem. 1672. upon consideration of debording of
appryzings from the first design, and of the great inconveniences arising
thereby for the bringing in of all appryzers within year and day, did give way
to break the credit and ruin the interest of the most considerable Heretors in
the Kingdom, that creditors being thereby invited, under the hazard of being
excluded to appryze within a year; and thereby one wilful, malicious, or
necessitous Creditor apprizing, all the rest followed, and entirely brook their
credit, unless they would pay all their debt in one day; therefore, the
Parliament, did in place of Appryzings, ordain adjudications, to proceed before
the Lords of Session, for adjudging the Lands and other Heretable Rights of
debitors, effeirand to the sums appryzed for, and a fifth part more in place of
the penaltiies and sheriff-fee, and allowed Witnesses for either party, for
clearing of the Rental and rate of the Lands, in the several places where they
ly, and appointed the adjudger to have present Possession of the Lands
adjudged, not being accountable for his intromission during the Legal,
redeemable only within five year, whereby the Creditor had easy accress for
his satisfaction, without all hazard or account, which had been the ground of
many tedious Processes of Count and Reckoning for the Intromission of former
Appryzers, and wherein the Adjudgers is to have the Consent of his debtor,
both as to Right and Possession, and delivery of the Evidents; and it is
declared, that if the debtor do not instruct, and deliver a good Right, and
consent, as said is, that the creditor might adjudge all the debitors Estate in
the same manner, and to the same effect, as is appointed by the Act of Par.
1661. between debtor and creditor.

We shall not here speak of Adjudications and Appryzings, as they are legal
Executions, and of the Order and Solemnities requisite to them, as such; but
only as they are Conveyances of real Rights, wherein we shall consider; first,
upon what ground Appryzings proceed. Secondly, against what Rights they are
competent. Thirdly, what is the effect of the Process, or Decree of Appryzing,
without further Diligence. Fourthly, what is the effect thereof, when further
Diligence is used. Fifthly, what is the effect thereof when Infeftment is
obtained. And lastly, in what manner it cease and becomes extinct.

14. As to the first, Appryzing is an Appretiation and Judicial Vendition of
the thing appryzed, from the Debtor to the Creditor; and as in all Venditions,
there must be merx and pretium, or the price in numerat Money; for if the
mutual consist in any thing else, it is not Sale but Exchange; therefore the
ground of Appryzing must be numerate and current Money, and if originally it be
not so, it must be liquidat before Appryzing can proceed; neither can it
proceed but upon a Decree establishing the Debt by Registration, or otherways
in the person of the Appryzer active, and of the Debtor Passive; yet an
Assigney intimating before the Cedents death, may Appryze summarly without
Action, establishing the Debt in his person, as has been shown, Title
Assignations. Neither could Appryzing proceed upon Heretable Bonds, unless the
same had been made moveable, by Requisition or Charge; and therefore, was found
null, proceeding upon an Heretable Sum, bearing a Clause of Annualrent, though
payable without requisition upon a single Charge of six days, seeing that Charge
was not given July 20. 1622. John Cranstoun contra Lord of East-nisbit. Hope
Obligations, Alexander Mowat contra the Creditors of John Richardson. John
Cranstoun contra Lord of Lugtoun. But Posterior Decisions have run in the
contrair, that if the sum were payable without Requisition, Appryzing might
proceed thereupon without a Charge, as well as Poynding or Arrestment, July 4.
1627. Edgar and Johnstoun contra Findlason. July 10. 1629. Clackmannan contra
Barroun. In which case, the principal sum was payable at a precise Term, and no
mention of any Term or time thereafter, and yet was Appryzed for, after that
Term, January 25. 1642. John Seatoun contra James Loch. But if Infeftment have
followed, or Requisition be requisite, the sum must be made moveable, before
Appryzing: But other Sums, though by Destination Heretable, yet having Summar
Execution by the parties consent, Appryzing is sustained thereupon.

15. As to the second point against what Rights Appryzings extend; First,
though Letters of Appryzings contain power to poynd Movables, which must be
searched for; yet that which is properly called Appryzing, extends to no
Movables, but only to Heretable Rights, as Lands, Annualrents, Liferents,
Tacks, Reversions, Heretable Bonds, July 25. 1623. Earl of Errel contra Buckie;
and therefore, it extends not to the Mails and Duties of the Appryzed Lands,
before the Appryzing, Feb. 14. 1623. Saltcoats contra Home. The like, though
the question was against the Debtor himself, and that the style of the
Appyzing bore, all Right that the Debtor had to the Lands to be Appryzed,
March 13. 1627. Mackre of Balmagie contra Livingstoun. And where an Annualrent
is Appryzed, it extends not to the bygone Annualrents, which are Moveable; but
these being Moveable, are Arrestable, neither does it extend to the Duties
after Denunciation, and before Appryzing, Feb. 16. 1633. Harper contra Cockburn
and Johnstoun.

Appryzing is extended to all Heretable Rights, though they were not provided
to Assigneys, but to the Debtor and his Heirs only, or failing, such Heirs to
return; and therefore, public utility and the favor of the Creditor makes it
more effectual then any voluntar Disposition or Assignation could be, so an
Appryzing was found to carry a Right, though not granted to Assigneys, Hope
Appryzing, John Brown contra Fssilmont of Buckie. And a Husband granting Right
to his Wife, but with provision that she should renounce it, if he required it
in his own life allennerly, a Creditor of his Appryzing that Land, and
requiring the Wife to renunce, was found to have right thereto, spots.
Appryzing, Lady Huttonhal contra Cranstoun of Moristoun. An Appryzing of the
ground Right and Property of Lands, and all other Rights, etc. carries not
only the Property, but all other real Right, or Obliegements for granting
thereof, and though no Infeftment follow, the Appryzing so conceived will carry
any Right, which requires not Infeftment, as if it had been specially Denunced
and Appryzed, June 19. 1635. James Rule contra Alexander Home.

16. To come now to the third Point concerning the Efficacy of the Process and
Decree of Appryzing, without further Diligence; and first, it has the effect
of an Assignation, without necessity of Intimation, and carries all Rights
which require not Infeftments to transmit them, as Liferents, Reversions, Tacks
And so an Appryzing was found to carry the Legal of an anterior Appryzing,
though the Denunciation, whereupon it proceeded, was anterior to the
Denunciation whereupon the first Appryzing proceeded, and thereby at the time
of the Denunciation of the second Appryzing, neither was the first Appryzing,
in being neither the Denunciation thereof, and so could not be Denunced or
Appryzed; yet the Denunciation of the Ground-right, and all Right competent, or
that might be competent to the Debtor, was found to carry the Reversion of the
said first Appryzing, Novem. 18. 1624. Doctor Kincaid contra James Halyburtoun.

17. Though second Appryzings carry the legal Reversions of anterior Appryzings
without Infeftment: Yet Infeftment is frequently taken thereupon, that the
posterior Appryzer may have Interest thereby, to reduce or quarrel the Anterior
Appryzings, and to pursue for Mails and Duties, or Removing, if the Anterior
appryzer should forbear.

18. The second effect of Appryzing is, that the Debtor is thereby so far
divested, that after his death, Infeftment may be taken by the Appryzer,
without transfering or Infefting the Debitors Heir, November. 20. 1624. Lag
contra his Tennents. So likewise the heir of the Appryzer dying before
allowance, or Infeftment upon Supplication obtained allowance from the Lords,
and Letters to Charge the Superior to receive him, Spots. hic, Alexander
Frazer Supplicant. The like was granted by the Appryzers Assigney, March 22.
1626. Collace contra Lord Elphingstoun. Yea, an appryzer did obtain allowance
and varrand to Charge the heir of the Superior, contained in the first
allowance, being dead, December. 5. 1628. Lord of Corsbie contra Kilsyth. From
this ground it is, that an Appryzing excludes prior assignations, granted by
the Debtor, to the Mails and Duties of the Lands appryzed, as to Terms after
the appryzing, Hope assignations, George Meldrum contra Lord of Anstruther.

19. And when an appryzing was led before an Husbands death, it excluded his
Wife from a Terce, Hope appryzings, James Chrightoun contra Relict of John
Cranstoun: Where he does also observe it to exclude a subsequent Ward, in
respect the Superior gave a Charter upon the appryzing, in his Vassals life,
though no Seasine followed thereupon, Ibidem, George Hamiltoun contra Tennents
of Newburgh. And albeit Dury observes, that in the case betwixt the Lord
Fleming and the Lord Balmerino, dispute the 7. of March 1633. it was not
decided, but superceeded in hopes of agreement, whether a Superior could be
compelled to receive the Minor himself till his Majority, it seems the
Superior ought to receive the appryzer upon his legal diligence, but prejudice
of the Ward, during the Minority of his former Vassal, though he would not
receive the Minor, yet he would be necessitate to receive the appryzer, and his
heirs whatsomever, though the Lands were Tailzied, and to return to the
Superior himself.

20. The third effect of appryzing is, that being a legal diligence, it renders
the thing appryzed litigious, not only from the date of the appryzing, but from
the date of the Denunciation: So that no voluntary deed of the Debtor, after
the Denunciation can prejudge the appryzer, if he be not in mora. Thus a Tack
set by the debtor after Denunciation, was found null, Spots. appryzing, Peter
Blackburn contra Walter Balvaird. Yet where the appryzer was negligent, and
obtained not Infeftment, nor did diligence; therefore, for some years, a Tack
set by a Debtor before the appryzing, but having its Entry after the
appryzing, was preferred thereto, July 11. 27. Wallace contra Harvie. Yea, no
Infeftment or diligence being used upon an appryzing, for many years, an
arrestment thereafter was preferred to the Mails and Duties of the
Landsappryzed, Feb. 14. 1623. Saltcoats contra Brown. But Custom since has
always preferred appryzings to arrestments, although there were no Infeftment
or diligence upon the appryzing, because it is a legal assignation, and needs
no Intimation, unless the appryzer had relinquished his right; and therefore,
though that case of Saltcoats was adduced, an appryzer of an annualrent, was
preferred to an arrestment, though the appryzer neither was infeft nor used
diligence, for nine years before the arrestment, Feb. 23. 1671. Lord Justice
Clerk contra Mr. John Fairholm. It is said, no voluntary disposition deed of
the debtor after the denunciation, will prejudge the appryzing, because if the
deed done thereafter be necessary, and that thereunto the debtor was specially
obliged before, and might have been directly compelled; such, even after
denunciation may be preferred, as an annualrent proceeding upon a Bond, prior
to the denunciation, containing an obliegemement to Infeft, in that annualrent,
the Infeftment thereupon, though after denunciation was preferred, Hope
appryzing, Samuel Henderson contra John Mcadam. The like of an Infeftment,
whereof the Charter was before denunciation, and the (...) before the Seasine
upon the appryzing, Ibid. The like of an Infeftment upon Resignation; which
Resignation preceeded the Denunciation; and though the Resignation was at first
refused by the Superior, being accepted thereafter, it was preferred, Ibid.
Mr. Thomas Hope contra Mr. Thomas Hendrison. And so an Infeftment upon a
disposition for a Cause onerous: Which disposition was of the same date with
the denunciation, and whereupon Infeftment followed, before the appryzing was
preferred to the appryzing, Spots. appryzing, Mark Hamiltoun contra Brown. Yea,
an Infeftment upon a disposition, posterior to an appryzing, was preferred
thereto, seeing the Appryzer did no diligence for six years, Ibid. Hamiltoun
contra Mcculloch.

21. In the competition of Appryzings being both legal diligences; The first
appyzer doing sufficient diligence, is preferred as the first appryzer, last
Infeft, but having (...) Charged, was preferred, though the Superior did
voluntarly Infeft a posterior appryzer, Jan. last, 1632. Ferguson contra
Mckenzie. Yea, a posterior appryzing was preferred to a prior, where the
debtor by Collusion suspended the Letters, and denunciation of the one and not
of the other, whereby the other appryzed first. Nov. 28. 1628. Borthwick contra
Clerk. The like where the prior proceeded upon a Citation of the party upon
sixty days, as being out of the Country, and the debtor was brought to the
Country of purpose, that a posterior denunciation upon fifteen days by another
appryzer, might give him the first appryzing: and yet the other was preferred,
Nicol. Tennents of Cockburnspeth contra Sir Hendry Wardlaw, and upon the late
competition betwixt the Lord of Clerkintoun pursuing a Reduction of Corsbies
appryzing, as collusive in so far as after his author Sir William Dick had
Charged the Superior, with the first Charge upon the Letters of four Forms,
they gave Infeftment to Corsbie before the days of the first Charge were
Expyred, the Lords reduced the Infeftment, but assoilzied him from bygones, as
possessing bona fide, and seeing the pursuer suffered him to possess without
pursuit, till the legal was expyred, they found that Corsbie, as now the second
appryzer might redeem, December 3. 1664. inter eosdem.

22. The fourth effect of an appryzing is, that being led by the Superior
against his Vassal, it needs no Infeftment, but consolidats the property with
the Superiority, and is preferable to all posterior appryzings, whatever be
their diligence, Spots. appryzing, Stevinson contra Lord of Craigmiller. But
in other cases, appryzing without further diligence, does not transmit the real
Right, though it may exclude assignations to Mails and Duties, or arrestments
upon personal debts, it is no sufficient title for Mails and Duties, against
any other having any real Title, March 5. 1628. Andrew Scot contra Tennents of
Whitesland.

23. As to the fourth point concerning the efficacy of appryzings, whereupon
diligenceis used before Infeftment obtained. They have no effect to remove
Tennents, though the Superior was Charged, and the Letters found orderly
proceeded against him, and though only proponed by the Tennents, and no party
pretending right, March 25. 1628. Lockhart contra his Tennents. But the
appryzing with diligence has this effect; First, it is a sufficient title for
Mails and Duties against the Possessors. Secondly, it excludes all posterior
Infeftments or Diligences by the Collusion, or voluntary deed of the Superior,
or any other. Thirdly, It is effectual to compel the Superior to receive, and
Infeft the appryzer upon payment to him of a years rent, which was formerly by
Letters of four Forms, till the Statute, 1644. cap. 43. whereby one Charge upon
twenty one days is sufficient, all which proceeds upon the allowance of the
Lords, upon the back of the appryzing: And albeit the Act is not revived in the
late Parliament, yet the Lords continue the Custom.

24. This allowance of appryzings is appointed to be registrate, and not the
whole appryzing, Par. 1641. cap. 54. yet neither the want of the allowance, nor
the want of Registration thereof, annulleth the appryzing, till the last Act of
Par. 1661. cap. 31. making the Registration of the allowance necessary:
Otherways posterior appryzings, first allowed, are to be preferred, unless
without allowance the appryzer has obtained Infeftment, before the others
Diligence, upon which grounds, the Lords upon Supplication, without Citation,
ordained an appryzing to be allowed, and registrate long after sixty days, and
after the debitors death, seeing it would be thereby preferable to all other
Rights, after the Registration thereof, June 8. 1665.

25. There are many debates which arise concerning the Entry betwixt appryzers
and Superiors, as whether the Superior can be compelled to receive the
appryzer, without instructing that the Vassal from whom he has appryzed, was
Infeft, or specially Charged, which has been several times decided Negative,
fifty years since. But now of a long time, Charges against Superiors for
Infefting appryzers, salvo jure ejuslibet and suo, have been still sustained,
because it is unusual and difficult for the appryzer to get his debitors
Evidents, unless it were the Extract of his Seasine, and the Superiors
receiving him upon obedience, cannot prejudge him; and therefore, the Superior
was ordained to receive the appryzer, though himself was in possession, by
virtue of a Right, March 5. 1634. Black contra Pitmedden. The like, whatever
Right the Superior might pretend, March 11. 2636. Margaret Scot contra Gilbert
Eliot.

26. The quantity of the years Rent by the Act of Par. 1469. cap. 36. is
expressed to be a years Mail, as the Land is set for the time, wherein
consideration is had of such real burdens affecting the Land, as are taken one
with the Superiors consent: But in the case of a Liferent so taken on, the
years Rent was modified full, but delayed to be paid till the Liferenters
death, July 18. 1633. Branden Baird contra Consideration is also had of Feus
set by the debtor before the appryzing, which while warranted by Law, the
Superior will only get a years Feu-duty for receiving the appryzer in the
Superiority, Feb. 15. 1634. Munktoun contra Lord Yester. Spots. appryzing,
Walter Cowan contra Master of Elphingstoun. But the Superior will not be
obliged to receive the appryzer for a years Rent of the Money appryzed for,
but of the Lands appryzed, March 23. 1622. Mr. Simeon Ramsay contra Lord of
Corstoun. March 30. 1637. Thomas Peterson contra Walter Murray. Yet in this
last case, the Lords modified the Rent far within the worth of the Lands, for
the Rent being worth 800. Merks, was modified to 300. Merks.

A Superior must not only receive the first Appryzer, but all others who
Charge, though one was Infeft before any other Charged, March 11. 1628.
Ferguson contra Couper. And if more Charge, he must accept a years Rent for
all, providing that he who should be preferred, refound to the rest the
proportions paid by them to the Superior, July 22. 1628. Lord Borthwick and
Walter Hay contra Haistoun and Smith.

27. If the Superior be contumacious, and will not enter the appryzer upon
diligence, Craig lib. 2. dieg. 2. Prescrives, that the Superior may be thrice
required, and if he refuse, Letters may be obtained from the Lords to Charge
his Superior, to receive the appryzer, supplying his place, and so from
Superior to Superior, till he come to the King, who refuses none, by which
the Superior would loose the Casualities of his Superiority, during his Life,
as is ordinary in the Entry of heirs upon retour.

28. As to the next Point, Infeftment following upon appryzing does Constitute
a real Right, but under Reversion of seven years, being before the Act debtor
and creditor, Par. 1661. cap. 62. or since of ten years, which is counted from
the date of the Appryzing, and not from the allowance, or Infeftment, November
11. 1630. Lord of Limpitlaw contra Mr. James Aikenhead.

29. Yet it remains but as a security, which the appryzer may renunce, or make
use of other securities till he be satisfied, March 15. 1628. Lord Blantyre,
contra Parochioners of Bothwel. The like, though after the Legal was expyred,
December. 7. 1631. Scarlet contra Paterson. But here the appryzer had attained no
Possession.

30. Remains the last Point proposed, how appryzings become extinct, and are
taken off; and that is first, when the appryzing is declared null, through
defect of any essential Solemnity. Secondly, When the sum whereupon it is
deduced, is not due, as when the half thereof was paid, Hope appryzing, Samuel
Blackburn contra James Lamb. James Lamb contra Hepburn of Smeatoun. Or being
deduced for a Terms Rent, which was not due till after the appryzing; albeit it
was an assigney who appryzed, seeing it was to the behove of the Cedent, it was
found relevan to reduce the appryzing in totum, June 20. 1678. Scot of Burnfoot
contra Sir John Falconer and James Edmonston. Jan. 31. 1679. Francis Irving
contra contra Lord of Drum. The like, where a part of the sum was Poinded for,
and yet the appryzing was for the whole, Nicol qui potiores in pignore, John
Steven contra Maxwels: Or where the denunciation was before the Term of
payment, though the appryzing was after, Nov. 28. 1623. Mr. Robert Craig contra
Wilson. And an appryzing for two Sums, instead thereof as to one of which sums
the decree was loosed and turnedin a Lybel, before the appryzing was deduced:
Yet the appryzers intromission thereby before Citation, was not found to be
repealed, as being consumed bonafide, upon a colorable Title, Nov. 23. 1677.
Boid and Graham contra Malloch. And an appryzing was reduced, because one of
the sums appryzed for, was Registrat, a non suo judice, July 20. 1678. Moreis
contra Orrock of Balram. In which case the Lords would have sustained the
appryzing as a security for the true sums resting, if the appryzer would have
past by the Termly failzie; for the Lords do frequently Supply defects in
appryzings or adjudications, in so far as they may stand as securities of true
debt, and real expense, especially when the question is betwixt the debtor and
the appryzer, but not in competition with more formal Rights, and they are most
strict against appryzings or adjudications, when they are insisted upon, as
expired, or for penalties, Sheriff-fees, and the annualrents thereof; and
therefore, a posterior appryzing being solemn and formal, according to the
Custom then in use, was preferred to a prior not being so formal, July 15.
1670. Lady Lucia Hamiltoun contra Boyd of Pitcon. And likeways, an appryzing
being led for Penalties and termly Failzies, was reduced as to these, because a
part of the sum was not due at the date of the appryzing, though it was deduced
at the instance of an assigney: But if it were proven to the Cedents behove, it
was also found reducible, quo ad, the accumulation of the annualrents, and
making them and penalties Principal sums. But seeing the appryzer declared it
redeemable, though the Legal Reversion was expyred, it was sustained as a
security of the first principal sum, and current annualrents thereof, Jan. 31.
1679. Francis lrving contra Lord of Drum. And appryzing was sustained upon a
Bond, bearing a long Term of payment, with a Clause irritant, that if two Terms
annualrent run together unpayed, the whole principal and annual should be
payable, without abiding the first Term, though there was no Declarator of the
irritancy, it not being penal, but taking away the favor of the Creditor to
the debtor, by delay of the term, June 20. 1678. Scot of Burn-foot contra
Falconer and Edmistoun.

31. Albeit the Lords do not ordinarily modifie Penalties after appryzing; yet
if they be exorbitant, they do modifie the same, and all Termly Failzies, as
they did in the said case of Orrock of Balram and Francis Irvin.

32. Appryzing was sustained upon a sum, payable without Requisition, albeit
there was no Charge preceding the appryzing, July 21. 1666. Mr. John Thomson
contra Mcgutrig. The like, though the Bond bore annualrent before 1641. seeing
there was no Infeftment thereupon, or Requisition therein, Jan. 14. 1679.
Farquhar of Finian contra Robert Stuart.

33. And an appryzing was sustained, though the Lands appryzed were not filled
up in the Letters of appryzing, or special Charge, nor in the Executions,
because the Messenger who execute was Judge in the Appryzing, which relating
the Denunciation of the Lands particularly, and Charging the appearand heir to
Enter thereto in special, was found a more solemn Execution, then any Execution
apart, Jan. 16. 1680. John Brown contra Nicol.

34. An appryzing was sustained without producing the Letters of appryzing,
being in anno 1636. But the Instructions of the debt was found necessary to be
produced, being within Prescription, February 11. 1681. James Kenuay contra
Thomas Crawford: Yea, an appryzing was sustained upon a Bond, payable upon
Requisition, though the appryzing made no mention of the Requisition, the
Instrument of Requisition being produced.

35. And though the Dispensation to appryze, was neither at Edinburgh, nor the
head Burgh of the Shire, but a place upon the open Fields, and upon a count of
a great rain, the Messenger did not appryze that day, but adjurned the Court of
appryzing til the next day, July 12. 1671. the heirs Mr. Thomas Lundie contra
the Earl of Southesk.

36. And an appryzing of the ground-right of Lands, and all other right
belonging to his debititor, the Superior being Charged thereupon, was
preferred to a posteriour appryzer, who appryzed particularly an annualrent out
of the Lands, which was the only Right of the common debtor, November 21.
1673. Mr. John Fairholm contra Rentoun and the Countess of Levin.

37. Appryzings are elided by satisfaction or payment, without necessity of
Renunciation, Resignation, or Reduction, as in the case of other Infeftment,
July 25. 1626. Lord Lovat contra Frazer: The reason is, because appryzing being
but a legal diligence, for security of the sum, which ceassing, it falls
without other solemnities; and the dobitors own Infeftment stands valid,
without Renovation; which, with the Infeftment upon the Appryzing, stood but as
a parallel Right for security, so that all returned, adpristinum statum; and
amongst the rest, the Casualities of the Superiority, if they were taken off by
the appryzing; and therefore, an heir not entering, but being Chargeed, if he
satisfy and redeem the appryzing, he will be in non-entry till he be received
of new.

38. Appryzings are excluded and qualified with the Back-bonds and obliegements
of the appryzer, as in personal Rights, which are valid against singular
Successors, as a back-bond, that an apprysing should not be prejudicial to
another parties Right, was found relevant against the appryzers singular
Successor, the Kings Donatar of the appryzers forefaulture, July 31. 1666. the
Earl of Southesk contra Marquess of Huntly.

The last and most ordinary Exstintcion of appryzing, is by Intromission with
the Mails and Duties of the appryzed Land over and above the annualrent, for
these are imputed in the principal Sum, by the Statute, Par. 1621. cap. 6.
which is also extended to Minors having the privilege after the ordinary legal
of seven year: But it was not provided for in the said Statute, that the
appryzer should be countable for his Intromission thereafter, which is
therefore provided for, Par. 1641. cap. 67. which, though it was neglected, and
not revived, Par. 1661. yet the Lords sustained the same, as now in Custom
twenty years and more, Feb. 18. 1663. John Ross contra Mckenzie. But the Tenor
of the said first Statute; being, that the quantities of the Mails and Duties
shall extend to as much as will satisfy the whole principal sum, and
annualrents thereof, composition to the Superior, and annualrent thereof and
expenses, in deducing the appryzing: In that case the appryzing is declared to
expyre, ipso facto; So that if any part thereof remain, and the debtor be so
negligent, as not to use an Order, and count and reckoning within the legal,
but suffer it to expire, the appryzing will stand valid, and carry the Right of
the whole Lands, and will not be extinct in so far as satisfied proportionally,
Hope Confirmation, Doctor kincaid contra Halyburtoun, which was so found, where
a part of the sum was satisfied, by payment, Novem. 28. 1623. Mr. Robert Craig
contra Wilson. But if the remainer be very small, the Lords may be the more
strict in modifying pryces, and if that be not sufficient, a small remainder
will not take away the Right, de minimis non curat Lex. Intromission is not
only extended to the Rents and Profits of the appryzed Lands, but to the price
of any part thereof, sold by the appryzer within the Legal, Jan. 14. 1669.
Mckenzie contra Ross. And ansappryzing was also found extinct by the
Intromission of him, to whom the appryzer granted Back-bond, declaring the
appryzing to be to his behove, and that against a singular Successor, who
thereafter was Infeft upon the appryzers Resignation, July 12. 1670. Kennedy
contra Cunninghame and Wallace. Yea, An appryzing was found excluded, as being
satisfied by the debtor, and retired by him, with a blank Assignation thereto,
lying by him at his death, though his Son thereafter filled up his name
therein, which was instructed by the sons oath and witnesses, ex officio, Feb.
27. 1666. Creditors of the Lord Gray contra the Lord Gray. But an appryzing was
not found extinct by Intromission, where the appryzer paid to his debtor, the
superplus of the rent, above his annualrent, before the leading of any other
appryzing; yet where any order of Redemption is used before the expyrie of the
legal, the appryzing was found extinct by intromission, after the course of the
legal, July 7. 1676. John Edgar contra Patrick Milu. The like was found in
respect of an order, used by a second appryzer, and was sustained, though the
first appryzer had acquired right to an order of Redemption by a third
appryzer, used against the second appryzer, which was not found to hinder the
second appryzer, to declare the first appryzing satisfied by Intromission
during the legal or the order, but prejudice to the third appryzer, or to the
first appryzer, having Right from the third appryzer to Redeem the Lands from
the second appryzer, by satisfaction of the sums due to him, July 18. 1676.
Gordoun of Seatoun contra Watson. Yea, an appryzing being both against the
Principal and Cautioners Estates, an order of Redemption used by the principal
debtor was found to keep the appryzing unexpyred, not only as to his own
Estate, but as to the Cautioners Estate, February 10. 1675. Lady Torwoed-head
contra Florence Gardner.

39. But the appryzer has it in his option, whether he will enter in
Possession of the Mails and Duties, or will uplift more thereof then his
annualrent; yet if a posteriour appryzer insist for Possession, the first must
either Possess, do diligence, and be countable, or suffer him to possess,
February 11. 1636. Colqhoun contra Lord of Balvie. But if the appryzer
possess, he must do diligence for the rent of that Land he possessed, and be
countable, not only for what he intrometted with but for what he might have
intrometted with; and if the Lands were Tennent-stead at his entry, he must
count accordingly at that rate, though thereafter given over and waste, if he
neither set nor labored them himself, nor intimat to the debtor so to do,
Feb. 9. 1639. Brownhill contra Cawder. The like found, that the appryzer was
countable according to the Rental, allowing all defalcations, Jan. 4. 1662.
James Seaton contra Antony Roswal. But where the appryzer entered in possession
of the Lands waste, he was not found countable, according as he set them
thereafter, for the first year of his proper Labourage, seeing by the Season
without his fault, he lost thereby, December. 23. 1629. John Dickson contra Young.
But an appryzer was found countable for the Rental of all the Tennents of a
small Tenement, lying contigue, having taken Decree against all the Tennents,
and yet refusing to count for some particular Rooms, without showing any
hinderance to uplift from these, which other appryzers calling to account,
could not know that he had forborne these, but nothing was determined as to the
common debitors own labourage, Jan. 14. 1681. Schaw of Grimmat contra John Mure
Writer. Yet where the appryzer was disturbed in his Possession by the debtor,
Via facti, or via juris, he was not found countable by a Rental, but what he
recovered till he attained to peaceable Possession, Jan. 20. 1681. Burnet
contra Burnet of Barns.

40. The Act of Par. 1661. cap. 62. has lengthened the legal of appryzings,
and has brought in all who appryze, within a year of the first effectual
appryzing, pari passu. By this Act these, these alterations are introduced as
to appryzings: First, Whereas before the first appryzer being infeft or doing
diligence, had only access to the whole appryzed Lands till he were satisfied:
Now the Lords are empowered to limit the Possession during the legal, as they
shall see cause, the appryzer getting his annualrent or security therefore; and
therefore, an appryzer pursuing for removing, and Mails and Duties, his pursuit
was only sustained, for so much of the appryzed Land as she should choose, the
rent whereof would be equivalent to eight per cent. of the sums appryzed for,
he being countable for the superplus, more then his annualrent and public
burdens, the defenders House and Mains being always excepted, seeing there was
sufficient of other Rents, June 27. 1672. Nicolson contra Sir William Murray.
But the power granted to the Lords to restrict appryzers, is only personal and
peculiar to the debtor, and not to the posterior appryzers, July 28. 1671.
Murray contra Earl of Southesk and others. Secondly, All appryzings led since
the first of January 1652. before the first effectual Compryzing, obtaining
Infeftment, or charging the Superior to receive, or within a year after the
same, or to be led thereafter upon any persosonal debts, come in pari passu, as
if they all had been contained in one compryzing, the other appryzers paying to
the first effectual Compryzer, the expenses of his compryzing, and Infeftment
thereupon, but the year is not to counted from the Infeftment or Charge, by
which the appryzing becomes effectual, but from the date of the Decree of
appryzing, July 4. 1671. Lord of Balfour contra Mr. William Douglas. But this
extends not to appryzings or annualrents, or other debita fundi; and
accordingly it was decided by the Lords, that those other appryzers behoved to
pay the whole composition to the Superior, Feb. 5. 1663. Robert Graham contra
John Ross. Yet these appryzings that were prior to the Act, were not found to
come in pari passu, from the dates of the appryzings, albeit the Act bear, that
they should come in as if they were in one appryzing, but only from the date of
the Act of Parliament. And as to what the first appryzer had possessed, bona
fide, before the act of his intromission, exceeded his annualrent, the same
should be imputed to the expenses of the compryzings and composition, and in
payment of the sums appryzed for, pro tanto, Jan. 7. 1665. Graham of Blaitwood
contra Browns.

But an appryzing led before January 1652. though Infeftment or Charge were
used thereon, after Jan. 1652. was found to exclude all appryzers after Jan.
1652. whose Infeftment or Charge were posterior to the Infeftment or Charge
upon the appryzing, led before Jan. 1652. and that the said posterior appryzing
did not come in pari passu, with that led before Jan. 1652. Because the Act of
Parliament relates nothing to appryzings deduced before Jan. 1652. December. 12.
1666. Sir Henry Home contra Creditors of Kello. And albeit the first effectual
appryzing was satisfied, and so extinct; yet it did stand valid as to the
second appryzing, within year and day; but a third appryzing was not found
thereby to come in pari passu, with the second appryzing, as being within year
and day thereof, as if the second appryzing became the first appryzer, December.
13. 1672. Street contra Earl of Northesk and James Deans. Feb. 20. 1679.
Tennents of Mortoun contra Earl of Queensberry. And where the first appryzer
(...) but a part of the Lands appryzed, the second appryzer not Infeft, was
preferred to the third appryzer Infeft, as to the remanent Rents, because the
second appryzer needed no Infeftment, but the Infeftment upon the first
appryzing was sufficient for all the appryzings led within the year of the
first, December. 22. 1664. Doctor Ramsay and William Hay contra Alexander
Seatoun. There is also an exception from this Clause, by another Act of
Parliament, 1661. cap. 21. Session 3. that second apprysers shall not be
prejudged if they did acquire right to a former apprysing, redeemed and
satisfied by them, for their own security, before the said Act, albeit led
since Jan. 1652. which first comprysing shall remain in the same case, as
apprysings were formerly; it was so decided, without necessity to allege that
Right was taken to the first apprysing, to shun the expyring of the legal, or
any other necessary cause, December. 9. 1664. Veatch of Dawick contra Alexander
Williamson. Thirdly, The extent of the legal is altered from seven years to ten
years; so that where the legal was not (...) the time of the act, three years
were allowed to redeem them, from Whitsonday 1661. which terminated at
Whitsonday, 1664. Whereanent it being questioned, whether intromission during
these three years, should satisfy apprysings, which being deduced since, Jan.
1652. were expyred according to the Law then standing, and disponed to others,
there being no mention of that Point in the said Act, the Lords decided
affirmative, January 20. 1666. Clappertoun contra Lord of Torfonce.

41. Fourthly, The benefit of Redemption is competent to Creditors against the
appearand Heirs of their Debitors, acquiring right to expyred Compryzings,
which was extended to appearand Heirs, even during his Fathers Life, June 19.
1668. Burnet contra Naesmith, or any person to their behove, acquiring right to
appryzings within ten years after the acquirers right, for such sums only as
they paid for acquiring thereof, and they were found extinct by the appearand
Heirs intromission by exception, which was so far extended, that it reached an
appryzing assigned to an appearand Heir, though the assignation was before this
Statute, seeing the infeftment which made the appearand Heirs Right real and
effectual, was after; and though the appryzing was redeemable when acquired,
but expired in the person of the appearand Heir, July 21. 1671. Sir George
Maxwel contra Maxwel of Kirkconnel. But the appearand heir getting right to the
appryzing, gratis, it was not found to accress to the Creditors, but only to be
redeemable within ten years after his Right, for the sum whereupon the
appryzing proceeded, Feb. 13. 1673. intereosdem. An appryzing acquired by the
Husband of an appearand Heir, found not redeemable by what be paid, unless it
were proven that it was acquired by the Wifes Means, or upon her account, June
13. 1674. William Richardson con. Palmer. Feb. 21. 1673. Richardson contra
Colline Laumond and Skeen of Halyards. Jan. 15. 1679. Andrew Mcdowgal contra
Sir Hendrie Guthrie and his Spouse. But this ten years Reversion was not found
competent to the debtor himself, to redeem from his appearand heir, December. 3.
1680. Sir Michael Naesmith contra James Naesmith. But a second Brother
acquiring an appryzing upon easy terms, when his elder Brother was out of the
Country, was not found redeemable by this Act, not being esteemed as appearand
Heir, alioqui successurus, Feb. 17. 1675. John Mclurg contra John Gordoun.

And an appryzing coming to the person of the appearand Heir of the principal
debtor, found satisfiable by the sums payable therefore, by the appearand
Heir, summarly without reduction, Feb. 22. 1671. Sir David Dumbar of Baldoon
contra David Dick. The like found by exception or reply, where the appryzing
was to the behove of the debirors eldest Son, July 4. 1671. Lord of Balfour
contra William Douglas. The like, where the apprizing acquired by the appearand
Heir, was found satisfied by intromission equivalent to what was paid for the
appryzing: the said intromission being either within the ten years, or after
the intenting a summons of Declarator, offering to pay what remained after
count and reckoning, it was found to prorogate the ten years Reversion, without
any other order, June 26. 1677. Mr. John Kincaid contra Gordoun of Abergeldie.

41. Apprysings deduced against appearand Heirs, specially Charged to enter
Heir, are not redeemable by the Heir of the Party Charged to enter Heir who was
never Infeft, but by the Heir of the Defunct, for whose debt the apprysiing was
deduced, who died last vest before the apprysing, February 6. 1668. January 19.
1669. Mr. John Johnstoun contra Sir Charles Erskine.

42. Minors have a special privilege, that the legal Reversions of apprysings,
run not against them during their Minority; and how far this is extended to
Majors succeeding to Minors, Vide Tit. 6. amongst Privilege of Minors, Vide,
what has been said of apprysing, Tit. 13. Section 29. and 30.

43. Apprysing while it is redeemable, is but a legal diligence for security;
and the appryser may relinquish the same, though he be in Possession, and may
do any other diligence for recovering his debt; but if he continue to Possess
after the apprysing becomes irredeemable, the debt is thereby satisfied and
extinct, which was so found, albeit the apprysing proved ineffectual as to a
part of the Lands apprysed, the remnant being equivalent to the debt apprysed
for, and it was not found, that a proportional part of the sums apprysed for,
correspondent to the Lands that were evicted, should remain due to the
appryser, June 18. 1675. Lord of Leys contra Forbess of Blacktoun.

The form and manner of Procedure in apprysings will come in amongst legal
executions of which hereafter.

44. Adjudication is remedium extraordinarium, introduced by Custom, where
apprysing could have no place, as when the debt to be satisfied is not a
liquidat sum or goods ordinarily liquidable, but is a disposition of Lands,
containing expressly or virtually, an Obligation to Infeft the acquirer, or some
other: Or an Obligation consisting in some fact to be performed: Or otherways,
where the debitors heir renunces to be heir, whereby there is no Party from
whom the Lands can be apprysed; therefore, Haereditas Jacens is adjudged. This
remeid is introduced by the Lords, who having ample power to administrate
Justice in all cases, and to make orders for that effect, do supply the defect
of the Law, or ancient Customs, by such new remeids, as such new occurring
cases do require, amongst which adjudication is a prime one, which Craig
testifies to have been unknown to our Predicessours, and being but recent in
his time, and few decisions thereupon, the nature and effect of it was little
known, but is now by course of time further illustrate.

Adjudication has place in two cases; the first and most ordinary is, when the
heir recounces to be heir, in which case adjudication is competent, whether the
debt to be satisfied be liquidate or not. The other is, when the obliegement to
be satisfied consists in facto, and relates to the Disposition of particular
things; which Disposition or Obliegement, not being fulfilled by the debtor or
disponer, though all ordinary diligence be done, then adjudication takes place
to make the same effectual.

As to the first case, adjudication upon the appearand Heirs renuncing to be
heir, proceeds upon these ways, if he be pursued as lawfully Charged to enter
heir, for satisfying of his Predicessors debt or obliegement, he may renunce to
be heir (if he have not meddled) either in the Process against him, as Charged
to enter heir in the first instance, or some time thereafter, by Suspension or
Reduction, if he renunce in the first instance, when the debt is not yet
instructed and established, as when it proceeds not upon a clear Bond or Write,
but abides Probation by Witnesses, or otherways then before the Process of
adjudication, there must be a Process and Sentence against the heir renuncing
cognitionis causa, for establishing and proving the debt; in which, because
there is necessity in all Processes, to have a defender, the appearand heir
renuncing, is only called to supply that place, cognitionis causa, but without
any effect against him, but only contra haereditatem jacentem. But if the
appearand heir renunce in the second instance, after Decree obtained against
him; Or in the first instance, when the Ground and Title of the Pursuit
instructs the debt, then there needs no other decree, cognitionis causa; but
the Pursuer Protesting for adjudication, the same will be admitted summarly.

Adjudication it self is a most simple and summar Process, whereby the heir
renuncing, and the debt being established, as said is, the whole heretage
renunced, orbenefite, whereto the heir might succeed, is adjudged by the Lords
to the pursuer for satisfaction of the Defuncts obliegement, wherein the heir
renuncing is again called to sustain the part of a defender, which is only for
forms sake, for he can propone nothing, and one single summonds is sufficient
without continuation; because it is accessory to a prior Decree, as Dury
observes, but expresses not the Parties, Feb. 26. 1629. And all is adjudged,
periculo potentis, whatsoever the Pursuer pleases to Lybel, alleging that it
might have belonged to the heir entering: Yea, though any Party having Interest,
should compear and instruct that he has the only Right, and the Defunct was
fully denuded; it would be incompetent, hoc loco, Spots. adjudication,
Cairncorss contra Lord of Drumlanrig.

46. The reason is, because the Adjudication is but periculo petentis, and can
give no Right, unless the Defuncts Right, competent to the heir renuncing be
instructed. Neither can the adjudger, who is a stranger to the debitors right
be put to dispute the same, in obtaining the adjudication; yet the Lords
admitted a singular successor to propone upon his Infeftment, that the Defunct
was denuded and adjudged, not the Property, but all Right of Reversion, or
other Right competent to the appearand heir, July 22. 1669. Alexander
Livingstoun and Sornbeg contra heirs of Line of the Lord Forrester. In this
case the matter was notour to many of the Lords, that the Lord Forrester having
no Sons, did contract his Estate with one of his Daughters, to Leiutenent
General Baities Son, who was thereupon publicly Infeft. But the reason why
appryzings and adjudications have past so much at Random is, because the
appryzings have deboarded from their ancient form, by an Inquest, knowing the
Lands, which therefore would never have appryzed Lands, but where the debtor
was commonly repute Heretor, or Heretable Possessor: But when appryzings came
to be deduced by Sheriffs in that part, constitute by the Lords by Dispensation
at Edinburgh, where persons were made the Inquest, who knew nothing of the
Lands, then all became to be appryzed which was claimed, and though the
appryzer would not pay a years Rent for entering him in Lands, where he had no
probability of Right in his debtor; the greatest inconvenience was as to the
Lands holden of the King, it was little addition of Expenses, to pass one
Infeftment for all; and other Superiors, getting a years Rent, salvo jure,
they were not suffered to Contravert.

But now Adjudications being in place of Apppryzings, and passing upon Citation
before the Lords, it is not like they will adjudge Lands where the Debitors are
not, at least repute heretable Possessors or Liferenters; for now the Lords are
in place of the Inquest: And albeit as they suffer Decreets in absence, to pass
periculo petentis; so they will suffer Adjudication to pass of all that is
Lybelled; but if any other shall appear, and make it appear that they and their
Predicessors have been holden and repute Heretable Possessors, and that there
was no Right repute to be in the Debtor, the Lords might readily superceed to
adjudge, till some evidence were given of the Interest of the debtor, Seasines
having been now Registrat, since the year 1617. And likewise Reversions, though
adjudicationes, of these might more easily pass then, because no Infeftment
would follow: But where Lands are adjudged, and Infeftments follow, there
arises thence grounds of pleas and pursuits, especially for Reduction and
Improbation, upon which all the Heretors of the Lands contained in the
Infeftments, would be obliged to produce their Rights, and open their Charter
Chests, to parties having no pretense to their Estates. The adjudication was
sustained of all Lands generally, without condescendence, December. 14. 1638.
Corser contra Dury. But where the Defender appeared not, or contraverted it not
in the adjudication, Process for Mails and Duties of the Lands adjudged, was
sustained in the same Libel, Ibidem. And in adjudication of a Reversion, the
Declarator for redeeming the same, was sustained in the same Lybel, July 8.
1629. Dury contra Kinross.

47. In adjudication all is competent to be adjudged, Which should have
befallen the heir entering, as Lands, Annualrents, Reversions, Tacks,
Liferents, and all Heretable Bonds; yea, not only these Rights themselves, but
the bygone Rents and Duties thereof, preceding the adjudication, and after the
Defuncts death, may be adjudged and pursued against the Possessors and
Intrometters in that same Process, because these are competent to the Heir
renuncing, and there is no other way to attain them, as in the case of
appryzings, which are not extended to bygones, seeing these may be arrested, and
pursued as Movables belonging to the Debtor, as was found in the said case,
Corser contra Dury. December. 14. 1638. And likewise, heirship Movables, for the
same reason are competent in adjudications, but not against other Movables of
the Defunct, which may be confirmed, Spotswood Caption, Isobel Hagie contra her
Daughters. November. 24. 1638. Campbel contra John Baxter: and so it is not
competent against an Heritable Bond, made moveable by a Charge, Jan. 30. 1627.
Couper contra Williamson and Bogmiln. Yet if an Heritable sum should become
moveable after the Defuncts death, as by an order of Redemption, it would be
competent by adjudication, seeing it could be reached no other way. In
adjudications it is only competent to Creditors to appear, having like Process
of adjudication depending, for all will be brought in pari passu, who are ready
before Sentence, with the first pursuer, Hope adjudications, Stuart contra
Sturt.

48. If the adjudication be of Lands or Annualrents, requiring Infeftment, the
Superior will be compelled to receive the adjudger, though a stranger his
Vassal, though he do not instruct his Authors Right, salvo jure cujustibet and
suo, Feb. 9. 1667. Elizabeth Ramsay contra Ker. But as to the years Duty,
payable by the adjudger to the Superior, for their Entry, though the Lords
thought it equitable, that it should take place, as well in adjudications as
appryzings, the reason being alike in both, yet found not sufficient ground,
whereupon to decern it, seeing the said years Rent is expressed in the Act of
Parliament, 1469. cap. 36. And the Composition of the Superior, for receiving
appryzers, Parliament 1621. cap. 6. Yet in the next Act of the same Parliament,
anent adjudications, there is no mention of Composition to the Superior,
though the Act relates to the former Act, anent appryzings; and therefore,
they thought it not competent to them to extend the said composition, ad pares
casus, where it did so much appear, that the Parliament of purpose had omitted
it; yet in the said case, Greirson contra Closburn upon the 21. of July 1636.
they did forbear to intimate their Decision, and desired the parties to agree.
And no Composition was found due by an Adjudger, having Charged before the late
Act of Parliament, December 23. 1669. whereby, like Compositions are appointed
for Adjudication, as for appryzing, July 10. 1671. Scot of Thirlestain contra
Lord Drumlanrig. In which case, it was found, that the Superior might refuse
to enter the Adjudger, if he paid his debt; but that he was to have nothing
for Composition, if he did so in the same way, as in appryzing, by the old Act
of Par. 1469. cap. 36. by which that option is given to the Superior.

49. Craig observes, that it was doubtful in his time, whether there were a
Legal Reversion competent to any renuncing, and afterward returning to Redeem
Adjudications or Appryzings, wherein he favors the affirmative, but the said
Statute, Par. 1621. cap. 7. determines the case, and grants a legal
Reversion, in favors of these who have posterior Adjudications, within the
space of seven years, or ten years since the Act of Par. 1661 betwixt Debtor
and Creditor, which is also competent to any Renuncing in their Minority, and
being restored against the said Renunciation; but it is not competent to any
other Heir renuncing; yet if the Heir, though Major, find that he has
prejudged himself, by renuncing a profitable Heritage, he may grant a Bond, and
thereupon cause within the legal, adjudge and redeem the former Adjudications,
which, though to his own behove, will be effectual, there being so much equity
and favor upon his part, being willing to satisfy the whole debts.

50. It is clear by the said Statute, the Lands or Heretage of a Defunct may be
Adjudged, the heirs renuncing, not only for satisfaction of the Defuncts debt,
but of the heirs own proper debt.

51. Adjudications are taken off and extinguished in the same manner as
appryzings are, by intrometting with the Mails and Duties of the Lands
adjudged, as is clear from the said Statute. And though cases be not so
frequent in Adjudications, as in appryzings; to clear the other ways of their
extinction: Yet the reason being the same in both, there is no doubt but the
determination will also be the same.

52. The other manner of Adjudications, is for making effectual Dispositions or
obliegements to Infeft, whereupon, when the acquirer has used all diligence
competent in Law, against the disponer to fulfill the same, by obtaining
Decreets and Horning Registrat thereupon, either against the Disponer or his
Heir, Law being there defective, and cannot make the Disposition or Obliegement
effectual; the Lords have allowed Adjudications of the Lands disponed, whether
in Fee or Liferent, July 19. 1611. Lord Johnstoun contra Lord Carmichael,
Spots. hic, contra Bruce of Airth.

And thereupon the Superior will be discerned to receive the Adjudger, as was
found in the case of an Obliegement to Infeft a Woman in Liferent, holden of
the Superior, wherein she having used Horning, the Superior was decerned to
receive her, July 10. 1628. Harris and Cunningham contra Lindsay. Feb. 24.
1675. Marion Hamiltoun contra Mr: William Chiefly: The like in the case of an
Heretable Disposition, whereupon the acquirer having obtained Decreeet against
the disponers heir, for Infefting him, and used Horning thereupon: The Director
of the Chancelary was decerned to Infeft the acquirer, December: 16: 1657: Ross
contra Lord of May. This manner of Adjudication is extended no further then to
the thing disponed, and has no Reversion: It requires no Charge to enter heir,
or renunciation; but the adjudger must instruct his Authors right, June 24.
1669. Mr. Dowgal contra Glenurchie.

These Adjudications do not come in pari passu, with other Adjudications within
the year, nor any other with them, July 16. 1675. Campbel of Riddoch contra
Stuart of Ardvorlick. December. 2. 1676. Lady Frazer contra Creditors of the Lord
Frazer and Lady Mar.

53. By the late Act of Pavliament, anent adjudications, there are introduced
two new forms of Adjudications; the one special of Lands effeirand to the sum,
and a fifth part more, in case the debtor produce his Rights, and put the
adjudger in his Possession, of his particular Lands adjudged: But if he do not,
adjudications are to proceed as appryzings did generally of all the debitors
Lands, or real rights, periculo petentis, redeemable within ten years: These
Adjudications are come in place of appryzings, especially the general
adjudications, which are declared to be in the same condition in all points as
appryzings were by the Act of Par. 1661. cap. 62. Except as to the lengthening
of a Reversion from seven to ten years: So that what has been said of
Appryzings, will have the same effect as to general Adjudications; but special
Adjudications being equitable and favorable, will not meet with such
strictness: This Statute has taken away the greatest Reproach upon our Law,
which for every debt indefinitely appryzed every Estate great or small, which
had no excuse, but that the debtor might redeem in seven years: But all
debitors being necessitat to appryze within a year, or to have no more then the
legal Reversion, paying the whole debts, the power of Redemption came to be of
little effect, few being able to pay all their debt in one day: But now if any
debtor complain, that his whole Estate is adjudged, and no proportion kept
betwixt the debt and his Estate, it is altogether his own fault, seeing he might
offer a proportional part, and liberat all the rest of his Estate; which part
is Redeemable also in five years: And though a fifth part be added, it is no
more then the ordinary penalty, being an 100. Pounds for a 1000, Merks, and 50.
Merks for the Sheriff-fee; makes 200. Merks, being the fifth part of a 1000.
Merks, and which was sustained in the most favorable cases of Appryzings from
the beginning, and the Reversion was for seven years.

Adjudications being executive Decree, the Lords allow them the greatest
dispatch; and to prevent Collusion, whereby some debitors might be postponed by
debate and probation till the year pass, which would excludethem; Therefore the
Lords do not suffer Co-creditors to stop Adjudications, that they might see for
their entress, and put the pursuer to abide the course of the Roll, unless they
produce an Entress, upon which the Ordinar will hear them immediately without
going to the Roll, Jan. 22. 1681. Earl of Dundonald contra Dunlop and his
Creditors. Neither is the Superior suffered to propone defenses, Jan. 13.
1675. Kinloch of Gourdie contra Mr. James Blair and James Strachan. Yea, the
Lords sustained the establishment of the debt in the same Lybel with the
Adjudication, July 26. 1676. Alexander Boyd contra Boyd of Pinkill. But if the
debtor himself appear, the Cause goes to the Roll; and if there be prior
adjudgers, defenses proponed against the debt, or adjudication, which are not
like to be verified within a year of the first adjudication; the Lords adjudge
and reserve these defenses contra executionem, by Suspension; In which terms
will be granted, because of the reservation; but there is this advantage, that
how long soever the Suspension be of expeding, the first decree being within
the year, brings the adjudger in pari passu.

TITLE XXV. Confiscation, Where, of single Escheat, Liferent-Escheat,
Shipwreck, Waith-goods, Treasure, Forefaulture, Bastardy, and Last-heir.
1. The Tenor of Letters of Horning. 2. The executions of Horning must bear the
party Charged personally, or at his dwelling house designed. 3. The Execution
at the dwellinghouse, must bear six knocks at the most patent Gate, because the
Messenger could get no Entry. 4. The knocks must be audible, that these within
may hear. 5: If the Messenger get entry, the delivery of a Copy to any of the
Family is sufficient without knocks, and must be so expressed. 6 The days
requisite for the Charge beyond the Water of Dee. 7. The denunciation must be
against the party, and at the Market Cross of the Jurisdiction where he dwells.
8. The denunciations must bear three Oyesses, or the equivalent. 9. The
execution must bear three blasts of the Horn. 10. The execution must be
stamped. 11. The Horning must be Registrate, and how. 12. Denunciation after
satisfaction has no effect. 13. The effect of general Letters of Horning. 14.
The order and effect of Relaxation from the Horn. 15. The single Escheat and
extent thereof 16. How far the denunceds debts, or deeds affect his
Escheat-goods. 17. Gists of Escheat, and preference thereof. 18. Gifts of
Escheat not expressing the particular Horning whereon they proceed. 19. Gifts
of escheat, though bearing goods to be acquired, extend but to these acquired
within a year after the gift. 20. Escheats within Regality. 21. In what cases
gifts ofescheat are held simulat. 22. Who must be called in the general
declarator. 23. The Titles and Tenors of general declarators. 24. Exceptions
against general declarators. 25. Special declarators of escheat. 26.
Liferent-escheat. 27. Confiscation of Treasures, Waith, or Shipwrack-goods. 28.
Forefaulture. 29. Several kinds of Treason by Statute. 30. Forefaulture
Confiscats without the burden of the debts or infeftments not confirmed by the
King. 31. How far fews are effectual against Forefaulture. 32. How far Tacks of
forefault Lands are effectual. 33. Forefaulture by arescinded Act, was burdened
with the debts and deeds of the Rebel. 34. Forefaulture, when, and how it may
proceed in absence. 35. How far the person of the Rebel gives Right to the
Fisk. 36 The effect offorefaulture of appearand heirs. 37. In what cases
forefaulture dishabilitats. 38 How far the forefaulture of appearand heirs may
be extended. 39 Explanation of the Act of Parliament 1594. cap. 202. importing
burdening of forfaultures with the debts and deeds of the Rebel. 40
Forefaulture is reducible upon any nullity, but only by way of grace. 41 How
far forefaulture takes effect without declarator. 42 What Children are lawful
and what bastards. 43 Declarator of Bastardy. 44 The effects of Bastardy, as to
Succession. 45 Legitimation and effects thereof. 46 How the debts and deeds of
the Bastard affect his Estate. 47 Ultimus haeres, and the difference thereof
from Bastardy.
THE Conveyance and Transmission of all kinds of Rights from private parties to
the Fisk, are here comprehended under one common Term and Title of
Confiscation: It is not proper in this place to treat of the Fisk, or
privileges thereof, or upon the several Causes, upon which Confiscation
follows; these being public Rights; but we shall only consider the several
kinds of Rights, or things that befall to the Fisk from private parties, and how
they return to private parties again, by Gifts and Processes thereupon; and
this is either in reference to Movables, Liferents, or the Property and Stock
of Heretable Rights and others

Movables fall to the Fisk, either wholly and entire, and that is chiefly by
Denunciation and Rebellion, or by some special Statute, the penalty whereof is
Confiscation of Movables; such are breach of Arrestment, or Deforcement
wherein, though the private party injured have an interest; yet in effect the
whole is Confiscat, and a part belongs to that party, by virtue of the Statute
thereanent, whereby they are constitute Donatars: Or otherways some particular
Movables befalls to the Fisk; either by Custom, as Waithgoods, Shipwreck,
etc. or by Statute. Liferents befall to the Fisk by the Denunciation of the
Owner, and remaining unrelaxed year and day, or by such Statutes, whose penalty
is the loss of the Liferent.

The Stock or Property of Heretable Rights, fall to the Fisk by forefaulture,
or becoming caduciary; the Confiscation of the whole Movables is called the
single-escheat; and of the Liferent, is called the Liferent-escheat. We shall
only speak of the Single-escheat of Movables by Denunciation; having spoken of
breach of Arrestment and Deforcement, Title Reparation. Secondly, Of
Liferent-escheat. Thirdly, Of Escheat of particular Goods, as Shipwreck, etc.
Fourthly, of Forefaulture. And lastly, of things Caduciary, especially by
Bastardy, and last Heir, and of Gifts and Processes thereupon.

Escheat, though it be a common Term, signifying any Confiscation, yet it is
restricted to Movables and Liferents, and most properly to Movables, so that
when it is simply expressed, it is ordinarily taken for single-escheat, or Escheat
of Movables; but before we descend thereto, it is fit to consider of the
ordinary Cause thereof, and of Liferent-escheat, viz: Horning.

Horning proceeds thus, by Letters Executorial, giving warrant to Messengers
at Arms, to charge any party in the Kings name, to obey what is contained in
the Letters, under the pain of Rebellion; And if he obey not within the days
of the charge, giving power to Denounce him Rebel by public Proclamation, at
the Market Cross of the Head Bargh of the Shire, Stewartry, Bailliarie of
Royalty or Regalitie within the which the Denunced dwells; and that by
publickreading of the Letters of Horning, and giving three blasts of a Horn,
for the clear manifestation and notice thereof, from whence it is called
Horning: And because of the Certification, the party Denunced is called Rebel,
by a term too rough, such Persons not being in Hostility against the King, nor
being public enemies, but only Denunced upon Causes Civil, which they lie
under frequently, not through contempt, but inability to satisfy. The English
do more properly call this Execution Out-lawerie, whereby the party becumes
Outlaw, and has not a person to stand in Judgment Active or Passive: And if
such should be called by us, the Denunced, it were smoother, and more suitable
then the odious term of Rebel. Seeing Horning is the ground both of single
Escheat, and Liferent Escheat: It would be fit to go through the several
Requisites thereof in order, and the nullities arrysing thereupon.

First, the Letters of Horning must be Signet: And therefore though the Bill
was past, and the matter small, and the parties Indigent, a Horning not Signet
was found null 1. of June 1610. John Megill contra.

Secondly, the Executions, or Indorsations thereof must bear, that the party
was charged personally, or at his dwelling house, designing the house. And
therefore a Horning was found null by Exception, for not designing thereof,
though the party was designed to be Burgess of such a Burgh, which might have
presumed his dwelling place to be there, July 14. 1626 Adam contra Baillies of
Air, yet a Horning was sustained, though not designing the dwelling house
nominatim; but by description of it. Thus, the Messengers Execution did bear,
that he charged the party designed by such Lands, at his Dwelling House, it
being proven, that he then dwelt there, November 9. 1632. Montgomerie contra
Fergushall.

3. If the Charge be in absence, at the parties Dwelling House, the Execution
must bear the Messenger to have craved entry to give the Charge to the Party,
or his Wife and Family and not getting Entry, six Knocks to have been given
by the Messenger, at the most patent Gate, or Door thereof, yet this being
wanting in the Extract, the same was sustained, It being proven by the Keeper
of the Register, and his Servant, That when the Horning was offered to the
Register, these words were in it, and by the Messenger, and Witnesses insert in
the Execution, that the Knocks were used, the intent of the Cause being
Alimentarie and Favorable, March 28. 1637. Scot contra Scot. But this is not
to be drawn in Example: For the Register of Horning is that upon which the
People ought to rest, and nothing ommitted to be expressed in the Register should
be supplied by the principal Hornings, Messenger, or Witnesses: For Executions
of Hornings cannot be proven by Witnesses, and consequently no matterial point
thereof,

4. Knocking at the Door audiblie is necessary, without which, Executions might
be Clandestine, and never come to the parties knowledge. And therefore the
Messenger must express this as truly done, wherein he runs the hazard of being
a Forger, if the Executions be improven, that either the Knocks were not given
or were given fraudulently, that these within might not hear, as if the Gate
had been but Struck with ones hand, a piece of Earth, or Stick, which could not
reach theirEars that were within, for the affixing of a Coppie may be more
easily evaded: Seeing the party may send of purpose to take the Coppie off,
being none of the Witnesses in in the Execution, albeit sometimes, even the
Witnesses carry away the Coppie, and the Messenger may imagine that his
Executions were true, when he said he left a Coppie affixed, because it was
affixed when he began to move from the Gate; Yet if he saw it carried away, his
Executions would be found false, and he would not escape punishment. A Horning
was also sustained, though it bore neither Personally, nor at the parties
Dwelling House, seeing it bore a Coppie to have been given, which necessarily
imported to have been personally apprehended, July 22. 1626. Stewart contra
Hannai.

5. Thirdly, the Executions must bear, that the Messenger gave a Coppie of the
Letters to the party charged personally, or in his absence, affixed it upon
the most patent Door of his Dwelling House: And therefore a Horning was found
null, because it bore not delivery of a Coppie, but only of a ticket bearing
the tenor of the Letters, Hope Horning Monteith contra Kirkland. But if the
Messenger get entrance into the house of the party Charged, and deliver a
Coppie to the parties Wife, or some of his Family, There the Execution will be
sustained though it bear not Knocks at the Door, or affixing of Coppies
thereupon, these being only required where entry is not gotten, December 11.
1679. James Somervail contra William Stains.

6. The Charge must also be upon 15. days being beyond the water of Die, and
six upon this side. Par. 1600: cap. 25. Yea, though fewer days be in the Claus
of Registration it was not found valid, February 14. 1625. Stewart contra
Bruce. The contrary was found, December 16. 1664. Philorth contra Forbes of
Asloun, and the Lord Frazer, Jannuary 20. 1675. Lord of Meldrum contra
Tolwhoun. And it was found, that the Act 1600. Was not to be Extended to
Hornings upon Clauses of Registration of consent: And that the meaning of the
Statute was both interpret by the Narrative, and Subsequent Consuetude. Nam
Consuetudo optima legnm interpres. And that the Decision Anno 1625. has been
upon this Consideration, that the Charger lived in Fyfe, and the Debtor in
Orknay, who could not possible, either come to the Creditor and pay, or to the
Lords and Suspend on six days, and so was not contumacious, but free by the Act
of Parliament 1592. cap. 138. Annulling impossible Conditions in Contracts,
whereby their is sufficient ground of reconciliation of these Decisions, for it
is only Contumacy that makes the Escheat fall which gave the rise to the Act of
Parliament, to allow 15 days for all beyond the water of Die. And though
parties consent to less time, yet Contumacie cannot be inferred, but where the
party could by exact diligence come in time, either to satisfy the party, or
to Suspend, which some beyond Die might do, if the Charger were near, that they
might offer him just satisfaction, and if he refused, they might have time to
reach Edinburgh, and Suspend: But in other cases that cannot be, as was evident
in the Case, in Anno 1625. And therefore, consent, in that Case, can no more
infer Contumacie, then the express Consent of parties, that Charges and
Denunciations at the Market Cross of Edinburgh, shall be sufficient, which is
declared null, Par. 1532. cap. 138.

7. Fourthlie, The Executions must bear, that the party was Denunced, conform
to the Charge, for not Obedience thereof: And that either at the Market Cross
of the Head Burgh of the Shire where the party charged dwells, or at the Head
Burgh of the Stewartrie, or Regalitie, or Balliary of Royalty, if he dwell
within these, Par. 1597. cap. 264. Yea, though the write bear, that Letters of
Horning execute at Edinburgh, should be sufficient against parties out of the
Shire, the same is declared null by the said Act. When there was no Head Burgh
of the Regalitie known, the Execution at the Head Burgh of the Shire was
sustained, Spots. Horning, Stirling contra Auchinleck, And the Head Burgh of
the Shire, where the Denunceds dwelling lies Locally, is sustained by the Act
of Par. Though his dwelling be upon Lands by annexation, in another
Jurisdiction, unless that be commonly known, and in use: Therefore, Horning was
not found null, not being Execute at the Head Burgh of Renfrew, the dwelling
being upon Lands annexed to the Principality, January 11. 1677. Scot conra
Dalmahoy. Neither, because the Denunced dwelt in Temple Lands within the
Regalitie of Torphichen, unless there were a known Head Burgh and Register
there, January 12. 1672. Mr. James Scot contra Boyd of Temple.

8. Fifthly, The Execution should bear, that the Messenger, at the Denunciation
did make three Oyesses, before he read the Letters of Horning, that the People
might thereby take notice of the Intimation, which therefore ought to be with
audible voice; Which, though it be not by any particular Statute, yet is
requisite by ancient Custom, and should be expressed in the Execution of all
Letters, which require to be published at the Market Crosses: The intent
thereof being, that the Publication thereof may come to the Ears of the
Country, and be carried by common Fame, that all parties concerned may look to
their Interest: And therefore, such Publications at Market Crosses, and at the
Peir of Lies, have by Law and Custom, as expedients to make them commonly
known. 3. Oysses before reading of the Letters, and affixing the Coppie of the
Letters upon these Public Places: And Horning has this supper-added, that
there must be three blasts of the Horn after reading of the Letters; But
because Executions do not always bear 3. Oysses, But generally lawful
Publication. The Lords did declare upon the February 15. 1681. That they would
sustain no Executions of Messengers, done in time coming, not bearing three
Oysses and public readingof theLetters, in a Reduction at the instance of
Gordon of Park contra Arthur Forbes, upon the want of 3. Oysses, which came not
to be decyded, because the Executions were Improven: And an Inhibition bearing
only, that the Messenger did lawfully inhibite, and not bearing three Oysses,
or the reading of the Letters. the Lords found the same null, and would not
Supplient by Witnesses, that these were truly done, July 11. 1676. William
Stevinson contra James Jnnes: But where the Executions did bear that the
Messengers did lawfully publish, and read Letters of Inhibition, which by
inspection of the Registers was found to be afrequent Style, and not the former
Style, which was merely general, The Lords sustained that the three Oysses
were truly given, Junne 21. 1681. Lundie contra Trotter.

9. The Execution must also bear, that the Messenger did give three blasts with
his Horn: And yet a Horning was not found null, because it bore not expressly
the party to have been Denunced, or three blasts to be given, but only
generally, that the Rebel was Denunced by open Proclamation, and put to the
Horn, January 19. 1611. Sr. Robert Hepburn contra Lord of Nidderie, and an
Execution was sustained, though it bore not three blasts, it being proven by
the Witnesses insert that these blasts were truly given, and the Execution
bore orderly Denunced, March 4. 1624. Drysdale contra Sornbeg, and Lamingloun.

10. Sixthly, The Execution must bear, that the Messenger, for more
Verification, has affixed his Signet, or Stamp, and the Stamp must appear, if
the Executions be recent, else it will be null, March, 6. 1624. Comissar of
(...) contra So the Execution of a Horning was found null, because it mentioned
not the Stamping thereof, Hope Horning Home contra Pringle of Whitebank; Yet
the Executions weresustained, though they bore not these Words, seeing they were
all written with the Messengers own hand, and were Subscribed and Stamped, as
Hadingtoun observes, but expresses not the party, February 19. 1611.

11. Seventhly, Horning must not only be Execute at the Head Burgh of the Shire
where the party dwells, but must be Registrat in the SheriffClerks Register of
that Shire within 15. days after Denunciation thereupon, Otherwise the same is
null, Par. 1579. cap. 75. Where the Clerk is ordained to give an Extract, and
Registrat it within 24. hours after recept of the Letters: And if he refuse it,
the Charger may Registrat it in the next Sheriff Books, or in the Clerk of
Register his Books, which upon Instruments taken of his refusal, is declared
sufficient, Par. 1579. cap. 75. Wherein the Registration is ordained to be
Judicially, or before a Notar, and four famous Witnesses, besides the ordainry
Clerk: But this part of the Act is rescinded, and it is declared, that the
Registration in the Sheriffs, Baillies, or Stewarts Books by the Clerk thereof,
or by the Clerk Register, and his Deputs in the Books of Council and Session
shall be sufficient in it self, Par. 1600. cap. 13. And for this effect, there
is a general Register of Hornings, Relaxations, Inhibition and Interdictions
kept at Edinburgh, and a particular Clerk Deput having the Charge thereof:
But if the party live within Stewartrie, or Bailliery of Royalty or
Regalitie, the horning must be Registrate there, in the same manner as other
Hornings must be Registrate in the Sheriff Books, else it is declared null,
Par. 1597. cap. 265. But Denunciation against parties who have found securetie
to underly the Law, and compears not at the day appointed, is declored
sufficient, being at the Cross of Edinburgh, within six days, though not at
the Head Burgh of the Shire, Par. 1592. cap. 126. And likewise, Denunciations
against parties entering in the place of the Criminal Court, with more persons
then there Domestic Servants, and Procurators are declared valid, though
Execute only at the Market Cross of the Burgh where the Justice Court sits for
the time, and Registrat in the Books of Adjurnall, Par. 1584. cap. 140.
Executions of Horning was also found null, because Execute upon the Sabbath
day, Spots Charge, Ribbald Frenchman contra Sr Jews Lauder, but were not found
null, Because Registrat after the Rebels death, being Denunced before December
20. 1626. Lord of Lie contra Executors of Blair.

12. Though the Horning be orderly used, yet if the Ground, or (...) whereupon
it proceeded be not due, or taken away before the Denunciation, the Horning is
thereby null, and reduceable, though no Suspension of the Horning was raised
before. but in this the Officers of State must be called to prevent Collusion,
Spots Escheat, James Douglas contra Creditors of Wardlaw. So a Horning upon
Lawborrows was found null by exception, because Caution in obedience was found
before Denunciation, November 29. 1626. Smeitoun contra Spear; Yea Horning was
reduced, because before Denunciation, the Charger had accepted a Band in
Satisfaction of the ground of the Horning, which was found probable by the oath
of the Charger against the Donatar, Hope Horning Mushet contra Forrester. The
like where the Charge was Suspended before the Denunciation, though the reason
of Suspension militated only against a part of the Charge; Hope Horning Buckie
contra Earl of Erroll: But the Rebels Oath, or holograph discharges before
Denunciation, were not respected as presumed Collusive, February 10. 1663.
Montgomery contra Montgomery and Lauder. In this case it was found, that
Reduction of the Decree upon Informality, not being upon material Justice, did
not annul the Horning; Neither was Horning taken away by compensation, by the
like Sum due to the party Denunced, equal to that in the Horning, not having
been actually applied, by Process or Contract before the Denunciation; Nor was
any warrant required for using the Execution, though for a party living in
England, and done against a Daughter and her Husband: But the having the
principal Band, was found sufficient warrant for Registration of it, and
Execution thereupon; And the Denunciation against the Husband was not taken
off, by dissolution of the Marriage before Declarator, December 23. 1673.
Thomas Dalmachoy contra Lord Almond.

13. Horning though orderily used, proceeding only upon general Letters, by
Supplication against all and Sundry, unless it be against a Burgh, College or
Community, proceeding not upon a Citation, and for a special and certain
Duty, the Denunciation thereupon has no effect, as to Escheat, or Liferent,
though Caption usually follow thereupon, Par. 1592: cap. 140. Which Act does
declare such Executions null: And therefore, such a Horning was not found
sufficient to debarr a party, as not having personam standi in judicio January
24. 1674. Blair of Glascun contra Blair of Baleid, much less can these general
Letters make Escheat to fall, or Annualrent be due, yet Caption proceeds upon
it, and uses not to be quarrelled.

14. Horning is taken off, and cease by Relaxation, which requires the same
Solemnities of Publication, and Registration as Hornings do; As is clear by the
forcited Acts of Parliament thereanent: But it does only operat to free the
Rebel relaxed, as to his goods and others, acquired after Relaxation, February
14. 1635. Lochart contra Mosman, December 23. 1673. Thomas Dalmachoy contra
Lord Almond.

It is also ordained, that all Copies of Summonds, and Letters delivered by the
Executer thereof, shall be subscribed by him Par. 1592. cap. 139. I have not
observed any Exception founded upon this, Act, which though it expresses not a
nullitie, yet ought to be a rule to Messengers, especially in Hornings, and
Inhibitions, which may prefer any other more orderly diligence.

15. The effect of Horning duly used, and Registrat in manner foresaid, is
that thereby the whole moveable Goods, and Debts of the parties Denunced are
Escheat, and Confiscat, and all that he shall acquire thereafter, till he be
relaxed; Whereupon the Thesaurer used to cause raise Letters of Intromission,
for uptaking of the Escheat Goods, direct to Sheriffs and Messengers: And in
case they be deforced, or the Sheriff not able, or willing to Execute the same,
Lettes will be direct to Noblemen, and Barrons within the Shire, to Convocat
the Leidges in Arms, and to make effectual the former Letters Immediately,
Par. 1579. cap. 75. But this is long in Desuetude: This is also an effect of
Horning, that the party Denunced, has not personam standi in Judicio; either
as Pursuer or as Defender, yet the Lords would not hold him as Confessed, if he
appeared, and were hindered by the other party, July 12. 1676. Sr. William
Purves contra Sharp of Gospetrie. The same will hold in any thing requiring the
personal presence of the Denunced, as byding by a write, quarrelled of Falsehood.

For clearing the matter of Escheats, it will be necessary to show, First, what
falls under single Escheat. 2. How far the same is burdened, or affected with
the Denunceds Debts or deeds, for the first single Escheat extends to no
Heritable Right, whether of Land Annualrent, or Heritable Band, but itcarries
the bygones of all these, preceding the Denunciation: And there after till
year and day, July 1. 1626. Halyburton contra Stewart, Hope Horning, Sr.
Hendrie Wardlaw contra William Dick. What Rights are Heritable, and what
moveable, hathbeen shown before Title Real Rights. So thatall which is there
Moveable, except Moveable Bands bearing annualrents, falls in the single
Escheat, and somethings are Moveable, in Relation to Escheats, which are not
Moveable in Relation to the Succession of Airs or Executors: As Tacks not being
Lyfrent Tacks, Par. 1617. chap. 15. It carries also the Office of a Clerk-ship,
Hope Horning, Mr. Hendrie Kinross contra James Drummond: And likewise the Jus
mariti of a Husband, and therewith per consequentiam, the Lyfrent right, or
other right of the Wife, belonging to the Husband, Jure mariti. Spots Escheat
Violet Dawling contra William Cochran. It carries also all casualities
befalling to a Rebel Denunced before the Denunciation: As the Lifrent Escheat
of his Vassals, Felrury 13. 1611. Symson contra the Lord of Moncur But if the
casuality had fallen to the Superior, after the Superiors own Liferent had
fallen by his Rebellion, year and day, it would be carried with the Superiors
Liferent Escheat, February 26. 1623. Clunie contra Bishop of Dunkell. And if
the Liferent Escheat, or any other casualitie be gifted, the gift makes it
Moveable, and so to fall under the Donatars single Escheat, March 10. 1631
Francis Setwart contra the Lady Samuelstoun: And the single Escheat of Husband
carries their Jus mariti, and in consequence, the Liferent of their Wives, for
though the Wifs right be a Liferent, which wouldnot fall under single Escheat,
Yet the Husbands Right Jure mariti, is no Liferent, for if the Wife die before
him, his Right cease in his own Life. Tacks also fall under single Escheat,
unless they be Life-rent Tacks: and Assignations to Life-rent Tacks, and other
Life-rents have been found to fall under single Escheat, because the direct
Right is incommunicahle; For no Life-renter can put another Life-renter in
their place, but canonly assign the profits befalling to the Life-renter by the
Life-rent Right: So that it is no Life-rent in the Assigney, but is as the jus
mariti in a Husband, which is as a Legal assignation: Likewise, Clauses of
Relief in Heritable Bands fall under single Escheat, because there is no
Heritable Clause adjected to the Clause of Relief, but Assignations to
Heritable Bands makes them not fall to under single Escheat, because the
Creditors right is directly Transmitted and Stated in the Assigneys Person. The
single Escheat of Ministers carries the meliorations of their Manses, but the
Escheat of an Executor carries no more then what is his own Interest, and not
the Share of the Wifes, Bairns, Creditors, Legators, or nearest of Kin, which
is Escheat by their own Rebellion only, even though the Testament were Execute
by Decreets, at the Executors instance against the Debitors, December 21. 1671.
Mr. Arthur Gordon contra Lord of Drum.

16. As to the other Question, how far the Denunceds Debts or Deeds affect his
Movables fallen in Escheat, it is clear, that the Debt contained in the
Horning affects the Escheat, whether in the hands of the Thesaurer, or
Donatare, Par. 1551. cap. 7. Par. 1579. cap. 75. And likewise all Intrometters
with Escheat, by Gift, Assignation, or otherways, upon a single Sum monds of
Six days, Par. 1592. cap. 143.

Secondly, It is clear, that no Assignation, Disposition, or other Deed done by
the Denunced, after Denunciation, not being for fulfilling an Anterior
Obleigment before Denunciation, for a Cause onerous to a lawful Creditor, can
affect the Moveable Goods or Debts of the Denunced: But when the Denunciation
is upon a Criminal Cause, the Escheat takes not only effect from the
Denunciation, but from the committing of the Fact: Therefore a Donatar of
Escheat recovered a Sum due to the Rebel, though Assigned before the Fact, and
paid before process, Seeing intimation was not before the Criminal fact, Hope,
Chalmers and Gordoun contra Gordoun.

Thirdly, These Debts or Deeds of the Denunced, do not simply affect the
Escheat Goods, unless they be Consumat, or lawful Diligence done before the
up-taking of the Escheat Goods, by the Thesaurer or Donatar; Yea, before
general Declarator, for that being the Intimation of the Donatars Gift, it
renders it to him to be a complete valid Right, after which no Creditor not
having a real Right, or Legal diligence before, can have any Access, unless the
Donatar, by back-band to the Thesaurer, be otherwise obleiged: And therefore a
Donatar having obtained general Declarator, was preferred to a Lawful Creditor
arresting after Declarator, February 22. 1628. Anderson contra Gordon.

But the Question remains, how far Lawful Creditors, whose Debt is before the
Denunciation, or Criminal Fact, using diligence thereafter, but before
Declarator, or obtaining Assignations intimat, or Dispositions cled with
Possession before Declarator, may thereby effect the Escheat Goods? For answer
thereunto, though in rigore Juris, the goods and debts of the Denunced fall to
the Fisk, as they are the time of the Denunciation, or Criminal Fact: And the
Declarator, according to the nature of all Declarators, does not constitute the
Fisks Right, but declares the same to have been from the Denunciation, or
Criminal Fact (albeit as an Assignation, it does constitute the Donatars Right;
Therefore the real Right passing to the Fisk without possession, or at least
the privilege of the Fisk might in the full Extent thereof, exclude all
posterior diligences or deeds: Yet such has been the Royal benignity of our
Kings, and there Favor to Lawful Creditors, that in this they accounted id
solum nostrum quod debitis deductis est nostrum. For which the Thesaurer has
been accustomed to prefer Creditors, giving Gifts of Escheat to them before
others, and in taking Back-bands from them, in favors of other Creditors; Yea
by long custom, Creditors, whose debts were anterior to the Denunciation, or
Criminal Fact, doing diligence before Declarator, are preferable to the
Donatar, Spots escheat, James Nisbit contra James Fullarton, February 24. 1637.
Pilmure contra Geggie. In this case the escheat belonged to a Lord of Regality,
and the Arrestment was laid on before the gift of escheat: But where the
Donatars Gift was in payment of his own debt, he was preferred to an Arrester,
arresting the Rebels goods after the gift, but before Declarator, February 27.
1623. Thomson contra Lord of Murckil, but voluntary deeds of the Rebel after
Rebellion, as Assignations not intimat before Declarator, for satisfaction of
Debt due before Denunciation, or Criminal Fact, are not preferred to the
Donatar, Hope assig. Sr. James Stewart contra Alexander Wardlaw, John Clerk
contra William Naper, and James Cramfoord contra John Mcaul. And though an
Assignation not being intimat before Rebellion was preferred to the Donatar,
yet it was in consequence of a Decret of Council decerning, that Assignation to
be made, and so not voluntary: So a Donatar was preferred to an assigney, whose
assignation bore a cause Onerous, and was before Declarator, but after
Rebellion, December 6. 1631. and February 26. 1633. Conheth contra Earlston.
December. 18. 1629. Lord of Caprington contra Cuninghame, February 2. 1632.
Lindsay contra Nisbit. Where the Assignation bore not a cause Onerous, Yet a
Lawful Creditor obtaining Disposition from the party denunced, cled with
possession, was preferred, ibid. Johnston of Corhead contra Johnston. In like
manner a disposition made by the Rebel for a Just debt, before the Giftor
Declarator was preferred to the Donatar: Here it was not expressed, that the debt
was before the Rebellion, February 10. 1635. Mosman contra Lockhart. Where
there seems some difference in the Decisions, wherein these points seem
clearest, 1. Dispositions and delivery of Goods, because movables are more
easily transmissible in favors of Commerce, and so have always a presumptive
Title upon Possession: So that if the Goods be bought in a Market, there seems
no Question, or if bought out of Market from a Rebel, getting the price which
accresseth to the Fisk, unless the Buyer was in mala fide. And though getting
the Goods in Satisfaction of a debt, before the Rebellion, be more questionable
then a present Exchange of the Goods and Price, the former decisious favor
that also. The Lords did lately find, that a Rebel selling part of his Corns,
to provide necessaries for Sowing of the ground, the Crop whereof fell to the
Fisk, the bargain was valid. 2. Legal Diligence upon Arrestment being complete
before Declarator, are valid, though after Rebellion; Yea the Decisions favor
even the inheat diligence, if the Arrestment was before declarator upon a debt
before Rebellion. And it was so found, February 19. 1667. Jsobel Glen contra
John Hoome. But voluntary Assignations seem not effectnal, if they be not
complete by Intimation before Rebellion, and though they be, if Payment or
Satisfaction, either in Money or renewed Bands, innovating the Rebels Band, be
not obtained before Rebellion, the Donatar was found preferable, but otherwise
the Creditor, by Precept, Assignation or otherwise, getting payment of his
debt, prior to the Rebellion, and obtaining payment, before Declarator was
found secure against the Donatar, February 11. 1675. William Veatch contra
Executers of Ker. But though actual Payment were obtained by Assignation after
Declarator, it will not Secure the Creditor December 20. 1676. inter eosdem.

17. The matter of Escheat being thus cleared, we come to the gift thereof, and
Declarator thereupon. A gift first Sealed, was preferred to an other, first
signed in Exchequer, albeit so near in diligence, as coming that same day to
the Seals, December 6. 1662. Stewart contra Nasmith.

Gifts of Escheat are in effect, the Assignations thereof by the Fisk, whereof
the Intimation is the Declarator. So that a Posterior gift, with a Prior
general Declarator is preferable to a prior gift, with a posterior Declarator:
But where there is yet no Declarator, Preference is by the first Citation, if
the same was followed with Lawful Diligence: And therefore a Posterior Gift,
whereupon Citation was prior, but three days was preferred to a prior Gift,
Jan. 31. 1635. Lord of Renton contra Lord of Lambertoun. If there be no
Citation, or Declarator, the Donatars possession is sufficient alone, and will,
prefer a posterior Gift though granted to the Rebel himself, being before any
Diligence upon the Prior Gift. And if two gifts be produced as enteresses,
without any Diligence on either, the first gift is preferable.

18. Gifts of Escheat, as all other gifts by the King are null, if granted
before the Casuality fall, as an erection of Kirk-lands, in a temporal Lordship
was found null, because a commendatar stood then in the right, and did not
Resign or Consent: And therefore a posterior Erection to that Commendatar, upon
his own Dimission was preferred, February 24. 1666. Sr. Robert Sinclair contra
Lord of Waderburn. And so a gift of escheat before Denunciation was found
null, by exception; Because it mentioned no particular Horning whereupon it
proceeded, though done by the Kings own hand at Court: And though Anterior
Hornings were produced in the Process, and no other Donatar, nor Officer of
State quarrelled the same. November 20. 1628. Weston contra Stewart.

19. Gifts of escheat not bearing expressly goods to be acquired, extend no
further then to the goods, the Denunced had the time of the gift, February 27.
1623. Bruce contra Buckie. And though the gift bore expressly, not only the
goods the Rebel had, but which he should acquire thereafter, during his
Rebellion: Yet the same was only extended to what he had the time of the Gift,
and what superveened within year and day, June 27. 1622. John Jnglis contra
Lord of Caprinton. It was so decyded, July 2. 1669. Barclay contra Barclay.
Yea the same was extended to no goods acquired after the gift, seeing the Style
thereof bore not what he should acquire, February 2. 1627. Lewis Somervail
contra Mr. William Stirling.

20. Escheats of Persons living within Regality, belongs to the Lord or Baillie
of Regality infeft with that privilege: And therefore Gifts by the King, reach
not these escheats, but gifts by the Lords, or Baillie of the Regality, which
was found to comprehend all Moveable goods, and sums belonging to the party
Denunced, as well within the Regality as without the same, June 26. 1680. Young
contra Lord of Raploch. But these gifts Differ from the Kings gifts, that they
are effectual according to their Tenor, both as to goods before and after the
gift, and are valid, though granted generally, or though before the Casuality
fall, if a special gift, after the Casuality fell, be not in competition, for
the Prior Limitations of the Kings gifts, are only in Favors of the King, that
he be not prejudged by the default of his Officers; But private parties ought
sibi invigilare: And albeit the diligence of Creditors be preferred to the
Donatars, chiefly by the Kings benignity: Yet the same was sustained against a
Donatar of Escheat, by a Lord of Regality February 24. 1637. Gilmore contra
Hagie.

21. The main difficulty anent Gifts, is, when they are Simulat, and to the
behove of the Denunced, which is much cleared by that excellent Statute, Par.
1592. cap. 145. Declaring it a sufficient evidence of Simulation, of any
Assignation, or Gift of Escheat, if the Rebel himself, his Wife, Bairns, or
near Friends, remain in Possession of his Tack, and Goods, to their own uses,
and behove; yet it is not declared, how long their possession must be; Seeing
the Rebel ordinarily, for some time is in possession, till the Donatar use
diligence: But where the Rebel retained possession till his death, a Gift
though declared was found null by exception, July 12. 1628. Morison contra
Frendraught, June 26. 1611. Gairdner contra Lord Gray: Yea, it was found
Simulat, where the Rebel possessed, 9. years, June 27. 1622. John Inglis contra
Lord of Capringtoun, and other Circumstances, concurring 4, or 5. years by the
Rebel, was found sufficient, the Donatar having consented to several Tacks, and
Wodsets granted by the Rebel: And yet the same Gift was found valid in part, in
so far as concerned Heritable Rights, acquired by the Donatar from the Rebel,
December 23. 1623. Ballantyn contra Murray, four or five years Possession of
the Rebel, were found sufficient to infer Simulation, though the Donatar was a
Creditor, and the Rebels Lands apprysed, seeing the appryser possessed not, but
the Rebel, 6, and 9. of January 1666. Sr. Lawrance Oliphant contra Sir James
Drummond, So that the time of Possession, sufficient to infer Simulation,
remains in arbitrio Judicis.

The next ground of the Simulation of gifts of Escheat, and presuming the same
to the Rebels behove is, when it is taken in the name of the Children in his
Family, which was found Relevant, without mention of the Rebels Possession,
June 25. 1622. Lord Borthwicks Bairns contra Dickson. But the presumption was
not found sufficient, that the Gift was to the behove of the Rebels Son: Here
it was not alleged, that he was then in his Fathers Family, March 20. 1623.
Keith contra Benholme. The like where the Son was not in his Fathers Family,
and was a Creditor, and made Faith, it was to his own behove at passing the
Gift, though the party Denunced, did remain in possession, sometime after
Declarator, December 4. 1669. Jaffray contra Jaffray.

The third Presumption of the Simulation of Gifts is, when the same is
procured, and past by the Rebels means which was sustained, though a part was
by the Donatars means, and a part by the Rebels, though the Donatar was then a
Creditor. June 26. 1622. John Inglis contra Lord of Capringtoun. The like
found probable by Members of the Exchequer, as Witnesses, Nov. 28. 1626. Earl
of Kinghorn contra Wood. Hope cessio bonorum, Lord of Clunie contra Lord of
Blandine, Cant and Porterfield contra Sir James Stewart. The like against an
assigney, constitute by the Donatar, Hope Horning, Sir Georg Hamilton contra
Robert Ramsay. Simulation, of a Gift of Life-rent to the Rebels behove, was
found probable by the Rebels Oath, and the Witnesses insert in the Gift, June
19. 1669. Scot contra Langtoun.

This ground of Simulation is found relevant, not only against the Donatar, but
against a singular Succesor, not partaking of the Fraud, whose Assignation was
after the Creditors diligence, December 10. 1623. Douglas contra Belshes. And
though there was no diligence, the Gift being exped blank in the name, and
filled up thereafter, in the Donatars name; It was found Simulat, even as to
him, though obtaining it for his true debt December 17. 1670. Nicol Langton
contra Robison. Simulation is not otherwise valid, against singular Successors:
Yet it will not be relevant to exclude the Donatar, and prefer another Donatar,
in so far as concerns the first Donatars debt, truly owing to him, though the
gift was given at the Rebels request, and past at his own Charges: So that the
Exclusiion, by this presumed Simulation, was only Inferred, as to the profit of
the Gift, above the Donatars own debt, in quantum Lucratus est. For that was
found no Fault in the debtor Rebel, to concur in desire, and moyen to get a
gift to his Creditor, in so far as concerned that Creditors debt, March 11.
1624. William Douglas contra Viscont of Air. The like where the Rebel concured,
in procurring the gift, the Donatar having made Faith the gift was to his own
behove, showing his Debt and Back-band, December 12. 1673. Mr. Georg Dickson
contra Sr. Alexander Mcculloch. All this must be understood, if the Rebel
remain unrelaxed, for if unrelaxed, a Gift though taken expressly in his name,
returns and accresceth to the Fisk, and next donatar, July 6 1627. Earl of
Annandale contra Lord of Cockpool: Yea, though he was after relaxed before any
other gift November 28. 1626. Earl of Kinghorn contra Wood. June 2. 1610.
Lenuox contra Turnbul. But if the Denunced were relaxed, the time of the Gift,
as it would be sufficient in his own Person expressly, so it is valid in another
person, though to his behove, yet it will exclude none of the Creditors.

These Nullities are not only competent to Posterior Donatars, but also the
Rebels Creditors using diligence.

To come now to the Declarators of escheat, there are two, the First, general,
the next special.

22. In the Action of General Declarator, the Rebel or his Bairns, or (...) of
Kin (if he be dead) must be called, Hope, cessio bonorum, Frazer of Tillebodie
contra Mopherson, but the Declarator has no effect against moveable Airship,
unless the Rebels Air were called: As to the other movables though there uses
seldom to be Executors, confirmed to defunct Rebels, and therefore the Wife,
and nearest of Kin are ordinarily called; Yet where the Wife was only called,
she being Executrix confirmed, it was sustained, Nicol, de Haereditariis
actionibus. contra Relict of James Forest. And though Summonds of general
declarator bear all parties having Interest, who must be cited generally, at
the Market Cross of the Head Burgh where the Rebels residence is, that is but
Stilus Curiae, and the want of it hinders nothing, June 27. 1666. Massoun
contra Black.

23. The Title in the general Declarator is the Gift, and the Horning whereupon
it proceeds, the extract whereof does as sufficiently prove, as the principal,
Par. 1579. cap. 75.

The tenor of the general Declarator is, that the Rebel was duly, and orderly
Denunced by the Horning Lybelled, and that thereby the whole moveable Goods and
Gear, etc. Became escheat, and belongs to the pursuer, by Virtue of his Gift:
All which is instantly verified by the Titles: And therefore if no relevant
exception be proponed, Decree is instantly given.

24. No exception will be here competent against the Horning, not being
instantly verified, for all others will be reserved to Reduction: So was it
found, it being alleged, that the Rebel dwelt in another Shire then where he
was Denunced, June 12. 1611. Mr. of Ocheltrie contra Lord of Symonton. Yet if
the Reduction be Depending, it may be sustained as prejudicial, and be first
discust, December 12. 1622. Dalmahoy contra Scot. Neither will any Exception be
sustained against the ground of the Horning, as not due, or satisfied, as that
it proceeded upon a null Band, Subscribed only by one Notar, January 12. 1610.
Durham contra Clelland. Or that payment was made before Denunciation, November
30. 1630. Douglas contra Wardlaw, Hope Horning escheat, Lord Douglas contra
Lord Carmichael. The reason is not only, because the alleagence is not
instantly Verified, but specially because the Kings Officers are not called,
that they may defend the Kings interest, and obviat Collusions, upon Forged
discharges, or otherwise; For oft-times the Donatar has but a small Interest,
in respect of his Back-band, and so may readily collude: And therefore, though
the defense be instantly verified, it is not received by exception, though it
might justly be without Multiplication of Processes, Intimation being made to
the Thesaurer, and Advocat, that they might appear for the Kings Interest, but
if it be a visible nullitie in the Horning, or an exception wherein there can
be no appearance of Collusion: It is sometimes admitted as this exception, that
the Horning was Suspended before Denunciation, and was false, was sustained,
Hope Horning Sheriff of Murray contra Exceptions of any party compearing for
their Interest, and alleging Assignation, or Disposition of the goods, or
diligence done, use not to be received in the general Declaratar, but reserved
to the Special, because the general is but an Intimation, and so proceeds
Summarily.

25. The Action of special Declarator, though it has the name of Declarator,
yet has little in it Declaratory, but it is Petitory of the goods specially
Lybelled in it. There is no necessity to call the Rebel, or any representing
him, but the haver or intrometter with the escheat goods. The Title in this
Action, is the Decree of general Declarator, and there is no necessity to
produce the gift or Horning, Feb. 10. 1627. Creditors of John Stewart, of
Coldinghams, escheat contra a debetor to the Rebel, November 20. 1629. Lundie
contra Lundie where another Donatar was admitted for his Interest, in the
special Declarator though he had no general Declaratar: Nor is any exception
competent against the same, or ground thereof, but only by Reduction.

Yet in the competition of others, Donatars or Creditors having used diligence,
or having gotten Assignations Intimat, or Dispositions cled with possession,
before general Declarator upon debts Anterior to the Denunciation, or Criminal
Fact, or otherways upon the Simulation of the gift, are here competent, as the
Simulation is competent also against the general Declarator, and all exceptions
generally or particularly reserved in the general Declarator, are competent in
the Special: All these exceptions being held forth before in the same Title,
there is no necessity here, to repeat them. In aspecial Declarator of escheat,
Payment before Denunciation was sustained, to be proven by the Creditors Oath,
upon a Reduction of the Horning, and general Declarator repeated by way of
Defense, February 10. 1662. William Montgomerie contra Theodor Montgomerie and
Mr. William Lander. In this cause a Creditor was not found to have Interest, to
found upon the Donatars Backband given to the Thesaurer, without obtaining a
second Gift.

Special Declarators may be persued any other way, as upon Arreistment or
particular Lybel, for restitution and delivery of the escheat goods. It is also
Consistaut in the same Lybel, with the general Declarator: But before the
pursuer insist in the other member for the special Declarator, he must pursue
that member for the general Declarator.

26. Liferent-escheat, though it be a penalty of Contumacy and Rebellion, and
so is properly a Confiscation: Yet seeing it does not befall only to the Fisk
but is a common Casuality of Superiority, and has been handled in the Title,
Superiority. We shall not here repeat, but only touch some Differences, between
Liferent-escheat, and Single-escheat.

First, Single-escheat is only a Legal Penalty, and therefore belongs alone to
the King, and his Ministers of Justice, who are comptable to him therefore as
Sheriffs, etc. Or to there own behove by their infeftments, as Lords and
Baillies of Regalitie: But Liferent-escheat is not only Penal, but is a Legal
Consequence of the Condition of the Rebel, whereby he being outlawed, and
having no person in Judgment, is excluded from the Possession of all his
Rights, and is esteemed as civiliter mortuus, whereby his Fies become open, and
are in the hands of his Superior, whether the King, or any other Superior, by
his continuing unrelaxed year and day: And therefore the diligences done
against, or the deeds done by the Rebel, for satisfying of his lawful debts
contracted before Rebellion, do not effect his Liferent-escheat, as they do his
Single-escheat, though they be done before year and day expire, being after the
Rebellion: And so Arrestments, or Assignations, even though before Rebellion,
have no effect after year and day is run, because these being but Personal, and
Liferent-escheat a real Right flowing from the Superiority, whereby the Vassal
is denuded of the Liferent: Therefore the effect of these Personal rights
cease; But all real rights flowing from the Vassal before the Rebellion, as
Fews, Annualrents, Tacks, Appryzings and Adjudications whereupon there was a
Charge, are effectual, and not excluded by Liferent-escheat, though these are
excluded by Ward, which is a Casuality following the nature of Fewdal Rights;
Whereas Liferent-escheat arises not from the Nature of Fies, but is introduced
by Law or Custom, and therefore the Fie falls in the hands of the Superior as
it was in the hands of the Vassal, with all the Real burdens he had fixed upon
it: Neither does Posterior voluntary Infeftments, though for debts prior to the
Rebellion, and granted before Declarator, exclude the Liferent-escheat,
Jannuary 18. 1611. Samuel Ord contra the Lord of Craigkeith. The like, where
the Infeftment was granted after Rebellion, but within year and day, January
23. 1627. James Wallace contra Thomas Porteous. Where there is an exception
insinuat, unless there had been an prior obliegment before the Rebellion, to
grant thelnfeftment, as if in that case (though in cursu Rebellionis) it would
be sufficient to exclude the Liferent. The like was found, that Infeftments
upon a voluntary Disposition, made in cursu Rebellionis, within the year, and
for a debt due before Rebellion, excluded not the Liferent-escheat, March 19.
1628. Mr James Rae contra Buckie, Hope Horning, Lord of Frendraught contra
Meldrum, Gordon of (...) contra Gordon of Haddo. But Infeftments in cursu
Rebellionis upon special obliegments, to grant the same before Denuneiation,
are valid. vide Tit. 14. 53.

As to Legal Diligences of Creditors, whither Appryzing and Infeftment
thereupon, being after Rebellion, will exclude the Liferent-escheat was
declared the last Title in the second effect of Appryzings, the sum whereof is,
that they are thus far preferable to voluntary Dispositions, That being done in
Cursu Rebellionis, for a debt before Rebellion; There being Infeftment, or
Charge in cursu Rebellionis, they exclude the Liferent.

Secondly, Single-escheats require general and special Declarator:
Liferent-escheats require but one Declarator for all, wherein the Title is the
Horning, the Gift, and the Superiors Seasine, without farther instructing the
Superiors Right, and without Continuation, July 2. 1622. Carmichael contra
Lermont, March 6. 1624. Douglas contra Eastnesbit, June 23. 1625. Viscount of
Stormont contra And there is no necessity to instruct the Lands holden of that
Superior by the Defender. The reason is, because that is presumed, unless the
Defender disclame, or that the Superior be a Singlar Successor, never
acknowledged by the Vassal, or his Predecessors.

27. Shipwreck, and Wath Goods, or Treasures in the ground, whose owner
appears not, are Confiscat as Caduciarie, whereby the owners are presumed to
Relinquish, or loose the same. And so a jure sup cadunt, and the things become
nullius, and yet belong not to the first Possessor, as things relinquished do,
by the Common Law, but do belong to the King, by his Royal Prerogative, or to
others having Right from him. We have spoken of these before in the Title Real
Rights. And shall only add this, that by that just and Noble Statute, Par.
1429. cap. 124. It is declared, that where Ships break in this Country, the
Ship and Goods shall be escheat to the King, if they belong to such Countries
as use the like Law anent Shipwreck in there own Land, otherwise they shall
have the same favor, as they keep to Ships of this Land broken with them. It
is also declared amongst the Statutes of King Alexander the Second, cap. 25.
That if any Living Man or Beast, as Dog, Cat, etc. come quick out of the
Vessel, the same shall not be accounted Shipwreck, but shall be preserved to
the Owner, claming and instructing his Right within year and day; Or otherwise
it shall belong to the King: So was it found, where an ox escaped alive out of
the Ship, and the Admirals Decree finding the same Escheatable, as Shipwreck
was Suspended Simpliciter December 12. 1622. Hamilton contra Cochran. In which
case nothing was alleiged, but this old Statute, the genuine meaning whereof
seems only to be where any person came to Land the Ship and Goods should not be
confiscat as Wrack, but the posterior Act, Par. 1429. cap. 124. Repeats not
that provision, but regulats the matter according to the custom of other
Nations, to do to them as they do to us, without any other Limitation. And
therefore where some Persons came to Land, the Ship being broken, the same with
the Goods dispersed were Confiscat, If Confiscation in the like case should be
proven to be the Law, or Custom of that place, to which the Ship belonged,
January 20. 1674. Jacobson contra Earl of Crawfoord.

28. Forefaulture is the great Confiscation, comprehending all other Penal
Confiscations. It is extended to the taking away of Life, Lands and Goods, Par.
1424. cap. 3. For it is the Penalty of the highest Crime, to wit Treason;
which at first, and by its native Signification, it expresses Crimes against
the Life of any party under Trust: So the Slaughter of any person under Trust,
Credit, or power of the Slayer, is declared Treason, Par. 1587. cap. 51.

29. Thence it is also called Treachery, and the Committers thereof Traitors.
And because of that Trust betwixt the King and all the Leiges, as their
Superior and Sovereign: The chief point of Treason is against the Kings
Person, as appears by the Act last Cited: These also, who without cause,
wilfully raise a fray in the Kings Host commit Treason, Par. 1455. cap. 54.
Upon the same ground, because of the Trust betwixt the Superior and his
Vassal, such Crimes against the Superior, is also called Treason, and thereby
the committer Loses for ever, all Lands and Heritage he held of that
Superior, quoniam Atachiamenta, cap. 19. But this Treason infers not a Simple
Forfaulture, but only is a ground of Recognition: But as now the Terms are
take, Treason, and Forefalture of Life, Lands and Goods are adequat, and
wherever the one is expressed in any Act of Parliament the other is understood
for the Stryking or Slaying of any person, within the Parliament House, during
the time of Parliament, within the Kings InnerChamber, Cabinet or Chamber of
Peace, the King being within his Palace, or within the Inner-tolbooth, the time
of Session sitting, or within the Privy Council-House the time of the Council
sitting, or in his Majesty's Presence any where, is declared Treason, Par.
1593. cap. 173. Impugning the Dignity or Authority of the three Estates of
Parliament, or procuring any Innovation, or Diminution of there Power, is
prohibit under pain of Treason, Par. 1584. cap. 139. And also declyning the
King, and his Council, in any matter to be inquired before them, Par. 1564.
cap. 129. Purchasers of benifices at the Court of Rome, are ordained to be
denunced as Traitors to the King, Par. 1471. cap. 43. Par. 1488. cap. 4. Par.
1540. cap. 119. So forgers of the Kings Coin, and home-bringers thereof, incurr
the lose of Life, Lands and Goods, Par. 1563. cap. 70. Saying of Mass,
resetting of Jesuits, Seminary Priests, and traffiquing Papists: And these
themselves are liable to Treason, Par. 1592. cap. 120. Par. 1607. cap. 1.
Raising of Fire wilfully, or burning of Houses, or corns, whither folk be
therein or not, is declared Treason, Par. 1592. cap. 146. Landed men committing
or resetting Riot or Robbery, incurr the pain of Treason. Par. 1587. cap. 50.
And generally, Resetters, Maintainers, and Assisters of declared Traitors,
commit Treason, Par. 1592. cap. 144. Accuser of others of Treason, if the
accused be acquit commit Treason, Par. 1587. cap. 47.

30. Forefaulture confiscateth the forfaulted persons whole Estate, without any
access to his Creditors; Yea without consideration of Dispositions Infeftments,
or other Real Rights granted by the Forfaulted Person, since or before the
committing of the Crime of Treason, for which he was forfaulted, which fall and
became null, by Exception, Hope, Forfaultur Viscount of Rochester contra
Teuents of Callavrock, July 14. 1610. Campbel contra Lifnories, Spots
Conjunctfie, Crawfoord contra Lord of Murdiestoun, unless these rights have
been confirmed by the King as Superior, or Consented to by him.

It only remains dubious, whether Feu Infeftments granted by Forefault Persons,
before committing of the Crime be also annulted by the (...). And the Act of
Parliament anent Feus, Par. 155. cap. 72. Should not only defend them against
Recognition, and the Casualities of Superiority, but even against Forfaultur
it self, it being therein declared, that the King will Ratify the said Feus.
The like is to be understood of other Superiors. So that though de facto they
be not confirmed; Yet the Declaration, and Obleigment of the Statute stands
as a Confirmation thereof, or at least as an Obleigment upon all Superiors,
against which, they nor their Donators cannot come. This is to be understood,
while (...) are allowed by Law, vide Title Infefints 34. Sect.

It was so decyded February 12. 1674. Marquis of Huntlie contra Gordon
Cairnlorrow, November 16. 1680. Campbel of Silver craigs contra Land of
Auchinbreck, and the Earl of Argyl, not only because the Act of Payliament,
1587. Imports a Confirmation of Feus granted thereafter, but also because
Forefaulture is by Penal Statute, and not by the Feudal Right, like unto
Liferent escheat, which returns the Fie to the Superiors, but with the
burdens put thereupon by the Vassal, whether Feu, blensh Ward, or by Annualrent
or Tack. And therefore when any Person is Forefault, that is not the Kings
immediate Ward Vassal, his Estate, both Property and Superiority falls to the
King, but with the burden of all Real Rights constitute by the Vassal; Yet
Forefaultur of the Kings immediate Ward Vassal, proceeds upon Crimes inferring
Recognition: And therefore returns his Ward Lands to the King, as they came
from the King free of all burden. So that the Act of Parliament 1457. Which
unquestionably secures against Ward, and Recognition must also secure Feus
against the Forefaultur of the Vassal granter of the Feus, but will not secure
any other Subalterne Right, without the Superiors consent, as a Blensh
Infeftment, Jan. 13. 1677. Marquis of Huntlie contra Lord of Grant.

32. Tacks also being Necessary and Profitable, are not excluded by Forfaultur,
Maitland December 14. 1570. Home of Manderstoun contra Tenants of Oldhamstock,
Leslie of Wachtcun contra The like as to Tacks for a competent Duty, but not
in Tacks for grassams, January 28. 1674. General Dalziel contra Tenants of
Caldwall.

33. But by the Act of Par. 1644. Forfaultur was declared to be without
prejudice to all Persons not accessory to the Crime of the Superior of the
Rights of Property of any Lands, Wodset, or others holden by them, of the
Forefault Person, or of the payment of their Just Debts, or relief of their
Cautionries our of the Forfaulted Estates, which is now rescinded by the
general Act rescissary, Par. 1661. cap. 15.

34. Forefaultur could not be pronunced in absence of the Forefault Person, by
the Justice Gerneral, but only by the Parliament. So that no Certification of
the Justice could reach Lands, but only Movables, So July 8. 1662. William
Yeaman contra Mr. Patrick Oliphant. Neither could it extend to Heritable Bands,
November 31. 1671. Anthony Hag contra Moscrop and Rutherfoord: But now the
Justices may proceed to Forefault absents, in case of open Rebellion, and
rising in Arms, Par. 1669. cap. 11.

35. Because of the defficulty the King or his Donatar might have, in knowing
the Rights of Foresaulted Persons, by Laboring the same with their own Goods,
setting the same to Tenants, and up-lifting the Mails and Duties, as their
Heritage, and so being reput Heritable Possessors for the space of five years,
immediately preceding the process of Forefalture, the lands so labored, or
possessed pertain to the King, and his Donatar, though they can produce no
Heritable Right, or Title thereof in the Forefault Person: For trial whereof
Commssion may be granted under the testimonial of the great Seal, to such
persons as shall be thought fit by the advice of the Secret Council, to take
cognition, by an Inquest, what Lands were brooked by the Forefault person, as
Heritable possessor thereof, so commonly reput and esteemed by the said five
years space, with power to call before them all parties pretending interest,
which being retured to the Chancelarie ad perpetuam Remanentiam, shall be a
sufficient Right, Par. 1584. cap. 2.

This right was sustained to a Donatar, though nearest of Kin to the Forefault
Person, and presumeable to have his Right July 11. 1623. Maxwel contra
Westeraw. But here the Donatar was made to depone, that he had just reason to
affirm, that the Rights were wanting, Hope possession inter eosdem. This right
was not elided, though it was offered to be proven, that the forefault Persons
Right was reduced in foro contradictorio upon Recognition before his
Forefaulture, Feb. 20. 1611. Hairstons contra Ramebel. So the said 5. years
possession being repute, Heritable possessor infers presumptionem juris and de
Jure, of the forefaulted persons Right, which admits no contrary probation, As
to the forefaulted persons Right, if the Quinquennial, Peaceable and Lawful
Possession be proven: But the probation thereof by Inquest, will not exclude a
contrary probation, by Reduction, of the possession of others, within the 5.
years: And if the possession be not Lawful and Peaceable, but interrupted, or
Vicious, the Statute takes no place, for by possession, Lawful peaceable
possession of the forefaulted Persons must be understood: And if any person
have moved Action within the 5. years, for taking away the Rebels right and
possession, they will be heard after the forefaulture, as before; Yea, Citation
before the 5. years, and Inhibition in the 5. years, with a subsequent
Security, was found sufficient to take off the benifite of this Act, July 23.
1666. Earl of Southesk contra Marquis of Huntlie. This privilege is not
competent by Exception, or Reply, offering to prove 5. years possession, but by
a reture upon a Commission served by an Inquest, July 13. 1666. Sr. Henry Hoom
contra Sr. Alexander Hoom. In this Statute, it is also provided, that where
there were Tacks, or possessions of Lands, or Teinds possessed by the forefault
Person, in respect that the rights thereof might also be abstracted, that the
King and his Donatar should continue in that same possession for sive years,
without any account for the profits thereof, and longer, if a Right be
instructed of the forefault person: And if a Fewer be forefault, the Land is
not liable for the Feu duty, preceding the Forefaulture, because the
discharges thereof might have been abstracted, Possession for fever then 5.
years, by the Forefaulted person, was found sufficient to continue for 5 years,
though no Tack was instructed, Jannuary 24. 1667. Sr. Henry Hoom contra Sr.
Alexander Hoom.

36. It is also declared in this Statute, that the Forefaultur of the appearand
Heir, carries therewith the right of the Lands, to which he might succeed,
though he were never entered Heir, nor Infeft, whereof Craig mentions a case,
Lib. 2. Dieg. 8. That the Daughters of the Lord of Laisindrum were excluded
from their Succession to their Goodsir, because their Father was forefault,
though he was never received, nor infeft in these Lands.

37. Craig, in the forecited place moves, but determines not this question,
whether the Forefaulture inserreth a Corruption of the Blood, of all the
Descendents of the Forefault Persons, whereby, till they be restored, they are
incapable of any Succession, though descending to them by the Maternal Line.
This Corruption of the Blood is frequently in Fngland, where persons are
specially attainted and convict of Treason: And sometimes with us, it is called
dishabilitation, and is a part of the Doom or Sentence, that the Successors of
the Person convict, shall be incapable of Lands, Estate, Honor or Office; Yea,
then Fame, and Memory, is sometimes condemned, and their Surname abolished, as
was done in the Forefalture of the Earl of Gourie: But it is not consonant to
our Customs, that Forefaulture in other cases should infer this Corruption of
Blood; First, because of the Multiplication of cases, to which Forefaulture is
now extended, as to Thest on (...) men, and false Coin. 2. If none of the
Descendents of (...) persons were Capable of Succession to any person, that
could not be, by reason of any speciality in the matter of Succession, but of
something in their person, by reason of the Forefaulture, excluding them
thence, which would not only take place in Heritage, but in Movables; Yea, the
Oye, or farther Offspring of the Forefaulted person could not succeed to their
ownimmediat Parents, which would infer, that they could be capable of no
Goods, or Means, but the same would be instantly Confiscat. 3. Though
Forefaultures in Scotland have been very frequent, the off-pring of such have
ordinarily acquired Lands, and Goods, and their Children Succeeded them
therein, without obtaining Restitution of their Blood: So that this Corruption
of the Blood is rather to be thought a Speciality, in some Attrocious Treasons
by the tenor of the Doom of Forefaulture, then a general consequence thereof.

38. But whereas it has been said, that the appearand Heir being Forefaulted,
the King has right to the Heritage, to which he might succeed; It may be
Questioned, whether that my be extended to the appearand Heir, if he be
Forefaulted, during his Predicessors Life: Or if it be only in the case, that
the Heir apparent is forefaulted, after the death of his Predecessor. Where de
presenti, he may be Heir, there is no doubt, if the person forefaulted should
be fugitive, and survive his Predecessor: But the Heritage accresing to him,
wherein he might de presenti infeft, would fall under forefaulture, though he
were not actually infeft; And it seems no less clear, that being forefaulted,
if he should die before his Predecessor, that his brother, or Collaterals might
succeed to their Father, or any other to whom the forefaulted person, if he had
survived them, would have succeeded. It is more doubtful, whether his
descendents could, if any were, for these would Exclude the Collateralls: And
there seems no reason to exclude them from their Grandfathers Heritage, not
being dishabilitat: And seeing I have not found it extended further, I conceive
it more favorable, that the Heir appearand dieing before his Predecessor,
should not hinder his Descendents to succeed to that predecessor: But unless
the forefaulture did incapacitat the Predecessor, to dispose upon his own
estate, the forefaulture in that case, would be improfitable; Yet seeing we have
no complaints of exhaeredatione in Scotland: But that Parents may freely
dispose of their Estates at their pleasure, it would be hard, to bind up the
Parent more in Relation to the Fisk, then tohis own Child, unless fraud to
prevent the effect of the forefaulture without a rational cause do appear.

39. For the further Security of the King and his Denatar, it is provided, Par.
1594. cap. 202. That no Letter of Pension, Factory, Band or Assignation,
granted by any forefault person, shall be valid, unless it be confirmed by the
King, or authorized by Decree of an ordinary Judge, obtained before citation
in the Process of Forefaulture, which seems to insinuate, that Creditors should
be satisfied out of the forefault Estate, but it will reach no further then the
Movables fallen by forefaultnre, which seems to be affected in the same way,
as falling by Single-escheat, the full Dominion in both being the Kings, but
with the burden of admitting the diligence of Lawful Creditors before
Declarator, but I have not observed this practiced, in movables of forefault
persons. The reason of this Statute appears by the Act immediately
preceding, whereby a former Act of Parliament in favors of the Vassal of
forefault persons is resoinded, and appointed to be delet out of the Books of
Parliament, which rescinded Act, though it be not Extant, but delet as
aforesaid has affected forefault Estates, with the debts of the forefault
person, and with the subaltern Infeftments, granted by forefault persons not
confirmed: And therefore such Rights being Constitute by a Law then standing,
could not be derogat by a subsequent Law: And therefore it was (...) to
Caution, by the foresaid Act 202. That Simulat or antedated Rights, might not
affect Estates Forefaulted, before the said rescissory Act.

40. Sentence of Forefaulture being pronunced, is declared Irreducible, upon
any nullitie in the process, upon which it proceeded, till the (...) be
remitted by the King, or the party tried and acquit thereof: But restitution
shall only be granted by way of Grace, to the parties forefaulted, or their
Posterity, Par. 1584. cap. 135. Which was not found to extend to
Dishabilitation of the Son of the Forefaulted person, but that it might by Act
of Parliament be taken off, without Citation of any party, who had acquired
Right upon the Dishabilitation from the Donatar, which fell in consequence,
February 24. 1665. Dam Elizabeth Douglas, and Sr. Robert Sinclair contra Lord
of Wedderburn.

41. The Doom or Decree of Forefaulture, when past in Parliament, gives
immediate access to the Mails, and Duties of the Estate possessed by the Forefault
person, and needs no Declaratar, because it is a Decree of Parliament, and
has the like effect as Ward, which requires no Declarator, Jan. 6. 1681.
George Hoom contra Mr. Patrick Hoom. The like though the Doom of Forefaulture
was by the Justices in absence. seeing it was ratified in Parliament, not by a
Ratification passing of Course, but by a public Law, ratifieing that
Forefaultnre by the Justices, as if it had been done in Parliament: And all
such Forefaultures by the Justices, being for open Rebellion, and rising in
Arms against the King, December 15. 1680. Gordon of Troquhen contra a Wodsetter
of Barscow.

42. Bastardrie and last Heir makes things befall to the Fisk, as caduciary,
because such things can be Lawfully Claimed by none. And therefore are applied
to the Fisk.

Ere we can conceive the effects of Bastardrie, we must understand the
efficient that makes a Bastard, which being Relative and Defective, is best
taken up by the opposite, viz. A lawful Child begotten of persons lawfully
Married: So then a Bastard is a Child, whose Parents werenot lawfully Married;
And therefore such are Bastards, First, Whose Parents were not at all Married.
2. These whose parents were Married, yet were not in degrees capable of
Marriage, 3. These who were Married, and in capable degrees, yet the Marriage
was inconsistent, because of some impediment, as if either party were Married
before, and the other Spouse on life, whether that were Solemnly, or Privately,
by promise of Marriage, and Copulation following, in which last case, if the
impediment be Secret, and not known to both parties, Craig observes as his own
opinion, and the opinion of the (...), that the said impediment, though it be
sufficient to anull the Marriage, yet not to take away the Legitimation of the
Children, procreat bona fide by any of the parties, before knowledge of that
impediment.

But, because, who are the Parents, is sometimes dubious, procreation being
Secret both in the Act and Effect: For clearing thereof, it is the common rule
in the Civil Law. And with us, Pater est quem justae Nuptiae demonstrant L. 5.
F. de in jus vocando. So he is presumed to be the Father, who the time that the
Conception might be, was Married to the Mother; But in this case, Lawful
Marriage is not opposed to Clandestine, or Irregular Marriage, as not being
after Proclamation in the Church, or by a person having power to Marry by the
Canons of the Church, or Statutes of the Country: But that is only understood,
as unlawful Marriage in this case, which materially is unjust and inconsistent,
where Marriage could not have subsisted, albeit it had been orderly performed,
as being by persons in degrees prohibited, by Divine Law, or where either
party had another lawful Spouse then living, and undivorced: Yea, Marriage
betwixt the adulterer and the adulteress, after dis solution of the former
Marriage does not infer Bastardrie of the Children of the subsequent Marriage,
though it may debarr them from Succession. The presumption, that the Children
born in Marriage are the Husbands, requires such time as they might have been
lawfully procreat, when both parties were free, and unmarried, which if it was
9 months before the birth, it is sufficient, but if less, the presumption will
not suffice; Unless it appear the Child was unrype, and born before the time,
otherwise the Child will be presumed to be the former Husbands. This is
presumptio juris, and admits contrary probation. As first, if the Father were
absent, or impotent, the time that the conception could be, which absence is
not necessarily beyond Sea, as the English require the fathers absence: And
therefore, if he be within the four Seas during the time the birth is in the
Womb, this presumption prevails against his absence with them: But with us it
will be sufficient, that his absence be special, and circumstantiat, that there
remains no doubt, that he could not have been present. As if the Father were
in prison, or at very great distance: So that a short time might not suffice
him to be present. This presumption will also be taken off, by the Testimony of
both Parents agreeing, that the Child belongs to another Father, and so is a
Bastard: But the Testimony of either of them will not suffice, as Craig
relates, of a Lady, that having controversy with her Son, she was accustomed
to consesse that he was a Bastard: And of a Queen, related by the Doctors,
whose name they forbear, Who, at the time of her death, declared to her Son,
that he was not the Kings Son, yet he was received as King, in his Fathers
place. It has been more frequently seen, that the Father has disowned the
Child born of his Wife, which though it might infer suspicion and reproach,
yet not Bastardrie, unless the Mother also of consent, or by process were made
to acknowledge it. It will not be sufficient to eleid the foresaid presumption,
though the Wifes adultery should be proven; Yea, though at a time answering to
the time of conception, though it has an ordinary course of 9 months, yet
has had such variations, that the Child has been accounted belonging to the
Father, by reason of the Marriag, though it preceeded the Birth of the Child,
only by the space of 8, 7, or the beginning of 6. months; Especially if by the
judgment of Phisicians immaturity of the Child concurred; Yea, this
presumption will atribute the Child to the Father, though the Child be born 9
10, or 11. months after the Fathers Death: But in these cases, the Probability
of the circumstances may make the Mothers Testimony alone sufficient to
instruct the Bastardie of the Child: Neither is Marriage here accounted, by the
Solemnization thereof in the Church, which in some places is ordinarily without
that, and though with us, it be a requisite solemnity, yet it is not of the
being of Marriage. And therefore, Cohabitation, as Man and Wife supplyeth the
Solemnity of public Marriage, which being a (...) Act, and having no record,
could seldom be proven; Yea, though it could be proven by the Oath of both
parties, or otherwise that there was never a formal Marriage, if the parties
were capable of Marriage, Cohabitation would supply, for after Contract, or
Promises of Marriage, or Sponsalia, if copulation follow there is thence
presumed a Matrimonial Consent de presenti, which therefore, cannot be past
from by either, or both parties, as having the essential requisits of Marriage
If diligence be used for performing that Solemnity, though it take no effect,
the Contract of Marriage will make the Child lawful, as when, in the time of
the Proclamation thereof, the one party died, whereof Craig relates a case:
Yea, in the case of Edward Younger there mentioned, who having begotten
Children under promise of Marriage, but refusing to acknowledge, or perform it,
the Woman having obtained Sentence of the Commissars (who are Judges of
Matrimony and Legitimation) against the said Edward, for Solemnizing the
Marriage, which though he obeyed not, the Children were accounted Lawful, and
capable of Succession.

Marriage, as is before shown, Title conjugal Obligations, is proven by
Cohabitation of the Father and Mother as married persons, which was sustained
upon 10. years Cohabitation, as Man and Wife, though it was offered to be
proven the Child was reput Bastard, July 7. 1626. Somervail contra Haltro. And
there being a mutual probation, whether a Defunct was lawful, or a Bastard, and
six Witnesses being examined on either side, though several of the Witnesses on
the one side proved, that the Defunct was reput Bastard, and that his Mother
gave signs of Repentance publicly in the Church, for Fornication with his
Father: But others proving that they were in there house, and saw them Cohabit,
as Man and Wife, but did not mention how long, the Defunct was found to be no
Bastard, but a lawful Child, Jan. 15. 1676. Mr. Robert Swinton contra Marion
Kaills; Yet this was eleided by contrary probation, that the Father had then
another Wife, and a lawful Child thereby, and that the person in Question was
reput Bastard, Hope Bastardrie, Archbald Chirnside contra Isobel Grieve, and
Christian Williamson.

Bastardry is also eleided, by proving the person in Question, to be holden and
reput Lawful, unless the pursuer condescend, and instruct the contrary, by
particular circumstances, Hope Bastardry, Hog contra Hog. Ninian Chirnside
contra William Hoom. The like where the person in question was 50. years old,
James Hope contra Scot: The like being 80. years after the Bastards death, who
died an old man. The Lords would not grant process de statu defunctorum post
tantum tempus, Feb. 25. 1642. Malcom Crawfoord contra Hellen and Bessie Russels.

43. Bastardrie has no effect till Declarator, which proceeds upon a general
Citation against all and sundry, at the Market Cross of the Shire where the
Bastard dwelt, at the instance of the Kings Advocat, or Donatar, because the
Bastard can have none to represent him, but if the Bastards debitors be called
specially, there will not only follow a general Declarator, that the person was
Bastard, but a decernitur against the debitors, which is a special Declarator,
though these may be disjoined in several processes, but if any party appear,
as nearest agnat, he would be admitted to defend, December. 11. 1679. James
Somervail contra William Stains.

It was found that a Declarator of Bastardry was not relevantly Lybelled, that
the Father and Mother were not Married, unless it were added, that the Defunct
in his life, was holden and reput Bastard, which was found and instructed, by
his taking Legitimation from the King, Feb. 19. 1669. Kings Advocat contra
Craw, June 15. 1672. Livingstoun contra Burns, Jan. 6. 1680. Somervail contra
Stains.

44. As to the effects of Bastardrie, from the former principile, Pater esi
quem justa matrimonia monstrant; Children not begotten of parents lawfully
Married, are called vulgo quaesiti, And are compted in Law, to have no Father
agnats, nor Kinsmen on the Fathers side, and therefore they cannot succeed to
their Father, or any of their Agnats: Neither can any of these Agnats, succeed
to them, either in Heritable or Moveable Rights, but only their own Succession,
by Lawful Marriage. So then Bastards dieing without Lawful issue, their goods
become caduciarie and void, and so fall to the Fisk: Yea, if the Lawful Issue
of the Bastard at any time fail for the same reason, their goods become
caduciarie, and return to the King, either by reason of the Bastardrie, or as
ultimus Haeres, July 13. 1626. Haltro contra Somervail.

Though Bastards can have no Ascendent or Collateral Heirs of Line, yet they
may have Heirs of Tailzie, in Lands which did exclude the Fisk, when the same
was provided to the Bastard, and the Heir of his body. Which failzing, to any
other person and his Heirs, Spots Bastardrie, Weir contra Kings Donatar. They
may also be Heirs of Tailzie specially nominat, as Craig observes, in the case
of the Earl of Errol contra Hay of Cockstoun, who, and the Heirs of his Body
made a member of Tailzie, which was sustained, though he was Bastard.

Bastardrie has only effect against Succession to the Bastard, but does not
incapacitat the Bastard, to dispose of his own Estate, Heritable or Moveable in
his liege paustie: And likewise the Bastards Wife has her share of his,
Movables as other Relicts have: But if the Bastard have no Issue, he has no
power of Testing, and can neither nominat Executors nor leave Legacies unless
he obtain Legitimation from the King.

45. Legitimation, though it have many ample Clauses, yet the main effect of it
is that the Bastard having no Lawful Children, has thereby power to Test,
June 18. 1678 Commissioners of the Shire of Berwick contra John Craw. But it
has no effect, as to his Heritable Rights, which his Testament cannot reach:
It will have the like effect, if the Bastard obtain from the King, the power of
Testing: And therefore a Bastards Legatar was preferred to the Donatar of
Bastardry, July 7. 1629. Wallace contra Mure. In which case it was found, the
Relict had her half: And if the Bastard had Lawful Children surviving, he may
Test without any gift, none being concerned, but his Children, to whom also he
may name Tutors, as was found, March 8 1628. Mare contra Kincaid, and these
will succeed him as Heirs, or Executors.

The effects of Bastardry, in hindering there Succession to others, falls to
be considered in the subsequent Titles, concerning Succession.

46. It remains to be cleared, whether the Bastards Debts follow his Estate,
and that diligence of Lawful Creditors will exclude, the Donatar or Fisk: It
was so found, that the Bastards Creditor, arresting before his death, had
access, notwithstanding the Bastardry, Feb. 26. 1611. Clerk contra Earl of
Perth. The difficulty will be, of the diligences competent after the Bastards
death seeing he has none to represent him, yet Bastardry is but a species of
ultimus Haeres, the ground in both being the same, that the King is Heir,
because there can be no other Heir, and so is last Heir. And therefore in both
cases, the Estate is liable to the Debt, which may affect it, contra
Haereditatem jacentem by Adjudication, calling the Officers of State, and
Donatar, Craig is of the same opinion, lib. 2. Dieg. 17. It was so found, July
25. 1560. Kings Donatar contra

It was also found, that the Donatar of Bastardry pursuing for payment of a
band due to the Bastard, was liable to fulfill the Bastards back-band, June 20.
1671. Alexander Alexander contra Lord Saltoun.

47. Ultimus Haeres may seem to be a Succession from the dead, and to come in
amongst other Heirs, yet though it has the resemblance of an Heir, because it
has effect, when there is no other Heir, and makes the Heritagelyable to pay
the Defuncts debts, it is only a caduciarie Confiscation of the
Defuncts-Estate, with the burden of his Debt, but no proper Succession to him
therein, which appears, thus; The Heir is one person in Law, and is therefore
personally obleiged for all the Defuncts debts, so is not the Fisk, against
whom, or the Donatar, there lies no Personal Action for payment, but for
Restitution, if he have intrometted, and of Real Action, contra Haereditatem
jacentem, which is most proper by Adjudication, being the Supplement of
ordinary Actions, or Executions competent by Law. For there being no party to
represent the Defunct debtor, there can be no Decree, but cognitionis causa,
and Adjudication following thereupon, in which the Fisk, or Donatar is to be
called passive, as the party having Interest, to see that the Debt be due,
which will affect the Defuncts caduciarie Heritage, to the detrement of the
Fisk, or Donatar. So then ultimus Haeres, and Bastardrie, are of the like
Nature, which being caduciarie Confiscations, fall to the Fisk, because no
other can have right, there may be this difference betwixt them; That in the
case of the last Heir, Creditors, for their satisfaction, may confirm the
Defuncts Movables, and so recover the same, for their own Satisfaction, in
which case, they would be liable, as other Executors, to the remanent Creditors
of the Defunct, and to the Fisk, or Donatar, for the superplus: As in the place
of nearest of Kin, and to the Relict also for her part, but this being only for
obtaining their own Satisfaction, and for shunning a more extraordinary way, by
Adjudication (which also they may use at their option) they ought not in
prejudice of the Fisk, to have the third part of the Defuncts part, as other
Executors, but in the cases of Bastardry, Confirmation of Executors is not
competent, because the Bastard, being excluded from the power of making
Testament, can have no Executor.

Concerning last Heir, the greatest doubt is, who they are, and in what Cases
they take place? As to the first, Craig, lib. 2. Dieg. 17. is not positive,
whether Superiors be last Heirs of the Defunct, in the Fies held of them, or
if the King be the last Heir for all: And according to the ancient Feudal
Customs, there is no doubt, the Feus return to the several Superiors, for
thereby none could succeed (without Express provision in the contrary) but the
lawful Issue of the Descendent of the first Vassal, whose Person and Race was
peculiarly chosen, and confided in by the Superior.

But now Fies not being gratuitous, as at first, but for onerous causes,
besides the reddendo and service, and ordinarily granted to the Vassal, and his
Heirs whatsomever: Which failzing, the King, by his Prerogative Royal,
excludes all other Superiors, who are presumed to retain no right, nor
expectation of Succession, unless by express provision of the Investiture, the
Fies be provided to Heirs Male, or of Tailzie, which failzing, to return to the
Superior: In which he is proper Heir of Provision.

As to the other Doubt, in what case the King is last Heir, Craig, in the
forenamed place relates, that some were of opinion, That if the Defunct had no
Heirs within the 7th degree, the King takes place as last Heir. And that
others thought it to hold in Collateral Successions, but his own opinion is in
the contrary: That any Heir, of what degree soever has Right, which suiteth
with the ground now laid, that the King has right, as last Heir to the
Heritage become caduciarie; Because no other party can be instructed lawful
Heir. So he reports, it was found in the case of the Earl of Mar, who was
served Heir to Lady Elizabeth Douglas Countess of Mar, beyond the tenth
degree. And that the Lord Seatoun, that he might have a Title to the Redemption
of the Lands of Longnidrie, against Forrester, served himself Heir to the
granter of the Wodsett, beyond the 7th degree, whereof several degrees were
Collateral. And the French King Henry the 4th Succeeded to Henry the 3.
though not within the 15. degree.

The gift, or right of ultimus haeres has no effect, till Decree of
Declarator be obtained thereupon, in the same way as in Bastardry, July 20.
1662. Lord of Balnagoun contra Dingwal. July 31. 1666. Thomas Crawford contra
Town of Edinburgh.

TITLE XXVI. Succession.
1. Whether in equity there be a Rule in Succession. 2. That Rule is the
express will, or presumed will of the Defunct. 3. The first degree of
Succession by the presumed will of Defuncts. 4. Whether in equity, there be
right of representation. 5. Failing descendents, ascendents succeed in equity.
6. Failing both brothers and sisters succed. 7. Failing these the nearest Agnat
succeeds. 8. The succession of Cognats. 9. The Jewish succession, whereby all
the sons succeed, and exclude the daughters, and the eldest son has a double
portion. 10. Fathers could not prejudge the primogenitur of their eldest Sons.
11. By the Jewish succession, failing descendents the inheritance passes to
Brethren, and these failing, to Fathers Brethren, and failing these to the
nearest Kinsman. 12. Whether in the Jewish Succession, there be right of
representation. 13. Why no Femals but daughters succeed among the Jews. 14. Why
Parents Succeed not amongst the Jews. 15. Succession amongst the Romans was
first by Testament. 16. If there was no Heirs institute by Testament, the
ancient Roman Law called all the Children of the Family unforisfamiliat male
and female, not excepting adopted Children to Succeed. 17. These failing, the
nearest Agnats, but no Parents thereby Succeed. 18. The Romans Succession be
the pretorian Law. 19. Their Succession, by Justinians novel constitution. 20.
In Feudal Succession, the first Rule is the express will of the party by the
investitur. 21. The nixt Rule is, the conjectured will, according to the nature
of the Fee. 22. Primo-geniture now established, by common custom in Feudal
Rights. 23. Succession in Scotland, is wholly different. in movables and
immoveables. 24. The several degrees of Succession in movables, 25. Succession
in Heritable Rights. 26. The difference betwixt the two successions. 27. The
privilege of Heirs, not to be prejudged by their predicessors deeds on
Deathbed. 28. What is estimate Deathbed. 29. Against what rights Deathbed is
extended. 30. Deathbed annulls no deeds for causes onerous. 31. Dispositions
in Testaments, are as on Deathbed. 32. Annus deliberandi. 33. Kinds if Heirs
in Scotland. 34. No place for Adopted, or Cognats in succession with us. 35.
Parents Succeed to their Children, and exclude the Parents Collaterals, or
these representing the Colaterals
SUCCESSION to Defuncts, is the most Important Title in Law, for thereby the
Rights of all persons, do necessarily pass once, and frequently often, in
every generation, and therefore the Rule and Course of Succssion ought to be
accurately searched out, and followed; and because the Channel of Succession is
with us divided in two currents, by the one whereof, all Heritable Rights; and
by the other all Moveable Rights are conveyed from the dead to the living. The
first passing unto Heirs, the second unto Excutors: We shall in this Title
consider, that which is common to Succession, and in the subsequent Titles,
that which is proper to the several kinds thereof.

As to the common Consideration of Succession, we must severally inquire.
First, what Natural Equity holds forth of Succession, 2. What the Judicial
Law. 3. What the Civil Roman Law. 4. What the Feudal Customs. last, What our
own Law, and consuetude, provideth concerning Succesion.

1. For the first, it may seem, that Succession has little Foundation, far
less a competent Regulation, in Equity, or by the Law of Nature; Because the
matter of Succession is so variable, That every Nation, Yea, almost every
Province, and many Cities, have their several Constitutions and Customs for
Succession, arguing it to be wholly in the Arbitriment of People, and Authority
over them.

Yet this will not follow, that Succession has no Rise, nor Rule in Equity;
For, as has been ofttimes showen before, most of the Rights of men, are
ordered in Equity; Yet so, as they are put in the owners power, who may alter
the same by there will. So it will be found in the matter of Succession, which
appears thus.

First, Succession was before Constitutions or Customs, of Constitution there
will be no doubt, these are but Rare to this day, Succession being yet
ordinarily by Custom, and Custom necessarily implies Antecedent Acts of
Succession, Inductive thereof, which therefore, behoved to have some other
Rule, then the Custom thereby introduced. 2. Where there is neither Law nor
Custom, concerning Succession: As when People from diverse Countries do gather
into new Plantations, in America, and live not severally, as parts of their
Mother Countries, but jointly: Such have goods, which by their death, become
not caduciarie or nullius, to be appropriat by the first Occupant. If
therefore, they remain in the Property of some persons, which needs must be by
some Law, it can be by no other, then Natural Equity, or the Law of rational
Nature. 3. It is not to be thought, that GOD, who has allowed Property, would
leave Man distitute of a Natural Rule, whereby to Regulate it after the Owners
Death, though there were no Law, nor Custom about it.

2. But it is not so dubious, that there is a Rule of Equity in Successions, as
what it is, for clearing thereof, we shall parcel it out thus: First, every
Right, being a Faculty, or Power of Exaction, or Disposal; It is a chief
interest and effect of it, that the Owner may dispose thereof, not only to take
effect presently, but if he please to take effect after his Death, and by the
Law of Nature, the sol will of the Owner is sufficient to pass, or transmit
his Right, if communicable, both in his life, and after his Death.

So then, the first Rule of Succession in Equity, is the express will of the
Owner, willing such persons to Succeed him in whole, or in part. It may be
objected, that the will of the owner is not the Rule of Succession, because
there lies upon the Owner a Natural Obligation, to provide for his Relations,
not only during his Life, but after his Death; As it is said, 1 Timothy 5. v. 8.
He that provideth not for his own, especially these of his own Family, has
denied the Faith, and is worse then an infidel. Which imports that infidels
have naturally that Principle: And therefore, the first member of Succession,
in Equity, must be those of the Defuncts Family, and not those of his
Institution, or Choice. This does indeed well conclude a Natural Obligation on
all men, to provide their own; But first, it will not extend so far, as to
incapacitat the Owner, to dispose of his own, either in his Life, or after his
Death: So that there remains a competent provision for his own, otherwise, he
might not even gift in his Life, but he may gift, both to take effect in his
Life, and after his Death: And is not necessitat, to institute his own as
Heirs, but to provide them. 2. The duty of Provision, is a Personal
Obligation, but the power of Disposal, and Succession thereby, is a Real Right,
which are toto genere different Rights; Now Real Rights are not hindered, nor
altered by Personal Obligations, though the Disponer has failed, and remains
Debtor, as an obliegment to dispone, is no Disposition: But the present
dispositive Act of the will does only Constitute, or convey the Right: Which,
though it be posterior to an obliegment, in favors of any other, that does not
annull the Disposition, though it oblidge the Disponer. If there be no express
will of the Defunct, the main difficulty is, what is the second Member of
Natural Succession: wherein the presumed will of the Defunct takes place, which
has this Rule, quod naturaliter inesse debet, presumitur.

And therefore the Defuncts will is presumed to institute his own, whom he is
naturally obliged to, provid in the first place: So that it is not the
obligment to provide, but the Defuncts will presumed thence, which disposes
upon his Succession, for the oblidgment to dispon, and the actual dispositon,
are different toto genere: And if the oblidgement to provide, were the Rule,
the express will of the owner could not over rule it; Where there is a custom
of Succession, the Defuncts will is presumed, to be according to that custom;
But that has its efficacy, rather from the Custom, as it is a positive Law
then from Equity.

The presumed will of the Defunct, to provide his own, is not indefinit of all
his own; But it has a natural order, or substitution, standing in the nearest
degree of Consanguinity: For natural reason shows, that as there is not an
equal Relation, so there cannot be an equal Devision to all, and there being no
Natural Rule of proportion, the nearest Degree must exclude the farther Degrees
in Succession, which is clearly held forth in the foresaid Text; Having an
Explicatorie, and Applicatory Term, especially these of his own Family: And as
the proportion is unknown, so the benefit, being extended to all (...), would
evanish. Therefore, what ever Natural Affection, or Charity, may obleige the
Defunct to have done expressly, his presumed will has no Rule beyond the first
Degree.

3. Fourthly, Therefore the first Degree of Succession, by the conjectured will
of the intestat, is of Children, according to that, Romans 8. 17. If children,
then Heirs: Which consequence does necessarily import, That all Children are
Heirs: Neither can this be an allusion from the Judicial Law, by which all
Children were (...) Heirs; But the Male excluded the Female: Therefore it must
needs be a consequence form the Law of Nature, and seeing there is no different
proportion, held forth by this Text, or by the Light of Nature; The Succession
of all Children must be in Equal shares, whether Male or Female, for in all
Communions, and Partnerships, an Equal Division takes place, except an Unequal
be expressed.

4. It is more dark, whether by the Law of Nature, there be competent, the
Right of Representation, whereby the Issue of the Defunct Children represent
them, and come in with the surviving Children, to get that Share, which their
Defunct Parent would have got, if alive; whereby they would not succeed in
capita, the whole Successors getting Equal Share, but in stirpes: Whereby the
Issue of the Defunct Children, though they succeed equally among themselves,
yet unequally with the surviving Children, because the whole Issue of the
Defunct, get but an equal share with each of the surviving Children: As if a
Father having three Children, the eldest dying before him, leaves one Child,
and two Oyes by another Child, if there be place for representation, the
Heritage would divide in three, the two surviving Children will have two third
parts, the other third will divide in two, whereof the Child of the Defuncts
will get one half, and the other half will divide equally betwixt the two Oyes:
So then the question is, whether the Descendents will thus succeed, or if the
Survivers will wholly exclude the Issue of the Deceasing.

This Right of Representation, takes place with us, and most other Nations, in
the Right of Immoveables; Which we call Heritable Rights, whether it be of
Descendents, or Collaterals: But doubtless in that the Course of the Law of
Nature is altered, for the preservation of the Stock or Stem of the Family: So
that it is clear, that there is no Right of Representation, in Collaterals, by
the Law of Nature, as that the Child, or Grandchild of a Brother should come
in with a Brother, because the Propinquitie of Blood, Natural Affection, and so
the Presumed Will of the Defunct is diminished: But it is not so clear in
Descendents, neither shall we be positive in it, but it seems most suitable to
Reason, and the Text adduced; That if the Issue of Defunct Children remain in
the Family, that they should come in by Representation, in the place of their
Defunct Parent, for, these that are in the Family, extends to all that are
not Forisfamiliat, whether Children or Grandchildren, to whom there remains
like affection, in the common Parent: but when the Defunct Child was
forisfamiliat, and so presumed to have been provided, and to have gotten a
Share, and therewith put out of the Family, to live in a distinct Family; In
that case, there seems no ground for Representation, which does agree to our
Custom, in the Succession of Movables, wherein there is no Right of
Representation, but the nearest of Kin exclude the Issue of the Defuncts, which
were of the same degree, which Suceession is certainly more near unto the
Natural Succession.

What has been said, may sufficiently clear the Natural Succession, of the
Defuncts descendents, whether Children, or Grandchildren, and while there are
any Descendents, there is place for no other.

5. The third Branch of Natural Succession, failing the express will of
Defuncts, and their Descendents, or the Issue of their Bodies, is of Parents,
among whom, these in the nearest degree are preferable, as Father and Mother:
And if the Father be dead, there seems to be place for Representation to his
Father, to come in with the surviving Mother Equally; But other Parents of, or
by the Female Line, who are in another Family, from the ground laid in the
Text, of providing these in the Family, seem not to come in to exclude
Brothers, and Sisters, and other Collaterals in that Family, as the
Grandfather, and Grandmother, on the Mother side: It will not be opposite to
this, which is said, Children are not to lay up for Parents, but Parents for
Children; which is not to be understood absolutely, but comparatively, and
according to the ordinar course of Nature.

6. The fourth Link of Natural Succession, is Brethren and Sisters, among whom
Brethren and Sisters German, being related by both Bloods, exclude these who
are only of one Blood, by the Fathers side: the reason is, because the presumed
will of the Defunct, being from their Interest and Relation, these of double
Relation, by both Bloods, are preferable to these of single Relation.

7. The last degree of Natural Succession is, of Uncles, Aunts, Nepheus,
Neices, all which being in equal propinquity to the Defunct, come in together,
And failling these, the Succession would befall equally, to the nearest degree
of Cousines, among whom the nearest degree excludes the father, without Right
of Representation: And these conjoined by both Bloods, exclude these onjoyned
by one. Husband and Wife, does not succeed properly, either to other, but
having a communion of goods, there is a Division by the Death of either.

8. The main question is here, whether there be Naturally, any difference in
Succession, betwixt the Collaterals on the Fathers side, who are called Agnats,
and the Collaterals on the Mothers side, who are called Cognats. Justinian in
his novel Constitutions, cap. 4. 127. took off all distinction of Agnats, and
Cognats in Succession: For which he is generally reprehended by Interpreters,
Who behold such a difference, even in equity, Cognats being conjoined by Women,
who ordainarily, are under the power of others, even naturally by Marriage. And
so being of another Family, they are not of the Defuncts own Family, as the
Agnats are (amongst these, the Mother, Fathers Mother, or other Ascendents, on
the Fathers side in his Family, are not hereby excluded) and so neither these
or other, by their express, nor presumed will, can transmit any Goods, or
Estates. Yet this point remains more dark: And I conceive, what has come by
the Mothers side, or by the Grandmother, etc. therein the Cognats of her Blood
would naturally succeed, because there are two grounds of Presumption joined,
Propinquity of Blood, and Gratitude, or Remuneration to that Lineage, by whom,
such things by Succession came. So that Paterna Paternis, Materna Maternis,
ought to take place in equity, as the presumed will of the Defunct, unless the
express will, or the Law, or Custom of the place be to the contrare.

So much for the Natural course of Succession, which has been the more
insisted in, not only to show the goodness and righteousness of GOD,
instructing man, with an inbred Law, written in his heart; though he were
destitute of any humane constitution or custom, so that he might walk justly,
in this important matter of Succession: Albeit all the Lines of this Divine
impression, be no clear, to our Sin-dimmed eyes; But also that, where positive
Law, or Custom is dubious, in the matter of Succession, or is defective
therein, Emendation, and Extention may be fetched thereto, from the Law of
Nature, we shall now proceed to the positive Law of God, given to Israel,
concerning Succession.

9. The Judicial Law, in the case of the Daughters of Zelophehad, Number. 6. 27.
Determines the order of Succession, in Lands or Immoveables, to stand as a
perpetual Statute to the Children of Israel. Thus the first degree of
Succession is, of all the Sons, whereby the Daughters, and their Descendents
are excluded, but the Sons do not Succeed equally: For the first born had a
double Portion, of all that the Father had, Deuteronomy. 21. 17. By which the eldest
Son had twice as much as the other Sons: So that the Heritage being divided in
one Portion more then there were Sons, of these the eldest had two, and each of
the rest one; As if there be two Sons, it divides in three, whereof the elder
has two third parts, and the younger one third part; If there be three, the
Heritage divides in four parts, whereof the eldest has two fourth parts, which
is the half, and each of the rest has one fourth part.

10. This Right of primogeniture, was so secured, that the Father could not
preser any other Son thereto, Deuteronomy. 24. v. 16. Failling Sons, the inheritance
passes to the Daughters equally; For though the Text expresses it to pass to
the Daughter, in the singular number; Yet it is cleared by the context, that
all the Daughters are therein included, for the Daughters of Zelophehad, though
more in number, are found to have the said Right, and to get an Inheritance
among their Fathers Brethren, by which it appears that the Right of
Representation had place there, for all the Daughters of Zelophehad were but to
have that share which their Father would have had, if he had been alive among
his Brethren, for they claiming the Right of their Father, whom they show not
to have been in the company of Corah, thereby forefaulting his right: So then,
right of Representation must take place amongst all descendents: So that the
Children of the Sons, though these Sons survive not their Father, would exclude
the surviving Daughters, or would come in with the surviving Sons, not equally,
and in capita, but in stirpes, whereby they would succeed to the shares of
their pre-deceased Fathers, by Right of Representation.

11. The third degree of Jewish Succession, is failing Descendents, the
inheritance passes to the Defuncts Brethren, and these failing, to his Fathers
Brethren, and these failing, to the nearest Kinsman of his Family, that is,
the nearest Agnats on his Fathers side, where all the male Agnats, of the same
degree are understood. It does not appear whether in this Collateral (...),
there be place for Representation; and though there be no mention of the
Succession of Women, or their Issue, but only of Daughters, Some have thought,
from the paritie of Reason, in every degree, failing the Males, the Females
are to Succeed, and to exclude further degrees of Males, as if there be no
Brothers, but Sisters, these should exclude the Fathers Brother: It may be also
thought strange, that in all this course of Succession, there is no mention of
the Succession of Parents.

12. In answer to these doubts, as to the first, I conceive, that in Collateral
Succession, there is also place for Representation, so that the Brothers Sons
as representing the Defunct Brother, their Father would exclude the Fathers
Brethren. And so of the rest, because it is said, if there be no Brethren, the
Inheritance shall pass unto the Fathers Brethren, which (...), unto the
nearest Kins-man, and if there be no Right of Representation, the
Cousin-german, or Father Brothers Son would exclude the Nephew, or Brothers
Son, for Uncle and Nephew are never understood by the name of Cousins or
Kinsmen, but have that special nominate relation of Uncle and Nephew, or
Father, and Brother Son, and therefore the Brothers Son, as representing the
Brother, must succeed, and exclude the Fathers Brother. 2. Cateris paribus,
Succession will certainly descend to the Brothers Son, and not ascend to the
Fathers Brother.

13. As to the second doubt, Ihold, that only Daughters and their Issue do
succeed, and no other Females, or their Issue; the reason is, First, from the
Text, where failling Sons, Daughters are expressed, but failling Brothers Sisters
are not substitute, but Uncles. 2. The Division and Succession, and the Land of
Canaan was Typical, and was not to pass from Tribe to Tribe, and therefore,
Daughters succeeding, are appointed to Marry in their own Tribe; because
ordinarily they were to be Married, when their Fathers succession did probably
appear; but this could not have been, if Fathers Sisters, and these of further
degree had succeeded.

14. As to the third, concerning Succession of Parents, it is sure, Mothers,
and all Cognats, by the Mother side, being ordinarily of other Tribes, and
Families, were for the reason now adduced, excluded from the Succession. The
Text is clear, that only Kins-men in the Family, that is on the Fathers side
succeed; But the reason why there is no mention of Fathers, etc. May be,
because the Land of Canaan, being Typical, is fixed to Tribes and Families, it
uses not to pass by Testament, or provision, or to be acquired further then by
Wodset, to return at the Jubilee; Therefore among the Jews, Lands passed by the
ordinar course of Legittime Succession, and so came from the Fathers to the
Children, which presupposes the Father to have been pre-deceased, and could not
succeed.

By this Tract of the Jewish Succession, it is clear, that GOD, by his Positive
Law, altered the effect of Equity, and of his Moral Law, in succession: For,
it has been now shown from that place ( if Children, then Heirs,) That all
Children must needs be Heirs, not by the Judicial Law, but by Equity; And yet
by the Judicial Law, not all Children are Heirs, but Sons exclude Daughters,
and Females are excluded by Males of a far distant degree, which necessarily
infers, that for expedience, the course of Succession may be altered. The like
must also be in other effects of Equity, which are in our power.

15. The order of Succession in the Civil Law, did exceedingly vary, being in
many points different, in the Ancient Law of the twelve Tables, in Honorarie
Law, introduced by the Edicts and Customs of the Pretors, who had Authority to
Supply, and Correct the Ancient Law; and in the Imperial Constitutions,
especially in the Novel Constitutions of Justinian, they did all agree in this,
that the chief mean of Succession, is the Will, or Testament of the Defunct,
which they held so Sacred, That all Pactions, or Provisio s, which might any
way hinder the Free Liberty of Testing, or any Act, whereby Defuncts might be
Restrained, or Constrained in the free Disposal of their Estates, were not only
null, but exclusive of such Persons, from having any interest in the Defuncts
Inheritance; Yet were the Romans so sensible of the Natural Obligation of
Parents to provide their Children, that their middle Laws, necessitat Fathers
either to institute there Children, or expressly to exhaeridat, or disherish
them, expressing their delinquencie of Ingratitude, the kinds and measures
whereof, the Law did determine: So that if the Children were past by in
silence, and neither Institute nor exhaeridat, the Law declared the Testament
void, and if they were exhaeridat without a due and true offense, it did allow
the Children querelam inofficiosi Testamenti, that is, complaint against the
Testament made contra officium, which is the Natural Obligation, or duty of
Parents to provide their Children; For the like Reason, the same Complaint was
competent to the Fathers, against the Testament of their Children, but because
that remeid might have been eleided, by exhausting the Heritage by Legacies,
whereby the institution of the Children might prove ineffectual, for their
provision: Therefore, the Law allowed Children a Legittime Portion, being the
sourth part of the Heritage; which that, it might extend to all Heirs.
Falcidius was the Author of that Noble Law, restraining Legacies, so that there
might remain a Portion to the Defuncts Heirs, which Law and Portion, in Honor
of his Name, was called the Falcidian Law, and Portio Falcidia, whereby the
fourth part of the free Goods of the Testator, remained always Secure against
Legacies, and when a new Subtilty was invented, to frustrat the Falcidian Law:
By taking away the Heritage, not Directly by Legacies; but Indirectly by Trust
or Fidei-comisses. Trebellianus procured that Ordinance of the Senate, called
Senatus-Consultum Trebellianum, whereby that Portion called also Trebelliarica,
should remain safe against FideiCommissarie Trusts: And though it be the Common
Opinion of the Doctors: That if the Defunct Expressly Prohibit the Heir, to
take the benefit of his Falcidia or Trebellianica, they will be thereby
excluded, yet the Common opinion, is that it cannot be extended to Children, as
to their Legittime, whom the Law has fully secured, either by Ordaining them
to be institute Heirs in Whole, or at least in a fourth Part; which is their
Natural, or Legittime Portion: And if they be Institute in less, they have
Right to the Supplement of their Legittime Portion, or otherwise they must be
Expressly, and Justly Exheredat, and they have the Common benefit of other
Heirs, of their Falcidia, or Trebellian, which the Testator cannot Frustrate,
with out express Prohibition.

16. If there be no lawful Testament by theLaw of the twelve Tables (which is
the Ancient Roman Law, and in comparison of the Pretorian, or Imperial Law, is
only called the Law, or the Civil Law) the Succession of Defunct, falls in
the first place to the defuncts Children, or nearest descendents without
Distinction of any lawful Children, though Adopted, or Posthumus, or though of
diverse lawful Marriages; whether Male or Female: So that they remain in the
Defuncts family, and in his Paternall power, for these who are emancipat, and
demitted from the family, and from under the Paternall power, they are either
really or presumptively provided, and so have no share of the Succession (of
this Paternal Power, and Emancipation, see before, Tit. Obligations of Parents)
These in the family were called Haredes Sui and necessarij; because they were
ipso facto Heirs without solemnity or entry; Among these, the Right of
Representation had place, so that for example, the Grand Children succeeded
with theChildren but not equally, et per capita; but per stirpes: For theGrand
Children had but the share of their defunct Parent equally among them, and so
of all other descendents being in the Family. The Pretors did in a part alter
this, and brought in the Children or Issue emancipat with those in the family,
without distinction, providing the emancipat brought in their goods, and
adjected the same to the Inheritance, per collationem bonorum; yet because only
the Law, that is, the Ancient Law, could make Heirs: The Emancipat were not
called Heirs, but bonorum possessores. The Pretorian Law did also take off the
necessity, and damage of the Succession, that none might be necessitate to be
Heirs, yea all Heirs had the benefit of an Inventar, being timeouslyand
duly, made beyond which they were not liable for the defuncts Debts.

17. The next degree of Succession, by the ancient Roman Law, was failing
Descendents in the Family, the nearest Agnats of the same degree succeeded;
But there was no Succession ofParents, nor of Cognats related by the Mothers
side (here Mother comprehends Grandmother and all other Ascendentsof that
kind) So the next Degree was of Brethren and Sisters, etc.

18. The Pretorian Law did also emendat this, and first brought in the Fathers,
with the Brothers and SistersGerman, or of both Bloods: And thereafter the
Tertullian Senatus-consult, failling the Fathers, brought in the Mother with
the Sisters in their share, but not with the Brothers German, who if there were
no Sisters German, excluded their Mothers totally, and, if for example there
were a Brother German, and a Sister German, the Father being dead, the Brother
had the half, and the Sisters half, was divided equally betwixt her and her
Mother, and so the Mother is preferred to the Fathers Father, and to the
Defuncts Brethren, and Sisters of one blood. Failling those of this degree, the
Brothers, and Sisters by the Fathers side, and these failling the nearest
Degree of Agnats, in which the paritie of reason infers, that as in Brothers
and Sisters, so in other Collateralls, these of both blood make a nearer
Degree, then these of one blood. Failling all these, the Pretorian Law admitts
Spouses to be Heirs, each to other, the Husband to the Wife, and the Wife to
the Husband, and last, the Fisk takes place as last Heir.

19. But the. Emperor Justinian, by the Novel Constitution, 118. cap. 4. Took
off all destinction of Agnats, and Cognats, and brought in the Mother, equally
with the Father: with what reason or approbation, we have touched before.

This is the sum of Succession, by the Roman Law, wherein there is no (...),
oveables, or Immoveables, and which takes up no small part of the body of the
Law, and writings of the Lawyers; wherein to insist particularly, would raise
a great bulk, unnecessar for our purpose: Whereunto, we conceive this Summarie
may suffice. But while the Roman Empire, and Laws were trampled down, by the
Northern Nations, the Feudal Law arose, and does yet continue with the Civil
Law of the Romans, and other Nations, by which there is a great distinction
introduced, in the Succession in Movables, and in Lands, or Immoveables; which
are now of a feudal nature: We shall therefore go on to the Common Feudal
Customs.

20. The Feudal Customs are local, and it is hard to find a common rule
therein, for Succession, which is variable, according to the diversity of place
only, if we call to mind what was formerly said, Title, Infeftments of the
Distinction of Ancient and Proper Fees and of Declining, and Improper Fees: The
nature of Proper Fees, will hold forth the matter of succession therein for a
Proper Fee being freely granted by the Superior to his Vassal for Military
service, the Vassalls person being chosen by the Superior, and a special trust
reposed in him, and the like hope of his Issue; Patrene sequitur sua proles: It
was at first so simply done, that the entering of the Vassal in Possession,
in (...) of his Peers, was a sufficient Constitution of his Right, and the
Investiture signified, then not so much the Act constituting, as the Write
evidencing the Fee, in the which case from the nature of the right, it is
consequent, first that none should succeed in the Fee, but such as were fit for
the Military Services, and so Women, and their Issue were utterlie excluded;
and all the Males Succeeded equally. 2. In Proper Fees, none could Succeed but
the Lawful Issue of the first Vassal, whose Person and Issue was specially
chosen, among which, first the Male Issue of the Vassal who dyed last infeft,
according to their nearness, do succeed with the right of Representation, and
so not per capita, but per (...); next unto the Descendents among the
Collateralls, Brothers and their Male Issue: and among these, the Brothers
German, and their Issue, exclude the Brothers by one blood; and after Brothers,
Father Brothers and their Male Issue; And so other Agnats of the last deceased
being, always of the Male Issue of the first Vassal, which being extinct the
Fee cease, and returns to the Superior not as the Vassalls, but by virtue
of that Directum Dominium, which still remained in the Superior, In this course
of Feudall Succession, there could be no place to the Vassalls Father, or other
Ascendents, because if the Fee were a new Fee, or Conquest by the Son, his
Father nor his Brethren could not Succeed, as not being of the Issue of the
first Vassal: and if it were an old Fee, not purchased by the Son, but
whereunto he did succeed, it does necessarly presuppose the Death of the
Father, and other Ascendents, to whom the Son could not be Heir, nor succeed,
till they were Dead.

But when by the course of time, Fees declined from the proper nature of
Ancient Fees, and the Investiture did express the Tenor, and special nature
thereof, the Tenor of the Investiture became the first rule of Succession in
such Fees, and came in place of the Testament or Will of the Defunct; for seeing
the Vassal could not alter the Succession, without consent of the Superior, he
could not effectually Test thereupon.

21. In the next place, what is not the Express Will of the Vassal, and
Superior by the Tenor of the Investiture, is regulate by their Conjectured
Will, from the nature of the Fee, and Propinquity of Blood: So if the Fee be
Originally granted to a Woman, her Issue (...) succeed, as well as the Male: or
if the Reddendo be not Military Service, but Money, Grain, or Services
competent to a Woman, or Manual Services, wherein there is no choice of
Persons, as Tilling, etc. And so generally Fees holden Blench or Feu: In all
these Woman may Succeed, because they are not excluded by the Nature of the
Service. 2. If the Fee be Granted to Heirs whatsomever, not only does the Issue
of the first Vassal, but all other his Lawful Heirs, or the Lawful Heirs of
the last Deceassing, Vassal, whether of the Issue of the first Vassal, or
not, do succeed: And now Fees being ordinarily acquired by Sale, Excambion, or
the like Onerous Title, Feuda ad instar (...) sunt reducta; Heirs whatsomever
are commonly expressed, and if they were not, they would be understood, for that
which is Ordinar is Presumed.

22. But now Custom has altered the Course of Feudall Succession, and given
the Prerogative of Primogeniture, to the eldest Male of the nearest Degree to
the Defunct Vassal; who excludes not only the Females of that Degree, but the
Males also, and their Issue; not only among us, but in England, France and most
other Nations, and therefore before we descend to our own Customs, it will be
fit to consider the Justice, and Expediency of this common Custom in Feudall
Succession.

The Lawfulness of Primogeniture, will be easily evinced from what has been
said already upon Succession, wherein the will of the Proprietar is the Rule
even in Equity: and though he be Naturally oblidged to provide for his own,
that Personal Obligation reatcheth him, but not the Inheritance, nor does it
Oblidge him to make these to Succeed, but to give them Competent Provisions,
and therefore the Judicial Law which is the Positive Law of God; evidenceth
sufficiently, the Lawfulness, and in some Cases the Expediency of altering the
Natural Course of Succession, and therefore not only the Male Issue, is thereby
preferred to the Female; All the Females are utterly excluded, but only
Daughters, that the Inheritance may remain within the Tribe, and the Preference
of Males, is because Femoles are less fitted for Management of Lands, and
therefore are to have a Portion, which the Judicial Law calls the Dowry of
Virgins.

The Expediency of Primogeniture, is partly Public, and partly Private: The
Public Expediency, is that the Estate of Great Familyes, remaining entire and
undivided; They with their Vassals and followers may be able to defend their
Country, especially against Sudden invasions, for with us in France Polland,
and many other Places, the Great Families are the Bullwarks of their Country:
Having (...) to Maintain them selves, and their Followers, for some time
without Standing Armies, Constant Pay, and Subsidies.

The Private Expediency, is for the Preservation of the Memory, and Dignity
of Families, which by frequent Division of the Inheritance, would become
despicable, or forgotten. Primogeniture takes Place in Germany, and France,
in proper Fees like unto Our Ward-holdings, but not in Allodialls and Lands
holden Freely, or for Cane or Rent, Gudelinus, de Jure novissimo, lib. 2: cap.
13. relates, that in many of the German and French Provinces; the Male gets
two third parts, and the Females one, in the other Provinces the Children of
the first Marriage, succeed in all the Lands the Parents had, during that
Marriage, and so in order, the Children of after Marriages; And in other
Provinces and Cities, the Youngest Son Succeeds in all, Excluding the rest,
and Generally, Bastards are not admitted, even to the Succession of their
Mothers, and in England, though Primogeniture, have the Prerogative by the
Common Law, yet it has an Exception of the Custom of Kent, where Primogeniture
has no Prerogative; And therefore that Custom is called the Gaball kind of
Kent, which is as much as to give to all the kind.

The Customs of England, and Germany, are contrary in this; That in Germany,
Parents come in the next place after Descendents, and exclude Brothers, and
Sisters, and all other Collateralls; but in England, Parents do never Succeed;
so if the Defunct have no Issue, Brothers nor Sisters, nor their Issue, the
Fathers Brother Succeeds, and excluds the Father, though his Relation be by the
Father, and much further distant then the Father: And it sometimes falls out,
that the Uncle Succeeding, dying without Issue, the Father Succeeds his
Brother, and so Accidentally, and Mediatly to his own Son.

23. To return to our Customs in Succession, in respect of the Matter, it is
divided in two Branches, the one is of Movables, the other of Immoveables,
which do as much differ, astheCustomes of diverseNations; The Successor in
Immoveables does only retain the Name of Heir, and therefore Immoveables are
called Heritable Rights, and that part of the Movables, which belongs to the
Heir, is called Heirship-moveable.

The Successor in Movables, from the Office of executing the Defuncts Will,
express, or presumed, is called Executor.

We shall here Summarily, at one view, set forth the whole matter of Succession
with us, which we shall more fully, and distinctly follow, in the ensuing
Titles.

Heirs in Law are called Universal Successors, quia succedunt in universum jus,
quod Defunctus habuit, they do wholly represent the Defunct, and are as one
Person with him, and so they do both Succeed to him active, in all the Rights
belonging to him, and passive, in all the Obligations and Debts due by him; and
when they do not orderly enter, they become Successors passive, liable to the
Defuncts Debt, but not Heirs active, having power to claim his Right, till they
be entered according to Law: Other Successors are called singular Successors,
as Assigneys, Purchasers, but Heirs only are universal Successors: And now,
when Heirs are of diverse kinds, as some in Movables, some in Lands, and other
Heritable Rights, and of these ac cording to the Investiture, some succeed to
Lands provided to Heirs of Line, some to Lands provided to Heirs Male, some to
Lands otherways Tailzied, in all which some Heirs Succeed alone, and in
solidum, some Succeed in part and pro rata, yet all may be said to Succeed in
universum jus quod Defunctus habuit, by universum jus, the whole Right, not
simply, and in solidunt, but the whole Rights of such a kind, either in
solidum, or at least pro rata part, as he who Succeeds in a half, or third
part of all the Defuncts Rights active and passive, Succeeds in universa and
singula jura, in all and every right, thought not in totum and solidum, the
whole or every part of every Right.

As to Movables, we shall not repeat, what has been said, Title Real Rights,
of the distinction of Heritable, and Moveable Rights, whether Goods, or
Moveable Debts; but shall only hold forth, what becomes of Moveable Rights,
after the Owners decease. And first, if the Defunct be Married, there was
thereby acommunion of Goods, betwixt the Defunct and the other Spouse, which
being disolved by Death, the surviver may withdraw their share, which share is
estimate by the condition of the Family at that time; for if in the Family
there were a Husband, a Wife and Children, not forisfamiliat, the Wife her
share is the third; but if there were no Children unforisfamiliat, the Wifes
share is the half, which is not properly a Succession but a Division.

24. The first degree of Succession, in Movables with us, is by the will of
the Defunct, by his Testament, or Codicil, whereby the Defunct may name
Executors, and dispose of his Movables, either in part by particular Legacies,
or in whole, by an universal Legacy, whereby, in effect the universal Legatar
is institute Heir in the Movables, and if the Executor nominat, be not also
universal Legatar, he has but one office, and is not Heir for himself, but in
name, and to the behove of the Legatar, and has but fidei-comissum of the
Movables.

These Legacies, whether Particular or Universal, does immediately transmit the
Right to the Legatars, and their Successors: The Solemnities of Testaments, or
Legacies are very plain with us, but we shall leave them to the Title Executrie.

The will of the Defunct is restrained with us, in three cases, the First is,
Bastards cannot at all Test, or leave Legacies, unless they be Legittimat or
have power from the King of making Testament, or have lawful Children. 2. A
Father is bound up in respect of his Children in his Family, which are not
forisfamiliat, and provided for, these have necessarily their Portion Natural,
and Bairns part of Gear, wherefrom their Father cannot exclude (...) by (...)
or otherways, as by Donations, in contemplation of ^ tion to a Moveable Band
granted on Deathbed, was found null, as to the relict, and Bairns part, Spots.
Assignations, Margaret Pyrie contra Ramsay. Yea, it was found, that the Gift of
Money by the Defunct, out of his own hand, on Deathbed was null as to them.
ibid, Mr. Andrew Moncrieff contra Mr. Archibald Moncrieff. The like of an
Assignation, to a confident Person, to the behove of the Defuncts Bairns, which
was found not to prejudge the Relicts third, Durie, July, 10. 1628. Cant contra
Edgar. And therefore, a Father has only power to dispose upon such a part of
his Goods, which are thence called Deads part, which if he have a Relict, and
Bairns in the Family, the Bairns part is the third, the Relicts part is also a
third, and so the Defuncts part is only a third, but if there be no Relict,
then the Bairns part is the half, and the Deads part is the other half; But if
there be neither Wife nor Bairns, the Defunct may dispose of the whole, as
Persons never married, or Wives upon whom there is no Restriction, though they
have Husband or Children, for they may dispose of their share of the Husbands
movables, or if they acquired, or succeed to any movables, in Viduity they
may iniurley Dispose thereof, though they have Children.

If his Legacies exceed his own part, then they abate proportionally, unles
there be a preference granted by the Testator, or a privilege, whereof I know
none with us, for even a Legacy, ob pias causas, viz. A mortification to a
Kirk, was found to have no privilege, but it, and other Legacies suffered
proportional deduction, seeing they exceeded Deads part, Durie, July 6. 1630.
Doctor Monro contra Scots Executors: The reason of this Restriction is, that
Natural Obliegment for provision of Children, of which before, it is extended
only to the immediate Children, and not to Grandchildren, neither does it
Restrict the Mother, but only the Father.

3. The third Restriction of the Defuncts will, is in favors of their Heirs of
Line, for Heirs having the sole interest in Heritable Rights, are by our
custom justly excluded, from coming in with other Children, in movables,
except that which is called Heirship-moveable, which is the best of every kind
of moveable, wherein the Defuncts will cannot prejudge the Heir.

The second member os Succession in movables is, from the Intestat; So that
failing the Defuncts will, with the Restrictions aforesaid, the nearest of Kin
have interest, both in the Defuncts movables, and office of Executrie, and
though they claim not the office, yet have they (...) Right to the Goods,
leaving a third of Deads part to the Executors, (...) administration of the
office.

These nearest of Kin, take place all in (...) all the nearest degree, Male or
Female, come in equally, and there is no Right of Representation in movables.
The first Degree is Children, Male or Female, with whom Grandchildren come not
in by Right of Representation, in place of their Defunct Parents: So Children
have an interest in their Fathers Movables, viz. their Bairns part, wherein
their Father cannot prejudge them, and their interest, as nearest of Kin;
Whereby they succeed to the deads part, in so far as intestat, next unto
Children, are Grandchildren, or any Descendents of the nearest degree. Next
unto these, are Brethren and Sisters, wherein, Brethren and Sisters German, or
by both Bloods, exclude these by one Blood. Next unto Brethren and Sisters, are
there Descendents, in the nearest degree, without Representation. And last, are
the nearest degree of Agnats, Male and Female jointly, without Representation:
If there be no Descendents, or Agnats, in the case of Bastards, who can have
none, or others, who happen de facto, to have no Children, or Agnats, their
goods become caduciary, and are Confiscat to the King, as last Heir or by
reason of Bastardry, of which before, Title Confiscation.

In the Succession of Movables, the same Goods, or Debts, are not in all cases
accounted Moveable, since the Act of Parliament 1641. cap. 32. Whereby Bands,
bearing Annualrent, which before in all respects, were Heritable, by the
Destination of the Annualrent, (Which, being perfected by Infeftment, is an
Immovable, and Heritable Right) are declared to fall under Executrie, and so
to be Moveable. And yet by the said Statute, the Relict, and Fisk, are
Excluded. The Reason expressed in the Statute, is, because the Obliegment upon
the Debtor, to pay Annualrent, is, for the Profit of the Creditor; and not a
Destination of Infeftment of Annualrent, in Favors of the Heir, to exclude the
Bairns: And therefore such Clauses make not such Sums Heritable, as to the
Bairns, and nearest of Kin: unless they bear an Obliegment to Infeft the
Creditor in Land, or Annualrent: In which case, they are properly Heritable,
and belong only to the Heir; but if not, the same belongs to the Bairns, and
nearest of Kin, Excludendo Fiscum and Relictam: Whereby there (...) a Different
Division of Moveable Sums, falling under Executrie: One of such as were
Moveable before the said Act, which, if there be a Wife and Children, are
divided in three: Whereof the Bairns, is a third part, and the Deads part a
third. Another in the Testament, of Bands bearing Annualrent, which if their be
Bairns, is Devisible in two parts whereof the one half is the Bairns part, and
the other half the Deads part, and the Relict has no part, being Excluded. So
that in case of Escheat, such Sums are not Moveable, nor fall not under Escheat.

Yet, if such Debts become Simply Moveable, by a Requisition or Charge, or by
the Death of the Debtor, or Creditor, before the Term of Payment of
Annualrent: Or, otherways they remain in the Ancient Condition. And the Statute
does not Exclude the Fisk and Relict. But where a Charge could not be given
through the Debtor, or Creditors Death, and there was no Requisition provided,
and Decree for Payment, was not found to make the samine Meveable, as it would
have been, if the Band had been Heritable, by a Clause of Infeftment. And that
because, by a Posterior Band of Corroboration, for the same Sum, Executors were
Excluded, which no Charge nor Requisition does alter; but it is still presumed,
that the Debtor would re-imploy the Sum, in the same way, to his Heirs,
Excluding Executors. And therefore, a Process and Decree for payment, was not
found to make it Moveable, though these would make it Moveable, as well as a
Requisition or Charge, if it had been Heritable, by a Clause of Infeftment,
July 12. 1676. Crystie contra Crystie.

It is also consequent from the said Statute, 1. That such Bands, bearing
Clauses of Annualrent, may be Exhausted by the Debts, due by the Defunct,
bearing Clause of Annualrent. 2. It is Consequent, that the Executor, will get
no Relief against the Heir, of Debts, bearing Clause of Annualrent, without
Clause of Infeftment; in so far, as there are such Debts in the Executry, but
the Heir will have relief thereof, against the Executor. 3. It follows, that
Debts, bearing Clause of Annualrent, and no Clause of Infeftment, will not
Exhaust the Relicts part; Because, as she is Excluded from any Share of such
Debts, due to her Husband; So she must be free of any such Debts due by him, as
was found, December 23. 1668. Magaret Mckenzie contra Robertsons.

25. Succession, in Immovable, and Heritables Rights, proceed wholly in a
different manner. For Succession, in Movables, is more near to the Course of
Natural Succession, and to the Civil Law of the Romans, especially their
Ancient and Middle Law; but the Sccession in Heritable Rights, aggreeth more to
the Recent Feudal Customs, of most Nations, whereby Primogeniture is
established, for the Honor and Preservation of Noble Families, and in them,
for the good and safety of their Kings and Countries.

26. Succession, in Immoveables and Heritables, do mainly differ, First, that
in Movables, the express will of the Defunct, by his Testament and Legacies,
and Donations, in Contemplation of Death, have the first place, but in
Heritable Rights, they have no place at all; Yea, no Personal Contract, or
Obliegment of the Fiar, can have any effect in prejudice of his Heir, to take
from him any part of the Heritage, directly or indirectly, by Legal Pursuits
thereupon, if the foresaid Personal Right, or Contract was done in lecto
aegretudinis upon the Fiars Deathbed: And though the same Disposition, or
Contract, were made in the Fiars Health, or Liege pouste, it does not alter the
Succession, unless it be in the investiture, though, as being of it self, or
having in it virtuallie, a Personal Obligation, it may by Process compel the
Fiar or his Heir, to denude themselves, and to obtain new Infeftments, conform
thereto, as if by Contract, any party may be provided, to be the Contracters
Heir, in whole, or in part; his provision does not make that party Heir, in
any Right, whereupon Infeftment has followed, which only properly are
Heritable Rights: Neither can that party be served Heir of provision, to the
Contracter thereupon, yet the Contracter may be compelled to take his Right
accordingly to himself: And these Heirs of Provision, which if he have not
done, his other Heirs may be compelled to enter, and to denude themselves, in
favors of that party provided to be Heir, conform to the Contract; but
Dispositions, Obligations, or Contracts of any Heritable Right, on Deathbed,
are null, and reduceable, in so far as may prejudge the Heir.

27. The privilege of Heirs, not being prejudged, by their Predicessors Deeds,
done on Deathbed, is, as most of our Laws, by Ancient Custom, time out of
mind, and not by statute, or written Law, for, though the Books, called Regiam
Majestatem, treat thereof, yet these are no part of our Law, but have been
compylled by some Stranger, who has not fully known our Law, but by mistake,
has resolved most Cases, by the Customs of other Nations, especially of
England. The reason of this Custom, may be conjectured not only from the Nature
of Feudal Rights not disposable by Testament, but only by investiture, but also
for public utility, because persons on Deathbed are weak, the mind being
easily affected with the trouble of the body, and so is easy to be wrought
upon by insinuations, or importunities, to do deeds contrary their Interest,
and former Resolutions, Especially by the Popish Clergy, who, having, for
their own corrupt ends, Forged Puragatory, and Prayers for the Dead, their
power of Indulgence, and Prayers for the Dead, their power of Indulgence and
Pardon of Sins, did thereby deceive the Christian World, and obtained upon
Deathbed so large Donations to their Clergy, to the prejudice of the Donators
lawful Heirs which therefore Our Ancient Custom has wisely provided against.

28. The main Difficulty is, in what cases the Law accounts Parties to be on
Deathbed, or when they are in Health, and Liege poustie, for these are the two
opposite Terms of Law, Liege poustie or Deathbed; for clearing whereof, these
Points must be considered. First whether it be necessar to Prove that the
Defunct before the Deed in question, had contracted disease, or become sick,
and whether it be necessar to condescend and instruct the special kind of
Sickness, or that it was Morbus Sonticus, or a disease affecting the whole
Body and Brain, or if the keeping the House, and the Parties Dying before he
went abroad, be sufficient to infer Presumptive, that he had Contracted the
disease whereof he Dyed, so soon as he kept the house. 2. Whether a contrair
Probation of the Parties being in health, be sufficient, in that he was of a
sound Judgment, and Memory, and kept the Ordinar time of putting off, and on
his clothes, and of eating and drinking, as when he was in health, or Writing
Securityes, that require clearness and distinctness of Mind, be sufficient, or
if doing his ordinar Affairs, making Bargains, and Accoumpts, Trysting for
others, or himself, playing at Cards, or other Games within Doors, giving
Evidence of being Merry, be sufficient to instruct Health, and Liege Poustie.
3. If Sickness contracted, be presumed or proven, whether there be necessity to
prove the Continuance of the Sickness till Death, or that the Defunct died of
that Sickness, or if the Sickness once contracted be presumed to continue,
unless Convalescence, and Recoverie of Health be proven. 4. Whether Liege
poustie, by Convalescence, be sufficiently proven by the Defuncts going to Kirk
and Marcat freely, without help: And whether it be sufficient to go to the
Marcat place, or to the Kirk, though there be no Convention, nor Congregation
there; or whether it be requisite, that going to Kirk and Marcat, be when the
Congregation is conveened, or in Market time. 5. Whether in that case
Supportation being proven, it is more pregnant and preferable to the Probation
of walking freely, and be what Acts Supportation is inferred; whether by
helping the Defunct by his Oxter, by his Elbow, or by his Hand, be sufficient,
or if helping him up Stairs, or down Stairs, to and from his Horse, or upon a
Ragged way, or whether being helped by a Staff, will infer Supportation. 6.
Whether going freely to Kirk and Marcat unsupported, may be taken off by any
probation, that notwithstanding thereof the Sickness did continue, whereof the
Defunct dyed. 7. Whether Convalescence and Liege poustie, may be proven by any
other Acts, then going unsupported to Kirk and Market, or if equivalent Acts
may be sufficient, and if going abroad about the House unsupported be
sufficient.

Deathbed is of so great Importance with us, as reaching the Estate, and
Heritage of Parties, that the Lords have been very careful for clearing and
fixing the same, that it may not be under uncertain conjecture or probation,
and whereas by an ordinar Act of Litiscontestation, the Pursuer might prove his
reason of Deathbed, by any two Habile Witnesses, or the Defender might in the
same manner prove, the going Abroad to Kirk and Market, or Acts equivalent in
Defense, or the Persuer might prove Supportation, by way of reply, and all by
any two Habile witnesses: The Lords have taken a far more secure sway, to
allow probation to be Adduced for either Party, concerning the condition of the
Defunct, as to Sickness or Health, and concerning his going abroad thereafter,
and the manner thereof, whereby neither Party has the choice of the
Witnesses, to be in a Capacity to influence them, but either Party adducing
Witnesses, there is scarce any one unexamined, who knew any thing of the
Matter, and so the Truth comes to clear and evident Light, and which probation
stands in place of Litiscontestation; for albeit it bear to be before Answer to
the Relevancie, and that after the probation is closed, they are permitted to
resume the Debate, as to the Relevancie, as to such Points as they desire
chiefly to be noticed, and wherein they do believe, that sufficient Probation
is adduced; which probation is closed, and may not particularly be debated
upon, how far any point is proven, which is only proper to the Lords, to
consider with closs Doors yet, no new Litiscontestation can be made, or any new
Fact admitted to be proven, after the Probation, before Answer is concluded and
advised, or renounced, unless the Lords, ex officio and proprio motu, for
clearing of any part of the probation that remains Dubrous, require further, as
they may do at the advising of any cause, even upon Litiscontestation; as was
found upon December. 5, and 6. 1672. Clellands contra Clelland, of Falskin.

To come then to the Points proposed to be cleared, for the first Point,
whether keeping the House presumes Sickness contracted, or if Sickness must be
proven, and what kind of Sickness. Albeit, the ordinar Style of the reason of
Reduction bear, thatbefore the Deed in question, the Defunct contracted the
Mortal Disease, whereof he Died; yet it is not necessar to allege or
instruct, that it was Morbus sonticus, January 7. 1624. Schaw contra Gray.
Neither that the Defunct was Bed-fast when the Deed was done, Feb. 1. 1622.
Robertson contra Fleeming. And albeit, the Presumption of the contracting of
Sickness, from his keeping ofthe House, be not always sufficient alone, yet it
is of great Importance, and a small probation of Sickness with it, will
suffice; otherways, it were easy to keep all access from the Defunct of
indifferent Persons, that might prove his Condition, and none be admitted, but
Contrivers, and Concurrers in the Deed: And therefore a Deed done be a Man
enclosed for the Plague, was found reduceable as done on Deathbed, as being
done after the Defunct was enclosed on suspicion of the Plague; and Dying
before he came out, without necessity to prove he was Sick or Infected when,
theDeed was done, seeing there was no further access for fuller Probation,
February 23. 1665. Jack contra Pollock and Rutherfoord. This Presumption does
withstand a far stranger opposite probation of Health, when the Defunct went
not abroad as was found in the said ease, Robertson contra Fleeming. That it
was not Relevant to eleid Deathbed, that the Defunct was in Strength and
Ability, to have come to Kirk and Marcat, nor that the Defunct put on his
Clothes daily, and that any Disease he had was but Lent, and not Impedimentum
rebus agendis; as was found in the said case, Schaw contra Gray. Neither that
the Defunct lived a year and a half after the Deed in question, and was only
hindered to come abroad by a Palsy, which troubled his walking, and made him
not come abroad; albeit he did all his Affairs within Doors, as formerly, July
1. 1637. Cranston Riddell contra Richardson. And albeit, there be remembered a
case of a Disposition made be David Graham Merchant in Edinburgh for a Pious
use to the (...) that his having on his Cloth the Contriving and Writing the
whole Disposition himself, was sufficient to eleid Deathbed and to instruct
Health; yet the Circumstances of that case are not fully known, not being
observed by any of the Lords, and the Decision has ever been decryed since.
But in the case of the creditors of the Lord Balmerino, against the Lady
Couper, for reducing of the Disposition of his Estate to her, which was Decyded
June 25. 1671. It was not found Relevant to instruct Liege poustie, that after
the Disposition, my Lord made Bargains and Counts, seemed to be Merry and
Laughed, kept on his Clothes, kept the Table, came from his Chamber to the
Hall, Whisled to himself, and Danced, Albeit, no particular Disease, but only
Sickness was proven. And in the foresaid case, Clelland contra Clelland, Health
was not found proven, albeit, soundness of Judgment and Memory was proven: And
that the Defunct did not only all his own affairs, but Trysted for others, and
that he lived two years and a half, after the Disposition, and was in like
condition, as he had been seven year before; so that it seems, that if the
contracting of Sickness be proven, no contrary probation of any Acts within
doors, will be sufficient to eleid the Reason of Deathbed; By all with
decisions, the second Point proposed is sufficiently cleared.

As to the third Point proposed, whether Sickness being proven once Contracted,
the Countinance thereof till Death must be proven. It is commonly held that if
it be proven Sickness was contracted, and that Death followed, probatis
extremis presumuntur media; And Sickness once being proven is presumed to
continue, otherways it were scarce possible by a positive Probation to instruct
the Continuance of the Sickness till Death, and this is only Presumptio juris:
Laying the Burden of probation upon the Party that alleges Convalescence.

The fourth Point for proving Liege poustie, either that there was no Disease,
or by Convalescence, if there had been a Desease; by going freely to Kirk and
Market unsupported, is the ordinar and unquestionable defense against
Deathbed, upon which Law and Custom has pitched, as the most public, and
sure evidence of Health andConvalescence: So that albeit, the going to Kirk and
Market, were but of design to Validat theDeed, yet if the attempt, be perfectly
made out, it would be sufficient; and much more will be allowed, when the going
abroad is Principally to hear Sermon or for Devotion, or about affairs to the
Market: In which case, taking the Party by the Hand, or helping him at a ragged
Ground, would not infer Supportation, there being no design of Cautiousness in
the Party, but useing his ordinar way; as if a Gentlewoman accustomed to by
led be the hand, should go so led to the Kirk or Market: By reiterated Acts it
might be sufficient for inferring Health or Convalescence, but if it did appear
to be upon design, she behoved to forbear the prerogatives of herQuality, and
go freely alone without being led, or if an old man, infirm by age, or any
defect in his Legs or Feet, not arising from inward Sickness, should be helped
in difficult places, in reiterated Acts in going to Kirk and Market: without
design. And as to that qualification, whether it be sufficient to go the Kirk
or Market Place, or at the Congregation orGathering at the Market, I have not
observed it perticularly debated or decided, but that Parties when they went to
the Kirk, ordinarily went to the Prayers, and certainly it is the most secure
way, that the going be to the Congregation, or Meeting at the Market,
otherwise picked out witnesses, may be Chosen to wait upon the Party to the
Kirk or Mercat-place, which in many cases will be very private, and will not
expose the Party to public View.

The fifth point concerning Supportation, is the ordinary reply against going
abroad, and as has been said, it is ever to be considered, whether the Act
appear to be of design or not, and that if the Acts be reiterat, and of course
nothing that was ordinar for the Defunct in taking of help, when he was in
unquestionable Health, will import Supportation; and therefore in the case,
Pargilleis contra Pargilleis, decided Febr. 26. 1669. It having been proven
that the Defunct was a very old Man, and that after the Disposition quarelled,
he had several times come to Calder, and done Affairs there: And that he went
up from the Merca-place, in the Market time, to the place of Calder, being a
Steep way, borrowed Money from the Lord Torphichen, told and received the same,
which was found sufficient; Albeit, he was helped up Stairs, and down Stairs:
and was helped to his Horse, and from his Horse, and his Man led his Bridle,
and that he had a Staff in his hand.

But when the going to Kirk and Market, is upon design, the least defect in the
exact Performance will render it Inefectuall, and so in the case of the
Disposition made by the Lord Couper, it having been evident that it was, of
design to Validat the Disposition, that the next day after the Disposition, my
Lord went to the Market at Couper, the laying hisHand upon Thomas Ogilbies
Hand, who walked by him, and that only at someimes, and in Ragged places where
he was accustomed to take any walking by him, by the Hand before: Yet seeing he
put nature to the outmost reach, to manifest Health by that Act, and could not
fully perform it, it was not found Sufficient; but he was found to be
Supported, and in the case, Clellands contra Clelland of Faskin, the Defunct
finding that his Disposition was quarrelld and stopped at the Exchequer: As
being done in Lecto; Immediately after he caused make a Chair, with a Fixed
(...) to bear his Feet, in which he was carried with Men till he came within
two pair or thereby to the Kirk, and thence he walked to the Kirk, but there
was no Congregation: And returned back to the Chair, and so was carried Home,
and the Witnesses that were about him, being examined, whether he Walked
freely, or with help, many deponed that several Persons having walked close
about him, they could not Distinctly know; and several Witnesses having
Deponed, that he Walked Freely without Help, and two having Deponed that he was
Helped by themselves, his so going Abroad was not found Sufficient, neither was
his being carried in the Chair found equivalent, as if he had Ridden upon his
Horse; because a Sick-man might have required help even upon Horseback, and
would not have been able to have Ridden Freely without Help, and yet might have
been Able to sit in a Chair: In this case a lso it was found that Supportation
was more positively Proven; Albeit, be fewer Witnesses: The Witnesses
themselves being Supporters.

As to the sixth point proposed, whether going to Kirk and Market unsupported,
infers Health, or Convalescence, presumptione juris, and de jure, So that a
contrary Probation, that even then he was Sick, and so continued tiil IDeath,
has not yet been destinctly decided: Albeit, in Pargilleis case, it was not
regarded, that the Witnesses deponed, that Pargilleis, when he came to the
Market, appeared Sick, and continued Sick thereafter; Neither can any
Conjectural Probation, in such case be Respected; Because Squalor morbi, does
ordainarily remain, afterConvalescence, which, if it were (...), would render
that Defense uncertain, and conjectural; So that there can be no question,
unless the Probation of the being then Sick, were positive, and pregnant, as
if a Person in a hot Fever, wherein there is ordinarily strength enough, should
come abroad to a Market, the Foam, and Fury of the Fever continuing in his
Face, or if the Party did Groan, and Bemoan himself, as Sick Persons use to do.

For the last point offered to consideration, whether Convalescence, can be
proven otherways, then by going un-supported to Kirk and Market. I have seen no
decision, whereby Deathbed has been elided, upon such equivalent Acts; But on
the contrare, it was found, in the Case of the Lord Salton, that his coming to
a Green, near his House un-supported, and standing there, till he saw men play
at Football, was not sufficient: And in Coupers case, his coming frequently
with Strangers to their Horse, and sometimes going up and down Stairs
un-supported, and oftimes going out, and walking in his Garden, and once to a
House, a quarter of a mile off, and all un-supported, were not found
equivalent, to going unsupported to Kirk and Market. And in Clellands Case, his
going several times to his Barn, and to some Trees, a pair from his Gate
un-supported, were not found equivalent to going to Kirk and Market. Yet it
cannot be doubted, but there may be Acts equivalent: As if any Person should go
a far Journey, but the equivalence must not stand in this, that the Defunct did
Acts, requiring as much strengh, as going to Kirk and Market. In respect of
this Difference, that going to Kirk and Market, exposes the Party to public
view: Whereas other private Acts about his House, may be proven by a few
Persons, prompted for that purpose: Which probation cannot be balanced with
any other; for clearing, that there was support, or help, as in the Case of
going to Kirk or Market, or going a long Journey, where they may be had many
un-prepossessed Witnesses.

Deathbed was not found elided, by ryding on Horseback, a Journey, of about
sixteen miles, Seeing the party had a man, who rode behind him, and for some
part of the way, was tied to the man, which was found to be Supportation. Nor
was it respected, that long before his Sickness, he had in his Testament left
the same things in Legacy: And therefore was not prevailled upon, with
Importunity; Seeing his purpose might have altered, after that Testament,
December 11. 1677. William Lockhart contra Cromuel Lockhart of Lie.

29. As to the extent ofDeath-bed, it does not only annul Dispositions ofLands,
but Assignations to Heritable Bands, Feb. 24. 1624. Donaldson contra Donaldson.
Or to a Band, Moveable in it self, becoming Heritable, by a Posterior
obliegment, to employ it for Annualrent, Spots, Juramentum calumniae, Margaret
Arthur contra James Watson. Yea, it will annull any Band, though Moveable, in
so far, as thereupon the Heritage may be Appryzed, or Adjudged, Jan. 7. 1624.
Schaw contra Gray. But an Heritable Sum being paid to the Defunct, on
Deathbed, his discharge thereof was not Reduced, ex capite lecti, though the
money was instantly given away, after it was received, which was found valid,
as a Legacy, out of the Deads part, March 15. 1634. Margaret Broun contra
Thomson; but such Deeds on Deathbed, will not prejudge the Relict, or Bairns
part, but is null as to them, as well as to the Heir; As has been now shown.

Deathbed was extended aganist Bands, though granted by a Father to a Son,
having no other Provision, which were not sustained, though ossered to be
restricted to a competent Portion, due Naturally by Parents, to Children, July
1. 1637. Cranston Riddel contra Richardson; Yea, Deathbed was found relevant,
to Reduce a Disposition, in Favors of the Disponers only Daughter, in
prejudice of the Brother, and Heir Male: Though the Disposition contained a
power, to alter the Tailzie, or dispone at any time in his Life, but bore not
etiam in articulo mortis, Feb. 25. 1663. Adam Hepburn of Humbie contra Hellen
Hepburn. But where the Disposition was neither to an Heir Male, nor of Line;
That clause was sufficient, to (...) the Disponer, on these Terms, to burden,
though it mentioned not Deathbed, or in articulo mortis, June 22. 1670. Douglas
of (...) contra Douglas. And Deathbed was not sustained, to Reduce a
Disposition, by a Father to his Son; Seeing the Father reserved such a Sum, to
be at his disposal in his Disposition to his appearand Heir, though it
mentioned not, at any time in his Life, June 28. 1662. George Seaton of Barns
contra Charles Seaton. And now, since the Lords have frequently decerned
Aliment to Bairns, against the Fathers Heirs, having competent Estates, it is
like the Lords will allow, all provisions on Deathbed, in so far as they may
be competentAliments.

Holograph writs without Witnesses, prove not their own dates to have been
Prior to the Subseribers Deathbed, and therefore, they are presumed to be on
Deathbed, withoutwhich, that privilege would be evacuat; it being as easy to
induce a Sick Person to Antidate a writ, as to Prejudge his Heir: But if it be
proven by Witnesses, that the writ was seen, and delivered, before the granter
contracted the Sickness, whereof he died; Or if it was Subscribed before his
Sickness, though not delivered; if it was in favors of his Children, or had a
Clause dispensing with delivery, or did reserve his Liferent: The presumption
to have been done on Deathbed, will be thereby elided. But a Disposition to
Neices, having been proven, to be Subscribed, before the Subscribers Sickness;
but blank in the Name, was reduced, as upon Deathbed, because the name was not
filled up: (...) the Writter did depone, that it was delivered to him to fill
it up, with the Neices name, seeing he filled it not up, till the granters
Sickness, July 22. 1678. Birnies contra Polmais and Brouns. But Deathbed, was
not found to hinder the recalling of a Disposition, made by a Grandfather to
his Oye, and delivered to a third Party in Liege poustie; if it should appear,
that the delivery was not Simply, to the behove of the Oye, whereby it became
Irrevocable; but Conditionally, that the Disponer might recall it; for eviden ce
whereof, it was proven, by that third Parties Oath, That the Defunct, on
Deathbed, called for it, and he delivered it; and that the Defunct, on
Deathbed, delivered two Blanks, for dividing the Right, in the first
Disposition, which he delivered, with his said first Disposition, to a Nottar:
And ordered the filling up of the one half to the Heir, the other half to a
second Son, but for further clearing the Party, to whom the first Disposition
was first delivered, was appointed to be examined, what the Defunct expressed,
when he delivered the first Disposition to him, December. 9. 1676. Janet Ker
contra Ninian Ker. But thereafter, the third Party not being found to be
examined, The Lords found, that there being nothing proven, expressed at the
delivery, The recalling, and the re-delivery did import, that the delivery was
not Simple, to the behove of the Oye, making it Irrevocable; But that it was
Conditional, to be delivered to the Oye, if the Disponer did not recall it, and
that his recalling of it for a special effect, to divide the same betwixt his
Heir and the second Son, was effectual, both against his Oye, to whom he first
Disponed; and as effectual against his Heir, as to the one half, albeit the
Revocation was onDeath-bed: Seeing thereby, the Heir had no prejudice, but
benefit, being formerly Excluded, by the Disposition to the Oye, delivered in
Liege Poustie, January 25. 1677. inter eosdem.

30. But onlyFree deeds onDeath-bed, are thusReduceable, for if there were an
equivalent Cause Onerous, which was truly Employed upon the Defunct, or might
affect the Heir, it is not to the Heirs Prejudice, and so not Reduceable; thus
the Reason of Deathbed was eleided, because the Band quareled, was offered to
be proven for Furnishing, truly Delivered to the Defunct, July 13. 1632.
Pollock contra Fairholme.

The like of a Discharge, granted by a Bastard, after he was Infected of the
Plague, against the Donatar of the Bastardry, November 23. 1609. Mar contra
Auchinleck. In all these Witnesses are Sustained to prove the Cause Onerous in
the write. And likewise a Band granted on Deathbed, being proven for a Cause
Onerous in part, viz. Droggs, and Service to the Defunct on his Deathbed, was
sustained pro tanto, and Reduced for the rest, January 7. 1624. Schaw contra
Gray. But a Liferent granted to a Wife on Deathbed, and a Liferent-Tack of
Teinds, of the Lands Liferented, were not reduced, Hope Teinds Lady Dunlap
contra Lord Dunlap. The reason whereof is observed to have been, because the
Husband before Sickness, was bound to Infeft his Wife in Lands, or Anualrent
equivalent Nicol. de haereditarijs actionibus inter eosdem.

31. AsDeeds on Deathbed, prejudge not the Heir: So deeds in Testaments,
though done in Liege Poustie, have no more Effect, then on Deathbed And it is
not habilis modus, by Testament to dispone any Heritable Right, December 14.
1664. Colvin contra Colvin: Deathbed is not competent by Exception, but by
Reduction, January 11. 1666. Grizell Seatown contra Dundas; But in Declaratorie
or Petitory Actions, as Recognition, it is receivable by Exception, July 20.
1669. Barcley contra Barcley; Or in a Reduction it is competent by Exception or
Reply, February 3. 1672. Barbara Hoom contra Bryson.

A third difference is, that Successors in Movables, or Executors are not
liable Passive, for the Defuncts Debts, in Solidum, but Heirs are; Though they
far exceed the Value of the Inheritance, without the benefit of an Inventar.
And though Craigs Opinion is, that Heirs may Renounce, even after their Entry,
if the Heritage appear overburdened. The course of Decision since his time has
cleared the Contrary.

32. Because Heirs entering cannot Renounce, there is Annus deliberandi, allowed
to them by Law, in which they may abstain from entering, and Immixing
themselves with the Heritage, and then they are not conveenable for the
Defuncts debt, upon charges to enter Heir or otherwise, but if they enter, or
meddle sooner, they are liable: This Annus deliberandi, is ordinarily
accounted, a year from the Defuncts Death, which was so accounted though during
a great part thereof, the Heir remained unborn; February 7. 1610. Knows contra
Menzies. But the Contrary was found thereafter, that the year was accounted
from the Birth of the Posthumus Heir that the benefit of Deliberation, might be
profitable to his Tutor in his Name, Spots, Heirs, Livingstown contra
Fullertown; If the Day of Compearance be after the Charge to enter Heir, and
after the year, it will be Susrained, June 27. 1667. Dewar contra Paterson: In
which case it was found, that even Actions Real, as Reductions, (...), etc.
which require no Charge to enter Heir, are not Competent within the year of
Deliberation, because in these the Heir cannot Defend, without the Hazard of
behaving as Heir.

33. Succession in Heritable Rights in Scotland, are either by the will of the
Fiar, or by Law, Provistone Hominis or Legis. Heirs by the (...) of Law, are
called Heirs of Line, as befalling by the Line of Succession appointed, and
known in Law, all other Heirs do Cross or Cut that Line: and therefore are
called Heirs of Tailzie, from the French word (...), to Cut; whence Craig
conceives this Tailzied Succession, has been first denominat amongst the
French and Normands, and thence being brought into England, by the Normand
Conquest, both in Custom and Name, has been Derived to Us; Yet it is liker to
have come to us Immediately from France, with which we kept greater
Intercourse, then with England of Old; And our Tailzies, at least to Heirs
Male, are Ancienter than the English, which begun but from the Famous Law,
called the Second Statute of Westminster, in the Reign of Edward the First, of
that Name of the Normand Line.

Heirs of Tailzie are also called Heirs of Provision, which terms are
Equiparat, both comprehending all Heirs, which are not according to the Line or
Course of Law; and among others, Heirs Male, and Heirs of Marriage: Yet our
Style does ordinarily distinguish them so, that where there is no alteration
from the Lineall Heirs Male, and where there are several Substitutions of
certain Persons, or Lines, failling others by the tenor of the Infeftment, they
are Specially called Heirs of Tailzie; but when there is an Alteration of the
Lineal Succession, yet not Simply to Heirs Male, nor to diverse Members of
Tailzie they retain the common Name of Heirs, of Provision, as is most ordinar
by Contracts of Marriage, providing Lands to the Heirs of the Marriage, whereby
the Heirs Lawfully Procreat betwixt the Married Persons whether Male or Female
do succeed; So that Daughters of that Marriage will exclude Sons of another
Marriage, or Heirs of the Body of the Members of the Tailzie, whereby there
Collateralls, or Ascendants are excluded: And in proper Tailzies, there are
always diverse Lines and Persons, Male and Female, substitute as Members of the
Tailzie, as when Infeftment bears Lands to be granted to the Fiar, and to the
Heirs of his Body, or to the Heirs Male of his Body, or to his Heirs of such a
Marriage, which Failling to such an other Person Named, and to the Heirs of his
Body, or to the Heirs Male of his Body, etc. And so to a Third or Fourth, which
all Failling to the first Fiar, and his Heirs whatsomever; or to return to the
Superior, or to any other Person, and to their Heirs whatsomever: And where
such Persons and Lines are not Substitute, it is not properly called a Tailzie,
but if it be simply to Heirs Male, it is so specially Denominate; all other
Heirs which are not Heirs of Line, or Heirs whatsomever, retain the Name of
Heirs of Provision, the Chief whereof, are Heirs of a Marriage, which Failling
the Husbands, or Wifes Heirs whatsomever, in which there is but one Blood or
Line, and not diverse Persons, and different Lines Substitute in these Tailzies,
the Person Nominat may Succeed, and be served Heir of Tailzie, though otherwise
Incapable of Succession as Bastards, as has been shown in the former Title;
But the Persons Nominate are never the Immediate and fast Heirs in Lands, but
always the Fiars Heirs of his Body, which Failling, the Persons Nominate; for
if the Heritage should be granted for example to John, and after his Decease to
William and his Heirs: John would be thereby Naked Liferenter, and William
Fiar, who could not be served as Heir to John: But if it were Granted to John,
and the Heirs of his Body, which failing, to William; These failing, William
would be served Heir of Tailzie to John: But this holds not in Bands, or
Securityes for Sums of Money, for Parents do srequently take their Bands and
Infeftments for Security thereof, to themselves, they being on Life, and after
their Decease, to such Children Nominat, yet the Parents are Fiars, and the
Children are but Heirs Substitute. So then, all Succession with Us, is either
of Heirs of Line, Male, Tailzie or Provision, Heirs of Line are also called
Heirs General, so also are Heirs Male, and of Conquest, and these may be served
Heirs by a general Service: But other Heirs of Tailzie or Provision, by
Investiture, cannot be served Heirs, but by a Special Service, serving them to
such Particulars, whereunto they Succeed, by Infeftment or Provision; Heirs of
Line are also Called Heirs whatsomever, because they are absolute without
Limitation, and in all cases where Heirs whatsomever, is not specially altered
by the Infeftment rights follow the Lineall Succession, as among Heirs Male,
the same course takes Preference, except that Female Heirs are excluded, as
that first Descendents, then Brothers, etc. do Succeed, and Amongst Heirs of
Marriages, the Eldest Son does exclude the rest, and so in the Members of
Tailzies.

We shall not need here to debate the Lawfulness, or Expediency of constituting
Heirs Male, or of Tailzie, or of Provision; having now cleared, that the first
Ground and Rule in Equity, is the Will of the Propriatar, though he be
Personally Obliged to provide Competently for his own, especially those of his
Family; And therefore, though several of our KINGS, in their general
Revocations, have Revocked Tailzies, it can infer no more, but a Scruple in
them, and a Preserving of their Power, against the course of Prescription: But
does not infringe such Rights being Lawful in themselves. The Expediency of
Tailzies, is the same with Primo. geniture, to preserve the memory, and
Dignity of Families: But as Primo-geniture, for that end, excludes Females of
nearest Degree, Heirs Male excludes them Simply and Heirs of Tailzie, have had
their Rise from Dissatisfaction, with some of the Fiars Race, or preference of
them, otherwise then by the Propinquity of Blood; Some have also Tailzied
their Lands, so as by Infeftments, to Introduce a Primo-geniture among
Familyes, as the Law has done among Males; as if the Land were granted to the
Fiar, and the Heirs Male of his Body, which Failling, to the Eldest Heir
Female of the Body, without division, and their Heirs carrying the Arms, and
Name of the Family: The intent of these Heirs of Provision, is also to preserve
the Unity and memory of the Family.

To come now to the Heirs of Line, the Law has ordered them thus; first the
Eldest lawful Son, and his Descendents in order, by Right of Primo-geneture,
excludes all other Descendents, Male or Female; Failling Sons, the Daughters,
and their Descendents do all succeed Equally, except in Rights Indivisible,
which fall to the Eldest; Failling Desendents, the next Degree is of the next
immediate Brother German, and his Descendents, and among Middle Brethern, the
immediate Elder Brother succeeds in Conquest, whereunto the Defunct did not,
nor could not succeed as Heir, but in all others, the immediate Younger Brother
succeeds, and therefore is called the Heir of Line; and the other the Heir of
Conquest: If the Fiar be a Woman, her Brother German excludes Sisters German,
and of her Brothers, the immediate Elder Brother succeeds inConquest, and the
immediate Younger in heritage; Failing, Brothers German, Sisters German, and
their Descendents exclude both Brethren and Sisters, by the Fathers side only,
June ult. 1629. Mr. Robert Cuningham contra Multray. Failling Brothers, or
Sisters German, Brothers by the Fathers side, succeed to the Defunct, whether
Male or Female, the immediate Elder in Conquest, and the immediate Younger in
Heritage. Failing all Brothers and Sisters, the Father or other Masculine
Ascendent of his Line, succeed to the Defunct, whether Male or Female, and
exclude the Brothers, or Sisters of that Ascendent, as a Grand-grandfather
excludes his Brethren: Fathers Brethren to the Defunct: Failling Ascendents,
the Fathers Brothers, and Fathers Sisters, and their Descendents, succeed in
all points as Brothers and Sisters, the double Blood excluding the single
Blood, and the immediate Elder Brother succeeding in Conquest, and the immediate
Younger in heritage, and all Failling the Grandfather; and Failling him, his
Brothers and Sisters the same way: And so upward, till there can be any
Propinquity of Blood proven, which all Failling, the King takes place as Last
Heir.

34. In this Line of Succession, observe, First, that there is no place for
Adopted Children, or their Issue, but only for the Natural Issue of the
Vassal; Which cannot be changed by a Voluntar Act of Adoption, without consent
of the Superior, in the Investiture, neither is Adoption in use with us in any
case. 2. These Natural Heirs, must also be Lawful, whereby Bastards are
excluded; who are such, appears by the former Title. 3. There is no place for
Cognats, as to the Mother, Grandmother, or other Feminine Ascendent, or these
of their side, but only to Agnats conjoined by the Father, Grandfather, etc.
Which holds, even though the heritage descended from the Mother, or these of
her side, for in the service of Heirs, the nearest lawful Heirs are only
inquired, and retoured either by the Lineall Succession aforesaid, or by
express Tailzie, or provision in the Infeftment, without respect from whence
the Inheritance flowed; for which we have no Satute nor Custom; But in England,
it is otherwise for Paterna paternis, and Materna Maternis takes place, but
with us the contrare was found in the case of John Gilbert, as Craig observes,
Lib. 2. Dieg 17. And he there relates that many afterward changed their
opinion therein, and though there be equity in it, yet no Law nor Practique
since, has favored the Maternal Line, but the Father was found Heir to his
Son, even in the Lands where the Son was Infeft, as Heir to his Mother, and did
exclude his Brother Uterin, by that Mother, February 5. 1663. Lenox contra
Lintoun. 4. In all this Line of Succession, there is place for Representation
of Descendents, in place of their Defunct Parents: So that Females of a further
degree, by the Right ofrepresentation, exclude Males of a nearer degree, as the
eldest Sons Daughter will be preferred in theGrandfathers Inheritance, to his
other Sons in private Rights, though that be contraverse, by the more common
Feudall Customs, as is largely and learnedly dispute by Tiraquellus.

35. In this Lineall Succession, the Father, Grandfather, or other Ascendents
of the Paternall Line, succeed in heritable Right, next unto Brothers and
Sisters, and before all other Collateralls, or Agnats. We have shown before,
why, there is no mention of Ascendents in the Jewish Succession, because such a
case could hardly occurr among them. Craig, Lib. 2. Deig. 13. affirms that it
was doubtful in his time, whether Ascendants could succeed in heritable
Rights, and that he heard the opinion of some learned men in the contrary, and
that he had not found the Lords decide in it, and that it is contrare to the
Feudal Law, and also to his own opinion; yet he brings both evident reason and
example in the contrary, the reason is, that no Inquest can justly Retoure,
that the Father Brother, is nearer then the Father: He brings also the
Example of the Earl of Angus, served Heir in the Earldom of Angus, to his
ownSon, whom he had infeft therein: And the Lord Colvill in likemanner, having
infeft his Son in all his estate, though sum affirmed that this was by
provision, in the infeftment; yet that the Service was, is sure, but that
provision is uncertain, and though some also were doubtful, whether the Earl of
Angus was served, and infeft as Heir to that same Son, which well infers
that the Father was not infeft as Heir to his Son, but not that he was not
served Heir to him therein, for he might have been served, and not infeft;
Whereby, the service as incomplete, became void, and the next Earl behoved to
serve of new to the Son, who died last vest, and seized as of Fee: The Custom.
and common opinion since, is for the Ascendants, and so the Earl of Roxburgh
was served as Heir Male to his Son; The Lord Ker, and many others which ought
to be the more favored, as more conform to equity, and the Law of nature,
which in Dubio ought to take place, where there is no Law, nor custom to the
contrary, as with us there is none; Neither did I ever hear of one who
attempted to exclude a father, by the Fathers Collaterails: And though there
had been no Decision upon it, neither have there been upon many other
uncontroverted Customs, especially in Succession, but the acquiescence of all
Parties, having interest in matters of so great moment, is a strong Evidence of
the National consent by Custom: But it has aho been so decided by the Lords,
Hope, Succession, Mr. Robert Burnet contra Mauld; Yea a Son, being infeft as
Heir to hisMother dying without Issue, his Brother uterin by the Mother was not
found Heir to him, but his Father, February 5. 1663. Lenox contra Lintoun.

As to the alleged opposition of the Feudall Law, as has been often times said,
it is Local; And therefore, as in England, all Ascendents are excluded, so in
Germany they succeed in the next place after descendents, and are preferred to
Brothers and sisters, according to theNaturall course ofSuccession. The reason
why Brothers and Sisters of the Defunct, are preferred to the Fathers with us,
may be, because such Fees do commonly proceed from the Father: And therefore by
the continuance of that sameFatherly affection, are derived to the Brothers and
Sisters, and because they are in more need of Provision then the Father.

TITLE XXVII. Heirs.
1. Appearand Heirs may pursue exhibition, ad deliberandum. 2. They may defend
their predecessors Rights and Possessions, being called, or compearing for
their interest; and their executors have right to the Rents of these years,
they were appear and Heirs. 3. The Aliment of Heirs from the Donatars, and
Life-rentars. 4. Heirs not entered, have the benefit of Clauses, which by Nature
import, they should not be actual Heir. 5. Heirs have interest in all Rights
granted to their Predecessors, though not mentioning Heirs, who are not
exclusive of Heirs, by their Tenor and Nature. 6. Heirs have the benefit of all
Rights heritable, by Destination, or having a future Tract of time, after the
Defuncts Death. 7. Heirs have Right to Moveable heirship, or obleigment for
Sums wherein Executors are excluded. 8. Heirs of Line, are heirs generally;
their interest. 9. Hirship Movables. 10. Heirs of Conquest their interest. 11.
Heirs Portioners their Interest. 12. Heirs Male, Tailzie, and Provision, their
interest. 13. All Heirs are liable pasive for the Defuncts debt, but not in the
same way. 14. Heirs Portioners how far liable. 15. The effects of different
Provisions, or Obligations by Defuncts, in Favors of Diverse heirs Portioners.
16. Heirs not being Portioners, no substitute in Bands are liable in solidum.
17. The order, by which heris are liable passive, and may be discust. 18. Heirs
of Tailzie ripresent not the Defunct, in obligations contrary to the Terms of
the Tailzie. 19. Heirs of Marriage, may quarrel their Predecessors Deeds, being
meerlygratouitus in their prejudice, but not such as are onerous, or rational
Deeds. 20. Heirs having the benefit of discussing, may propone the Exception,
that all parties having interest, are not called, without instructiug the Right
whereto they may succeed. 21. The exception of the order of discusing, is not
sustained without condescending on the heritage, whereunto the anterior heir
may sueceed, and what is discusing. 22. The order and effect of a Genral Charge
to enter heir. 23. The order, and effect of a special charge to enter heir. 24.
Renounciation to be heir, its order and effect. 25. The entry of heirs
general, and effects thereof. 26. The entry of heirs upon precept of Clare
Constat. 27. The entry of heirs by hesp and steeple within Burgh. 28. Entry
of heirs by Brievcs out of the Chancellarie. 29. To whom these Brieves are
directed. 30. The manner of citting the Inquist, and Proclaming the Brieve. 31.
Exceptions competent against members of Inquist. 32. The appearand heirs claim.
33. Exceptions against the Claim. 34. First head of the Brieve. 35. The 2. head
of the Brieve. 36. 3. head of the Brieve. 37. The 4. head (...) of Brieve. 38.
The 5. head of the Brieve. 39. The 6. head of the Brieve. 40. The 7. head of
the Brieve. 41. The Service. 42. The Reture. 43. Reduction of Retures by a
great inquist. 44. Reduction thereof otherways. 45. Reduction of Retures how
competent. 46. Precepts out of the Chancellarie, to Superiors to Infeft. 47.
Suspensions of the precepts, and the reasons competent therein. 48. The
certification of the loss of the Superiority, during the life of the Superiors
disobeying. 49. Further reasons of Suspension of these precepts. 50. Whether
the Persons nearest at the Defuncts decease, may be entered where a nearer is in
spe. 51. Who are Fiars of Conjuct-fees, or Provisions substitute. 52. The
entreast of heirs of Provision, and import of Clauses of Conquiest, in
Contracts of Marriage.
BY the former Title, it appears who are Heirs; let us now Consider what
their Interests are by being Heirs: And that is either Active by the benefit,
or Passive by the Burden whereunto they do succeed; For Heirs being successors
in Universum jus quod Defunctus Habuit, they do fully represent the Defunct
both in the Rights, belongiug to him, and in the Debts due by him. First, then
of the Interest, common to all Heirs; And next of the interest, special to the
several Heirs.

1. The interest of Heirs are most properly Competent, when they are entered
Heirs, according to the due Course of Law, of which afterward; Yet somethings
are competent, not only to heirs entered, but to appear and Heirs, as first,
they have interest to prusue Exhibition of all writs made by their Predecessors
to their Wives, Children, and others in Familia, but not of writes made by them
extra Familiam, December 6. 1661. Margaret Forrester, and Schaw of Sor nebeg
her Spouse, Contra Tailzefere. Or to their Predecessors Simply, to the effect,
they may know the condition of the heritage: And may desiberat whether they
would Enter Heirs, or not; Seeing if they do Enter, they are liable for all the
Defuncts Debts, though they far exceed his Estate, and have no benefit of
Inventary, as in movables: And therefore they are allowed to pursue for
inspection of all Writes, Importing a debt of the Defunct; Yet not so as to
open the Charter Chists of Strangers, who have purchased Lands from the
Defunct, on pretense of the Burden, by the Warrandice; for in that case the
Strangers Infeftment will exclude them, and only dispositions made to these in
the Family, hinder not inspection of the Heirs whole Rights Flowing from the
Defunct, or his Predecessors: But I doubt not, but all will be obliged to
produce Bands, or Personal obleigements, which might burden the appearand Heir,
if he enter. As was found in the Case of Dispositions, and Bandsgranted by the
Defunct, to Strangers, Feb. 26. 1633 Lord of Swynton contra Lord of
Westnisbit. But if Infeftment had followed upon the Disposition, the Defender
would not be obliged to produce the Disposition, because the appearand Heir
might, by the Registers, find his Predecessors denuded. This inspection is
competent, during their Annus deliberandi. It was so found, in Favors of the
appearand Heir, pursuing Exhibition within the Year, Feb. 26. 1633. Lord of
Swinton contra Lord of Westnisbit, where the Writs pursued for, were likely to
be the ground of a Plea, against the Defender himself. This Exhibition, ad
deliberandum, is competent at any time, before the Heir enter, even after the
Annus deliberandi, which is granted to appearand Heirs, that they may be free
of all Actions on Chargesto enter Heir, Reductions, or Declarators during that
time, if they do not enter, or behave as Heirs: But on this account, the
appearand Heir has no Interest to put parties to Count and Reckon, ad
deliberandum, June 22. 1671. Lessies contra Alexander Jeffray. In these
Exhibitions, the Relations, or Propinquity of Blood, of the appearand Heir,
passes, without probation, as Notorium: So, as if the Defender be absent, the
Decrcet will not be null, for want of Probation of the Title. Yet a Scots man
born of Parents, residing in Holland, was found to have no Interest, to pursue
Exhibition, as appearand Heir to his Father, till he produced an Authentic
Declaration, and Trial, by the Magistrants in that place; that he was the
eldest lawful Son of his Father, December 17. 1627. Fleming contra Broun.

2. Appearand Heirs, may defend all Rights competent to them, upon Production
of their Predicessors Infeftments, whether they be called, or compear for their
Interest, January 19. 1627. Lord of Rosline contra his Tenants and George
Fairbairn for his interest. They may also continue their Predecessors
Possession, and pursue for Mails and Duties of there Lands, finding Caution, in
case of doubtfulnesse, to make these forthcoming to any other, having
Interest, Spots Heirs, James Oliphant contra his Tenants.

Yea, the Rents of Lands, were so far found, to belong to an appearand Heir,
That though he died un-entered, the next Heirs not entering to him, was found
obleiged to pay the former appearand Heirs Aliment, in so far as he intromitted
with the Rents of the Years, during which the former appearand Heir lived,
December 20. 1662. Lady Tarsapie contra Lord of Trasapie. And consequently,
the Rents might be confirmed by his Executors, or arrested for his debt. The
like was found of moveable heirship, wherewith the appearand Heir was
entertained by his Mother, June 29. 1629. Robertson contra Dalntahoy. They may
also pursue the Life-renters of their Estate, for Aliment, Feb. 12. 1635. James
Hepburn contra Dam Margaret Preston and Isobel Seatoun.

3. The Aliment of Heirs, out of there Lands, being Life-rented, or in Ward, is
constitute by the Act of Parliament, 1491. cap. 25. Bearing a reasonable Living
to be given, to the Sustentation of the Heir, after the Quantity of Heritage;
if the said Heir have no Blensh, or Feu ferm to sustain him, as well of Ward
Lands fallen in the Kings hands, as in the hands of any Barron, Spiritual or
Temporal, whereby, it is clear. 1. That the Quantity of the Aliment is
indeterminat: And therefore is modified by the Lords, according to the Quality
of the Heir, and his Estate, 2. It takes no place, if the Heir have Blensh, or
Feu Lands, sufficient to sustain him; but if these be not sufficient, the same
will be made up by the Life-renters and Wardatars proportionally, March 16.
1622. Heir of Milioun contra Calderwood. Yea, where the Minor had any other
means, sufficient to intertain himself, as the Heir, being a Writer, and
thereby able to Aliment himself, he was found to have no Aliment from his
Mothers Life-rent, who brought 8000. Merks of Tocher, and had but 10. Chalders
of Victual in Life-rent, July 21. 1626. Lord of Ramorny contra Law. The like,
where the Heir was not Minor, but designed himself Preacher, and so having a
calling, Feb. 11. 1636. Sibbald contra Wallace. Here the Relict was Infeft in
no Land, but had an Annualrent of 400. Merks, out of Land, and the Heir was not
Minor: Whereas, the Lords thought the Act of Parliament, was not in favors of
Majors, who ought to do for themselves, but all must be considered complexly,
in this Decision: Some Heirs, by their Quality, not being bound to follow
Callings, but the Life-rent was a mean Annualrent, no more then an Aliment to
the Relict, the Pursuer Major, and having a calling: And certainly, where the
Life-rent is but an Aliment, the appearand Heir must rather want then the
Person provided for a cause onerous.

Though the Act mention only Ward Lands, yet it was extended to a Minor, having
no Ward Lands, against a Life-renter of all his Fstate, being Houses, and
Annualrent of Money, Feb. 22. 1631. Fiinnie contra Oliphant. In this case, it
was not found sufficient, that the Life-renter offered to maintain the Minor,
her own Child, upon her own charges, she being married to a second Husband: But
the Tutor obtained modisication, with consideration of the moveable Heirship,
on the contrary, where the Mother was not married, her offer of Intertainment
was received, July 14. (...). Alexander Noble and his Tutors contra his Mother:
Neither was the modifi cation excluded, because there were free Lands, at the
Defuncft Death, seeing they were appryzed thereafter, for the Defuncts debt,
Hope de haered. White contra Caldwall. The like, the debt being great, and the
Annualrent thereof, equivalent to the rent of the Lands not Liferented, Feb.
13. 1662. Antonia Broun contra her Mother: But Aliment was not found due by a
Father Life-renter to his Son, on this Act, but only, super Jure Naturae, July
21. 1636. Lord of Rumorney contra Law. Nor by a Grandfather to his Oye, who
had disponed his Estate to his Son, reserving his Life-rent, of a part, the
rest unsold by his Son, being Life-rented by his Wife, July 7. 1629. Hamilton
contra his Goodsir: But where the Heirs Mother brought a great Tougher, and the
Grandfather fell to a plentiful Estate by his Brother, the Heir was found to
have Aliment of his Goodsir, though he disponed the Land to the Heirs Father,
burdened with his Mothers Life-rent, June 27. 1662. Heir of Gairn contra Lord
of Gairn. This behoved not to be from the Statute, but ex debito naturali.
Aliment was found due by a Liferenter to her daughter, the appearand Heir,
though she renounced to be Heir, July 16. 1667. Hamilton contra Symonton. But,
where a Father disponed to his Son a part of his Estate, reserving his
Life-rent, and another to his Son, and his Wife in Conjunctfie, after his Sons
Death, his appearand Heir got no part of his Aliment from his Goodsir, but only
from his Mother, Feb. 26. 1675. Sr. John Whitfoord contra Lord of Lamington.
Aliment was found due to the Heir, by an Asigney to a Gift of Ward, without
necessity to prove, that he intromitted with the Ward Lands; unless he had
been Legally excluded, which was Modified by the Lords: And it was not found
sufficient to intertain him in the Assignyes Family, but nothing was Modified
for that time, that the Minors Mother Alimented him gratis, Feb. 19. 1679.
Sibbald of Cair contra Sr. Alexander Ealconer.

4. Heirs also not entered, have the benifite of such obliegments, or
provisions conceived in Favors of Heirs, which by their Nature, or Meaning,
require to be fulfilled before the Heirs entry. As when a Party was obleiged to
employ a Sum upon Land, and to procure himself, and his Umquhil Spouse Infeft
therein, in Life-rent, and the Heirs Procreat betwixt them in Fee, the Bairn of
the Marriage, who would fall Heir, was thereby found to have Right to crave his
Father, to employ the Money accordingly, though he never was, nor actually
could be Heir, his Father being alive, December 16. 1628. Lord of Collington
contra Granton. In this case, the Lords inclined, so to decide, but decided
not; But that day, Durie observes a like case decided, July 7. 1632. Young
contra Young. The like was decided, Feb. 13. 1677. Alexander Frazer contra John
Frazer. In which case, a Father, by his Contract of Marriage, being obleiged to
employ a certain Sum, upon security to Him and his Wife in Conjunct-fee, and to
the Heirs of the Marriage, and likewise to take all Conquest during the
Marriage, the one half to the Wife in Life-rent, and the other to the Heir of
the Marriage in Fee, after the Wifes Death. Process was sustained, at the
instance of the apparent Heir of the Marriage, against his Father, who was
decerned to employ the special Sum to himself, and after his decease, to the
Heir apparent of the Marriage albeit, thereby, the Father would remain Fiar, and
might dispone, or burden the Sum so employed, for reasonable Considerations,
but not by Deeds, merely gratuitous, to evacuat the obleigment: And if he did
Deeds prejudicial, he would be obleiged to purge the same, or re-imploy (...):
But it was not so found, as to the Conquest, before the Marriage, which might
be altered during his Life, for that only could be accounted Conquest, that he
had more at his Death, then at his Marriage. And so Heirs of a Marriage, in an
obleigment, in case a Wife deceased, without surviving Heirs of the Marriage,
these were Interpret Bairns of the Marriage, who survived their Mother, but
died before their Father; and so could never be served Heir to him, January 26.
1630. Turnbul contra Colinshlie. The like, where a Father was obleiged to
Infeft himself and his Spouse in Conjunct-fee, and the Heirs procreat betwixt
them, etc. The apparent Heir was found, to have interest, to pursue the Father
for fulfilling thereof, and of the obleigment adjoined, not to dispone in their
prejudice, Hope de haeredibus, Hamilton contra Silvertonhil. Tacks set to
Heirs, require no service, but being Notour, to be the Person, who might be
served Heir, they have right without service, June 9. 1675. Hoom contra
Johnston of Oldwells.

5. As to the benifit of Heirs, they have Right, not only to Obleigments
conceived in favors of the Defunct, and his Heirs; But though there be no
mention of Heirs, unless by the nature of the obleigment, there be a
speciallity, appropriating the same to the Person of the Defunct only, as in
Commissions, Trusts, etc. So Heirs were found to have the benifit of a promise.
made to their Predicessors, for disponing of Lands to him, acquired for his
use, though it mentioned not Heirs, Feb. 22. 1610. Heir of Jean (...) contra
Livingston. The like of a Reversion, not mentioning Heirs, which was thought to
be omitted by neglect, seeing it bore not Redeemable to that Party during his
Life, as it is ordinarily adjected, when that is meaned, January 9. 1662. Earl
of Murray contra Lord of Grant. The like of an Annualrent, though it bore only
to be paid yearly, and not perpetually, or heritably, or to heirs, Feb. 2.
1667. pourie contra Dykes. And a Substitution, mentioning only a Person
substitute, without mention of Heirs, was found competent to that Persons
Heirs, January 7. 1670. Innis contra Innis.

6. Heirs have the benefit of heritable Rights, not only whereupon Infeftment
has followed, or which, by Destination are heritable, or requiring Infeftment
to their accomplishment, as heritable Bands, bearing Clause of Infeftment, for
these bearing only Clause of Annualrent, are declared Moveable, by, and since
the Act of Parliament, 1641. cap. 57. Revived, Par. 1661. cap. 32. Of which, in
the last Title. So also, are Reversions, Pensions, Tacks, without necessity of
being entered Heir, June 17. 1671. John Boyd contra Hugh Sinclair, July 9.
1675. Hoom contra Johnston of Oldwells. And all Rights, having a Tract or
Course of time, after the Defuncts Death. In these Cases, where the Defuncts
Right is Temporary, and runs out by a certain Course of Time, that time
runs, whether the Defuncts Heir be entered, or do Possess, or not, as
Tacks, Pensions, or Annuell Prestations, during so many Years: And therefore,
these require not Service, or Solemnity; but that Person, who might be Served,
may continue, or recover the Defuncts Possession, and his Possessing makes him
liable passive, as Representing the Defunct. Neither needs there any Service of
Children nominatim, substitute immediately to their Parents, but if they be
Substitute in the Second place, a Service must be used to instruct, that the
Heirs appointed in the first place did fail, July 21. 1676. (...) of Drumelzier
contra the Earl of Tweddel. What Rights are heritable, and what moveable, vide
Title Real Rights.

7. Heirs, have also Right to Moveable Heirships, and to all Obleigments,
though the matter be in moveable Rights, if Executors be expressly secluded,
otherways, if the matter be moveable, and Heirs only be expressed, but not
Executors, yet Executors will not be Excluded, because Heir is a General Term,
comprehending Exectors, Hope Ejection, Sr. Lewis (...) contra Tenants.

The special Interest of Heirs, are according to their several kinds, viz.
Heirs of Line, and of Conquest, heirs Portioners, heirs Male, and heirs of
Tailzie, and Provision.

8. The Interest of heirs of Line, is, that they are heirs Generally, not only,
because they may be Served by a General Service, but chiefly, because they must
Generally represent the Defunct. So, that what cannot be claimed by a special
Title; either as being Conquest, or Specially provided, by the Tenor of the
Infeftment, befalls to the heirs of Line: And therefore, in dubious cases,
what does not appear to belong to other, Heirs appertains to these, in
respect of whom, heirs Male, and of Tailzie, and provision, are accounted as
Strangers, and may come against the Defuncts Deeds, in favors of the Heirs of
Line; But the Heirs of Line, cannot come against such Deeds, in favors of
others, because, as heirs of Line, they are reputed as one Person, with the
Defunct; and so are obleiged to maintain, and fulfill his Deeds, not done on
Deathbed. It was so found in the Case of an heir of Tailzie, against an heir
of Line. Spots Earl of Hoom contra And as heirs of Line have generally the
Benefit, so they have more effectually the Burden of the Defuncts debts, which
ordinarily reach them in the first place: So that ofttimes the heirs of Line,
have little or nothing free. We shall not need to be Special, what befalls
the heirs of Line; being to show particularly, what befalls to the other
heirs: For what remains, belongs to the heirs of Line only. Heirships
moveable belong only to heir of Line, and not to heirs of Tailzie, January 27.
1668. Colonel Montgomrie contra Stewart.

9. Heirship moveable, is the best of every kind of movables, belonging to the
Defunct, which the heirs of Line may draw from the Executors, whereof there is
an ordinary list: The reason of this Heirship moveable, is, because, by our
Law, by primo geniture excludes the Defnncts other nearest of Kin in Heritage,
wherethe nearest of Kin Succeeds alone in movables; and as they have no share
with the heir in heritable Rights, so most sitly the heir has no share with
them in movables, but has only the best of every kind, which therefore is
called heirship moveable. In which the Defunct cannot, in his Testament, or any
other Deed done on Deathbed, prejudge his heir, as was shown last Title; but
if the nearest of Kin be all Femals, they are both heirs (...) Executors, or,
if but one Male, he is both heir and Executor: in which cases. there is no
heirship moveable drawn.

Heirship Moveable is established by the Act of Parliament, 1474. cap. 53.
Ordaining the Heirs of Prelates, Barons and Burgesses, to have the best of every
kind, according to the Burrow Lands, and so was found not to belong to the Heir
of a Defunct, who had only heritable Bands, being neither Prelat, Baron, nor
Burgess. Hope de haered. Todorig contra (...). But the heirs of Prelates was
Extended to other Beneficed Persons, as was found in the heirs of the of Person
of Dingwal, Novem. 28. 1623. William Rig contra Mckenzie. And likewise, the
heirs of Barons was extended to any Persons heirs, dying in Fee of Lands,
though not erected in a Barrony, Hope de haered. Keith contra Mckenzie, Todoirg
contra Purdie. heirship Moveable was found competent to the heir of a Person,
who died only Infeft in an Annualrent, July 19. 1664. Elizabeth Scrimzeor
contra Executors of Mr. John Murray. But heirs of a Burgess was found not to
extend to an honorarie Burgess, who died not Trading, or Working in the Burgh,
Spots heirs, James Leslie contra Hugh Dumbar.

Heirship Moveable, is not always a single thing, but goes sometimes by Pairs,
and sometimes by Dozens, as in Spoons: So the heirship of Oxen was found to be
a Yoke, and not a single Ox, Nicol. de haereditatis petitione, July 20. 1610.
Black contra Kincaid. And heirship takes place, only in corporibus, but not in
quantitatibus, as in Money, Cloth, Metal, etc. And so the Shell of a
Salt-pan, which was out of use, was accounted but Iron, and not to fall under
heirship Moveable, Had. January 19. 1611. Reid contra Thomson.

10. Heirs of Conquest, though they be also heirs of Line, as befalling by the
Course of Law, and not by the tenor of the Infeftment, and therefore were set
down as Lineal Successors, in the preceding Title; Yet because heirs of
Conquest have only place, where there is an Elder and Younger Brother, or an
Elder and Younger Father Brother, etc. and their Issue to succeed: In which
case, the Law allows two heirs, the immediate Elder succeeds in Conquest,
and the immediate Younger in the heritage: Therefore, the one is specially
called the heir of Conquest, and the other retains the common name of the
heir of Line.

Conquest is feudum novum, whereunto the Defunct did not succeed as heir to any
Person, or whereunto the Defunct could not succeed as heir, for if that were
disponed to him by the Defunct, whereunto he would have succeeded, it were but
Preceptio haereditatis, and so remained to be repute as heritage to descend to
the Younger, and not to ascend to the Elder, as Craig observes, lib. 2. dieg.
15. Such heritages are rare, and befall only by Tailzie, or Provision amongst
middle Brethren: Because the eldest, by primogeniture, excludes the rest from
being heirs of Line, but it may befall, in case of the heirs of Line, when the
nearest Successor, is the Fathers, or Grandfathers Brothers, or their Issue,
there being Elder and Younger Brothers; but Conquest is frequent, because, not
only that which is acquired properly, by the means and industry of the Defunct:
But that which is by Gift of the Defuncts Parents, or any other, or, whatsoever
the Defunct could not succeed to, is Conquest. Yet, if the heir of Conquest
succeed, that which was Conquest becomes heritage, and descends: As if there
were four Brothers, and the third acquiring Lands, Died without Issue, the
second would be his heir therein, who, if he Died also Infeft, the Lands would
fall downward to the Youngest Brother, and not upward, to the Eldest Brother.
The custom of England is contrary, for thereby, the eldest Brother succeeds
to all his Brothers, failling the Issue; But with us, the Immediate elder or
younger does always succeed, though of different Marriages, none of them being
Brothersgerman: And therefore, in the case proposed by Craig, lib. 2. (...).
15. In fine of a Brother, by a second Marriage, dying without Issue, and having
three Brothers of a former Marriage, no doubt the youngest would succeed:
according to the Opinion of Oliphant and King, there related: Albeit, that
Craigs opinion be, that the eldest would succeed. It was so decyded, contrary
Craigs opinion, July 20. 1664. Lord of Clerkington contra Stewart.

Heirs of Conquest succeed, not only to Lands Conquest by their immediate
Predicessors, but in other heritable Rights, passing by Infeftments, as
Annualrent, or such as are heritable by distination, and which are accomplished
by Infeftment, as Despositions of Lands, or Annualrents, Appryzings, or
Adjudications, etc. The like, where an Annualrent was first Disponed, and a
Clause of Requisition, and Reversion subjoyned, July 7. 1675. Robertson contra
Lord Halkertoun, and in Reversions, Hope de Successionibus, heirs of Pitcairne.
But in this case, it is not cleared, whether the Lands given in Wodset, were
heritage or conquest; but it seems, if the Lands had been heritage, as they
were Wodset, the Reversion would also belong to the heir of Line, as the Lands
whereto it was accessory would; Yea, heirs of Conquest succeed in heritable
Bands, bearing Clause of Annualrent: As was found amongst the heirs of Doctor
Craig. But the heirs of Line, and not the heirs of Conquest succeed in Tacks,
acquired by the Defunct, Hope Succession, Earl of Dumbars heirs, June 23. 1663.
Ferguson contra Ferguson. The heirs of Line do also succeed in Pensions, or any
other Right, not requiring Infeftment, as in these which having a tract of
time, after the Defuncts Death, do thereby exclude Executors, and do belong to
the heir of Line, and not of Conquest, though they be acquired.

The heir of Line, and not the heir of Conquest falls to be Tutor, or nearest
Agnat to the Pupil, to whom the heir of Line might Succeed. The heir of Line
has right to the heirship Moveable, and not the heir of Conquest.

11. Heirs-portioners are amongst Heirs of Line, for when more Women or their
Issue succeed, failing Males of that degree, it is by the course of Law that
they succeed; and because they succeeed not in solidum, but in equal Portions,
they are called Heirs-portioners; and though they succeed equally, yet Rights
indivisible fall to the eldest alone, without any thing in Lieu thereof to the
rest. As first, Dignity of Lord, Earl, etc. 2. The principal Manse being Tower,
Fortalice, etc. which does not extend to houses in Burghs, nor to ordinary
Country-houses, the former being divisible, the latter falls under division, as
pertinents of the Land whereupon they stand, and are not as separata jura, or
distinct Rights. 3. Superiorities are accounted indivisible, and befall only to
the eldest Daughter and her Issue, and thereby all the Casualities of the
Superiority, either preceding or following the Defuncts death, as Ward,
Relief, Marriage of the Vassals Heirs, Nonentry, Liferent, Escheat, etc. The
reason is, because the Vassals condition ought not to be worsted and made
subject to many Superiors by such Successions, Craig lib. 2. dieg. 14.
excepteth the Superiority of Feu Lands, the Feu Duties whereof are divisible
amongst all the Heirs-portioners, yet the former reason of the indivisibility
of the Superiority in respect of the Vassals Interest, reaches Feu
Superiorities as well as others; and it is hardly conceivable how Superiorities
should belong to the eldest, and yet the Feu Duties divide to the rest, seeing
the Superiority as being Dominium directum, is the only Title for poynding the
Ground, or pursuing the Possessors or Intrometters with the fruits thereof. It
seems for the reason adduced, the Superiority, and therewith the Feu Duty
befalls to the eldest; yet so, because the Feu Duty is constant and liquid,
and is not like the other Casualities of Superiority, which are illiquid and
accidental; therefore the other Heirs-portioners ought to have Compensation for
their parts of the Feu Duty, in or off other proper Lands: Or if there were more
Superiorities of Feu Lands, so that some of the Superiorities might befall one
Heir, and others to other Heirs, no particular Superiority being divided, or
the Vassal made Vassal to many Superiors, I conceive it would be allowed; or
otherways the eldest Coheir would be dicerned to infeft the rest in
Annualrents out of the Fee correspondent to their share of the Feu Duty. A
Vassals Heir, though the Defunct had taken Infeftment of more Heirs-portioners,
was not found obliged to take Infeftment of some of them severally, but either
of all jointly, or the eldest, July 30. 1678. Lady Luss contra Inglis.

How far Heirs-portioners succeed passive, and are liable for the Defuncts
Debt, shall forthwith appear.

12. Heirs Male, and of Tailzie, and Provision, succeed not by Law, but by the
tenor of the Infeftment or Provision, and therefore have that benefit and no
more, which is so provided to them, or which is accessory thereto, whereby any
Right or Security of Lands, or others befalling to these Heirs, which is
thereafter acquired by their Predecessors, though the same be acquired to him
and his Heirs whatsover, yet the same will befall with the principal Right, to
which it is accessory to the Heir Male, or of Tailzie, or Provision. As if a
Proprietar Infeft himself, or his Heirs Male, or of Tailzie, or Provision, in
Lands or Annualrents, and thereafter acquire Reversion, Apprisings, Tacks, or
others, further or better security of the same Lands to himself and his Heirs
whatsoever; these will accress to his Heirs Male, or of Tailzie, or Provision,
whether the Infeftment in their favors be anterior or posterior, which is the
more dubious Case; for it cannot be thought that the Defunct having before
provided such Lands or Annualrents to his special Heirs, does by acquiring new
Rights mean to set his Heirs by the Ears to debate upon their several Rights:
Neither can his posterior Deeds be repute an alteration of the former
Provision; which can only be done by Resignation, unless the Defunct debarred
expressly, his former special Heirs, and obtained his Heirs whatsoever Infeft.
And though Heirs whatsoever do ordinarily signify Heirs of Line, who are heirs
general, and take place, when the Right of no special heir appears, yet the
adequat signification thereof, is not heirs general, but heirs generally,
whether of Line, Male, Tailzie, or Provision, as is more clear passive in the
Defuncts Obliegment, as if he obliged himself and his heirs whatsoever. By
heirs whatsoever, will be understood all kind of heirs in their order, yea in
some Cases only his special heirs, if the Obliegment relate to Lands or others
so provided, as will shortly appear: And therefore, heirs Male, or of Tailzie
and Provision, in respect of the heirs of Line, are as Strangers, and may come
against their Predecessors Deeds in favors of his heirs of Line; as if any
person provide any Lands or Annualrents to his heirs Male, or of Tailzie, and
thereafter dispone the same to his heirs apparent of Line, his heirs Male, or
of Tailzie, will in several Cases not be obliged to fulfill that Provision; and
if such express Provisions be ineffectual to the heir of Line, it seems a
general taking a new Right in favors of heirs whatsoever should be less
effectual: But the difficulty is, how special heirs can be served heirs in such
Rights supervenient, conceived in favors of heirs whatsoever, which will be
loosed if the heirs special may be comprehended, and so served under the common
Title of heirs whatsoever. How far heirs of Tailzie or Provision may alter the
Tailzie of the Fee, or affect or burden the same, is largely considered, Title
13.. 58. which therefore needs not here be repeated.

13. The common Interest of heirs passive, is, that they are liable for their
Predecessors Debts, for they are repute in Law as one Person with their
Predecessors, and so represent them, not only active in their Estates and
Goods, but also passive in their Debts and Burdens, Quem sequuntur commoda
eundem and incommoda sequuntur; and this is common also to Executors as being
heirs in the Movables, but as the Executors succeed only in Moveable Rights
active, so they succeed only in Moveable Debts passive, yet the Creditor has
his option to pursue either, or both of them, whether the Debt be heretable or
moveable, and the heir has relief against the Executor, in so far as he is
distressed for Moveable Debts; so has the Executor releif against the heir of
the heretable Debts, March 7. 1629. Falconer contra Blair. Spots. Executors
Lord of Carnousie contra Meldrum. But heirs and Executors differ in this, that
the Executor is only liable secundum vires inventarli, according to the
Inventar of the confirmed Testament, unless he disorderly intromet with more;
but the heirs are liable in solidum, though the Debt far exceed the value of
the Estate.

Heirs are liable for their Predecessors Debts, but not all the same way:
First, Heirs portioners though jointly they be liable for their Predecessors
Debts in solidum, without benefit of Inventary; yet severally, each
Heir-portioner is regularly liable but pro rata part, though the proportion
whereunto they succeed be more then the whole Debt, February 7. 1632. Hoom
contra Hoom. Spots. Improbation Lord of Laars contra Dunbars, John Duncan and
the heirs of John Ogilvy.

14. Yet one Heir-portioner was found liable in solidum, as Successors in his
whole Estate by disposition post contractum debitum, though there were other
two Sisters, the one of whom being called, renounced, the Pursuer condescending
upon nothing, unto which she could Succeed; and the other having no means, but
being called passive, Feb. 15. 1634. Peter Orr contra Elizabeth (...): Neither
did it avail, that the other Sisters had received portions of money near to the
value of the Estate, by the Father in his Life, but Action of Relief was
reserved against them, as accords, March 21. 1634. Inter eosdem: The reason
thereof adduced, is, that the getting Portions in Money, could be no (...), and
so could not make the Receivers Lucrative Successors, (...) contractum debitum,
as the Disposition of the Lands does. Yea, an heir portioner being convened
without the other, was found liable in solidum, because the other was found not
solvendo, and had disponed all right to the Defender, January 29. 1642. Scot
contra Heart. But here the matter was but of small moment, and this was a doubt
in the first Decision, in this Case, if some of the heirs Portioners should be
insolvendo, whether or no recourse might be had, against them that were
solvendo, at the least, to the value of their proportion; which, though it seem
Equitable, and is favored by this last Decision, yet it is not decyded in the
former, neither have I observed it decided since, but in the pursuit, December.
23. 1665. at the instance of Dam Rachel Burnet, now Lady Preston contra Sisters
of her first husband: The Lords only discerned, against the heirs portioners,
pro rata, but with Reservation to the Pursuer, to Insist and Dispute her Right
against any of them, for more, if any of them proved insolvent: But it seems,
the Portion of the insolvent, would not reach the solvent, above the value of
their Succession. Because the only ground they could be liable on, for more
then their part would be in quantum lucrantur. For as heirs they could not be
liable in solidum, neither by our Law, nor the Civil Law. And if the Creditors
Taciturnitie, whereby the other heirs became insolvent did appear, it would
prejudge the silent Creditor, and not the heir, who did not know the debt, and
so could not prevent the others Dilapidation.

15. There is a case occurreth oft-times amongst heirs Portioners, when Several
Obligations, and Provisions are granted in their Favors by the Defunct,
whereby, after his Decease, they become mutual Debitors, and Creditors; and
sometimes these Provisions exceed the Estate, quid juris, whether do these
Obligations evanish, and become extinct confusione; because the same Persons
become Debitors and Creditors; or whether they do all stand, and in that Case,
whether the first in Order will be preferred, or, if they all will be abated
proportionally, to the value of the heritage. Thus Maitland observes, December
20. 1550. That a Father Infeft himself, and the heirs of the first Marriage,
and thereafter resigned, and Infeft himself, and the heirs Male of the second
Marriage, which failling his nearest heirs whatsomever, these heirs Male the
second Marriage failled: And therefore, not the Daughter of the first Marriage
only, but she, and the Daughters of a third Marriage Succeeded, by the second
Infeftment, as his heirs whatsomever, substitute to be his heirs of the second
Marriage. Craig has the Case, but otherways observed, lib. 2. dieg. 14. Where
a person had provided his Lands to the heirs of three several Marriages; of
each whereof there survived a Daughter: The question was, which of the
Daughters should succeed? Whether the first, as having the first Provision, or
the last having the last Provision: The parties were three Sisters, Aikmans. In
which the Lords admitted all the three Sisters as heirs Portioners, and so
confounded the Provisions, being all equal; and about the same thing, which
must be the Reason, and not that which is there rendered. Because the Defunct,
notwithstanding of these Provisions, in Favors of heirs might have Disponed
effectual, to a Stranger: And so likewise to his own Children of another
Marriage; For that Reason would have excluded the Daughters of the first
Marriage, and preferred the Daughter of the last Marriage. And as has been
shown, Tailzies of Provisions, upon an anticedent, onerous obligation; Such as
is Marriage, hinder the Fiar to dispone, or provide the same to his heirs of
Line, representing him simply, and must fulfill his Obliegment; Albeit his
Disposition to Strangers, not so representing him, will be effectual: And
therefore, Craig in that same place observes, in the case of Isobel Barron,
who being heir to her Father of his first Marriage, by which it was provided,
that the heirs of the Marriage should Succeed to all Lands conquest during the
Marriage: And thereafter, having a Son of the second Marriage, who was his
Fathers heir of Line, to whom his Father Disponed, or provided a Tenement
acquired, during the first Marriage; Yet the said Isobel, as heir of that
Marriage, recovered that Tenement from her Brother, as heir of Line. But the
main difficulty remains, when the obliegment in favors of the heirs
portioners are un-equal for when they are equal, whether they become extinct by
confusion, or not, it is alike: But if they be so extinct, when they are
un-equal, there will not be an equal suffering, or abatement; but the greatest
obliegment will be extinct, as well as the least: Neither can such obligations
be wholly extinct, by confusion, but only pro rata. So that if there be three
heirs Portioners, for example, the obliegment granted to every one of them, can
only be extinct for a thirdpart, because they are but heirs in a third part,
and as to two third parts, each two of them are debitors to the third: And if
the obligation exceed the value of the heritage, such of them as find
themselves losers, if they enter heirs, may abstain, and renounce, and they, or
their Assigneys, may pursue any of the rest that shall enter, for fulfilling of
the Defuncts obliegments, but if they be considerat, when all the obligations
jointly exceed the value of the Estate, they will all Renounce, and Assign
there obliegments, and their Assigneys will be preferred, according to their
dilignece, without consideration of the priority, or posteriority of the
obliegments; but if they happen to enter, or when their provisions are not
Personal to themselves, nominatim, but as they are heirs of Provision; and
therefore necessarily require, that they must be heirs, before they can obtain
their Provisions, then the obliegments or Provisions of each Portioner are
extinct, as to their own proportion; but they have like Action against the
others heirs portioners, for there proportion, as other Creditors have, the
point will be clear by example; if three Sisters were provided by the Father,
to un-equal Portions. The first to 15000. Merks, the second to 12000. Merks,
the third to 6000. Merks. and the Defuncts whole Estate, had only been worth
18000. Merks. All of them entering, the case would be thus: The eldest would
succeed to 6000. Merks of the heritage for her part, and the second would be
liable to her for 5000. Merks, as the third of the her provision, to whom she
would also be liable, for 4000. Merks, as the third of the seconds Provision,
which being compensed, the second would be liable to the first in an 1000.
Merks, dc claro. In like manner, the first would be liable to the third in
2000. Merks, and the third would be liable to the first, in 5000. Merks, which
being balanced, the third would be debtor de claro, to the first, in 3000.
Merks. So the Interest of the first would be 6000. Merks, as her own portion:
and one out of the Second, and Three out of the Thirds Portion, being in all a
10000. The second falls 6000. as her share, out of which she is liable in
1000. Merks, to the eldest and the youngest is due to her, de claro, 2000.
Merks, whereby her interest will be 7000. Merks, the youngest Portion will be
6000. Merks, out of which she is due to the eldest, 3000. Merks, and to the
second 2000. So there will remain only free to her 1000. Merks, This may clear
the case as to liquid Sums, and as to Dispositions, or Provisions of Lands, or
other obliegments in facto. These, or the Interest, or Value, will be the same
way effectual, amongst the Heirs Portioners, as if they had been made to
Strangers; Except, where the same Disposition, or Provision is made to diverse
of them: For then either being equally obliged to others, as representing the
Defunct, the same become void, and in-effectual, protanto. As was found in the
case of the Sisters Aikmans: But since the Act of Parliament 1621. against
fraudulent Dispositions, the first Disposition, or Provision, constituting,
that Party Creditor may give ground to Reduce a posterior Disposition of the
same thing, to another of the Heirs Portioners, as being without a Cause
onerous, after contractiong of the first debt, but that will not hold in Bands,
for Sums of Money, all which will have their effect, as is before said. Neither
will it hold, when the Provision of Lands, provideth the Party provided to be
Heir, for thereby the party cannot Quarrel that Predecessors Deed: Otherwise
the first Obliegment, or Disposition to any of the Heirs Portioners nominatim,
may Reduce any posterior Disposition to others, of the Heirs Portioners.

Two Daughters being served, both Heirs Portioners to their Father in some
Teinds, but one of them Succeeding to her Brother, who was Infeft as Heir to
his Father in Lands, excluding the other Sister, who was not Sister German to
her Brother, by both Bloods, and both being pursued for their Fathers Debt,
they were not found liable equally, but proportionally, according to the
Interest they Succeeded to; the one being only immediate Heir to her Father, in
a Right of Tiends, wherein her Brother was not served, and Infeft, the other
being equally, and Immediately Heir to her Father, in these Teinds, and
mediatly Heir to her Father, by being Heir to her Brother, who was Heir to his
Father, being Infeft in the Lands, by precept of Clare Constat, without
Service, June 10. 1673. Christian White contra Janet White.

16. Other heirs not being Heirs-portioners are liable for the Defuncts Debt in
solidum, except heirs substitute in Bands, who are only liable quoad valorem in
the sums in these Bonds, July 3. 1666. Fleeming contra Fleeming.

17. Heirs are not conveenable at the Creditors option, as in the case of heirs
and Executors, but they have the benefit of an order of discussing. Thus, first
Debts and Obliegments, relating to any particular Lands or Rights, and no
other, do in the first place affect the heirs who may succeed in these Lands or
Rights before the heir general: So an Obliegment oblieging the Defuncts heir of
Line or Tailzie, so soon as he should come to his Estate, was found to affect
the heir of Tailzie who came to that, Estate without discussing the heir of
Line, Hope de Haeredibus, Lion contra Sir Robert Scot. Nicol. de haereditariis
actionibus inter eosdem: So an Obliegment oblieging a Debtor and his heirs
Male succeeding in such an Estate and not all other heirs, was found to burden
the heir Male, before the heir of Line or Executors, July 22. 1662. Margaret
Anderson contra Andersons. So likewise, an Obliegment to infeft a Party in an
Annualrent out of Lands designed, was found to affect the heir of Provision in
these Lands, without discussing the heir of Line, Nicol ibid. Edmonstoun contra
Edmonstoun. This was also the opinion of the Lords, though there was no
decision in it, February 19. 1611. Lord of Blair contra Fairlie. And in these
Cases, the heir of Tailzie or Provision will have no Relief against the heir of
Line, or other nearer heirs of Blood, who otherwise, and also Executors, must
be discussed before heirs of Provision or Tailzie. General Obliegments not
relating to particular Lands, do, first, affect the heirs of Line, who are
heirs general. 2. The heirs of Conquest, July 21. 1630. Fairlie contra Fairlie.
3. Heirs Male must be discussed before heirs of Tailzie or Provision, not being
so near of Blood, Hope de haered. Dunbar contra Hay of Murkill. the like must
follow as to heirs of Marriages, who are also heirs of Blood, and must be
discussed before other heirs of Provision or Tailzie, who therefore are only
liable in the last place, the rest being discussed, unless they become obliged
to relieve the heir of Line, November 22. 1665. Lawrence Scot contra Boswel of
Auchinleck.

18. But an heir of Tailzie was not found to represent the Defunct in
Obligations contrary to the terms of the Tailzie, as to which, heirs of Tailzie
are as Creditors and Strangers; as when the security of a Sum was by way of
Tailzie payable to the Creditor and the heirs of his Body, which failing, to a
Person named, his heirs and Assigneys whatsoever, the Creditor being obliged
to do no Deed hurtful to the Tailzie; and the Debtor obliged not to pay
without the consent of the Person named, that Person was found to have Interest
to obtain Declarator that the sum was unwarrantably paid by the Debtor,
without his consent or order of Law, by consigning it to be employed in the
same terms, and therefore, the Debtor was ordained to make up the Security
again as at first, reserving to Creditors how far they could affect this Sum
for the first Fiars Debt; or whether the terms of the Tailzie would exclude the
Fiars Debts or Deeds for his necessary use, or only unnecessary and voluntary
Deeds, Feb. 3 1674, Drummond contra Drummond. And in like manner, a Father
having granted two Bonds of Provision to his two Daughters payable to them and
the heirs of their Body, which failing, to return to the Father and his heirs,
the one of them having died without heirs of her Body, but having assigned her
Bond to her Sister, the Assignation was found ineffectual, as being done on
design to disappoint the Tailzie made by the Father of the return of the
Provision, in case the Daughters had no Heirs of their Bodies, and so was done
without any onerous Cause or just Consideration, January 31. 1679. Jean
Drummond contra Drummond of Rickertoun.

19. And likewise heirs of Marriage are heirs of Provision, and partly
Creditors, and therefore may quarrel Deeds fraudulent, or merely gratuitous,
done by the Defunct whom they represent in prejudice of their Provisions, as
was found in the forementioned Case of Isobel Baron, observed by Craig, who
being heir of a Marriage, to whom all Lands conquest during the Marriage were
provided, the Father having disponed a Tenement acquired during that Marriage
to his eldest Son by another Marriage, yet that heir of the Marriage did
recover the same from that Son, albeit the heir of the Marriage did represent
her Father, and yet not simply, but according to the provision by the Contract
of Marriage, which being an onerous Contract, uberrimae fidei, the Father
Contracter can do no Deed contrary thereto, but upon an onerous Cause or just
Consideration; and therefore, if he sell any thing falling within such
Provisions, the heir of Provision cannot quarrel that Stranger, but is obliged
to fulfill to him, but might quarrel the same, if it were merely gratuitous,
much more might heirs of a Marriage quarrel Deeds prejudicial to their
Provision in favors of the Children of other Marriages, without which, the
great trust of these Contracts would be eluded, whereupon Parties rely and make
Matches and give Tochers; and therefore take Provisions to the heirs of the
Marriage, either of definite Sums, or of all, or a part that the Contracters
have, or shall acquire during the Marriage, by which, the whole Estates of
Citizens are ordinarily conveyed; or otherwise, Contracts of Marriage bear
particular Lands, or Sums to be provided to the heirs or Bairns of the
Marriage, and also the conquest during the Marriage, which clause of Conquest
will reach only to what the Father had more at his Death then the time of the
Contract, and is ordinary both in the Contracts of Citizens and others, which
therefore should not be elusory, but effectual, according to the true meaning
of the Parties, which is not to bind up the Father that he cannot do Deeds for
Causes onerous, or rational Considerations, but that he can do no other Deeds
merely gratuitous and arbitrary in prejudice of such Provisions: for though by
such Provisions when fulfilled, he himself must become Fiar, and so may
dispone, yet he is also Debtor, and so cannot effectually dispone against the
import and meaning of the Provision: And therefore, a Father by his Contract of
Marriage having provided certain Tenements to himself, and his future Spouse in
Conjunct-fee, and to the Bairns of the Marriage, etc. and the Wife having
restricted her self to the half of the Liferent of these Tenements, after which
the Father having Infeft her of new in that half, the said last Infeftment was
found reducible at the instance of the Bairns, as heirs of the Marriage, and
that they were not obliged to fulfill their Fathers Deed in favors of their
Mother, who was competently provided, in respect the same was contrary the
provision in the Contract of Marriage, July 10. 1677. Carnagie and Clark contra
Smith and Baird. Yea, a Father by his Contract of Marriage having provided a
definite Sum to the eldest heir Female of the Marriage, and thereafter having
disponed his Estate to her, she marrying a Person that would assume his Name
and Arms, wherein if she failzied, providing the same to his second Daughter
upon the same terms, etc. the said eldest Daughter having married suteably
before she knew that Disposition, and her husband refusing to take her Name,
she was found to have Right to take her to her Portion by her Mothers Contract,
and so the Right of her Fathers Estate was divolved to her second Sister, upon
the terms therein contained, who was found liable to pay the Provision to her
eldest Sister, contained in her Mothers Contract, July 26. 1677. John Stevinson
contra Marion Stevinson. But these Provisions do not hinder just and rational
Deeds of the Father, as providing a Jointure for a posterior Wife, as was found
in the Case of Katharine Mitchel contra the heirs of Thomas (...), June 16.
1676. Nor will they hinder Fathers to provide Children of an other Marriage
with competent Provisions according to his condition, though thereby the
conquest during the Marriage will be affected; Yea, where in a Contract of
Marriage, the Husbands present Means, and the Wifes Tocher, were provided to be
employed for the Man and Wife in Liferent, whilks failing, the one half to the
Man's heir, and the other half to the Woman's heir. There being no Bairns of the
Marriage, the Husband was not found liable to employ that Sum, and the conquest
in favors of himself and the Wifes heirs, but that he might employ the whole
in favors of the Child he had by a posterior Marriage, December 21. 1680.
Bailiff Anderson contra Andrew Bruce.

20. The exception that all Parties having Interest are not called, will be
sufficient to sist Process against such Heirs as have the benefit of
discussion, without necessity to condescend or instruct any Right they may
succeed to, January 24. 1667. Lord of Luss and Glendening contra Earl of
Nithsdale.

21. But the exception of the order of discussing will not be sustained, unless
the Defender condescend on, and clear an Heritage, to which the anterior heir
may succeed, which being a Dilator, must be instantly verified, as where it is
notour; and where that cannot be, sometimes Process will be sustained against
both heirs of Line and of Tailzie together, superceding Execution against the
heirs Male or of Tailzie, till the heir of Line were discussed, July 13. 1626.
Edgar contra Heirs of Craigmiller. And heirs of Line and Provision being
pursued jointly, the heir of Line renouncing, was assoilied and Protestation
admitted for Adjudication against the heir of Line, which the Pursuer was
ordained to assign to the heir of Provision, and was not found obliged further
to discuss the heir of Line, or to put him to his Oath upon any other passive
Title, seeing the heir of Provision required not the same, when the heir of Line
renounced, nor show any visible Estate which might befall to the heir of Line,
June 22. 1678. Thomas Crawford contra the heirs of the Lord of Rater. The
question is here, what is meaned by discussing, which is not understood by that
heirs renouncing to be heir? July 26. 1622. Cowan contra Murray, but in that
Case the renounced Heritage must be adjudged. Discussing therefore, is by
Horning, Caption, and Apprising, March 22. 1627. Edgar contra Heirs of
Craigmiller; or otherwise by Adjudication, in case the heirs renounce, by
alleging his behaving as heir, was found in the foresaid Case, Cleghorn contra
Fairlie. This passive succession of heirs in their Predecessors Debts and
Obliegments, making them personally liable thereto, befalls in three Cases.
First, When the Heir is entered heir. 2. When he is not entered, but immixeth
himself by meddling himself as heir, or becoming lucrative Successor, after the
Debt contracted. 3. When the Heir is lawfully charged to enter Heir, though he
has neither entered nor meddled, if he do not renounce, he is personally
obliged; and if he do renounce, his Person and proper Estate is free, and only
the Heretage is liable, and the Creditor has Action contra haereditatem
jacentem. The first Case is most ordinary and orderly, the second infers the
vicious passive Titles, Gestionem pro haerede, or Preceptionem haereditatis: of
which in the ensuing Titles. Let us here consider, first, the Charge to enter
Heir, which is antecedent to the Entry; and then the Entry of Heirs it self.

22. The Charge to enter Heir, is founded upon the Act of Parliament, 1540.
cap. 106. and it is of two kinds; a general Charge, and a special Charge: The
general Charge to enter Heir proceeds thus; the Creditor, upon Supplication,
without Citation, obtains from the Lords of Course, Letters passing under the
Signet, to charge the Party complained upon to enter heir, to the Compleaners
Defunct Debtor, within 40 days after the execution of the Charge, with
Certification if he enter not, such Process will be granted against him, as if
he were actually entered Heir: The reason of this Charge with us, is, because
Heirs are not liable passive, if they enter not, nor immix themselves in the
Heretage; and therefore, that the Creditor may not ly out beyond the Year and
Day granted to Heirs to deliberate, the Law has introduced this remeid, that
the Creditor may charge the Debitors appearand Heir to enter, whereupon he has
personal Action against him, if he renounce not, and thereupon may reach not
only his Heretage, but his own proper Goods belonging to him aliunde; and if he
renounce, he has Action contra haereditatem jacentem.

The general Charge to enter Heir, may be execute against the appearand Heir,
after the Defuncts death, even within the annus deliberandi; but the Summonds
thereupon, must be after the Year and day expired, not only from the Defuncts
death, but from the Heirs (...), if he be posthumus, Spots. Heirs of Livingston
contra Fullertoun; and therefore a Summonds execute after Year and Day expired,
upon a Charge to enter Heir within the Year, was sustained, June 19. 1628.
David Maculloch contra Marshal and Reid. July 10. 1610. Neil Montgomery eontra
Lord of Langshaw. There is also an Act of Sedorunt in Anno 1613. allowing
general Charges to enter Heir within the Year and Day, or within the days of
the Charge, if the Heir renounce and omit that Defense, the Decree Cognitionis
causa, and Adjudication thereupon, werefound valid, and that alledgance
proponed by another Creditor, was repelled; because it was free to the Heir as
well to renounce when he pleased, as to enter when he pleased, July 10. 1631.
Blair contra Broun; but it is like the posterior Creditor has been negligent,
otherwise that prae natura diligentia of pursuing and renouncing within the
Year, would have been accounted collusive and fraudulent, and so would not
prejudge the other Creditor doing diligence in the ordinary way.

General charges to enter Heir, do evanish as incomplete diligences, if the
Party charged die before Litiscontestation or Sentence; and though the forty
days be expired before the death of the Party charged, yet the Charge uses not
to be transferred or made use of against any subsequent Heir apparent, but it
is not consequent that if the Charger die before Litiscontestation or Sentence,
that the same should also become void, because the Charger does not necessitate
the Party charged to enter or renounce in favors of the Chargers heirs, but of
himself. And it was found, that an Assigny might insist upon a Charge at the
Cedents instance, after the Cedents death, though nothing followed thereupon
during his life, June 18. 1631. Prior of Archattan concra Captain of
Clanronnald.

23. A special Charge to enter Heir, differs from the general Charge in this,
That the general Charge is in lieu of the general Service: for thereby the
Creditor reaches the Person of the apparent heir of his Debtor, and his
Estate or Goods established in his person, unless he renounce: and so the
general Charge is the ground of Process and Decree for Payment. But thereby
the Creditor cannot reach the Lands and Annualrents, which are not as yet
established in the Person of the apparent heir, he not being specially served
thereto, or infeft therein. And therefore, that the Creditor may reach these,
he must use a special Charge, which supplieth the special Service and Eutry.

This special Charge, though it proceeds upon Supplication without Citation,
yet it must be upon production of a Decree at the Creditors instance, not only
cognitionis causa, but for performance. And it is competent in two Cases:
First, upon the proper Debt of the Party to be charged. For if the Debtor be
unentered to some of his Predecessors, and so their Rights not established in
his Person; in that Case the Creditor must charge his own Debtor specially to
enter heir in the Rights competent to him by that Predecessor, with
certification if he enter not, the Creditor shall have such Process and
Execution against that Land and heretage to which he might enter, as if he were
actually entered therein: whereupon Apprising does proceed. In this Case there
is no necessity of an antecedent general Charge, which only is used to the
effect that the Debt may be established in the Person of the Debitors apparent
heir passive, by a Decree upon the general Charge. The other Case is, when the
Debt is not the proper Debt of the Party charged, but of some Predecessor to
whom he may be heir: in which Case the Debt must first be (...) against him
passive, and then follows the special Charge. In this Case the special Charge
cannot be till after Year and day, because it presupposes not only the
Summons, but also the Sentence upon the general Charge, both which must be
after Year and Day. When the Debt is the proper Debt of the Party charged, if
the special Charge may not be at any time, even within Year and Day, or if it
must be after the annus deliberandi? This makes for the Negative, That it needs
not abide the Year of Deliberation, because the intent of the Deliberation, is
not so much whether the Party charged will be heir, as whether he will
personally subject himself to the ground of that Charge, For albeit he renounce
not, it will not make him liable to any of the Defuncts Debts, except it be by
his fraud and collusion with one Creditor in prejudice of another. And
therefore seeing he cannot deliberate, whether he will be subject to his own
Debt, he ought not to have the benefit ofYear and Day before the special
Charge be effectual. Yet before the late Act preferring the diligence of the
Defuncts Creditors to the heirs proper Creditors, there was no reason to allow
special Charges for the apparent heirs own Debt, but more summar Execution than
other Charges so to prefer the apparent heirs proper Creditors to be Heir.

The Act of Parliament, which is the ground of the Charge to enter Heir, and is
only the rise of the special Charge, insinuates an Exception, if the heir be
major: But the custom of the Lords has introduced the general Charge to
constitute the Debt, and allows both Charges against minors.

There is no necessity either of a general or special Charge, as to real
Actions, which may proceed against apparent heirs; as poynding of the Ground,
January 2. 1667. Oliphant contra Hamilton. Neither in Declarators or Reductions.

24. The remedy against both Charges to be heir, is a Renounciation to be heir,
whereby the Renouncers Person and his proper Estate, will not be liable for his
Predecessors Debt, but only his Predecessors heretage. This Renounciation uses
to be offered by way of Exception in the Process upon the general Charge: and
if the Defender be not absent, it is not ordinarily admitted by Suspension,
except in favor of Minors: who though being apparent heirs they take a day to
Renounce and fail therein, yet they will be restored against the same by
Suspension, without Reduction, January 25. 1628. Kennedy contra Mackdougal.
Spots. Minors, Nisbet contra Nisbet. But if the Minority were controverse, and
not instantly verefied, it must be by Reduction, Spots. Minors, Mr. Thomas
Craig Advocat contra Cockburn.

Renounciation to be Heir, was admitted rebus integris, though the Decree and
Charge were six years before, July 20. 1626. Harvie contra Baron. Yea it was
admitted, though there was an Adjudication, and the Decree supsended, which
was declared to stand, and the apparent heirs Person and proper Estate were
only freed. Spots. Restitution in integrim, John Oliphant contra Mr. William
Blackburn. A Renounciation to be heir was not admitted with this quality,
Excepting to the Renouncer certain Lands whereinto he was appointed to be
infeft by his Fathers Contract of Marriage, and whereupon Inhibition was used
before contracting of the Chargers Debt, to the effect he might enter heir to
those Lands, January 23. 1627. Lady Ogilvy contra Lord Ogilvy. But in the like
Case, Hope Inhibition, Donald Thorntoun contra Bailzie, June 15. 1615. and the
like, November 30. 1620. Adamson contra Hamiltoun, the apparent heir was
suffered to renounce to be heir to his Goodsire, except as to those Lands which
his Goodsire had disponed to his Father in his Contract of Marriage, whereupon
Inhibition was used: which the Lords found a singular Title consistent with a
Renounciation of the heretage ex titulo universali.

The Exception upon Renounciation to be heir, is elided, If the Defuncts Estate
be burdened with the heirs proper Debt: whichis taken off by the duply of
purging the same: as appears in the Decisions before adduced. The said
Exception is also elided by the Reply, As behaving as heir, albeit the same
were libelled as a several passive Title, March 18. 1631. Reguel Bennet contra
Bennet.

25. The Entry of Heirs, is either of heirs general, or heirs special. The
former requires only a general Service, which is necessary to all heirs, except
heirs in Tacks, Pensions, and heirs nominatim, immediately substitute in Bands.
But heirs of Tailzie or Provision must be served, that it may appear that the
heirs to whom they are substitute are failed. And therefore the only Child of a
Marriage was found to have no title to pursue Implement of the Contract of
Marriage, till he was served heir of the Marriage, July 21. 1676. Hay of
Drumelzier contra Earl of Tweeddale. The general proceeds thus, a Brieve is
taken out of the Chancery of course, without Citation or Supplication, for
serving such a Person nearest and lawful heir to such a Defunct. It may be
directed to any Judge ordinar at the Parties option, albeit the Defunct nor the
heir never lived within that Jurisdiction, March 6. 1630. the Lord of Caskiben
Supplicant.

The Lords may in Cases where an ancient or important Service is required,
choose the Judge most fitting for the Affair. And when Brieves pass of course,
they are obtained to any Judge desired. But they are easily Advocat, and
remitted to the Macers, with Assessors in cases of difficulty.

The tenor of the Brieve, is by way of Precept from the King to the Judge, To
enquire per probos and fideles homines patriae, That such a Person died at the
Faith and Peace of our Sovereign Lord: And that the user of the Brieve, is the
nearest and lawful heir. So this Brieve, has only these two heads. And thus
not only Heirs of Line may be served generally, but also Heirs of Conquest,
being to Succeed to Reversions, heretable Bonds, or the like Rights, not having
an Infeftment, or requiring a special Service: Hope Succession, Earl of
Dumbar's Heirs. And no doubt, Heirs Male may be served generally, that they may
succeed to the like Rights which may be conceived in their Favor, and
whereunto they can have no other Access. And for the same reason, Heirs of a
Marriage may also be served, and Heirs of Provision in Bands.

General Services, use to be included in special Services, as Members thereof;
and a Retour to an Annual-rent, bearing to be granted to Heirs whatsoever, and
that the persons retoured Heirs in the said Annual-rent, was found to instruct
him general heir, though it did not bear per expressum, that he was heir
generally, but only in that Annualrent: Feb. 9. 1676. Ricartoun Drumniond
contra Stirling of Airdoch.

The general Service of Heirs being retour'd, does so establish Rights not
having Infeftment (as Dispositions, Heretable Bonds, Reversions, Apprisings,
and Adjudications) in the Person of the heir served, as that no posterior heirs
can have Right thereto, unless they be served heirs to the Person last served
heir, though the Right stood in the name of the firstAcquirer, and not ofthe
last heir, as an heretable Bond or Reversion remaining in the name of aFather,
to whom his eldest Son was served heir generally, who dying without Issue, the
second Brother must be served heir to his Brother, and not to his Father
therein: as was thought by all the Lords after dispute in praesentia, albeit
the matter was agreed without decision. Spots. Heirs, Captain Peter Rollo
contra Stewart of (...). The reason is, because the general Service is a
compleatestablishing of the Right in the Person of the heir: and therefore as
in special Services the heir is served to him who died last vest and seized as
ofFee, whereby that Right is established; so in the general Service, the heir
must be served to him in whose Person the Right stood last. And though in
special Services, the heir cannot be served to him who is last served special
heir, unless he had been also Infeft: the reason thereof is, because the
special Service as an incomplete Right evanisheth, and the next apparent heir
must be served again to the same Defunct, but it is not so in general Services.

26. The Entry of Heirs to Lands or Annualrents, the Fee whereof is by
Infeftment is either by consent of the Superior voluntarly, or by Law. The
former is by the Superiors Precept, which from the initial words thereof, Quia
mihi clare constat, etc. is called a Precept of Clare constat, by which the
Superior acknowledges, that the Defunct died last vest and seized in such
Lands or Annualrents, and that the same are holden of him by such a Tenor, and
that the obtainer of the Precept is nearest and lawful Heir to him in the said
Lands, etc. and that he is of lawful Age for entering thereto. And therefore
commands his Bailiff to Infeft him therein. Infeftment being past accordingly,
gives that Party the real Right of Lands or Annualrents if done by the light
Superior. It does also constitute the receiver thereof Heir passive, and makes
him liable to his Predecessors Debts: but it will not constitute or instruct
him Heir active, or give him an active Title to pursue as Heir. Yea it will not
be a sufficient title as to the real Right of the Ground against any other
Party, than those who acknowledge the Giver thereof to be Superior, and the
Receiver to be Heir. For if upon any other colorable Title, they question any
of these, the Infeftment and precept of Clare Constat will not be sufficient
alone, unless it have obtained the benefit of a Possessory Judgment or
Prescription.

27. Like unto this is the entry of Heirs, within Burgh Royal, by Hespand
Staple, according to the Custom of Burgh, which is instructed by the Instrument
of Seasing only, without other adminicles, November 13. 1623. Mershall contra
Mershal, July penult. 1629. Wilson contra Stewart. In which case, though a
Seasing by Hesp and Staple, was sustained to instruct an Heir active: yet it
was only because this pursuer had been proven Heir passive the eby, at the
instance of that Defender.

28. The securest Entry of Heirs specially, in Lands or Annalrents, is by Law.
The procedor whereof is in this manner: Any Person may summarely (...) a
Brieve, out of the Chancerie, in the same manner, as the general (...) which is
directed by way of Precept from the King, or Lord of the Regality, having
Chapel and Chancelarie; whereby the Judge to whom it is directed, is ordained,
by an Inquest upon oath, to enquire, Who died last Vest and Seized, as of Fee
in such Lands, or Annualrents: And if at the Faith and Peace of our Sovereign
Lord, and Who is his nearest and lawful Heir therein, Of whom it is holden in
Chief, By what Service, and What the Value of it is, now, and in time of Peace;
And if the said Heir be of lawful Age, In whose hands the same now is, From
what time, How, By what Service, By whom, and through what cause. It is
needless to be Curious concerning the number of the heads of this Brieve, some
parts thereof not being distinct, but explicatory of the former.

29. These Brieves are accordingly direct to the Judges ordinary, where the
Land, or Annualrent lies, as to Sheriffs, Bailiffs of Royalty, or Regality, or
Bailiffs of Burghs-royal. But if there be just exception, against the Judge
ordinary of the place, or if the Lands, or Annualrents lie in diverse
Jurisdictions, and so be represented; Warrant will be granted, upon
Supplication to the Lords, that the Director of the Chancerie, issue Brieves to
other Persons: and frequently, in the case of diverse Jurisdictions, they are
directed to the Macers.

30. By Virtue of this Brieve, the Judge ordinary, or Delegat, to whom they are
direct, cites Persons to be members of inquest, upon 15. days: And (...) the
Brieves at they Market Cross, unless they be Served at the (...) Court, when
all the Freeholders are obliged to be present, and then the Brieve may be
served, without further delay, conform to the Act of Parliament 1429. cap. 27.
and Par. 1503. cap. 94. where it is left arbitrary, to summon the Inquest on
what days the Judge server of the Brieve pleases: or presently, if they be
Persons of Inquest present in the Tolbooth, un-summoned. But in all cases, the
Brieves must be proclaimed publicly, at the Market Cross, in plain Market,
where most confluence of people is gathered, so as it may come to the knowledge
of the party, before whom it should be served. And then, that the said Brieve
be thrice cried, plainly together: which is by three several Oyesses, with a
loud and audible Voice, before the reading of the Brieve, and the Sheriffs
Precept thereupon: and each Oyes to be at as great distance from other, as the
time required to give the said Oyes, thrice: and that the Officers of the Town
be present. But if the Brieve come to be served so near Whitsunday, or
Martinmass, that there does not intervene a Market day, the Brieves may be
proclaimed upon any week day; the Officers and six. others of the Town being
present: Yet, either the day of Compearance, or the day of Citation is
numbered, as one of the fifteen. July 27. 1626. Mackculluch contra Mackculloch.

There is no necessity to Summon any Defender: in lieu whereof, is the
publication of the Brieve, by Proclamation at the Market Cross. Yet upon the
Supplication of the party interessed, Warrant was granted by the Lords, to the
Director of the Chancerie, that no Brieves should be issued for serving Heirs
to such a Defunct, unless they contained a Clause to cite the Supplicant, who
was Donatar to the Defunct's Bastardrie, Spots. de haereditarijs actionibus,
Mackculloch contra Lord of Martoun.

31. The Inquest being called, consists ordainarly of 15. Persons: against
whom, like Exceptions are competent, as against Witnesses. And though Craig,
lib. 2. dieg. 17. regrateth, that any person is admitted to be one of the
Inquest, whose Rent exceeds not 40. lib. though they be not pares curiae, nor
Con-vassalls with the party to be served, neither of the vicinity, or
Neighborhood, contrary to the Intent and Ancient Custom of these Services:
Yet he acknowledges, that it was so ordainarly, especially in the Service of
Noblemen: and Custom has containued the same hitherto. But those of the
Neighborhood were fittest: because, as Craig observes in that place,
Inquests are in the middle, betwixt Judges and Witnesses, partaking part of
them both for two, or more of them, of their proper Knowledge, will be
sufficient for Witnesses, in the matter of fact; and upon their declaration,
all the rest will Serve affirmative, without any other Testimony. And it is
like they have been of old, sole Judges in Brieves, the Judge ordinary, having
no more power, but to call and order them. And they are yet with the Judge
ordinary, or Delegat, as Judges: for they must serve, and do sometimes seal the
Service with him.

32. The Inquest being settled, the Heir apparent gives in his Claim, craving
to be served Heir to his Predecessor, in such Lands, or Annualrents: and
therewith the Brieve and Executions thereof, together with the instructions of
the same.

33. The Brieve and Claim are as a Libel; against which, any party compearing,
and found to have Interest, may propone their Exceptions; which are many more
than those, contained in the said last Act of Par. 1503. cap. 94. And first
against the Executions, as being blotted in the date, or other Substantials,
and so null; which thereby may not be mended, as other Executions: as the Name,
and Surname of the Followers, and of the Defender; the name of the Land, and
Cause upon which the Brieve was purchased. Which was found, not only to extend
to the blotting of the Brieve, but to the Executions thereof. July 27. 1623.
Mackculloch contra Martoun. Or as not proclaimed upon fifeen days, which also
will be relevant, by way of Reduction. Or that the Defunct was Bastard, and had
no lawful Issue. Or, that the pursuer of the Brieve is Bastard, and so
incapable of Succession: wherein, if the proponer be more special, and
pregnant, than the apparent Heir, in his alledgence of being nearest and lawful
Heir; he will be preferred. Exceptions also are Competent, as to the point of
Right, by proponing, and instructing, that the Defunct was denuded of the Fee:
but Exceptions upon parallel Rights, that the Defunct had not a good Right, are
not competent here. And also Exceptions upon the age of the apparent Heir, or
his being forefault, or Rebel, etc. are here competent: and likewise Objections
and Debates, upon Instructions and Writs adduced for proving of the Claim and
Head of the Brieve. In which cases, if there appear difficulty, or intricacie;
the Lords upon supplication, will constitute Assessors or grant Advocation of
the Service: and after discussing of the points in jure, will remit the same.
either to the same, or to other Judges delegat. But no Objection or Exception
will be admitted, unless it be instantly verified; because this Brieve is no
Brieve of Plea, Par. 1503. cap. 94. and therefore cannot admit of terms to
prove Exceptions.

34. The Debates upon the Brieve being discussed, the Pursuer thereof must
prove, and instruct sufficiently the Heads of the same. As first, that the
Defunct died last vest and seized, as of Fee, at the faith and peace of our
Sovereign Lord: which comprehends, first, the Death of the Defunct, which is
ordainarly proven by the Knowledge of the members, Notorietie, or common Fame,
without necessity to instruct the same, by ocular Witnesses who saw the Defnnct
die, or buried. But in case of the Defunct's Death out of the Country, or if
it be dubious or controverse; the testimony of Witnesses, or proper knowledge
of two, at least, of the Inquest, or Testificats from abroad, especially from
the Magistrates of the Place where the Defunct died, or was buried, are
requisite: or common Fame, as to Persons who perish, or are killed.

The second point of this Head is, that the Defunct died, last vest and Seized
as ofFee: which must be instructed, by production of theInfeftment, specially
the Instfrument of Seizing, and warrant thereof or ground of the same: For
though in antiquis the very Precept cannot be shown, yet the Charter, or
Disposition willbe a sufficientAdminicle, to corroberat thisSeising, that it be
not accounted only as the assertion of a Natar: Yea, there is no doubt, but
since the Act of Prescription, consequent Seisings having the Course of forty
Years, may instruct this point: being sufficient even in the case of
Competition, which is much exacter than this. And Spotswood observes upon
Retours, that in Anno 1547. a negativeService was reduced, upon production of a
Transumpt of theDefuncts Seizing, out of a Protocol transumed before a
Comissar, with a Decree against the Superior; bearing, to have confessed, that
he had infeft the Defunct. But here the instructing the Defunct's being once
infeft, will infer a Presumption, that he so continued, and so died Infeft:
unless the contrary be proven, that he was denuded.

The third point in this Head, That the Defunct died at the Faith and peace of
our Sovereign Lord, is also presumed: quia quod inesse debet (...). And
therefore needs no other Probation, but lays the burden of Probation upon
theAlledger in the contrary, viz. That the Defunct died Rebel, or that he was
Forfaulted, or his Blood attiainted: which may be elided, by the Replies of
Relaxation, Dispensation, or Restitution. But there uses small notice to be
taken of Rebellion upon civil Debts: but only open Rebellion of War, or upon
Treasonable Causes, whereupon the Defunct was declared Fugitve; which makes the
Defunct, as to this point, not to die at the Faith of our Soveraing Lord.
November 21. 1626. Seatoun Supplicant.

35. The second Head of the Brieve, is, That the Pursuer is nearest and lawful
Heir to the Defunct in these Lands. Which resolves in two points: First, that
the Fee was provided to such Heirs, as are contained in the Claim, whether they
be Heirs of Line, or of Conquest, Heirs Portioners, Heirs of Marriage, Heirs
Male, or of Tailzie and Provision. And this can only be instructed by the
Defunct's Infeftment, and other ancient Evidents where in dutio, the
Presumption is always for the Heir of Line. So that if it be not sufficiently
instructed, that the Fee was provided to special Heirs, it will belong to the
Heirs general, of Line, or Conquest according to Law: as if it be instructed by
three consequent Seisings, which ordinarily do not express the the several Kinds
of Heirs.

The other point of this Head is, That the Pursuer of the Brieve is nearest
lawful Heir: which sometimes also is instructed by the Infeftment. As when the
Person to be served, is a Member of Tailzie nominat: as if the Infeftment bear
Land, or Annualrents, to be granted to the Feer, and to the Heirs of his Body;
which failling to George his Brother, etc. George pursuing a special Service,
needs no further instruction: because, That he is George, the Defuncts Brother,
passes without probation as Notorium. But ordinarily the Propinquity of Blood
must be proven to the Feer, who died last infeft, or to some member of Tailzie
substitute. For proving whereof, the Relation must be particularly condescended
on, according to the Line of Succession, mentioned in the former Title, as that
the Pursuer is the Defunct's eldest Son, or the eldest lawful Son of that Son;
or that they are the Daughters of that Son, etc. or the lawful Daughters of the
Defunct, etc. And it will not be sufficient to instruct, or serve the Pursuer
nearest lawful Heir, without condescending. Here also the propinquity of Blood,
being condescended on, and proven; it is sufficient, in whatsoever Degree can
be proven, though it were beyond the tenthDegree. Yea, any Degree being
presumed to be the nearest Degree, unless a nearer Degree be instructed; for it
resolves in this Negative, that there is no other nearer Degree; which as other
Negatives, proves it self. And that thePursuer is not only nearest Heir,
according to Lineal Succession, by Course of Law; but that he, nor none of the
Intervenient Blood were Bastards, or unlawful Children, (which is instructed
sufficiently by common Fame, or being so holden and repute, in the
Intermediates) it will be sufficient, that nothing is known to the Inquest, on
the contrary, unless Bastardrie be on the other part alleged, and instructed.
This propinquity of Blood is proven, either by Writ, or by Retours,
Infeftments, or Designations, or Acknowledgments of the Feer for the time,
bearing such a Person to be of such a Degree, or Relation to him. And in
antiquis, Writs bearing such Designation and Acknowledgment, even by others of
Fame, will be sufficient. For there is not equal evidence of Fame required in
all Cases. And therefore, when the Fee is to fall Caduciarie, and to cease from
the Feer's proper Blood, less probation will serve, than when the Competition
is betwixt diverse Persons of the same Blood; or at least members of the same
Tailzie: amongst whom the pregnantest probation will take place. So the Service
and Retour of the Earl of Airth, then designed Earl of Strathern, was reduced;
because the propinquity of Blood not sufficiently instructed: which could not
be known by the Inquest, or was Witnesses, the progress thereof being far past
memory of man; and Hearsay, or common Fame was not found sufficient. Neither
were the Writs produced sufficient to prove the said Earls Propinquity of Blood
to David Earl of Strathern, Son to King Robert the second, or to Eupham, only
Daughter to the said David, and Patrick Graham her Spouse: which progress not
being sufficiently instructed, the Right remained with the King, as the
unquestionable Descendent of the said King Robert the third, and so Heir of his
Brother, the said David Earl of Strathern So that no other lawful Issue, being
proven of the said David's own Body, nor of any other nearer Brother; all his
Right remained with the King, as descending from King Robert the third, who was
Brother to the said David Earl of Strathern. March 22: 1633. The King contra
the Earl of Strathern. There is another Exception against this Head, That the
pursuer has slain his Father, Mother, Good-sire, Grandsire, etc. whereby he,
and all his Issue are excluded from the Heritage of the Party slain, if he be
convict thereof by an Assyse and the next Agnat may be served. Par. 1594. cap.
220. Which was not sustained, where the Slayer was only declared Eugitive, for
not appearing to underly the Law, in a Dittay for Slaying his Mother. Feb. 3.
1674. Mr. George Oliphant contra Oliphant.

36. The third Head of the Brieve is, Of whom the Fee is holden in Chief, or
who is immediate lawful Superior thereof: and this also be instructed by the
Infeftments: whereby the Giver of the last Infeftment will also be presumed to
continue Superior, and the Inquest will serve accordingly; unless another
Superior be instructed, or acknowledged by the Pursuer. Which acknowledgment,
in respect of the Pursuer's hazard of Disclamation, and that the subsequent
Superior's Rights are in his own hand, and he cannot be prejudged by the
Service; therefore that point will be so served Periculo petentis.

37. The fourth Head of the Brieve is, By what Service the Fee is holden,
whether it be Ward, Blench, Feu or Burgage; which also must be instructed by
the Evidents. And if nothing else appear, the Fee is presumed to be Ward,
because that only is the proper Fee, and the others are improper, declyning
from the nature of Fees: and therefore are not presumed, but must be proven:
And as Craig observes, lib. 2. dieg. 17. It will not instruct the Fee not to be
Ward, though it contain a particular Reddendo, of a Cane or Duty; yea, though
it bear pro omni alio servitio and questione seculari: unless it express the
said Reddendo to be in name of Blench Duty, or in name of FeuDutie; So an
Infeftment, bearing a particular Duty payable at Whitsunday, and Martinmass
yearly, cum servitiis in curiis nostris debitis and consuetis; was found to be
a Ward Holding. Hope de Feudi Renovatione Williamson contra Thomson: And an
Infeftment bearing sex denarios nomine canae, with a Taxed Marriage, was found
Ward. Feb. 7. 1610. As was resolved by Oliphant the King's Advocat, in a
Consultation with the Bishop of St. Andrews, for entering the Lord Lindsay to
the Lands of Struthers.

38. The fifth Head is, The Value of the Fee now, and in time of peace. The
reason of inserting of this Article, is, because there is due to the Superior a
years Rent of the Fee, for the entire of the Heir, which is called the Relief:
of which formerly, Title Superiority. And that it might be constant, and
liquidat, there was a general Valuation of the whole Kingdom, which is called
the old Retour, or old Extent. Thereafter there was a second Retour, called the
new Retour, or Extent; whereby the new Retour of some Shires was made the
Triple, and some the Quadruple of the old; Yea, different new Retours were in
the same Shyre, but there is no new Retours in Southern Shires, upon the
Border, which were frequently wasted with War, and little addition in the
Northern Shyres. So the meaning of the Article is, what the Fee is worth now,
that is, what the new Retour, or Extent thereof is, and what it was worth in
the time of Peace, or what is the old Extent thereof. Craig declares, he could
never find clear satisfaction in the reason of these expressions, especially,
why the old Retour is called that which was in the time of Peace. And he
conjectureth, that because our fore Fathers are said to rest in peace,
therefore, by the same peace, is meant the time of our Predecessors. But I
conceive the matter may be better cleared thus. The Casualities of the
Superiority were, of old, the Chief Patrimony of the Crown of Scotland, and
were further extended than of late: and therefore it seems, that the time of
the making the new Retour, and cause thereof, was the frequency of War,
requiring an Addition of the Royal Revenue And though, through the alteration
of the Rate of Money, neither of the Retours be now considerable; Yet
doubtless they were very considerable in those times. So that by quid valet
nunc, is to be understood in time of War, at which time the new Retour was
made: which is the more evident, by the opposite member, what was the Value in
the time of Peace. So that the old Retour, being that Value which was before
the necessity of heightening thereof, by the War, is fitly said to be that
which was in time of Peace: and the new Retour, that which was made in time of
War. And immediately, after the Constitution thereof, the Brieve was made to
express it, by the then present time, Nunc: which has been always so
continued, because the Style of Brievs is not to be altered. This is the more
evident, that the Bordering Shyres, which were frequently wasted, by
Incursions, were not altered in their Extent: So that it has been made in a
time of War.

The new Extent is not only the Rule of Relief, but of Non-Entrie, in Lands
holden Ward, and Blench: for the new Retour Mail is only due till general
Declarator. But in Feu Lands, there is only regard to the Extent for during the
Non-Entry thereof, at least before general Declarator, nothing is due: but the
Feu Duty, and the Duplication thereof for the Relief. Annualrents have no
difference, before or after Declarator: and therefore are always Retoured to
the full Value of the Annualrent, and is thus expressed, quod valet seipsum.

39. The sixth Head is, Whether the Pursuer be of lawful age. Wherein we must
distinguish betwixt Ward Holdings and other Holdings, Blench, Feu, or Burgage;
For in these, any Age is lawful Age. but in Ward: Holdings, because the
Superior by virtue of the Ward, has the profit of the Land, during the Heirs
Minority; therefore they cannot enter till their Majority, at which time, only
the Heir is of lawful Age: which in Men is, twenty one Years complete, and in
Women fourteen Years complete. January 27. 1610. Lord of Kilbirnie contra
Fairly. Yet if the King, or any other Superior give Dispensation of the Age,
the Service will proceed, but the benefit of the Ward continues with the
Superior, by the Dispensation in the Disposition. The Heir Age must also be
instructed to the Inquest, either as being Notour, by inspection of the
Persons; for it would be Ridiculous, to prove a Grayheaded Heir to be Major,
but in dubio, Witnesses, or other sufficient Adminicles must be adhibited.

40. The seventh Head of the Brieve, is, In whose hand the Fee is; that is, to
whom the profit and benefit thereof does now belong. For ordinarily the Fee is
Retoured; to be in the hands of the Superior by reason of Non-Entrie, but
sometimes retoured to be in the hands of the Supeiors, Superior, when the
Superior has lost the Casualities of the Superiority, during his Life; and
sometimes it is in the hands of the Liferenters, by Conjunct-Fee, or Liferent
holden of the Superior; which does not hinder the Entry of the Heir to the
Fee, yet excludes Non-Entrie.

The remanent Particles of the Brieve, From what time, how, by what Service, by
whom, and through what Cause; are but circumstances relative to the last Head:
that thereby it may appear, First, How long the Fee has been in Non-Entry, or
in the hands of the immediate Superior, or Liferenter. 2. How it came to be in
that Condition: So it became in Non-Entrie, by the Vassal's Death, and in the
hands of the mediat Superior, by the contumacie of the immediate Superior, in
not entering his Vassal; and in the hands of the Liferenter, by the Infeftment
of Liferent, granted by the Superior. 3. The kind of Service which relates to
the Fee's being in the hands of the Liferenter, in respect that the Liferent,
is oftimes a different Holding from the Fee, and is ordinarily Blench; and
therefore it is the Superiors Interest, to know what such Service is, and also
to know by whom, and through what Cause, the Fee is in the hands of such a
Person. These Circumstances therefore, do not make distinct Heads of the
Brieve, and are not al ways necessary to be retoured, as the former Heads be.

41. The points aforesaid being cleared, and instructed to the Inquest, the
Service is the Sentence or Decree: which ought to be sealed with their Seals,
and with the Seal of the Judge, to whom the Brieve is directed, and is returned
to the Chancerie, whence it is called a Retour, being Registrate there, and
Extracted; till which it is not complete: neither does the Service ordinarily
instruct the active Title but only the Retour. The Service is kept in the
Chancery, for Warrant of the Retour: Yet it was found, that Services before the
year 1550. were sufficient to satisfy the Production in Improbations, or
Reductions, without producing the Retour it self; because at that time the
Books of the Chancerie were destroyed by War. Feb. 17. 1624. Lord Elphinstoun
contra Earl of Mar.

42. Retours are easily annualled, or reduced, because no Desender is called
thereto, and the Probation in most part, is by presumption, as has been shown;
and by the proper Knowledge of the Inquest, or Witnesses, whereof there seldom
remains any Testimony in retentis. The Lords would not reduce a Retour for
want thereof; But ordained the whole Inquest to be examined upon oath, upon
what Evidence they served. Feb. 24. 1665. Sr. James Mercer of Aldie contra
William Rowen. A Retour being found null in one Head, was found null in otum,
Hope, (...); Lord of (...) contra

A Retour of a Sister as Heir to her Brother, was found null by Exception upon
production of another Brother's Retour, though posterior, who thereupon was
preferred; albeit an excommunicat Papist. Feb. 16. 1627. Lord Colvil contra Mr.
Walter and Christian Herds. And a Retour of a second Brother served Heir to his
Father, where the elder Brother was absent, and repute dead: but returning home
again, and granting Band to a Creditor, who charged him to enter Heir, and
apprised and possessed; the Retour of the second Brother was thereupon found
null by Exception; albeit twenty Years after the Date thereof: though by the
Act of Patliament, 1617. cap. 13. Retours are not quarrellable by Reduction, or
Summonts of Error; unless the same be intented, execute, and pursued within
twenty Years after the Service, and Retour, in respect of the Apprising, and
Possession within these Years, which import an interruption; and that the
second Brother's Retour was null by Exception, and needed no Reduction. January
11. 1673. Lamb contra Anderson.

A Retour was also annulled by Exception, by referring to the Parties oath,
that he had no contingencie of Blood with the Defunct, Feb. 10. 1636. Murray
contra Sinclair and Meikle. The like in the case of a Woman retoured sole Heir:
it being instantly verified, that there was another Sister. Hope. Retour of
Idiotrie, Fairly contra Fairly. The like was found by Reply, referring it to
the Partie's Oath, that he was Bastard. Spots. Retours, Murray contra Murray.

43. Retours are ordinarily annulled and reduced by a great Inquest, of twenty
five Members: who do enquire, not only concerning the Verity, and (...) of the
Retour; but also concerning the Ignorance and Malice of the Jurantes super
assisa: which is not always inferred, when the Retour is reduced. As if it be
found, that the Defunct died not, last vest, and Seized; as of Fee; by
instructing that he was denuded: July 7. 1663. Isabel Mow contra Duchess of
Buccleugh. Or that he died not at the Faith, and Peace of Our Sovereign Lord;
by instructing that he was forefault: or that he was not nearest and lawful
Heir; by instructing a nearer Heir: is no Error in the first Inquest; seeing
these points were presumed, and needed no probation. And in like manner, if by
Reduction, there be a more pregnant Condescendence and Probation for another
Party, than for the Heir served; it will be no wilful Error, unless
competition had been at the time of the Service. But it must be an evident and
gross Error, in the positive Probation, specially concerning the Death of the
Defunct, and his being once infeft; the special Relation, and Degree of Blood
of the Heir, his Age, and the Extent of the Fee, which though the point of
least moment, yet will annull the Retour. But if there be a probable cause for
the Inquest, as by production of Writs containing wrong Extents; they will be
declared free of wilful Error. Spots. Retours, Mark Kerr contra Scot of
Hartwoodmires. The manner of reducing of Retours, is, by a Summons of Error
against the Assysors before the Kings Council, which is now the Lords of
Council and Session. Par. 1471. cap. 47.

44. Though it be the ordinary way to annull Retours, by a great Inquest; yet
the Lords do sometimes sustain Reductions thereof as erroneous, by Witnesses
before themselves, without a great Inquest, July 7. 1663. Isabel Mow contra
Duchess of Buccleugh.

45. The Reduction of Retours being of such hazard to the members of Inquest it
is statute Par. 1494. cap. 57. That they shall not be reducible, but within
three years after the Date; so as to inter Error against the Inquest: albeit
they may be reduced, as to render the Retours null in themselves at any time,
within twenty Years after they were deduced. Par. 1617. cap. 13. Which Act
reaches only Retours after it, but not Retours before, and actions against the
same; which Prescrive by the general Act of Prescription, Par. 1617. cap. 12.
As was found November 28. 1665. Younger contra Johnstoun.

46. The Heir being thus specially served and retoured, if the Fee immemediatly
hold of the King, he does thereupon obtain Precepts out of the Chancery, of
course without Citation; commanding the Judge ordinary of the Place where the
Feelyes, Sheriff or Balliff, to give Seasine to the Person retoured, capiendo
securitatem, taking Security for the Non-Entry and Relief due to the King: for
which the Judge ordinary is countable in Exchequer, unless the Profits belong
to himself as Bailiff of Regality. If the said Judge ordinary do not grant
Seasine accordingly, the Lords upon Supplication, and Instruments of his
disobedience, will grant Warrant to the Director of the Chancery, to issue
Precepts to an other Person as Sheriff in that part specially constiture,
without first using Horning against the Ordinary disobeying. Spots. David
Balfour Supplicant.

These Precepts, because of the Clause capiendo securitatem, were found to make
both the person of the Heir, and the Ground liable for the Sums due thereby,
though Infeftment was never taken. Spots. Sheriff, Lord of Stobs contra Lord
of Lauristoun. These Seasines are appointed to be given by the ordinary Clerk
of the Jurisdictions, Parl. 1540. cap. 77. Parl. 1567. cap. 27. Parl. 1587.
cap. 64. If the Fee be holden of any other Superior than the King, if he do not
willingly grant Infeftment upon fight of the Retour; the Heir will of course
get Precepts out of the Chancery, to charge the Superior to enter and infeft
the Heir so retoured: with certification if he fail, he shall lose the benefit
of the Superiority during his life: containing also this Clause in favor of
the Superior, faciendo vobis quod de jure facere debet. And upon Instruments of
the Superior's Refusal or Delay, being thrice required; Precepts are directed
out of the Chancery in course, against his Superior, to supply his place: and
if he should refuse, the like Certification is competent against him, and so
Precepts are direct against his immediate Superior, till at last it come to the
King as supreme Superior; who refuses none, but thereupon Precepts of Seasine
are direct out of the Chancery to the Judge ordinary of the place to give
Seasine.

47. For preventing of the loss of the Superiority during life, the Superior
being charged, if he obey not, must supend the Precepts: which is done most
ordinarily upon this Reason, that the Heir has not satisfied the Relief and
Nonentry Duties, due to the Superior, conform to the Clause of the Precept,
faciendo vobis, etc. Which Craig lib. 2. dieg. 17. shows not to have been
sustained by the Lords, seeing the Superior had poynding of the Ground competent
therefore: yet the custom since has been contrary, July 29. 1624. Lord of
Capringtoun contra Lord of Keirs. In which case, Keirs being pursued to
receive Capringtoun in place of Capringtoun's immediate Superior, Foulshiels,
who being charged to enter Heir within forty days to the Superiority, that he
might receive Capringtoun his Vassal, obeyed not; and therefore Keirs,
Foulshiel's Superior supplying his place, was ordained to receive Capringtoun,
he always paying the Non-entry; neither was Capringtoun the Sub-vassal put to
take out Charges against Keirs as he had done against Foulshiels, but this
Action was summarly sustained. The like July 16. 1628. Earl of Wigtoun contra
Lord Yester. March 12. 1630. Somervel contra Downie. Where the Annualrenter
craving Entry, was not found liable to pay the full Annualrent during the
Non-entry, but the Blench duty only. And though in the Case of Peebles contra
Lord Ross, January 23. 1630. Peebles as Superior craving the Nonentry Duties
for three Terms subsequent to the Ward, to be paid to him by the heir craving
Entry not according to the new Retour, but according to the full Duties, as
being subsequent to the Ward; was ordained to enter the heir without payment of
those Duties, without prejudice of his Right thereto Prout dejure: the reason
is rendered, because the Duties were not liquid as the new Retour is, neither
was the case it self clear and unquestionable, and therefore was only reserved.
If the Superior himself be not entered, he may be charged to enter within
forty days, with certification if he fail, to lose the Superiority during his
life, conform to the Act of Parliament 1474. cap. 57. and if he fail, his
Superior may be pursued via actionis, to supply his place, and receive the
Sub-vassal with the same Certification, without necessity of charging him with
Precepts out of the Chancery: As was sound in the said Decision, Capringtoun
contra Keirs.

48. The Certification of loss of the Superiority during the Superior's life,
though it would seem to extend to all the Casualties of the Superiority
befalling after contumacy; yet it was found only to extend to the Non-entry,
which was purged by the immediate Superior who supplied the place of the mediat
Superior: but that subsequent Wards and Liferent-Escheats did notwithstanding
belong to the immediate Superiors. March 24. 1623. James Hay contra Lord of
Achnames. In which Case it was also found, that the Feu and Blench Duties
contained in the Reddendo, did no ways fall by the said Certification: which is
clear, because these are not Casualities of the Superiority. But whether these
Casualities will not be lost during the life of the contumacious Superior, as
the Certification would import, and will belong to the mediate Superior
supplying his place, is not so clear: because if the negative hold, the
Certification which seems so great, signifies nothing.

49. The next Reason of Suspension of these Charges for entering of Vassals, is,
That the Heir retoured does not produce the ancient Evidents, that the new
Precept of the Superior for obedience may be made conform thereto. This Reason
was repelled, November 14. 1609. Lord of Drum contra Lord of Ley. And though
that might have been admitted, because of old Infeftments were simple; but now
since they are clogged with many Provisions, which fall under the Service of
the Brieve, there is reason that the ancient Evidences should be showen with
the Retour, and those Provisions in the Precept offered to the Superior;
otherwise the said Provisions may become ineffectual: because these Precepts
and Infeftments thereupon, will be sufficient Rights, without showing any
elder. And seeing it is the Vassal's duty to show his Holdings to the Superior,
there can be no time so sit as at the Entry.

A third Reason of Suspension of these Charges, uses to be upon the Superior's
Right to the Property by Recognition, or upon Improbation of the heir's Retour.
Which if Decree be not past thereupon, will be repelled, and only reserved as
accords: but will not be sustained upon a Reason of prejudiciality of a
Reduction at the Superior's instance. Spots. Sheriff, Lord of Taich contra
Hume. Craig lib. 2. dieg. 17. moves this Question, When one Person is the
Feer, and another Liserenter of the Superiority by Reservation of his
Frank-Tenement, or Liferent; and the like is, when Liferentis by Conjunct-fee:
Of whom in that Case ought the Heir crave to be entered? In which he relates,
that the Lords in favor of the Vassal, found in the Case of Cransioun, Brother
to the Lord of Cranstoun, That the Heir might enter by any of them he pleased,
being without detriment to either of them. As to the Casualities of the
Superiority, how far such Casualities belong to Liferenters, Vide Title
Liferents.

50. There is another weighty and subtle Question in the Enty of Heirs,
Whether that Person who falls to be nearest Heir at the time of the Defunct's
decease, may not then be entered, though there be a nearer in possibility, or
in hope? There is no question but when a nearer Heir is really or probably in
Being, in the Womb, though unborn; that the Service must be stopped till the
Birth. For in all things working in favor of those unborn, they are accounted
as born: and that not only for presuming that there is a living Child, not a
salfe Conception; but presuming that it is a Male Child, not a Female. And
therefore Daughters of a Defunct cannot be served Heirs, if there be a
probability of a posthumus Child, who is presumed to be a Son: whereby they
will be excluded till the contrary appear. It was so amongst the Romans, who
therefore sent the Womb in Possession for the Child. But with us, the Fee of
necessity must remain in Non-entry: and the Friends or nearest Agnats of the
Birth, as Pro-tutors, may continue the Possession. But the difficulty is, when
the nearer Heir is in possibility, and neither conceived nor born: and it
occurs specially in two Cases. First, in the Case of Heirs ascendent: as when
the Father succeeds to the Son, having no Issue, Brother, or Sister. For in
that Case, though at the Defunct's death there be neither Sister nor Brother
gotten or born; yet the Father may have them after. So that the question will
be, Whether the Father may enter immediately upon the death of his Son, having
no Children, Brother, nor Sister born, nor in the Womb; or if he must attend
the future possibility of a superveening Brother or Sister? The other Case is
in Heirs of Tailzie, whereof there was a notable instance, long debated in Anno
1647, and 1648. on this occasion. The Lord of Blackwood married his Natural
Daughter Marion Weir, having no other Children, to Major James Bannatine; and
in Contemplation of the Marriage, and for a Sum advanced by the Major for
satisfying his Debts, he disponed his Estate of Blackwood to Major Bannatine
and the Heir to be procreat betwixt him and Marion Weir; which failing, to the
Heirs of the said Marion Weir by any other lawful Husband; which failing, to
the Heirs of the Bannatine. The Major died without Issue: So the question was,
whether Bannatine's Heirs should succeed, or if the Succession behoved to be
pendent, till it appeared whether there would be any lawful Heir of the Body of
the said Marion Weir, who was no Member of the Tailzie her self, but only the
Heirs of her Body. The whole question resulted in this Point, Whether whilks
failing was to be understood failing de praesenti at the time of the Feer's
death, or failing simply as being (...) at no time. The matter was not dicided,
but transacted, Whereby Marion Weir being married to William Lowrie, and having
Children during the dependence of the Plea, the matter ended by Transaction
betwixt the Lord of Corhouse, who was Major Bannatine's Heir, and William
Lowrie taling Burden for his Heirs with Marion Weir, thus; That the tailized
(...) should belong to Marion Weirs, Heirs: That William Lowrie for them should
pay to Corchouse 20000 pound Scots, as the Sum which the Major his Brother had
contracted for payment of Blackwood's Debts, and had paid out upon
Contemplation of the Marriage. There was a very equitable Transaction to the
same effect, as if the Clause in the Tailzie had been interpret thus; That
failing Heirs of Marion Weir, that is, so long as the Heirs failed, the Major's
Heirs should succeed to him in the tailzied Estate. So that where there became
to exist Heirs of Marion Weir, both that they should succeed to Major
Bannatine's Heirs, to wit, Corehouse who was served Heir of Tailzie to his
Brother Major Bannatine; and should exclude Corehouse his Heirs of Line.
Whereby the Fee should never be in pendente at the death of the last Feer, but
that Person should be entered as Heir of Tailzie, who at the death of the
Defunct Feer, or at the time of the Service, was nearest Heir of the Tailzie:
whereby Corehouse should succeed as Heir of Tailzie to his Brother, because at
his death, neither of the two former Branches of the Tailzie were existent,
viz. the Heirs betwixt the Major, and Marion Weirs heirs by another husband.
And therefore, a judicious and just Inquest lerving a Brieve for the Heirs of
Tailzie of Major Bannatine, could not but find that he died last vest and
seized as of Fee, in the tailzied Estate of Blackwood; and that the Majors Heir
of Line, to wit Corehouse, his immediate elder Brother, is the nearest Heir to
the Major by the Tailzie, there being no Heir of Marion Weir then existent,
conceived or born, she being unmarried. For if she had then had a lawful Child,
the Inquest behoved to have served that Heir, as nearest Heir of Tailzie to
Major Bannatine, then his Heir of Line. Neither would that Child be excluded;
because the Child could not be Heir to Marion Weir while she was on life: for
Heirs in that case were only mean'd, such as might be Heirs if she were dead.
Suppose then there had been a Son betwixt the Major and Marion Weir, who had
been infeft as Heir to his Father, and died without Issue; Marion Weir at her
death having then a Daughter by asecond Husband: that Daughter would have
succeeded as Heir of Tailzie, albeit a Son of Marion Weir were in possibility,
and in the nearest hope, and to whom the title of her Heir would be most
proper, as being her Heir of Line, or Heir simpliciter: yet the Fee would not
remain in pendente and vacant till the event of that possibility, but the
Daughter would be served as nearest, at the last Feer's death. And therefore,
the Inquest could not justly swear, but that Major (...) Heir of Line, is his
nearest Heir of Tailzie the time of the Service. For if it should be (...),
that there were a nearer Heir in possibility or hope; the Inquest could not
demur thereon: because an Heir in possibility is not, but only may be. And
therefore, the Major's heir is the nearest heir of Tailzie, who needs not be
served heir of Line to the Major. If the Major had an untailzied Estate; his
Brother might renounce to be heir of Line to him in that Estate, and yet might
be heir of Tailzie to him in the tailzied Estate, as being still his heir of
Line demonshrative: that is, the Person who might be his heir of Line. And
therefore, after Corehouse his death, if he died infeft as heir of Tailzie to
his Brother; if the question again had arisen betwixt Corehouse his Son as his
heir of Line, and Marion Weirs Son being then existent; an Inquest could not
justly ferver Corechouse heir of Tailzie to him in the Estate of Blackwood:
because then Marion Weirs Son was a prior Branch of the Tailzie, and so behoved
to exclude Bannatine's heirs of Line, which are the posterior Branch.
Therefore, in lieu of this temporary Succession of Corehouse, resolving in his
Liferent, as the Branches of Tailzies frequently do; he accepted 20000 l. which
was his Brothers true Interest, and denuded himself in favor of Marion Weirs
Son, the prior Branch. So we are left in both to a rational Debate, without
decision. As to the first Case, we have already showen, both by Reason and
Practice, That failing the Feer's Children, Brother and Sisters, his Father and
Grandfather succeed, and exclude their Collateralls. So thence it necessarly
follows, that these Ascendents may be served without delay: otherways they
could never be served; there being ever possibility of the Issue of Men. Yet if
they should not be entered before the superveniency, even though but in the
Womb, the same would take place: but if the Ascendent be actually entered, the
Law affords no remedy, Reversion, or Restitution. Neither can this
difficulty be a Reason against the Succcession ofAscendents: because the
question is only betwixt them and their own Children, and nothing operats in
favor of their Brothers and Sisters, or their Descendents. As to the other
Case, in the instance proposed, it seems the Succeession ought to have
depended, till the event of the lawful Issue of Marion Weir. First, because
that had a determined time, by the Course of Nature, viz. the fifteth or
fiftieth two year of her Age; at which time, the Issue of Women is repute
extinct: which is not so in the case of Men. Secondly, in Tailzies upon
Contracts, and for onerous causes; respect is to be had to the meaning, and
interest of the Parties contracters: and in dubio pars mitior est sequenda. And
that sense is to be embraced, by which the provisions can have some effect: and
not that by which they can have none. Whereby it may seem, that it was
Blackwood's meaning, that the Succession of his own Natural Daughter should be
substitute, in the second member, to the Heirs betwixt the Major and her: and
that while these were possibe, his Heirs should have no place. Otherways the
second membet had been elusory. For if by sailling the Heirs of the Major with
the said Marion, at the time of the said Major's Decease, Marions Heirs, by
another lawful Husband should take place; her other Heirs could never take
place. For she could not have another lawful Husband, at the time of the Majors
her first Husband's Death.

Yet the Reasons on the contrary are no less pregnant; and that in this Case,
as in the Case of Heirs ascendent, the Heirs nearest at the time of the Feer's
Death, should have Rights immediately to Succeed: because the Fee necessarly
must belong to some Person, and it cannot hang in the Air, on a future
possibility. Which is a principle, whereof mention and use has been made
frequently before. Secondly, if that were the meaning, then at the time of the
Major's Death, the Lands were truly nullius: and so as caduciary, behoved to
sall to the KING, as ultimus Haeres. But if it had been so expressed, That no
place should be to the Heirs of the Major's other Heirs, till there were no
possibility of Heirs of Marion Weir; the defficulty seems the same, that the
Fee should be pendent, and nullius. It may be answered; That even in that other
Case, the Major's other Heirs would succeed, notwithstanding that provision,
which does but resolve in aPersonalObligation to those Heirs, to forebear. Yet
they were Heirs: and if contrary the provision, they should enter, it would
give interest to the Heirs of Marion Weir, to compel the Major's Heirs having
entered, to denude themselves in their favor. But there was no such thing in
this Case. And as to the Reasons upon the contrary, though it may seem,
Black-wood's interest, that the Heirs of his Natural Daughter should be in the
second Place; yet non fuit habilis modus to make the Fee pendent and nullius.
But to that which is the main Reason; Otherways the second member behoved to be
elusory: it is answered, That it is not elusory, because the most ordinary and
hoped Case was, That there should have been Heirs betwixt the Major and Marion;
who, if they had died without Issue, the Lands would have fallen to Marions
Heirs by another lawful Husband, and not to the Major's other Heirs. So that
the case which fell out, that there was no Children procreat betwixt the Major
and Marion was not feared, and so not provided for: as it oft-times fares in
such cases. Therefore we conceive it more probable, that in all cases, that
Person, who at the time of the Defunct's Death, is in being born or unborn, may
be Heir, and immediately enter, so soon as by the birth it appears who may be
Served.

There has a later Case occurred, and been determined on that occasion. The
late Earl of Leven tailzied his Estate and Dignity to the Heirs Male of his
Body: Which failling, to the eldest Heir Female, without Division: Which
failling to the second Son of the Earl of Rothess: Which failling to the second
Son of the Lord Melvil, who had Married the Earl of Levens Sister: Which
failling to the second Son of the Earl of Weemes, who had married his Mother.
Leven left three Daughters after him, who died all un-entered. Rothess having
no second Son, David Melvil second Son to the Lord Melvil, took a Brieve out of
the Chancery, to serve himself Heir of Tailzie to the Earl of Leven. The Earl
of Rothess took a Gift of the Non-entry, in the name of Sr. William Bruce, who
raised an Advocation of the Brieve, with a Declarator, That while there was no
hope of a second Son of the Earl of Rothess's Body, David Melvil, nor no Son of
a subsequent Branch could be entered: Or declaring, That the Lands were in
Non-entrie. Both members of the said Declarator the Lords did sustain, and
stopped the Service: albeit many inconveniences were represented, thence
arising. As that there could be no active Title for pursuing the Rights of the
Family, or for receiving Vassals: nor any Access to the Estate passive by
Creditors. But the Lords did reserve to the special Declarator, how far the
Non-entry would reach, whether to the retoured Duties only, or to the full
Rents. But many of the Lordswerc of opinion, that David Melvil should enter as
Heir of Tilzie; Yet so that if the Chancellor had a second Son, he or his Issue
would succeed, as Heir of Tailzie to David Melvil: and neither his own Heirs of
Line, nor the Earl of Weemes's second Son. Because at the time of David Melvils
Death, the Chancelor's second Son would be a nearer Heir of Tailzie to David
than his own Son, as being of a prior Branch of the Tailzie. Feb. 22. 1677. Sr.
William Bruce contra David Melvil. But the Lords found, that the Non-entrie by
the special Declarator, could not reach to the full Rents, but only to the
Retoured Duty; Seeing the apparent Heir, was neither in culpa nor mora, Which
does only infer the full Duties. And therefore found the Donatar had right to
the retoured Duties: and that the remainder continued in haereditate jacente,
to be managed by the Lord Malvil, as Curator datus bonis of the Estate of Leven
by the King, having power to manage the Affairs of that Estate as a Tutor, or
as if an Heir had been entered. July 24. 1677. inter eosdem.

51. It comes oft-times to pass, that through the unclear conception of
Clauses of Provision, it becomes dubious, who is thereby constitut Feer, and
who Liferenter: as is ordinary when Sums of Money are lent, and the Obligement
to repay is conceived thus; To be paid at such a Term to the Lender, and in
case of his Decease, or failing him by Decease, or after his Decease to such a
Person. Whence these Questions result; first Whether the Lender be Feer of the
Sum, and the Person substitute Heir of Provision? Or whether the Person
substitute be Heir; whether he may succeed at any time, or only if the Lender
die before the Term of Payment? As to the first Question, the Person substitute
is not Feer but Heir: and the Lender is not Liferenter but Feer; and therefore
may dispose of the Sum at pleasure, by Assignation, Legacy, or otherwise, as
other Feers may. February 22. 1623. Mr. John Leich contra Lord of Balnamoon.
February 28. 1626. Tulliallan contra Lord of Clackmannan. And where the Clause
bare to be paid to Clackmannan and his Spouse, the longest liver of them two;
and in case of their Decease, to Alexander Bruce their Son in Fee, with an
Obligement to infeft the Spouse in Liferent and the Son in Fee, in an
Annualrent effeirand thereto; yet the Father was found to have Right to dispose
of the Sum. The like was found Feb. 20. 1629. Lord of Drumkilbo contra Lord
Stormount: where the Father surviving the Term of payment, though he freely and
without a Cause onerous, discharged the Sum provided to be paid to him, and
failing him to his Son; though it bare a Clause of Infeftment to the Father in
Liferent, and to the Son in Fee, but no Infeftment followed. The like, though
the Father and the Son subtitute, were both infeft in one Seasine: July 23.
1675. Lord of Lamingtoun contra Muire of Annistoun.

As to the second Question, The more ancient Decisions have interpret such
Clauses strictly, thus; That the Sum payable at such a Term to the first
Person, should be paid at that Term to the Person substitute; so that it
should be payable at no Term thereafter to the Person substitute: but if the
first Person survived the Term of payment, though he did nothing to alter the
Substitution, the same should not belong to the Person substitute, but to his
heirs. Hope succession. Spots. Assignations, Lord of Bonytoun contra John
Keith. Feb. 22. 1623. John Leich contra Lord of Balnamoon. Where it was found,
that such Sums came under the first Persons, surviving the Term, their
Testament, and belonged to their Executors. But more frequent Decisions have
with better reason interpret such Clauses on the contrary, that the Person
substitute is heir of Provision whenever the Defunct dies, whether before or
after the Term. Because constitution ofheirs is simply, and not ad diem: but
mainly because the ordinary intent of such Clauses, is to appoint Portions for
the Bairns named therein, who therefore are substitute heirs of Provision to
their Father; so that if he do not expressly alter or prejudge the
Substitution, his intent is, that they succeed him whenever. Spots.
Assignations, Currie contra Nimmo: Relict of John Thomsom contra William
Thomson. The like in a Legacy left to a Person, and failing her by Decease to
another: which was not found a fidei commissum, to be restored by the first
Person to the second at her death. And therefore the Assigny of the first
Person was preferred. Spots. Disposition, Sarah Reid contra Alexander Downie.
January 18. 1625. Wat contra Dobbie. June 26. 1634. Keith contra Innes.
Therefore such Sums bearing no Clause of Infeftment, yet fall under Testament,
neither has the Relict a third thereof, Hope, Successions.

In these Substitutions, though the Person be substitute as heir, yet he is not
properly heir, and so needs not to be entered by any Service, because he is
nominate, and there is no other heir. But inTailzies, though some of the
Members of the Tailzie be nominate; yet because in Lands as is before said, the
Person nominate is never the first heir: therefore there must be a Service, to
enquire whether the first heir fails or not, which is unnecessary where there
is one Person only nominate to be heir, concerning which, there needs beno
enquiry.

Though the Persons substitute be as heirs, it follows not that they must be
liable as heirs of Provision to the first Person's Debt, contracted before the
Substitution: because they are not properly heirs, not requiring any Service
They are interpretative like to heirs, because the nature and intent of such
Clauses is not to constitute the first Person as a naked Liferenter, but that
they are understood as if they were thus expressed; With power to the first
Person to alter aad dispone at his pleasure during his life. So thereafter,
only the heirs substitute take place, though in these respects as heirs, yet in
reality as secundary, conditional, or substitute Feers. But the Substitute is
liable, other (...) Heirs and Executors being discussed; unless the Person
substitute abstain. Because the Substitution is a gratuitous Deed in prejudice
of Creditors, post contractum debitum, and so annullable; and the Substitute
meddling, is liable to repay quoad valorem only, but never by an universal
passive Title. July 3. 1666. Fleeming contra Fleeming.

The next difficulty is, who is Feer in Provisions, or Tailzies of Sums,
Annualrents, or Lands in Conjunctfee: wherein these general Rules do ordinarily
take place. First, That the last termination of Heirs whatsoever, infers
that Person of the Conjunctfeers, whose Heirs they are, to be Feers, and the
other Liferenters. 2. When that is not expressed potior est conditio masculi,
the Heirs of the Man are understood. But these have their own Limitations; as
first in Moveable Goods, and Sums provided to a Man and a Wife, and their
Heirs, without me ntioning, which failing to whose Heirs the same should be
due, were found not to fall to the man's Heirs, but to divide equally betwixt
the Man and Wifes Heirs. February 2. 1632. Bartholomew contra Hassingtoun.
February 18. 1637. Mungle contra John Steill. Yea, a Clause in a Reversion
redeemable by a Man and his Wife, and their Heirs, was found to constitute the
Wife Feer of the Reversion; because she was Feer of the Land Wadset. Hope,
Liferent, Kincaid contra Menzies of Pitfoddels. But an Assignation to a
Reversion provided to a Man and Wife, the longest liver of them two and their
Heirs, was found to make the Man only Feer. Hope, Husband and Wife, Walter
Collistoun contra Lord of Pitfoddels. A Clause in a Charter providing Lands to
a Man and his Wife, the longest liver of them two, and the Heirs betwixt them;
Which failing, to the Heirs of the Man's Body; Which failing, to the Wife her
Heirs whatsoever: though the last termination was upon the Wife, yet the
Husband was found Feer. July 24. 1622. Ramsey contra Lord of Conheath. The
like in a Clause providing a Sum, being a Wifes Tocher, to the Man and Wife,
and the longest liver of them two in Conjunctfee, and to the Heirs betwixt
them; Which failing, the Wifes heirs; yet the Husband was found Feer: and
therefore the Creditor apprising, excluded the Wife and her heirs. January 29.
1639. graham contra Park and Jarden. And a Bond providing a Sum to a Man and
his Wife in Conjunctfee, and the Bairns procreat betwixt them; which failing,
to two Bairns of a former Marriage nominatim, containing a Precept for
infefting the Spouse and the two Bairns named, whereupon all the four were
infeft: yet the Father was found Feer, and all the Bairns of the Family, Male
and Female equally, were found heirs of Provision; and the two Bairns named
were found Heirs substitute, failing the Bairns of the Marriage, January 14.
1663. Thomas Beg contra Sir Thomas Nicolson. And a Bond bearing a Sum borrowed
from, and payable to Man and Wife, and longest liver of them two in
Conjunctfee, and to the heirs, betwixt them and their Assignys; Which failing,
to the Heirs and Assignys of the last liver: found to constitute the Husband
Feer and the Wife Liferenter, albeit she was last liver, and that her heirs of
Line were found heirs of Provision to the Husband. January 2. 1668. John
Justice contra Mary Barclay his Mother. A Tocher provided to the Husband and
Wife, the longest liver in Conjunctfee and Liferent, and to their Bairns in
Fee; was found to make the Husband Feer, and that the Father might alter the
Substitution. December 12. 1665. Mr. John Pearson contra Martine. And generally
in all Infeftments in Conjunctsee betwixt Man and Wife, the Husband is always
interpret to be Feer, and the Wife Liferenter: albeit the last Termination be
the Wifes heirs; who are heirs of Provision to the Husband, unless the Right
flow from the Wife originally: as if she should resign her Lands in favor of
her Husband, and her self in Conjunctfee, and the heirs of the Marriage; which
failing, her heirs: or if the Right did flow from the Wifes Father by a
gratuitous Deed. But by the Contract of Marriage, a Father obliged himself to
infeft the Husband Contracter, and his Daughter, in Conjunctfee and Liferent,
and the heirs betwixt them; which failing, the Daughters heirs and Assignys
whatsoever. And by the same Contract, the Husband was obliged to provide all
Lands that she should acquire or succed to, to himself and Wife, the longest
liver of them two in Conjunctfee, and to the heirs betwixt them; which failing,
the one half to the Husband's heirs, and the other to the Wifes heirs, and
their Assignys. By both these Clauses the Husband was found to be Feer, and the
Wife Liferenter: albeit the Tenement disponed by the Father was not nomine
dotis, yet there was no other Tocher, July 2. 1671. Adam Gairns contra Isabel
Sandilands. Yet a Clause in a Minute of a Contract of Marriage, obliging the
Husband to infeft his Wife in Conjunctfee and Liferent in such a Barony named,
and obliging him and his Heirs and Assignys, that all and whatsoever Lands or
Sums of Money should be purchased by him during the Marriage, that Security
should be made in Liferent thereof, as of theforesaid Barony, to his future
Spouse in case of no Issue of Children, the one half of the said Conquest to be
disponed upon as the Wife shall think fit; the Conquest was found to be equally
to the Husband and Wife, and that she was Liferenter of the whole, and Feer of
the half: in respect the Minute did not bear whose heirs should succeed; and
that the Conquest was all to be expected by the Wifes Means, therefore she
being Conjunctfeer, that the one half of the Conquest should be disponed as she
pleased; she was found Feer of that half, as not being a Faculty, but a Power
of Disposal importing Property. June 27. 1676. Earl of Dumferling contra Earl
of Callendar.

52. There do many questions arise, as to the Succession of Heirs of Provision,
by Clauses of Conquest in Contracts of Marriage. The main question is, what is
accounted Conquest; Whether that which is acquired, and thereafter disponed, be
accounted Conquest, either as to the Wife, or to the Heirs, or Bairns of the
Marriage. As to which it has been shown before, that such Provisions infer not
only a Succession to the Heirs, or Bairns of the Marriage, as Heirs of
Provision; but thereby the Wife or Heir, and Bairn of the Marriage, have an
interest as Creditors that the Husband, or Father cannot, ad arbitrium, do
Deeds prejudicial to that which is once acquired: but the Husband is not
thereby bound up from disponing to Strangers, for causes onerous; or to other
Wives or Children, for competent Provisions. But he may not otherways intervert
the design of those Provisions, by taking the Rights to Wives, or Children of
another Marriage; unless he have not means aliunde to provide them. And
therefore the Husband being obliged, to take all Sums acquired, during the
Marriage to to himself and his Wife inConjunct-fee; having taken a Sum acquired
during the Marriage, in the name of his second Son: his Relict was found to
have Right to the Annualrent thereof. July 16. 1625. Knox contra Brown. The
like, where the Bonds were taken originally in the name of the Bairns, leaving
out the Wife. March 14. Graham contra Representatives of her Husband. But
Clauses of Conquest, of all Lands acquired during the Marriage, do not extend
to Lands, acquired and disponed during the Marriage. Yea Conquest of Lands was
extended where there was Disposition without Infeftment: with a burden of a
part of the Price upon the Disponer. January 24 1629. Lady Rentoun contra Lord
of Rentoun. Spotswood, Husband, Countess of Dumfermling contra Earl of
Dumfermling. And where the Clause of Conquest bare Lands or Annualrents; the
same were extended to Bonds bearing Annualrent, though without clause of
Infeftment. Feb. 20 1629. Douglas contra White. And these Clauses are interpret
strictly, according to the tenor thereof: for sometimes they only bear Lands
Conquest, sometimes Lands or Annualrents, sometimes Lands, Annualrents, or Sums
of Money, and sometimes also Goods or Geer: in which case the Executors will be
obliged to employ moveable Goods, and Sums; for the Wife in Liferent, and for
the Bairns and Heirs of the Marriage in Fee. These Clauses of Conquest do never
extend to any thing, whereunto the Husband succ eds as Heir, or Executor;
unless Succession be expressed. A clause of Conquest, oblieging the Husband to
take all Lands, Annualrents and Sums, conquest, during the Marriage to himself,
and the Heirs and Bairns of the Marriage, one or more; found to constitute all
the Bairns of the Marriage, Male and Female, Heirs Portioners: and that it was
not alternative, that the Husband might either take the Conquest to himself;
and the Heirs of the Marriage; or to himself, and Bairns of the Marriage, at
his option. And therefore having taken a considerable Sum, in favor of himself
and the Heir of the Marriage, who was his only Son; yet after his Death, his
four Daughters, of that Marriage, obtained Decree against their Brother, to
denude himself of their Shares. January 29. 1673. Stewart contra Stewart. But
Conquest is only understood, of what the Husband acquired more, after his
Contract of Marriage, than what he had before. And therefore if he acquired
Lands, Annualrents, Sums or Goods; if he instruct, That he had as much, (or a
part thereof before) as he sold; the superplus will only be counted Conquest.
And though he have not disponed on any thing he had before, (...) he contract
Debt for purchasing the Conquest; it will be burthered with the Annualrent of
the Debt: as was found in the former cases. And the like, December 20. 1665.
Lady Kilbocho contra Lord of Kilbocho. June 27. 1676. Earl of Dumfermling
contra Earl of Callender. The like was found in a Provision of Conquest, of all
the Husband's Goods and Geer acquired during the Marriage, to the Wife for her
Liferent use: which was found to be with the burden of the Husband's Debt,
contracted before, or after: and so to import only Liferent of the free Geer.
December 23. 1660 Jane Smith contra Margaret Muire. And where a Husband was
obliged to employ a definite Sum, for himself, his Wife, and Bairns of the
Marriage; and also his Conquest, and having acquired a Tenement during the
Marriage: to himself, and his Heirs whatsoever; that Tenement was applied to
the definite Sum, primo loco, and the superplus as a Conquest, January 4. 1672.
Beaty contra Roxburgh.

So much for the Being and Interest of Heirs. As for the proving and
instructing who are Heirs, the most ordinary by way of Retour, or Infefment as
Heirs; or by a Service, though not Retoured: but those Instructions must be
repeted in every several Process. For so an Heir active, was found not to be
instructed, by a Decree at his instance, as Heir, against the same Defender.
and in the same Matter, without reproduction of the Instructions. Feb. 22.
1629. Stewart contra Wilson: neither was it instructed passive by a Decree of
the Comissars, by production of the Defender's Seisine without (...) thereof,
Had.

Neither was it instructed passive, by the Kings gratuitous Restitution of the
apparent Heir, of a forefault Person; which made him capable of his Father's
Rights, but not Heir nor Successor to him. Hope, forefaliure, Halyburton contra
Lord Balmerino. Neither by a Bond, wherein the Party designed himself Heir, or
at least apparent Heir; which relates nothing to the benefit of Succession.
January 24. 1626. Lord of Glenkindie contra Crawfoord. Neither by an Award of
a Town Court, recognoscing a Burgess, Heir to his Predecessor. Spotswood Heirs,
Gudelet contra John Adamson.

TITLE XXVIII. Behaving as Heir.
1. Gestio pro Haerede described. 2. The time when this passive Title was
introduced. 3. The reasons of introducing it. 4. The latitude used in this
Title. 5. This Title not competent after the Intromette's Death, or where there
was any color able Title. 6. Behaving as Heirs by Intromission with Heirship,
only competent against Heirs of Line. 7. Intromission of Tutors or Curator's
infer not gestionem against the Pupills or Minors. 8. Cases inferring gestion
by Intromission with the Heirship movables. 9. Exceptions against this member
of the Title. As first, The Pursuer must instruct that the Defunct was either
Barron, Prelat, or Burgess, by Infeftments of Lands, or (...). 10. The 2.
Defense against Intromission with Heirship Movables, and vicious Intromission,
That the Defunct died Rebel, and his Escheat gifted before intenting the
Creditor's pursuit. 11. The 3. Defense, That the apparent Heir intrometted, by
a Gift to himself, or to his behoof. 12. The 4. When Movables belonging to a
Defunct remain in his House, whereunto his apparent Heir has right by
Infeftment. 13. Gestion by intrometting with Lands, Tiends, or Tacks, wherein
the Intrometter might be Heir. 14. Defenses against this member. 15. Gestion by
intrometting with the Defunct's Charter Chest. 16. Item, by intromission with
Sums due to the Defunct, or doing any Deed, that may transmit the Defunct's
Right. 17. This passiive Title excluded, unless established in the behavers in
the behavers lifetime. 18. How far Heirs Portioners, behaveing as Heirs are
liable, and whether behaving as Heir excluds the benefit of (...) and relief
competent to Heirs actually entering.
GESTIO PRO HAEREDE, is the apparent Heirs disorderly Entry, and immixing
himself with the Heritage, without order of Law: and therefore it gives him no
Right nor Active Title, as Heir, but makes him only Heir, (...), whereby he
represents the Defunct in all his Debts and Burdens, and is liable for them
all.

2. This passive Title, as Spots. observes, was but introduced by the Lords of
Session, and was not before the institution of the College of Justice; the
apparent Heir being only liable for restitution of the single value formerly.
As was found in the case of an Heir's Intromission with the Heirship moveable.
November 14. 1546. Janet Seatoun Lady Dirlton contra Anna (...).

3. The reason of introducing this passive Title, is in favor of Creditors,
that they be not un-satisfied, or shifted by the heirs of the defunct Debitors:
who, if they might continue possession of their Predecessors Means, and Estate,
and be but countable; would rarely enter, and hundle up their Intromission, and
with time ascribe it to singular Titles, abstracting their Predecessors Rights.
And therefore it is an expedient Custom, that they should either enter legally,
and for good and all; or that they should wholly abstain. Especially seeing the
Law allows them a year, to enquire into the condition of the Desunct's
heretage, whether it will afford them loss or gain: during which time they may
deliberat; and if they abstain, can be troubled by none. So that though it may
seem rigourous, for a small Intromission to make the Intrometter liable for all
the Defunct's Debts, how great soever; Yet it being so easy to abstain, and
the hazard known; the Expediency and Favor of the Creditor, proponderateth the
wilful Disadvantage of the Debitors Heir.

4. In this Title the Lords have always taken great Latitude, and sometimes
have found small Intromission not relevant, to infer this Title, in odions (...)
November 6. 1622. Lord of Dundas contra Hamilton of Peill. Where a Decree of
Spulzie of Tiends being obtained against Peill's (...), and never insisted in,
till in his time he was convened as Heir to his Father, who had behaved himself
as Heir to the Good-sire, in so far as he had entered and dwelt in the house of
Peill: and there being, in the house, the Goodsire's best Board, standing Bed,
and brewing Caldron; he used the same, by eating at the Board, lying in the
Bed, and brewing in the Caldron: and desivered the Good sire's Beiff Pot to a
Flesher, for Flesh furnished to the Defender's Father: the Defenders Mother
having kept possession of these Heirship Goods for five years before.

5. Yet this Condescendence was not found relevant in this Case, The passive
Title was not established before the Defender's Father's Death. As the Lords
lately found, That these passive Titles, quae sapiunt delictum, should not be
competent after the Intrometter's Death. It was also thought by the whole
Lords, after dispute in presentia upon this Title, That it takes only place,
where there appeared the apparent Heir's animus immiscendi, and adeundi
haereditatem; and not where he has any probable, or colorable Title. Spots.
Heirship, Corser contra Durie. Yet in favorable cases, a small Intromission was
sustained as making use of the Defnuct's chief Bed and Board, though standing
in the Defunct's House: seeing the Heir entered the House, before he obtained
Inventary of the Movables, made by authority of a Judge; though the House
belonged to himself proprio jure. March 8. 1610. John Bailzie contra Hoom of
Bassenden. Or by Intromission with a Mazer Cup of the Defunct's, and drinking
therein; entering in the House when he died; lying in his Bed and bed Clothes
standing there; and wearing his Silk Stockings: though all these were
undisposed upon, and that the Defunct's Mother, who had given them to her Son,
had meddled therewith, who died in a Chamber belonging to his Mother, and his
name was upon the Mazer. January 15. 1630. Cleghorn contra Fairly.

6. There are two Cases of Behaving as Heir, viz. Intromission with the
moveable Heirship, and Intromission with the Lands, Teinds, Tacks, or other
Rights which might have belonged to the Intromitter as Heir. In both which
cases the Intromission will not infer this passive Title, unless the
Intrometter might succeed in the same particulars. And therefore the apparent
Heir of Line and no other, can be liable by Intromission with Heirship
moveable, because the same can only belong to the Heir of Line. So the
Intromission with Rents of Lands, Tiends or Tack, will not infer gestionem,
unless by the apparent Heir, who would succeed therein, according as they are
provided to Heirs of Line, of Conquest, Heirs male, or of Tailzie, or
Provision. Neither will any other Intromission be relevant, but what is
immediate, or by express Warrant, Command, or Ratihabition.

7. A Tutor or Curator's Intromission will not infer gestionem upon his Pupil,
unless he accept the same from the Tutor in his Accounts. Nor the Intromission
of one having a general Commission, as Factor, etc. It was so found in the Case
of a Tutor's Intromission with the Rents of the Pupil's Predecessor's Lands,
for the restitution whereof he was only found liable. Nevember 3. 1665. David
Boyd contra Tailzfair.

8. Behaving as Heir by Intromission with the moveable Heirship, is most
unquestionable, when the said moveable is chosen, drawn, and separat by the
Heir from the remanent movables. In which case the apparent Heir will not be
admitted to allege, that the Defunct could not have an Heir or Heirship
moveable, when he formerly drew the same. July 13. 1631. Lord of of Gadgirth
contra Lord of Auchinleck. But it seems very hard where the apparent Heir's
choice of such particulars as the best of every Kind for her Heirship, does not
evidently appear: for that must be accounted the best, which is such in the
opinion of the apparent Heir. And yet in favorable Cases Intromission with any
Kind of movables, out of which Heirship may be drawn, will be found
sufficient, and repute as the Heir's choice. As the apparent Heir's making use
of his Fathers Board, lying in his Bed; though he disposed not thereof, and
though the same were standing in a House disponed to him by his Father before
contracting of the Debt pursued on: seeing he continued two years in possesion,
and got no Warrant from the Lords, or made any Inventary thereof. July 14.
1626. Gilbert Johnston and Masson his Spouse contra Masson. The like by making
use of the Defunct's Bassin, Silver Spoons, Timber Beds and Boards, without
alienation thereof: though the beginning of the Intromission was, when the
Intrometter was not apparent Heir himself, but was Tutor to another Heir who
was Idiot: seeing he continued five years after the Idiot's Death, himself being
then apparent Heir. January 17. 1627. Frazer contra Monimusk. Yet the contrary
was found, where the Intromission began before the Intrometter was apparent
Heir, there being a nearer apparent Heir: though it continued after that nearer
apparent Heir's Death, when the Intrometter was apparent Heir. July (...) 1629.
Mr. Robert Cuuingham contra Moultry. Yea, Behaving as Heir was sustained by
Intromission with certain Goods of the Defunct which might have been Heirship,
though they were confirmed promiscously by an Executor, and bought from him by
the apparent Heir. But this Executor was his own domestic Servant, and
confirmed to his own behoof. December 16. 1630. Weir contra Ker of Cavers. The
like where the Heirship Goods were sold to the apparent Heir by a stranger:
seeing they were not delivered to that stranger, but possessed by the Defunct till
his Decease, but his possession continued by the apparent Heir. Nicol. Plus
valet quod agitur. Feb. 9. 1621. Melvil contra Melvil. But the contrary was
found, the Goods being disponed by the Defunct to the apparent Heir, albeit not
delivered before his death, otherways than that the Defunct being un-married,
came to his Son's House, and lived with him till his death. January 30. 1630.
Calderwood contra Porteous. Neither was the same inferred by a Disposition of
the Defunct to his apparent Heir of certain movables, in satisfaction of his
Heirship movables whereunto he might succeed. Feb. 24. 1636. Meidhope contra
Hepburn.

9. The ordinary Objections and Exceptions against Behaving as Heir by
Intromission with the Heirship moveable are; First, That the Defunct was
neither Prelat, Baron, nor Burgess, to whose Heirs only Heirship moveable is
competent by the Act of Parliament: the extent whereof is shown in the former
Title. And therefore the Pursuer must condescend, and instruct that the Defunct
was either Baron, Prelat or Burgess: which would besufficiently instructed by
the Defunct's Infeftments of Lands or Annualrents, at any time: for thence it
would be presumed that he continued undenuded till his death, semel baro semper
baro presumptive. And this will be elided by this Exception, That the Defunct
was denuded before his Death. For though some have been of opinion that semel
baro semper baro is meant, that though a Person once infeft were denuded; yet
his Heir would have Heirship as a Baron. For which I find neither Reason nor
Decision: But it is most reasonable that he who is once proven to be a Baron,
should be presumed so to continue, unless the contrary were proven, that he was
denuded, It was so found January 27. 1636. Straiton contra Chirnside. But if
the Legal was not expired at the Defunct's Death, he is not esteemed denuded:
and therefore his Heir has Heirship. Feb. 26. 1663. Cuthbert of Drakies contra
Monro of Foulis. July 8. 1628. Dumbar contra Lesly. Neither will it be
sufficient that the Defunct was once Burgess, but itmust be proven that when he
died he was acting as a Burgess. So that neither the Heirs of honorary
Burgesses, nor they who once were trafficking Burgesses and take themselves to
a Country Life, their heirs, will have heirship moveable. And therefore semel
civis semper civis is not presumed. Neither semel paerlatus semper praelatus:
for if a beneficed Person were deprived or demitted before the Death, his heir
would have no heirship moveable.

10. The second Defense against Intromission with heirship moveable, and which
is also competent against Vicious Intromission, is, That the Defunct died
Rebel, and his Escheat was gifxted and declared before intenting of the
Creditor's Pursuit. June 10. 1663. Gordon of Lismoir contra Keith. June 10.
1674. Lady Spenserfield contra Hamilton of Kilbrachmount. December 22. 1674.
Heirs of Seatoun of Blair contra Sr Alexander Seatoun. And It is not necessary
to allege, That the apparent heir had any Right or Tollerance from the
Donatar. For the Exception is equiparat to Executors confirmed, against Vicious
Intromission: whereby Vicious Intromission is excluded, albeit the Intromission
was before another was confirmed Executor, if the Confirmation was before
intenting of the Creditor's Cause. But it is no relevant Defense, That the
Defunct died Rebel, and so had no movables, but that they were confiscat.
Neither was it sufficient that the Escheat was gifted, not being also declared,
before the Creditor's Pursuit. As was found in the said two first Cases.

11. The third Defense is, That the apparent Heir intrometted by a Gift to
himself, or to his behoof; or by a Right or Tollerance from a Donatar. These
being prior to the Creditor's Pursuit, although posterior to his Intromission,
albeit not declared, are relevant: because the Donatar thereby is in
possession, and needs no Declarator. Feb. 26. 1663. Cuthbirt of Drakies contra
Monro of (...). June 10. 1663. Gordon of Lismoir contra Keith. July 4. 1674.
Mr. William Innes contra George Wilson. June 10. 1674. Lady Spenserfield contra
Hamilton. of Kilbrachmont. Feb. 10. 1676. Grant contra Grant.

12. The fourth Exception is, When Movables belonging to a Defunct, remain in
his House whereunto his apparent Heir has Right by Infeftment, wherein the
Defunct had his Liferent or Tollerance: if the Heir enter in possession of the
House, if at his entry he represent to any competent Judge, that there are
Movables in or about the House belonging to the Defunct, which he desires to
be inventaried, or that such as cannot be preserved may be sold, that the price
may be made forthcoming to all parties having interest; if Inventary or Sale be
made by warrant of that Judge, the continuing of these Movables in the House,
or the Sale of those which cannot be preserved, will not infer Behaving as
Heir. Yet the making use of the things in the Inventary, or the Sale of that
which is not warranted; yea the ommission out of the Inventary of Movables of
any considerable value, was found to infer Behavior. January 25. 1632. Helen
Scarlet contra John Paterson.

13. The other ordinary member of Behaving as Heir, is by Intromission with the
Rents of Lands, or Tiends, whereunto the Defunct had Right by Infeftment; or
entering in possession of these Lands and Tiends unto which the apparent Heir
would succeed, which is the most direct Behavior as Heir; and is only
competent against such persons as might be Heirs in that whereinto they immix
themselves. And so an Heir of line poslessing or intrometting with the Rents of
Lands provided to Heirs male, or to Heirs of Tailzie or Provision; or the
Intromission of these with the profits of Lands or Tiends befalling to Heirs of
line; will only infer Restitution or Reparation: but will not infer a general
passive Title, making the party liable to all the Defunct's Debts.

14. There are many Defenses which use to be proponed against this species of
Behavior. As first, it was an ordinary custom to shun this passive Title, that
the apparent Heir granted a Bond of purpose to adjudge the Defunct's Right,
upon the apparent Heirs Renounciation, and then take Right to the Adjudication:
till the Lords by an Act of Sederunt, Feb. 28. 1662. did declare, that if
apparent Heirs should in time coming, take Right to any Appryzing or
Adjudication of their Predecessors Rights for their own Debt, and did (...)
thereby, whether before or after expyring of the Legal; they should be liable
as behaving as Heirs: which has always since been followed. And therefore no
Defense for such Rights will be sustained, albeit it were a true Debt of the
apparent Heirs, and not a simulat Bond granted of design to adjudge or apprise.

Neither is it a relevant Defense, That the Lands or Teinds were appryzed or
adjudged from the Defunct, albeit Infeftment had followed thereupon; if the
heir apparent intromet without Right, or Warrant from the Appryser or Adjudger,
within the Legal. Feb. 21. 1663. Henry Hamilton contra William Hamilton. But
it is a relevant Exception, That the apparent heir's Intromission or possession
was by Right from an Appryser or Adjudger, though the Legal was not expired:
unless the Sum were fully satisfied by Intromission or otherways. January 10.
1662. Barclay contra Lord of Cragievar. The like though the apparent heir
continued to possess, for some time after the Apprysing was satisfied by
Intromission. Feb. 26. 1663. Cuthbert of Drakies contra Monro of Foulis. Yea
Intromission with the Rents of the Defunct's Land by his apparent heir,
waselided by a Tollerance from a Donatar of Recognition, albeit not declared
till after his Intromission; the apparent heir paying the single value of his
Intromission. July 17. 1666. Thomas Ogilvie contra Lord Gray. But a Tollerance
from Apprysers after their Intromission, was not found relevant, July 11. 1671.
Sr. George Maxvell contra Maxvel. Yet the apparent heir's Intromission was
elided, because the Defunct's Rights were improven, though after the
Intromission. March 22. 1628. Roderick Farquhar contra Campbel of Kingingcluch.
And an apparent heir's Intromission was elided by a colorable Title, though
not valid, whereby the heir of a Marriage being entered and infeft as heir to
her Mother, yet her Infeftment being reduced, and her Father being found Feer
in a dubious provision of Conjunct-fee; the heir so served, was not found
liable, as behaving as heir to her Father: but only quoad valorem of her
Intromission. July 12. 1671. Adam Gairns contra (...) Sandielands. But it was
not elided because the apparent heir past by his Father, and was infeft as heir
to his Good-sire, though his Father was infeft: that colorable Title was not
sustained the apparent heir being in mala fide, having the Evidents in his
hands. November 23. 1671. Rorieson contra (...). Yet Behaving as heir was not
inferred by the heir apparant's intrometting with the Rents of Lands, which his
predecessor had disponed in trust to a third party, for the behoof of the
apparent heir, and whereupon the Entrusted was infeft. January 14. 1662. Nicol
contra Home of Plandergest. But Intromission by the apparent heir was elided by
a Disposition by a Defunct to the apparent Heir's Son, his Oye, though without
Infeftment: or by a Tack to the apparent Heir's Husband, though expired before
the Defunct's Death; as being continued per tacitam (...). January 16. 1667.
Reid contra Salmond.

Behaving as Heir was inferred by the apparent Heir's entering in possession of
a Coal-heugh, whereof the Defunct had Tacks for Terms to run: albeit the
apparent Heir took a new Tack. June 26. 1610. Atchison contra Lord of Cockpen.
The like though the apparent Heir took a Gist of the Defunct's Escheat, who had
an unexpired Tack of the Lands, and pretended to possess as Donatar to the
single Escheat. June 28. 1610. Crawford contra Cockpen.

15. Behaving as Heir was also inferred by the apparent Heir's giving a Receipt
of the Defunct's Charter Chest, and keeping it two Years without Protestation,
or Inventary. June 28. 1670. Ellis of Southside contra Carse.

16. Behaving as Heir will also be inferred by Uplifting or Discharging Sums,
Principal or Annual, which would befall to the Party Heir: or by doing any Deed
that might transmit the Defunct's Right. But it was not found inferred by the
apparent Heir's Renouncing to be Heir in favor of the Heir Male, to whom their
Father had disponed: seeing they gave no Right thereby hurtful to Creditors;
though they got a Sum for their Kindness and willing Renounciation. July 5.
1666. Lawrence Scot contra Heirs of Auchinleck. Neither by the apparent Heir's
getting benefit by a Transaction with a Party having Right from the Defunct,
granted on Deathbed, and being obliged to acquire the Defunct's Debts, and
apprise thereon, and to communicate the benefit of the Apprising: unless a Deed
had been done communicating any Right of the Defunct. July 19. 1666. Margaret
Nevoy contra Lord Balmerino.

But Behavior was not inferred by the apparent Heir's taking out of Brieves:
seeing the same were not served. June 28. 1670. Ellis of Southside contra Carse.
Neither was it inferred by proponing Payment of the Defunct's Debts, and
succumbing: which is only effectual as to that Process. July 16. 1629. Murray
contra Ross. January 21. 1675. James Tailzifer contra John Corsan. Neither was
it inferred by the apparent Heirs voluntary Payment of their Predecessor's
Debt. January 26. 1628. Commissar of Dunkel contra Abercromby.

17. There is the same ground for excluding this passive Title, unless it were
established against the apparent Heir in his own life, as to exclude vicious
Intromission: which has frequently been repelled when not established in the
Intrometter's life.

18. It remains now to consider, Whether Behaving as Heir being a vicious
passive Title, will import more than if the apparent Heir had been actually
entered: which may occur in two Cases; First, where Heirs-portioners behave
themselves as Heirs, whether they will be liable in solidum, or only pro rata?
2. Whether those who behave themselves as Heirs, will have the same benefit of
the order of Discussing and Relief, as if they were actually entered.

As to the first Case, the Behavior of Heirs-portioners cannot oblige them in
solidum, but in so far only as if they were actually entered Heirs: which is
always pro rata part, according to the number of the Heirs-portioners, non per
capita, sed per stirpes, But as it has been yet undetermined whether
Heirsportioners may be liable for more than their share of the Debt, not
exceeding their share of the benefit to which they have succeeded; there is no
question but if Heirs-portioners behave as heirs, they would be made liable
quoad valorem of their Intromission, if it did exceed their share.

As to the other Case, Behaving as heir being a vicious passive Title, they
will not have the (...) of Discussing: which is only competent to heirs
lawfully entered. Yea they will not have Relief from the heirs who are liable
before them: because they have in their Person no active Title. Yet it is in
arbitrio judicis to ordain the Creditor, on satisfaction to assign his Right,
by which the heir behaving may indirectly attain Relief, as Assigny by the
Creditor This favor will not be refused, unless the manner of Behavior be
very odious: as when it is fraudulent, by concealing the Immixtion; or that the
Creditor himself having an other Interest, may be prejudged by his Assignation.
And therefore heirs behaving, if distressed for moveable Debts, they have no
direct recourse against Executors. And if the Executory be mean, so that there
be small provisions for the Wife and Children; the Creditor would not be
ordained to assign. And it may so fall out in other Cases. The same Reason may
occur, where heirs of Conquest, or heirs Male, of Tailzie, or Provision behave;
if the prior heirs who are nearer of Blood have little benefit and provision.

TITLE XXIX. Lucrative Successors.
1. The rise of this passive Title. 2. It takes place though the Disposition
bear Cause onerous, (...) it be otherwise instructed. 3. It is extended to
Dispositions in Contracts of Marriage, in some Cases. 4. Lucrative Dispositions
of any part of the Heritage infer this passive Title. 5. This Title is
extended to Dispositions made to Oyes, though then not immediate apparent
Heirs; but not to Brothers, though none then nearer. 6. Whether it suffiseth to
infer this Title, that the Infeftment was after the Debt; or if the Disposition
whereon the Infeftment proceeds, must also be after. 7. Cases in which this
Title takes no place.
THERE is no Nation has been more favorable to Creditors, or more studious of
their satisfactions than this; which has anticipate all Conveyances, Devices,
and Frauds prejudicial to Creditors, either in favor of singular Successors by
simulate Assignations or Dispositions, without equivalent onerous Causes: or in
favor of apparent heirs, that they might in no way enjoy their Predecessors
(...), without satisfying their Debt; which has given the rise to this passive
Title, whereby apparent heirs accepting Dispositions from their Predecessors,
of their Heretage wherein they would have succeeded, or any part thereof, are
made liable to all their Predecessors Debts, contracted before such Disposition
or Right. And the acceptance thereof is accounted praeceptio haereditatis, and
as an Immixtion with the Inheritance, makes the apparent heir to represent the
Defunct passive. Yet with this temperament, that he shall be liable only to the
Debt contracted before the Disposition or Right made to him by the Defunct, in
which Right he might have succeeded. Wherein apparent heirs are most
expediently differenced from the other singular Successors without onerous
Causes, that these are not ordinarily personally liable, except in so far as
they have disposed of such Rights as were fraudulently disponed to them in
Trust, and in which they were interposed Persons to the behoof of the Disponer
or his Children; but these Rights are always reduceable at the instance of
anterior Creditors. But because such Fraud is more incident to apparent Heirs,
therefore these are personally liable for the whole anterior Debts, and the
Right granted by them may also be reduced upon the Statute 1621. Yet the
personal Obligement does remain and both are compatible: Hope, Successor
Lucrative, Gray contra William Burgh.

2. This passive Title is not only extended to Dispositions of Lands bearing
expressly a lucrative Title, as for Love and Favor, etc. but though the
Narrative thereof bear expressly a Cause onerous, which being betwixt the
Disponer and his apparent heir proves not: and therefore the Cause onerous must
be proven aliunde. Vide Title Reparation upon Circumvention: where the
Narrative of Writs amongst conjunct and confident Persons, proves not the Cause
to be onerous. And though there be a Cause onerous instructed, it will not be
sufficient, unless it be equivalent to the worth of the Lands, to substain it
against Reduction: but if the Cause onerous be considerable, the heir will not
be liable simply, or personally, but the Right may be reduced, and the heir may
be lyble in quantum est lucratus. And therefore an apparent heir having
accepted the benefit of a Disposition and Infeftment, granted by his
Predecessor to a third Party, but to the apparent (...) behoof; the Lords
before answer ordained the Cause onerous of the Disposition to be instructed,
reserving to their consideration how far the apparent heir should be liable
personally thereby. January 14. 1662. Nichol Harper contra Hume of Planergest.
The like of a Disposition of Lands by a Mother to her apparent Heir, though it
did bear a Sum of Money: which did not prove betwixt Mother and Son. February
15. 1676. Patrick Hadden contra George (...). The like was found of a
Disposition by a Father to his Son and apparent heir, though the Son offered to
prove it was for equivalent onerous Cause: seeing the Disposition it self did
bear for love and favor and other good Considerations. November 22. 1671.
Beaty contra Roxlurgh. But Bonds of Provision by Parents to Children infer no
passive Title, though the Children be Heirs apparent. As when the Bonds are
granted to the eldest Son, or Bonds of Provision, or a Tocher to Daughters,
when there are no Sons, though in that Case the Daughters might be esteemed
heirs apparent, although truly they be not; for a man is ever understood to be
capable of having a Son: and therefore Daughters are little more heirs apparent
than Brothers. Yet Bonds of Provision or Tochers are reducible by anterior
Creditors, if the Defunct had not a visible Estate sufficient for these
Portions and his whole anterior Debts. And therefore accepting a Tocher did not
make a Daughter liable as lucrative Successor, though there was no Son; yet the
Daughter and her Husband were found lyble to the Father's anterior Creditors,
for what was above a competent Tocher, suitable to the Parties. December 23.
1665. Dame Rachel Burnet contra Lepers. Neither will taking Bonds in the name
of the Daughters, or assigning Bonds to them, make them liable as lucrative
Successors. And yet the accepting of Assignations to heretable Bonds by a
Father to his eldest Son, in which the Son would succeed as Heir, may infer
this passive Title. December 2. 1665. Edgar contra Colvil. But where the Father
in his Contract of Marriage provided his Son to several Bonds, which before any
Creditor pursued, were paid and cancelled, and it did not appear by the
Contract whether they were heretable or moveable; the Lords did not sustain the
passive Title, but found the Son liable in quantum (...): and did presume the
Bonds to be heretable, unless they were proven to be moveable. January 7. 1679.
Hamilton of Burdowie contra Mr. Andrew Hay. But a Disposition of Lands to the
eldest Son, was found to make him lucrative Successor, although by his Father's
Contract of Marriage with his Mother, his second Wife, the Father was obliged
to infeft the eldest Son of the Marriage in the said Lands; which did import a
Succession: seeing the Obligement contained no determinate time, and so might be
performed by the Father any time in his life. November 29. 1678. Hagens contra
Maxwell. The like was found in a Disposition of Lands or Annualrents to the
eldest Son of the Marriage: seeing these were provided to the Heir of the
Marriage. February 22. 1681. Grizel More contra Ferguson. The Disponer's Bairns
Portions are not a Cause onerous, being granted after the Creditors Debts;
albeit undertaken and secured by the apparent Heir, bona fide, before any
Diligence at the Creditors instance; not being paid before the Pursuit: ibid.
because the Heir may suspend upon double Poynding, and will not be made to pay
both the Bairns and Creditors.

3. This Title is extended to Dispositions granted in the apparent Heirs
Contracts of Marriage, which in many respects is accounted a Cause onerous.
July 8. 1625. Gray contra William Burgh. Where the Son was not liberat, though
he offered to renounce the Lands he had by Contract. And it was found that
Lands being disponed and resigned by the Father in favor of the Son, by his
Contract of Marriage, though they were for the present wadset and disponed with
that burden, and thereafter redeemed by the Son by his own means, so that
there remained nothing in the Father, but the Superiority and the (...); yet
the Contract of Marriage was found onerous as to the Wife's Luerent. And in
respect the Son was Minor and presently revoked the Disposition, and renounced
all other Rights, except that of the Wadset which he had redeemed; he was
liberat of the passive Title, and the Lands declared redeemable by any Creditor
anterior to the Contract. January 14. 1634. Mr. David Courtney Minister contra
Weems of Lothoker. In the like Case, where Lands were disponed by a Father to
the Son in his Contract of Marriage, for a Tocher paid to the Father for some
Debts and Bairns Portions far within the worth of the Land; the Son was not
found liable in solidum as lucrative Successor, nor yet the Pursuer put to a
Reduction: but the Son was in hoc processu put to count and pay the superplus
of the true price of the Land. June 17. 1664. Lion of Murask contra Bannerman.

4. This Title takes place not only in universal Dispositions, of the
Predecessor's whole Estate; but a Disposition of any part thereof, is
sufficient: seeing the least as well as the most, is praeceptio haereditatis.

5. This Title is extended also not only to Dispositions made to, and accepted
by the immediate apparent Heir; but also to the mediate apparent Heir, so that
he be alioqui successurus, by the course of Law, necessarly: as what is granted
to the eldest Son of the apparent Heir. Because the ground of this Title being
to prevent Deeds in favor of the Disponer's Successors, prejudicial to the
Disponer's Creditors, whose Debts are anterior; the reason holds as much where
he dispones to his Oye, who by the course of Law is to succeed to him, as to
his Son. 2. It is Praeceptio haereditatis in the Oye as well as in the Son. And
therefore the Rule in this Title is not, that the Accepter be that Person who
would succeed at the time of the Disposition, and so may seem to be immediate
apparent Heir pro tempore: for so a Disposition by one Brother to another, or
to a Brother's Son, the Disponer for the time having no Children; will not
infer this Title. November 22. 1662. Lawrence Scot contra David Beswell of
Auchinleck, Nephew to umwhile Auchinleck. December 22. 1674. Heirs of Seatoun
of Blair contra Sir Alexander Seatoun. The like though the Disponer was an old
man, the time of the Disposition, and had little hope of Issue. December 17.
1632. Lady Spenserfield contra Lord of Kilbrachmont. The reason is, because
the Brother or Brother's Son is not alioqui successurus by the course of Law,
while the Brother's Children are in spe: and therefore such are never called
apparent Heirs; neither is the presumption in them, that the Defunct would, in
prejudice of his Creditors, adventure simply to dispone to such, while he had
hope of Issue: but all this holds in Oyes. And it was so decided January 29.
1639. Lady Smeatoun contra Richardson of Smeatoun: where an Infeftment was
granted by the Good fire to the Oye, reserving his Son's Liferent. And in the
like Case, the Father who was but Liferenter, and his Oye Feer, by the
Grandfather's Disposition, was found lucrative Successor. February 23. 1637.
Lightoun contra Lord of Kinaber. But this Decision was stopped to be further
heard.

6. But here occurreth the Question, If the Disposition be anterior to the Debt
contracted, but the Infeftment posterior to the said Debt; quid juris? The
ground of Doubt is, that though the Defender had a prior Disposition, yet by
the Infeftment only, he was Successor: seeing Lands pass not by Dispositions,
but by Infeftments: and therefore he was clearly Successor post contractum
debitum, and also ex causa lucrativa. 2. If this were not the meaning, the
intent of the Law would be frustrate: for it were easy to make Dispositions and
to keep them up, and in the mean time to contract Debts, when the Creditors
could not know the Debitor's condition, and so contracted bonafide. This Case
was not decided: but the like Case was formerly decided negative, that the
Infeftment though posterior to the Debt, did not infer this Title; being upon
a Disposition anterior to the Debt. February 23. 1637. Lightoun contra Lord of
Kinaber. The like was found, where there was an Obligement in a Contract of
Marriage, to dispone Lands, prior to the Debt contracted: albeit both the
Disposition and Infeftment were posterior to the Debt, and did not bear
expressly in implement of the Contract; which was presumed, seeing no other
Cause was showen. July 27. 1678. Thomas Ferguson contra Lindsay of Wauchope.
For answer to the contrary Reasons; the first is upon misapplication of the
words, post contractum debitum: which are not to be referred to Successor thus,
successor post contractum debitum ex causa lucrativa; but successor ex titulo
lucrativo, qui titulus est post contractum debitum. So that if the lucrative
Title be not after the Debt, this Title takes no place. As to the other reason,
the same inconveniency will be of Dispositions to Strangers, which being kept
up, Creditors may contract bona fide. And yet Inhibition before Infeftment will
not be effectual, unless it preceed the Infeftment and the Disposition: which
will also be effectual against the apparent Heir. But if there be fraud in
keeping up such Dispositions, which will be easilier presumed in the person of
the apparent Heir, than a Stranger; it will be sufficient upon the common
reason of fraud, to reduce the Infeftment, though the general passive Title be
not inferred. The like was found where there was an Obligement in a Contract of
Marriage, to dispone Lands, prior to the Debt contracted: albeit both the
Disposition and Infeftment were posterior to the Debt, and did not bear
expressly in implement of the Contract; which was presumed seeing no other Cause
was showen. July 23. 1678. Thomas Ferguson contra Lindsay of Wauchope. And
lucrative Successor was not found inferred by the Infeftment of a Father to his
apparent Heir after the Debt contracted: seeing there was an anterior Obligement
in the apparent Heir's Contract of Marriage, to grant the Infeftment, and
Inhibition thereupon. Nicol. de haereditariis actionibus. March 31. 1626. Ker
contra Sterling.

7. This Title can take no place, first, where the Party to whom the Right is
granted is not alioqui successurus in that same Right: because it cannot be
praeceptio haereditatis where there can be no haereditas. And so a Disposition
to an heir of Tailzie, of Lands not provided to that heir of Tailzie, cannot
infer this Title: though it may be reducible, as without a Cause onerous.
Neither will a Disposition of tailzied Lands to an heir of line, infer this
Title. For in that case it cannot be praeceptio haereditatis: albeit the
Disposition will be reducible, as without a Cause onerous. But there is more
reason, that Rights acquired originally by Predecessors, in name of their
apparent heirs, cannot infer this Title: because the Predecessor himself never
being Feer in that Right, the apparent heir could not be his Heir therein.
Neither can such Rights be reducible by the Act of Parliament, 1621. because
the falling thereof, will not make the Fee return to thePredecessor who never
had it: but the same can only be reached by a Declarator, That it was acquired
by that Predecessor's means, after the Debt contracted; and therefore ought to
be affectable, as if it were in the person of the Debtor, or his heir: which
has frequently been found relevant.

TITLE XXX. Executorie, Where, of Testaments, Codicills, Legacies, Relict's
part, Bairns part, Dead's part, Confirmations, and Office of Executorie.
1. The Romans carfeulnesse to preserve the freedom of Testing. 2. The ancient
form of Testing amongst the Romans. 3. The modern form of Roman solemn
Testaments. 4. Their nuncupative Testaments. 5. Their military Testaments. 6.
Requisits for Roman Testaments. 7. How far Sons in familia could Test. 8.
Persons who could not Test. 9. Persons who could not be institute, or
substitute. 10. Restriction of the freedom of Testing, in favor of Children.
11. The Legittimes ofChildren. 12. The Falcidian portion. 13. The difference of
the Legittime and Falcidian. 14. The Trebellianica. 15. Fidiecomissa. 16.
Codicills. 17. Institution of Heirs. 18. Substitution. 19. Substitutions vulgar
and pupillar 20. Legacies. 21. Legacies are void if the Legatar die before the
Testator, or if the Testament be void; unless there be therein a codicillar
Clause. 22. The Kinds and Effects of conditional Legacies, or Fideicommissa.
23. Special Legacies. 24. Conditions adjected to Legacies in Fideicommissa. 25.
The Inventary. 26. Collation. 27. Jus accrescendi. 28. The Power of Testing
with us may be restricted by Contract or Portion. 29. It is restricted to
Movables, and extends to no heritable Right. 30. Wherein the Office of
Executors consists. 31. The nearest Agnats are Successors in Movables to the
Intestat. 32 The line of Succession in Movables. 33. The Nomination of
Executors, and Codicills. 34. Solemnities requisite in Testaments with us. 35.
The Effects of Testaments made abroad. 36 Verbal Legacies. 37. The Power of
Testing is competent to Minors having Curator, without their Consents, and to
Wives without their Husbands Consent: but not to Pupills, Idiots or furious
persons. 38. Legacies with us. 39. Legacies and Donations mortis causa are
proportionally abated if they exceed Dead's part. 40. Whether special Legacies
will be so abated. 41. The Effect of Legacies of things not in the power of the
Testator. 42. The Effect of Legacies left siverally. 43. The Relist's part of
the Executory. 44. The Bairns part. 45. What Foris-familiation is. 46.
Collation by our Custom. 47. Sums bearing Annualrent without Clause of
Infefiment, fallin Executory as to the Defunct and his Children, but not as to
the Relict. 48. Heirs have no benefit of the Bairns part, except they renounce
in favor of the remainent Bairns. 49. If there be but one
Childeun-forisfamiliat, the same is both Heir and Executor, and has the full
Bairns part. 50. The Executory is divided as it was at the Defunct's Death, and
the time of the Confirmation. 51. The interest of the nearest of Kin 52.
Dead's part. 53. The interest of Executors nominat, and Dative. 54. The Order
of confirming Executors. 55. How Executors nominat in England are admitted
here. 56. Licenses to pursue. 57. Executors interest, as to the Rent the year
the Defunct died. 58. Executors have Right to Steellhow Goods. 59. Co-executors
and their power. 60. The Effect of Executors Assignations before Sentence. 61.
Executors ad non executa. 62. Executors ad ommissa and male appretiata. 63.
Executors Creditors. 64. How far Executors are liable passive, and of their
Diligence. 65. The Releef betwixt Heirs and Executors. 66. How Executors may
safely pay Creditors. 67. What time Executors have to do Diligence, before they
be liable to Creditors. 68. All Executors, and Creditors doing Diligence within
six months ofthe Defunct's Death, come in pari passu. 69. After six months,
Creditors come in according to the priority of their Diligence. 70. Executors
paying Relicts, Bairns and Legatars, after 6. months, and before Citation of
Creditors, are secure; and the Creditors have only Repetition against these.
71. Executors after obtaining Bond or Decree, are not in Pleno dominio, of the
Defunct's goods: nor do they fall under the Executors Escheat, but the
Defuuct's Creditors are preferable to the Executors proper Creditors. 72.
Executors may pay privileged Debts, at any time. 73. Arrestments hinder the
Executor to prefer any other Creditor. 74. Compensation is not competent to the
Defuncts Debitors, upon Debts due by the Defunct, assigned after the Defunct's
Death. 75. Exoneration of Executors. 76. Exhaustine ofExecutors, how competent.
77. The Diligence necessary to liberate Executors: Executors are not obliged to
depone upon their Knowledge of the Defunct's Debt, except as to their own
Share. 78. How farCo-executors are conveenable severally. 80. Executors
furviving, are not liable for the Share of the deceassed in so far as they
executed the Testament, and lifted their part. 81. Executors are liable for the
Inventary, without proving their Intromission. 82. Where Testaments are to be
confirmed.
REMAINS now the other Branch of Succession, viz. in Movables: which is of two
Kinds, The one of Executors, which is the only lawful Succession in Movables,
and therefore is both an active and passive Title; the other illegal and
Vicious, and is therefore called Vicious Intromission, and is only a passive
Title. Of the former in this Title, and of the later in the next.

The whole interest of the moveable Goods and Rights of Defuncts, is
comprehended under the term of Executory, wherein not only that which proper to
the Executor by his Office, or Succession, is contained; but also that which
befalls to the Defunct's Relict, Children, and nearest of Kin and to his
Legatars and Creditors. We shall not here repeet what has been said of
Succession in general, of which at large in its proper place, Tit. 26. Where
the rise and rule of Succession, both according to Equity and the Law of
Nature; and according to the positive Law, and Custom of this and other
Nations, is held forth. This much only in general; that the Will of the Owner
is effectual in equity to dispose upon his Rights, either to take effect during
his Life, or after his Death. The former being complete, constitutes a present
Right, irrevocable by the Disponer: the later is ambulatory, and dependent upon
the Owner's Will, and has always employed in it the Condition of his Death;
and therefore may be altered, abrogat, and derogat by a posterior Will. And
thence it is called the Laterwill of the Defunct: because the Later-will is
always effectual, and preferable to the former Will. It is also more
favourablie interpret and extended, than Contracts or Dispositions amongst the
Living. And if there were no positive Law, the express or presumed Will of
theDefunct would be the adequat Rule of his whole Succession.

But Succession being of great consequence, whereby all the Rights of men are
at least once, and many times oftener, transmitted in every generation;
therefore positive Law for utilitie's sake, has justly and fitly preicribed
the forms and solemnities thereof, that it may be clear and sure: and has
applied remedies to make it effectual. And has restrained the power of the
Defunct's Will in some cases, especially in favor of the Defunct's Wife and
Children, whom by the Law of Nature, he is obliged to provide. And has also
declared the Degrees of Succession, Meaning, and Presumption of the Will of
Defuncts.

1. The Romans of all Nations, were most solicitous in this matter, and
accounted it a publict interest; reipublicae interest, voluntates defunctorum
effectum sortiri. And therefore they did exactly guard the power of testing,
not only against Violence and Fraud, by severe Punishments, and exclusion from
all benefit of Succession; but also they rejected and annulled all Pactions,
restraining the power of testing, as pactum corvinum de haereditate viventis.
Which was not only extended to Pactions made by Persons disposing of the
Heretage of Persons, to whom they might succeed, but even to Pactions of
Persons in relation to their own Heritage. They did also clearly determine what
Persons had not the power of testing; and in whose favor Testaments might not
be made; and the manner of all Kinds of Testaments, Institutions, and
Substitutions of Heirs, Legacies, Fideicommisses, and the sense of most
ordinary Clauses in all these: and also the Succession of the intestat. Which
has made the matter of Succession swel into a mighty bulk, and to make the
chief Integral of the Civil Law; wherein to insist here, would neither be
necessary nor profitable for our purpose: but as in other cases, a short Sum,
without Ampliations or Citations, will suffice.

2. Succession amongst the Romans, was either by Testament, or from the
intestat. The ancient way of testing amongst the Romans, was either in peace
and solemn, which was done in presence of the People, being convocat callatis
comitiis: or otherways by a simulat Sale, per aes and libram; wherein the
Testator, in presence of five Witnesses Romans, did hold a Balance, and
weighed Money therein, and under that form, as it were, sold his Inheritance
for the Money, and asked Witnesses. Or otherwise Testaments were made in
precinctu, when they were standing in Battle before the Fight, without other
Solemnity than three or four Witnesses.

This was the ancient form of testing. The matter and power of testing was very
absolute, according to Equity: concerning which, this was the Law of the twelve
Tables uti quisque rei suae legasset ita jus esto.

But the after-course of the Civil Law, changed both this ancient manner and
power of testing, and redacted Testaments into three kinds, Solemn,
Nuncupative, and Military.

3. Solemn Testaments were so called, because they required the most
Solemnities: as First, That the Testaments were in writ, the Name of the Heir,
at least, being written by the Testator, or one of the Witnesses. Secondly,
There behoved to be seven Witnesses, specially required, all present, and
subscribing by themselves, or another, and sealing the Testament at the foot
thereof: none of which might be Women, Pupills, Servants, Prodigalls, or
furious Persons; neither the Heir himself, or any of his Domestics: each
Subscription bearing. I Titus, etc. being called and required to be a Witness
to this Testament, which is contained in this Schedule, have subscribed it with
my hand, and sealed it with such a Seal. Thirdly. The Testator also behoved to
subscribe thus, I Mevius, etc. declare this Schedule to be my Testament, and I
have tested as is contained therein: or by another if he could not write, who
stood as the eighth Witness. Fourthly, The Testament behoved to be made by one
continued Act, without interruption of any extraneous act, least by extraneous
acts the mind might be diverted, or inconsiderat, in so solemn an Act. So the
Testament was closed up, and sealed. And if the Testator opened the Testament,
it was presumed he changed his mind. But after his Death, the Witnesses were
called together, to acknowledge their Seals and Subscriptions, at the opening
thereof. Or otherwise it was opened by the authority of a Judge, before other
honest Witnesses. And if any of the Witnesses acknowledged not their
Subscriptions, the Testament was held suspect.

4. A Nuncupative Testament is that which was by Word only, before seven
Witnesses qualified as aforesaid. Yet two Witnesses were sufficient in a
Father's Testement amongst his Children; and a Woman might be Witness therein.
Or in a Testament for pious Uses, five Witnesses did suffice, where there was
penury of Witnesses.

5. A Military Testament, was that which was made by the Soldiers in War:
wherein they had these Privileges. First, when they were in procinctu, ready
to join Battle, any declaration of their mind, by word or writ, though it
were written but in the sand, was sufficient. It was also valid, if made during
the Expedition, with such Solemnities as can be had for the time: Yet so, that
if the Testator lived a year, in which he might make it more Solemn; it became
void. Military Testaments have this further Privilege, that the Testator may
institute for a time, and may institute in a part, and so die partly testat,
and partly intestate: which is against a Principle of their common Law.

6. The ancient absolute power of testing, was by the subsequent course of Law,
cleared and restrained, not only by the declaratory Laws, finding testing, and
otheracts invalide, as done by furious Persons out of their lucid intervalls,
and by Idiots, and by Pupills, who have not the use of reason; or those made by
Fraud, or Error in the Substantialls, or by extortion: but more particularly it
is limited in these particulars.

7. First, Filii familias, Persons in the power and family of their Fathers,
could not test upon their Goods; whether profectitious from their Father, or
adventitious aliunae; even though their Father consented: but only on their
bona castrensia, acquired in War; or quasi casirensia, as in militia togata.

8. Secondly, Captives with publict enemies, or Persons given in pledge to
them; or Persons condemned to capital Punishment, whose goods are con fiscat;
or those condemned of Infamy; could not test.

9. Thirdly, by Testament some Persons can neither be institute nor substitute
Heirs, such as the spurious Children of the Defunct: to put a restraint upon
such unlawful Procreations. But Children begotten on Concubins, while those
were tollerat, could not be institute or substitute, (these being lawful
Children) in more then a sixth part of the heretage. Only there could be left
to spurious Children, Legacies for their necessary Aliment. Neither could
Persons guilty or condemned of Treason, be institute or substitute Heirs.

10. Fourthly, power of Testing is restrained in those who have lawful
Children: who were necessitat, either to institute their Children their Heirs,
or expressly to exheredat or disheirish them, expressing the Cause of so doing.
For if these institute others, and past over their Children in silence, the
Testament was void. And if they unjustly exheredated them, they had Quaerelam
inofficiosi testamenti, to annul the Testament, as done against the natural
Duty of Fathers, without just Cause.

11. Fifthly, the power of Testing was restrained in favor of lawful Children,
that the Testator could not by Legacy or fidei commissum abate from the
Children their Portions natural, due to them by the Law of Nature, obliging
Parents to entertain their Children: which the Law defyned to be the fourth
part of the Inheritance, Debts deduced, when there were fewer than four
Children; a third part, when four; and a half when more. If there be no
Children, this Legittima is due to the Parents, Grand Father, and Grand Mother;
but not to Brethren, unless a base Person be institute. Which Portion natural
the Testator could not prohibit the Children to withdraw from the Heretage.

12. Sixthly, the Falcidian Law did restrain Legacies, that they might not
exceed three fourth parts of the Inheritance: so that there behoved to remain
one fourth part to the Heir, which therefore was called portio Falcidia. And
therefore if the Legacies did exceed three Quarters of the free Inheritance,
Debts being deduced; they were abated proportionally, that the Falcidia might
remain to the Heir.

13. This Portio Falcidia differs from the natural Portion in this, that the
Testator could not prohibit the Heir to take the benefit of the Portion
natural; but he could effectually prohibit the Heir to take his Falcidia. The
Reason whereof was, because the Falcidia was introduced, to the effect that the
Wills of the Defuncts might be execute: which could not be, if the Legacies
left nothing to the Heir considerable, but trouble, as oft-times it falls out.
So that this being a Remedy in favor of the Testator, to make his Will
effectual; he might prohibit it: and could not be presumed so irrational as to
prohibit it, if he had not good ground to know that his Heirs would enter
without it. Or indirectly, if the Testator prohibit the alienation of the
Heretage, the Law esteemed it as a prohibition of the Falcidia.

The Falcidia had no place in Military Testaments, or in Legacies left to Pious
Uses, or left to the Relict of the Testator, nomine dotis. The reason of these
exceptions was in favor of Soldiers, Pious Causes, and Tochers. And if the
Heir ommitted to make Inventary, he lost the benefit of his Falcidia

14. When the fiduciary Succession became in use, whereby Heirs were institute
or substitute, to the use and behoof of others, to whom they were to restore
the Inheritance, or some part thereof, or thing therein; which therefore was
called fideicommissum, as being committed to the trust and faithfulness of the
Heir: the Senatusconsultum Trebellianum did introduce the reservation of a
fourth part to the Heir, institute or substitute by these fideicommisses, in
the same way that the Falcidia was a reservation from Legacies. And therefore
this fourth part was called Trebellianica: which therefore, has the same
exception with the Falicidia, of which in the former Paragraph. And this
further, if the Heir were forced by Law to enter, or if within a year
thereafter, he do not fulfill the Will of the Defunct; he lost the benefit of
his Trebellianica. And if he had either Legacy or Portion of the Inheritance,
it was reckoned to him as a part of his Trebellianica.

15. The use of these Fideicommissary Trusts was, when the Testator designed
his Inheritance, or some of his Goods, either for Persons that were not capable
to be Heirs, or not fit to manage; as through Pupilarity, prodidigality, or
some other defect; then he institute other Heirs fit for the present managment;
and desired, or required them by his Testament, to restore the Inheritance, or
some part of it, to such Persons. And that either simply to a day, or
conditionally. And often times the day of Restitution, was after the Heirs own
Death, whereby he had his Liferent or Vsufruct thereof. At first this was
wholly left to the trust and faithfulness of the Heir, without any legal Remedy
or Compulsion: which afterward were adhibite, with the Reservation of the
Trebellianica, as has been shown. But where the Persons in whose favor the
Trust was, were such as could not be Heirs, or succeed, as spurious Persons;
then those Heirs were not compelled to restore.

The essential and chief point of a Testament is, the Nomination of an Heir,
either by Institution, or Substitution: without which it was not allowed the
name of a Testament, but only a Legacy, or at best the name of Codicills, which
is called by some an imperfect Testament.

16. Codicills might be made before five Witnesses, either in writ or
nuncupative: and they were ordinarily additions to Testaments. Yea because, if
when Testaments, through want of Solemnity, became void, the Legacies failled;
therefore there used to be adjoined this Clause, If this be not valid as a
Testament, Let it be valid as a Codicill, which thence is called Clausula
codicillaris.

17. The form of Institution of Heirs, was in plain and short terms, thus;
Titius haeres esto. These were either institute solly, or jointly: and that
either equally, or indefinitely, which is understood equally; or otherways by
certain Portions. No Institution can be conditional, or to a day: or if it be,
it is presently effectual. Because the Heritage cannot hing in the air, and
belong to none: else it would prove caduciary. Yet in military Testaments this
Privilege is indulged, as has been said.

18. Substitution is the Nomination of substitute Heirs, who take place failing
the institute. There may be as many subordinate Members of Substitution as the
Testator pleases. The Institute or prior Substitute, is found to fail, when
either he cannot, or will not enter: but if once he enter, the Substitution for
ever evanisheth. And if he or his should be extinct who was institute, the
Heretage becomes his Patrimony, and no more the first Defunct's Heretage: and
so falls not to the Substitute, who is Heir of the first Defunct; but to the
Heirs of the Institute. It is otherways with us, in Tailzies, or other
Substitutions, as hereafter will appear.

19. Substitution was of two kinds, vulgar and pupillar. Pupillar is that,
whereby Fathers were allowed in their Testament, having named their Children
being Pupils, to be their Heirs, to substitute Heirs to them: which Substitutes
had not only the Father's Heretage, but the Son's, dying in Pupillarity. Under
which is comprehended that which is called substitutio exemplaris: whereby
Parents having institute their Children, being Idiots, their Heirs; did
substitute other Heirs to them, if they entered not, and died Idiots, or
Furious. And in military Testaments, the pupillar Substitution is not only
effectual, if the Testator make his own Will, and institute his Children: but
though he only substitute. And though the Children survive their Pupillarity;
yet if they entet not, the Substitution is valid. All other Substitutions are
ordinary, or vulgar; when the Testator institutes Heirs, and substitutes
others: but has only effect as to the Testator's own Goods, if those institute
enter not; but not as to the Goods of Heirs institute.

20. The matter of next moment to the Institution or Substitution of Heirs, is
the leaving of Legacies; which may be left in Testements, or Codicills, and
without either in some cases. Any thing may be legate, which is in the Defunct's
Goods, alienable; except in so far as is restrained in the Legittima, Falcidia,
and Trebellianica: of which formerly. Yea though the thing legate be not the
Testator's, the Heir is obliged to purchase it to the Legatar, or the value of
it, if the Testator knew it was another's: for then his mind is followed, to
make it effectual; at least by the value. But if the Testator legate any thing,
thinking it to be his own, which is not his own; the Legacy is ineffectual For
Legacies being Donations, they are undestood to be given, but so far as the
Giver has Right: and therefore there is no Warrandice of them, as to the
Testator's Right. But if the Heir deliver any thing, not specially legate, in
satisfaction of the Legacy; if that be evicted upon defect of the Heir's Right,
he is liable for Warrandice. As if an Heir were appointed to give in Legacy, a
Horse worth such a price, not being in the Heretage, but delivered by the Heir,
to satisfy the Legacy; if the Horse be evicted, the Legatar has Warrandice
against the Heir: because it is not the Defunct's Right, but the Heir's Right
that fails.

Legacies, and particular Fideicommisses, not being for Restitution of the
whole Heretage, or any special Part, or Quota thereof; are equiparat: as
Fideicommisses of the Heretage, or a Quota thereof are equivalent to the
Institution, or Substitution of Heirs. And either Legacies, or Fideicommisses
may be general, whereby a quantity is left; or special, whereby an individual
Body is left, as such a Horse, etc. so may they either be left purely, or
conditionally, or to a day.

21. This is common to all Legacies, that if the Legatar die before the
Testator, the Legacy becomes void, and is not transmitted to the Heirs, and
Successors of the Legatar. Neither does the Legacy belong to the Legatar
ordinarily, if the Testament wherein it is left be void, for want of the
requisite (...), (of which formerly;) unless it have the codicillar Clause, or
if the Heir do not enter, or if the Codicills in which it is left, or if the
Testament, having the codicillar Clause, want the Solemnities requisite to
Codicills.

22. If the Legacy, or Fideicommisses be conditional, the Legatar dying before
the existence of the Condition, loses the Legacy; and does not transmit it to
his Heir, if it be a casual Condition: but if it be a potestative Condition
depending upon the power of the Legatar, and not upon accident without his
power; or if left to an uncertain day, which is equivalent to a casual
Condition: if so the Condition be in the Legatar's power, (unless he did all
diligence to satisfy the same) he loses the Legacy. But if the Condition fail
not through his fault, as being offered and not accepted, or being impeded by
any third party; the Legacy is thereby transmitted to the Legatar's Heirs, who
are only liable for the interest of the Condition.

Legacies pure or to a certain day, are transmitted by the Death of the
Testator; especially if the Heir be entered, though the day be not come: quia
cessit dies, sed non venit.

23. In the several Cases, by which Legacies are established, and
transmissible, the property thereof is in the Person of the Legatar, if it be a
special Legacy: but the possession thereof remains in the Heir, against whom
the Legatar has not only a personal Action, for payment or delivery of the
Legacy; but has also a real Action of vendication, against him, and all other
havers thereof, for delivety of the same. So fideicommisses, which are not
conditional, are not alienable by the Heir, but are recoverable from every
singular Successor.

24. Conditions adjected to Legacies, or fideicommisses, are of diverse kinds;
of which shortly observe; 1. That when Conditions are copulative, they must all
be jointly performed: or when diverse Conditions are severally set down in
several places of the Testament. But if they be disjunctive, the (...) formance
of any of them is sufficient. 2. If the Condition be divisible, and performable
by more persons; each performing his part, has access to his Legacy. But if it
be imposed upon one person, the performance of a part thereof, does not give
access to a proportionable part of the Legacy: but the Condition must be wholly
performed, otherways there is no part of the Legacy due. 3. Conditions
impossible in facto, as not being lawful, regularly are void, and as not
adjected. Amongst which that is accounted one, if Marriage be absolutely
prohibited: which the Authenticks restricted only to Maids, and found it lawful
in the case of Widows, to adject such a Condition, si Titionubat; and therefore
if the Legater married not to that Person, the Legacy was not due.

In Legacies and fideicommissis, a false Narrative vitiats not: as when the
efficient Cause, mentioned therein, was not true. for example; if a Legacy be
left, bearing to have been for Services done, generally or particularly; albeit
these were not done, it is valid. But the expression of the final Cause implys
a condition: and if it be not performed, the Legacy cease, causa non sequnta,
As when Legacies are left for such Uses, Services, or Deeds to be done.
Legacies being gratuitous, are of the nature of Donations: and therefore are
revocked by Ingratitude, Ipso facto; not only in reaching the Defunct, as if
Inimity rose betwixt him and the Legatar; but even after his Death, as if he
curse him, or endeavor to make him infamous. Yea, those things against the
Heir, will be sufficient to take away the Legacy.

So much may serve for a Summary of the Roman Law, in the matter of Testaments.
As for the Succession of the Intestat, it being one, without distinction of
heretable and moveable Rights, we have spoken thereof before, Title Succession.
We shall therefore only touch on those points which are common, in all
Successions, by the Roman Law; viz. of the Inventary, Collation of Goods, and
Right of Accrescence.

25. The Inventary of Heretage, was a Repertory of every Particular contained
therein: and was contrary to the Rules of the ancient Roman Law, l. si dotis
nomine, 33. ff. soluto matrimonio; by which there was neither a Duty nor
Benefit to the Heir by an Inventary. But the use thereof was introduced by
Justinian in favor mainly of Heirs, and in some cases of Creditors, and
Legatars. Of Heirs, that they might not be liable for the Defunct's Debts in
solidum, but secundim vires inventarij, according to the value of the
Inheritance. And this much in favor of the Creditors and Legatars, that the
Inheritance might not be imbesled. And therefore the making of the Inventary
was appointed to be with great Solemnity, before a Judge, upon Citation of the
Creditors, and Legatars, so far as they were certain; and public Proclamation
for the rest: and before famous Witnesses. And in place of the absent Legatars
and Creditors, three persons were to be present, besides the Witnesses, of good
Fame and Means. The Inventary behoved to be made within 30 days, after the
Heir knew and could enter to the Heretage; and behoved to be complete within
60. days after the beginning thereof. The Inventary not being thus made, the
Heir was liable to the Creditors for their whole Debts, and to the Legatars for
their Legacies; without deduction of his Falcidia. Neither could the Testator
dispense with, or prohibit the making of the Inventary, in prejudice of the
Creditors: but he might in prejudice of the Legatars, so as the Falcidia would
be due, in that case, though the Inventary were not made.

26. Collation is the Obligation of the nearest Heirs descending, to
communicate what the Defunct Parent bestowed upon them, by Donation, or Tocher,
unto the Inheritance: that an equal Proportion or Division might be of the
whole, amongst the Coheirs.

The reason of this Collation was, the equality of interest and affection of
Parents, to their Children, of the same Degree, and thence their presumed Will,
that these should enjoy equal benefit by their Parents. And therefore if it
appeared, not to have been the Parents Will, Collation had no place. As if the
thing were bestowed, with express exemption, ot prohibition of Collation, or if
it were left as a Legacy, or Donation, mortis causa: for thereby the Parents
purpose appeared, to prefer that Child to the rest, even after the Parents
Death.

Collation was competent amongst no other Heirs, than Descendents in the same
Degree; and not amongst extraneous Heirs, institute, or substitute; or amongst
Ascendents, or collateral Heirs: but only when the Coheirs were by Testament,
or from the Intestat, who are in the same Degree, as being all Children, or all
Oyes, etc. But if Children, or Grandchildren were institute or substitute
together, there was no Collation.

Amongst things bestowed upon Children by their Parents, their peculiar
Provisions and Tochers were comprehended: but not their Entertainment, or
Expense of their Education. And therefore though one Child were elder, or
longer entertained than the rest, or though more sumptuously; or though
educated with more noble Accomplishments, and at a greater Rate, as being bred
at Schools, Trades, Exercises, etc. neither the Instruments requisite for these
as Books, Clothes, or the like, came under Collation, or was there any estimate
or consideration thereof. The reason is, because Entertainment and Education is
presumed to be according to the fitness and capacity of the Persons, whereunto
a proportion is observed in all Societies and Communions. And therefore the
Parents are presumed to have expended upon their Children proportionally,
according to the capacity and excellency of their Spirits, and to render them
fit to the services of their Generation: which as they have a Benefit, so have
with them a large Burden, and oft-times Hazard. Neither do Donations to
Children for any special Service done to the Parents, come under Collarion:
because these are not properly Donations, but Remunerations.

27. The Right of Accrescence, is that whereby the Portion of an Heir, Legatar,
or fideicommissar, befalls to another: not by a new and several Succession,
but by the first Succession, and as a part thereof. We have little use of this:
and therefore I shall be shorter, in the many and subtle Debates, agitat
amongst the Doctors thereupon. For taking clearly up this Right, we must take
notice, that Coheirs by Testament, or Legatars, or (...), are either appointed
conjunct by the words of the Testator, or by the matter: or conjunct as to the
words, but (...) as to the matter: or wholly several, both as to words and
matter. As if the Testator say, Titius and Mevius shall be my Heirs: there the
copulative conjunction joins them in the same Sentence, and they are joint in
the same Inheritance, without expressing their distinct Portions; in which the
Law interprets them equally institute. The like is, if he leave a Legacy, or
fideicommissum, in the like terms. But where the Proportion is express, equal,
or unequal, thus; Let Titius and Maevius be my Heirs equally; or, let Titius be
Heir in one half, and Maevius and Caius in another half: here Caius and Maevius
are conjunct in words and matter; but they are several from Titius, both as to
words and matter. Or in the first case, Titius and Maevius are joined in one
Sentence, but separat as to the matter: because their Portions are severed and
expressed. But if the Testator say thus; I leave Titius my dwelling House, and
say after, I leave Maevius the same dwelling House, there is no conjunction of
words: because to both severally the same thing is left. In all these Cases
there may be Substitutions: we shall then set down the Right of Accrescence in
the several Cases thereof.

First, in the Institution or Substitution of Heirs directly, there is place
for Accrescence, whether the Coheirs be conjunct or disjunct. The reason is,
because of that principle of the Civil Law, that no man can die partly Testat
and partly Intestat, except in Military Testaments. And therefore if any of the
Coheirs will not, or cannot enter; the Inheritance accresceth necessarly unto
the other Coheir, with its own burden, whatever it be. Neither can the Heir
reject that Portion, for the same reason: and if he enter before the other Heir
be excluded, he has no remedy, and can neither reject the whole nor a part:
because he might, and should have seen to the other's Entry, with him, or else
he enters on his peril. This takes no place in Legacies, or (...); because in
these, the ground of Law proceeds not. And therefore if any Heretage be ordered
to be restored to such persons, severally in distinct Portions, if one of them
will not, or cannot accept, that Portion accresceth not to the other, but
returns to the Heir. And so in Legacies, if there be a Substitution to any of
the Heirs, the Portion accresceth not: because there is place for the
Substitute, who becomes Coheir with the other Institute. This Accrescence is
so necessary, that the Testator cannot prohibit it, because he cannot die
tested, pro part. And therefore provisio hominis, non tollit provisionem
legis, being as to the necessary Requisits, Essentials, and Solemnities of Law.

Secondly, in the Institution or Substitution of Heirs, or in Legacies, and
(...), if there be more Persons, and some of them joint as to both matter and
words; the Rights of those so conjunct do accresce, (if any of the Persons so
(...), do not, or cannot accept,) to the rest of the Conjuncts: and not to
those that are disjunct in the matter, though they be conjunct in the words. As
if the Testator say, Let Titius be my Heir; and thereafter say, Let Seius and
Mavius be my Heirs: if Seius or Maevius cannot, or will not enter; their
Portion accresceth to the other, and not to Titius. And therefore this
Conjunction is called a tacit Substitution, because the Law presumes that the
Testator did not inconsideratly, or in vain, join Seius and Maevius in one
Sentence; and put Titius in another by himself: and so construeth that these
two should be more conjunct, and their Portions accresce to one another, and
not to Titius.

Thirdly, This proceeds where the conjunction is only in words, if there be
any disjunct both in matter and words: for then the Conjunction makes the
Portions of the Conjuncts to accresce each to other, and not to those who are
wholly disjunct. As if the Testator say, Let Titius be my Heir in the Half, and
let Seius and Mevius be my Heirs equally in the other Half: Here Seius and
Mevius are conjunct in words and not in the matter; because their Portions are
severed, and yet their Portions accresce to other, and not to Titius, who is
wholly disjunct; and that from the presumed will of the Defunct, as having
consideratly put them in one sentence for that purpose. But this takes place
only in Institution and Substitution of Heirs, that the Testator die not partly
testat: but not in Legacies and Fidei commissis; for in these the Portion of
the Conjuncts only in words not being accepted, does accresce to none, but
returns to the Heir.

Fourthly, In all, Cases where there is conjunction in the matter, and not in
words, there is place to Accrescence. As if the Testator say, I leave my
dwelling House to Titius, I desire my Heir to restore the same dwelling House
to Mevius; the Portion of either Party not accepting, accresceth to the other,
and returns not to the Heir. But if the Testator say, I leave my House to
Titius, I leave the same House to Seius and Mevius, either indefinitly, or
expressing their Portions; Seius and Mevius their Portions accresce each to
other, and not to Titius: because if they and Titius be conjoined in matter
only, yet they are also conjoined in word; and so the more Conjunctions
prevail, by the presumed Will of the Defunct.

This kind of Accrescence is called by the Doctors, jus non decrescendi:
because each party being provided to the whole, which cannot be effectual:
therefore concursu parts faciunt, and the Deed is made effectual to them in
part equally; if the Will of the Defunct appear by the Provision, not to take
away the former wholly, as in many Cases it falls out. And therefore in this
Accrescence, if any burden be adjected, if that Party accept not, his Portion
aceresceth to the other, without that burden: because the other enjoys his own
Right, which was total, and becomes now effectual as to the whole: the
impediment that retrenched it, being wholly taken off. But in all other
Conjunctions, the Portion accresceth with its burden. And therefore the
accrescing Portion, as being special, may be rejected in Legacies, and Fidei
commissis: but it cannot be rejected in Institutions or Substitutions, lest the
Testator should be intestat in part. But in jure non decrescendi, when Portions
accresce, amongst those that are conjoined in the matter only; the Accrescence
is necessary, and the Portion accrescing cannot be rejected: because it
befalls by one integral Right, which either must be accepted wholly, or
rejected wholly: and therein approbans non reprobat, no man can both approve,
and disapprove, of the same individual thing.

28. The Law and Customs of Scotland have reduced the matter of Testaments, and
Succession in Movables, much nearer to natural Equity, and made it much
shorter and plainer than the Roman Law. For first, the Civil Law did lay the
greatest weight, upon the free power of testing: which our Law has so far
abridged, that all Contracts, Pactions, and Provisions in relation to the
Heretage of Persons living, are valide and ordinary, in Contracts of Marriage
etc. And even pactum corvinum, in the worst sense, is valide: as when one,
being provided by Contract of Marriage to be a Bairn in the House, sells that
Portion in the Lifetime of the Contracter. Which was sustained, 6. of Julie
1630. Mr. James Aikenhead, contra Bothwel. So an Obligement to leave a Legacy,
was found valide, and to stand as an irrevocable Legacy: yet only to be taken
out of the Defunct's part of his free Goods. 13. of Januarie 1631. Houstoune
contra Houstoune.

29. Secondly; Not only may the power of testing, be restricted by Paction; but
is actually restricted by Law, to extend to no immovable or heretable Right:
which cannot be alienate, or affected upon Deathbed, or, which is equiparat,
by Testament, though the Testator were in his liege pousty, or perfect Health.
And that on good considerations: because Persons are ordinarily and still
presumed to be weak, when affected with Sickness, and so not fit to alienat or
affect things of their greatest concernment, as their Lands, Heretage, etc. And
because it is the great interest of Persons, to be free of all importunities
when they come to their Deathbed. At which time they are only capable of their
Deads part, which is seldom (...) and so they cannot affect their Lands, nor
can they further dispose of their Goods, upon the Solicitation of Churchmen,
which is very powerful in the Popish Church, where Indulgences and Prayers for
the Dead, to bring them out of Purgatory, are believed, and cannot but be
forcible upon dying Men who then are more concerned for the safety of their
Souls, than preservation of their Estates. And every where, the pressing
Desires of Wives for themselves, or for such of their Children as they most
affect, or of Children, Relations, and Friends, may have great impression upon
the Sick for preserving their Peace and Quiet. So there remains nothing
testable, but moveable Rights. What Rights are moveable, and what heretable,
see in the beginning of the Title, Rights Real, which shall not be here
repeted. Thence it is, that there is a total Separation of the Succession in
heritable Rights, which are only competent to Heirs; and in moveable Rights, as
to which because they were entrusted to Prelates, and their Officials, as being
presumed most careful of Widows and Orphans, and that the Will of Defuncts
should be effectual, who did appoint or confirm Persons to execute the
Defunct's Will: the Persons so appointed, or confirmed, were called Executors,
and the whole moveable Rights of Defuncts, whether tested on, or from the
intested, are comprehended in Executory.

30. The whole interest of Executory with us, is in the Office of the Executor;
the Division of the Communion of Goods, betwixt Man and Wife, (whereby the
Relict has her Part;) the Saccession of Children, and nearest of Kin; or
Legacies. There is with us, properly, no Institution or Substitution of Heirs.
for albeit the Nomination of Executors, be in the Defuncts power, in the first
place; and does resemble the Institution of Heirs, and may receive
Substitutions, in the same way; yet is it not properly a Succession, but rather
an Offce, which therefore has a part of the Goods. Executors are Heirs in
mobililus, and when Heirs only are expressed, Executors are comprehended, quoad
mobilia. If there be Nomination of Executors, with a material Legacy to
another, it is a fideicommissiry Succession, to be restored to the universal
Legatar. And Executors dative have also a fideicommissary Succession, which
they must restore to the Wife, and nearest of Kin of the Defunct. So must
Executors nominat, not being also universal Legatars, and being strangers:
retaining only a third of Dead's part to themselves, for executing their
Office. The greatest power of Defuncts, either by Testament, or otherwise, is
the power of legating by particular or universal Legacies. The interest of the
Wife is not so much a Succession, as a Division, of that Communion of moveable
Rights, which the Law stateth betwixt the Husband and her stante matrimonio,
and which is dissolved by the Dissolution of the Marriage: and so she takes
her share of the free Goods by way of Division.

31. The Succession in Movables from the intestat, belongs to the nearest of
Kin; who are the Defunct's whole Agnats, male or female, being the Kinsmen of
the Defunct's Father's side, of the nearest Degree, without primogeniture or
Right of Representation: wherein those joined to the Defunct by both Bloods, do
exclude the Agnats by one Blood.

32. The Line of Succession in Movables, is first, the nearest Descendents,
male or female, in the same Degree, equally; whether Sons or Daughters, without
Right of Representation. So that if the Defunct, the time of his Deceass had
two Daughters, though he had an Oye by a Son; the Daughters will exclude the
Oye, albeit the Defunct had nothing but Movables.

The next Degree of the nearest of Kin is, Brothers and Sisters german: and
failing these, Brothers or Sisters by the Father's side only, or their nearest
Descendents of the same Degree, without Right of Representation.

As to the third Degree of Succession in Movables, failing Descendents, and
Brothers and Sisters, and their Descendents; the Question is, Whether the
Father surviving, will exclude his own Brother, or if there be any place for
Ascendents, in the Succession of Movables? Such Cases occur rarely: and I have
not observed it debated, or decyded. It is but of late since the like Case has
fallen in the Succession of Heirs, and Heritable Rights: wherein our Custom
has according to the course of the Law of Nature, found the Father to be Heir
to his Son, and not the Father-brother, or any of his Descendents; and in that
have differed from the Custom of England. And there is no reason why, if the
Question should occurr, that the like should not be done in Movables.

The next Degree is, the Father's Brethren and Sisters german; which failing,
the Father's Brethren and Sisters by the same Grandfather, and their
Descendents, in the next Degree. In all which both Bloods exclude one Blood.
And if there be no Agnat or Kinsfolk found, who can instruct their propinquity
of Blood; the Goods become caduciary, and confiscat, and belong to the King, as
ultimus haeres; who, and his Donatar, have the same interest, that the nearest
of Kin would have had. Vide Title, Confiscation, Section Ultimus hares.

Children in familia, have not only the common Right, as nearest of Kin; but
have their legittime Portion, called the Bairns part: in which their Father
cannot by Testament, Legacy, or Donation 'mortis causa, prejudge them; or by
any other Deed, on Deathbed.

By the Premises it appears that the whole power of Defuncts, as to Succession
in their Movables, is to nominate Executors and give Legacies.

33. The Nomination of Executors, is properly called a Testament, Additions
thereto, or Alterations thereof, are Codicils. Legacies may be left, whether
there be Testaments or not; and either in the Testament, Codicils, or apart:
but all is ambulatory during the Defunct's Life, and may be taken away
expressly, or implicitly, by posterior or derogatory Deeds; unless the Defunct
be obliged by Contract, inter vivos, not to alter the same. In which case
Contract and Paction, does so far overruled the power of testing; that
posterior Deeds whether expressly, or implicitly altering, would be
ineffectual, like to that Obligement, to leave a Legacy, which was found an
effectual Legacy without further Solemnity. January 30. 1631. Houstoun contra
Houstoun.

34. The effect of Testaments being so small, the Solemnities thereof are no
other, than what are requisite to accomplish any other Writ. For two Witnesses
suffice, and if the Testament be holograph, it is valid. Or if the Testator
cannot, or be not able through Sickness, to write, a Testament will be
sufficient by a Notar and two Witnesses: notwithstanding the Act of Parliament
1579. cap. 8. requiring to Writs of importance, two Notars and four Witnesses;
which holds not in Testaments, though containing matter of great importance.
18. of January 1623. Bog contra Robert Hepburn. Yea Ministers are authorized as
Notars, in the case of Testaments. Par. 1584. cap. 133. The reason here of is;
because Ministers are ordinarily with sick Persons the time of their Death.

Nuncupative Testaments are not of force in Scotland. For though Legacies left
within an hundred pounds, may be nuncupative, without Writ; yet the Nomination
will not so subsist, nor be respected by the Commissaries. And therefore a
verbal Testament, taking away a formal Legacy, subscrived but by initial
Letters; was not sustained, though made at Sea, and so in a Case of necessity:
and not admitted to be proven by Witnesses in the Ship. Feb. 18. 1631. Houstoun
contra Houstoun.

35. The effect of Testaments is not greater, though made in England, the
Testator residing there: and so extends not to an Heretable Sum due in
Scotland, left in Legacy by the Testator, being a Scots-man. July 3. 1634.
Melvil contra Drummond. Hope Testaments, Purves contra Chisholm. Executors of
Colonel Henrison ibid. Neither do nuncupative Testaments of Scots-men, though
residing, animo remanendi, abroad, and dying there; have any effect with us:
albeit nuncupative Testaments be valid according to the Law and Custom of that
Place. For albeit the Custom of the Place, may supply the Solemnity of any
Writs, or Evidents, for instructing a Right; as Writs made abroad by Nottaries,
and Tabellions, are valid, though not done according to the Law of Scotland,
which requires two Notars and four Witnesses, in Writs of importance: yet the
Custom of those Places cannot constitute any Right of Succession, not allowed
by the Law of Scotland. And therefore William Schaw, Factor and Residenter in
London, having lived and died there, in the House of one Mary Lewins, who had
confirmed, in England, a nuncupative Testament, whereby he had designed her as
Executrix and Legatrix; and the nearest of Kin of the said William, having
confirmed themselves Executors to him, in Scotland, and the competition being
betwixt them: the Lords preferred the Executors confirmed in Scotland, and had
no respect to the nuncupative Testament, as having no effect by the Law of
Scotland. January 19. 1665. Schaw contra Lewins.

36. The like Solemnities will be sufficient for Codicils and Legacies. A
nuncupative Legacy within an hundred pounds, is probable by Witnesses. November
24. 1609. Russel contra July 7. 1629. Wallace contra Mure. Where a greater
Legacy, left by word, restricted to an hundred pounds, was found so probable.

37. The power of Testing is competent to all Persons, who have the use of
Reason, though Minors, having Curators not consenting: Wives cled with
Husbands, without their consent; Persons interdicted, without consent of the
Interdicters: but not to Pupils, Idiots, furious Persons in their Furiosity:
neither to Bastards, not having lawful Issue, or testamenti factionem, by the
Kings Gift; as in the former Case, Wallace contra Mure. Vide Tit. Confiscation.
Bastardry.

38. Legacies are either particular or universal, general or special. Universal
Legacies are when the whole Movables, in so far as is in the Defunct's
disposal, and not left by particular Legacies, is legate. and so it is legalum
per universitatem, and like to the Succession of an Heir.

Special Legacies are, where some Individual is left, as such a Horse, Clothes,
etc. or such a Sum due by such a Person: whereby the Property is stated in the
Legatar, and at most, but the Possession or Custody in the Executor. And
therefore the Legatar may pursue for Delivery, or Payment of the special
Legacy, against the Havers or Debitors: but he must call the Executor, that his
interest may be preserved; least the Debts exhaust even the special Legacy.
Upon which consideration, the Lords sustained not a Pursuit upon a special
Legacy, leaving a Sum due by such a Person, in such a Bond, pursued against the
Debtor; the Executor not being called. March 9. 1627. Forrester contra Clerk
And before, the Pursuit against the Debtor, at the Legatar's instance, was
simply repelled; not being against the Executor. February 4. 1623. Lord of
Balnamoon contra Balcomie. Yet Process was sustained at the instance of the
universal Legatar, against the Debtor, the Executor being also called. Here
there was Malversation betwixt the Executor and Debitors. But ordinarily,
Legatars have no immediate Action, against the Debitors of the Defunct; but only
against his Executor, Hope, Legacy, Ballantine contra Mr. John Eliot.

Legacies may be left, not only in Testaments, or Codicils; but where there is
none: or where there is in Contract;, Letters, or Tickets apart; though the
Legacies were not in the Confirmation. December 1. 1629. Executors of Sir
William Scot contra Arthur Rae.

39. Legacies, and Donations in contemplation of Death, or done on Death bed,
albeit as inter vivos; yet being of Movables, as Bonds, Assignations, or Gifts
of Money, or Goods on Deathbed: have the like effect, and are only effectual,
as to the Defuncts free Goods at his disposal, which is called the Dead's part.
And if the whole Legacies, exceed Dead's part of the free Geere; regularly they
are abated proportionally. Wherein there is no preference, nor Privilege
granted to Legacies left ad pias causas: as for building of a Kirk, delivered
by the Defunct long ere he dyed; which suffered proportionable Defalcation with
the ordinary Legacies, July 8. 1630. Doctor Monro contra Executors of William
Scot. But if the Defunct express his Will, to leave a Legacy without
Defalcation; it will not be defalked with the other Legacies.

40. Whether a special Legacy, without such express Will of the Defunct, will
be abated proportionally with other Legacies; I have not observed often decyded.
But I conceive it will not bear proportional Deduction: because though not the
express, yet the tacit and presumed Will of the Defunct seems to be so. Else
why should he leave that Legacy more specially, than the rest? Which is more
clear in things left in Legacy; as when a Horse, Sword, Clothes etc. are left;
and the other Legacies are not special: there seems no reason, upon failing of
the other Legacies, to burden the special Legacies; abated they cannot be,
directly, not being Quantities but Bodies. The same reason is in Sums specially
legate: for though it may appear that the Defunct's reason may be, to leave such
a special Debt, to such a Legatar, not as a (...), but because that Debtor is
less solvendo; yet with that hazard, the other advantage is consequent; that as
he will get no benefit with the other Legatars, solie should bear no abatement
with them. It was so decyded July 21. 1665. Spreul contra Murray.

41. Quaeritur, Whether, as in the Civil Law, so with us, if the Testator leave
a special Legacy, of that which he knows is not his own; it will be valid quoad
valorem? It was found, that a special Legacy left of an heritable Bond, which
fell not in Executory, was valid, to affect the Dead's part of Movables, pro
tanto. 22 of Januarie 1624. Drummond contra Drummond.

A Legacy by a Wife, ordaining an Executor to discharge a Bond to the Legatar,
was found valid, and to be made up by the Wife's Executors; albeit the Half of
the Bond belonged to the Husband jure mariti: as being legatum rei aliena
scienter legatae; and the Wife was presumed to know that common Principle in
Law, and not to be ignorant thereof. 18. of June 1664. Murray contra Executors
of Rutherfoord. It was also so decided, of a Bond left in Legacy, which Bond
had been assigned by the Defunct to another, shortly before his Death, whereof
he was presumed not to be ignorant. 14. June 1664. Alexander Falconer contra
Mr. John Dowgal The like was found of a Legacy, left by a Defunct, out of a Sum
he had upon such Lands; which Sum he could not but know was heretable, and
could not be legate: wherethe Executor, (who was also Heir,) was decemed to make
good the Legacy. 2. of December 1674. Robert Cranstoun contra Brown. Yet a
Legacy being special, bearing such a Bond to be confirmed, and communicate to
the Legatar; was not found due, or to be made up: in respect that after the
Legacy, the Defunct made that Bond heretable, by a superveening Security, which
did import the Revocation of the Legacy. July 8. 1673. Grizel Edmondstoun
contra Margaret Primrose. But where the Testator gives a special Legacy, of
that which he supposes to be his own; he gives it, but as he has it, without
any warrandice, being merely gratuitous: and the Executor is not obliged to
make it good. As if he legate a Sum, which he supposes moveable, and yet is
truly heretable. February 21. 1663. Anna Wardlaw contra Frazer of Kilmundie.

42. Legacies are sometimes left together, in one Writ, and sometimes by
posterior Writs, which do not derogat to the prior Legacies; but all come in
together. If they exceed the Defunct's part, they suffer all, proportional
Abatement, except such as are special Legacies. For if one Thing, or Sum be
Specially legate to one Person, and by a posterior Writ, be legate to another;
the posterior Legacy takes place, and is a Revocation of the former; and they
do not come in together, concursu parts facere; as they would do, if left in
one Writ, by the Roman Law; and each Legatar would have but a Half. But we have
no such Custom, or Style, to legate the same thing entirely, to different
Persons, in the same Writ. And if that should happen, it is like, that the
posterior Legacy, though in the same Writ, would exclude the prior; as an
alteration of the Testator's mind, while his Testament was a framing: for it is
ordinary in the same Writ, to alter prior Clauses, by posterior. There is also
this Exception, of the Consistency of Legacies, left at diverse times, that the
Assignations, as inter vivos, on Deathbed, have only the effect of Legacies.
Yet posterior Assignations, though not special, but generally, out of so much
of the Defunct's Means, are preferable to prior general Assignations. July 21.
1676. Trails contra Gordoun. And Bonds of Provision to Children, on Deathbed,
though they have but the effect of Legacies; yet they do not come in with prior
Legacies, to suffer a proportional Abatement, but are preferred thereto.
December 14. 1676. Katharin Mitchel contra Litlejohn. And a Defunct having, on
Deathbed, given Assignation to one of his Children, to some of his Bonds, and
thereafter by his Testament, nominat that Child, and an other his Executors,
and universal Legatars; the universal Legacy, was not found to take away the
prior Assignation: though the same was not delivered, nor did contain a
Clau^se, dispensing with Delivery; but that Child had both the Assignation, and
the Half of the remainder of Dead's part. January 29. 1677. Aikman contra
Successors of David Boyd. A Legacy by a Husband to his Wife, was found not to
be understood, to be in satisfaction of her Third, but to be wholly out of the
Defunct's Third. January 12. 1681. Trotter Lady Craigleith contra Rochead Lady
Prestoungrange. And a Legacy left, for building a Bridge, being a definite Sum;
the Executor having builded the Bridge, with less Expense, the superplus was
applied, to build another Bridge in the same Shire. June 18. 1678. Commissaries
of Berwick Shire contra John Craw.

43. Legacies, Donations in contemplation of Death, or Deeds on Deathbed, may
affect the Defunct's whole free Movables, Debts being deduced; except only as
to the Relict's, part, and Bairns part: which were found not to be prejudged by
an Assignation to a moveable Sum, made by the Defunct on Deathbed. July 10.
1628. Cant contra Edgar. The reason of this limitation on Legacies, will easily
appear, when the nature of the Relict's part, and Bairns part shall be
considered.

The Relict's part of her Husban'd Executory, or Movables, has its rise from
that Communion of Goods, betwixt Man and Wife stante matrimonio, of which,
Title Conjugal Obligations,. 12.

The Communion of Goods, betwixt Husband and Wife, is competent ipso jure,
without Contract, as a part of that individual Society, wherein Marriage
consists. And therefore by the Dissolution of the Marriage, the Communion is
dissolved. So that if the Husband die first, the Wife has her Share of his
Executory: and if the Wife die first, her Executors, Legatars, and nearest of
Kin, have a Share of the free Movables, the Husband has, the time of her
Death. In which Children of that Wife though of other Marriages, will have part
of her Share, with the Children procreat betwixt the present Husband, and the
Wife, both being in a like propinquity to her.

44. The Bairns part is their Legittima, or Portion natural: so called, because
it flows from that natural Obligation of Parents, to provide for their
Children. Which is not extended, to restrain the Parent to dispose of any part
of his Means; but only so, as to leave a Portion thereof to his Children: which
because the Law orders, and determins; it is called the Legittime.

The Bairns part is only competent as to the Father's Means, and is not
extended to the Mother, or Grandfather: nor is extended to any, but lawful
Children. Neither is it extended to all lawful Children, but only to those who
are not for is familiat. And it carries a Third of the Defunct's free
Movables, Debts being deduced, if his Wife furvived; and a Half if there was
no Relict.

45. But here the Question arises, What is For is familiation, whether being
actually out of the Family be sufficient; as if the Child exercise a Trade a
part, or be married, without the Father's consent; at least without a Portion
or Tocher from the Father? Or whether it be sufficient that the Child be
forisfamiliat, and provided by the Father, albeit the said Provision be not
accepted expressly in satisfaction of the Portion natural, and Bairns part? Or
whether none be accounted forisfamiliat, to exclude them from the Bairns part;
unless they discharge the same, or accept a provision in satisfaction thereof?
There be probable reasons for all the three parts: but the main Doubt, is upon
the last two, Whether Provision be sufficient, as being presumed, to be given
and accepted, in satisfaction of the Portion natural. So much the rather that
in Contracts of Marriage, Fathers of times use to adject a Clause, That the
Child Contracted shall be a Bairn in the House: which would be superfluous, if
the Child would be a Bairn of the House, unless the Bairns part were expressly
discharged. And therefore Tochers, and Provisions being neither expressly in
satisfaction of the Bairns part, nor yet with provision, That that Child shall
be a Bairn in the House; must be holden to be given, and accepted, in
satisfaction of the Portion natural. Which is confirmed by a Decision observed
by Dury. February 1. 1622. Janet Eleis having pursued the Executors, af umquhil
Patrick Eleis her Father, for her share, with the rest of the four Bairns, in
the said Patrick's House; and that by a Clause, in her Contract of Marriage
with John Smith, afterward Provest of Edinburgh, providing her to be
Portioner, of her Fathers free Geer, with the rest of his Bairns, provided the
rest were forisfamiliat, and provided likeways by their Father. In which Case,
the said Janet was found to have her Share, albeit two of the Bairns were not
married, but only provided. Whereby it appears, that the Lords accounted
Provision as Forisfamiliation. Yet the contrary opinion is more probable, viz.
That nothing can take away the Bairns Legittime, unless it be discharged. And
that a Presumption, of accepting a Tocher, or Portion, in satisfaction, will
not be sufficient, unless it bear in satisfaction of the Portion natural and
Bairns part. 1. Because the legittime is so strongly founded, in the Law of
Nature, and positive Law, that Presumption or Conjecture cannot take it off. 2.
This is more suitable to the Civil Law, which we follow in this Case, whereby
the difference betwixt Children, being emancipat, or forisfamiliat, or sui
under the paternal power, and in the Family is taken off as to the Succession
and Legittime. And therefore there is introduced collatio bonorum, whereby all
that the emancipat or forisfamiliat received from their Father, must fall in
under the Account. So their Tochers, Gifts, Provisions etc. are imputed in a
part of the Legittime; but are never presumed to be the whole, unless it were
expressed. 3. Collatio bonorum is ordinary with us, by which the Tocher of the
married Children comes in the Account of the Bairns part: which could not take
place, if those Tochers were presumed to be in satisfaction of the Bairns part,
unless the Clause to be a Bairn in the House, were expressly added. Which was so
found. February 27. 1627. Janet Ross contra Marion Kellie. Where the Pursuer
being married, and tochered; was not excluded from the Bairns part, there being
no other Bairns in the Family. Yet there was a Wife in the Family, and so the
Executory was tripartite. Neither was the Pursuer made to bring in her Portion,
collatione bonorum. But here the Contract bare, that the Tocher was in
satisfaction of that Daughter's right to her Mother's Third, who was her
Father's first Wife.

If then it be urged, that the Clause, to be a Bairn in the House, signifies
nothing: It is answered, that the Clause may be propter majorem evidentam and
securitatem. But also as to the clearing of this Question, Whether that Clause
has not this effect, that that Child should not only come in, to have a Share
of the Portion natural, with the Bairns of the Family; as if that Clause had
not been adjected, but the Child had come in, only provisione legis. In which
Case, the Child forisfomiliat behoved to have brought in the Tocher, or
Portion, collatione bonorum: but when the Child comes in also provisione
hominis, the effect is, that it be without Collation. Which is so much the more
evident, that oftimes Children are provided to be Bairns of the House, after
the rest are likewise provided. So that when that Condition is not adjected,
the meaning is, that without consideration of the Tocher, or former Provision,
the Children by that Clause should have equal share. It was so found Spots.
Test. Elizabeth Carsen contra Agnes and Marion Carsens.

46. Collation then has only place amongst Children, where it is not
prohibit, expressly, or implicitly, by the Father, providing that Child to be
a Bairn in the House. But Collation has no place as to the Wife: because
Tochers in such Provisions, being as inter vivos, of its own nature, it is no
part of the Executory; but is done by the Husband in (...) potestate, who is
dominus omnium bonorum, at least has plenam administrationem, notwithstanding
the Communion of Goods in the Wife: But Collatio is only a Remedy introduced in
Law, to keep Equality amongst Children, who have an equal Interest in their
Father and his Movables: but it is not introduced, to keep an Equality betwixt
the Wife, and them. Neither does it design an Equality in all things, but in
Provisions, or Tochers, in Money; which must be accounted to those who got the
same. But Land disponed to a second Son for Love and Favor, not bearing for
his Portion or in satisfaction thereof, was not found to exclude him from his
share of the Bairns part, with his Sister: nor to require him to collate what
he got in Land. January 14. 1677. Duke and Duchess of Balcleugh contra Earl of
Tweedale.

Hence arises another Branch of the former Question, Whether if all the
Children be forisfamiliat and provided; but have not discharged their Portion
natural, or Bairns part, or accepted the provision in satisfaction thereof: If
in that case they will have access to a Portion natural, in prejudice of the
Relict and Legatars? I say, if they be all provided, because if some be in the
Family unmarried and unprovided, the Relict and Legatars will be no more
prejudged, if all the Bairns come in, or only some of them, because many, or
few, they will have all the Bairns part and no more. The former Case, Ross
contra Kelly, seems to bring in the Children, though all forisfamiliat, to a
Legittime with the Relict: because there was but one Child, and she married,
and tochered. Only it is observed, that her Provision was in satisfaction of
her Mother's part: so that albeit she was married, yet it appears that she was
not provided, ex bonis paternis, but only ex bonis maternis. And therefore it
remains yet unclear: and there seems much reason that the Wifes interest being
a division of her Communion of Goods, she should not devide with them who are
out of the Family and provided, unless they had a Provision to be Bairns in the
Family. By the common Practick also, Commissaries divide Executory in two,
where there is a Wife, and the whole Children married, and so presumed to be
provided. It was so found where there was but one Child married and provided,
though not expressed in satisfaction. But the Child was admitted to a Third,
offering to confer. February 18. 1663. Dumhar of Hemprigs contra Frazer And
where a Defunct had only two Daughters, besides his Heir, the one in her
Contract of Marriage, getting a Tocher in full satisfaction of her Portion
natural and Bairns part; and the other in her Contract, being provided to be a
Bairn in the House, was found to have the whole Right to the Bairns part, and
to the Deads part, and Office of Executory, excluding the other: who was found
to succeed to no part, as being renounced in favor of her Father, and
returning back from him by his Succession; but that it accresced to the other,
though she was not Executrix nominat, but dative. And therefore the
Confirmation of her, sole Executrix, was sustained. January 27. 1680. Agnes
Sandielands contra Rachel Sandielands.

There is an other considerable difference, betwixt the condition of the Wife
and Children, introduced by the Act of Parliament 1641. revived Par. 1661. cap.
32. whereby Bonds and Provisions bearing Clause of Annualrent, which before
were heritable, and so fell not within Executory; now are moveable, as to the
Bairns, nearest of Kin, Executors, and Legatars, only excluding the Relict: and
are disposeable by Legacy, or Nomination, and at the Defunct's disposal, by
Testament, or any Deed on Deathbed. And they are exhaustible by Debts of the
same nature, which Debts of that nature, do not exhaust the Relicts part: which
is inferred by a necessary consequence from the foresaid Act of Parliament
1641. For seeing thereby Wives have no Share of their Husband's Bonds bearing
Annualrent; as they have not the benefit, so they ought not to be burdened
with such Bonds: unless the Husband or Wife die before the Term of Payment of
the Annualrent; or that the Bonds become moveable, simpliciter, by a Charge, or
Pursuit for Payment thereof, whereby the Creditor's mind is presumed to make
the Sum simply moveable. In which Case, the Wife has both the benefit and
burden of such Bonds in her Share, July 14. 1664. Elizabeth Scrymgeour contra
Murrays.

Yet the Wife has her Share of the Annualrent of all Bonds, though heritable,
due before Dissolution of the Marriage: but no Share of the said Annualrents
after, nor of the Stock. June 24. 1663. inter eosdem. In this Case, a Bond
being payable to the Husband and Wife, the longest Liver of them two, but
bearing no Annualrent; the Relict was found to have her option either to lift
the whole, and re-imploy it, for her Liferent use; or to have the Half of the
Stock, seeing it bare no Annualrent: but not to have both the Annualrent of the
whold, and the Half of the Stock. But Bonds which exclude Executors, are
heritable quoad creditorem: but moveable quoad debitorem. Because the Creditor
excludes his Executor: whereas the Debitor's Executor is not excluded, but
liable. But Bonds bearing Clause of Infeftment are simply heritable, both as to
the Debtor, and Creditor: for by these, the mind of the Creditor appears, to
exclude all others but his Heir, except as to the bygone Annualrents.

48. Heirs are excluded from the Bairns part, though in the Family; because of
their Provision by the Heritage: except two Cases. First, if the Heir renounce
the Heritage, in favor of the remanent Bairns: for then the Heir is not to be
in worse case than they; but they come in pari passu, both in heritable and
moveable Rights, which is a kind of collatio bonorum: which will hold when
there is no Bonds but heritable Bonds.

49. Secondly, If there be but one Child in familia, and so both Heir and
Executor; that Child has not only the Heritage, but the whole Bairns part, and
so abates the Relict's part, and Dead's part. Nic. Division of testaments,
Kennedy contra his Father's Relict. The like without Collation of the Heritage.
January 12. 1681. Catharine Trotter Lady Craigleith contra Rochead Lady
Prestoungrange.

50. In the Division of Executory, respect is had to the time of the Defunct's
Death, as to the Relict and Children, though before Confirmation, or any one's
owning of the Succession. For then if there be a Wise surviving, and Children,
the Exeentory is tripartite, whether the Bairns be of the same Marriage, or
some other Marriage. As was found in the former Case. June 17. 1631. Chapman
contra Gibson. In which Case, there was but one Bairn, who if the Father had
been dead, would have been Heir. The like. July 18. 1624. Henrieson contra
Sanders. So the Wife and Children surviving, transmit their Parts to their
nearest of Kin ipso jure. And Legatars have Right to, and do transmit Legacies,
to their Executors, though they have not insisted or recovered them in their
own Life: unless the Legatar die before the Testator, (for then the Legacy is
not due,) or that the Legacy be conditional, and the Legatar die before the
Condition be purified. And if any of the Children, who survive the Defunct, die
before Confirmation, they transmit.

51. Yea the nearest of Kin, surviving, transmit their Right by the Act of
Parliament 1540. cap. 120. Whereby it is clear that the nearest of Kin have a
proper Right, and not solly by the Office of Executory. But it is more clear by
the Act of Parliament 1617. cap. 14. which makes jus agnationis, to the
nearest of Kin, due by the Executors, though the nearest of Kin be not
confirmed Executors, and so have Interest only by the Office. And so it was
found amongst the Executors of umquhil Patrick Bell in Glasgow, whose three
Sisters having confirmed his Testament, one of them was found to transmit her
Share to her Children, though she died before Execution. For the Son of that
Sister was found to have his Share, albeit the Office of Executory accresced to
the two Sisters surviving, and with the Office, the Third of Dead's part. Feb.
11. 1662. The like was found since betwixt Dame Agnes Maxwel and the Earl of
Wintoun. And after full Debate, it has been determined, that the Jnterest of
the nearest of Kin, is only extended to those who are existent nearest of Kin
the time of the Confirmation of the Defunct's Testament, which is aditio
haereditatis mobilium. And the Executor is haeres fideicommissarius, who must
restore to the Relicts and Bairns, their part of the free Geer, Debts deduced;
and to the nearest of Kin, whether Bairns or any other, in proximo gradu, the
time of Confirmation, the Deads part, the Legacies deduced: reserving to the
Executors nominat, if they have no proper interest, a Third of the Dead's part,
unexhausted by Legacies. So that the Executor adit haereditatem, not for
himself only, but for all Parties having interest. Which is suitable to the
Entry of Heirs in heritable Rights: and whereby jus sanguinis, of the nearest
of Kin, is not prejudged; seeing immediately after the Defunct's Death, Edicts
may be served, and the nearest of Kin will be confirmed Executor, if a
Nomination be not produced. And though any of the nearest of Kin, should die
before a Confirmation can be expede; it is an extraordinary contingencie, which
Law regards not. And the Act of Parliament 1617. which establishes the Right
of the nearest of Kin, by making Executors comptable to them, presupposes a
Confirmation, before the interest of the nearest of Kin be established. But
though the Executor die, before the Testament be execute, there must be an
Executor ad non executa, who will be comptable to those, who were nearest of
Kin, the time of the first Confirmation. And if any of them die, before they
attain their Share; their Bairns or nearest of Kin will have no Right, till
they confirm the Testament of the nearest of Kin deceassed, and give up an
Inventary, of what will be due to the Defunct's nearest of Kin, by the
Executors of the prior Defunct. Neither will the Share of any Bairn, or nearest
of Kin, deceassing without Children, belong to the Surviver jure accrescendi:
who will not represent them passive, and be liable to the Debts. And therefore
must be confirmed as Executors to them: and thereby have both an active and
passive Title. All which was found. Feb. 14. 1677. Duke and Duchess of
Balcleugh contra Earl of Tweeddale.

52. By the premises it is evident how Executory is to be divided, what Dead's
part is, and how it may be affected with Legacies, or Deeds of the Defunct in
Testament, or on Deathbed. For first, all Persons who have no Wife, or
Children unforisfamiliat, without Husband, (and Wives, though they have
Children) have the whole disposal of the Executory: and may leave Legacies, and
Donations of their moveable Estates, and do other Deeds on Deathbed,
equivalent to their free Goods: so that Dead's part is the whole. But if the
Defunct had a Wife, and Children unforisfamiliat, then the Executory is
tripartite: and Dead's part is a Third, the Wife's part is a Third, and the
Bairns part a Third. But if the Defunct have a Wife and no Children
unforisfamiliat, the Executory is bipartite: the Dead's part is a Half, and the
Wife's part another Half. Or if he have Children unforisfamiliat, and no Wife,
the Executory is also bipartite: and in either Case, his Legacies, or Deeds on
Deathbed, may be equivalent to the Half of his free Geer. And if the
Commissaries by error or mistake make the Division otherwise, none are
prejudged thereby, who are not called, and compearing: but may summarly,
without Reduction of the Confirmation, be admitted to claim their Share. Which
was so found. Feb. 27. 1627. Janet Ross contra Marion Kello.

Children have a threefold interest in their Father's Executory. First, their
Bairns part, wherein their Father cannot prejudge them. Secondly, their
interest in Dead's part, whereby they have Title to the Office of Executory, if
the Defunct nominat none. Or thirdly, if he die, they have all that is free of
Dead's part, not exhausted by Legacy, or by the Executor's Allowance, for his
Administration; which is the Third of the Dead's part. And that, when he
nominats Executors: unless they be also universal Legatars; or though the
Children appear not, to claim their Office, when Executors dative are confirmed
by the Commissaries.

53. This interest is common to all other nearest of Kin. This is clear by the
Act of Parliament 1617. cap. 14. as to Executors nominat, that the nearest of
Kin may pursue them, for the free Geer; even for Dead's part, except a Third to
the Executors for their Administration. So that if they have any Legacy, it is
imputed as a part of the Third, and the Executor nominat, has not both,
separatim: and he has but the Third of Dead's part, Debts and Legacies being
deduced. So that if there be an universal Legacy to another, the Executor
nominat has nothing. November 29. 1626. Forsyth contra Forsyth. July 9. 1631.
Wilson contra Tinto. Where the reason is rendered, because before the Act of
Parliament 1617. Defuncts might exhaust all their Dead's part by Legacies: and
that Act was not to better Executors, but to restrict them. The like January
15. 1674. Pattoun contra Leishman. The like Spots. Executors of Moncrief contra
Moncrief. And seeing the said Act bears, Strangers being nominat, shall have but
a Third of the Dead's part; therefore the Wife will have no more but her Third.
Or if one of the Children should be nominat, or the nearest of Kin: for none of
these are Strangers, and so have nothing for their Administration, but their
Expenses. November 28. 1676. John Ker contra Jean Ker. But concerning Executors
dative, this Statute gives them no Share of Dead's part.

54. The order of Confirmation is, that the Commissaries having emitted Edicts,
affixed on the Church-door, where the Defunct died, calling all Persons having
interest, to confirm; then, according as Parties compear, and compete, they
prefer the greatest interest. First, the Executor nominat, then the nearest of
Kin. Thirdly, the Relict, Legatars, and Creditors: and all failing, the
Procurator fiscal, or such who are surrogat by him; who enjoyed the whole
Dead's part, till their Right were reduced, on a better Title. But since, not
only the Wife and Bairns, who may call all Executors to account, for their
parts, but also the nearest of Kin, have been admitted, to call the ordinary
Executors dative to an account, without Reduction. But before the said Statute,
all Executors had the whole profit of Dead's part, as the Narrative of it
bears. And yet of old, it appears the Executors had little benefit, if there was
any Debt, heritable, or moveable: for they only were liable for a year: and
thereafter to find Caution to relieve the Heretor, Par. 1503. cap. 76. But
these Executors dative have not a Third of Dead's part, for their
Administration, though they be Strangers: for the Statute gives that only to
Executors nominat, being Strangers. But the Fiscal, by the Trust committed to
Bishops to have a care of Defunct's Executory, and the Quota, which is the
twentieth penny of free Geer, should execute the Executory, where none are
nominat by the Defunct. And therefore, Executors dative are his Assigneys,
surrogat in place of the Fiscal. November 28. 1676. John Ker contra Jean Ker.

This interest of Children, as nearest of Kin, is never taken away; unlese they
renunce or discharge, not only the Bairns part, or Portion natural, but all
that they may succeed to, by their Father's Death.

To come now to the Office of Executory, and what power Executors have active,
and how far they are liable passive; we must distinguish Executors. They are
either nominat, or dative, constitute by the Commissaries: and these are
preferred according to their several interests in the Executory. And these who
are Creditors of the Defunct, preferred hoc nomine, are called Executors
Creditors. Executors are also principal, or ad ommissa, and male appretiata; or
ad non executa. And all these may be either Sole Executors or Co-executors.

All Executors are obliged, to give up Inventary upon Oath, bearing that they
have omitted nothing known to them, nor have misapretiat the same; and must
find Caution, to make the Executory foorthcoming, to all Parties having
interest. They use also to protest, that what further comes to their Knowledge,
they may (...) or add to the Inventary: which they may still do, before another
do Diligence, to confirm a Dative ad omissa, and male appretiata; or before
they be pursued for Super-intromission.

55. An Executor nominat in England, was admitted to pursue in Scotland, upon a
Confirmation there, without Inventary: in respect of the Custom there, not to
make Inventary. Feb. 16. 1627. Lawson contra Bartholemew Kello. But in that
Case, an Executor dative, confirmed in Scotland, having found Caution, was
preferred to the Executor nominat and confirmed in England. Spots. Executors,
inter eosdem.

An Executor being decerned, though not confirmed, may pursue not only the
Defunct's Wife and Bairns, to give up Inventary; but also Strangers. November.
11. 1609. Heriot contra Heriot. But till he be confirmed, or have License, he
cannot pursue for Payment. December. 12. 1622. Cathcart contra Cuninghame.

56. Executors intending to confirm, use to get a License to pursue: which
ordinarily bears, excludendo sententiam. Which was sustained, though general, to
pursue for all the Defunct's Debts, naming none. Hope, Executors, Farquhar
contra Law. But the Obtainer must be first decerned Executor: for till an Edict
be served, and an Executor confirmed, there can be no Title given to pursue.
Yet before Confirmation, the License may be granted.

If the Decree be extracted, on such License, before Confirmation, the Decree
is null. Hope, Executors, John Aitkin contra Richardson. Nicol. de acquirenda
and amittenda hereditate, Janet Tweedie contra Magdalen Lawson. Licenses use
not to be granted, after the principal Confirmation: and therefore was not
sustained as a Title. December 14. 1621. Haliday contra Yet it was sustained,
for pursuing a Debt particularly expressed therein, being dubii juris. January
21. 1624. Carnousie contra The like where the License was granted to a Creditor
surrogat as Executor Creditor, ad omissa. June 30. 1665. Stevenson contra
Crawford. Feb. 21. 1668. Scot of Clerkingtoun contra Lady Clerkingtoun.

Executors confirmed, have Right to call for, and uplift all the Defunct's
Movables confirmed. The Executors of a Donatar ofa Liferent Escheat, was found
to have Right to the Bygones of that Liferent, before the Donatar's Death: and
his Heir to the Profits of the Liferent, after the Donatar's Death, albeit
there was no Declarator in his Life. January 28. 1671. Keiry contra Nicolson.
But Sums secured by a condition in a Reversion, that no Redemption should be
till these Sums were paid, (where the Disposition was not granted for these
sums, as the Cause thereof,) though they affect the Ground disponed, yet remain
a moveable Right, befalling to Executors. Feb. 18. 1676. Thomas Wauch contra
Doctor Jameson.

57. It uses to be controverted, betwixt the Heir and Executor, about the
Rents of Lands, and others, which run according to the legal Terms. So if the
Heretor, or Liferenter, survive Whitsunday and Martinmasse; their Executors
have that whole year, albeit it be Victual payable at Candlemasse. because the
last legal Term is Martinmasse. And it was so decided, even in the Case of a
Miln. Feb. 21. 1635. Lord of Westnisbet contra Lord of Swintoun. The like was
found, albeit the Entry of the Tenent was at Whitsunday and the conventional
Terms of Payment of the Miln Rent, were, the first Half at Candlemasse, and the
second at Whitsunday; That Liferenter surviving Martinmasse, being the last
legal Term, had the Rent of the Miln, both payable at Candlemasse and
Whitsunday, after that Martinmasse. July 20. 1671. Guthry contra Mackerstoun.
But if they live only till Whitsunday, then their Executors have the Half of
the Rent, Victual, or Money: if they live till the Term-day, though they die
that Day, their Executors have that Term wherein they died. It was so found,
that the Defunct dying on Martinmasse-day, at eleven hours, his Executors had
that whole Years Rent. Hope, Executors, Tenants of Merchistoun contra Napeir.
The like, where the Defunct died on Marlinmasse-day in the afternoon, the
Executor got that whole Year. 16. of February 1642. Lady Bruntoun Relict of the
Bishop of Galloway contra his Executors.

58. Executors have also Right to Steelbow Goods, without prejudice to the
Tenent's Tack thereof, to continue till it were expired. December. 4. 1638.
Countess of Westmorland contra Countess of Hume. January 28. 1642. Patrick
Dundass contra George Brown. June 1681. Mackanlay contra Lord of Ardincaple.
As to other particulars, it will appear what Rights are moveable, Title Real
Rights.

59. Co executors cannot pursue, unless the rest be concurring, or called.
March 8. 1634. contra Lag. Yet if any of the Executors confirmed will not
concur, and contribute equal Pains and Expense; the Pursuit will be sustained
without him: and he may be excluded by a Process before the Commissaries on
that ground. June 29. 1629. Young contra Murray. But when Co-executors have
ohtained Sentence, and so execute the Testament, every one may pursue for their
Shares, severally, without concourse or calling the rest. January 25. 1665.
William Menzies contra Lord of Drum.

One Executor cannot discharge a Debt, wholly: seeing the other Executors have
equal Share in all. March 17. 1630. Semple contra Mackie and Dobbie. Yet this
Debtor alleging, that the Executors pursuing, had received their full Share;
it was sustained. March 24. 1680. inter eosdem. An Executor's Discharge was
sustained, though the Executor dyed before the Testament was registrat, he
having confirmed, made Faith, and found Caution. Hope, Executors, Elizabeth
Lawson contra Lady Humby.

Amongst Co-executors the Office accresceth to the Survivers, who are in the
same case as if the defunct Executor had not been named. Only in so far as the
Testament was execute before that Executor's Death, his Share is transmitted to
his Executors, and accresceth not: but is transmitted cum onere debitorum
defuncti pro rata. And it seems the defunct Executors, being Strangers, should
have only a share of a Third of Dead's part, so far as execute in their Life:
seeing that benefit follows the Office, and should be proportionable to the
effect, and charge thereof.

60. Assignations granted by Executors, have only the effect of Procuratories,
and ceass by the Death of the Debtor: unless they have attained effect by
Sentence, or Satisfaction, whereby alone the Testament can be execute. And if
all the Executors die before the Testament be execute, in so far as it is not
execute, the Goods remain in bonis (...): and the Assigny cannot pursue, but
there must be an Executor ad non executa. But if the Testament was execute by
the Executor, by obtaining Decree for the Sum assigned; the Assignation is
effectual, after the Executor's Death: or if the Assigny obtain sentence or
Satisfaction in the Executor's life. For in either of these Cases, the
Testament is execute as to that part.

61. If all the Executors be dead, and any part of the Testament unexecute;
then there is place for Executors ad non executa. A Testament is execute when
the Debt is established in the person of the Executor active, and the Debtor
passive; either by new Security, or by Decree: or otherways, when it is
discharged, or assigned to a party interessed in the Executory. But
Litiscontestation does not execute the Testament. Feb. 20. 1627. Duke of Lennox
contra Alexander Weyms. But the Execution of the Testament, does not establish
the full Property of the Goods in the Executor, leaving only an Action against
him, to the Defunct's Creditors: but he continues as Administrator. And
therefore in competition betwixt the Creditors of the Defunct, and the proper
Creditors of the Executor affecting the Sums or Goods which were the Defunct's,
by Arrestment; the Defunct's Creditors, without respect of Diligence, are
always preferred to the Executor's proper Creditors. July 8. 1664. William
Veatch contra Lord Lee. December 16. 1674. Kelhead contra lrving and Borthwick.
December 16. 1675. Crediiors of James Mastertoun and Eleis Thin. Neither does
the Executors Delinquency or Rebellion confiscat further than their own
Interest in the Executory, but not the Interest of Creditors, Legatars, Wife,
or Bairns: albeit the Executor have execute the Testament by Decreets. December
21. 1671. Mr. Arthur Gordoun contra Lord of Drum.

But it may appear, that seeing now the nearest of Kin surviving, transmit their
part of the Executory to their Executors, though they die testamento non
executo; there should be no need of Executors ad non executa: but the Executors
of the Wife, Bairns, and other nearest of Kin, might confirm the same in their
Testament, and not in the first Defunct's Testament; not being in bonis primi
defuncti, but secundi, being transmitted to his Successors. But this is not
consequent, or consonant to our Custom. And therefore, to clear this
difficulty, advert, that though the Right to the Goods, be in the nearest of
Kin surviving; yet the administration and possession is in the Executor. And
therefore, the Goods are still said to be in bonis defuncti, till they be
established in another's person, active, by execution. So that their Goods
remain in bonis primi defuncti, though all his Executors die, as well as one,
and are not in bonis of the nearest of Kin, who have but an Obligation on the
Executor, or jus ad rem, whereby the Goods are still said to be in bonis
defuncti. So that all the Executors of the Defunct dying, there should be a
Confirmation ad non executa: yet if the nearest of Kin die, there may be
another Confirmation of his Executots to establish the Right of the nearest of
Kin in their person; to the effect his Executors may pursue the first Defunct's
Executor ad non executa. In the same way as if the first Executor had been
alive, and the nearest of Kin had died before execution; the Executors of the
nearest of Kin, behoved to confirm his Right, and thereupon representing the
nearest of Kin, pursue the Executor of the first Defunct, as the nearest of Kin
himself could have done. If it be objected, that there is no Representation in
mobilibus: the answer is, that this is to be understood at the time of the
Defunct's Death; whereby those only who survive, have Right per capita, and not
the Descendents of those who died before the Defunct. But if all survive, the
Right is in all, and transmitted, not by Right of Representation, but as jus
quaesitum, to their immediate Predecessors. And though the Office will belong
only to those, who are alive the time of the Confirmation, in the nearest
Degree to the Defunct; yet the nearest of Kin to those who survived the
Defunct, and died before Confirmation, will get the Share of their surviving
Parent, as to the Bairns part or Relicts part: because these are not properly
Succession.

But as to the Deads part, which befalls to the nearest of Kin jure
agnationis, it is conveyed by a proper Succession to the nearest of Kin:
wherein Children unforisfamiliat, succeed as nearest of Kin, and so are liable
to the Legacies, and Deeds of the Defunct on Deathbed, as to the Deads part;
but not as to their Bairns part. And therefore Bairns surviving their Father,
though they die before Confirmation, they transmit their Bairns part, but not
Deads part, unless they also survive the Confirmation; that being aditio
haereditatis in mobilibus.

62. Executors ad omissa, and male appretiata, ought to call the principal
Executor to their Confirmation: else their Confirmations are null. February 14.
1622. Bain contra March 12. 1631. Duff contra Alves. But this holds not in
Executors Creditors ad omissa. June 28. 1623. White contra These having a more
favorable interest, for satisfying their own Debt.

It may be questioned here, Whether those things can be called male appretiata,
which are pretiat by the Defunct himself? Doubtless modica differentia is not
to be regarded: but if the Price be considerably to the lesion of Creditors,
Legatars, or others, as being a Half, or Third within the just Price, they may
be repretiat. Feb. 1. 1662. Belshes contra Otherways it stands: though both the
Quantity and Price were known to be greater, the Difference not being
exorbitant. Feb. 2. 1672. Agnes Nimmo contra William Martin. And Executors are
comptable, according to the ordinary Prices: seeing id non agebatur by the
Price, to gift to the Executor; unless it had been expressed that the Price
should not be questioned. And then it is as a Legacy to the Executor, and to be
imputed in part of the Benefit of his Office: and prejudges none, but Legatars.
For the Defunct can do no Deed on Deathbed, or in Testament, further than
extends to the Dead's part. An Executor ad omissa pursuing the principal
Executrix, who deponed that she had confirmed her Husband's Corns, by an
Estimat thereof, in the Barn-yard, by skilled Men; but that it had arisen some
Bolls higher: and that she had confirmed a part of a Sum, contained in a Bond
granted to her Husbands, because she knew the rest was paid: she was found
liable, not according to the Estimat, but according to the Quantity the Corns
arose to; and for the whole Sum contained in the Bond: unless she produced the
Bond, that the Executor ad omissa might proceed thereon for the rest; or
otherways, that she proved that part she omitted, was paid by the Debtor: and
that her oath of Knowledge could neither exoner the Debtor, nor her Self.
November 6. 1679. Alexander Bruce contra Anna Douglas. And an Executor was made
to depone, upon the Goods, Quantities and Prices, in the Inventary, at the
instance of an Executor ad omissa, notwithstanding the principal Executor's
Oath at the Confirmation. July 18. 1667. Jean Ker contra John Kiv.

63. Executors Creditors must instruct their Debt before the Commissaries. And
therefore if they have no Writ to instruct it, they may pursue the nearest of
Kin cognitionis causa. And having obtained Decree, it will instruct their
interest, to get Confirmation as Executors Creditors: which being done they
need not instruct their Debt to the Defunct's Debitors, or others, but the
Confirmation is sufficient; the Debt being but the ground, on which the
Commissaries preferred them to be Executors dalive. Spots. Testament, James
Reid contra James Lochier. So that no Objection against their Title or Debt, or
that they are satisfied by the Executory or otherwise, will exclude them: as
that the Debt was a Bond on Deathbed, though proponed by other Executors
Creditors, confirming within some days after. Feb. 16. 1628. Creditors of Adam
Marshal contra Byres. And therefore, they may confirm, and uplift much more
than the Debt due to them: but are liable for the superplus. But their
Confirmation prejudgeth not other Creditors, who used Diligence before the
Confirmation.

64. So much for the Office, Power, and Interest of Executors active. Let us
now consider their Duty and Burden passive. And that is, first, All Executors
are liable for Diligence in executing the Testament, but not all equally: for
those who have a profitable Office, are liable for more Diligence, than these
who have not; as Executors nominat, where Dead's part is not exhausted with
Legacies, are most obliged for exact Diligence. But if there be an universal
Legatar, whereby the Executor has no benefit, the Executor is only liable
quoad dolum and latam culpam, and for supine negligence; but not to use Horning
and Poinding, but to assign when ever the Legatar insisteth. June 11. 1629.
Nivine contra Hogs. The like as to a special Legacy, whereof the Executor had
no benefit, and the Legatar might have pursued for it himself. December 2.
1628. Port contra Morison.

The ordinary Diligence required of Executors, is Sentence and registrat
Horning against the Defunct's Debitors: but how soon this must be dispatched,
is according to the difficulty and length of the Process, quod est in arbitrio
judicis. Executors are liable in the first place, to the Defunct's Creditors,
secundum vires inventarii, and no further. And that not only to the Creditors,
to whom moveable Debts are due: but also to the Creditors in heritable Debts or
Obligements prestable by the Executor, not consisting in facto proper to Heirs,
as to dispone Land, etc. December 14. 1609. Gray contra Craig. February 24.
1627. Carnagie contra Lermonth. Hope, Executors, Adam contra Gray. And so were
found liable, to employ a Sum on Land or Annualrent for a Wife's Liferent-use.
Hope, Executors, John Tran contra James Jackson. February 17. 1632. Kincade
contra Yeoman. Where the Executor was not only found liable to employ the Sum,
but to pay the Annualrent of it. March 12. 1622. Sir William Fairly contra
Executors of Fairly. And also for Warrandice of an Infeftment, being liquidat.
July 22. 1630. Salmond contra Orre. And an Executor was found liable to pay a
Creditor of the Defunct, the Price of Lands sold to the Defunct by a Minute:
without restricting the Creditor to the Heir, who only would get the Right of
the Land by the Minute, which remained incomplete; or without causing the
Creditor dispone the Land to the Executor, in lieu of the Movables exhausted
by the Price: reserving to the Executor Relief against the Heir as accords.
July 1. 1662. William Baillie contra Margaret Henrison. And generally Creditors
have their option, to pursue the Heirs or Executors of their defunct Debitors.
Yet Executors were not found liable for an annual Payment for Years after the
Defunct's Death, but only his Heir. Febrnary 5. 1675. Mr. Ninian Hill contra
Maxwell. But if there had been no heretable Right to affect, the Executor would
have been found liable.

It was long dubious, whether Executors Creditors were liable for any
Diligence, seeing they confirmed for Payment of (...) own Debts, and therefore
were only obliged to assign to Creditors after the Executors themselves were
satisfied; or at least that they had sufficient time to recover Satisfaction.
Till the Lords by Act of Sederunt of the 5. of March 1679. declared Executors
Creditors, liable for what they confirm, as other Executors dative: but that
they are not (...) to confirm the whole Inventary. And that they might have
License to pursue, to find out the most solvent Deb of their defunct Debitors,
making Faith that they doubted of the existency (...), or (...) of these Debts;
and finding Caution to confirm what they found good Debt. And that other
Executors might be confirmed ad omissi, who should be liable to all Parties as
principal Executors. The reason whereof was, because the Means of Orphans,
might be neglected by the Confirmation of Executors Creditors, who were obliged
to give up, and confirm a full Inventary upon oath, though far exceeding their
own Debt, whereby other Executors that were obliged to Diligence, were excluded
and hindered.

Executors Creditors, are liable for the Defunct's privileged Debts: as
funeral Expenses, Servants Fees for a Year or a Term as the Servants (...):
which are preferable to the Executors Creditors own Debt. Nov. 25. 1680. David
Crawford contra Huttoun.

65. But the Executors have Relief of all heritable Debts against the Heir, as
the Heir has of moveable Debts against the Executor. July 30. 1630. Carnousie
contra Meldrunt. December 11. 1632. Geills Shaw contra Shaw.

66. Executors may not prefer one Creditor to another: and so may not make
voluntary Payment, but upon Sentence without Colinsion. And if before Payment
any other Creditor use Citation, they may not pay securely, till in (...)
Double-poynding the Creditors be called, and dispute their preference. December
2. 1628. Lyel contra Hepburn. December 16. 1629. White contra Relict of the
Master of Jedburgh. July 8. 1634. Dame Margaret Prestoun contra Executors of
Hepburn. Unless the Creditor citing, pass from that Instance. December 4. 1623.
Rochead contra Manderstoun.

And therefore the ordinary Defense is, That the Executor is exhausted by
Payment, made upon Sentences before intenting of the Pursuer's Cause. Yet if
the Executor have paid, he may allege, That the Creditor to whom he has
paid, had done more timous Diligence, and so was preferable: in which case he
will be heard as that Creditor were competing. And Executors may pay Creditors
whose Debts are acknowledged in Testament, without Process, if the same be
paid before intenting of any other Creditor's Pursuit: but after Citation
Debts may not be paid, though given up by the Defunct in Testament. March 31.
1624. Lady Curriehill contra Lord of Curriehill, Nicol. de haereditariis
actionibus. March 28. 1627. contra Anderson. Neither may the Executor pay any
other Debt, though before Citation, in prejudice of the Debts in the Defunct's
Testament, which puts the Executor in mala fide, and in necessity to suspend on
Double-poynding, though these Debitors testamentary insist not. March 8. 1631.
Duff contra Alves. Nicol. de haereditariis actionibus. March 28. 1631. Scougal
contra Horseburgh. Yea Executors may not safely pay any Creditor of the
Defunct, not being a testamentary or privileged one, but upon Sentence.
Otherwise Executors might before any Pursuit prefer what Creditors they
pleased. June 7. 1677. Andrew contra Anderson.

67. But because Creditors, Relict, Bairns, or Legatars, may pursue the
Executor immediately after the Confirmation, before Executors can do Diligence;
therefore they cannot be decerned to pay: but either time will be granted to do
Diligence; or the Executor will be liberat, upon granting Assignation to parts
of the Inventary. Wherein the Creditors will be first preferred, and next the
Relict, Bairns, and Legatars.

68. And because Creditors at distance, may be excluded, not knowing of the
Defunct's Death; therefore the Lords by Act of Sederunt. February 28. (...).
did declare, That all Creditors of Defuncts, using legal Diligence, at any time
within half a Year, of the Defuncts Death, by confirming themselves Executors
Creditors, or by Citation of the Defunct's Executors, or vicious Intromettors
with their Goods; shall all come in pari passu, without respect of the
prioritie or posterioritie of their Diligence. Whereunto it is necessarly
consequent, that all Decreets against Executors, within six Months of the
Defuncts Death, except for privileged Debts, ought to bear Superceeding
execution for seven Months at least, after the Defunct's Death: that in the
seventh Month Executors may suspend upon Double-poinding, all Decreets against
them within six Months of the Defunct's Death. To the effect all the Creditors
may come in jointly, if they exceed not the Inventary: and if they do exceed,
they must suffer proportional Abatement. But if the Inventary exceed all the
Debts, the Relict, and Bairns, will have their Shares, of what is free: and
Dead's part will be applied to the Legatars, who if their Legacies exceed, must
suffer proportional abatement; but if they be less, the Remainder will belong
to the Children or other nearest of Kin.

69. After the six Months are run from the Defunct's Death, and all Debts,
recovered in that time, are fatisfied; Creditors pursuing thereafter, are
preferable, according to the Sentences recovered by them, without collusion. As
if the Executor defend against one, and not another; or that after Process
before the Lords, other Creditors prevent them by prior Sentences before
inferior Courts: the first Citation will be preferable, if they have not been
negligent.

70. If the Executor make payment, bona fide, to the Relict, Bairns, or
Legatars of the Defunct, before intenting of any Creditors Cause; he will be
secure, against Creditors intenting posterior Process: for he could not hinder
the Payment of these, upon unknown Creditors. But voluntary Payment, without
Sentence at the instance of the Relict, Bairns, and Legatars, will not secure
him. By the Roman Law Legatars were obliged to find cautionem mucianam,
obliging them to refound their Legacies, in case posterior Creditors did
pursue. l. si cujus es ff. de jure deliberandi, which has not been accustomed
with us. But there is competent to such Creditors, Action of Repetition,
against the Relict, Bairns, or Legatars, which will be instructed by the
Discharge to the Executors.

71. Testaments or Confirmations are execute, when the Inventary is established
in the person of the Executor, either by obtaining payment Bond or Decree. Yet
thereby the Executor becomes not to have the full Property of the Defunct's
Goods and Debts so established: but he remains Fideicommissarie, and is obliged
to restore. Yea the Decree, or Bonds granted to him for the Defunct's Estate,
may be affected for Debts due by the Defunct. And in Competitions betwixt the
Creditors of the Defunct, and the Creditors of the Executor, the Defunct's
Creditors are preferable: though the Creditors of the Executor proprio nomine,
have done more Diligence. And for the same cause the Rebellion of the Executor
or his Delinquency does not confiscat the Executory, although established in
his person by Decreets, in prejadice of the Defuncts Creditors; but only the
Executors own Interest therein. December 21. 1671. Mr. Arthur Gordoun contra
Lord of Drum.

72. But Executors may safely pay funeral Expenses, comprehending Medicaments
to the Defunct: because these have a Privilege, from the common Obligation of
Humanity to bury the Dead; and therefore are preferable to all other Debts of
the Defunct, and so may be paid at any time. December. 16. 1674. Kelhead contra
Irving and Borthwick. Item Servants-fees for a Year or Term as they are hired,
and a Term's House-maill or Cures to the Defunct on Deathbed, have the like
Privilege.

73. Arrestment was found habilis modus, to put the Executor in mala fide to
pay other Creditors, not calling the Arrester, who being a Cautioner, arrested
all Sums in the Executor's hands due to the Creditor, though he had not used
Diligence thereupon to make foorthcoming. June 14. 1625. Andrew Couper contra
Lady Haltoun. Yet without legal Diligence or Intimation, exhausting as
aforesaid was not found relevant against a Creditor, whom the Executor had
acknowledged ypaying Annualrent to him. Spots. Executors, Janet Telfer contra
Moffat. The Executory is likewise exhausted, by Debt due to the Executor
himself, without any Process but merely by exception of Compensation, though he
be not confirmed Executor qua creditor, but Executor otherwise.

74. The Defunct's Debtor will not get Compensation, upon an Assignation to
any Debt of the Defunct's taken after the Defunct's Deceass, whereby that
Debtor would be preferred to other Debitors doing Diligence. Feb. 8. 1662.
Thomas Crawford contra Earl of Murray. Feb. 14. 1662. Children of Mouswell
contra Lawrie of Maxwelstoun. And likewise, if the Executor had paid a Debt,
for which he or his Predicessor was Cautioner for the Defunct, whereof the
Terms were past before Payment, (though without Process) it may be allowed: but
not for Cautionry, not paid before intenting of another Creditor's Cause.
Januarie 26. 1628 Adie contra Gray.

75. The old Custom was, that Executors behoved to get Exoneration before the
Commissaries, calling the Creditors and all having interest, and compting to
them. And it was not relevant to allege Exhaustine, by Exception, but there
behoved to be a Deereet of Exoneration obtained, which is the only sull and
general Liberation. But it is not valid against Creditors having out the
Executor in mila fide, as being Creditors testamentarie, or (...) by the
Executor, or using Citation or Arresiment. June 14. 1625. Andrew Couper contra
Lady Haltoun. Neither is Exoneration valid being general, not containing a
particular Account. March 10. 1632. Lady (...) contra Haddo.

76. But now for a long time, the Lords have been accustomed to admit the
Exception of Exhausting, albeit there has not been a Decree of exoneration
obtained. For instructing Exhausting, Executors may found upon Payment of the
privileged Debts at any time: upon the Expense of Confirmation: upon Debts due
to themselves, before Confirmation; but not upon Debts assigned to them after
Corfirmation: upon Payment of testamentary Debts, after six Months, though
without Process: upon Payment of other Debts thereafter, according to the
priority of Diligence: upon Absolvitors of Debts due to the Defunct in the
Inventary: upon Diligence by Process or Execution for recovery of the Defunct's
Debts not recovered: and upon Expenses of Process or Execution; seeing Executors
get no Expenses modified against the Defunct's Debitors, who are not obliged to
pay, without Sentence. All which being allowed, if any thing in the Inventary
remain unrecovered; the Executors will either get time to do further Diligence,
or will be liberat, granting Assignations to the Creditors according to their
Diligence.

Executors are not obliged to make faith on the Defunct's Debts, except in so
far as may concern the Executor, without prejudice to Creditors, Legatars,
Wife, Bairns, and nearest of Kin. Spots. Executors. Monteith contra Katharine
Smith. March 6. 1627. Scot contra Cockburn. March 13. 1627. Ker contra Lady
Covingtoun. And therefore they cannot exoner themselves by Decree, upon their
Oath or holding them as confessed, without having other probation which may be
taken off by the Executors Oath. Nicol. hic, Bell contra Gib.

Executors are not conveenable Severallie nor liable in solidum but pro virili
part: unless they have intrometted with as much as will satisfy the Debt in
question. July 22. 1630. Salmond contra Orre. July 23. 1625. Mr. Peter Ewat
contra Atkin. July 12. 1626. Turnbull contra Mathison. Hope, Legacies,
Mackmichael contra Mackwharie.

If any of the Executors be dead, the Office accresceth to the Survivers: and
they are liable and conveenable alone. But if the deceased have intrometted
with, or done Diligence for any part; in so far as the Testament was execute
before the Executor's death, it liberats the Survivers, and the Pursuers must
have access to those representing the deceassed. But for what is wanting
through negligence of the whole Executors, the Survivers are liable. And so
where the deceassed had intrometted with their Share, the Survivers were only
found liable for their own parts. Hope, Legacles, Haliday contra Halidly. July
16. 1628. Peacock contra Peacock. July 23. 1625. Atkin contra Mr. Peter Ewat.

Executors are liable for the Inventary, without necessity for any to prove
that they intrometted therewith: which is presumed, unless the Executor show
his Diligence, and how he was excluded. Which was sustained as to the Movables
of the Defunct, consirmed by an Executor Creditor. February 7. 1679. Pearson
of Kippen-Ross contra James Wright. And likewayes an Executor was foundly able
for Sums confirmed, due by Bonds whereof the Dates were expressed in the
Confirmation: which were presumed paid, seeing the Bonds were not produced.
Januarie 29. 1681. Gray contra Brown.

Executors are to be confirmed ubi defunctus habuit domicilium: and these who
have Houses or Residence in diverse Commissariots, the chief Residence is the
Domicile, and that Commissary only confirms the whole, though in other
Jurisdictions. June 25. 1611. Lord of Abercrombie contra The Wife's Domicile
follows her Husband's: and though she resided several Months in another
Comissariot and died there, yet her Testament was confirmed where her Husband
resided. July 23. 1622. Procurator-fiscal contra Lady Gordoun. But as to
Defuncts residing out of the Country, their Testaments are confirmed at
Edinburgh, Yet if they die in Edinburgh, or else where, not animo remanendi;
their Testaments are not to be confirmed at Edinburgh, but where they had their
Domicile. So albeit a Defunct had dwelt in Edinburgh half a year, in a House
taken for a year and furnished for himfelf; it was found that his Testament
behoved to beconfirmed in the Country: because he had his principal Domicile
there with some Children and Servants, and attended only at Edinburgh on Law
Affairs. Procurator-fiscal of the Commissariot of Edinburgh contra the Relict
and Children of the deceass'd Earl of Panmoore.

TITLE XXXI. Vicious Intromission.
1. Vicious Intromission only a passive and no active Title, even against
other vicious Intromettors, without Assignation from the Creditor. 2. Vicious
Intromission is the (...) etensive passive Title, reaching only those who
might (...) Defunct, but all other (...) mettors. 3. The reason of the large
extent of Title. 4. All vicious Intromettors are (...) in solidum, and conveena
(...) verally. 5. Whether vicious Intromission be competent by Exception? 6.
Vicious Intromission sustained generally, without the Pursuer's Condescendence.
7. Vicious Intromission is only competent to Creditors. 8. How far vicious
intromssion must be universal. 9. Vicious Intromission is excluded, if
Executors were confirmed before Citation, though after the Intromission. 10.
Whether Executors Creditors, being confirmed, exclude (...) Intromission
pursued thereafter. 11. How far Confirmation of Executors although after
Citation, excludes vicious Intromission. 12. Super-Intromission. 13. Vuious
Intromission how far excluded by Gift of Escheat and Declarator. 14. Vicious
Intromission is excluded, by any colorable Title, though defective. 15. The
Cusiom of England as to Intromission. 16. Vicious Intromission sapit delictum,
and is only competent against Intrometters themselves during their lise. 17.
How far vicious Intromission is excluded by acquiring bona fide?
VICIOUS Intromission is only a Passive Title, making the Intrometter liable to
all the Defunct's Debts, passive: but is not an active Title, whereby the
Intrometter can call and pursue active. For thereupon there is no ordinary
Action competent at the instance of the Intrometter, against his Accomplices, for
mutual Relief: but the Intrometter paying, must only make use of the Creditor's
name to give him a Title, upon the Creditor's Assignation; which will
necessitat the other Intrometters to satisfy but only pro rata, they alleging
that it is to the behoose of another Intrometter, whose part at least must be
abated.

2. This is the largest passive Title, extending not only to those who have
relation to the Defunct, and have a Title to be his Heir or Successor in
movables; but to any Stranger intrometting without any interest: whereas
gestio pro haerede, and Successor titulo lucrativo post contractum debitum, can
be incident to none but apparent Heirs, qui precipiunt haereditatem. But not
only the Children and nearest of Kin intrometting, are liable in solidum for
the Defunct's whole Debts, but any other Person having no legal interest of
Succession. Which is peculiar to this and no other Nation, and not without
ground.

3. The rise and reason of this passive Title is, because Movables are more
easily abstracted from Creditors of Defuncts, than their Lands, or Profits
thereof, which every one will not attain without a Title, at least without
being apparent Heir therein. But if Defuncts Movables might be meddled with
without Confirmation, or making Inventary upon Oath, and no further hazard than
single R eitution; there would never be a Confirmation: but both Creditors and
Orphans would be highly prejudged by abstracting and concealling the Movables
of Defuncts. And to remedy this, our Law has introduced this passive Title,
that without Confirmation or other Title, the Medler shall be liable in solidum
to Creditors.

4. Vicious Intromission is so far extended, that one Intrometter may be
conveened singly in solidum, and his alleging other Intrometters will not
liberat him pro tanto. July 12. 1628. Moristoun contra Lord of Frendraught.
But where more persons ( viz. two) were conveened together as Vicious
Intrometters, and the Probation instructed that both intrometted; they were not
found liable in solidum, but equally, without consideration of the proportion
of their Intromission. November 16. 1626. James Chalmers contra Marshal and
White.

5. Whether Vicious Intromission be competent by Exception, or only by Action,
is not yet come the length of a current Custom. But there are Decisions
favoring either side. As if any person pursue the Executor Heir or Cautioner
of a Defunct, the Question is, Whether they may except, That the Pursuer is
Vicious Intrometter with the Defuncts Goods, and thereby is liable to pay his
Debts, and so is Debtor as well as Creditor, and confusu ne tollitur obligatio?
It was decided affirmative, Hope, Exception. Lindsay contra Douglass: but it
was decided negative, November 20. 1630. Pride contra Thomson. And the Negative
seems more favorable, not to extend this burthensom and odious passive Title
ultra (...). And therefore Vicious Intromission may always be purged by
Confirmation, before intenting of the Pursuer's Cause. To which it is more
consonant that they who allege Vicious Intromission, should not be permitted
to except but pursue: that before the Pursuit the Intrometter may have liberty
to purge. It was so found in the Case of an Assigny pursuing, against whom the
Debtor pursued alleged, That the Assigny could be in no better case than the
Cedent who was Vicious Intrometter with the Debitor's Movables, and so was
both Debtor and Creditor. Januarie 20. 1671. Captain Ramsay contra William
Henrison.

6. Vicious Intromission was also sustained generally, without necessity to the
Pursuer to condescend on Particulars: seeing the Libel bare the Defender to be
universal Intrometter with the Defunct's Movables, which is the ordinary Style
of this passive Title. In which Case the Defender was found obliged to
condescend upon particular Movables which were the Debitor's, and intrometted
with by him by a Title. Januarie 20. 1630. Adamson contra Ireland. But if the
Pursuit be against the Defender as Vicious Intrometter, he ought to condescend
upon the special Intromission; unless he refer it to the Defender's Oath, who
knows his own Intromission and must either adject a Quality where competent, or
propone a Defense, to purge the Vitiositie.

7. This passive Title being so large, wants not its own Limitations and
Exceptions. As first, it is only effectual to Creditors, and not to Legatars,
or any other Party, who cannot pursue upon this ground, nor for any further
than is truly intrometted with, in those Cases where these can pursue
Intrometters, as in special Legacies, etc.

8. The Intromission must be universal: not that the Intrometter must meddle
with all the Defunct's Movables, but must meddle quasi prr universitatem,
because Heritage is per universitatem. And he that medles with a Flock of
Sheep, medles per universitatem: yet many of the Flock may be meddled with by
others, but what remains being still the Flock, he is only said to meddle with
the Flock. And so Intremission with one thing, or some small thing will not
infer this passive Title, to make the Intrometter liable. So a Relict was not
found liable in solidum, as having intrometted with the Crop of five Bolls of
Corn, eating of four or five Sheep, and detaining in her possession thretty
more; not upon the account of her being Relict, or of necessary Intromission,
but for that her Intromission was not Universal. December 5. 1623. Scot contra
Levingstoun. But if universal Intromission be libelled, though the Probation be
not so ample, yet if it reach Particulars of diver Kinds, and these of moment;
it was found enough. Januarie 12. 1623. Bruce contra Where fewer Kinds of less
value proven, were found sufficient reo absente. And Vicious Intromission was
inserred, by the Son of a Wright's continuing to work with his Father's Tools.
June 15. 1625. Lord of Abercairnie contra Nicol. This was for a year's Rent
due by the Defunct to his Master. But vicious Intromission was not (...) by the
Servants of a Coal-heugh continuing to use the Instruments of the Coal-work for
some time, without determining whether those Instruments were moveable or not:
but the Heir was not found Vicious Intrometter thereby. June 9. 1680. William
Brain contra the Earl of Lothian.

9. It seems to be on this ground, that it is a legal Desense against Vicious
Intromission, to allege, That there are Executors confirmed to the Defunct;
whether it be the Intrometter, or any other, though the Intrometter derive no
Right from these Executors, nor had no Warrant of Intromission. Because
Executors being Universal Intrometters, there cannot be more Universal
Intrometters severally: and therefore there cannot be both Executors, and other
Universal Vicious Intrometters. And albeit more persons may be conveened as
Vicious Universal Intrometters, yet one or other of them must be understood to
be sole Vicious Intrometter; or otherwise that they all join in Universal
Intromission.

Confirmation of Executors was found sufficient to elide Vicious Intromission,
albeit after the Intromission the Intrometter caused a person wholly insolvent
be confirmed and find a Cautioner insolvendo, and the Intrometter paid the
Quote, and was at all the Expense. July 28. 1620. Tenent contra Tenent. Spots.
Universal Intrometters. Stevenson contra Paterson.

10. Some have questioned, Whether Confirmation of Executors Creditors could
purge Vicious Intromission, seeing Creditors do only confirm for their own
satisfaction, and not to execute the Defunct's Executory, and so need confirm
no more than will satisfied themselves. But I have not observed it repelled,
nor is the difference convincing. For albeit Executors Creditors confirm to
their own behoof, yet are they universal Intrometters, and must confirm all
they know, and so make Inventary: albeit their interest to be Executors, be but
qua Creditors. And albeit they be not liable for so exact Diligence as others,
it was found relevant to exclude Vicious Intromission, That an Executor
Creditor was confirmed. June 20. 1629. Douglass contra Touris. January 20.
1663. Stevenson contra Ker and others. The matter may be more dubious now,
since the late Act of Sederunt, whereby Executors Creditors are not obliged to
confirm all they know, or make faith on the Inventary; but so much as they
think may secure their Debts: and therefore other Executors may be confirmed.
So that the danger and inconveniency of Vicious Intromission remains, and
Executors Creditors so confirming, are not Universal Intrometters. And
therefore it is like, that by such Confirmation Vicious Intromission with
Movables not confirmed, will not be excluded by such Confirmation.

11. Confirmation of Executors regularly, is not relevant to purge vicious
Intromission, whether by the Intrometter, or others, in so far as concerns
those Creditors, who had used Citation and Diligence against the vicious
Intrometters before Confirmation, whose Sentences are drawn back to their
Citation: especially si non sint in mora, and so est jus iis quaesitum, at
least inchoatum, before Confirmation. December. 12. 1609. Durtie contra Clerk.

But this must be limited thus. If the Creditor has used Citation shortly
after the Defunct's Death, there being no competent time to confirm, neither
any time limited in Law other than year and day, after which the Executor must
be comptable to relieve the Heir: therefore unless the Intrometter were merely
praedo having no interest, as neither being Wife, Bairn, nearest of Kin, or
having a Disposition without delivery; it is sufficient to confirm after the
intenting of the Creditor's Cause, being within year and day. In which case the
Intrometter confirming will be liable secundum vires inventarii, albeit only
conveened as Intrometter, not as Executor: without necessity of a new Process.
It was so found in the Case of the Defunct's Son, who intrometting, and being
cited, yet confirming within year and day; was but liable as Executor. January
24. 1628. Aldie contra Gray. Hope Executors, Bald contra Hamiltoun. Spots. eod.
Thomson contra Lord of Rentoun. Jan. 28. 1663. Margaret Stevenson contra Ker
and others.

12. The Exception of Confirmation of Executors is elided, by alleging That
the Intrometter, though having confirmed, yet has fraudently concealed some
part of the Goods and Means, not put in the Inventary. Which Superintromission
dolose, is relevant to elide Confirmation. Hope Executors, Raeside contra
Cathcart. Spots. eod. Cleiland contra Baillie. Which holds, if the
Intromission were before the Confirmation: but if it was after, it uses not
now to be sustained, till the Creditor confirm as Executor dative ad omissa,
that the Quote be not lost. July 8. 1676. Irving contra Forbess of Tolquhon.

Super-intromission was also sustained without a Dative ad omissa, to elide
Exhausting proponed by an Executor. Jan. 14. 1639. Margaret Inglis contra (...)
Bell.

13. When Defuncts die at the Horn, Declarator of their Escheat has the same
effect to exclude Vicious Intromission as the Confirmation of their Executors;
not only competent to the Donatar intrometting, but to any other Intrometter:
for both being Universal Titles, reaching the Defunct's Movables, every
Intrometter there with is liable. December. 15. 1638. Ogilvie contra And a Gift of
the Escheat obtained by the Intrometter, albeit after the Intromission, being
before Citation at the instance of the Creditor pursuing; was found relevant to
exclude Vicious Intromission: because the Donatar needs no Declarator for what
was in his Possession, Nicol. de haereditariis actionibus, Moodie contra Hay of
Fourlands. But if the Gift were taken before the Defunct's Death, if it be
simulat, by the Defuncts retaining Possession during his Life; it will annull
the Gift and Declarator, and exclude the Defense thereupon: as was found in the
foresaid Case, Ogilvie contra

Nor will a Gift and Declarator be sufficient against any Creditor pursuing the
Intrometter, the Gift being post motam litem. Or though the Gift was ante motam
litem, it will only defend the Donatar intrometting, or those deriving Right
from him: but not other Intrometters, as Had. observes, but expresses not the
Parties. Jan. 25. 1611. And as was found in the Case of the Intrometter's
obtaining a Gift ante motam litem, though after his Intromission: although
Citation was used before Declarator. July 17. 1635. Lord Johnstoun contra
Johnstoun. Jan. 22. 1675. Chalmers contra Agnes Gordoun. And Vicious
Intromission was elided by an Heir's Intromission with his Father's Movables,
having obtained a Gift as soon as was possible, his Father having died Rebel in
Sepemb. and the Gift being obtained in November. so soon as the Exchequer sat,
albeit the Gift was after Citation. January 8. 1680. John Urquhart contra
Arthur Delgarno. Yea if the Intrometter did intromet by Right or Warrant from
the Donatar, whose Gift was ante motam litem albeit before Declarator, it is
sufficient. As was found by a Tolerance from the Donatar. Nicol. de
haereditarits actionibus Cairncross contra Crookshank. And by a Warrant from
the Donatar. July 4. 1665. Mr. Walter Innes contra George Watt. But it is not
relevant to allege, That the Defunct died at the Horn, and thereby had no
Movables, which were become escheat to the King. Feb. 7. 1662. Gray contra
Dalgarne.

14. Vicious Intromission is also restricted to the single value, when it is by
virtue of a Disposition from the Defunct, albeit the Disposition was found null
by Reply, as done in defraud of Creditors, by a Husband to his Wife. June 16.
1671. Bonar contra Lady Couper. And a Disposition of Movables, with an
Instrument of Possession, being for a cause onerous, granted while the Defunct
was on Death-bad though there was no natural Possession till after his Death;
wassustained to purge Vicious Intromission. July 6. 1664. Alexander Brown
contra Lawson. But a Disposition of Movables, where the disponer retained
Possession during his Life, was not sustained. Nicol. de haereditariis
actionibus, Strachan cont. Scot. The like where the Disposition was to the
Defunct's Son's Wife: seeing the Defunct retained Possession for a considerable
time; his Son and his Wife being with him in Family June 28. 1632. Dalrymple of
Waterside contra Lord of Closeburn. So that such Dispositions, if the Defunct
live long after retenta possessione, are not sufficient, as in the last two
Cases. But if the Disposition were shortly before the Defunct's Death, that his
continuing in Possession would not (...) simulation or frand, the same would
purge the Vicious Intromission, at least restrict (...) to the single value.

15. By the Law and Custom of England, Vicious Intromission with a Defunct's
Movables does only extend to the single value. And therefore Intromission
being made in England, was extended no further here. July 26. 1619. Lord
Dingwal contra Wanderson.

16. Vicious Intromission being penal, sapiens naturam delicti, is not to be
sustained against any as representing the Intrometter, when there is no Action
intented against him in his own life: after which, no other can be able to
clear the Title of his Intromission with moveableGoods quae transeunt per
commercium, and so the Defunct might have bought them bona fide. July 10. 1666.
Cranstoun contra Wilkison. And for the same reason Behaving as Heir by
Intromission with Heirship-moveable, is not sustained after the Intrometter's
Death, as has been observed in that Title; though there can be less pretense
of Commerce in that case. Yet though Decree were not obtained before the
Intrometter's Death, if Litiscontestation were made against him compearing,
when it was proper to him to purge his Intromission by any competent Defense;
if the same were proven after his Death, it might overtake his Successors:
unless the Intromission had been simply referred to his Oath; for then dying
before he gave his Oath, his Successors could not be liable, because he might
either have qualified or denied his Intromission.

17. Vicious Intromission is simply excluded by those who acquire, by way of
Commerce bona fide, for a just Price: albeit in some Cases Executors may
recover Defuncts Goods reivendicatione. But where bona fides does not appear,
but Collusion or Fraud, the buying of Defuncts Goods will not be sustained. As
was found in the Case of a Party deponing that he bought a Defunct's Goods
within ten days after the Defunct's Death, when he knew there could be no
Confirmation of the same, or lawful Title thereto: albeit he deponed that the
Seller had a Disposition from the Defunct, but which he did not produce, and
his Oath was not found to prove it, but the Acquisition was found to be a
Collusion, the Buyer being the Defunct's Goodson, pretending to buy from a
Stranger. Nov. 29. 1679. Irving contra Kilpatrick.


