To the Representatives of the People and Nation of England, Assembled at
Westminster at their Session, begun October. 20. 1696.
Grace, Wisdom, and Understanding be Communicated forth unto, and Multiplied
amongst Ye.
THE Patience and Long-suffering of God does seem to wait, by giving ye
opportunity after opportunity, thus to Assemble your selves at this Return of
each Year of your Rebellion, to know what is in your Hearts, to prove ye (not
only once or twice, but time after time, that in case ye should still Refuse
and Rebel, your Sin may become more exceeding sinful, and your Condemnation may
be more just and deserved.) Whether ye will at length do according to his
Commandments or no. And particularly that his Commandment in Isa. 1.17. Relieve
the Oppressed. In the Margin of the Bible it is Righten (which signifies to set
right again) So that herein ye should obey the Law and Commandment of God, as
to Relieve, Righten, and set right again your Oppressed K. James. This same
Commandment is general, indefinite, and comprehensive: So that it extends to
all Persons, of all Generations and Countries, from the Highest to the lowest,
that have been or shall be oppressed. Again, there is another Commandment of
God, To execute true Judgment between Man and Man. Ezekiel. 18.8. and so thoroughly
execute judgment between a Man and his Neighbor. Jer. 7.5. If ye would once
obey this, then ye should adjust the Matter between Him aforenamed and the P.
of Orange, according to the Instructions of Wisdom, Justice, Judgment, and
Equity. Prove. 1.3. If Ye would do this in a Parliamentary and Peaceable way, by
bringing the Cause to a Re-hearing; and then by making a righteous and
impartial Decision and Determination of this Great Case, laying aside in Ye
severally all Malice, and Guile and Hypocrisies, and all Evil-speakings and
Revenge; (The wrath of man works not the righteousness of God, vengeance
belongs unto me, I will recompense, says the Lord) and all Covetousness, and
Fear, and indirect ends and Purposes of your own; This doing, would forthwith
staunch, and put a stop to that Issue of Blood which has been running on the
Sea and Land these seven years. And then King James would not be tempted, nor
yet led aside (for sometimes a good and righteous Cause may be endeavored to
be carried on by evil and wrong Means, through the ignorance of wicked
Instruments; hereby Satan the invisible Enemy of Mankind acting at the bottom
of all this with yet greater Subtlety and Deceiveableness, to render the same
more perplex, intricate, and hard to be understood.) To use such foolish,
violent, and sinful Methods, to seek to Re-instate Himself into these Kingdoms.
Which are not agreeable unto the Law of God, who is the God of Peace, and not
of Confusion; nor yet consistent with the Gospel, which does not allow to hurt,
nor to destroy. Isa. 11.19. But corrupt Nature is prone and liable to make use
of such. Fot consider the thing simply and abstractedly: If any of Ye were
Dispossessed of your Right, Freehold and Property, by a forcible Entry made
thereupon (in which case the Law does preserve the Right all the mean while
unto the True Owner and Proprietor) and Ye could not possibly recover it again
any other way; for either there was not Law, or it was corrupted, or the Judges
would not admit that particular Case to an Hearing, Would Ye not then try to
get a like or greater Number of Armed Men, and endeavor to get your Estates
again by Force, as you were Dispossessed by Force. A man in his corrupt Nature
(as King James does seem to be therein) would do thus. But a true regenerate
and sanctified Christian would not, but rather take wrong, and suffer himself
to be defrauded, and sit down contented with the Loss, rather than use Force
and Violence (which is sin and evil) to regain it. Yet here He may Assert his
Right, in words only.

Every one can imagine that it would be a sad World if there was no Law, nor
Legal Decision of things; for then all Property would be unhinged, and a Gap
would be presently opened, to the Hurt and Murder of one another, and to all
sort of Theft, Robbery, Violence and Evil. So by the like proportion and truth
of things, it may be Conceived and surely Reasoned, He that is unjust in the
Least, is unjust-also in much, Luke 16.10. What is unjust and unreasonable in a
less Matter, is unjust and unreasonable also in a Greater Matter. And as we can
readily conceive what would be the Inconveniences, Mischiefs and Evils, if
there was no Justice nor Law in private Cases: From hence also we may know the
very Reason why our Land is moved and divided, and because of the Sores thereof
it shakes. By Swearing, and Lying, and Killing, and Stealing, and Committing
Adultery, they break out, and Blood touches blood. Hos. 4.2. And why there is
no Peace in our Borders; Because in reference to the King, who of Right was,
and ought still to be the Governor thereof, Judgment is turned away backward,
and Justice stands afar off; for Truth is fallen in the street, and Equity
cannot enter, Isa. 59.14. For what true Reason can be assigned why His Cause
and Case should not be brought to a Rehearing and Impartial Trial, as it is
allowed to every Common person, when all Things are not fully Alleged on both
sides. That Act of the Convention was in no wise a full and impartial Trial;
For, Qui statuit aliquid, part in audita altera, aequum licet statuerit, haud
aequus fuerit; a fortiori, si statuerit iniquum. And even now all their
subsequent Acts can no more make wrong right, than they can make crooked
straight; for they cannot alter the nature of things. Indeed they may bind and
transfer one's Property, where is a Consent of all Parties. But yet again, they
may (for they are not infallible) Decree unrighteous Decrees (against which a
woe is pronounced in Isa. 10.1.) As so they did in the instance here mentioned,
in taking away the Right of their King, contrary to their former Oaths of
Allegiance, and giving it unto a Stranger.

Your selves the Representatives of the People of this Nation, and Ye being
their Superintendents, and an Higher Authority than they, would not approve it,
but rather Ye would be apt to call them to account, if either the Judges would
not judge Causes at all, or if they were corrupt in their Judgments; for then
they are primarily and originally Occasional of all that Evil and Mischief,
which is done and committed when people go about to Redress themselves;
inasmuch as they would not have done so, if they could have had Remedy at Law.
Now with what Judgment Ye judge, Ye shall be judged. Here ye are to remember
and bring it to mind, O ye Transgressors, That there is one Higher than ye,
even the invisible God. And the Lord saw it, and it displeased him that there
was no Judgment. Isa. 59.15. Even so it may be truly supposed, as thus ye will
find it, when ye come to appear before his Judgment Seat (In the latter days,
ye shall consider it perfectly) but then it will be too late, because the time
of your Trial will be over.) God is displeased in that ye will not execute true
Judgment between man and man in the Instances beforementioned. For Your selves
assent, that true Judgment ought to be executed between Man and Man, as to
those of low Degree; so God expects from ye, and will call ye to an account,
That ye should execute true Judgment between Man and Man, as to those of the
highest Degree. As the Scripture says, One sinner destroys much good. Ecles.
9.18. So it is now seen that the unlawful and unreasonable Ambition of one Man,
does hinder the Peace of Europe.

When the Lord makes Inquisition for blood. Psalm. 9-12. He who is All-knowing
will impute all the Murder, Bloodshed, Outrages, Cruelty, Desolation,
Devastation, and all the manifold Evils and Mischiefs of this long present War
unto them who were the first Beginners; and true Occasions thereof: for it
might have been all prevented at first, and may be so still, if ye would
execute true judgment between man and man: For if ye would admit K: James
peaceably to the Inheritance of his Father's, Violence would be no more heard
in our Land, as proceeding from Him, nor yet any fear of Wasting and
Destruction in our Borders. But a way would be again made for this Nation to be
at Unity, Peace and Concord with all the Countries round about. It appears
evidently and clearly from the written Word of God (which best discovers the
Nature of Things; for who can better know them, than that same Word that made
and established them) that the way to peace is by Righteousness: And the work
of righteousness shall be peace, and the effect of righteousness quietness, and
assurance for ever: Isa. 32:17. which is true all one to outward as to inward
Peace. And from what is written, Offer the sacrifice of righteousness, and put
your trust in the Lord, Psalm. 4.5. So that Ye may boldly say, and upon sure
grounds put the same in practice, We will do Righteous things, and Trust our
God with ^ Event of all. The Lord is our help, we will not fear what man shall
do unto us. Now the Lord is none of their help, who will commit sin or evil (as
so it is to refuse to do according to his Law) to help or save themselves.

By the words of Truth, Meekness, and Righteousness, this Nation might be yet
Healed. But when they are laid before the Chief Men and Rulers thereof, an
unseen Enemy does subtly work in their Minds, either to despise and not
receive the knowledge of them, or to Refuse and Rebel, and to do yet more
earnestly and violently to the contrary. But there was none like unto Ahab,
which did sell himself to work wickedness in the sight of the Lord. whom
Jesabel his Wife stirred up. 1 Kings 21.4, 5. In the Margin there it is,
incited. So though there is a great deal of wickedness in the heart of Man, by
reason of original sin and inbred corruption (for Flesh and Blood will imagine
and practice evil; yet this corrupt Nature would never proceed and tend so far,
especially in immediate Rebellion against and provocation of God (for what is
showed forth against his Word, is against God himself, as will appear at his
future Judgment, although this may be besides the mind and intention of the
Creature in the meanwhile) unless this infernal Jesabel, whose right Name is
Beelzebub, did initiate and stir them up. But this is the fault of the
Reasonable Creatures at present, and will be their Punishment hereafter, that
when they do or may know this, yet they willingly give way to the Devil herein.

Such as obey the Truth of God shall be saved: But they who continue in an hard
and impenitent Heart, do treasure up to themselves Wrath against the day of
wrath; Because they received not the love of the Truth that they might be
saved: And for this Cause God shall send them strong delusion, that they should
believe a Lie, that they all might be damned, who believe not the Truth, but
had pleasure in Unrighteousness.

To all Rulers, Magistrates, and Officers of Justice; and to all other People,
whom this following may in any wise Concern.
WHereas I do only Reprove Trangression, and Exhort people to come again into
the way of God's Commandments. I do set his Laws before Mankind, and I do
Publish his Eetrnal Truth. I do nothing more beyond or besides this. Which
again I do not out of mine own head, but only from the Statute-Book of the Lord
God. If Ye think that I deserve to be Imprisoned for this Doing, and ye will be
instrumental to Confine me, God will judge that ye and the other People do
deserve Damnation, for not obeying those his Laws and Commandments, which from
out of the same Book of Scriptures I have set before ye and them. And when your
Breath is out of your Nostrils, and your Souls are departed from your Bodies,
ye will receive yet greater Condemnation, and be beaten with more stripes for
your thus doing unto me his Creature, who was sent and employed by him in the
Ministration of his Word and Truth. So Warns and Witnesses.

RICHARD STAFFORD.


