A TREATISE OF JAPANING AND VARNISHING, Being a complete Discovery of those
ARTS.

WITH The best way of making all sorts of VARNISH for JAPAN, WOOD, PRINTS, or
PICTURES.

The Method of GUILDING, BURNISHING, and LACKERING, with the Art of Guilding,
Separating, and Refining METALS: and of Painting MEZZO-TINTO - PRINTS.

Also Rules for Counterfeiting TORTOISE-SHELL, and MARBLE, and for Staining or
Dying WOOD, IVORY, and HORN.

Together with Above an Hundred distinct Patterns for JAPAN-work, in Imitation
of the INDIANS, for Tables, Stands, Frames, Cabinets, Boxes, etc.

Curiously Engraven on 24 large Copper Plates.

By JOHN STALKER.

OXFORD, Printed for, and sold by the Author, living at the Golden Ball in St.
James's Market, London. in the Year MDCLXXXVIII.

THE PREFACE To the Admirers of the Noble Arts of PAINTING, JAPANNING,
GUILDING, etc.
IF the Antiquity of an Art can advance its credit and reputation, this of the
Pencil may justly claim it; for although we cannot trace it from its Original,
yet we find many valuable Pieces extant in time of Alexander the Great. The
Grecians (who always encouraged Learning and Ingenuity) had so great an honor
for this Art, that they ordained, That Gentlemen's Sons and Freeborn should be
first sent to a Painting-School, to learn the way to Paint and Draw Pictures,
before they were instructed in any other thing; Slaves and vulgar hands, by a
perpetual Edicts, were excluded from the benefit and practice of it: And
lastly, it was enacted, That the Art it self should be ranged in the first
degree of Liberal Sciences. After them the Romans entertained it with great
respect and veneration; and the Jews, though denied this Profession by their
Law, were not wholly destitute of Artists; for St. Luke (if Tradition may be
credited) was a Painter, as well as Evangelist and Physician, and for that
reason we honor and respect him as our Patron and Protector.

The Civilized of all Ages have given it a kind and most obliging reception:
Candaules King of Lydia purchased a Table, whereon the Battle of Magnetes was
painted with excellent skill, for its weight in Gold; and King Demetrius,
forbore taking the City of Rhodes, lest in the fire and plunder of his
soldiers he should have lost a Picture, which he prized beyond the Conquest of
the Town. Indeed, they are so highly valued by us, that we think them fit
ornaments for our Churches and Altars. The Hollanders reckon their Estates and
Worth by their pieces of Painting, and Pictures with them are ready and
current money: in these too they discover their ingenuity, for you shall rarely
meet with a better joke, than in a Picture. Some femals have also been well
pleased with this Art, which they imagine can heighten and preserve their
beauties; Jezebels, who prefer Art to Nature, and a sordid Fucus to a native
complexion; and it is so familiar to meet with these walking Pictures, that
unless we are very circumspect, we may be imposed upon with Ixion's fallacy,
who embraced a Painted vapor for a Goddess. Painting will certainly make us
survive our selves, and render the shadow more lasting than the substance, when
the colors are laid in the right place, and by the Painters hand.

Begging the Muses pardon, I should prefer a Picture to a Poem; for the latter
is narrow and short-lived, calculated to the Meridian of two or three
Countries, and perhaps as many Ages; but Painting is drawn in a character
intelligible to all Mankind, and stands not in need of a Gloss, or Commentator,
it is an unchangeable and universal language. Painting can decipher those
mystical characters of our Faces, which carry in them the Motto's of our Souls,
whereby our very Natures are made legible. This comely part is the Limners more
peculiar Province; and if the beauty and proportion of it can excite our love
and admiration, what regard and esteem must we reserve for him, who can so
excellently describe both. The Rarities of this Art were never yet so common,
as to make them despicable; for the world very seldom produced above one famous
Artisan at a time; this Age brought forth a Zeuxis, that an Apelles, and the
third an Angelo, as if a particular sprightly Genius was required, and they
were to rise from the Phaenix-ashes of each other, or that Men were to be born
Painters as well as Poets.

If we duly weigh the merits of the Pencil, we shall find the deference and
respect which our Predecessors paid to the Masters of it, was most just and
reasonable; and that we our selves ought not to be wanting in gratitude and
address. By the Painters assistance, we enjoy our absent friends, and behold
our deceased Ancestors face to face: He it is, that stretches out our Eighty to
eight Hundred years, and equals our Age to that of our Forefathers. The
Egyptian Pyramids and embalming Spices of Arabia, were not sufficient to rescue
the Carcass from corruption or decay; and 'twas a grand mistake, to suppose the
Ashes of one body could be preserved by the dust of another: Painting only is
able to keep us in our Youth and perfection; That Magic Art, more powerful
than Medaea's charms, not only renews old age, but happily prevents gray hairs
and wrinkles; and sometimes too, like Orpheus for Euridice, forces the shades
to a surrender, and pleads exemption from the Grave. Mahomet's is truly the
Painter's Paradise, for he alone can oblige with a Mistress for ever young and
blooming, and a perpetual Spring is no where to be found but in his Landscape.
In fine, what were the Heathen Gods but fancies of the Painter, all their
Deities were his handy work, and Jove himself stole his boasted Immortality
from him.

Well then, as Painting has made an honorable provision for our Bodies, so
Japanning has taught us a method, no way inferior to it, for the splendour and
preservation of our Furniture and Houses. These Buildings, like our Bodies,
continually tending to ruin and dissolution, are still in want of fresh
supplies and reparations: On the one hand they are assaulted with unexpected
mischances, on the other with the injuries of time and weather; but the Art of
Japanning has made them almost impregnable against both: no damp air, no
mouldring worm, or corroding time, can possibly deface it; and, which is much
more wonderful, although its ingredients, the Gums, are in their own nature
inflammable, yet this most vigorously resists the fire, and is it self found to
be incombustible. True, genuine Japan, like the Salamander, lives in the
flames, and stands unalterable, when the wood which was imprisoned in it, is
utterly consumed. Just so the Asbeston of the Ancients, the cloth in which
they wrapped the dead bodies, lay unchanged and entire on the Funeral Pile, and
preserved the body, when reduced to ashes, from being mixed with common, and
undistinguisht dust. Not that it is only strong and durable, but delightful and
ornamental beyond expression: What can be more surprising, than to have our
Chambers overlaid with Varnish more glossy and reflecting than polisht Marble?
No amorous Nymph need entertain a Dialogue with her Glass, or Narcissus retire
to a Fountain, to survey his charming countenance, when the whole house is one
entire Speculum. To this we subjoin the Golden Draught, with which Japan is so
exquisitely adorned, than which nothing can be more beautiful, more rich, or
Majestic: Let not the Europeans any longer flatter themselves with the empty
notions of having surpassed all the world beside in stately Palaces, costly
Temples, and sumptuous Fabrics; Ancient and modern Rome must now give place:
The glory of one Country, Japan alone, has exceeded in beauty and magnificence
all the pride of the Vatican at this time, and the Pantheon heretofore; this
last, as History informs us, was overlaid with pure Gold, and 'twas but proper
and uniform to cloth the Gods and their Temples with the same metal. Is this
so strange and remarkable? Japan can please you with a more noble prospect, not
only whole Towns, but Cities too are there adorned with as rich a Covering; so
bright and radiant are their Buildings, that when the Sun darts forth his
luster upon their Golden roofs, they enjoy a double day by the reflection of
his beams. These delights would make us call to mind the fictions of the Poets,
and persuade us that the Golden Age was still in being, or that Midas his Wish
had at length suceeded. Surely this Province was Nature's Darling, and the
Favorite of the Gods, for Jupiter has vouchsaf't it a Visit, as formerly to
Danae, in a Golden shower.

The EPISTLE to the READER and PRACTITIONER.
WE have laid before you an Art very much admired by us, and all those who
hold any commerce with the Inhabitants of JAPAN; but that Island not being able
to furnish these parts with work of this kind, the English and Frenchmen have
endeavored to imitate them; that by these means the Nobility and Gentry might
be completely furnished with whole Setts of Japan-work, whereas otherwise they
were forced to content themselves with perhaps a Screen, a Dressing-box, or
Drinking-bowl, or some odd thing that had not a fellow to answer it: but now
you may be stockt with entire Furniture, Tables, Stands, Boxes, and
Looking-glass-frames, of one make and design, or what fashion you please; and
if done by able Hands, it may come so near the true Japan, in fineness of
Black, and neatness of Draught, that no one but an Artist should be able to
distinguish 'em. It Is certain, that not only here, but in JAPAN too, there is a
vast difference in work: we our selves have seen some that has been brought
from thence, as mean and ordinary in Draught, (though the groundwork may be
pretty good,) as you can possibly imagine. As for our Undertakers in this kind
they are very numerous, and their works are different; some of them have more
confidence than skill and ingenuity, and without modesty or a blush impose upon
the Gentry such Stuff and Trash, for Japan-work, that whether it is a greater
scandal to the Name or Artificer, I cannot determine. Might we advise such
foolish pretenders, their time would be better employed in dawbing Whistles and
Puppets for the Toy-Shops to please Children, than contriving Ornaments for a
Room of State. 'Twill certainly please us to hear such Ignorants blame this our
Publication of an Art, that was not understood by the world: it is unknown, we
confess, even to them, and they themselves will find upon examination, that we
have discovered more than they ever knew or dreamt of, and in spite of all
their Bravado's, will be beholding to our Rules and Patterns: These Pages are
so far from exposing our Art, that on the contrary it enhances and raises its
esteem and value. These will assist 'em to distinguish between good Work and
Rubbish, between an ignorant Knave and an Artist,, and put a stop to all the
cheats and cousenage of those whiffling, impotent fellows, who pretend to teach
young Ladies that Art, in which they themselves have need to be instructed, and
to the disgrace of the Title lurk and shelter themselves under the notion of
Japanners, Painters, Guilders, etc.

What we have delivered in this Treatise, we took not upon Trust or Hearsay,
but by our own personal knowledge and experience do promise and aver, that if
you punctually observe them, you must of necessity succeed well; and if any
Gentlemen or Ladies, having met with disappointments in some of the Receipts,
do question the truth and reality of them, they may for their satisfaction (if
it stands with their convenience) see them tried by the Author, according to
the very Rules set down; who is in this, and all other Commands, their most
ready and most humble Servant.

In the Cutts or Patterns at the end of the Book, we have exactly imitated
their Buildings, Towers and Steeples, Figures, Rocks, and the like, according
to the Patterns which the best workmen amongst them have afforded us on their
Cabinets, Screens, Boxes, etc. Perhaps we have helped them a little in their
proportions, where they were lame or defective, and made them more pleasant,
yet altogether as Antic. Had we industriously contrived prospective, or
shadowed them otherwise than they are; we should have wandered from our Design,
which is only to imitate the true genuine Indian work, and perhaps in a great
measure might puzzle and confound the un-experienced Practitioner.

We know nothing farther that wants an Apology or Explanation; but to these our
Endeavors do subjoin our hearty Wishes for your happy Progress and Success,
and Subscribe,

YOVRS

ERRATA.
In the Preface, page 1. line 4. for in time, read, in the time. l. 20. for
Magnetes, read, the Magnetes l. 28. for, better joke, read, better Dutch joke
l. ult. it is unchangeable, read, for it is unchangeable.

In the Book, Page 5. line 26. for, silver, read, silver-dust. p. 7. l. 25. for
Smalt, read Lake l. 45. for Seagreen, read fine Smalt, and for, Greens, read,
Blews. p. 25. l. 32. for, Muller or, read Muller and p. 29. l. 47. for, Venice
Turpentine, read, oil of Turpentine. l. ult. for Turpentine, read,
Turpentine-oyl p. 36. after line the 27. read CHAP. XIII. p. o. l. 9. for,
narrow, read, many p 77. l. 16. for red, r. brown-red. l. 16. after vermilion,
read, or.

Contents
THings necessary to have by you. Of Japaning
Page 1 A character of the best Spirits, Gums, Metals, etc. Page 2 To make
Seed-lacc-varnish. Page 8 To make Shell-lacc-varnish. Page 9 To make the best
White Varnish. Page 10 To make a White Varnish inferior to the other. Page 11
To make Varnish that shall secure your draught, whether Goldwork, or Colors,
from the injuries of Tarnishing, and will give it a gloss. Page 12 To secure
your whole piece, both draught and groundwork, whereby it may endure polishing,
and obtain a gloss all over like the Indian performances. Page 13 General Rules
to be diligently observed in all mvnner of varnishing. Page 14 To varnish
Olive-wood. Page 18 To varnish Walnut, and all plain woods. Page 18 How to
varnish black Japan. Page 19 How to make Isinglass-size. Page 22 How to make
Blew Japan. Page 23 How to make Gum-water. Page 24 How to make Red Japan. Page
24 How to make Chesnut-colour Japan. Page 25 How to make Olive-colour Japan.
Page 26 How to work Metals or Colors with gum-water. Page 26 How to make
Gold-size for Japan. Page 28 How to varnish Prints with white Varnish. Page 30
How to lay Speckles, or strowings, on the out or inside of Boxes, Drawers,
Mouldings, etc. Page 31 To lay Speckles on the Drawing part of Japan-work, as
Rocks, Garments, Flowers, etc. Page 32 How to make Raised work in imitateon of
Japan, and of the Paste. Page 33 To prepare ordinary, rough-grained woods, as
Deal, Oak, etc. whereby they may be Japaned, and look well. Page 35 How to
imitate Bantam-work. Page 36 How to take off any Japan-patterns, in this Book,
upon any piece of work whatsoever. Page 39 The manner of working and setting
off of some Draughts in this Book. Page 39 How to work the first Draught. Page
41 To set often Raised work with Black. Page 42 To work the second Pattern. Page
43 To work the third Draught. Page 44 How to work in Colors and Gold the great
Sprig in the 13th Print. Page 45 To work in gold-size the 20th Print of this
Book. Page 47 To work in gold-size the 23d Draught of this Book with perfect,
and corrupt metals. Page 49 To guild any thing in Oil, Of Guilding.
whereby it may safely be exposed to the weather. Page 53 How to make Primer.
Page 54 Of Fat oil. Page 54 Of Gold-size in oil. Page 54 How to mix and lay on
Gold-size. Page 55 Of the laying on the Gold, and the Tools required in, and
for the business. Page 55 To lacker in oil, such things as are to be exposed to
the weather. Page 56 To prepare and guild Carved Frames in oil, that are not to
be exposed abroad. Page 56 To overlay wood with Burnisht gold, or silver. Page
57 Of Gold and Silver-size for burnishing. Of Burnishing.
Page 57 The best way to make Silver-size. Page 58 The best Gold-size now in
use. Page 58 Another Size for Silver. Page 58 How to gold-size your Frame. Page
59 How to lay on Gold for Burnishing. Page 59 How to burnish your work. Page 60
How to lay on Silver-size. Page 60 How to make Paste, fit to mould or raise
Carved work on Frames for Guilding, Page 61 How to make Paste. Page 61 How to
make a Mould of any Carved frame, thereby to imitate it in Paste. Page 61 Of
placing Paste or Carved work on Frames. Page 62 Of Lackering. Page 62 How to
make common Lacker. Page 63 Another sort of Lacker. Page 63 How to make the
best of Lacker now used by the Guilders. Page 63 To make a Lacker that may be
used wothout fire or Sun. Page 63 To lacker on Oil, or Burnished Silver. Page
64 To make Lackering show like Burnished gold. Page 64 Of Guilding Metals. Page
64 How to prepare Gold. Page 65 To guild Silver, Copper, Brass, or Princes
metal. Page 65 Another way to guild Silver, Brass, etc. Page 66 How to heal or
heighten the color of the Gold. Page 66 To take off Gold from any Guilt Plate,
without damage to the one, or loss to the other. Page 66 To silver over Brass
or Copper, as the Clock-makers do their Dial-plates. Page 66 To guild Iron,
Brass, or Steel with leaf-gold or silver. Page 67 How to refine Silver. Page 67
To separate Gold and Silver when incorporated. Page 67 Directions to paint
Mezzotinto Prints on Glass, or without Glass, and the colors therein used.
Page 69 To wash any of the powdered colors fine. Page 71 Of Oils, and their
price. Page 72 How to make the best Drying oil. Page 72 A Drying oil more
ordinary. Page 72 To make Varnishes for these prints or pictures in oil. Page
72 Another more excellent Varnish either for pictures in oil; or making Prints
transparent. Page 72 How to lay Prints on Glass. Page 73 To lay prints either
Graved, or Mezzotinto's on glass, in such manner, that your may role off all
the Paper, and leave only the shadow behind. Page 73 To prepare prints, without
glass or straining frames Page 73 Of the posture and position of the Prints,
and those that paint them. Page 74 How to paint a Mezzotinto Landscape on a
Glass, or otherwise. Page 74 To paint a piece of figures, as Men, Women, etc
Page 75 How to paint Hair. Page 76 How to paint Drapery, or Garments. Page 76
How to paint changeable Drapery. Page 77 To paint several sorts of Red Drapery,
and first of the finest. Page 77 Another Red near the same. Page 77 Other Reds
more ordinary without glazing. Page 77 To paint the best Blew, and glaze with
Ultramarine. Page 77 To glaze and paint the best purple Drapery. Page 78 Purple
without glazing. Page 78 Yellow Drapery. Page 78 How to paint the most
beautiful Yellow. Page 78 To finish, varnish, and polish pictures that are not
laid on glass. Page 78 To varnish these prints, or other pictures without
polishing. Page 79 To varnish pictures, and polish them like Japan. Page 79 To
imitate or counterfeit Tortoise-shell. Page 79 Another way to counterfeit
Tortoise-shell. Page 81 How to Dye Wood a beautiful Red. Page 82 How to stain a
fine Yellow. Page 82 To stain or dye woods of any color for inlaied or flowred
work done by the Cabinet-makers. Page 83 How to dye or stain wood Black. Page
83 The best Black Dye for Ivory, Horn, Bone, etc. Page 83 To stain a green
color on Wood* Ivory, Horn or Bones. Page 84 How to dye Ivory etc red. Page 84
THE ART OF JAPANNING, VARNISHING, etc.
EVery Artist, who undertakes to treat of his Profession, before he enters on
the work, must describe the Instruments and Materials with which it must be
performed: and by observing this method, those persons who either for diversion
or advantage design to be Masters of this Art, furnish themselves with all
things necessary after the best manner, shall lay a good foundation, and may
proceed to practice with cheerfulness and success. And that no one may impose
upon you in the Price or Goodness of your Drugs; that your Spirits be very
strong, your Gums and Metals of the best; take this following account, as your
only security against all cousenage and imposture. But before I speak of these
things which the Shops supply us with, I presume it is convenient to acquaint you
with others, that conduce to the composition, mixture, and preservation of the
Varnish, Colors, etc.

And 1. two Strainers are required, made of pretty fine Flannel or ordinary
course Linen, in shape like a Tunnel, or Sugar Loaf, or a Jelly-bag that women
strain Jellies through: one is useful for straining your white Varnish, and the
other for your Lacc-varnish, and Lackers, when you make any.

2. You must have two Tin-tunnels; one to use with your Lacc-varnish, and
Lacker, and the other for your white varnish for the same use.

3. You must be furnished with several Glass bottles, and Vials small and
great, according to the quantities of varnish you make or use; and also with
Gally-pots of several sizes, to put your varnish in when you intend to varnish:
and for your Blacks, with which other things must sometimes be mixed,
Gally-pots are better than any other vessels to mix your blacks and hold your
varnish, because they are deeper than Pottingers, and not so wide, so that the
varnish does not so soon thicken, for the Spirits in a deep Gally-pot do not so
suddenly evaporate.

4. You should provide several sorts of varnishing-tools or Pencils, according
to the greatness or smalness of the thing you design to work. Your varnishing
Pencils are soft, and made of Camels hair, and are of several prices, according
to the bigness of them: the best that I know are sold in Blackamoor-street by
Clare-market, but you may have them also at several Colour-sellers in and about
London, from sixpence to half a Crown or three shillings the Pencil.

5. You must procure Pencils to draw with, small and greater, Goose, little
Goose, Duck, and Swallow-quills, according to your work. The longest haired
Pencils I esteem the best for this use; you may have then all at the places
aforesaid.

6. You should get 200 of Musle-shells, that you may have them always in
readiness to mix your Metals or Colors in, as occasion shall serve: not that
you need use the tenth part of them at once, but that you may not be to seek
when you want; and for change, when your metals or colors, by frequent
mixture, shall grow dirty, which will be, if you work in Gum-water, as I shall
hereafter observe.

7. You should furnish your self with Rushes, which are called Dutch-Rushes,
with which you must smooth your work before you varnish it; and as you lay your
ground of Color or Black, if any knob or roughness appear on your work, you
must take a Rush and rush it off; so must you do as often as you find any
roughness or grittiness upon your work, either in laying your Grounds, or
varnishing it up. You may buy them at the Iron-mongers.

8. You must have Tripoly to polish your work after it is varnished, which must
be scraped, or finely pounded and sifted. But of this I shall have occasion to
speak more largely, when I come to give rules for varnishing* you may have it
at the Iron-mongers.

9. You cant be without store of Linnen-rags as well coarse as fine, with which
you must polish and clear up your work, as shall be showed hereafter.

10. You must have Sallet-oyl for clearing up your work, as shall be notified
in its proper place. All these things every Practitioner ought to provide, as
being necessary to his future performances.

CHAP. I. A true Character of the best SPIRITS, GUMS, METALS, etc.
To know a Strong Spirit.
TO make Varnish you must have Spirit of Wine, which must be strong, or it will
spoil the Varnish, and not dissolve your Gums, and consequently hinder your
design; for the stronger your Spirits are, the better will the Varnish be; the
Spirits only being to dissolve the Gums, in order to make them spread, or lie
even upon the work. After it has performed that work, the sooner they
evaporate the better, and the higher the Spirits are drawn, the less phlegm or
watery parts are in them; and the less of watery parts are in the Varnish, the
sooner it dries, and is fit for polishing, is more permanent, and will come to
the greater and better gloss. But this is of little use now Varnish is so much
used; for the Distillers have learned by practice and custom to make Spirits
that just dissolve the gums, only it requires the longer drying: Yet these
Spirits that are commonly used will sometimes be too weak, either by neglect or
dishonesty of the Distiller, who has not sufficiently deflegm'd or drawn all
the watery from the spirituous parts. Therefore the best way to prove your
Spirits, is to take some in a spoon, and put a little Gunpowder in it, and
then set the Spirit on fire with a little paper or candle, as you do Brandy,
and if it burn so long till it fire the Gunpowder before it go out, it is fit
for use, and will dissolve your Gums. All pretenders to this Art know this way
of trying Spirits, and the damage weak Spirits do the Varnish* but since my
design is to inform the ignorant and learner, it is reasonable and necessary in
this place to insert it.

To choose Gum Lac, called Seed-Lac.
The best Seed-Lacc is that which is large-grained, bright, and clear, freest
from dust, sticks, and dross. The Drugsters afford it at several rates,
proportionable to its goodness, generally for 14*16, 18 d. the pound.

To choose Gum Sandrick.
The best Gum-Sandrick is the largest and whitest, or that which casts the
least yellow. Let it be as free from dust or dross as you can. The value of it
is commonly 12 or 14 d. the pound.

To choose Gum Animae.
The whitest, clearest, and most transparent is the best, and the price is
sometimes 3, 4, or 5 s. the pound, according to the goodness.

Venice-Turpentine.
The only directions that can be given for the choice of it are, that the
clearest, finest, and whitest is the best; and is sold at 18 or 20 d. the pound.

White Rosine.
The best white Rosine is white and clear, and purchased at 4 d. or 6 d. the
pound.

Shell-Lacc.
The best Shell-Lacc is the most transparent, and thinnest, and that which (if
melted with a candle) will draw out in the longest and finest hair (like melted
wax) because the toughest. There are counter feits, which you must endeavor to
discover by the aforementioned rule. The true may be procured at 18 d. or 2 s.
the pound.

Bole Armoniak.
The best Bole Armoniak is as fine as red Oker, and of a deep dark,
blackish-red color, free from grittiness or gravel, and is commonly called
French-Bole.

Gum Arabic.
The best is clear, transparent, and white: you may pick it your self from the
Drugsters, but then you must pay something more; the common rate is 12 d. the
pound.

Gum Capall.
The best Capall is the whitest, freest from dross, and thick dark stuff that
is incorporated with the Gum. It is of it self a thick whitish heavy Gum, and
rarely without that dark and drossy mixture; but that which is clearest and
freest from the said stuff is the best. The price is 12, 16, or 18 d. the
pound, according to the goodness.

To choose Gum Elemni.
The best Gum Elemni is the hardest, whitest, and clearest, freest from dross
or dirt. It is brought over commonly in the bark or husk of a Tree; which you
may take off as well as you can before you use it. The Shops can afford it at 4
or 5 d. the ounce.

Rosine.
The best is the clear, and transparent, and clarified. It may be had at 3 d.
the pound.

Isinglass.
The best Isinglass is that which is clearest, and whitest, freest from
yellowness. It is, if good, worth 3 or 4 d. the ounce; you may have it cheaper
by the pound. The same may be observed by other things; for the greater
quantity you buy at a time, the cheaper will your purchase be.

Gambogium.
The best is that of the brightest yellow, and freest from dross. Some of it is
dirty, thick, and full of dross: there is difference in the price according to
the goodness; the best is worth 6 d. the ounce.

To choose Benjamin, or Benzoine.
The best is that of a bright reddish color, very like to clarified Rosine,
but never so fine, freest from dross or filth. It Is as in goodness, 4 d, 6 d, or
8 d, the ounce.

Dragons Blood.
The best is the brightest red, and freest from dross. You may buy it in drops
(as the Drugsters call it) which is the best. They are made up in a kind of
leaf or husk: it is commonly 8 d. sometimes 12 d. the ounce, according to the
goodness.

I have here given you an account of those things and Gums you will have
occasion for in Japanning and Varnishing, and are all to be bought at the
Drugsters at or near the prizes I have specified; and may serve to inform you
in some measure of the Gums, their excellencies and value, but time and
practice will make greater discoveries. Indeed grains of Allowance must be made
for their different prizes; for their rise and fall depends upon the plenty or
scarcity of them, and varies according to the goodness of the commodity. It is
not necessary to furnish your self with all, or any part of these, but as you
have occasion to make use of them: for of some an ounce will serve you a great
while, of others a pound will be used at one time; of which you will know more,
as I shall have occasion to treat of them in their order. I shall now proceed
to Metals, which I will also give you some account of; and first,

Of Brass-dust, which is commonly amongst the Artists called Gold-dust.
This cannot be made in England fit for use, though it has often been
attempted, but comes from beyond Sea, as the rest of the Metals do that are
good. Germany is the place where the best of all sorts is made. The best
Brass-dust is that which is finest, and of the brightest and most gold-like
color; which you may best discern, by taking a little on your finger, and
squeezing it along your finger with your thumb; and if it be good, it will look
with a bright and rich luster, if bad, it will appear of a dull clayish color,
and will never work lively and bright. Several sorts of this Metal are imported
here from foreign parts; which differ vastly as to the coarsness and fineness,
and the different ways of working them: As for instance, the coarser sort will
work well with Gold-size, which will not with Gum-water; other differences will
arise also, which are subject to the discoveries of practice and experience.
From this difference of Metals proceeds that of the prizes; for some are worth
12 or 14 s. the ounce, whilst that others amount to not above 4 or 5 s. for the
same quantity. But these are two extremes; the first very good, and the other
altogether as vile and bad; for there is a middle sort between both, which is
generally afforded, by those that buy of the Merchant, for 8 or 9 s. the ounce,
which will work well.

To choose Silver-dust.
Some have attempted to make Silver here in England, but none I ever saw
comparable to that beyond Sea; for that enjoys a lively bright luster like
polished or new-coined silver, (which you may find by squeezing it between your
finger and thumb) whereas that which we make here is dull, dead, and heavy, and
indeed is a fitter representation of a Color than a Metal; and by comparison
you may find, how the dimness of the counterfeit is obscured by the dazzling
luster of the true. Its price is answerable to its goodness and excellency, for
its lowest rate is no less than 16 s. the ounce. But I would not have the price
fright any one so far, as to prefer cheaper before it, for it is neither so
useful nor pleasant in the work, and the best will go farther than this
proportionable to its price. It Is customary in Japan to use several sorts of
Metals that are corrupted and adulterate, and they are laid too in garments,
flowers, houses, and the like, which makes the work look more beautiful and
surprising: these likewise are vended and sold for the aforesaid use, and are
commonly called,

First, Green-gold,
Is a certain corrupted mettle, casting a kind of a dead greenish color, and
is commonly sold at 6 s. the ounce.

Is another kind of corrupted metal, which bears some resemblance to drossy
dirty Gold: it may be purchased at 6 s. the ounce.

Powder-Tinn
Is Tinn grinded to dust, of a dull, dark, though silverish color; made use of
in Rocks, etc. Its price the same with the former.

Of Coppers
There are three sorts, Natural, Artificial, and Adulterate.

The Natural is ground without mixture, well cleansed, and is of the true
genuine color of Copper, and is sold at 6 or 7 s. the ounce.

The Artificial accordingly exceeds the Natural; it is more deep and red, but
very clear, and its bright glittering color shows how far it is possible for
Art to exceed Nature. It Is very rarely procured, or sold under 10 s. the ounce.

The Adulterate Copper is of a thick, heavy, metallic color, and is commonly
used to work other metals on, as if that be laid for a Ground, you hatch or
highten with bright gold, or other light metal; and sold at 6 s. the ounce.

There is also used in Japan-work metals, commonly called Speckles, of diverse
sorts, as Gold, Silver, Copper, and many other colors, some finer than other,
and worked according to the fancy of the Artist, either on Mouldings, the out
or inside of Boxes, Drawers, etc.

Of these, those that are used in the Indian work, are the Gold, Silver, and
Copper, though, as aforesaid, every one may take their own fancy or humor in
the use of them. They are made here in England very well, and are sold each of
them much at a price, 5 or 6 shillings the ounce, according as they are in
fineness. So that what I said concerning the rates of Gums, will hold good here
also, That a glut or scarcity of these enhances or abates the price; but
generally these are exposed to sale at the rates I have affixed to each of
them. These are sold by great quantities by several Merchants in London; and in
lesser, by as many. I shall only mention two, viz. a Gold-beater, at the hand
and hammer in Long-acre; and another of the same trade, over against
Mercers-Chappel in Cheap Side.

Having given you an account of Gums, and Metals, I shall briefly run over the
Colors, which formerly our ignorant English and French Practitioners used to
mix with their Japan-work, but improperly; for the true natural Japan-work, so
called from the Island of that name, did so far surpass all the painting of
Bantam, and the neighboring places, in goodness of black and stateliness of
draught, that no fidling pretender could match or imitate it; and the ignorant
undertaker not being able to make his work look well and lively, inserts
several colors as a file to set it off, when (unfortunate man) instead of art,
fancy, and skill, he exposes a piece gay, queint, gaudy, finical, and mean, the
genuine product of ignorance and presumption; and an ornament of Bartholmew, or
Alehouse, rather than a Palace or Exchange. The mistake of Bantam-work for
Japan, arose from hence: all work of this kind was by a general name called
Indian; by use they so far confounded all together, that none but the skilful
could rightly distinguish. This must be alleged for the Bantam-work, that it is
very pretty, and some are more fond of it, and prefer it to the other, nay the
work is equally difficult with Japan: But if I must give you my opin^^n, my
skill and fancy induce me to believe, that Japan is more rich, grave, and
Majestic, and for that reason ought to be more highly esteemed. But fancy,
like Proteus, putting on a thousand shapes, cannot, ought not, be confined; and
those who are inclined to admire colors, may find safe and exact rules set
down by way of information.

And first, some colors we call transparent; such as are those we lay upon
Silver, Gold, or some light color, and then they appear in their proper
colors very beautiful and lively. Of these for your use is, first, Distilled
Verdigreece, for a green; fine Lake for a red; fine Smalt, for a blew. To
render these useful, you must observe the following method: having provided a
Porphyr, or Marble stone, with a Muller, take what quantity of Verdigreece or
Smalt you please, and with Nut-oyl, so much as will just moisten it fit to
work, grind it upon your stone till it be as fine or finer than butter; then
put them in shells, mixing them with Turpentine-oyl till they be thin enough
for your use; lay these upon silver, gold, or any other light color, and they
will be transparent, and alter their lightness or darkness according to the
lightness or darkness of the metals or colors you lay under them. The same may
you do with Lake for a red, only instead of Nut-oyl, use Drying oil to grind it
in.

Other colors are used which have a body, and are laid on the black of your
table or box, where you have designed any thing, as Flowers, Birds, etc. These
are Vermilion for a red, White-lead for a white; some use Flake-white for a
white, which is a purer white, and much better, but for ordinary work the other
will do* if you make a blew to lay upon your work, you must take Smalt, and
mixing it with Gum Arabick-water put in what quantity of white-lead you please,
to make it deeper or lighter, as your fancy shall direct; but you must put in
white-lead, because your blew will not otherwise have a body; so must you do
with all colors that have not a body of themselves. Some use Rozett, fine
Lake, and Seagreen, for a Purple, and other sorts of Reds and Greens: and
indeed ways of working, are very numerous, which being now out of fashion, I
should to no purpose both trouble you, and tire my self, by increasing the
number; those which I have mentioned are abundantly sufficient, for any that
design to have something beside gaudy colors in their work. Twill be
convenient here to insert a caution concerning these Colors; that they are all
to be laid with Gum-water, except the transparent ones abovementioned: and
whosoever has a mind to work, either in Gum-water, or Gold-size, shall
hereafter receive sufficient Instructions for both.

According to my promise I have in full treated of Gums, Metals, and Colors; I
shall now in full proceed to discover the methods that are used to make
Varnishes.

CHAP. II. How to make VARNISHES.
To make Seed-Lacc-Varnish.
TAke one gallon of good Spirit, and put it in as wide-mouthed a bottle as you
can procure; for when you shall afterward strain your varnish, the Gums in a
narrow-mouthed bottle may stick together, and clog the mouth, so that it will
be no easy task to separate or get them out. To your spirits add one pound and
a half of the best Seed-lacc; let it stand the space of 24 hours, or longer,
for the Gum will be the better dissolved: observe to shake it very well, and
often, to keep the Gums from clogging or caking together. When it has stood
its time, take another bottle of the same bigness, or as many quart-ones as
will contain your varnish; and your strainer of flannel made as aforesaid in
this book, fasten it to a tenter-hook against a wall, or some other place
convenient for straining it, in such a posture, that the end of your strainer
may almost touch the bottom of your Tin-tunnel, which is supposed to be fixed
in the mouth of your empty bottle, on purpose to receive your strained varnish.
Then shake your varnish well together, and pour or decant into your strainer as
much as conveniently it will hold, only be sure to leave room for your hand,
with which you must squeez out the varnish; and when the bag by so doing is
almost drawn dry, repeat it, till your strainer being almost full of the dregs
of the Gums, shall (the moisture being all pressed out) require to be
discharged of them: which faeces or dregs are of no use, unless it be to burn,
or fire your chimny. This operation must be continued, till all your varnish is
after this manner strained; which done, commit it to your bottles close stopped,
and let it remain undisturbed for two or three days: then into another clean
empty bottle pour off very gently the top of your varnish, so long as you
perceive it to run very clear, and no longer; for as soon as you observe it to
come thick, and muddy, you must by all means desist: and again, give it time to
rest and settle, which 'twill do in a day or two; after which time you may
attempt to draw off more of your fine varnish, and having so done you may lay
it up, till your art and work shall call for its assistance. It Is certain, that
upon any emergency or urgent occasion you may make varnish in less time than 24
hours, and use it immediately, but the other I recommend as the best and more
commendable way: besides, the varnish which you have from the top of the
bottles first poured off is of extraordinary use to adorn your work, and render
it glossy and beautiful. Some Artists, through have or inadvertency, scruple
not to strain their varnish by fire or candlelight: but certainly daylight is
much more proper, and less dangerous; for should your varnish through
negligence or chance take fire, value not that loss, but rather thank your
stars that your self and workhouse have escaped. Should I affirm, that the
boiling the Lacker and Varnish by the fire, were prejudicial to the things
themselves, I could easily make good the assertion; for they are as well and
better made without that dangerous element, which if any after this caution
will undertake, they may feelingly assure themselves that it is able to spoil
both the Experiment and Operator. On the other hand, no advantage or excellence
can accrue either to Lacker or Varnish; especially when, as some of them do,
it is boiled to so great a height, that this Aetna is forced to throw out its
fiery eruptions, which for certain consume the admiring Empedocles, who expires
a foolish and a negligent Martyr; and it would almost excite ones pity, to see
a forward ingenious undertaker, perish thus in the beginning of his Enterprise;
who might have justly promised to erect a noble and unimitable piece of Art, as
a lasting monument of his same and memory: but (unhappy man) his beginning and
his end are of the same date; his hopes vanish, and his mischance shall be
registered in doggrel Ballad, or be frightfully represented in a Puppet-shew, or
on a Sign-post.

To make Shell-Lacc-varnish.
Whosoever designs a neat, glossy piece of work, must banish this as
unserviceable for, and inconsistent with, the rarities of our Art. But because
it is commonly used by those that employ themselves in varnishing ordinary woods,
as Olive, Walnut, and the like; it is requisite that we give you directions for
the composition of it, that if your convenience or fancy lead that way, you may
be supplied with materials for the performance. Having therefore in readiness
one gallon of the best Spirit, add to it one pound and a half of the best
Shell-Lacc. This mixture being well stirred and shaked together, should stand
about twenty four hours before it is strained: You might have observed, that the
former varnish had much sediment and dregs; this on the contrary has none, for
it wholly dissolves, and is by consequence free from all dross or faeces; it is
requisite however to strain it, that the sticks and straws, which often are in
the Gum, may by this percolation be separated from the varnish. But although
this admits of no sediment, and in this case differs from the aforementioned
varnish, yet it is much inferior also to it in another respect; That this will
never be fine, clear, and transparent, and therefore 'twill be lost labor to
endeavor, either by art or industry, to make it so. This small advantage
however does arise, that you need not expect or tarry for the time of its
perfection, for the same minute that made it, made it fit for use. This, as I
hinted before, is a fit varnish for ordinary work that requires not a polish;
for though it may be polished, and look well for the present, yet like a
handsome Ladies beautiful face, it has no security against the injuries of
time; for but a few days will reduce it to its native mist and dullness. Your
common Varnish-dawbers frequently use it, for it is doubly advantageous to them:
having a greater body than the Seed-Lacc, less labor and varnish goes to the
perfecting their work; which they carelessly slubber over, and if it looks
tolerably bright till it is sold, they matter not how dull it looks afterward;
and lucre only being designed, if they can compass that, farewell credit and
admiration, Poor insufficient Pretenders, not able to make their work more
apparent, or more lasting than their knavery! And it is pretty to think, that the
same misty cloak will not cover the fraud and the impostor! that the first
should be a foil to the second, and the dull foggy work serve only to set off
the knavish Artist in his most lively colors! But to conclude, if with a pint
of this varnish you mix two ounces or more of Venice-turpentine, it will harden
well, and be a varnish good enough for the inside of Drawers, frames of Tables,
Stan-pillars, frames of Chairs, Stools, or the like. Painters Lacker made also
with this Varnish, and something a larger quantity of Turpentine put to it,
serves very well for lackering of Coaches, Houses, Signs, or the like, and will
gloss with very little heat, and, if occasion be, without.

To make the best White-varnish.
I would desire the Reader to observe, that when any Drugs, Gums, or Spirits,
are set down for the use and making of Varnish, Lacker, or the like, though we
do not to every particular write the best of such a sort, yet that you should
understand our meaning to be such, when we do not particularly forbid the
getting or buying of the best; for it is irksom and tedious to every single drug
to affix the word Best: wherefore to avoid so needless a repetition, I shall
forbear mentioning it above once, either at the beginning or end, as it shall
seem most necessary. Besides, it is a very reasonable supposition; for you must
not expect to raise a Noble piece from dross or rubbish; to erect a Louvre or
Escurial with dirt or clay, nor from a common Log to frame a Mercury. But to
return to our design of White-varnish: Being furnished with one pound of the
whitest Gum Sandrick, one ounce of the whitest Gum Mastick, of the clearest
Venice-Turpentine three ounces, one ounce and a half of Gum-Capal, of
Gum-Elemni half an ounce, of Gum-Benzoin or Benjamin the clearest half an
ounce, one ounce and half of the clearest Gum Animae, and of white Rosine half
an ounce. The Gums thus separately and in their due quantities provided, each
being the best and most excellent in its kind; I must desire you to observe
carefully the following order in their mixture and dissolution. Put the Capal
and Rosine in a glass-vial, with half a pint of Spirits to dissolve them: for
the same end to another glass, containing three quarters of a pint of Spirits,
confine the Gum Animae, Benjamin, and Venice-Turpentine. The Gum Sandrick and
Mastick should likewise enjoy the privilege of a distinct bottle, and in it a
pint and half of Spirits, for their more effectual dissolution; and lastly, the
Gum Elemni by it self, content with one quarter of a pint of Spirits to
dissolve it. It Is not highly necessary to observe the quantities of Spirits so
exactly: but this in general I advise, that all your Spirits exceed not three
quarts. They must in this distinct manner be dissolved, the better to extract
the whole virtue of each Gum, and prevent their clogging and caking together,
which would much hinder their being quickly or thoroughly dissolved. I must not
forget further to acquaint you, that the Gum Animae and Benjamin be very finely
pounded and reduced to powder, before they are mixed with the Spirits; you may
also bruise the Capal and Rosine, as for the rest, they may be used or put into
the Spirit as you buy them, without any alteration. Having thus carefully mixed
'em, let them caress one another for two or three days, and make them dance or
change places, by shaking very briskly each bottle or vial once in two hours
for the first day; the remaining time shake them at your own convenience. Then
take a bottle large and capacious enough to hold all the varnish you have made,
and through the fine linen Strainer (of which in the beginning) strain all
your gums, mixed as aforesaid; but squeez gently, and not with so close an hand
as was required for your Seed-Lacc: for by this easy percolation you prevent
the sandy, hard, gritty stuff passing through into your varnish. Some never
strain it, but with great diligence pour it off as long as twill run clear from
each bottle. But if I may be a competent Judge, this is not so good a way or so
convenient, for these reasons: You have not, first, so much varnish, neither
can you pour it off so clear and fine, as you may by straining. Again, your
dregs being left in, by frequent use will fill up your vessel, and the fresh
Gums will mix with the old, and slacken the melting of them, all which our
method disallows of, and keeps the bottles empty, and fit for the same repeated
use, without these inconveniences. The varnish thus strained having stood three
or four days, (the longer the better,) pour of gently as much as will come very
clear, reserving the thick and muddy part at the bottom for ordinary uses; as
mixing with other varnish for black work, or to gloss the inside of boxes, as
we shall hereafter more fully discover.

To make a White-varnish much inferior to the former.
This is made out of two distinct Varnishes, the one Sandrick, the other of
Mastick; of both which take the following account. Having provided three
quarters of a pound of gum Sandrick, mix it with two quarts of Spirits, and
having been well shaken, and stood for about two days, decant or strain it into
another bottle, and reserve it for use. Take also of clean picked Mastick the
same proportion, to an equal quantity of Spirit with the former, and in every
particular observe the rules for making the Sandrick, as to settling, shaking,
decanting, and straining it.

Now when you design to varnish a print or any thing else with this varnish,
your usual proportion for mixing, them, is to add a double part of gum Mastick
to a single part of gum Sandrick. As for instance: suppose the work would take
up or consume three quarters of a pint of varnish; then by the foregoing rule
you must put half a pint of Mastick to a quarter of a pint of Sandrick-varnish,
and so accordingly in a lesser or greater quantity. And we think fit to make
these varnishes severally, and so mix them, that we may have our varnish answer
to our desires in softness or hardness. Now when you have set by your work for
two days, you may try its qualities, if, by pressing your warm finger on it,
you leave your print behind you, it is a sign that it is too soft, and a wash or
two of the Sandrick will harden it: if it not only resist your touch, but has
some streaks, flaws, or cracks, like scratches, sometimes more or less, you may
be sure it is too hard, and it must be remedied by a wash or two of your
Mastick-varnish. Some usually ddissolve these gums together, and others mix
them before hand, and by so doing are not certain how their varnish will
succeed; for it often happens, that some parts of each gum are softer than
others, and so the contrary. Should therefore a varnished piece prove too soft,
or hard, this way cannot remedy it; for to wash it again with the same, is only
a repetition of the former miscarriage. These things being premised, I need not
infer which way will prove the most rational, certain, and satisfactory.

To make Varnish, that shall secure your Draught, whether Gold-work, or Color,
from the injuries of Tarnishing, and will give it a gloss.
Before we come to the Varnish, it is requisite to acquaint you with the manner
of preparing Turpentine, which is the chiefest ingredient. Take then of good
Venice-turpentine as much as you please, enclose it in a Pipkin that will hold
double the quantity that you put in. Having prepared a fire that will never
flame out, but burn gently and clearly, set your pot over it, but be cautious
that it boil not over, thereby to prevent the firing your Turpentine and your
Chimny. To this gentle boiling motion caused by the fire you must join another,
and with a stick very often stir it, until you find it is rendered fit for use;
which you may discover, by dropping a little of it on the ground; for when it is
cold, it will crumble to powder between your fingers, if it be sufficiently
boiled; and when it is brought to this pass, nothing remains but that you let it
cool, and preserve it for the following composition.

Your Securing-varnish requires a quarter of a pint of the finest
Seed-Lacc-varnish, (which is always the top of it,) and one ounce of this
boiled Turpentine finely powdered; they must be both shut up close prisoners in
a double glass-vial or bottle, capacious enough to contain a double quantity;
which being stopped close, may be placed over a very gentle fire, that it may
leisurely heat, thereby to forestall the danger of breaking the glass, which it
is certainly past when it is exceeding hot; and in this condition keep it for
some time, simpering, and smiling: then take it off, and give it vent by
unstopping; so done, return the stopple shaking it well, and place it on the
fire again, never discontinuing the operation; but repeat the foresaid method,
till such time as your Turpentine shall be so far dissolved, that the bigness
of a large Pea shall only remain visible; for that being the dross and
indissoluble part, will not endure to be incorporated. Being arrived to this
degree, remove your Varnish, afford it two days to cool and settle; and
vouchsafe the clearer part fresh lodgings in a clean bottle, that may entertain
and keep it for your future designs.

Now whatsoever you propose to be by this varnish secured, if convenience will
allow, should be destined to a warm place, that it may dry the sooner; if you
cannot admit of it, then give it the space of half an hour to dry between every
wash; however it will gloss either way. Then take a Pencil, for great work
large, and so the contrary, proportionable to your draught: with this Pencil
dipped in the varnish, secure it, that is, pass it over, leaf by leaf, and sprig
by sprig, not omitting to give your Rocks, Figures, etc, the like
entertainment; but be sure above all, that your steady hand never trespass upon
the least part of your black or groundwork. Having run over all your draught
thus, three or four times, for oftener may spoil the color of your metal, you
may rest satisfied that your undertaking (whether of Gum-water, or Gold-size)
is armed against all injuries and Tarnish; and, if performed Artist-like, adds
to the native luster of the metals, with an artificial gloss more bright,
durable, and surprising.

To secure your whole piece, both Draught and Groundwork, whereby it may
endure polishing, and obtain a Gloss all over, like some of the Indian
performances.
Here also, as in the last, your patience must be desired, and before we open
our Scenes, think it reasonable to give you a survey of those passages which
must be transacted in the Tiring-room or Shop, before the Actors and Operators
appear on the Stage. That necessary and serviceable friend, Venice-Turpentine,
here also gives his attendance: who in the quantity of one pound, to three
pints of water, takes up his lodging in a clean, earthen, Pipkin, almost as
large again as the Inhabitants. These Guests so disposed of, with their house
of clay the Pipkin, place over a gentle fire, and by degrees warm them, till
they being pleased with their habitation begin to simper, and dance a little;
then do you promote their pastime by stirring with a stick, (as in the last
Chapter you were directed.) But if they finding the place too hot for them,
should endeavor to escape by boiling over, which you will soon discover by the
rout and bustle, and rising of the water; release them, not from the Vessels
but fix the Pipkin in a cooler place; yet so, that they may always dance, and
boil leisurely. If you find that a little of this Liquor being poured on the
ground, if cold, is willing by your fingers to be reduced to powder, you may
conclude that the operation has succeeded well, and ought now to be concluded.
Having stood long enough to loose its acquired heat, and will suffer you to
handle it; part these fellow sufferers, by taking the Venice-Turpentine into
your wet hands, and therewith squeez from it its friend the water, as clean as
possibly; roll it into the figure of a ball, and after a day or two pound and
beat it into fine powder, and in a fit place set it to dry, but not too near
the fire, which will melt it; and lastly, imprison it in a Gallipot.

This Operation is just like the former; but the two Turpentines are at
variance, and differ in their colors; for this is as white as Paper, the
other, in the last Chapter, as yellow as Amber: You must therefore of necessity
judge this most excellent for the present life; although it is more often to be
washed with it, before it will endure and acquire a glittering Polish.

Having advanced thus far, let us now proceed to compose the Varnish, by
joining one ounce of this powdered Turpentine to half a pint of
Seed-Lacc-varnish, in a bottle twice as large as the things you put in, close
stopped. When it has stood some small time on an easy fire, take it off, unstop,
and shake it: be sure to do so, until the Turpentine be dissolved to the
bigness of a large Pea; and after two days have both cooled and settled it,
decant and separate the clearest, which is now in readiness for your work. Your
piece therefore lying before you drawn and finished, waiting for security
against all damages, fortify after this manner. Take a neat, clean,
varnish-Pencil, large or small, as your work is in its Area, surface and
breadth; for a large Table or Box requires a great Pencil, and so the contrary.
This Pencil being dipped into a Gallipot, wherein you have poured some of the
said varnish; when you take it out, always stroke it against the sides of the
pot, for fear it should be too full and overburthened with varnish, which will
incur this inconvenience, That 'twill lie thick and rough in some places,
whereas a smooth and even superficies is its greatest beauty. This, without any
distinction, must wash over your whole work, both draught and ground: And you
must do it five or six times, as you see the gold and metals keep their color,
gently warming and thoroughly drying it between every wash; and indeed it must
be but just warm, for if more, 'twill ruin all your labor. Having observed
these rules, as also that it must by all means be evenly and smoothly done; let
it have rest fot three or four days before you attempt any thing further upon
it. After this time is past, provide some Tripole, scraped with a piece of
glass, and a fine rag, which dipped in a basin of water, and some powder of the
same Tripole being lickt up by the said cloth, therewith in a moderate way,
neither too hard or too soft, rub and stroke, until it becomes smooth and
glossy; but if it should come so near your gold or draught as to molest and
displace it, utterly desist, and rub no more there, but let your chief aim be
to render your ground or black, bright and smooth, for there your wavings and
uneveness will be most discernable. Now to fetch of the Tripolee, take the
softest Sponge soaked in water, and with it wash it off, and a clean cloth or
rag to dry and free it from all the Tripolee that remains. But because this
will not free the crevises and fine lines from it, mingle a little oil with a
like quantity of Lamblack, and grease your Table all over with the same: now to
fetch off this too, labor and rub with a fine cloth, until your Lamblack and
Oil vanish and disappear. To conclude this tedious business; Take one fine
clean rag more, and therewith rub and stroke until a gloss is acquired, and
that it glissen and reflect your face like a Mirror or Looking-glass.

I suppose by this time it is apparent, what trouble, pains, care, and
accuracy, accompany our Undertakings; and if to these you prefix the Skill,
Fancy, and fine Hand of the Artist; I say all these must enhance, and set an
high price upon good Japan-work.

These instructions for composing Varnishes, the must needful and best for all
works of this kind, being thus fully laid down; it will be no ways prejudicial
to give some Rules, which must be most strictly observed in all sorts of
Varnishing, and to inform you how you may employ these Varnishes about other
Woods; or to lay Blacks, and other colors, which are much in vogue with us and
the Indians. We grant, it is not a part of Japan-work properly, but rather
foreign to that design, but its universal benefit will abundantly compensate
for that pretense, and the knowledge of it cannot certainly prove burdensome
to any: But to those especially it is advantageous, who living in the Country
remote from Artists, cannot without great trouble move or alter anything they
have by them, unless assisted by this our information.

CHAP. III. General Rules to be diligently observed in all manner of Varnishing.
I Am very sollicitous that your Work should succeed, and therefore take all
imaginable care to guide you, so that you cannot possibly miscarry; and in
order thereunto shall propose Rules and general Cautions,, which I desire you
would have always in mind, and call them to your assistance in all your
undertakings.

1. Therefore let your wood which you intend to varnish be close-grained,
exempt and free from all knots and greasiness, very smooth, clean, and well
rush't.

2. Lay all your Colors and Blacks exquisitely even and smooth; and where ever
mole-hills and knobs, asperities and roughness in colors or varnish offer to
appear, with your Rush sweep them off, and tell them their room is more
acceptable to you than their company. If this ill usage will not terrify them,
or make them avoid your work, give them no better entertainment than you did
before, but maintain your former severity, and with your Rush whip them off, as
often as they molest you.

3. Keep your work always warm, by no means hot, which will certainly blister
or crack it; and if that mischance through inadvertency should happen, it is next
to irreparable, and nothing less than scraping off all the varnish can rectify
the miscarriage.

4. Let your work be thoroughly dry, after every distinct wash; for neglect in
this point introduces the fault again, of which we warned you in the second
rule, That your varnish should not be rough and knobby.

5. Let your work lie by and rest, as long as your convenience will admit,
after it is varnished; for the better will your endeavors prove, the longer it
stands after this operation.

6. Be mindful to begin your varnishing stroke in the middle of the table or
box that you have provided for that work, and not in full length from one end
to the other; so that your brush being planted in the middle of your board,
strike it to one end; then taking it off, fix it to the place you began at, and
draw or extend it to the other end; so must you do till the whole plane or
content be varnished over. We have reasons too for this caution, which if
neglected, has several faults and prejudices attending it; for if you should
undertake at one stroke to move your Pencil from end to end, it would so happen
that you would overlap the edges and mouldings of your box; this overlapping
is, when you see the varnish lie in drops and splashes, not laid by your brush,
but caused by your brushes being at the beginning of the stroke overcharged and
too full of varnish; and therefore we advise you to stroke your pencil once or
twice against the sides of the Gallipot, to obstruct and hinder this
superfluity; small experience will discover these mislates.

7. When you come to polish, let your Tripolee be scraped with glass or a
knife: for fine work your rags must be fine, and your Tripolee too delicately
small, and powder-like; and so for common work, coarse linen, and coarser
Tripolee will be very serviceable: let your hand be moderately hard, but very
even, in all your polishing-stroaks; and remember to polish and brighten one
place, as much as for that time you intend to do, before you forsake it, and
pass over to another. For

8. Remember, never to polish your work as smooth as you intend at one time,
but let it rest two or three days if you can after the first polishing, and
then give it the finishing and concluding stroke. Be circumspect likewise that
you come not near the wood, to make your piece look thin, hungry, and
threadbare: should you therefore injure your workmanship after this manner, it
will demand another varnishing for satisfaction and reparation.

9. Take a large quantity of Tripolee at the first polishing, till it begins to
become smooth; afterward, a very small parcel will suffice. Circumspectly
examine your Tripolee and clout, least some mischievous, unwelcom gravel,
grittiness, or grating part, unawares steal in, and raze or scratch your work;
it will prove no easy matter to hide the flaw and damage: and if ever it
should so happen, you must retrieve your negligence by your labor, and with
your cloth wrapped about your forefinger polish the faulty place until you have
brought it to a good understanding and evenness with the rest of the piece, and
the wounded part to be no more visible.

10. When you resolve to clear up your work, and put it in its best apparel,
remove and wash off your Tripolee with a Sponge and water: drink up that water
with dry linen, and with oil mixed with Lamblack anoint the whole face of your
work; let no corner or moulding escape, for this will totally free your piece
from the lurking Tripolee. Now it is time that these should withdraw* and as they
turned out the Tripolee, so must a clean linen rag displace them, and put them
to shift for new quarters; and then with anothor clean, very fine, soft, dry
cloth, rub it all over; spare no place, or pains, but salute it all with a
nimble, quick stroke, and as hard an hand, and the fruits of your industry will
be a dazzling luster, and an incomparable gloss.

Lastly, for white-work, be kind and gentle to it, let your hand be light and
even, and your skill in polishing it neat and curious; and observe, that when
it is to be cleared up, you must not pollute and dawb it with Lamblack, but
oblige it with oil and fine flower instead thereof.

To conclude, let this Chapter be well studied, and remember, that without it
you cannot regularly or safely perform the task: This is the Common-place-book,
to which I shall continually refer you; and if you will prove negligent and
remiss in this particular, I shall prophecy, that nothing can so infallibly
attend you as Error and Disappointment.

CHAP. IV. Of varnishing WOODS without Color.
To varnish Olive-wood.
WHat remains then, but that from Precept we proceed to Practice, that from
mean and ordinary endeavors we successively rise to the excellence and
perfection of this Art. To begin with Olive-wood, which for Tables, Stands,
Cabinets, etc, has been highly in request amongst us; that which is cleanly
workt off, void of flaws, cracks, and asperities, is a fit subject for our
skill to be exercised in. Having rushed it all over diligently, set it by a
weak fire, or some place where it may receive heat; and in this warm condition,
wash it over ten or twelve times with Seed-Lacc-varnish, that remained after
you had poured off the top for a better use, with a pencil proportioned to the
bigness of your Table or Stand, or the like; let it thoroughly dry between every
wash; and if any roughness come in sight, rush em off as fast as you meet with
them. After all this, welcome it with your Rush until it is smooth, and when very
dry, anoint it six several times with the top or finest part of the aforesaid
Seed-Lacc-varnish, After three days standing call for Tripolee scraped with a
knife; and with a cloth, dipped first in water, then in powdered Tripolee, polish
and rub it till it acquire a smoothness and gloss: but be circumspect and shie
of rubbing too much, which will fret and wear off the varnish, that cannot
easily be repaired: If when you have labored for some time, you use the rag
often wetted, without Tripolee, you will obtain the better gloss. Then wipe of
your Tripolee with a sponge full of water, the water with a dry rag; grease it
with Lamblack and Oil all over; wipe off that with a cloth, and clear it up
with another, as I have most fully showed in the last Chapter, to which I refer
you. If after all this pains your work look dull, and your varnish misty, which
polishing before it is dry, and damp weather will effect; give it a slight
polish, clear it up, and that will restore its pristine beauty: If you have
been too niggardly of your varnish, and there is not enough to bear and endure
a polish, use again your finest Seed-Lacc, and afford it four or five washes
more; after two days quietness polish and clear it up. Should any one desire to
keep the true natural, and genuine color of the wood, I council him to employ
the white-varnish formerly mentioned, as every where answerable to his purpose;
for this being of a reddish tawny color, and so often washed with it, must
necessarily heighten and increase the natural one of the Olive.

To varnish Walnut-wood.
To avoid a tedious and troublesome repetition or tautology, I shall refer you
to the last Chapter, and desire you to observe the same method exactly for
varnishing Walnut, that I gave you for Olive. And farther take notice, that
those Rules will hold good also for all sorts of wood, that are of a close,
smooth grain, such are Yew, Box, the Lime-tree, and Pear Tree, etc. Thus much
may suffice for varnishing woods without color; we pass over from hence to
treat of the adorning woods with color, and of each in its order.

CHAP. V. Of varnishing WOODS with Color.
Of Black Varnishing or Japan.
BLack varnishing is done in imitation of Japan-work; and because the making
this very good is a great ornament to the whole undertaking, I shall give you
the best account I can possibly for the making it. Having provided wood,
close-grained, and well wrought off, rush it smooth, and keep it warm by a
fire, or in some hot place; but be always cautious, that whilst you varnish,
you suffer not the piece to take the eye of the fire, that is, come so near it
as to burn, scorch, or blister your work, which is an unpardonable fault, and
remedied no other way when committed but by scraping off the varnish, as I
hinted in the Chapter of Rules and Directions. Those that make it their trade,
generally work in a Stove, which is beyond all dispute the best and safest way;
and I would advise those, who intend to make it their employment, to use no
other; because it gives an even and moderate heat to all parts of the room: but
those who for pleasure, fancy, and diversion only, practice; for them I say, a
great fire a close, warm chamber, may perform it as well. In the next place,
pour some of the thickest Seed-Lacc-varnish into a Gallipot, adding to it as
much Lamblack as will at the first wash blacken and discolor the work; the
Colour-shops furnish you with it for 2 d, 4 d, or 6 d the barrel, whose price
is equal to its bigness: With this varnish and black mixed together varnish over
your thing three times, permitting it to dry thoroughly between every turn.
After this, take more of the Lac-varnish, and mix with it Lampblack to the same
degree of thickness with the former. This is the only black for this business,
I prefer it before Ivory, (tho some differ with me on this point;) this is a
fine, soft, and a very deep black, and agrees best with the varnish; how you
shall make it, I will in the next Section direct you. With this black
composition wash it over three times, between each of them rushing it smooth,
and suffering it cleaverly to dry. Then with a quarter of a pint of the
thickest Seed-Lacc, mix of Venice Turpentine the bigness of a walnut, and shake
them together until it is dissolved, and observe this proportion in less or
greater quantities. Now put in Lamp-black enough to color it, and no more, and
with this wash it six times, letting it stand 12 hours between the three first
and the three last washings. Having thus clothed the piece with ordinary
varnish as with a common under-garment, we now intend to put on its gayest
apparel, and cover it all over with the top and finest of the
Seed-Lac-varnish, which must also be just colored and tinged with the
Lamp-black: twelve times must it be varnished with this, standing as many hours
between the six first and the six last washings, with this never to be
forgotten caution, That they stand till they are dried between every distinct
varnishing. After all this give it rest for five or six days before you attempt
to polish it; that time being expired, take water and Tripolee, and polish it
according to the directions I have assigned and taught you in the Chapter for
Olivewood: but however take along with you this further remark, That you allow
three times distinct from each other for polishing; for the first, labor at it
till it is almost smooth, and let it stand still two days; the next time, polish
till it is very near enough and sufficient: lay it aside then for five or six
days; after which, lastly, polish off, and clear it up as you were before
instructed. Following this course, I have, I will assure you, made as good, as
glossy, and beautiful a Black, as ever was wrought by an English hand, and to
all appearance it was no way inferior to the Indian.

I promised to detect and lay open the whole Art, and do resolve by no means to
fall short of my engagement. I intend therefore to pleasure you with another
way to make good Black, and having variety you may take your choice, and try
either, as your fancy or Genius is inclined. I must confess, I have made
excellent good black this way too, and such as in all respects would match and
parallel the foregoing. Lay your blacks as before, and take of the best
Seed-Lac-varnish, and the White-varnish, (I mean the first White that I taught
you to make in this Book) an equal quantity, and vouchsafe to give it a
tincture only of your Lamp or Ivory-black; wash your work with it six or eight
times, let it stand the space of a day or two, and dry between every turn; then
repeat it four or five times more, keeping it but just warm, and having rested
a day or so, anoint it as often with the fine Seed-Lac-varnish only. To
conclude, in a weeks time, after all this has been done, it will be dry enough
to polish, and not before, which you may then do, and clear it up. You will
observe, that your glossy persormances after some little time may happen to wax
dull, misty, and heavy; which a slight polish will remedy, with clearing it up
afterward. Now the causes of this disappointment are two; either first, your
varnish is not reasonably well dried, or it has not a sufficient body of
varnish; both these occasion it to mist, and, as it were, to purl. It Is no hard
task to distinguish them: if the former is in fault, it will appear dull, but
of a full body, and smooth; if the latter, the work will look hungry, and so
bare, that you may almost, if not quite, see the very grain of the wood through
your varnish. This last fault is mended by five or six washes more of your fine
Seed-Lacc; the other is assisted by frequent polishings with discretion. One
Memorandum I had almost passed over in silence, which I presume I have not any
where mentioned; You must look upon it as a necessary remark, and by no means
to be omitted, and this it is; To be industriously careful, in laying on your
colors and varnish, never to strike your pencil twice over the same place, for
it will make your varnish or colors lie rough and ugly: but let every stroke
anoint a place not washed before, carrying a steady, quick, and even hand;
beginning at the middle of the table, and so conveying your brush to either
end, until the whole surface has been passed over. Perhaps I have here spoken
the same thing over and over again; in justification whereof, I allege what
Seneca did to those, who objected that he was guilty of tautologie, and
repetition; "I only (says he) inculcate often the "same precepts to those who
commit and react the same vices: This is my case; if you charge me with that
fault, my plea is his; I often admonish you, and insert many cautions which
refer to the same error, and apply 'em to those who are subject to frequent
miscarriages.

To make Lamp-black.
Being furnished with a Lamp that has three or four Spouts, for as many lights
and cotton-week, which you may have at the Tallow-chandlers, twisted up so big
that it will but just go into the nose of your Spouts; for the greater light
they make, the large quantity of black is afforded. Procure a quart of oil, by
the Oil shops rated at 6 d. and so much will make black enough to use about a
large Cabinet. Get a thing to receive your black in, such in shape and
substance as you may often see is planted over a candle to keep the flame and
smoke from the roof or ceiling of a room* Having placed your weecks in their
proper apartment, and put in the oil, fire or light 'em, and fix your receiver
over them so close, that the flame may almost touch them. After it has
continued so the space of half an hour, take off your receiver, and with a
feather strike and sweep off all the black on it. Snuff your weecks, and put it
on again, but forget not to supply your Lamp with oil, as often as occasion
shall require; and when you imagine more black is stuck to the receiver, do as
before directed: and thus continue and persevere, until you have obtained black
enough, or that all your oil is burnt up and exhausted. This is that which is
properly called Lamp-black, and is of excellent use for black varnish.

White Varnishing or Japan.
You cannot be over-nice and curious in making white Japan; nothing must be
used that will either soil or pollute it, in laying on the color, or in
varnishing. Your first necessary therefore is Isinglass-size, (to make which
the next Section shall instruct you;) scrape into it as much whiting, as will
make it of a reasonable thickness and consistence; or so long, till by a stroke
with your pencil dipped into it, it will whiten the body which your brush has
passed over; your own discretion is the best guide. Suffer it not to be in
extremes, either too thick or too thin; but with your brush, made of the
softest Hogs-hair, mix and incorporate very well the whiting with your size.
This being prepared, whiten your work once over with it, and having stood till
it is thoroughly dry, do it all over again; and when dry, repeat it a third time:
after which let it stand twelve hours, but be sure to cover and defend it from
dust before it is varnish't. Take then some rushes; rush it as smooth and as
close to the wood as you can conveniently. This done, procure some white flake,
with which the Colour-shops can furnish you; mix it too with your, size only,
that it may lie with a full, fair body on your piece. With this, three several
times whiten your work, giving it sufficient time to dry between each of them;
then rush it extraordinarily smooth, but be not now so bold as you were before;
adventure not to come near the wood, but by all means keep your distance. These
two sorts of white being used, we charge you with a third, and that is, white
Starch, boiled in fair water, until it come to be somewhat thick, and with it
almost blood-warm wash over the whole, twice; never forgetting that it should
dry between every turn. After 24 hours rest, take the finest of your
white-varnish, and with a pencil (first washed in spirit to clean it from dust)
anoint or varnish your work six or seven times, and after a day or two do the
like again. These two fits of varnishing, if done with a fine careful hand,
will give it a better gloss than if it were polish't; if not so accurately
performed, it is requisite to polish it; and in order thereunto, you must bestow
five or six washes of varnishing more than to the former: so that if it is done
so well, that it stands not in need of a polish, two turns of varnishing will
suffice; but if it must be polish't, three are absolutely required, besides a
weeks rest before you begin polishing. Care and neatness should attend this
operation from one end to the other; for in polishing, your Linen and Tripolee
must be both of the finest; your hand light and gentle, your cloth neither too
wet, or too dry; and when you clear it up, and give it the finishing,
concluding stroke, fine flower and oil must be admitted to the performance, but
Lamp-black utterly laid aside and excluded.

To make Isinglass-Size.
Take an ounce of Isinglass, divided or broke into small pieces; let it stand
in a clean Pipkin, accompanied with a pint and a half of fair water, for twelve
hours together. Place the vessel on a gentle fire, suffer it to boil mighty
leisurely, and continue smiling and simpering, till it is wholly consumed and
dissolved in the water. After the water it self is wasted and boiled away to a
pint or less, remove it, and let it stand in a convenient place to cool. This
when cold will turn to a Jelly, which we call Isinglass-size. You are advised
to make no more than what will serve your present occasions, for two or three
days will totally deprive it of its strength and virtue. It Is of great use, not
only in the foregoing white-varnish, but several other things, hereafter to be
mentioned.

To make Blew-Japan.
This task calls for several ingredients, and those too diversely prepared,
before they can be admitted to the composition. In the front white-lead
appears, which must be ground with Gum-water very finely on a Marble-stone. The
next in rank is some of the best and finest Smalt, (to be met with in the
Colour-shops,) which you must mix with Isinglass-size; adding, of your
white-lead so grinded, a quantity proportionable to the Blew you intermix with
'em, or as you would have it be in strength of body. All these well stirred and
tempered together, being arrived to the consistence and thickness of common
Paint, wash over your work with it, and, when perfectly dry, do the like three
or four times, until you observe your Blew lies with a good fair body; if it
should so fall out, that the Blew should be too pale and weak, put more Smalt,
and no white-lead into your size. Having rush't it very smooth, strike it over
again with this stronger Blew: soon after; yet not till it is very dry, with a
clean pencil give it, at two several times, as many washings with the clearest
Isinglass-size alone; and lay it aside for two days carefully covered, to
preserve it from dust: The same diligence forget not in making White-Japan,
which does as absolutely require a covering, until either of them is secured by
a proper mantle of their own, varnish, which is sufficient to guard 'em against
all injuries of dust or dirt. But to proceed: When you have warmed it by the
fire, employ again your cleanest pencil, dipped in a small portion of
white-varnish, anointing your work seven or eight times; desist then for one
day or two, after which wash it again as often as before. Lay it aside for the
same space of time, which being expired, repeat your washes the third and last
time, as often as formerly. So many operations certainly deserve some leisure
minutes, and a week at least must be passed over, before you dare presume to
polish it. When that is done, with Lamblack and oil clear it up, and lend it a
glissening smooth, and pleasant countenance. Observe, that your Blews being
more deep and dark, thin or pale, depends wholly upon the different quantities
of white-lead, that are mixed with the Smalt after the first washes: for as a
small proportion of Lead introduces the first, so a greater plenty occasions
the latter.

Let this serve for a general caution in laying either Blews, White, or any
other colors with Isinglass-size; Let it not be too strong, but rather on the
contrary very weak, but just sufficient to bind your colors, or make them
stick on your work: for if it be otherwife, it will be apt to crack and fly
off. But last of all, when you lay or wash with clear Isinglass, to keep you
varnish from soaking into, or tarnishing your colors, then let it be of a
strong and full body.

To make Gum-water
Hardly any can be ignorant of the making of this; it is very common, and easy,
and the composition consists of two bodies only. In three quarters of a pint of
fair water dissolve one ounce of the whitest Gum-Arabick, carefully and cleanly
picked: If you keep stirring and shaking it, the sooner 'twill be dissolved;
which done, strain it through a fine Holland-rag into a bottle, and if you want
it, use it.

To make Red-Japan.
This beautiful color is made several ways, and we want not drugs and mixtures
to vary the different Reds, and humor all fancies whatsoever. I shall confine
their variety to three heads: 1. The common usual Red; 2. the deep, dark; and
lastly, the light, pale Red. Of these in their order.

In contriving the first, Vermilion deservedly claims the chief place: It Is mixed
with common size by some, by others with the thickest of Seed-Lacc. The last I
judge most fit and useful, for this reason; because it will not then break off
in polishing, as that mixed with size frequently does: neither is it more
chargeable, seeing it helps better to bear the body of varnish that shall be
spread over it; Your mixture should keep a medium between thick and thin; it is
difficult, and almost impossible to assign exact Rules for mingling your
Colors, in general we tell you between both extremes; small practice and
experience will master this seeming difficulty. Your work being ready and warm,
produce your Vermilion well mixed with the varnish, and salute it four times
with it; then allow it time to dry, and if your Reds be full, and in a good
body to your liking, rush it very smooth: so done, wash it eight times with the
ordinary Seed-Lac-varnish, and grant it a repose for twelve hours; then rush it
again, though slightly, to make it look smooth. And lastly, for a fine outward
covering bestow eight or ten washes of your best Seed-Lacc-varnish upon it: and
having laid it by for five or six days bring it forth to polish, and clear it
up with Oil and Lamblack.

The next in succession to be discoursed on is the dark, deep Red. When you
have laid on your common Red as before directed, take Dragons-blood, reduce it
to a very small dust or powder, and as your judgment and fancy are inclined,
mix it, a little at a time, with your varnish; and indeed you will find, that a
very small portion will extremely heighten your color, as also that every wash
will render it deeper; but when you find it has acquired a color almost as
deep as you design, forbear, for you must remember you have more varnish of
Seed-Lacc to lay on, which will add and supply what is wanting. Consider
therefore how many washes are still to be laid, and according to that use your
Sanguis Draconis, or Dragons-blood. This performance differs no way from the
former, but must be managed by those rules given for polishing and clearing the
other Red, the Sanguis only excepted.

But in the third place, to oblige any person that is an admirer of a pale Red,
we assign these instructions. Take white-lead finely ground with your Muller on
the Marble-stone, you must grind it dry; mix it with your vermilion till it
becomes paler than you would have it, for the varnish will heighten it: stir
therefore vermilion, white-lead, and varnish together very briskly; which done,
give your work four washes, and then follow closely the prescriptions laid down
for the first Red varnish. You must in the foregoing mixture consult with your
self, how many times you are to varnish after the Red is laid; for if many,
consider how they will increase and heighten the color, which for that reason
must be paler, and have a more large portion of white-lead allotted it. By
these means we have opened a spacious field, we have discovered the very nature
of the thing; our Art has been freely displayed, and we have been neither
penurious or niggardly in our communications: What admirable Products may we
expect, when a lively and unlimited fancy is exercised in an Art that is
equally boundless and unconfined.

To lay or make Chesnut-colour-Japan.
This color is now very much used, and of great esteem, especially for
Coaches; I have also made other things, as Tables, Stands, and
Looking-glass-frames. I must of necessity declare, that it sets off Gold and
Metals well: and because variety in every thing that is new is acceptable, but
chiefly to the ingenious Gentry, for whom these pages are intended, I could not
in silence pass this color over.

The things that make up this color are Indian Red, or else Brown red Oaker,
which will serve as well: of either, what quantity you imagine will serve your
turn, and with a Muller or Marble-stone grind it, mixed with ordinary size, as
fine as butter. From thence translate it to a pottinger; then take a little
white-lead, and laboriously grind it after the former manner, and with the same
size: In the third place, have Lamblack ready by you; mix this and the
white-lead with the Indian Red or Oaker in the pottinger, stirring and
incorporating them together. If the color produced by these three be too
bright, darken it with Lamblack; if too dark and sad, assist it with
white-lead; this do, until you have mastered the color you wish for. One thing
here commands your memory and observation; The same color exactly which you
make when it is thus mixed and wet, will also arise when it is varnished, although
when it is laid and dry, twill look otherwise. Now when the colors are thus
managed in the pottinger, set it over a gentle fire, put to it so much common
size as will give it a fit temper to work, (neither too thick, or too thin.)
Being thus qualified for business, call for a fine proportionable Hogs-hair
brush, with it wash over smoothly your piece; let it dry, and repeat until your
color lie full and fair. Again, give it a drying time, and rush it smooth, but
by no means close to the wood, unless you intend to begin your work anew, and
varnish it a second time. After a days rest, adorn it with three or four washes
of the fine Seed-Lacc-varnish; when that is also dried on, varnish it up to a
body, fit to receive a polish, with your white varnish. To conclude, its due
and necessary time being spent, polish and clear it up with Lamblack and Oil.

To make an Olive-colour.
This performance is every way answerable to the former; only instead of those
put English Pinck: grind it with common size, and when it has attained the
consistence of butter, convey it to a pottinger, and there Lamblack and
White-lead mixed with it produce the Olive-colour; if too light, Lamblack will
prevent it, if too dark the other. But farther, if you think it looks too
green, take raw Umber, grinded very fine with size; add of that enough to take
away that greeness: And nothing then remains but a due heed and observance of
the foregoing rules for Chestnut. But before we leave this Section, remember,
That all colors laid in size will not endure so violent a polish as those in
varnish, but are more subject to be rubbed off.

By these methods you may make any color you can fancy; with this admonition,
That all colors, which are light and apt to tarnish, and loose their glossy
beauty with Seed-Lacc, must be humored and varnished with White-varnish, the
Seed-Lacc being prejudicial.

CHAP. VI. To work Metals or Colors with Gum-water.
Whenever you design to work Japan in Gum-water, you are advised to mix all
your Metals and Colors, and every thing you make use of, with this Gum-water.
But because there is no general Rule without exception; therefore we understand
all colors, except those which before we called Transparent ones, for they
require a different and distinct way of operation, as the beginning of this
Treatise has directed.

When you design a mixture, forget not to stir the ingredients very well,
together with the water, in a Muscle-shell, which I conceive is more proper for
this undertaking, and for that reason desired you to furnish your self with a
great number of them. Be cautious, I beseech you, that you make not the mixture
of your metals or colors with the gum-water either too thick or thin, but
endeavor to keep the golden mean between both, that it may run fine and
smoothly from your pencil. Beside, be not prodigal, lavish, and profuse of your
metals, but make a quantity requisite for your present business only, and
provide not for time to come; for from a mixture of this nature, made in too
large a proportion, several inconveniences arise. As first, in some short time,
the metals standing useless, wax dry, so that they must be wetted for a second
emploiment with the said gum-water, which by repetition corrupts both the metal
and the color, by receiving too much of gum in them: and although this might
be likewise prevented, by adding fair water instead of that mixed with gum; yet
in spite of all care and diligence, and beyond expectation too, another trouble
and fault accompanies it, and that is, the dust will gather to them and render
'em unfit and unserviceable. Again, for your colors especially, your Shells
must be often shifted and changed, otherwise the gum and colors will be both
knobby and dry, in that unseemly posture sticking to your shells. I believe it
will be your own negligence, and the fault will lie at your door, if after
every minute caution and remark, whereby you may not fail of success if they
are observed, you should through inadvertency miscarry. But to proceed: Your
metals or colors thus prepared, well mixed, and ready for the business, stir
them with the pencil about the shell, and draw it often on the side of the
shell, that it may not be overloaded with the metal, when you design to draw
small strokes; on the other side, not too dry, because you must be careful in
making all your strokes full and fair, by no means thin and craggy; carry your
hand even and steady, and finish your line before you draw off your hand,
otherwise you may incur making the stroke uneven, and bigger in one place than
another. But when you attempt great broad things, as Leaves, or large work,
then charge your pencil very full, with this proviso only that it does not
drop. Here is one observation to be made for Gum-water, which in Gold-size is
useless and unnecessary, and indeed very advantageous for learners, and the
unskilful especially, and by them in a particular manner to be remarkt and
observed. But first, it is useful for all; for that place you intend to make your
draught in must be rubbed with a Tripolee-cloth: the reason is this; your
black, when cleared up will be so glossy, and as it were greasy, that your
metal or color will not lie on it, unless it be primed with the Tripolee in
that manner. So when you find any such greasiness on your work, rub it with
your Tripolee-cloth, and permit it to dry; after which you will perceive the
draught of your pencil to be smooth and neat, and to your liking and
satisfaction.

Now that which I before spoke of in behalf of beginners is this; It may very
reasonably be supposed, that a practitioner in his first attempts may not frame
his piece even and regular, or his lines at a due distance: now upon these or
any other accounts, if he is displeased at his own handiwork, he may with this
useful Tripolee-cloth wipe out all, or any part which he thinks unworthy to
stand, and on the same spot erect a new draught; by these means he may mend,
add, blot out, and alter, until the whole fabric be of one entire make, good
and answerable to each part of the undertaking. I cannot better in words
express my self, or with my Pen deliver more full or plain rules for mixing
your colors and metals; neither can I with my tongue more steadily guide your
hand and pencil. I am apt to flatter my self so far, as to believe what I have
communicated may abundantly suffice, and shall therefore add nothing more with
relation to laying metals or colors, and the manner or method of working them
in Gum-water. That part of our Profession which we call Setting off, or, which
is the same thing in other words, Seeding of Flowers, Veining of Leaves,
Drawing of Faces, and making Garments, desires not our present consideration,
but shall be handled in the following pages.

CHAP. VII. To make Gold-size.
THis is the other f^mous composition, which is in great esteem and use for
laying metals and colors, and ought in due manner to be made known; but we
shall first give you the method of mixing those things which are concerned in
its production. Their names and quantities are, of Gum animae one ounce, Gum
Espaltum one ounce, Lethergi of Gold half an ounce; Red-lead, brown Umber, of
each the like portion. To these, shut altogether in a new earthen pipkin, large
enough to hold one third more than you put in, pour of Linseed oil a quarter of
a pint, of drying oil half a pint, with which you may be furnished at the
colour-shops. Place this earthen vessel thus loaded over a gentle fire, that
does not flame in the least, keeping it continually so warm, that it may but
just bubble up, or almost boil; should it rise over, your chimny and materials
would be in danger: if you perceive it swelling, and endeavoring to pass its
bounds, remove it from that hot place to a more cool and gentle. When first it
begins to simper and boil a little, with a stick keep moving and stirring it,
until the whole mass of Gums be incorporated and melted; not that you must
desist or forbear stirring until it become as thick and ropy as Treacle, for
then it is sufficiently boiled. This done, convey the pipkin to a cool place,
and there let it rest, till the extremity of heat is over. After which time,
strain it through a coarse linen cloth into another earthen pot, there to
cool, and lie ready for use.

This is the manner of its composition. I shall now insert the ways of working
it. When your business shall call for this Size, bring forth what quantity you
require for the present, and put it into a muscle-shell with as much oil of
Turpentine as will dissolve the size, and make it as thin as the bottom of your
Seed-Lacc. Hold it over a candle, and, when melted, strain it through a Linen
rag into another shell. To both these add vermilion enough to make it of a
darkish red; but if this make it too thick for drawing, afford it as much oil
of Turpentine as will make it thin enough for that purpose. The main, and
indeed only design of this Size, is for laying on of Metals, which after this
manner must be performed.

When you have wrought your work, and that which you intend to decipher on it;
draw this Size all over that part, and that part only, which you resolve shall
be gilded or adorned with gold, passing over those places where you think to
lay your other metal or colors, as Copper, Silver, or the like. Your Size
being thus wrought for the Gold, let it stand till it is so dry, that when you
put your finger upon any of it, it may be glutinous and clammy, and stick a
little, but not so moist that the least spot or speck should come off with your
fingers, not unlike to thick glue when it is half dry. When you find it agrees
with the characters we have given you, conclude that to be the critical minute,
the very nick of time, wherein you must apply your Gold; then take a piece of
soft, washed leather, or the like: this being wrapped about your forefinger, dip
it into your gold-dust, and rub where the gold-size is laid, for it will stick
on the size, and no where else. If any dust of Gold lies scattered about your
work, with a fine varnishing-brush, that has not been used, brush or wipe it
all into your gold-paper. This being thus finished, take your pencil in hand
again; draw that part which you design for Copper with Gold-size also; and when
dry, cover it with Copper after the same method that you received for Gold. A
third time weild your instrument, the pencil, and lay Size for Silver, and
operate as aforesaid; so likewise for all dead metals, wheresoever you design
them: Only take this remark along with you, That you lay your metals
successively one after another, suffering each to dry and be covered, before
you begin a distinct one; as for instance, Your Gold-size must be dry, and
gilded before you proceed farther, and so of the rest. After all these, lay
your colors with gum-water if you are pleased to insert any, reserving the
Rocks for the last labor; which how to perform, in the succeeding discourse
shall be demonstrated.

It may often so fall out, that you will mix more Gold-size than at one time may
be consumed, or you may be called off from your business for a day or more. Now
to preserve it entire and moist enough, and in condition fit to work against
next time, observe that after it has stood five or six hours, a film or skin
will arise and overspread the surface of it: then put it in water, and let it
remain there with the pencils covered too, until your next operation shall
desire their assistance; before which, you must stir it well together, and
employ it as you think fit. If it should chance to grow thick, the old remedy,
Venice Turpentine, will relieve it. But farther, if by frequent mixture with
Turpentine, often putting into water, or long standing, it becomes skinny,
thick, and knobby, and by consequence unserviceable; the best use you can
possibly put it to, is to cast it away.

I shall conclude this Chapter with my requests to you, so to order and compose
your Size, that, being of a good mediocrity, neither too thick or thin, it may
run smooth and clear, and your strokes be fine and even; in some time you will
be so skilful, and so delighted with your draught, that the most subtle, neat,
and hairy lines will adorn your piece, and your work in all good qualities may,
though not exceed, yet vie with, and parallel the Indian.

CHAP. VIII. To varnish Prints with White Varnish.
PRocure a Board very fit and exact to the Print you resolve to varnish, and
thus manage it. Get common Size, which you may have at the Colour-grocers;
warming it by the fire, scraping whiting into it; make it of an indifferent
thickness, and with the softest hogs-hair-brush, proportionable to your board,
wash it once over, permitting it to dry: then white it again, and so repeat,
till it lies with a fair body, and quite covers the grain of the wood, which
may be of Deal, Oak, or any other. This done, take off your whiting with rushes
very close, and smooth, hut not so far as to discover the grain: then with
flower and water make a paste thick as starch, and with your hand or brush work
or dawb over the backside of your Print, with an even steady hand lay your
Print on the board, and stick it on as close as you can with all imaginable
diligence. Suffer it not to cockle, wrinkle, or rise up in little bladders; if
it should, press it down with your hand, but be sure your hands be
extraordinarily clean and free from all dust, filth, and pollution when you
come to paste on the Print, that it may not in the least be soiled, before it is
varnished. Smooth down the whole paper with your hand, pass it over and over,
that every part thereof may stick close and adhere to the whiting. I cannot
here burden you with too many cautions and caveats; for if any the least part
of your Print rise or bubble, the whole beauty and pride of the Picture is
destroyed when you come to varnish. Being thus closely and carefully fixed to
the board, set it by for 24 hours, or longer; then take the cleanest of your
Isinglass-size, and with a soft pencil wash over your Print; but be certain it
be dry before you pass it over again, which you must do with a quick hand, and
not twice in a place; give it leisure to dry, and afford it one wash more, with
two days rest: Afterward with the finest and clearest of your white-varnish
grant it fix washes by a gentle heat, not too nigh the fire, to avoid
blistering. When 24 hours are past, give it eight washes with the said clear
varnish: lay it aside for two days, and then vouchsafe to anoint it six or
seven times more, giving it leave to rest two or three days. Having advanced
thus far, with linen and Tripolee, both very fine, polish it, but with gentle
and easy strokes. Lastly, clear it up with oil and flower.

This I must needs commend for a pleasing and ingenuous contrivance; a new sort
of Speculum or Lookinglass, which without deceit gives a double representation.
Here the Prince and Subject may (and not irreverently) meet face to face; here
I may approach my King without the introduction of a Courtier: nay, it is so
surprising, that though I expect no shadow but that of my friend graven on the
paper, it will in spite of me, in an instant too, draw my own Picture, so to
the life, that you might without perjury swear it is the Original. Amorous piece!
That (without the assistance of a Cunning man) obliges me with a survey of my
Self and Mistress together; and by this close conjunction, by these seeming
caresses of her in Effigy, I counterfeit, nay almost antedate our more
substantial enjoyments! Kind Picture too! which will permit me to gaze and
admire without intermission, and can survey me as I do her, without anger or a
blush! I know very well no Apelles dare pretend to delineate or make an
artificial beauty, that shall equal her natural: Know, that the perfections of
her Body as far surpass the skill of the Pencil, as those of her Mind transcend
the expressions and abilities of the Pen. But yet, in one circumstance, and one
only, the Picture does excel my Mistress; the shadow is more lasting than the
substance; She will frown, wrinkles and old Age must overtake her; but here she
lives always Young, for ever blooming; Clouds and Tempests are banished from
this Hemisphere, and she blesses me with a gracious and perpetual Smile.

CHAP. IX. How to lay Speckles or Strewings on the out, or inside of Boxes,
Drawers, Mouldings, etc.
HAving in readiness a quantity of Speckles, which you think may answer your
present occasion, mix them with so much of your ordinary Lac-varnish, as will,
being put both into a Gallipot, render them fit to work with a suitable Pencil,
but by no means so thick as you would Colors. For this use only you must
reserve a Brush, with which you must stir 'em very well, and your work being
gently warmed by the fire, wash it over with it, and when dry, again. This
repeat, until your Speckles lie as thick and even, as you could wish or desire
them; afterward beautify them with three or four washes of your Varnish mixed
with Turpentine, and you have concluded all, unless you intend to polish; for
then, having done every thing as above directed, it is required that you give it
eight or ten washings of your best Lac-varnish, which being all successively
dried on, you are at liberty to polish it. All sorts and variety of colored
Speckles may be thus ordered, except Silver, the laying on of which choice
metal deserves the best and finest of your Seed-Lacc, instead of the ordinary;
and the best white-varnish too, must be employed to bring it to a polish; but
if you conclude upon not polishing it, be more sparing of your varnish, for
fewer washes will suffice.

CHAP. X. To lay Speckles on the drawing part of Japan-work, as Rocks,
Garments, Flowers, etc.
BEfore you can proceed to try this experiment, a little Sieve must be framed
after this manner. Take a small box, such as Apothecaries employ for Pills,
something larger in compass than a Crown-piece, about half an inch deep: strike
out the bottom, and in its place bind very strait about it fine Tiffanie, and
to prevent coming off fasten it on the outside of your box with thread, and
reserve it for your necessities.

Now when your work expects to be adorned with Rocks, Flowers, or the like, use
first your Pencil to varnish those places with, and whilst it is wet put some
of your strewings into the Sieve, and gently shake it over the place designed
for your Rock, until it appears answerable in Speckles to what you intended;
but especially when for Rocks, call for a pencil about the bigness of your
finger, one that is dry and new, and with it sweep all those straggling
Speckles, that lie beyond the wet or varnished part, into the sides and top of
the Rock that is thus moistened; for there it will not only stick, but render
your work, thicker of Speckles in those places, more beautiful, and oblige it
with a kind of shadow and reflection.

This work admits of no idle hours, no interludes and vacations, for as soon as
one part is completed, the other desires to undergo the skill and contrivance
of the Artist. When this Rock is dry, the next must succeed in operation; and
by this way of working the one, when, and not before, the other is perfectly
dry, you may, like the Giants of old fighting against Jupiter, cast mountain
upon mountain, lay one rock upon or beside another, of different colors, and
as many shapes, until the whole enterprise of Rock-work is completed. But
observe, that in sweeping your Speckles into the edges of each Rock, you
intermix not one portion of scattered parts into a Rock of a different color;
let them therefore enjoy their proper strewings. When you thus lay your Rocks
on your work being cold, it will certainly for the present look dull and heavy,
nay to that degree, that you might very well suggest to your self nothing less
than the damage and ruin of the whole undertaking. But though no signs of
life, beauty, or shadow do appear, let not this startle or discourage you; for
when you have secured it, as we directed before, this fright vanishes, the
dangerous Mormo or Bugbear disappears, its expected qualities suddenly arise,
and by the assistance of your Securing-varnish, it is decked with gay and
beautiful apparel.

CHAP. XI. To make raised work in imitation of Japan, and of the Paste.
TO attempt the composition of this Paste, you must provide a strong
Gum-Arabick-water, charged with a double quantity of Gum to that we before
taught you. Have in readiness an ounce of Whiting, and a quarter of an ounce of
the finest and best Bole-Armoniack; break them on your Grinding-stone with the
Gum-water, until they are made as fine as butter, but so thin, that when moved
into a Gallipot, it may but just drop from the stick with which you work and
stir it. If its condition be too thick, gum-water will relieve it; if too thin,
you must give it an addition of Whiting and Bole-Armoniack, as much as will
make it capable of working well, and regularly. The stick that I spoke of
before should resemble that of a Pencil-stick, but it must have a more sharp
and taper end. This dipped into your paste, drop on the Rock, Tree, Flower, or
House which you purpose to raise, and by repetition proceeding until it is raised
as high and even as you think convenient. Prevent all bladdering in the paste,
which scurvie fault proceeds from a careless and insufficient grinding and
stirring of the Whiting and Bole: should you with these blemishes endeavor to
raise, your work when dried will be full of holes, and thereby destroy the
beauty of it. The only way to prevent it in some measure, when so dried, is,
with a wet fine cloth wrapped about the finger, to rub it over again and again,
until the holes and cracks are quite choked and stopped up, and after its time
of drying is expired, with a rush and all imaginable industry and care smooth
it.

These assistances I have laid down only in case of necessity, by way of
corrections for accidental miscarriages; for your work will look abundantly
neater, if these Errata are prevented by a Paste in the beginning, well grinded
and tempered before it is dropped on your work. You are desired farther to
observe, that in the Japan raised-work for Garments, Rocks, etc. one part is
elevated and higher than the other; as in flowers, those that are first and
nearest to the eye are highest, some leaves too that lie first are higher than
those that lie behind 'em: So in the pleats and foldings of garments, those
which seem to lie underneath, are always at the greater distance. I will
instance in but one more, and that is of Rocks, where in position the first
must always surmount and swell beyond that which skulks behind, and is more
remote: The rule holds good in all things of a like nature, and if you
endeavor to counterfeit the Indians who take these measures, it is reasonable
and necessary to follow their prescriptions. I shall assign two ways for its
accomplishment, which, if truly and carefully copied out, will come very near
the Japan original.

First, after your design is raised to a due height, whether Figure or Flower,
and well dried, with a little Gum-water, Vermilion, and a Pencil, trace out the
lines for the face, hands, or foldage of the garments, for the leaves of your
plants and seeds of flowers, or any thing intended, in its proper shape made at
first before the raised work was laid, and according to which your Paste was in
such manner directed, and confined by those lines that were drawn as its
boundaries; for unless such strokes were made, it is impossible to lay the paste
in its proper figure. This done, three or four small instruments must be
procured; one of them a bended Graver, which the Engravers make use of; the
rest, small pieces of Steel, in shape like a Chissel of the Carpenters,
fastened in a wooden handle, the breadth of the largest, not exceeding a
quarter of an inch, of the others sizeably less: With these your raised work
must be cut, scraped, and carved, leaving one part higher than the other,
keeping due regard to the proportion of the thing you design. But here I must
forewarn you of the difficulty of the enterprise; no heavy, rustic hand must
be employed in this tender, diligent work; for if in haste or unadvisedly you
attempt it, believe me your raised work will break off in several places, to
the disgrace of the Artist, and deformity of the piece. Let therefore your
tools have an exquisitely sharp and smooth edge, whereby they may cut clean and
fine without roughness: And now it is time to smooth and sleek it with a brush
that has been often used before, in order, in the last place, to cloth it with
any metal you shall judge most proper, as shall hereafter be showed at large.

The other way which we promised for raised work, is this: Strike or trace out
your design, as well the inside as the outward; that is, the shape of your
face, neck, hands, legs, the chief strokes of the foldings of the under and
upper garments, so of flowers, or the like: Then take your Paste, somewhat
thinner than you commonly use it, and with it raise the lower garments or
parts, which require the least raising. Grant it time to dry thoroughly, and
then with a very small pencil dipped into the thickest of your Seed-Lacc, varnish
just the edges of your raised work; for this intent, that when you advance the
higher part, it may hinder the wet incorporating with the dry, which must be
avoided; for should it do so, the work will never show well. This must be
performed as often as you elevate one part above another; and still as your
work is exalted, your paste must be thickened; and raising each part
successively, beginning with the lowest, you are to conclude with the
upper-most; and when all is dry, if need require, smooth it with a rush, and
then it is in a condition fit to receive your metal. Make ready then what sort
of metal you please to cover it with, mixed in gum-water, and with a pencil
destined for the use lay it on the raised work full and fair: give it leave to
dry, and with a dogs tooth, which you may have at the Guilders, or a Stone or
Agat, by them employed in their Frames and Guilding, burnish your work untll it
is bright, and shines as much as you desire it should. And farther, dip the
pencil into your finest Lacc-varnish, and lay it over twice; then set it off,
or shadow it with what your fancy directs, but of this I shall discourse
hereafter. Take notice, that if you grind more paste than you can consume at
once, and it be dry before you shall have occasion for it the second time,
grind it again, and it is fit for your business. You may judge of the strength of
your paste, by the easy admittance of your nail pressed hard upon it, for then
it is too weak, and must be hardened and strengthened by a more strong gum-water:
Trials and Experience will give you more accurate, more satisfactorie
directions. With these ingredients, joined to Art and Skill, it is possible to
make a paste so hard, so stubborn, that a violent stroke with an hammer can
neither break or discompose it.

CHAP. XII. To prepare ordinary, rough-grain'd woods, as Deal, Oak, etc.
whereby they may be Japanned, and look well.
PRovide ordinary Size, used by the Plaisterers, and vended by Colour-shops,
dissolve it over the fire, making it pretty warm; mix Whiting with it until it is
of a reasonable body and consistence, yet not too thick; then take a Brush fit
for the purpose, made of hogs-hair. Lay your work once over with this mixture
of Whiting and Size, and so often repeat it, until you have hid all the pores,
crevises, and grain of your wood, suffering it to dry thoroughly between every
turn. You may afterward take a fine wet rag, and rub over your work, making it
as smooth as your industry is able; this furbishing it with a cloth dipped in
water, we call Water-plaining; when dry, rush it even and smooth, and as close
to the grain as possibly you can. This done, wash over your work twice with the
thickest of your Seed-Lacc-varnish; after which, if it be not smooth, again
rush it, and in a day or so varnish it over with black, or any other color, as
you have been directed in those places where we have treated of it; when it has
stood sufficiently, you may apply your self to finish it by polishing.

According to these methods you are to prime carved Frames for Cabinets or
Chairs, when you desire they should look well; with this difference, that these
must not be polisht, and by consequence require not so great a body of varnish,
no more than will contribute to a rich and splendid gloss. There is also
another way, which I recommend for the most valuable, because the most durable
and lasting, but not indeed of so large an extent as the former, being proper
only for the tops of Tables, Boxes, or the like; and thus you must proceed.
Boil common Glue in water, let it be fine and thin; into which cast the finest
Saw-dust, until it is indifferently thick, and fit to lay with a brush, which you
must provide for that purpose. Run it over once with the glue so mixed; if the
grain of the wood be not effectually obscured, wash it again, and two days
being given to harden, send it to a good workman or Cabinet-maker, who must
scrape it with his Scraper, as Pear Tree or Olive-wood are served, and make it
as fine and even as possibly he can; then varnish it as you have been learned
to do by Pear Tree, or any other smooth wood. This, if well done, will not come
behind any for beauty or durability. It Is confessed, these labors are to be
performed only upon cases of necessity, for they are very troublesome; and if
every circumstance were truly weighed, not so cheap or valuable as your smooth,
close-grained woods, of all which Pear Tree is in the first place to be
esteemed.

Of BANTAM-work.
I Think it most proper in this place to speak of the manner of working at
Bantam, because the way of preparing the wood is much the same with that of
priming with Whiting. There are two sorts of Bantam, as well as Japan-work* for
as the Japan has flat lying even with the black, and other lying high, like
embossed work; so the Bantam has flat also, and incut or carved into the wood,
as a survey of some large Screens, and other things that come from those parts,
will beyond all scruple convince and satisfy you: with this difference
however, that the Japan-Artist works most of all in Gold, and other metals, the
Bantam for the generality in Colors, with a very small sprinkling of Gold here
and there, like the patches in a Ladies countenance. As for the flat work, it
is done in colors mixed with gum-water, appropriated to the nature of the thing
designed for imitation: for the ordering these colors with gum-water, you have
already received instructions. The carved or in cut work, is done after this
manner: Your Cabinet or Table, be it whatsoever you please to work on, should
be made of Deal, or some other coarse wood; then take Whiting and Size, as
before taught, lay it over your work, permitting it to dry between every wash;
this must be so often done, till your primer or whiting lie almost a quarter of
an inch thick; but always remember to mix your whiting and size thinner than
formerly, and lay it therefore over the oftener; for if it is too thick, it will
not only lie rough and unseemly, but twill be apt to fly off and crackle.
Having primed it to its due thickness, being dry, water-plain it, that is, as
we hinted before, rub it with a fine, wet cloth; in some time after rush it
very smooth; lay on your blacks, and varnish it up with a good body, and next
of all in some space polish it sufficiently, though with a gentle and easy
hand. Being thus far advanced, trace and strike out your design with vermilion
and gum-water, in that very manner which you intend to cut and carve it, and
very exactly; your figures, Trees, Houses, and Rocks, in their due proportions,
with foldage of Garments, leafing of Trees, and in a word, draw it as if it
were to stand so without any alteration. This finished, exercise your Graver,
and other instruments, which are made of shapes, differing according to each
workman's fancy: with these cut your work deep or shallow, as you think best,
but never carving deeper than the whiting lies, for it is a great error to pass
through that and carve your wood, which by no means ought to feel the edg of
your instrument. Be mindful likewise to leave black strokes for the draperie of
garments, and the distinction of one thing from another: as for example, if you
were to work in this manner the great Bird, which is in the 11th Print at the
end of this Book; You ought, I say, to carve where the white is, and leave the
black untouched, which shows not only the feathering of the wings, but the form
and fashion of the Bird it self; the same means are to be used in all other
things which you undertake. But I should counsel that person, who designs to
imitate Bantam work, to endeavor to procure a sight of some Skreen, or other
piece; for one single survey of that will better inform him, than ten pages can
instruct or demonstrate. Had it been a thing of little trouble, or which might
have been useful to the young and willing practitioner, we had inserted a Plate
or two of it, for it differs vastly from the Japan in manner of draught; but
since it is now almost obsolete, and out of fashion, out of use and neglected, we
thought it a thankless trouble and charge to affix a Pattern, which could
neither advantage Us, or oblige You: I think no person is fond of it, or gives
it house-room, except some who have made new Cabinets out of old Skreens. And
from that large old piece, by the help of a Joyner, make little ones, such as
Stands or Tables, but never consider the situation of their figures; so that in
these things so torn and hacked to joint a new fancy, you may observe the
finest hodgpodg and medly of Men and Trees turned topsie turvie, and instead of
marching by Land you shall see them taking journeys through the Air, as if they
had found out Doctor Wilkinson's way of traveling to the Moon; others they
have placed in such order by their ignorance, as if they were angling for
Dolphins in a Wood, or pursuing the Stag, and chasing the Boar in the middle of
the Ocean: in a word, they have so mixed and blended the Elements together,
have made a league between fire and water, and have forced the clouds and
mountains to shake hands, nay deprived every thing of its due site and
position, that if it were like any thing, beside ruin and deformity, it must
represent to you the Earth, when Noah's Flood was overwhelming it. Such
irregular pieces as these can never certainly be acceptable, unless persons
have an equal esteem for uglie, ill-contrived works, because rarities in their
kind, as for the greatest performances of beauty and proportion.

But to return to our business. When you have finished your carved work, and
cut it out clean and smooth, with your pencils lay the colors, well and purely
mixed, into your carved work, in the manner which your ingenuity shall suggest,
or the nature of it absolutely require. When the colors are finished, the gold
may be laid in those places where you have designed it, with powder-gold, or
brass-dust mixed with gum-water, but that looks not so bright and rich as
Leaf-gold, which the Bantam Artists always employ; and so may you also, if you
make a very strong and thick Gum-Arabick water, which you must lay with a
pencil on your work, and whilst it is wet take leaf-gold, cut it with a very
sharp smooth-edged knife (on a piece of leather straightly nailed to a board) in
little pieces, shaped to the bigness and figure of the place where you dispose
of it. Take it up with a little Cotton, and with the same dab it close to the
gum-water, and it will afford a rich luster, if your water be very strong;
otherwise 'twill look starved and hungry, when it is dry. Having thus finished
your work, you must very carefully clear up your black with oil, but touch not
your colors, lest you should quite rub them off, or soil them; for this is not
secured, as the other Bantam flat-work is; if wet come at this, the colors
will be ruined, and peel off. I confess I have seen some even of the
raised-work, whose colors would not stir, but none so secured and firm as
flat, in which you will seldom or never find some Colors that will not endure a
security with varnish, but with the loss of their native splendour: but those
who please may leave out the Tarnishing colors, and secure their carved work
with a pencil, as formerly directed.

CHAP. XIV. To take off any Japan-patterns in this Book, upon any piece of work
whatsoever.
When your Black, or any other color is varnished and polish't fit for
draught, take a particular design out of this Book, or any thing else that is
drawn upon paper, with whiting rub all over the backside of your Print or
Draught, and use a linen cloth to wipe off all the whiting that lies rough and
dusty on the backside of your paper so whited. Then lay the Print on the Table
or Box, with the whited side next to it, in the very place where you design the
Draught should be made, and with a needle or piece of iron-wyer round and
smooth at the point, fixed in a wooden handle for the purpose, not sharp to cut
or scratch your Paper and Print, which we call a Tracing-pencil; with this, I
say, draw over and trace the Print as much as you think necessary, taking the
most material and outward strokes, or all others which you imagine are hard and
difficult to draw without a pattern. This, by the assistance of the whiting
with which your paper was rubbed, will give the fashion and lines of what you
have done, upon the Box or Table. After this, if you draw in Gold-size, use
Vermilion mixed with Gum-water, and with a small pencil dipped in it, go over
those lines made by the whiting; for by this operation it will not easily come
off, so that you may work at leisure with the Gold-size. But if you will work
your metals or colors in gum-water, then trace or draw over your Design with
Gum-water mixed with Brass or Gold-dust. Now either of these ways here
mentioned, when dry and finished, will work either in Gum-water or Gold-size,
as I have formerly discovered.

CHAP. XV. The manner of working and setting off some Draughts in this Book.
I Think by this time I may truly say, That I have in a familiar and easy
method proposed Rules for purchasing materials of all sorts, the manner of
their composition, with the way of using Varnishes, laying of Metals, Colors,
and whatsoever else is necessary, or may claim affinity and relation to the
Varnishing and Japanning Art. But because these lines have a double design, to
instruct and inform the ignorant, as well as assist those that have a small
knowledge and smattering in this Science: though I am persuaded I have
sufficiently obliged the latter, yet because I may not be so clear and
satisfactory in my Rules to those who before never attempted any thing of this
nature, to whom it is a perfect Terra incognita, an undiscovered Province; for
their sakes I shall willingly make an addition of a few pages, to show in a
plain and more particular manner the way of working some Patterns in this Book
either in Metals or Colors, by the knowledge whereof they may be enabled with
ease and inclination to perform any enter-prize that shall oppose them. To
these I shall affix the different ways of setting off and adorning your work,
which I have before rather mentioned and touched upon, than treated of.

The first eight Copper-prints, at the end of this Book, are several designs
for small work, of whose differences their Titles will inform you: Two others
for Drawers of Cabinets; one, of all sorts of Birds flying in Antic figures;
two, of Birds great and less, standing in various postures; another of Beasts,
etc. Two figures of Chinese men and women, in untoward gestures, and habits:
Others, of Flower-pots, Sprigs, Trees, and the like: Lastly, their Temples,
Structures, and Palaces; their manner of worship, and reception of foreign
Ministers and Ambassadors; with as much pleasing variety as can reasonably be
expected. Any part of these may be placed on the work, as the fancy and
ingenuity of the undertaker shall direct: yet I shall give a little light after
what manner they may be transposed.

Suppose then you have a large piece of work, as a Table, or Cabinet; take one
of the Prints which chiefly complies with your humor, insert others also which
may be most agreeable, yet give variety too: borrow a part from one, a figure
from another, birds flying or standing from a third; this you may practice
until your Cabinet be sufficiently charged: if after all this any thing be
wanting, your judgment must order, beautify, and correct. But observe this
always, that if you would exactly imitate and copy out the Japan, avoid
filling and thronging your black with draught and figure, for they, as you may
remark, if ever you happen to view any of the true Indian work, never crowd up
their ground with many Figures, Houses, or Trees, but allow a great space to
little work: And indeed it is much better, and more delightful; for then the
Black adds luster to the Gold, and That by way of recompense gives beauty to
the Black.

But here an Objection may be started; That if a little work is most natural,
and according to the Pattern which the Indians have set us, why have not I
followed that Rule in my Draughts annexed to this Book? To this I answer; That
if I had so done, I must have provided thrice the number of Plates, to show the
variety that these have sufficiently done; not to mention a triple charge that
would have attended. Again, should these have been beautified with little work,
I had then been liable to censure for being niggardly of my Patterns, and
depriving the practitioner of choice and variety: But by what I have presented,
I have securely sailed between this Scylla and Charybdis; have passed the Rock
on one hand, and the Gulf on the other; and, if I am not flattered, have not
only obtained the good liking of the Curious, but sufficiently supplied the
wants of those who are great undertakers. Here you may alter and correct, take
out a piece from one, add a fragment to the next, and make an entire garment
complete in all its parts, though it is wrought out of never so many disagreeing
Patterns. Besides, I have not by this variety fixed a Ne plus ultra to your
fancy, but have left it free, and unconfined: I do advise, that no one would
oblige himself to keep close to the Copy, for even the small Cutts will supply
the place of a much larger Box than is there expressed, and not injure or
disgrace it. I do with modesty and submission pretend not to confine, but lead
and assist your fancy. Thus much in general terms; I Will detain you no longer
on this large and pregnant Topic, but regularly now descend to particulars,
and instruct you how to work off some of the forementioned Draughts.

To work the First Draught.
This affords you ornaments for the tops and sides of little Boxes, which, when
traced out according to the directions already given, must be done with gold,
if you work in gum-water. Take your gold-shell, and with your pencil fill some
of the tops of your houses; and those parts which you observe in your Print to
be marked with black lines, as the Doors, Windows, etc, afterward the Sprigs,
Flowers, and Birds, all of them in a fair, small, but full stroke: now if you
paint these latter things with colors, they may be variously managed, with
red, some others with blew, a third with silver, until the whole be entirely
completed. If you think to raise any of these, be sure to practice on those
that lie first and foremost, for which I do refer you to the Chapter of Raised
work.

When you have thus far advanced, it is required that you should proceed to
Setting off, which I desire now to make my business to inform you, as having
never yet mentioned it; yet I shall at present confine it only to that of
Gum-water, for this is not the way with Gold-size, of which more properly
hereafter. When the leaves and tops of your Houses are fairly laid in
Flat-work; to make the black and shining veins of your leaves, the tiling of
your buildings, and foldage of garments, appear through your gold and metals,
as some of the Indian work does, exercise your Tracing-pencil, breathing on
your work with your mouth close to it; and when moistened with your breath,
streak or draw out the veins and foldage of the figures, their hands, face, and
parts so made in their proper order. When your metal begins to dry, and will
not separate, force it to part again by breathing on it, for that moistness
will reduce it to obedience, which must be observed too in a moderate degree;
for if you make it over-wet and damp, the tracing-iron it is true will disjoin
it, yet no sooner can it pass the place but it closes up, and reduces it self
to its former amicable conjunction; as a Ship that ploughs and divides the Sea,
makes a channel in an instant, but as that sails off the waters return, the
breach is healed, and the place of its passage is no more to be found. Too much
moisture is therefore as great an inconvenience as none at all. Perhaps your
work may be rough and unhandsom before it is thoroughly dry, yet after that, a
soft, new pencil by brushing will cast off that disguise, will command the
loose rough particles to withdraw, and represent the Veinings and Hatchments in
a smooth and pleasant dress.

To set off Raised work with Black.
When your Raised work has been varnished and burnished, put Lamp-black into a
Muscle-shell, and with gum-water hardly wet it, for if you allow it too large a
portion, you will find it a difficult task to make it comply and incorporate: but
when it is mixed, which you must perform with your brush, then add as much water
as will prepare and enable it, by the assistance of a small well-pointed
pencil, to draw fine black strokes. These must frame the lineaments and
features of the Faces, the foldage of your raised Figures, the veins of Leaves,
Seeds, the bodies of Trees, together with the black hatchments of your Flowers.
If you would have any Rocks speckled, first pass them over with the said black,
and when dry, grant them two washes with the Securing-varnish; lastly, lay on
the Speckles. One thing here deserves your observation; If your good will and
labor cannot be accepted, and your black, or whatsoever you Set off with, will
not be received; pass over the Raised work with a Tripolee-cloth in a soft and
gentle manner, lest the Metals should be seduced, and forsake their apartment.

This manner of Setting off is more practiced than that with a Tracing-pencil,
or breathing on it, not only for Raised but Flat-work too; for when your piece
is dry, salute it once with the Securing-varnish, after which take your black
pencil, and employ it in hatching and veining at your own pleasure; other
metals and colors desire the same management: I will give you an instance; if
a red flower were to be Set off with Silver, then must your Red be secured with
varnish: and being first supposed to dry, hatch and vein it with your Silver.
These directions must be of force and consequence in all cases where you design
to work one thing on another, whether color upon metal, metal upon color, or
metal upon metal, without being guilty of false Heraldrie. Having adorned and
Set off your piece, if it be Flat-work, you may make use of the varnish spoken
of in the 13th page of this Book, to secure your whole piece both draught and
groundwork, which will endure polishing: but if for Raised-work, you must make
use of the other Securing-varnish, which is set down in the 12th page, and the
reason is, because your Rais'd-work will not bear a polish as the other, but
must only be secured, and cleared up. But here is to be noted, that this last
varnish may be used either for Flat, or Raised-work, but the former is only
proper for Flat. In working with Gum-water be ever vigilant and careful that
your metals or colors be not too strong of gum, for it will utterly spoil
their beauty and complexion; but when you have sufficiently mixed them in the
beginning, fair water afterward may quench their drought. Look upon this as a
general, unerring guide; let them be just so far encouraged with gum, as may
oblige them to stick close to your work, and enable them to endure varnishing
without coming off: If this should at last prove a repetition, you must pardon
me; it is a business that I am very zealous for, and should be highly concerned
to think of a miscarriage, in the last, ornamental part of the undertaking; and
if you strictly examine it, you will find, if this is not new altogether, yet it
may bear a second reading, as being a paraphrase and explanation of the former.

I intimated before, that the Rocks should be last of all treated of, because
not to be finished till the rest were completed; only those few scattered
sprigs, supposed to grow out of them, that they may not appear bald and naked,
nor too full of 'em, lest they might confound the eye, and interrupt the
shadow. Now if these Rocks are to be covered with metals, with your pencil lay
Gold, Silver, or Copper, in a full body round the outward strokes, which were
traced with your pencil, in breadth a quarter of an inch; prevent its being too
wet; call for a large Goose-quill-pencil, cut off the point, making it flat and
blunt at the end: With this touch or dab your Metal, then do the like to the
black part of the Rock, whereby that may be sprinkled with some of the metal
too, by little and little continue it until the whole be scattered over; yet
these Specks should be thicker toward the sides and top, than in the middle.
Other metals, artificial and adulterate, may be laid according to these
directions, and may be dabb'd or workt with your middle finger as well as the
Goose-pencil. Thus much may suffice for the first Print, workt in Gum-water: I
shall give some brief directions how to proceed in some few more; for by
understanding those, you may safely adventure on any that remain.

The Second Pattern.
This is a representation of Birds, which if you work with gold and colors, I
advise that the body of the first Bird, that stands before the other, be done
in gold, the wings with bright copper, and, when secured, let its breast be
redded a little with vermilion, in that part of it which in the Print is darker
than the rest. Then take your black shell, and beautify the eye, and the
touches about it with black; as also the feathering of the body and the back.
Let the wing be set off or feathered with silver, the long black strokes in the
feathers of it with black; the tail, legs, and bill with gold, but change the
white lines in the tail for black. The bodies of the other Birds may be laid
with adulterate, dirtie, dark copper, but the wings gold, set off the body with
the same; the breast with touches of silver, the wing with black: Lastly, let
the tail be bright copper, and feathered with white, the bill and feet gold.
Next, cover the Flies body with gold, his wings with bright copper, hatched or
set off with silver, the body with black. Make your Bird on the second Box-lid
with gold, feather and shadow it with bright gold; let the wing be with
vermilion and Lamblack mixed, till it is become a dirtie red; feather it with
gold, the quills with silver, the beak gold, and the legs vermilion. Let the
other Bird be gold in the body, feathered about the wing (as you may see in the
Pattern) with black; the wing natural copper, feathered with white or silver;
let the Flies be gold, and set them off with black. Beautify the first Bird,
on the lid of the Patch-box, with bright or red copper; hatch it with silver,
touch it about the eye and head with black; make the wing of gold, feathered
with black; the feet and bill of the same metal. The other Bird behind it must
have green gold in the body, feathered with silver; the wing gold as the other,
hatched with black. On the other lid make the Bird gold, the wings bright red
copper, feathered with white and touched with black. The sides of each box may
be contrived after the same manner: the sprigs deserve all to be laid in gold,
as the rocks with different metals, and shadowed, but allow the outward strokes
to be gold, not only as they confine, but as they adorn your work.

The Third Draught.
Before this piece can be adventured on, you are desired thus to make a paint
or color for the face and hands of the Figures. Grind white-lead finely on
your Marble-stone; add as much Auripigment or Orpiment, as will give it a tawny
color; if you think it too lively and bright, allay it with Lamblack, which
may contribute to a swarthy complexion, and nearest the Indian: but if you are
inclined rather to a pleasant, flesh-like color, a little vermilion or
dragons-blood mixed with it, can to any degree oblige you. Now if you love
variety of figures, you may use as many mixtures for their countenances; and
distinguish the Master from the man, the Abigail from the Mistress by her
tawnie skin. Lay then the garment of your Figure in the first powder-box-lid in
bright red copper;, on that part which covers the breast, and encircles the
neck, paint vermilion; let the cap and stick be of gold: set off the foldage of
his vesture with silver, and close to each silver-thread join other of black;
set off the black with the same. Lastly, strike out the lineaments of the face,
and shapes of the hands, with black also: Let his Lacquey, the boy that attends
him, have a golden livery, the bundle under his arm red, with a cap of silver.
Set off the garment and cap with black, his parcel with lines of silver. Order
the Bird and Fly to be overlaid with gold, and set off with black. As for your
Sprig, the great leaves must be green gold and pale copper, bordered with
bright gold; your flowers vermilion, encompassed with silver, and seeded with
the same; garnish the small leaves and strokes with gold. The cover to the
second Box should have its first figure attired in gold, where the black
surrounds his neck, vermilion, the forepart of the cap the same, the hinder
gold; his vest buttoned, looped, and drapered with black; the red of the cap
and neck edged with silver, the gold of the cap hatched with black; the feet
bright copper, set off with silver. The other gentleman his companion, that he
may have as good apparel as his friend, let his cap before be gold, behind
green gold; set off the first part with black, the latter with silver, the
covering for his neck with the same metal; his long robe will require green
gold, set off with bright gold; his feet of the same, set off with black. The
Fly and Bird just as the former, the Sprig in like manner, except the seed,
gold, set off with black. The Figure in the first Patch-box may be arrayed in
bright copper, hatched or set off with, silver; the cap and staff gold, the
tree also. The figure on the other little box should have his upper coat
vermilion, hatched with silver; the under gold, set off with black; the stick,
bird, and fly, gold; his feet, the color of his face: The sprig, all gold,
except the flowers, which may be red and silver, set off with black and silver.
Let the sides be all gold, saving the rocks, which may be silver and copper.

Thus have I directed you in these methods of working colors, and how
sparingly I have made use of them, for the least part of them is sufficient:
and unless even these are workt clean, and with good judgment, it were more
credit to omit, than insert 'em. But because some have a particular genius and
inclination that way, I shall not make this Tract so incomplete as to forsake
the treatise of them, and therefore to oblige universally the next Section is
subjoined.

How to work in Colors and Gold the great Sprig in the XIIIth Print.
This has infinite variety, and by consequence will require the aid and
assistance of very many colors, so that the Transparent ones may be here
employed as well as the others.

First therefore trace out your design, and fill most part of the small work
belonging to it, as the stems and little leaves, with gold, passing by however
a few of them, to be reserved for bright copper, green gold, or the like; added
too in such sort, that they may grace and enliven the piece: for it is the custom
and fashion of the Japan-artificers, to fill frequently with dead metals, yet
bind 'em in with gold. From these set upon the great leaves and flowers in the
posture that they lie, and fill 'em by these directions, or any others of the
like kind. But by way of example; The first great flower next the rock, half
covered by great Leaves lying before it, I would fill the seeded part with
silver, the leaves with vermilion, and in setting off, work it in black
Diamond-wise, and those little spots of black which lie lurking in the white,
with bright red copper; then the part that is filled with red, I should bind in
with silver, and vein it with the same. From this I come to the other on the
right hand, and fill the seed of that flower with bright copper, the leaves
with silver, and when I come to set off, border the seed with black, the inside
with silver, compass in the leaves with gold, hatching them with black. From
hence I march to that on the left, partly hid by a great leaf: the seed of this
shall be green gold, its squares bright gold, the spots in the squares
vermilion, its leaves with dark heavy copper, set off with silver. Next for the
three flowers that lie somewhat above this: that in the middle I would do with
green gold, the seed bright gold, squared with black: the other may be laid
with silver, seeded with bright copper, hatched and squared with black. The last
with vermilion, the seeds with transparent green, and enclose them with
vermilion, and hatch in the leaves with silver. From these I would proceed to
the other flower, opposite to them on the right hand, somewhat larger; whose
seed must be red, bound in and checkered with silver, covering the leaves with
blew, hatched and surrounded with gold: the little one above that with red, the
seed with blew, set off with silver. From these we make our progress to the two
great flowers above them: the first may be laid with transparent blew, bounded
and worked with gold, the leaves covered with silver, and hatched with
vermilion: the seed of the second with dirty copper, set off and encircled with
silver; the leaf of the said flower clothed with deep bright red copper,
hatched with black. Next busy your self in filling the single great flower
above that, whose seed may be dirty gold, environed and squared with silver;
the spots in the squares done with bright gold, that part of the leaves that is
white changed for black, and with gold hide the black that lies in the white:
the remaining part of the leaf may be laid with bright red copper, bounded with
silver, and hatched with the same. As for the flower next above that, I would
lay the seed in transparent red, set it off with silver, border if with black;
then make the leaves silver, and hatch it with black. Afterward, the three
above this, I would work in the same manner with me lovvermost three; but
that above all, may have his seed bright copper, compassed and set off with
black; the leaves dirty copper, which might be hatched and enclosed with
white. Now remember, I beseech you, that although I have mentioned filling
and setting off together, for the more easy apprehension of it, yet be
constantly mindful to lay all your plain colors, before you think of setting
them off; and the reason of it is this, because you are more ready to set off
with one color, before you undertake another, and your sancie is more quick
and ready to adorn and garnish every single flower and leaf. Now supposing the
flowers filled, let us contrive what shall be the covering of the great leaves.
But to be brief* Deck them with metals, generally such as green, dirtie gold;
pale, muddy copper; yet intermix here and there blew and green transparent:
bound and vein 'em with such as give the greatest life; not wild, gaudy
colors, so much as grave, modest, and delightful. I advise you sometimes to
double your borders in the leaves, with the ground-black of the Box or Table
left between, as the Print will inform you: And again, make all your veins,
finishing lines, and the strokes you set off with, fine, clean, even, and
smooth. By this time I suppose, whosoever shall survey these last pages, may
imagine we have pleased out selves with fancies and Chimaera's; that we have
discoursed like men in a dream; nothing but Gold, Silver, and the richest
colors can satisfy our luxuriant fancies; nay, we pretend to have it in such
plenty too, that Solomon himself, compared to us, was a beggar: By our talk we
are Masters of both Indies, Pactolus Sands, and the Mountains of Potosi should
be our proper inheritance; for, like Midas, and the Philosophers stone, we turn
every thing to Gold. Our Birds are so splendidly arrayed, that all common
ornaments are excluded; the best Dies so universally overspread their wings,
that you would imagine they would outshine the Bird of Paradise. The clothing and
livery of the Fields are mean and heavy, when compared to the Flowers our Art
has produced, whose luster is more radiant, more durable, and surprising.

CHAP. XVI. To work in Gold-size the Twentieth Print of this Book.
SInce our Gentry have of late attained to the knowledge and distinction of
true Japan, they are not so fond of colors, but covet what is rightly
imitated, rather than any work beside, tho never so finical, and gaudy. The
most excellent therefore in this Art copy out the Indian as exactly as may be
in respect of Draught, Nature, and Likeness; in this performance then colors
must be laid aside. Some variety of metals indeed may be admitted, but in a
very slender proportion to that of gold, which is the Fac totum, the general
ornament of right genuine Japan-work. This undertaking now in hand may be done
with gold only; But I shall in the next Chapter choose a Print, whereon perfect
and corrupt metals may be laid. To begin therefore with that of Gold: Be ever
cautious and exact when you trace or draw out your design in vermilion or gold;
which being performed with an even hand, call for your gold-size, ready
prepared for the draught; use a small convenient pencil, to mark in your size
the outward lines, the boundaries of that rock, which in the twentieth Print
you may perceive lies beyond the Buildings; and although you do begin here, you
are not to fill it (either with metals or speckles,) until the other work is
concluded; for, if you remember, we charged you before, to finish the Rocks in
the last place. Again, if I may counsel you, begin with the remotest part, that
which is farthest distant from you; for then you will not be liable to the
inconvenience of rubbing, or defacing any thing whilst it is wet, with an
unwelcome hand, or intruding elbow. Having therefore in short undertaken the
farthest part first, work it just as the Print is; I mean, draw your gold-size
on the black lines of the Print, and no where else; reserving the white for the
black Japan or ground of your Table. But to explain it a little more. In all
respects operate with your Size, as if you were to copy the Print on white
paper with ink, or black Lead; only take care, that whilst you are busied in
working one part, you suffer not that already done with size to dry to that
degree, that it will not receive and embrace your metal, but very often try the
draught so lately made: if it is clammy, and sticks somewhat to your finger,
but not so as to bring off any, then it is high time with your leather to lay and
rub on the gold-dust: if it clings to your finger so fast, as to come off with
it, then know it is not sufficiently dry; if it is no way clammy, you may
conclude it is too stubborn for the reception of the metal. This caveat, being
rightly managed, set upon your drawing part again, and so continue, now making
lines, then guilding them, until the whole be completed. If you find it a
tedious, troublesome undertaking to draw the white, and pass over the black;
or, on the contrary, to draw the black and omit the white on the tops of your
houses, or foldage of figures, faces, or the like; then for your ease overlay
all those parts of your building or foldage etc with gold-size, and when your
metal is laid on that, and is well dried, wash over with Securing-varnish those
places only which you design to set off with black: which done, exercise your
pencil in making those lines and divisions that are required to distinguish the
parts of your house, as the Tiling, Draperie of garments, or any thing of the
like nature. The reason why we enjoin you to wash with varnish, is not out of
any suspicion or jealousy that the size or metal will forsake its allotted
seat, but because its surface is generally too smooth and greasy to admit of
and unite with the black, unless reconciled by the mediation of the aforesaid
varnish. What I have propounded is an example for any other Print, that you
could wish or desire to accompllsh in Gold-size: and indeed I had been very
negligent, should I have permitted this noble subject to rest in silence and
oblivion; this, which above all others presents us with the grandeur and
majesty of Japan work; our under-performances vanish and shrink away, when the
Masterpiece is exposed to view. Let the narrow-soul'd Miser hug and adore his
bags, and pray to the golden Calf that he has erected, I shall neither envy or
comply with his idolatry; for I had rather line my House with that precious
metal, than my Coffers.

CHAP. XVII. To work in Gold-size the twentythird Print of this Book, with
perfect or corrupt Metals.
THis draught requires a greater variety of colors than any of the precedent,
without which it were no mean or ordinary performance to dress every figure in
its proper habit, and equippe the attendance according to their respective
qualities; but to show what Art and Contrivance can effect, we have on purpose
selected this Pattern, which was chiefly designed for colors, and intend to
alter the property, converting it to perfect and mixed metals: so that if we
overcome the most difficult, all meaner undertakings must by consequence yield
obedience and submission. Were I therefore allowed to prescribe in this affair,
I would in the first place overlay the canopy and curtains belonging to it with
pure gold, then flower, and set them off with black: the two streamers or flags
may be done in bright copper, faintly shadowed with powder-Tin, or dirtie
silver; for the best and brightest silver is to glaring a metal for black
Japan, and very seldom if ever made use of, (yet I must acknowledge I have seen
several Cabinets of Raised-work come from the Indies wrought altogether in
Silver, but that is not authority sufficient for us to practice it in
Gold-work.) As for the King, his face and hands should not be of the ordinary
hue with inferior mortals; Gold best becomes his Majesty's countenance, his
eyes and beard black, his cap green gold set off with bright gold; his body may
be clothed in bright red copper, shadowed with black; the table-cloth covered
with green gold, shadowed or set off with bright. The figure kneeling by him,
should have his upper garment done in dirtie gold, shadowed faintly with dirtie
silver, but his under in Powder-tin, hatched with black; his feet with dirty
copper. The bottom of the Throne, with the Ascent, you are to lay with gold,
and set it off with black: The Ambassador first in rank approaching the throne,
may be allowed the same metal for his face with his Majesty, and set off as his
too with black; that on his shoulders and sleeves with bright red copper,
shadowed with black; his present in his hand, gold, his cap green-gold, set off
with bright; his feather behind it bright copper, set off with black; his body
dirtie copper, shadowed faintly with dirty silver, or tin, yet flowered with
bright gold; his feet bright copper, set off with black. The figure immediately
following him I should clad in gold; the cap may be bright copper, all shadowed
or set off with black; his present in his hand, his shoos and girdle, bright
copper let off with black. The third Gentleman's face, hands, and feet, I would
work in natural copper set off with black, that on his head powder-tin shadowed
with black; the covering on his shoulders green-gold, spotted and hatched with
bright gold. His outward apparel should be a lay of bright copper, set off
with black; that in his hand, gold; his under-vestment the same, and hatch it
with black. The last figure may have his hands, face, and feet, covered with
gold, set off with black; the upper-garment with green-gold, flowered and set
off with bright gold; the under, natural copper set off with black; that on his
shoulder with bright, red copper, shadowed also with black. The body of the
tree can be done with dirty gold, shadowed and set off as you see with bright
gold; the leaves of the same. Lastly, the fruit, bright copper, and hatched with
black.

Thus may you work with Metals only, and vary it according to your fancy. And
you may set off your plain metals, when rubbed on Gold-size, either with,
Metals mixed with Gum-water, or Gold-size; that is, when your plain Metals are
laid, and thoroughly dry, hatch or work in the Size for setting off, as you
would do with Metals mixed with Gum-water. You may use which you please, but
it is my opinion that Gold-size is best.

I had rather see an Embassy thus in Miniature, than take a voyage into China
that I might really behold one: not that we have too richly attired his
Majesty, and the Ambassadors, or given them more magnificent habiliments than
ever they bestowed upon themselves. Whether the King is desired to join in the
league against the Tartar, or to stand Neuter, I cannot truly determine; but by
those weighty reasons, the Golden Presents, we conjecture that he may be
bribed, and brought over to the party. The Agent seems very zealous in the
business; what will be the issue and event, lies not in my power to foretell at
present; nay, if you should have patience to tarry till the revolution of the
Platonic year, when every thing shall be in the same posture it is now, even
then by consequence we should be ignorant of it. This indeed I can assure you,
I have known these Politicians nigh ten years, and never saw them yet in any
other manner than what the Picture represents; and do therefore imagine, that
there are no hopes of an amicable and sudden conclusion.

We however shall now fix a period to this Treatise of Japan, as you may
perceive by our giddy discourse, which seems to imply, that we have nothing
more to say to the purpose. Yet give me leave, kind Reader, to offer something
before we take our formal leaves of this subject. Many excellent Arts are
buried in oblivion, which must certainly be ascribed to the neglect of the
skilful, who never committed them to posterity by the useful conveyance of
Manuscript or the Press; Painting of Glass, and making it malleable, may serve
for instances of Arts that have miscarried, either through the laziness or ill
nature of the Artists, who would not communicate their ingenuity to after-ages,
or else through envy denied it a longer date than themselves, and foolishly
resolved it should not survive them. Short-sighted ignorants! as if their fame
and memory could die whilst their Arts thrived, or that their great Grand-sons
should admire the invention, without entertaining a just esteem and deference
for its Author. Yet I would not have you mistake me, and surmise, that I have
made a circular Preamble, to hook my self into the circumference; for I
proposed this Tract as a means to perpetuate my Art only. I must confess, I
have too great an Esteem for this Pallas of mine, then in the least to slight
or neglect it; and I think my self obliged to make as good a provision for the
issue of my Brain, as that of my Body; for the first is entirely my own, but I
am forced to admit of a Partner in the generation of the latter. I shall never
be sollicitous for my self, and look upon Applause to be as empty and
insignificant after death as before it; and am not in the least ambitious to
live by another's breath, when I am deprived of my own. If I may be allowed to
bestow a hearty Wish, it must be for its Success, that it may flourish and be
admired; that from these lines, as from the Serpents teeth which Cadmus sowed,
may spring experienced Artists, that will invest it with splendour and
reputation; yet with this difference from the parallel, that they may mutually
conspire to establish and eternize it.

THE ART OF GUILDING, LACKERING, etc, displayed.
CHAP. XVIII. To guild any thing in Oil, whereby it may safety he exposed to
the weather.
WE have hitherto uttered big and glorious words, hardly a Page that has not
ecchoed Gold and Silver; but if you will pardon us, we will frankly and
ingeniously confess, that the expressions are as valuable as the things: for
Brass-dust, and viler metals have been thus disguised to counterfeit the more
noble and excellent: yet it cannot be denied, but that they are such cunning
cheats as may almost impose upon the skilful and ingenious. And this may be
said in their behalf, That although they deceive the eye, they neither pick or
endanger the purse, which true gold would do after a most profuse and
unnecessary manner. Well then by way of requital we shall cast away the vizor,
and lay aside the mimick dress; for the Art now in hand will not admit of the
former couzenage. Guilding accepts not of base materials, is wholly
unacquainted with dross or allay, and the finest unadulterate gold is the only
welcome and acceptable guest. I am sensible that the Guilders on metals will
quarrel at the name, who pretend, that Guilding is a term appropriated to the
working on Metals only; but the dispute is equally trivial, and unreasonable:
for if I overlay Wood or any other body with Gold, I cannot conceive how I
transgress the rules of common sense or English, if I say, I have gilded such
a wood; and I shall therefore acquiesce in this title, until the frivolous
Enquirers furnish me with a more natural and proper appellation. However, since
some of that profession have upon this occasion disputed the title with me,
though to no purpose, to show that I can and will be as good as my word, I Will
give you their way of Guilding of Metals in full to end the dispute. But to the
business in hand: I shall here instruct you in all things necessary for this
way of Guilding, as Primer, Fat Oil, and Gold-size, all which are to be gotten
at the Colour-shops. Priming may be afforded for 6 d. the pound, the other two
will cost each of them 3 d the ounce: but because they are scarce commodities,
and seldom to be met with very good, it is requisite for those who guild much, to
make it themselves, alter this manner.

To make Priming.
Priming you may make of any color that has a body; as white-lead, brown or
red Oker, and Umber, ground in oil pretty light: but the Painters have the best
convenience for this composition; for it is made of the scraping of their pots,
the oldest skinny colors, and the cleansing or filth of their Pencils. All
these being mixed grind very well, put them into a canvas-bag that will hold a
pint, sowed very strongly for this purpose. If the color be too dark, it may
be altered by adding a little white-lead. Being securely in-closed and tied up,
press it between a pair of Screws, such as Apothecaries employ, now and then
turning the bag, until all the fine primer be squeezed out, which should be
received into a Gallipot, the skins and filth that remain are useless, and may
therefore be thrown away. With this your piece must be very thinly primed over,
and permitted to dry.

Fat Oil
Is nothing else but Linseed oil, managed thus. Put it into leaden vessels,
shaped like dripping-pans, but so, that the oil may not be above an inch deep.
Set them out exposed to the Sun for five or six months, until it become as
thick as Turpentine, the longer it stands the more fat it will be, and by
consequence the Gold will require a better gloss; if it arrive to the
consistence of butter, that it may be almost cut with a knife, reserve it
carefully, and as the best for use that can possibly be made.

Gold-Size in Oil.
Provide the best yellow Oaker, see it very finely grinded and thick with
Linseed-oyl, which is something fat. This done confine them to a pipkin, and
put on it some fat oil, to keep it from skinning over: cover it with paper, or
a bladder to guard it from dust and injury; lay it aside for your occasions.
You may use it presently, and if you keep it seven years twill come to no
damage, but on the contrary be much better for your purpose. Should it happen
that you might have old gold-size that is skinny, and yellow and brown Oaker in
the same condition, grind them, shut them up in a clean Canvas-bag; press it
between your Screw as your Primer was, until you have made a separation, and
parted the good and serviceable from the bad and insignificant; a Gallipot is a
fit receptacle for the first, and the dunghill for the latter. This sort of
Gold-size is ready to serve your present and more urgent necessities; if you
desire to have a piece extraordinary, I advise you to prime it thinly over once
niore, allowing it four or five days to dry, if your business will permit, if
not, instead thereof Lacker over your work in the Sun, or some such moderate
heat, and then it is rightly prepared for the reception of the Gold-size.

How to mix, and lay on Gold-size.
Take of the best Gold-size, and of fat Oil, an equal quantity, yet no more
than your piece requires. Mix and incorporate them well together by the means
of your Stone and Muller, and put them into a pot; procure a clean Brush that
has been formerly used, and with it dipped in the Size pass over all the piece
very thinly, jobbing and striking the point of the pencil into the hollow
places of the carved work, that no place, creek, or corner of your work may
escape the salutation; for every part of your Frame or thing that has not been
partaker of the Gold-size, or touched with it, is not in a condition to embrace
or receive your Leaf-gold; so that if care in this be wanting, your work, when
it comes to be guilt, will be full of faults, and look scurvily. Having thus
done, remove it to a convenient place for twenty four hours, free and secure
from dust; the longer it stands, the better gloss your Gold or Silver will be
adorned with, provided that it be tacky and clammy enough to hold your metals.
Now to distinguish the true exact time when the Gold-size is fit to be gilded,
breath on it; if your breath covers it over like a mist, it is evident that you
may lay on your Gold; or otherwise, press your finger upon it somewhat hardly;
and if you perceive it is so dry, that it will neither discolor or stick to
your finger, but is in some measure clammy, tacky, and unwilling to part with
it, conclude it is in a good condition: should you attempt to guild before the
Size is dry enough, that moisture will drown and deprive your Gold of that
gloss and luster which it would acquire if skilfully performed; on the
contrary, if the Size is over-drie, you are come too late, you have lost the
opportunity, for it will not accept of the Gold. The first miscarriage of being
too moist, is rectified by suffering it to stand one day longer to dry; the
latter, which is so dry and stout, that it will not receive it, must be
confined to a damp cellar for a night, and then without question twill
willingly accept of the golden Bribe.

Of laying on the Gold, and the Tools required for the business.
You are desired in the first place to furnish your self with a Cushion made of
Leather stufft very even with Tow, and strained on a board 10 inches one way,
and 14 the other. On this you are to cut the gold and silver with a thin,
broad, sharp, and smooth-edged knife: To these, three or four Pencils of finer
hair than ordinary; some are of Swans-quills, and sold singly for 6 d. the
Artists use also the end of a Squirrels tail spread abroad, and fastened to a
flat pencil-stick, which is broad at one end, and split, just like an
house-painter's Graining-tool, but less; it serves for taking up and laying on
whole Leaves at a time, and is by them called a Pallet: Cotton is also
requisite, and some use nothing else. The Guilders commonly border their
Cushion at one end, and four or five inches down each side, with a strip of
parchment two inches high, intending by this fence and bulwark to preserve
their Gold from the assaults of Wind, and Air, which if moved never so gently,
carries away this light body, which willingly complies with its uncertain
motions. Experienced Artists frequently shake a whole book of Gold into this
end of their Cushion at one time, and with their knife single out the Leaves
carefully, and either spread them whole on their work, or divide and cut 'em,
as the bigness of the place requires: but I would not advise young beginners to
presume so far, as to operate this way, but venture upon a leaf or two at once,
cutting it as above directed. Next, handle your Pencil or Cotton, breathing on
it, with which touch and take up the gold; lay it on the place you designed it
for, pressing it close with the said Pencil or Cotton. Thus proceed, until the
whole be finished and overlaid; then cut some leaves into small pieces, which
may cover several parts of the Frame that have escaped guilding. Having laid it
aside for a day, call for a large fine hogs-hair-brush; with this jobb and beat
over the work gently, that the gold may be pressed close, and compelled to
retire into all the uneven, hollow parts of the Carving: Afterward brush all
the Leaf-gold into a sheet of paper for sale. Lastly, with fine soft, Shammy
leather, as it were polish, and pass it over. These Rules being strictly
observed, your undertaking will be artificially concluded; 'twill appear with a
dazzling and unusual luster, and its beauty will be so durable, so well
fortified against the injuries of wind and weather, that the attempts of many
Ages will not be able to deface it.

To Lacker in Oil, such things as are to be exposed to the Weather.
In this I request you to observe the very method prescribed before for
guilding, with this difference, That your Primer be more white than the last,
which is effected by mixing a little White-lead, that has been grinded a long
time, amongst the former Gold-size; farther considering, that your Silver-size
ought not to be so dry as that of Gold, when the leaves are to be laid on.
These two remarks being rightly observed, go on with your design in every
particular as aforesaid, and you cannot possibly miscarry.

To prepare and guild Carved Frames in Oil, that are not to be exposed abroad.
Provide a pipkin, in it warm some Size pretty hot; bruise with your hand, and
put in as much Whiting as will only make it of the same white color. Size over
your Frame once with it, then add more Whiting, until it is of a reasonable
consistence and thickness: With this lay it over three or four times, as you
find it deserves, granting it time to dry sufficiently between every turn. Now
take a fine Fish-skin or Dutch-rushes, and smooth your Frame with 'em; when so
done, you may with a rag, or finger dipped in water, smooth, or, which is the
same thing in other words, water-plain it to your mind; let it dry. After
this, with a small quantity of strong Size, Cold-clear it; which is a term and
name Artists make use of in this case to express themselves by, but is no more
then if I had said in short, Size it over: when this is dried, Lacker over your
piece by a gentle heat two several times. To conclude, lay on your Gold-size,
and perform every thing required in the foregoing instructions.

CHAP. XIX. To overlay Wood with burnisht Gold and Silver.
IN order to this work Parchment-size must be provided, which is made thus.
Take two pounds of the cuttings or shavings of clean Parchment; the Scriveners
vend it for 3 d. the pound: wash and put it into a gallon of fair water, boil
it to a Jelly, then strain, and suffer it to cool, and you will find it a
strong Size. This may be used in white Japan also, instead of Ifing-glass-size.
When you intend to employ any part of it about the business in hand, put a
proportionable quantity into ah earthen pipkin, make it very hot, remove it
then from the fire, and scrape into it as much Whiting as may only color it;
mingle, and incorporate them well together with a clean Brush. With this whiten
your Frame, jobbing and striking your Brush against it, that the Whiting may
enter into every private corner and hollowness of its carved work; give it rest
and leisure to dry. Melt Size again, and put in as much Whiting now as will
render it in some degree thick; with it whiten over your Frame seven or eight
times, or as you think best, striking your pencil as aforesaid; never
forgetting this caution, to grant a through-drying time between every turn by
the fire or Sun: but after the last, before it is quite dry, dip a clean brush in
water, wet and smooth it over gently, and rush it smooth when dry if you find
it necessary. In the next place, with an instrument called a Gouge, no broader
than a straw, open the veins of the Carved work, which your Whiting has choakt
and stopped up. Lastly, procure a fine rag wetted, with which and your finger
gently with care smooth and water-plain it all over; and when it is dry, it is in a
capacity to receive your gold-size; of which in the following Paragraph.

Of Gold and Silver-size for Burnishing.
Gold-size is the chief ingredient that is concerned in this sort of guilding,
and it is a difficult task to find the true quantity of each distinct thing that
is required to make up the composition; and the reason of it is this, because
you are compelled to vary and alter the proportions, as each season changes its
qualities of moisture and dryth; for the Summer demands a stronger Size than
the Winter. The most experienced are uncertain, when they make the Size,
whether 'twill answer their intentions, and suffer them to burnish on it;
therefore to know infallibly how 'twill endure, they lay some of it on the
corner of a Frame, and cover it with Gold or Silver; now if it does not burnish
well, but is rough, and inclined to scratch; add more grease or oil, yet avoid
too large a quantity. And seeing it is no easy matter to hit right, and nick the
due required mixture, I shall lay down several ways to make it, which I have
not only experienced my self, but are now practiced by some of the chief
Professors of it in London.

The best way to make Silver-size
Get in readiness fine Tobacco-pipe-clay, grind it very small; if you please,
mix as much Lamblack as will turn it of a light ash color; add to these a
small bit of candle-grease, grind 'em together extraordinarily fine, granting a
mixture, of size and water; then try it as before directed.

The best Gold-size now in use.
Take of the best English and French Armoniack an equal quantity, grind them
very finely on a Marble with water, then scrape into it a little candle-grease,
incorporate, and grind all well together. Again, mix a small quantity of
parchment-size with a double proportion of water, and it is all concluded.

Another Size for Silver.
Provide fine Tobacco-pipe-clay, grind a little black lead with it, call in
some Castile-soap, grind all of them together, mixing them with a weak Size, as
we taught you in the last account of making Silver-size.

A Size for Gold or Silver.
Take two drams of Sallet-oyl, one dram of white wax, put 'em into a clean
gallipot, only dissolve them on the fire; to these, two drams of black Lead,
and near a pound of Bole Armoniack, grind all very finely together, mixing with
them also size and water. Remember that I desire you never to grind more gold
or silver-size, than will serve your present necessities; if you transgress,
and imagine 'twill be useful another time, believe me you will be deceived when you
come to make trial: more ample and full directions experience will dictate to
you; what follows, may be advantageous and instructive in the preparation of
your work. In order to gold-size it, If the subject you are to work on be a
carved Frame, and you propose guilding it, take yellow Oaker, grind it finely
with water, add a little weak Size to bind it; when warmed, color over your
Frame, pass by no part of it, permit it to dry leisurely.

To Gold-size your Frame.
Employ either of the former Gold-sizes, yet I am rather inclined to the first;
melt it, so that it be only blood-warm, stir it well with a fine brush; as for
its condition, let it be somewhat thin. With this, size over the Frame twice,
but touch not the hollow places or deepest parts of the Carving, where you
cannot conveniently lay your Gold, for the yellow color first laid on is
nearer in color to the gold, so that if in guilding you miss any, the fault
will not so soon be discovered. Allow it a drying space of four or five hours,
and try if the gold will burnish on it: if not, alter your gold-size, and do it
over again, and when dry, thus cover it with.

To lay on Gold for Burnishing
Having set your Frame on an Hasel, or fixed it in some other place, in an
upright posture that the water may run off, and not settle in any of the
hollownesses, lay some leaves of Gold on your Cushion, which you are to hold,
in your left hand, with the Pallet and Pencil: also it is convenient to have a
basin of water at your feet; as likewise dry Whiting, to rub your knife with
some times, that the gold may not cling to it. All these being advantageously
placed, and in readiness, advance forward, and after this manner set upon the
work. Produce then a Swans-quill-pencil, or a larger tool of Camels-hair if the
work require it: this being dipped in water, wet so much; of your Frame as will
take up three or four leaves, beginning at the lower end, ascending and
guilding upwards, laying on whole leaves, or half, as your work calls for them,
for your own interest contriving how you may bestow 'em without waste, which is
the principal concernment a Guilder ought to be vigilant and circumspect in;
and that darling-metal, which we foolish Mortals covet, nay almost adore, is
certainly too precious to be lavishly consumed, and unprofitably puffed away.
Then wet such another part of your work, and lay on your gold, with your Pencil
or Cotton pressing it gently and close. By these regular steps and motions
having gilded the two upright sides of your Frame, turn it, and proceed to
operate after the same manner by the remaining upper and under part. If your
work be sufficiently moist, you will perceive how lovingly the gold will embrace
it, hugging and clinging to it, like those inseparable friends, Iron and the
Loadstone. I enjoin you, after the guilding of one side with whole, or half
leaves, or large pieces, as your work requires, to make a strict enquiry, and
review those many little spots and places, which, like so many Errata, have
escaped the Pencil, and may thus be regulated: Cut some leaves of gold into
small pieces, and with a smaller pencil than before wet the unguilded parts,
and take up bits of gold proportioned to the places that stand in need of it;
this last performance we call, Faulting. All these things being done, let it
stand till to morrow thai time, and no longer, for if you transgress,
especially in the Summer, you will find it will not burnish kindly, or recompense
your trouble by giving you ample satisfaction.

To Burnish your Work.
A dog's tooth was formerly looked upon as the fittest instrument for this
business; but of late Aggats and Pebbles are more highly esteemed, being formed
into the same shapes, for they not only have a fine grain and greet, which
conduces to, and heightens the luster of the gold, but besides it makes a
quicker dispatch, for by these means those narrow tedious strokes are prevented
in this burnishing, and is performed with greater expedition. These Pebbles are
each valued at 5 s. I do therefore prefer and recommend 'em before dogs-teeth.
Having burnisht so much of your work as you design, leave the ground of your
Carving untoucht, and some other parts as you think best, which being rough in
respect of the other, sets off and beautifies the burnishing: that which is not
burnisht, must be matted or secured with Size, Seed-Lac-varnish, or Lacker, if
you desire it deep-colour'd; and pray confine it to this part only, let not
your unsteddy hand wander or transgress its bounds, and upon no account
approach the burnishing. Then the work must be set off or repossed with Lacker,
mixed in a gallipot with Dragons-blood and Saffron, or a color called, Ornator;
into which a fine pencil being dipped, with it touch the hollownesses of your
Carving, the hollow veins of the leaves and foldage, if you imagine it is not deep
enough, make it so by a repetition; some I know use Vermilion in Size, but I
declare I am not reconciled to it, for it is not so pleasant and agreeable to the
eye.

To lay on Silver-size.
Take Silver-size that is newly ground and mixed with weak Size; warm it as your
Gold-size was, and with a clean pencil, of a bigness suitable to the work, size
over the same once or twice. Let it dry, and if your Silver will burnish on
it, it is sufficient; but on the contrary, if it will not, we advise you to an
alteration. Next, wet your work, lay on your Leaf-silver after the method for
Gold directly, without any alteration, and burnish it all over.

Now before we part with this subject, I shall in brief lay down a few Rules to
be observed by all Practitioners. And

1. Let your Parchment-size be somewhat strong, and keep it no considerable
time by you; for 'twill not then be serviceable.

2. Grind no more Gold or Silver-size, than what may supply your present
necessities.

3. Preserve your work clean and free from dust, before and after it is
gold-sized, and gilded, otherwise twill be full of scratches in burnishing.

Lastly, never attempt to whiten, gold-size, or burnish it, in the time of a
hard frost; for your Whiting will be apt to peel off, the Gold and Silver-size
will freez in laying on, not to say any thing of other misfortunes that attend
the unseasonable operation:

CHAP. XX. To make good Paste, fit to mould or raise Carved work on Frames for
Guilding.
I Acknowledge this to be utterly useless, on supposition those persons who
want Frames lived at London, or had any convenient commerce with, and
conveyance from, that City; because Carved work is there done very cheap and
well: but I consult the wants of those who cannot be supplied from thence, or
any other place where Artists reside, who may afford 'em at reasonable rates.
In this strait and exigency, therefore carve your Frames your self, after this
method. If you understand Modelling, or desire to make Models on which your
Moulds shall be cast; take good, tough, well tempered Clay, and with your tools
model and work out any sort of Carving which you fancy: lay it aside to dry
in the shade, for either fire or Sun will crack it. When it is firmly dry and
hard, and you intend to cast the Moulds on the Models, oil your models over
with Linseed, oil; work the paste briskly between your hands, clap it on, and
press it down close every where, that it may be a perfect mould in every part;
and it is no sooner dried, than finished.

To make Paste.
Steep as much glue in water as will serve you at present, then boil it in the
said liquor; make it stronger than any size, yet something weaker than common
melted glue: bruise and mix whiting very well with it, until it is as thick and
consistent as paste or dough; knead it very stiffly, wrapping it up in a double
cloth, in which it may lie and receive some heat from the fire; if you permit
it to lie in the cold and harden, twill render it unserviceable.

To make a Mould of my Carved Frame, thereby to imitate it in Paste.
Take a piece of paste more or less according to the length or largeness of the
leaves and flowers, you take off; 'twould be idle and fruitless to take off the
whole length, for you will find one bunch of flowers, perhaps six or eight times
in one side of a frame; so that one mould may serve all of that sort, provided
they are artificially united and joined together. Work then the paste between
your hands, clap it on that part of the frame which you design to take a mould
off; let there be paste enough, that the back of the mould may be flat and
even. While the mould is warm take it from the frame, and at the same instant
with a weak glue fix it to a board that is larger than it self. Thus may you
take off any other small sort of Carving, not only from the inside and edge,
but any part of your frame, glewing all your moulds on little boards, and
giving them leisure to dry and harden.

Of placing Paste or Carved work on Frames.
Every Joyner can make frames for this purpose, which sometimes are very plain
mouldings, either half round, ojee or flat; for there may be some little
hollowness and ojee, or what else you please, allowed of, on the sides of the
paste-work. When your frames, paste, and moulds are ready, oil the moulds very
well with Linseed-oyl, striking the brush into every little corner, for this
prevents the moulds sticking to the paste. Then use as much warm paste as will
fill up the mould, work it again between your hands, and whilst it is thus
warm, and in good temper, put it into the mould, pressing all parts with your
thumbs; next, with a knife cut off the superfluous paste even with the top of
the mould: turn out your newly fashioned carved work on your hand, and before
it cools glue it, and the place it is designed for, with thin glue; clap it on
your work in the very place your intend it shall always abide, pressing it
gently. Then oil your mould again, work your paste, cast and place it as
before: this must be repeated, until the whole be accomplished, and the frame
is to your content filled with carving. Grant it four or five days to dry in,
after which time you may safely whiten it. On these; sorts of frames you may
guild in oil, or burnish, but to the latter it is chiefly accommodated.

CHAP. XXI. Of LACKERING.
LAckers are composed several ways, and differ as variously in their value and
goodness, which admits of degrees, according to the method and materials out of
which they are produced; yet they have common to them all in which they
universally agree, the famous ingredients, Spirit of Wine, and Seed or
Lac-shell-varnish; but their Color and Tincture for all this differ extremely.
Some boil their Lacker, whilst others (who are more in the right) are not
beholding either to Fire or Sun. They who through ignorance dissolve it by
fire, are in the first place to be excused, as also when they cannot rise to
the price of good Spirits, strong enough to dissolve the Seed or Shell-lacc
without fire; but because some may be willing to save charges, and others
desire indifferent Lacker only, take along with you directions for them both.

To make common Lacker.
Take one quart of Spirit, put it into a Pottle-bottle; of Shell-Lacc eight
ounces, beaten small enough to enter the bottle; shake 'em well together;
having stood till quite dissolved, strain it, and reduce to powder a small
quantity of Sanguis Draconis, which with a little Turmerick tied up in a rag
put into it, grant it a days continuance in that posture, at your leisure hours
shaking it. You may alter the color, heighten or abate it, by adding or
diminishing the quantity of the two latter ingredients.

Another sort of Lacker.
Use the same quantity of Spirit of Wine and Shell-Lacc as before; when
dissolved, strain it; but, to give it a tincture, instead of common
Dragons-blood and Turmerick, employ a very little Sanguis Draconis in drops,
and Saffron dried, which bruise, and cloth with a piece of linen, and manage
it as the other, by putting it into the vessel. If you desire the Lacker of a
deeper or more copperish color, add more Sanguis; if the contrary, Saffron.
These being shakt well, keep close stopped for your designs.

To make the best sort of Lacker now used by the Guilders.
Some use Shell-lacc-varnish only for this Lacker, but Seed-lacc is much
better, the composition of which you are taught in the 8th page. Take therefore
of this seed-lacc-varnish, a quantity answerable to the Lacker, which give a
tincture to after this manner. Take the color called Ornator, ground and
reduced to a very fine dry powder; mix it and some of the varnish in a
gallipot, stir and dissolve it over a gentle fire; after this confine 'em to a
viol closely stopped. Take likewise three or four ounces of Gambogium, which I
would have bruised, dissolved on the fire, and kept in a vial as the other. To
a quart of this varnish, if you please, two penniworth of Saffron dried and
bruised may be added; to these, five or six spoonfuls of the Ornator, and a
double portion of Gambogium-varnish: being shaked well together, try it on a
little bit of silver, or a small frame; if it appears too yellow, afford more
from your Ornator, but if too red, from your Gambogium vial: by these
contrivances you may continue the mixture until you arrive at the true golden
color, which is the only excellence we design and aim at.

To make a Lacker, that may be used without Fire or Sun.
To a quart of the aforesaid Lacker allow 2 penniworth of Venice Turpentine;
mix and incorporate them very well. With this you may lacker any thing in the
open Air, and although it may look dull and misty immediately after every
lackering, that fright, that seeming discouragement, will quickly vanish; that
thin cloudy vapor, will be dissipated by its sudden, and piercing luster.

To lacker Oil, Size, or Burnisht Silver.
Let your Frame or Work be warmed before you lacker it, and when some of your
Lacker is poured into a large Gallipot, with a fine large Brush, that does not
drop any of its hairs, made of Hogs or Camels-hair, be quick and pass over the
piece, carefully contriving to miss no part, or to repass another that has been
already lackered; but in a manner observe the same rules here, that are given
for Japan, yet with these exceptions in lackering Carved work; for then you
must be quick, and strike or jobb your brush, thereby to cover the deep parts
also: Be sure to lay it thin and even, and presently warm it by the fire whilst
it looks bright, for by these means you may lacker it again in a quarter of an
hour, warming it before and after the operation. If two or three varnishings
will not produce a color deep enough, oblige it with a fourth; but remember,
if you should carelessly do it too deep, all assistance will be insignificant,
and no remedy whatsoever will avail you.

To make Lackering show like Burnisht Gold.
If you are careful and neat in burnishing your silver, and have graced your
Lacker with a true gold-colour, have with an even hand laid it no thicker in
one place than another; then Matt and Reposse it, as you do burnisht gold; and
unless narrowly surveyed, twill put a fallacy upon and deceive curious,
discerning eyes. Matting is only the groundwork of your Carving altered, or
varnishing it deeper and more dull than the other part of the Frame: Repossing
is done with Lacker and Ornator, (which latter the Drugsters sell at 4 d the
ounce,) with these mixed, touch and deepen all the hollow deep places and veins
of your work; for it adorns and sets it off admirably well, by ite color and
reflection.

CHAP. XXII. Of Guilding Metals.
I Acquainted you before with a controversy between the Guilders, concerning
the Terms of Art, who denied the name of Guilding to that of Wood, and confined
it to Metals only: upon which account we promised you to treat of the latter
too, and thereby comprehend both; although it is no question but one lays as
just a claim to that title as the other. They are certainly fine inventions,
that serve to please us with the shadow, when the substance cannot be purchased.
We are all of us great admirers of Gold, and by consequence must be enamoured
with Guilding, which is so nearly related to it. For Guilding is Gold in
Miniature, with which as with a golden Ray, we beautify and adorn our viler
Metals. Its preparation therefore must first be discovered, before we can
proceed to the use and performance.

To prepare Gold.
Take Leaf, or fine Ducket-gold, which is more excellent for this use, of
either what quantity you please; but be sure that the Ducket be beaten very
thin: put the gold, and as much quicksilver as will just cover it, into a
gallipot. Let them stand half an hour, presently after the mixture stirring
them with a stick. This time being expired, strain 'em through a piece of
leather, squeezing with your hand, till you have brought out as much
quicksilver as will be forced through by all your industry. Now that which
remains in the leather looks more like silver than gold, yet it is that, and that
alone which must be employed in the succeeding operation

To guild Silver, Copper, Brass, or Princes-metal.
Whatsoever you design for guilding, should be first well scrubbed with a
Wier-brush, sold by the Iron-mongers. Wet the piece with water or beer, and
continue scrubbing and wetting it, until all filth and dirtiness be fetched off,
that the two metals may more closely hug and embrace each other. This being
cleans'd, make ready quicksilver, by mixing it with a very small quantity of
Aqua fortis in a vial, which should always stand by you; three or four drops
only of Aqua fortis, is sufficient I assure you for an ounce of quicksilver.
With this quicken your work, that is, with your finger or a fine rag rub this
mixture on your metal, till it is all oversilvered or touched with the said
quicksilver. This done, call for your gold formerly prepared, and with an
iron-tool or little knife fit for the purpose, spread or overlay the whole
work, being careful to miss no part, under the penalty of doing that place over
again, after you have given it an heat over a fire, which you must do when the
gold is laid, to compel the Mercury or quicksilver to evaporate and fly away,
leaving the gold fixed and adhering close to the piece. But before you give it
a through heat, let it have two or three little heats, that you may with a
hair-brush, like that of a comb, dab and spread your gold, which by the little
warmth you gave it, makes the quicksilver also more ready to spread. After
these two or three visits made to the fire, give it the thorough-heat at first
mentioned: then take it from the fire, and with a scrub-brush, that has never
been touched with quicksilver, clean it, as you did in the beginning. Now, if
you perceive any spot of quicksilver untoucht, you must lay your gold upon it
again: when it is cleaned with the scratch-brush, you may after this manner
heighten its color, if you think convenient.

Take of Salt, Argal, and Brimstone, an equal quantity; mix them with as much
fair water as will cover the thing when put into it; boil them over the fire,
and having tied your gilded work to a string, put it into the boiling liquor
for a little space, looking on it every minute, and when it has acquired a
color that pleases you, dip it in cold water, and the whole is finished. But
still if you would have the work more rich and lasting, you may again quicken
it with quicksilver and aqua fortis, and guild it over again after the former
method, and repeat it so often, if you please, till your gold lies as thick as
your nail upon the metal.

Another way to guild Silver, Brass, or Princes-metal.
First, brush over your silver with Aqua fortis, then quicken your work with
Mercury as before taught. Let your gold be beaten thin, and put into a
Crucible, with just so much quicksilver as will cover it, and let it stand till
it begin to blubber: then strain it through a piece of leather as before, and
the quicksilver will go through and leave your gold, but discolored, as has
been said; then lay it on with an iron-tool, and in every thing do as you were
taught in the other guilding.

Another, way to heal, or heighten, the Color of your Gold.
Take Sal Armoniack, Saltpeter, Sandiver, Verdigreece, white and green
Vitriol, grind them with white wind vinegar, which lay all over your work; then
lay it on a fire, and give it a small heat that may make it smoke, and then
take it off and quench it in urine.

To take off Gold from any guilt Plate, without the damage of one, or loss of
the other.
Put as much Sal Armoniack, finely beaten, into Aqua fortis, as will make it
thick like a Paste; spread your Plate all over with it, put it into the fire,
give it a thorough heat, neal it, or make it red hot; then quench it in fair
water, and with a scrub-brush scratch and scrub the Plate very well, which will
fetch off all the gold into the water. After a little time standing quietly,
pour off your water, and the gold will he to your satisfaction found at the
bottom; if all the gold be not come off, do the same again. As for cleansing
this plate, or any other, which we call, Boiling of silver, first, make your
plate red hot, let it stand till it is cold; then mix Argal and Salt with water,
when it boils, put in your plate, keeping it there for a quarter of an hour:
take it out, and when washed and rinsed in fair water, you will perceive by its
beauty that it is sufficiently changed.

To Silver-over Brass or Copper, as the Clockmakers do their Dial-plates.
Having Leaf or burnt-silver in readiness, put it into as much Aqua fortis as
will cover it; after an hours standing pour off the Aqua fortis as clean as may
be from the silver; wash the silver three or four times with water, let it dry,
and then mix it with one part of fine Argal to three of silver, with a little
fair water. When you make use of it, rub it on the work with a cork, until it is
all silvered, and lie as fair as you could wish. Next, dry it well with a
linen cloth, and having made it warm, wash it over three or four times with
the best white varnish, spoken of in this book, and it will not fail to secure
it from Tarnishing, and other injuries.

To guild Iron, Brass, or Steel, with Leaf-gold or Silver.
If you are to guild Brass or old Iron, you must cleanse it very well with a
Scratch-brush, before you hatch or guild on it; but for new Iron or Steel,
after you have filed it very smooth, take a hatching-knife, (which is only a
knife with a short blade and long handle,) and hatch your work all over neatly;
then give it an heat, whilst it looks blew, on a charcoal fire, from whence
take it and lay on your gold or silver, and with a sanguine-stone burnish it
down a little; then give it the same heat and burnish it all over. Thus may you
repeat three Or four, of half a dozen, or a dozen times if you please, still
observing to give it the same heat before and after you lay on your gold or
silver, and burnish it. This leaf-gold and silver is much thicker than the
other, and four times as dear.

To refine Silver.
Take Silver, be it never so coarse, and melt it in a melting-pot, then cast it
into water, to make it hollow; after it is cold take it out and dry it, mixing
one ounce of Saltpeter to a penni-weight of Antimony, (so proportionably
greater quantities, if you have occasion.) These with your Silver confine again
to a melting-pot, covering that with another, very closely luting them together
with loam, made of clay and horse-dung. The two pots being thus cemented, put
'em into the fire, and give them a very strong heat, after which remove them to
a cooling place. Break the pot when cold, and you will perceive the silver fine at
the bottom, but the scorio and dross on the upper part like a cinder. Copper
may be separated from Gold after the same manner.

To separate Gold and Silver, when incorporated, with Aqua fortis.
Take as much Aqua fortis duplex, as will something more than cover your metal,
in a strong vial or parting-glass. Put it on sand over a gentle fire at first,
with the glass open and unstopt; for if it is closed twill break in pieces, as
may also a fierce fire at the beginning: by degrees therefore increase its
heat, till you make the Aqua fortis simper and boil; continue so doing, till
your metal be dissolved. This done, pour the Aqua fortis gently into water; the
silver will invisibly go along with it, but the gold remain at the bottom of
the glass; which gold, when well washed with water, you may melt down, or
preserve for guilding metals, by mixing it with quicksilver, and straining the
latter through leather, as you were instructed by Leaf and Ducket-gold.

Now to reduce the silver into its former body which appears to be a water, and
so would remain many years, unless you take this method for its alteration;
pour the said water (wherein your silver is floating like undiscernable Atoms)
into a copper vessel, if in any other, put in copper plates; and immediately
all the silver will repair to the copper, like an army to their posts at beat
of drum, so that in two or three hours time (that small parcel of silver, which
has been separated into parts more innumerable than the Turks army will be
this Campaign) you find all hanging and clinging so lovingly to the copper, and
as loath to part as we from our Mistresses, tho they are sometimes more
unconstant to us than the silver is to the copper, for no other metal can tempt
it to the same compliance. The same silver so gathered you may use for
silvering any metal, doing with it as is here taught of the gold, or instead of
leaf or burnt silver dissolved in Aqua fortis, as was before said in
Clockmakers silvering.

Directions in Painting MEZZOTINTO-PRINTS, on Glass, or without it. CHAP. XXIII.
THis most ingenious way of Painting justly claims applause and admiration, if
skill and dexterity are called to the performance: Where these two combine,
beauty and perfection must dance attendance. It Is a pleasant, insinuating Art;
which, under a pretty disguise betrays us into a mistake: We think a piece of
Limning lies before us, bur more strict enquiries will evince, that it is
Mezzo-tinto at the bottom; Who can be displeased to be so innocently deluded,
and enamoured at the same time? It Is female policy at once to ravish and deceive
the eyes, and we not only caress the cheat, but are in loves with the impostor
too. This manner of Painting is looked upon to be the Women's more peculiar
province, and the Ladies are almost the only pretenders, yet with modesty and
submission I may adventure to affirm, that I have not had the good fortune to
meet with one of an hundred, that had an excellent command of the Pencil, or
could deservedly be styled a Mistress of this Art; yet it is certainly no uneasy
task to arrive to a great height in it: but we are overstockt with no less
conceited than ignorant Teachers, well qualified to deface a Print, and spoil
the colors, who abuse those young Ladies that desire instructions, persuading
'em to the damage of their purses, and loss of their time to attempt that which
they are not able so much as to assist 'em in. This is a sufficient inducement
to persuade my self, that these Rules will be acceptable; tho I know very well
that I have raised a discourse on a subject with which the world is very well
acquainted, yet by way of requital I shall make greater discoveries than the
famous Mistress of it ever pretended to communicate; in a word, I promise to
display it in its perfection.

I conceive it is requisite to advise you, first, in the election of Prints,
Frames, and Glass; of each in their order. Mezzo-tinto Prints are to be
preferred before all others, being more fit and suitable for Painting than
those that are engraved, for in these all the strokes of the Graver are plainly
visible; but the other, if done with a neat and careful hand, on a good,
fine-grounded print, can hardly be distinguished from Limning. Consider, that
some of these Prints are of a coarse ground, others of a fine: the first are
discernible, for they seem to be rough, and workt as it were with the pricks of
a Pen; but the latter has soft and fine shadows, like a piece neatly wrought
in Indian ink, or a picture in black and white. Observe farther what paper they
are drawn upon; for if it be too thick, which you may foresee by wetting a
corner of it with water or your tongue, and it pass not through the paper
presently, then conclude it is not for your purpose; but on the contrary, the
thin and spungy paper must be elected: Their value is enhanced by the different
size and goodness of each Print; some may be afforded for six pence or a
shilling, others for 18 d. or more.

Your Glass ought to be thin, white, and well polisht, such as is made for
Looking-glasses. All bluish, red, green, and window-glass, cannot be allowed
of here, you must altogether despise and cashier it; for if you paint on either
of these, especially window-glass, your colors can never appear fair and
beautiful.

Your Frames for glass-painting are usually made of stained Pear Tree, with
narrow mouldings for little pieces, which increase in breadth, as the size of
your picture does in largeness; they are made with Rabets, and are afforded for
6, 8, and 12 pence, or more, according to their several dimensions.

Another sort of Frames I recommend to you, most proper for those Prints which
you paint without glass, called Straining-frames: If you desire to have them
Carved, Gilded, or black, order them to be made flat, and even, without a
Rabet on the backside, half an inch less than the edge of the Cut, every way;
which is apt to rend when it undergoes the trial of straining. This mischance
is occasioned by the sharp edge of the Plate, which almost cuts the paper when
it is printed: If you approve of black Frames, command the Frame-maker to work
them half round with Pear Tree; would you stain, or Japan them, guild or raise
their carved work; this Book will sufficiently inform and direct you. Thus much
of these things in particular; I shall now proceed to give a catalogue of such
Colors as may be assistant to you in this business, together with the Oils,
and their several prices; as also directions to make drying Oil, and various
sorts of Varnish for Painting. And first, the names of your colors, and their
value, as they are commonly sold ready prepared; take in the very order that
they are placed on your Pallet.

Flake White, finely ground in Nut-oyl, is sold at 2 s. the pound. White-lead,
ground in the same oil, 1 s. per pound.

Yellow and brown Oaker, finely ground in Linseed oil, is vended for 3 d. the
ounce.

Yellow or Dutch Pink may be afforded, when ground, at the same rate.

Brown or glasing-Pink is indeed very dear, the bigness of a Nutmeg grinded
will stand you in 6 d.

Fine Lake will cost as much.

Light and brown Red, are only yellow and brown Oaker burnt; it is 3 d. the ounce
ready ground.

Italian Terravert, is not much used in this Painting, though very much in all
others; it is dearer sometimes than at others.

Umber, Collins-Earth, Ivory, blew black, are afforded at the ordinary price
when ground, which is 3 d. the ounce.

Distilled Verdegreas ground, you may have at the same rate with Brown Pink and
Lake; but these three colors I would advise you to purchase by the Ounce, and
grind 'em your self, if it will stand with your convenience; for the
Colour-Grocers will afford these cheaper by the Ounce than Dram. Its price is 1
s. the Ounce; indifferent brown Pink, and Lake, for the same value; but that
which is more pure and fine, is 1 s. 6 d. 2 s. and 2 s. 6 d. or more, as they
excel in goodness.

Some Colors are in powder, which you must of necessity have by you, and
should mix and temper on your Pallet, as you shall have occasion to use them.

The first is Vermilion, usually sold at 4 d. the Ounce.

Carramine, being the finest and most excellent Red, is sometimes vended for 3
l. the Ounce.

For Blews, the best fine Smalt is to be bought for 4 or 5 s. the pound.

Blew Bice, useful only in making green colors, may be gotten for 4 d. or 6 d.
an Ounce.

Ultramarine, the richest blew in the world, bears several prices: the deepest
and best will cost 6 or 7 Guinea's, but then it must be extraordinary fine;
other sorts are exposed for 3 or 4 l. the Ounce, which is very good too, and
fit for this use; some again for 20 s. the same quantity, and may serve for
Painting, but it is too coarse for glazing.

Yellow and pale Masticott, which is finest, free from greet, with the
brightest color, is the best. If it prove coarse, grind or wash it a little on
a clean stone; it is sold for 2 d. the Ounce.

Red Orpiment you must mix with drying Oil; this too is afforded for 2 d. the
Ounce.

These are the Colors useful in Painting, with which you may exactly imitate
and hit any color whatsoever, by different ways and methods of mixture. Their
price also I have given you, if you buy them in small parcels; but if you
furnish your self with greater quantities at one time, you will find the purchase
more cheap, and easy. Observe, that six of these are transparent or glazing
colors, viz. Brown Pink, fine Lake, Carramine, fine Smalt, Ultramarine, and
Distilled Verdegreas.

To wash, or make any of the Powders very fine.
You must have four or five large Wine-glasses by you, and two or three quarts
of clear water. Fill one of your glasses with it; put in half an Ounce, or as
much of your color as you intend to wash; stir it well about with your knife,
permit it to stand no longer than while you could count or tell forty; for in
this short space of time all the coarse will sink and settle to the bottom, the
finer remains floating in the water, which convey and pour off into another
glass, leaving the coarse part behind. Let the vessel, with the fine color and
water, stand till next day, by which time that also will settle to the bottom
of the water. This being poured off, take out the color; place it on a clean
smooth Chalkstone, to soak and drink up the water; and when it is dry, paper it
up for your business.

Of OILS.
It remains, that to this account of Colors, we subjoyn that of Oils, which
must be serviceable to us in the Art of Painting.

The first of these is Linseed Oil, sold at 8 d. the quart.

Nut-Oyl, to be purchased at 16 or 18 d. the like quantity.

Oil of Turpentine is afforded for less than 8 d. the pound.

Drying-Oyl, will stand you in 2 d. an Ounce at the Colour-shops, and
Fine-varnish 3 d. which in my opinion is too dear; and therefore, if you will give
your self the trouble, I Will be at the pains to instruct you, how to make either
sort.

To make the best Drying-Oyl.
Mix a little Letharge of Gold with Linseed-Oyl, for a quarter of an hour boil
it; if you would have it stronger, continue boiling it, but not too much neither,
lest it prove over-thick and unserviceable.

Another more ordinary.
Bruise Umber and Red-lead to powder, mix 'em with Linseed-oyl, and for boiling
follow the directions foregoing. When this Oil has stood a day or two, and you
find a skin over it, know then for certain it is at your service.

To make Varnishes for these Prints, or Pictures in oil.
Put an Ounce of Venice-Turpentine into an earthen pot, place it over a fire,
and when dissolved and melted thin, add to it two ounces of oil of Turpentine;
as soon as they boil take off the pot, and when the varnish is cool, keep it in
a glass-bottle. This and all other varnishes ought to be stopped close, and
secured from the approaches and damage of the Air. With this you may varnish
your Prints on glass or others, to render them transparent; this is what the
Shops sell for fine varnish: should your varnish be too thick, relieve it by an
addition of Oil of Turpentine.

Another more excellent Varnish either for Pictures in oil, or making Prints
transparent.
Enclose six ounces of the clearest, white, well-pickt Mastick finely powdered,
in a bottle with sixteen ounces of oil of Turpentine; stop and shake them well
together, till they are incorporated. Then hang the bottle in a vessel of
water, but not so deep as to touch the botom; boil the water for half an hour,
in which space you must take it out three or four times to shake it; if you would
have it stronger, boil it a quarter of an hour more. I could give you a
greater-number of Recipe's, but 'twill be too irksome, tedious, and
unnecessary, seeing these will preserve your pictures, and are as good in their
kind as any Varnishes whatsoever.

CHAP. XXIV. To lay Prints on Glass.
HAving at large treated of the Colors, Oils, and other materials required in
this work; I proceed to instruct you how the Prints themselves must be laid on
Glass First therefore let your Prints be steeped in warm water flat-ways, for
four or five hours, or more, if the paper be thick: provide then a thin pliable
knife, with it spread Venice-Turpentine thin and even over the glass, and with
your finger dab and touch it all over, that the Turpentine may appear rough.
Next, take the Print out of the water, lay it on a clean Napkin very evenly,
and with another press every part of it lightly, to suck and drink up the water
of it; afterward lay the print on the glass by degrees, beginning at one end,
stroaking outward that part which is fastening to the glass, that between it
and the Print no wind or water may lurk and hide it self, which you must be
careful of, and never fail to stroke out. Then wet the backside of the print,
and with a bit of sponge or your finger rub it over lightly, and the paper will
role off by degrees; but be careful, and avoid rubbing holes, especially in the
lights, which are most tender: and when you have peeled it so long, that the
Print appears transparent on the backside, let it dry for two hours; next,
varnish it over with Mastick or Turpentine-varnish four or five times, or so
often, till you may clearly see through it. After a nights time for drying, you
may work on it.

To lay Prints, either graved, or Mezzo-tinto's, in such manner, that you may
role off all the paper, and leave the shadow behind.
Soak the Print in water, dry it with a cloth, spread on the glass oil of
Mastick: and some Turpentine, and lay on the print upon it, exactly as before.
When it is almost dry, brush off the paper with a brush, and you will find none but
the inky, shadowed part remain: then do this as the former with
Mastick-varnish, which preserve dry and free from dust, until you are at
leisure to paint upon it.

To prepare Prints without glass or straining-frames.
When your prints are steeped sufficiently in water, lay them on a smooth, wet
Table, with the print-side downwards, and rub 'em thin as before for glass.
Next, with common paste, do the backside of your frame, and paste on your print
while wet: give it leisure to dry, and then varnish it on both sides four or
five times with Mastick or Turpentine-varnish, until it is so transparent, that
you may see the Picture as plain on the back as foreside. Lastly, allow it a
day or two for drying.

Of the posture and position of the Prints, and those that paint them.
I may now very reasonably suppose, that all things are in readiness, and that
nothing may hinder us from setting about the work in earnest. Most Ladies that
have practiced this Art have made use of an uneasy posture for themselves, and
a disadvantagious situation for their piece: for they generally stand to it
when the windows are high, against which they place the Print; but whosoever
stands, cannot so steddily move the hand and pencil as the person that sits
down. I advise you therefore to a Table Hasel, very like to, and not improperly
called, a Reading-desk; only with this difference, That where the Panel or
back-board for the book is, there our Painting-desk may be all open, with three
or four wiers pendant-wise, to keep the picture from falling through, and a
narrow ledge at the bottom to support it. Beside these, I would have little
holes made equally distant on both sides of the Desk, as it is remarkable in
Painters Hasels, that by pegs or pins, and a narrow ledge laid upon them, I may
raise my Picture higher or lower, as it best suits with my convenience. Being
thus fixed, lay a sheet of very white paper behind the picture on the table, and
you will find it much better, and more conveniently placed than against the window.

How to paint a Mezzo-tinto-Landskip on Glass, or otherwise.
The first thing to be attempted in this work, whether Landscape or others, is
Glazing all those places that require it; and if you desire they should lie
thin, and dry quickly, (as they ought to do,) mix varnish when you lay them
on, and in four hours time they will be ready for the reception of other colors.
In Landscape, you should first glaze the nearest and great trees, and ground 'em
with brown Pink, or, if you fancy them greener, add distilled Verdegreas. The
trees, that are to appear with a lively, beautiful green, as also the leaves
and weeds, that are in some pictures, must be glazed with Dutch-Pink, and
distilled Verdegreas; the trees farther off, with Verdegreas alone; the hills,
mountains, and trees, at the greatest distance of all, remember to glaze with
fine Smalt, a little Lake, and Verdegreas, all thinly mixed with varnish. As for
the Sky, although several Mistresses practice and teach the cutting of it out
from the picture, and painting it on the glass, I do by no means allow of it,
for it agrees not with the eye, but makes that part which should seem more
distant, appear too nigh and before the rest; in a word, it spoils and
disparages the whole piece. I cannot suggest to my self any reason for this
foolish contrivance, unless a sense of their inabilities to paint 'em
beautifully, obliges them to commit so great an absurdity. Take then
Ultramarine, or, for want of that, fine Smalt; mix it thin with varnish, and
glaze it over two or three times with a clean large Pencil, and a very swift
stroke; for if you're tedious, it will dry so fast, that you cannot possibly
lay it even. If the Landscape be adorned with Figures, Buildings, Rocks, Ruins,
or the like, they require finishing first of all. The mixture of colors for
these things consists chiefly of white, black, and yellow, sometimes a tincture
of red; but the management and composition of them I leave to your inclination,
fancy, and experience: yet I would have you consider, that all your Colors for
this sort of Painting ought to be extraordinary light. Now to finish the Trees,
Ground, and Sky, and the rest of the picture, begin as before with the greatest
or nearest trees, and with yellow Pinke and white, paint over the lightest
leaves; but with a darker color of Pink, and a little Smalt, do neatly over
the darkest and outward leaves with a small pencil dipped in varnish. Those trees
you would have beautiful, paint with a mixture ^f yellow Masticott, Verdegreas,
and white; the darker parts with Pink, Verdegreas, and white; as those trees
also which you glazed with Verdegreas only, they being mixed very light with
white. But to finish the sky and foreskip; if any clouds appear, touch them
with varnish and light color, made of white, yellow Oaker, and Lake: With
these likewise touch the lightest parts of hills, and towns, at the remotest
distance; then mix Smalt and White as light as you can conveniently, and paint
over the sky; add to these a tincture of Lake, and do over the darker clouds:
Let your colors lie thin, and even; if the whole be finished, grant it time to
dry in. If you would have your Picture look more strong, brisk, and lively,
set it against the light, or on the Hasel as before; and although it is painted
all over, you may perceive the shadows and lights through it; if not, what you
painted before will guide you. Paint then your sky and foresight with the same
but lighter colors than before, and so every thing else respectively.

CHAP. XXV. To Paint a piece of figures, as Men, Women, etc.
IN painting a Face, the first thing required is, if there are any deep
shadows, to glaze and touch them thinly with Lake, brown Pink, and Varnish;
also the white speck and black ball, or sight of the eye, as the Print will
direct you; the round white ball of a convenient color too. If you make the
lips of a delicate red, glaze them with Carramine, or Lake: For the rest of the
face, begin with the dark side, and paint the shadows with a color more red
than ordinary, for which Vermilion, yellow Pink, and white, are most proper;
where note, that all varnish is forbid in painting flesh-colours, except what
is used in glazing the shadows: if you should mix varnish, the inconvenience
will be, that the colors will dry so fast, that you cannot sweeten the
shadows with the flesh. Then give some touches on the strongest lights of the
face, as the top of the nose, forehead, and by the eyes, mouth, and chin, with
a color made of white, pale Masticott, or yellow Oaker, and a little
vermilion, and mixed according to the complexion intended; then mix that color
a thought darker, and lay it on all the face, that was not painted before, very
carefully; yet for the mouth, and cheeks, somewhat redder. Next, with a fine
clean pencil, that has been used and worn a little, hatch and sweeten all your
flesh-colours and shadows sweetly together, cleansing the pencil as often as
it is requisite. Cheeks too pale, or any other part, may be regulated with
suitable colors, whilst the piece is moist and wet. For swarthy complexions,
mix the flesh-colors with white, yellow or brown Oaker, and light red, with
shadows agreeable. I request you to observe the same method in painting
breasts, hands, or naked bodies, as for the face: When any of these are dry,
you may go over them again, by which second painting you may effectually mix
your colors to your humor. Lastly, be ever careful, that your pencil be
steddily guided, without the least slip or trespass upon lines and features of
a disagreeing color.

To Paint Hair.
It Is not convenient in this Painting to use Varnish or Colors near so dark as
the life, for the Print will darken it: as for example; Suppose I were to paint
an head of hair that is black, I would mix white, black, red Oaker, with a
touch of Lake or light red, all which may produce an ash color; and the hair
or Peruke being colored with it, will represent a natural black. Now to make
the curles show stronger, touch the lightest parts with a lighter color, and
the darkest with the contrary; all which you may see through, if they are not
laid too thick.

To paint Drapery or Garments.
To paint a piece of Drapery or Cloth, of a broken color, you must take care
of its mixture; yet you are to make three degrees of the said color, that is
one, the very color, another more light, the third darker: this last is for
the darkest folds, the lightest for the lightest pleats, and the color between
both for the other part of the garment; sweeten the color with a worn pencil,
that the folds may not lie hard. If you have a mind to embroider a garment,
make fringe, or any other parts with shell or powdered Gold or Siver, mix then
your metals with gum-water, and with a fine pencil hatch or embroider your
flowers, and touch the fringes, or what else best pleases you, before you
either glaze or paint the garment you design to adorn, after this manner.

How to paint changeable Drapery.
Imagine that your garment to be painted had its ground purple, and the lights
yellow; take then a fine pencil dipped in varnish, and with yellow Masticott
touch thinly all the lightest parts of your folds; if there be occasion repeat
it, for your color must be very thin with varnish: when dry, glaze it all
over with Lake and Ultramarine, or Smalt with varnish once or twice, and let it
dry; then mix three degrees of a purple color, one of Lake, Smalt, and White,
and lay them on, as the last Paragraph directs you.

To paint several sorts of Red Drapery; and, first, of the Finest.
Take Carramine, and mix it thin with varnish alone; glaze over your garment
once, if you would have it very beautiful, two hours after do the same again; and
when that is dry, with vermilion and white, or vermilion only, you may paint
all except the dark shadows, which should have red. If you can see through the
color when dry, the lightest folds, touch them over with clear white, and
they will appear more rich and ornamental.

Another Red near the same.
Grind Lake very finely in oil, temper it well with drying oil and varnish;
with this glaze over your Drapery two or three times, and when it is dry, paint
the lightest with white, the darkest with light or brown red, the remainder
with vermilion.

Other Reds more ordinary, without Glazing.
Mix vermilion and white, and paint the strongest lights with it; the dark
shadows with a light or dark red, and the rest with vermilion. For the lightest
folds, mix light red and white; for the dark pleats, brown red; for the rest,
light red only.

To paint the best Blew, and glaze with Vltramarine.
Mix Ultramarine with thick Nut-oyl; but if you cannot wait and attend its
drying two or three days, then instead of oil use varnish, and glaze your
garment three or four times over, letting it dry between every turn* when it is
dried, make three degrees of Smalt and White very light, and with the clearest
white do the lightest folds, and the rest as directed in the other colors. If
you are unwilling to bestow Ultramarine upon it, you may after the same method
glaze with fine Smalt, and varnish it as often as with the former, and paint it
with White and Smalt: An indifferent Blew is made with White and Smalt, mixed in
several degrees without glazing.

To glaze and paint the best Purple-Drapery.
Glaze the garments thin, once over with Carramine, or Late; when it is dry,
paint it every where with Smalt and White, lighter or darker as you think best,
but let the lightest folds have still a color more light than the rest.
Contrary to this you may produce a purple, by glazing your work over once or
twice with Ultramarine, or Smalt, and paint it with Lake and White.

Purple without glazing.
Make a mixture of Lake, Smalt, and White, with which paint the Drapery,
heightning and darkening the folds as in the other Receipts.

Yellow Drapery.
For your lightest folds, mingle yellow Oaker, and White; and brown Oaker for
the shades: if that is not dark enough, Umber will make it so; but do over the
other pleats with yellow Oaker. Such another color may be made with White,
yellow and brown Pink.

To paint the most beautiful Yellow.
Glaze your Drapery, or any thing you would have lovely, with brown Pink once
or more, and the darkest parts oftener; after it is dried, touch the lightest
folds with pale Masticott, the next with yellow Masticott: if some require a
color darker than that, mix yellow or brown Pink; but for the saddest of all,
use yellow Pink and a little Umber. When it is dry, you may paint all with
white, except the shades.

To finish, varnish* and polish Pictures, that are not laid upon Glass.
These desire the same proceedings with those on Glass, unless you have a mind
to adorn Embroidery, Fringe, or the like, with Gold or Silver. Touch then the
forside of your picture with shell-gold in gum-water; or else, after you have
varnisht it two or three times with varnish made of Spirit, take Japan
gold-size, with which hatch and lay it over with gold-dust; and if your
judgment and experience will allow of it, you may touch and heighten all the
strongest lights, and deepen your shadows too on the foreside, which gives so
much life to it, that Limners themselves have been deceived, and mistook it for
a piece of real painting. I desire young beginners to forbear, and not attempt
this way of finishing, till experience and practice shall give them
encouragement. If you design to varnish and polish any of these Prints, lay on
the colors without skins, and very even on the backside, and permit them to
dry at least a week (for the longer the better) before you offer to varnish
them after this following manner.

To varnish these Prints, or other Pictures, without polishing.
Take of the best white Japan-varnish, and an equal quantity of Varnish made of
Mastick and oil of Turpentine; into these mingled together, dip a fine
Camels-hair-brush, and with it varnish over your piece, four or five times
carefully by the fire, as you are taught to do Japan; and you will find that it
gives a very rich gloss.

To varnish pictures, and polish them, like Japan.
With white-Japan-varnish only wash over your work five or six times, observing
all the method for Japan directly. When it has rested three or four days, lay
the Picture on the Cushion, whereon you cut the Leaf-gold: then with Tripole
and water polish it; and lastly, clear it up as you do White-Japan.

These are the Rules in short, I thought fit to lay down in the treatise of
this pretty Art; and I question not but they are full, most exact, and
satisfactory, and will be found so, when the Ingenious Ladies shall put them
into practice.

To Imitate and counterfeit TORTOISE-SHELL and MARBLE. CHAP. XXVI.
BEfore Japan was made in England, the imitation of Tortoise-shell was much in
request, for Cabinets, Tables, and the like; but we being greedy of Novelty,
made these give way to modern Inventions: not, but that it is still in vogue, and
fancied by many, for Glass-frames, and small Boxes; nay, House-Painters have of
late frequently endeavored it, for Battens, and Mouldings of Rooms; but I must
of necessity say, with such ill success, that I have not to the best of my
remembrance met with any that have humored the Shell so far, as to make it
look either natural, or delightful. But, to avoid all reflections, I must
attribute this to that mistaken piece of frugality in them, who think, if they
can agree with a Painter by the greatt, their business is done; for by these
means, they not allowing the Artist a Living price, he cannot spend both his
oil and labor, nor stretch his performances to the utmost extent of his skill.
On the other hand, some there be who are indeed willing, but not being Masters
of what they profess, sink and come short through their inabilities. I believe
the complaint is universal; the ingenious and most excellent in each
profession, being destitute of a reward that is answerable and proportioned to
the worthiness of his undertaking.

But it is high time that we close with the business in hand. And first, the
Tortoise-shell, I propose for your imitation, is that which is laid upon
Silver-Foil, and is always made use of for Cabinets and Boxes, for it gives
life and beauty to the Shell, which else would appear dull and heavy. Now to
counterfeit this very well; your wood ought to be close-grain'd, smooth, and
cleanly wrought off, as Pear Tree; but if it be a coarse-grained wood, as Deal,
Oak, or the like, you must prime it with Whiting, as you have been taught in
the chapter of black Japan for coarse-grained woods. When either of these are
rushed smooth, as is required; take a fit varnishing tool dipped into a gallipot
of the thickest of your Seed-lac-varnish, and wet with this varnish the breadth
of a Silver-leaf, which you must take up with cotton, and clap on it whilst it is
moist, dabbing it close to the work, as you have been taught in Guilding. This
done, wash again, and lay on another leaf of Silver, ordering it as before, and
so continue, till the whole is so overspread with Silver. When it is through
dry, with a fine hair-brush sweep off all the loose Silver. Next, grind
Collins-earth very finely on a grinding-stone, mixed either with common size,
or gum-water; this I esteem better than Lamblack, because Collins-earth comes
much nearer to the color of the Shell: Being finely ground, mix it with more
common size, or gum-water, as you have made use of either in the grinding. With
this spot the darkest of your Shell, striving to the utmost to imitate it as
nearly as it is possible; and in order hereunto, I counsel you to procure a piece
or more of the true, right Shell, that has much variety in it; this lying by
you, will quicken and assist your fancy, and enable you to perform it with
much more ease and cunning. You may observe, (when this is done, that several
reds, lighter and darker, offer themselves to view on the edges of the black,
and sometimes lie in streaks on the transparent part of the shell: To imitate
this, you must grind Sanguis Draconis very fine with gum-water; and with a
small pencil draw those warm reds, flushing it in and about the dark places
more thick, but fainter, thinner, and with less color toward the lighter
parts of the shells; sweetning it so, that by degrees it may loose its strength
of red, being intermixed with, and quite lost in the silver, or more transparent
part. It Is worthy your observation, that those who are expert and ready at
spotting or working this imitation, do usually grind the forementioned colors
dry and very finely upon a stone, and mix 'em with fine Lacc-varnish as they
work them, which is most agreeable and proper, as I have noted before, being
not so apt to polish off as Size or gum-water; notwithstanding, I advise young
beginners to use size or gum-water, for I suppose they are not able to do it so
well, that it should not require a review and correction; for then they may
with ease and a little care rub out any faulty place, and go over it again,
until it is done artificially, (but this convenience is not to be had, if you
employ Lacc-varnish at the first.) When this is done, and dried, give it six
washes of your Seed-lacc-varnish; let it rest one day; after which time rush it
gently, till it is smooth and fit for the second operation: in order to which,
grind Dragons-blood and Gambogium, in an equal, but small quantity, very
finely; put them into as much Seed-lacc-varnish as will wash it six times more:
permit it to stand twelve hours, and then allow it the third varnishing and
with the last mixture wash it so often, till your silver is changed into gold,
or a color like it. Note, that your first washings may be with the coarse, the
two last with the fine and clearest of your Seed-lacc-varnish; avoid making
your varnish too thick and high colored with Gambogium, and Sanguis Draconis,
but heighten it by degrees, otherwise your silver will be too high-colored,
before you have given it a sufficient body of varnish. When it has stood two
days, polish and clear it up, as you have been instructed in the treatise of
black varnishing.

Another way to counterfeit Tortoise-shell.
First, prime, lacker, and size your work in oil very thin, as you are taught
before in the Art of Guilding, and when your silver is laid on and dried, let
these colors be ground fine and thick in drying-oyl, placing them on your
Pallet; they are, burnt Umber, Co^lins-earth, brown Pink, and Lake. Do over
your work with Turpentine-varnish, and whilst it is wet, mix brown Pink and
Lake thin with varnish; and lay all your faintest clouds or spots, which you
may soften very sweetly, seeing your varnish is moist. After three hours
standing, or longer, if the colors are dry, with a large, soft Tool, pass it
lightly over; and again wetting it, lay in your clouds more warm and dark with
Umber and Collins-earth, before it is dry; always observing the life, and
sweetning your work, which is blending and mixing two colors after they are
laid, so that you cannot perceive where either of them begin or end, but
insensibly join with each other. If the clouds are not dark enough, repeat the
varnishing and clouding once more, where it is required. When it is well dried,
glaze it two or three times with brown Pink, yet a little tincture of
Verdegreas in it will not be amiss; if you had rather, you may varnish it with
Lacc-varnish, and finish it as you did the former.

Whiten and prepare your wood in all respects as you do for white Japan; and
after you have done it over with flake white, or white-lead, if you design a
white with some veins, use some Vine-black, (which is made of the cuttings of
Vines burnt and grinded,) mix two or three degrees of it with white-lead and a
very weak size being warmed, until you have produced the intended color for
the clouds and veins of the Marble. Being thus far advanced, call for a large,
clean brush, wet your piece over with water, and before it is dry, with a great
Camels-hair-pencil, dipped in the palest thin mixture, flush or lay the faintest
large clouds and veins of your Marble, which being laid on whilst the work is
wet, will lie so soft and sweet, that the original will not exceed it. Then if
your work be not too dry, take a smaller pencil, and with a color one degree
darker than the first, touch all the lesser veins and variety of the Marble: If
your work dry too fast, wet it again with the brush and water, and lay not on
your colors when the water is running off, lest they bear it company. Lastly,
take a small-pointed feather, and with the deepest color touch and break all
your sudden or smaller veins, irregular, wild, and confused, as you have them
in the natural Marble. After days drying, cold-clear it, that is, do it over
with Isinglass or Parchment-size; and; then varnish, polish, and clear it up,
exactly in all things according to the directions for white Japan, to which
places, and others above mentioned, we refer you. By mixing other colors this
way, any sort of Marble is subject to your imitation; and, if neatly done, well
polisht, and varnisht, will not only exceed any Marbling in oil, but will in
beauty and gloss equal the real stone.

CHAP. XXVII. Of Dying or Staining Wood, Ivory, etc.
To Dye Wood a beautiful Red.
VVoods, that are very white, take this dye the best of any: set a kettle of
water boiling with a handful of Allom, cast your wood into it, permitting it to
boil a little; that done, take your wood but, and put into the said water two
handfuls of Brasil wood, then return your wood into, the vessel again to boil
for a quarter of an hour, and it is concluded. When dry, you may, rush and polish
it, or varnish it with the tops of Seed-lacc-varnish, and polish it; by which
management, you will find the wood covered with a rich and beautiful color.

To stain a fine Yellow.
Take Burr or knotty Ash, or any other wood that is white, curled, and knotty;
smooth and rush it very well, and having warmed it, with a brush dipped in Aqua
fortis wash over the wood, and hold it to the fire, as you do Japan-work, until
it leaves smoking: when dry rush it again, for the Aqua fortis will make it
very rough. If to these you add a polish; and varnish it with Seed-lacc, and
then again polish it, you will find no outlandish wood surpass it; for the curled
and knotty parts admit of so much variety, being in some places hard, in others
soft and open-grained, to which Aqua fortis gives a deeper color, than to the
harder and more resisting parts. In short; you will perceive a pleasing variety
interwoven, beyond what you could imagine or expect. If you put filings or bits
of metals, as brass, copper, and iron, into the Aqua fortis, each metal will
produce a different tincture: the best French Pistols are stockt generally with
this sort of wood, and stained after this manner.

To Dye or Stain Woods of any color, for Inlaid or Flowered work, done by the
Cabinet-makers.
Use the moistest horse-dung you can get, that has been made the night before;
through a sieve or cloth squeez out what moisture you judge sufficient for the
purpose, convey it into several small vessels fit for the design; in each of
these dissolve of Roach-allom, and Gum Arabic, the bigness of a nutmeg, and
with them mix reds, blews, greens, of what colors best please you, suffering
them to stand two or three days, yet not without often stirring them. Then take
your woods (of which I think Pear Tree is the best if t be white,) cut them as
thick as an half-crown, which is in all reason thick enough for any Fineered or
Inlaid work, and of what breadth you please; making your liquors or colors
boiling hot, put the wood into it, for as long time as will sufficiently color
them; yet some must be taken out sooner than the rest, by which means you will
have different shades of the same color; for the longer they lie in, the
higher and deeper will be the colors: and such variety you may well imagine
contributes much to the beauty and neatness of the work, and agrees with the
nature of your parti-colored flowers.

To Dye or Stain Wood Black.
Take Log-wood, and boil it in water or vinegar, and whilst very hot brush or
stain over your wood with it two or three times; then take the Galls, and
Copperas, well beaten, and boil them well in water, with which wash or stain
four work so often till it be a black to your mind; the oftener it is laid, the
better will your black be: if your work be small enough, you may steep it in
your liquors instead of washing it.

The best Black Dye for Ivory, Horn, Bone, etc.
Put pieces of Brass into Aqua fortis, letting it stand till it is turned green,
with which wash your Ivory (being polished) once or twice. Next, boil Logwood
in water, into which put your Ivory, whilst it is warm, and in a little time it
gives a fine black, which you must now rush and polish again, and twill have as
good a gloss and black as any Japan or Ebony.

If you desire any foldage, flowers, or the like fancies should remain white,
and of the same color with the Ivory; draw them neatly on the Ivory with
Turpentine-varnish, before you stain it; for those places which you touch with
the varnish, are so secured by it, that the Dye cannot approach or discolor
them. After it is dyed, if you can hatch and shadow those fancies with a Graver,
and fill the lines by rubbing and clearing up the whole with Lamblack and Oil,
it may add much to its ornament and perfection.

To Stain a Green color on Wood, Ivory, Horn, or Bones.
First, prepare either of them in Allom-water, by boiling them well in it, as
you were just now instructed. Afterward grind of Spanish-green, or thick
common Verdegreas, a reasonable quantity, with half as much Sal-Armoniack; then
put them into the strongest wine-vinegar, together with the wood, keeping it
hot over the fire till it is green enough: if the wood is too large, then wash it
over scalding hot, as in the other instances.

To Dye Ivory. etc, Red.
Put quicklime into rainwater for a night; strain the clear through a cloth,
and to every pint of water add half an ounce of the scrapings of Brasil-wood:
having first boiled it in Allom-water, then boil it in this, till it is red
enough to please you.

Thus, Courteous Reader, are we at lenghth arrived at our desired Port. Our
Performances have been no way inferior to our Promises. What we engaged for in
the beginning, we have punctually accomplished; and nothing certainly remains,
but that you convert our Precepts to Practice; for that will be the ready way
to examine, and try, whether they are false or insufficient. We have all along
been directed by an unerring Guide, Experience; and do therefore advise you,
upon the least miscarriage, to make a diligent review, and doubt not but second
thoughts will convince you of too slight an observance. We desire you would be as
exact and regular in your performances, as we have been in ours; for by these
means, Satisfaction will attend both Parties, all our designs must succeed to
our wish, and our Labors shall be, crowned with success and reputation.

FINIS.
The Lidd of a Powder Box


The Lidd oF a Patch Box*


The side of a Patch Box


The side of a Powder Box


The Fellow to it


The Fellow to it


Other patterns for Powder Boxes


Other Patterns for Patch Boxes


The Sides


The Sides


The Fellow


The Fellow


Other patterns for Powder Boxes


Other Patterns for Patch Boxes


For the side of Patch Boxes


Another Sort of work for ye Sides of Powder Boxes


The fellow to it


The follow to it




Cloth Brvshes


Comb Brushes


A Pincushing Trvnks for Pendents Necklace Rings and Jewels


The topp of a 12 Inch Frame for a Lo^king Glass for Jappan Work


The Bottom of ye Said frame


The Side of ye fram on ye Right hand


The side of ye frame on ye Left hand


The topp of a half Rovnd Frame for Japan work* called a 10 Inch Dresing
frame for a Looking Glass


The Bottom of ye Said Frame


The side of ye frame to ye Right hand


The side of ye Frame to ye Left hand


For a Standish for Pen Ink and paper (...) also may sarve for a Comb Box
The Movlding



The Fore Side of ye Standish


For ye topp. or Lid. of a Gombe* Box*
The Movlding



The fore side of ye Comb Box


engraving of birds and insects

engraving of birds and insects

engraving of birds and insects

engraving of foliage

engraving of foliage

engraving of potted greens and birds

engraving of animals

Several Figures to be plased as Occasion serves in Japan Work


A Pagod Worshipp in ye Indies


Another


For Drawers for Cabbinets to be Placed according to yo^ fancy


Of Drawers some are Deep and some more narrow of ye same Cabbinett


engraving of buildings

engraving of buildings and people

engraving of bird and buildings

An Embassy


engraving of birds and buildings


