MODUS LITIGANDI, OR FORM OF PROCESS OBSERVED BEFORE THE LORDS OF COUNCIL AND
SESSION IN SCOTLAND.

By Sir JAMES DALRYMPLE of STAIR, PRESIDENT of the SESSION.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, Anno DOM. 1681.

MODUS LITIGANDI OR FORM OF PROCESS Before the LORDS of COUNCIL and SESSION.
A PROCESS comprehends the Instruments and order of Procedour in the
Administration of Justice.

By Instruments are meant Writs and Testimonies, as Oaths of Parties,
Witnesses, etc.

Processes are brought in before the Lords diverse ways: some in the first
Instance, some in the second.

In the first Instance, the most ordinary way was, of old, by ordinary Summons,
which were drawn up by the Writers to the Signet, without any Bill or Warrant
from the Lords, because the Style and nature of them was current and known, in
the same manner as the Brieves of the Chancery. But where there was any thing
singular or extraordinary, it behoved to proceed by special Warrant of the
Lords: whether it were different from the common Style, in relation to the
Diets or endurance of the Citation, or in relation to the Table and Roll by
which Summons were to be called, or in relation to the matter it self. And
therefore a Bill was presented to the Lords and passed; and the Summons
thereupon bears Ex deliberatione dominorum concilii, which the ordinary Summons
bear not. Now most part of Summons are rai^ed upon Bills.

Processes also come in upon naked Supplication without a Libel passing the
Signet, in some Causes, especially if they concern Advocats, Clerks, Writers,
Agents, and other Attendants of the House; which the Lords call (upon
Complaint) by the Macers summarly, and thereupon grant Process.

And now since the discussing of Causes by a Roll is established by Act of
Parliament, the Lords for dispatch of Complaints of smaller moment, upon
special consideration represented by Bill, do grant Warrant to Macers or
Messengers, to cite Persons in ^dinb^rgh or the Suburbs upon 24. Hours, to
answer before the Ordinary upon the Bills, who discusseth the same summarly,
without any signetted Libel, and so without abiding the course of the Roll.
They do also upon complaint of any Contempt, as if Parties proceed to Execution
where Stops of Execution are granted, summarly give Warrant by a Deliverance on
the Bill of Complaint, to cite the Persons complained upou wheresoever they
dwell: which is summarly discussed by the Ordinary upon the Bills.

Processes do likewise come in by Letters of Horning without an antecedent
^earing of Parties: especially where Horning is ordained to proceed summarly by
Act of Parliament, or ancient Custom. So Letters are granted for the King`s
Revenues, and likewise for the Charges of Commissioners of Parliament, for
Reparation of Kirks and Kirk-yards, and for Removing from Gleebes designed for
Ministers, etc. These are called GENERAL LETTERS, because they bear not warrant
to charge any particular Person, but generally all and sundry concern`d, as
Heretors, Li^erenters, Wad^etters, Tenants, and Possessors, etc. And therefore
such Charges differ little from other Summons, and are easily suspended: because
the Party or Messenger has power to make the Application. But they require no
Diet or Continuation: and yet the Party charged (or Defender) ere he can be
heard, must suspend and sind Caution.

All other general Letters of Horning are prohibited, where either the thing
charged for, is not specially expressed, or the Names of the Persons charged:
except as to beneficed Persons, to serve for an Intimation of their Provisions,
but not to denounce any Party. Par. 1592. cap. 240. Yet oftimes general Letters
in other Cases pass of course: but thereupon Escheats fall not, though Caption
does follow. For preventing whereof the Lords by Act of Sederunt. June 8.1665.
did prohibit the Writers to draw, or Clerks of the Bills to write upon any
general Letters of Horning either as to Benefices or modified Stipends, until
the Incumbent produ^e a De^reet conform in his own Person, although he produce
one in the Person of his Predecessor.

Ordinary Actions may pass without Bill, or by Bill, both passing the Signet.
The S^iles and Tenors of ordinary Summons, and of most part of privileged
Summons passing by Bill, as now become fixed and ordinary, are commonly known
and observed by the Writers to the Signet, and are contained in their
Stile-Books, which they are obliged, and every Session enjoyn`d punctually to
observe. And they will be censured by the Lords if they transgress, not only in
the Style of Summons without Bill, but also in presenting common Bills of
course (without special notice of the Lords) upon trust of the Writers, and
Servants in the Bill-Chamber who write the Deliverance upon the back of the
Bills. The like, if the Style be altered in general Letters or other Letters,
of Horning, Diligence, and Executorials.

All these Warrants of the Lords contain a Command to Messengers, or Sherisjs
in that part, to cite and charge the Parties. And in ordinary Summons the
Citation is to a Day, which is left blank that the Obtainer thereof may make
use of any Day he pleases, within a year after the Summons are rais`d.

Most part of Summons formerly, did abide Continuation: that is, the Defender
being cited and the Day of compearance past, the Clerk marked the Summons as
being called and continued till such a Day: albeit in reality they they were
not called, because the Defender was not obliged to answer, till he was cited
again^ which was by Letters pass`d under the Signet, making mention of the
first Summons, of the Citation, and Continuation of the Summons, and commanding
Messengers to cite the Party to the second Diet, which also was left blank that
the Obtainer might use it any time within a year after their obtaining thereof.
Such Summons were not continued as were instantly verified by Writ, or needed
no other Probation than the Summons it self, as being negative or presumed in
Law to be true. But if the Summons behoved to be proven by the Oath of the
Defender, or by Witnesses the same was then to be continued except in some few
privileged Causes as in Actions of recent Spulzie, Ejection, and others. And
though Summons upon Bills by the Deliverance of the Lords bare expressly, to
proceed without Continuation; yet that passing of course, was but periculo
petentis, and the Summons behoved to be continued. The Act also of Continuation
behoved to be extracted before Process could proceed.

But now by the Act of Par. 1672. cap. 6. Acts of Continuation and second
Summons are discharged. And it is ordained, That in Cases where second Summons
were before required there shall now be one Summons with two Diets, in which
the Executions to the first Diet may be given by any Person as being Sheriff in
that part constitute by the Letters. But after the Day to which the Party is
first cited, the second Citation must be given to a new Diet by Messengers,
when any Point is re^err'd to the Defender's Oath, with Certification if he
compear not and depone, he shall be holden as confessed.

After the last day of compearance is past, if the Pursuer insist not; the
Defender may compear and produce a short Copy of the Citation given to him,
which being delivered to a Sub-Clerk, he will thereupon call the Pursuer, of
course, before the Ordinary comes out. And if no Advocat compear for the
Pursuer, the Clerk will admit Protestation: so called, because the Defender's
Advocat does either really compear or is reputed to do so, and to protest, That
his Client being cited to such a Day, and that Day past, (the Pursuer not
compearing to insist) He may not be obliged to answer till he be summoned of
new again. Which Protestation the Clerk admits, and extracts a Sentence of the
Lords, bearing them to have admitted the said Protest^tion: which is a kind of
Sentence absolvitor from that Instance, and any thing done thereafter till new
Citation will be null. If any Advocat compear for the Pursuer, the Clerk will
assign him a Day to produce his Summons: and then will call again upon the
Copy^ and give him a short Diet more, to produce, with Certification that
Protestation will be admitted. And then calling the third time, the Ordinary
will admit Protestation unless the Process be produced. Upon which Protestation
the Defender may raise a Summons against the Pursuer to insist, with
Certification if he insist not, never to be heard again. Wherein if the Pursuer
of the principal Cause appear, he will get a Day to produce and insist: at
which time Certification will be admitted. Or if at the first, the Defender
compear not, the Day of compearance being past, if the Pursuer of the principal
Cause appear, he gives in his Summons to a Sub-clerk who calls the same after
the Day of compearance is past, though there be no Judge present. And if none
appear for the Defender, the Clerk writes thereupon, and either decerns or
assigns a Day to prove as the Procurator demands, or grants Certification. But
if the Cause be not ordinary and obvious, the Clerk must advise with the Lords:
who will consider the Relevancy of the Summons, and the sufficiency of the
Probation, and either give Act or Sentence as they see just; or otherwise
forbear, if the Libel be not relevant and proven.

In ordinary Cases the Clerk extracts the Decree or Act, as if it were done
upon special notice of the Lords. If any Compearance be made for the Defenders,
the Clerk then marks upon the Summons or Act of Continuation the names of the
Pursuer's Advocat and Defender's in these terms, Actor such a man, alter such a
man to see. After which there can be no further procedure till the Process be
seen by the Defender's Advocat. And if there be several Advocats for several
Defenders, the Process is marked to be seen in such a man's House, where they
should either conveen to consult their several Interests, or borrow the Process
for that effect, and return it. But the Pursuer does more safely, when he takes
back the Process from the first Party, and gives it to be seen severally to the
rest. For otherwise they will delay him when they come to the Dispute, and
will at least get liberty to see the Process in the Clerks hands till the next
Calling, that in the mean time they may borrow the Process from the Clerk (upon
their Receipt) and see the same.

Processes were accustomed not only to be seen and called once every Session,
and if they were not marked by the Clerks so called, there could be no Process
till a Summons of Wakening was raised: for they were not only said to be asleep
in the mean time, but also the Defender's Advocats were not obliged to answer,
unless they had seen the Process that same Session. But since the Act of
Regulation, a Process being once seen is not to be seen again, unless there be
Alterations in the Summons, or new Productions. Yea when the Process has not
been called for a whole year, and that thereupon there be a Citation upon a
Wakening, the Cause goes on as it stood in the Roll before, and is only seen
with the Wakening in the Clerks hands.

The Pursuer's Advocat when he gives out the Process to be seen, writes upon
the back thereof, Given out by etc. to etc. to be seen, and subscribes the
same. And after two or three days calls for the Process back. He does also
ordinarily write an Inventary of the Process apart, or upon the back of the
Summons and the Defender`s Advocat by accepting of the Summons, is presumed to
have received the same the day mentioned upon the back of the Summons, and to
have received the Pieces of the Process mentioned in the Inventary: because if
these be not truly set down, he may refuse to accept of the Process. If then
the Defender`s Advocat deliver back the same, he must write upon the back, that
they are seen by him and subscribe his name. Which if he refuse to do, and to
give back the Process, the Pursuer by a Ticket may complain to the President,
or Ordinary upon the Bills, who will call the Defender's Advocat and amerciat
or fine him, till he produce. Or otherwise the Pursuer upon a Copy of the
Summons, may cause the Sub-clerk call the Defender's Advocats to reproduce the
Process, With Certification that if he do not, his Copy will be holden as a
principal, and holden as proven, whereupon the Defenders will be decerned.
Which Certification being admitted, a Decree for not Reproduction may be
extracted, which will have all Execution as any other Decree in absence: and
albeit it be more easily suspended, yet not ordinarily without Caution.

But for the Security of Parties, that they may not be wronged by the Clerks,
all that passes every day, is mentioned in the Minute Book: which Book is read
in the Outer-House every day after twelve a clock, and nothing can be extracted
till it be read in the Minute Book and twenty four Hours thereafter; that in
the mean time either Party may compear and produce, or take up the Process and
get the Decree delet out of the Minute Book, and oftimes at the very reading
of the Book, they compear and get it delet.

If the Pursuers after the Process is seen, make any alteration therein by
production of new Writs, and altering or mending of the Summons; the Defender
must see of new again the Pieces of the Process, or the Pursuer's Title, where
there is any required to be produced, (which is in most Causes) and which
instructs the Pursuer's Right, as the Summons, or Charge, with the Executions
Acts of Process, and Writs produced for Probation.

Processes allowed to be seen in the Clerks hands being kept up beyond the time
appointed, upon Complaint from the Clerk, they are ordained to be delivered the
next day under a certain Penalty, as ten or twenty Dallers. And upon the second
Complaint, Warrant is given to debar Advocats from coming within the Bars, and
to incarcerat Agents and Servants, till the Process be reproduced and the Fine
paid.

Processes being thus seen and ready for Dispute, the same are enrolled
according to the Dates of the Return marked upon the backs thereof; he who is
first ready being first to be discussed, without preference of the Parties:
except the Kings Causes, which after fight may be called without inrolling, at
any time upon 14. days Intimation to the Defender's Advocats, wherein Donatars
Processes are not comprehended.

Which Rolls being affixed on the Walls of the Outer House Parties and Advocats
may inform themselves, to be in readiness to dispute without surprisal, or
tergiversation.

Ordinary Actions after they are seen, returned and enrolled are called by the
Roll. If the Pursuer compear not to insist, the Defender may crave Protestation
upon his Copy. But ordinarily the Pursuer compears, and relates the Cause
shortly, if it be an ordinary Summons, the tenor and nature whereof is fixed
and known; which therefore he needs not relate, but only mention the Summons
and crave Decree, if there needs no further Probation: and if there do, he
then craves a Day to prove. But if the Cause be upon a libelled Summons, not
having a particular known Style, the Pursuer does more fully relate, not only
the tenor of his Summons, but the merits of his Cause, to enforce the justness
and equity of the Cause in particular: unless the Lords upon hearing the
relation of the Summons stop him, till it appear whether the Defender
controvert the Relevancy thereof, yea or not. For it is an improfitable
spending of time, for the Pursuer to enforce the Relevancy of the Summons, if
the Defender controvert not the same. In the next place, the Defender if he
resolve to dip upon the merits of the Cause, or to adhere rigorously to exact
form in the order, then he relates the merits of the Cause, and odiousness of
the Pursuit, and thereupon proceeds to his Defenses.

Defenses do not only comprehend Exceptions properly so called, but all
Objections against the Relevancy of the Summons, Order, and Interest. And
therefore the Defender propones his Defenses against the Order of the Process;
and first, That the Day of compearance is not yet past. And because the Day of
compearance in the Summons and Letters by negligence is left blank, the
Defender uses to score the same, or to fill up a wrong Day, and to object
thereupon. But if the Day of compearance be mentioned in the Execution, it will
be sufficient, albeit the Blank be scored: and if it be wrong filled up, the
Ordinary will sometimes cause the Clerk immediately mend it, and so proceed. And
at other times does as he sees the Cause favorable, or not.

The second Defense is upon the Days of Citation: wherein the common Rule is,
that against Persons without the Kingdom, Citation should proceed at the
^iercat Cross of Edinburgh and Peer and Shore of Leith, upon threescore Daye^
for the first Summons, and fifteen Days for the second; and for Persons within
the Kingdom upon twenty one Days for the first and six for the second.

From this Rule are excepted Summons upon recent Spuilzie, Ejection, Intrusion,
or Succeeding in the Vice of Persons against whom Decree of Removing is
pronounced, which are privileged by Statute to proceed upon a Citation of
fifteen days. And by Custom Removings, Causes alimentary, Exhibitions Summons
for making arrested Goods or Sums furthcoming, Transferrings, Wakenings,
Poindings of the Ground, special Declarators, Suspensions, Prevento`s, and
Transumpts are commonly privileged by the Lords Deliverance upon six Days.
And the second Citation when it is needful is always upon six days except
against the Inhabitants of Edinburgh, and the contiguous Suburbs thereof, where
the second Citation may be upon twenty four Hours which is declared by Act of
Sederunt. June 21. 1672. concerning privileged Summons. And the Writers to the
Signet are prohibited to insert any other Privilege.

The third Defense is, That the Summons has not two Citations conform to the
Act of Parliament 1672. For clearing whereof it is to be considered, that the
reason of double citation is, that the Defender may have more Citations before
any Process be sustained against him, not only to give him competent time to
propone his Defenses, but to ascertain him of the Citation, which is some times
clandestinely done, but not so easily when there are reiterat Citations.

Some times Causes are privileged to proceed upon one Citation by Law and
Custom, and sometimes by the Lords Deliverance. The Law allows no Continua^ion
of recent Spuilzies, R^movings, and Actions accessory to the Lords Decreets, as
special Declara^ors; unless the Cause be of the greatest importance, as
Reductions, Daclarators of Property, and Declarators of expyring of Rev^rsions.
For though ^hese require no further Probation either by Writ or Oath of Party;
yet because of their importance they must be continued. And so must all Summons
which are to be proven by the Defender's Oath of Ve^ity, or by Witnesses.

The fourth Defense is upon the tenor of the Executions. As first, if the
Pursuer crave the Defender to be holden as confess`d, then the De^ens^ is, That
he was not personally apprehended by a Messenger at Arms, or That the Execution
bears not that a Copy was delivered: but if it bear a Copy delivered it will be
sufficient, albeit it bear not personally apprehended, because it does import
it. Secondly, if the Defender was not cited personally but at his
Dwelling House, the Execution will be null if it bear not, That the Executer
gave six Knocks at the most patent Door or Entry of the Defender's House,
designing the same, and that he either delivered a Copy to the Wife, ^^irns, or
Servants; or that he affixed a Copy upon the most patent Door or Gate. It must
also contain two Wi^nesses at least: and it mus^ be stamped. If any of th^se be
omitted the Execution will not be sustained. But the Pursuer may take up his
Summons and mend the Executions, abiding by the verity thereof: and it must be
seen again by the Defender.

The fi^th Defense uses to be upon the Pursuer`s Title, whereby the Defender
alleges, No Process, because the Pursuer produced no sufficient Title in
initio li^is. As if an Heir pursue without production of his Retour, an
Executor without a C^nfirmation or License, an Assigny without an Assignation,
etc. And almost in every Process, that does not merely consist in facto, a
Title in Writ must be produced in initio litis: whereupon there arises much
debate, (and very diverse and different,) what Writs must be produced as the
Title in initio litis, which were too tedious here to relate.

The sixth Defense is upon the Interest of the Defenders not cit^d: whereby the
Defender alleges, That all Parties having Inter^st are not called. As i^ a
Pupil were called without his Tutor's being called, at least in general, at the
Market Cross where the Pupil dwells: or if a Vassal be called in the Reduction
of his Right, or in a Declarator of Property and Cognition of his Marches,
without calling of his Superior. But this yields no Defense for principal
Debitors, or for Cautioners bound conjunctly and severally as Principals: for
one of them may be called withoue the rest.

The seventh Defense is, the order of discussing: whereby the Defender
alleges, No Process against him till such other Parties be discussed. As
Cautioners not being bound conjunctly and severally as full Debtors, are not
liable till the Principals be discussed. And so Cautioners for Tutors or
Executors are not liable, till the Tutors or Executors be discussed. So
Heirs-male, till the Heirs of Line be discussed; nor Heirs of Tailzie, till the
Executors, Heirs of Line, and Heirs-male be discuss`d.

The eighth Defense is, That the Libel, or some member thereof, is not
relevant: For clearing whereof it is necessary distinctly to understand what
the Relevancy is, which is so frequent and important a Term in our Law.
Relevancy is a relevando, to relieve or help: and therefore a thing is said to
be relevant, when, if it be true and proven, it would relieve the Pursuer or
Complainer, and give him the Remedy which he infers and concludes in his Libel,
and craves to be done as due by Justice. For every sufficient Libel contains an
argument or ratiocination, sometimes in form of a Syllogism, when the point of
Law is first deduced, as the major Proposition; and then the matter of Fact is
related, as the minor or Subsumption: and thence the Conclusion is inferred as
consequent in Justice, applying the Law to the Fact subsumed, and craving the
Remedies of that Law to be applied to this Fact, for the help or remedy of the
Pursuer in his Complaint. And therefore in the Libel he is called Complai^er.
But more frequently Libels are framed as an Enthimeme wherein the matter of
fact is deduced as the Antecedent: and it is thence inferred that in Justice
such remedy should be adhibited. Where sometimes, after the matter of fact is
deduced, and before the Conclusion or Remedy craved, the Law is mentioned:
either generally, That the Fact related as done or omited by the Defender, is
contrary to Law, Equity, Reason, or Justice; or specially, contrary to such
Points of Law. Or otherwise it is subjoyned to the Conclusion, That upon the
matter of Fact libelled, it ought to be declared or decerned as is libelled,
according to Law, Equity, or Justice: or particularly according to such Points
of Law. So then the Relevancy of the Libel or Complaint, is the Consequ^nce of
the Conclusion of the Libel, from the Premises thereof. Or it is the Justice
of the Libel, or the Sufficiency and Goodness of the Plea. And the Probation is
the Verily or Truth of the Libel. So that the Remedies of Law proceed upon
Justice and Truth.

The effect is the same^ in Suspensions and Reductions, though the form be
different. For the Conclusion or Remedy of Law is first proposed: and the
Premises are subjoyned, as Reasons for adhibiting the Remedy proposed. Every
Reason being a several Syllogism or Enthimeme inferring the proposed Remedy,
and in effect a several Libel.

If the Libel be instantly verified, and require no further Probation, as when
the Law presumes it to be true, or when it is instructed by Writ; or when the
Defender is craved to be holden as confessed; or there is any other
Certification containing a presump^ive Probation, as that, if Writs be not
produced, it is presumed to be because they dare not abide Trial, but would be
found false or null, therefore if they be not produced, they are declared to be
holden as false or null; in these Cases, if the Libel be instructed, there is
nothing can be controverted but the Relevancy, Inference, or Justness of it.
And therefore the Defense, That the Libel or such a Member of it is not
relevant, imports this, That the Conclusion craved is not just, or that there
is no sufficient ground for it in Law or Equity. And therefore the Pursuer must
condescend upon what ground o^ Law or Equity he foundeth, unless it be clear
and evident to the Judge. In which Case, without putting the Defender to
answer, he sustains the Libel: that is, he finds that if the Fact related be
true, the Remedy craved is just. And if he find the Libel relevant, and
instantly verified, he decerns: either simply in all points according to the
Libel, or in part, finding ^ome Members of the Conclusion just, but others not
just; or qualificate, when he finds the Conclusion just, but not in the way
that it is demanded, and grants it as it ought to be demanded. Which is
ordinarily done in favorable Cases: nor will the Decree be quarrellable as
ultra petita, or disconform to the Libel. But if the Case be unfavourable, he
may forbear to qualify the Conclusions, and assolzie a libello ut libellatur:
which will not exclude new Summons, where the Conclusion is rightly qualified:
as neither will an Absolvitor in a Reduction, exclude a Reduction in the same
Cause, upon new Reasons upon different points of Fact, or differently
qualified. But it is not so in Suspensions: where the Decree suspended not
having taken effect by Execution, the Suspender remains in effect Defender, and
the Charger who obtained the Decree, is still Pursuer to get his Decree put
to execution. And therefor whatever Reasons were competent and omitted in the
first Suspension, are not receivable in any posterior Suspension. But if the
Libel be simply relevant, the Judge does simply assolzie.

If the Libel be not instantly verified, the Pursuer craves no Decree, but a
Term to prove. And the Question will still remain, Whether the Libel be
relevant, that is, Whether if it were proven to be true, it would also be just.
For frustra probatur quod probatum non relevat.

Relevancy comes to be debated, not only as to Summons and Libels, but as to
Exceptions, Replys, Duplys, Triplys, or Quadruplys, etc. which will not be
sustained or admitted to Probation, if they be irrelevant, and would not
relieve or avail the Proponer. It is to the same effect when the Dispute is,
Whether the Defense, Reply, etc. be good or sufficient. For the goodness or
sufficiency thereof is the justness, or Relevancy of it. But the Term Relevancy
is most formal and frequent with us, and more than with any other Nation. The
Roman Law, and the Nations that follow that Law, do but seldom mention it: and
the English know it not. But their Dispute to the same purpose, is of the
sufficiency or goodness of the Plea, or Defense, etc.

Yet we do never adhibite the term Relevancy, but to a matter of Fact proven or
to be proven, whether in the Libel, Exception, Reply, or Duply, etc. But when
the Alledgence is only an Objection, we do not debate whether the Objection be
relevant. As when Writs are adhibited to instruct a Libel ab initio, the
Ordinary will hear the Dispute upon the Writs produced, and the Objections made
against the same. Wherein the terms are not, That the Writs are not relevant,
but that they instruct not, or that they are not to be respected for such
reasons: and the Pursuer endeavors to enforce the same, and answer the
Objections. In all which it is improper to mention Relevancy.

The ninth Defense is upon the Competency, Whether the Suit be competent hoc
ordine. For albeit the Libel be relevant, yet it may not be competent.

Exceptions, so properly called, are not founded upon the Defects of the
Pursuit, but are founded upon some positive Right or Fact, distinct therefrom,
exclusive thereof: and that either for a time, or for ever. Those Exceptions
which exclude the Defense but for a time, are therefore called Dilators: those
which elide the Cause for ever, are therefore called Peremptors, quia perimunt
seu destruunt causam. And albeit Dilators may assolzie the Defender ab
instantia aut lite, yet never ^ causa. And therefore some Dilators are more
properly termed peremptoriae instantiae. To make both clear by example; in the
most frequent Pursuits, as in Actions for Debts, if the Defender alleges that
the Pursuer cannot insist for payment of the Debt, because the Debtor by his
Promise or Writ is engaged not to seek the Sum for a time, or has renounced or
discharged Action or Sentence; if the time be not very long to come, Sentence
will be pronounced, suspending execution till that time: which qualifies the
Sentence, and is dilatory as to the execution. But if there be an absolute
Paction upon the Debitor's part de non petendo, or that the Defender has his
Discharge or Renounciation of the Debt, or if the Defender allege Payment or
Compensation; these Excep^ions are peremptory, which if proven willassolzie the
Defender for ever. And though commonly all Defenses, whether they be Exceptions
or Objections, are called dilatory, if they do not absolutely determine the
Cause: yet it is clear what difference is betwixt an Exception and Objection:
the Objection being only the alleging of a Defect and Nullity in the Pursuit,
and therefore are parts judicis, which if he do accurately notice, although
there were no Defender, he would not decern. As if there were an Act or
Sentence craved before the Day of compearance were come, or if the Summons were
not upon the Days requisite by the Law, or if the Executions were defective in
the Requisits ordained by Law, or if the Libel were not relevant, or any member
thereof, or were not competent in such a Process: all which reasons are
negative, and require no further Probation. But proper Defenses are positive
and are not proper to the Judge to supply: and are not founded upon deficiency
of the Process, but upon some positive Right or Fact competent to the Defender.

Dilators must be instantly ve^ified, and there can be no Term assigned for
proving thereof. Secondly, they are not competent to be proponed after
proponing of Perempto^s. Thirdly, all Dilators must be proponed together, or at
least at the second Calling, that they may not be drawn in length.

As to the first, that Dilators must be instantly verified, the reason is
because they do not determine the Cause, and to run a course of Probation for
instructing a Dilator, were tedious and expensive, and not worthy of the work.
Therefore Defenders are to prepare themselves, and have in readiness the Writ
or Witnesses to inctruct the Dilator, which will be received without any
Citation or Diligence, but being instan^ly called by a Macer will be admitted.
For instance, if a Tenent be pursued to remove, and allege, all Parties
interessed are not cited, viz. his Master, to whom he is Tenent by payment of
Maill and Duty before warning: this is a Dilator, and it must be verified
instanter, that the Person he condescends upon was his Master before the
warning: which may be done either by production of his Master`s Discharges, or
by Witnesses, if they be in readiness. Yet in some Cases a Term may be granted
to instruct a Dilator, as if the Defender have a Supersedere of the Pursuer for
a considerable time, or a probable cause for which he has not the Writ in his
own hand: if he make faith de calumnia, he may get a short time cum onere
expensarum. Which is most fully performed without assigning a Term or Diet to
instruct the Dilator, but repelling it as not instructed, yet superse^ing the
extract of the Act or Decree for some short time, that if in the mean time he
De^ender produce the same, it may be received.

If a Dila^or be sustained, the Defender may extract the Sentence thereupon,
which in effect is an Absolvitor from that Ins^ance. And if the Pursuer do not
mend the Executions and Libel before it be extracted, he will not be heard
thereupon till new Citation.

As to the peremptory Exceptions this is a Rule, that exceptio falsi est omnium
ul^ima. and after Improbation is proponed the Defender can return to no other
Defense, unless i^ be emergent, o^ new come to his Knowledge. But where
Improbation is not by Exception, but by way of Action joint with Reasons of
Reduction, the Reasons of Reduction and Improbation may be insisted in
together, and Probation allowed in both jointly, or severally, because they are
but two Lib^ls in one Process.

When a Peremptory is proponed, the Dispute then runs first upon the Compet^^c^
^h^reof, and next upon the Relevancy; both which are the Objections against the
Exception, and are not Replys. For as the Exception is upon some Right or Fact
positively alleged, eliding the Libel, albeit defective in nothing; so is the
Reply to the Defense, and the Duply to the Reply, etc. As to the Competency of
Defenses, the chief Objection is, That such an Alledgence is not receivable by
way of Exception without Reduction. As if any person be pursued upon a Bond,
and allege Minority and Laesion, or allege Interdiction, or that the Bond was
granted by his Predecessors in lecto aegritudinis; these will be repelled as
incompetent. Much more, if in any Pursuit upon a real Right, it should be
alleged to be a non habente potestatem. So also nullitates facti upon Clauses
of Failzie, bearing that in such and such Cases such Rights should be null, are
incompetent by way of Exception, even albeit the Clause bear that the same
shall be null without Declarator: for the Lords notwithstanding, will not
sustain the same without a preceding Declarator. If these Provisions be penal,
the Lords will also allow the Parties to purge the Failzie, by performance at
the Bar, in the Declarator: and therefore not sustain such Alledgences by
Exception, or by Suspension; but by Reduction, or Declarator: especially in
heritable Rights, and matters of great moment. Though in matters of small
moment, when the Parties are poor, they will indulge that favor, which is
competent to them by the eminency of their Office, whereby they are not
altogether straightened by the limits of ordinary Form. For albeit the Act of
Parliament 1621. against fraudulent Alienations make them null by Exception, or
Reply; yet the Lords do not sustain it, in regard that no Infeftment can be
taken away, without the Superiors and Authors be called.

But Nullities in Law, whereby there is a visible defect in the Solemnities
requisite to a Writ or Right, which requires not the calling of a third Party;
are competent by way of Exception, or Suspension: and in effect are rather
Objections, than Exceptions. As, That a Writ is null by the Act of Parliament
1540. because it wants Witnesses: or because, the Witnesses, or Writer, or both
are not designed: or because, being a Writ of importance, it is subscribed by
one Notary, and not by two Notaries and four Witnesses.

Against the Defense of Nullity upon the want of Witnesses, this Reply is
relevant, That the Writ is holograph, all written and subscribed with the
Granter`s own hand; which is probable by Witnesses: not only if they prove,
That they saw the Writ subscribed; but if they positively affirm, and clearly
cognosce, That it is the ordinary Hand-writ of the Party, both as to the Body
and Subscription. Against which Reply, this Objection is competent; That the
point to be proven, is concerning the Date, or time of the Subscription: which
the Writ cannot instruct, albeit it be proven holograph. Yet the Lords will
sustain the same, if it be proven by other Adminicles, and Witnesses who saw
the Writ subscribed of the Date it bears; or who saw the Writ before the time
in question: but such Witnesses must be above all exception. As when a
Discharge granted by a Cedent, is excepted on, against an Assigny; who if he
allege, That it is null, as wanting Witnesses, and the Defender in
fortification of his Defense offer to prove, That it is holograph: and the
Pursuer yet objects, That it cannot prove the Date; the Defender in
fortification of his Defense offering to prove by Writs relating to the
Discharge, or Witnesses above exception, That they saw the Discharge as it now
stands, before the Intimation of the Assignation; the Lords will sustain the
Defense, if so fortified. Which albeit it appear to include a Duply, and
Quadruply; yet it is but a complex Defense: seeing as to the members thereof,
there interveens no Reply, nor Triply, but only two Objections: which the Lords
upon advising, might supply, albeit not objected by the Party. As if in a
Reduction of a Bond against an Assigny, as being paid before the Intimation,
or Assignation; if the Defender be absent, and a holograph Discharge be
produced, the Lords, if they advert to it, will not find the Reasons proven;
unless the Pursuer prove it holograph, and instruct the Date thereof to be
true, or at least anterior to the Intimation.

The Nullity of the want of the Writer`s name insert, or the Witnesses, is
elided by condescending upon the Writer, and his designation, and upon the
Witnesses: seeing thereby the intent tf the Act of Parliament is fulfilled,
which is that there may be means to improve such Writs if questioned.

All these hold not in Writs that are regulat by the Law of Nations, and not by
the proper Law of our Country, in which the Consuetude of Nations is sufficient
to astruct the Writ: as Bills of Exchange, Orders, Letters of Advice, Accounts,
and Receipts amongst Merchants, which do require no such Solemnities.

And in like manner Writs not made in Scotland but abroad. secundum
consuetudinem loci, are valid without these Solemnities, and take effect in
Scotland. But the Custom of that Place's observing, or not observing such
Solemnities, must be instructed. As Writs subscribed by one Tabellion, in
France, and Germany; and Writs sealed and delivered, in England, or Ireland;
prove, though the Writer be not mentioned, nor the Witnesses designed. But in
these two Kingdoms, if the Writ bear only to be signed, but not to be sealed
and delivered; it does not yet prove, till it be approven by the Oaths and
Testimonies of the Witnesses.

In proponing of Exceptions, the Defender ought not to give Reasons for the
Competencie, or Relevancy thereof, unless the Judge call for them: as when they
are not ordinary, and appear not to him relevant and competent, though there
were no answer made. Otherwise, having repeted his Defense, he should be
silent, until he see if the Pursuer object against the Competency or Relevancy
thereof; or whether he propone a proper Reply, to elide the Exception, without
further Debate. In which the Dispute goes over to the Reply, and so unto the
Duply, until the Point be discussed. The Defender may also propone several
Defenses, which, if found relevant and competent, he will be heard upon all.
And what he omits, that was then competent, will not be receivable in the
second Instance, by Suspension, or Reduction: nor will be admitted after Litis
contestation, unless it be then instantly verified, or be emergent, and new
come to Knowledge. The reason is, that Process be not drawn in length, to the
vexation of the People in their Rights, by perpetuating of uncertainty of Plea.
Which was always used as necessary in ordinary Actions; and now of a great
while, also in Suspensions: the reason being alike in both.

Exceptions are so various and many, that it is not proper here to enumerat,
much less to explain them: what we intend by this, being but to give a short
view of the form and not of the matter of Process. It shall suffice to name
some few most common and most ordinary.

Besides what has been said of Defenses before, and besides the obvious
Exception of Satisfaction, Payment, or Discharge, and the Personal Exception
against persons being Rebels, and so not having personam standi in judicio;
which will exclude the Pursuer, till it be elided by Relaxation, or till the
Rights and Process be assigned, for then (it being personal) it will not follow
the Assigny: which is also competent against the Defender, whom though the
Pursuer has called to appear, yet he may hinder him by Horning, but cannot
hold him as confessed, if he will not suffer him to depone: for albeit the King`s
Officers might exclude him, yet Horning being but a civil Rebellion; it is
against reason, that he that provokes him to Judgment, should exclude him from
it. Wherein nevertheless, Pursuers will sometimes be so cruel as to crave the
Defender to be holden as confessed; albeit they will not suffer him to compear,
and depone, which the Lords do not admit. I say, besides these, there are
further the common Exceptions of Praescription, Renounciation, Innovation,
Transaction, and the Exception rei judicatae, and litis contestatae.

Praescription was once as large as Exception, till it was appropriat to this
chief kind of Exception. We have many Praescriptions in Scotland. As 1. of a
Year: and so Tutors of Law not serving themselves within a Year, their Interest
praescribes, and there is place for a Dative. 2. Of three Years: so Inquests
can not be called in question by Summons of Error, so as to infer any
prejudice against the Persons of Inquest after three Years. Recent Spulzies, as
to their special Privilege of summar Process, Oath in litem, and violent
Profits, praescribe, not being intented within three Years after the Warning.
So also Actions for House-maills, Servants-Fees, and Merchants Compts,
praescribe, as to the manner of Probation by Witnesses, if not intented within
three years: and are then only probable scripto, vel juramento. So the
Preference of the Creditors of the Debtor, to the Creditors of the Heir in
affecting the Estate of the Defunct, by the Act of Parliament praescribes in
three years. 3. In four Years, the Action of Reduction upon Minority and
Laesion prescribes, after the Partie's Majority. 4. In five Years, the Right of
any holden and repute Heritable Possessors, (and so possessing for five years,)
praescribes so in the case of Forfaulture, that if the Possesor be forfaulted,
and the KING succeed; all other Parties Rights are excluded, unless they have
interrupted the Possession, and raised Process within five years before the
Forefaulture. 5. The effect of Infeftments of Property, and Possessory
Judgments thereupon, praescribe by the Defender`s possessing seven Years, by
virtue of an Infeftment, or Tack, from a third Party: so that thereby Actions
for Maills and Duties, or Removings, are excluded, and the Defender`s Right
cannot be taken, away but by Reduction, being clad with seven years lawful
Possession. 6. The legal Reversion of Apprisings which did expire or
praescribe, by seven years after the Date of the Apprising does now expire and
praescribe by the course of ten years, from the deducing thereof. And of
Adjudications, the Legal expires in five years, if they be special; and if
general, in ten years. 7. Summons of Error, or Reduction of Retours deduced
since 1617. do praescribe, if the Summons be not intented within twenty years
after the Service. 8. And lastly, Heritable Rights^ and all other Rights
praescribe, if not pursued, nor possessed by, during the space of forty years.

The Exception of Praescription of 40. years, is elided first by the Reply of
Minority, because that Praescription runs not against Minors: and therefore
there must be 40 years, besides the years of their Minority. 2. All
Praescription are elided by Improbation, because the Case of Falsehood is
excepted. 3. The Praescription of three years as to the quarrelling the Persons
of Inquest, runs not against Minors, or Absents forth of the Country. Neither
does the Praescription of the Legal of Apprisings, run against Minors. And if a
Major succeed to a Minor, he has a Year after his Succession to redeem. 4.

And last of all, Praescriptions are elided by Interruption, in the manner
prescribed by Law: whether the Interruption be by natural Possession, or civil
by intenting competent Process, or by legal Acts or Instruments.

Renounciation is a common Exception: whereby the Pursuer renouncing the Right
or Action, he (or any representing him,) is thereby excluded therefrom But in
Real Rights, singular Successors will not be excluded by Renounciation, unless
there had been a Process against the Party Renouncer, whilst he had Right,
whereby the matter became litigious, which is vitium inhaerens, descending to
singular Successors. But in all Personal Rights, the Renounciation of him who
has Right for the time, is valid, not only against his Heirs, but against
singular Successors.

Innovation is also a common Exception: whereby any new Right is given, not in
Security or Corroboration, but in full Satisfaction of a former Right; whereby
that former Right is extinct and there can be neither Action nor Defense
thereupon.

Transaction is also a common Peremptory Defense: for thereby the former Right
is either taken away in whole, or in part, and in so far only is the Defense
peremptory. For there can be no Transaction, (properly so called,) but where
the Right transacted is either innovat, or simply renounced, or quit for a Sum
of Money, or an onerous Cause, or at least abated.

Exceptio rei judicatae, is where the same Cause now pursued, has been judged
before, and decerned. For there is no new Process therea^ent can be sustained:
else there could be no end of Pleas. But this Exception is elided by several
Replies. As if the Pursuit be indeed for the same effect, but not super eodem
medio: as when the Person pursuing, pursues as Executor for a Debt, and the
Defender alleging that the Debt is Heritable, be as^olzied; if the Pursuer
thereafter enter Heir, and pursue super hoc titulo, the Absolvitor will not
exclude him. And sometimes, though the medium be the same, and have been
referred to the Defender's Oath, and he thereupon be assolzied; yet if Writ
after be emergent, that does not infer Perjurie, or contradict the Oath, but
proves more nor what the Defender knew, or remembered; it will not be excluded
by an Absolvitor upon the Oath: especially if the Deponent was not positve, but
to his Knowledge and Remembrance.

The Exception of Litiscontestation is rather a dilator, than a peremptor
Exception, because thereupon the Cause is not determined. But the Pursuer may
be thereby excluded from any other Process, without prejudice to him to insist
in that wherein lis est contestata: unless the new Pursuit be different from
the former, at least super diuerso medio.

All the foresaid common Exceptions are as well competent by way of Reply Duply,
Triply, or Quadruply, as by Exception; and may be libelled upon, as good
Reasons of Suspension, Reduction, or Declarator.

In all Processes whatsoever whether in ordinary Actions, or in Reductions, and
sometimes in Suspensions, Litiscontestation may be made. Which is done when
those Points which are to be proven or either part, are discussed and
determined, as to the Relevancy, and Competencie; and that is put to Probation
which will end or carry the Cause, for the Pursuer or Defender, according as
the Point shall be proven, or secumbed in. Whereupon there is an Act extracted,
deducing the Process, and Points sustained and admitted to Probation, and
likewise those that are repelled: which does contain the Libel, or Suspension,
the Compearance of the Parties, and the Production, and the Dispu^e of all
Parties compearing, and the Interlocutor of the Lords. But when all is
instantly verified, or needs no further Probation, there is no
Litiscontestation: which is sometimes in ordinary Actions, and frequently in
Suspensions and Advocations, when the Ordinary does at once, judge the
Relevancy and Probation. But Probation after Litiscontestation, must be advised
by the whole ^ords.

Litiscontestation may be against the Defender absent, and then the Libel is
only admitted to the Pursuer's Probation. Wherein, if he do cautiously libel,
he will libel that which may take off the Objections, compe^ent in Law, against
his Titles: as if they be holograph, or ancient and past Prescription; that
they are preserved by Minority, or Interruption, particularly libelling and
proving the same. Otherwise the Lords may stick to give him Sentence: or if by
inadvertency they do, the Sentence will be easily suspended, or reduced, unless
supplied as aforesaid. And therefore if the Defender appear not, the Pursuer
will call for the Libel, and insert what is necessary to make it effectual,
and make Litiscon^estation, and Probation accordingly.

When Litiscontestation is made part comparente, sometimes the whole
Objections and Defenses of the Defender are repelled, and the Summons is found
relevant, and admitted to the Pursuer's Probation. Sometimes the Defender`s
peremptory Exceptions, one or more, are found relevant, and admitted to his
Probation: which when they do import the verity of the Libel, the Pursuer is
liberat from Probation thereof. Otherwise the Defender propones his Defenses,
denying the Libel, or denying the Quan^^ties and Prices libelled. In which
case, by the Act of Litisconte^tation the Pursuer is ordained to prove his
Libel, and the Defender his Exceptions. For instance, if the Pursuit be for
Payment of a Debt, if the Defender propone his Defense upon a general
Discharge, not relative to any particular Debt, or if he do propone
Compensation; he does not acknowledge the Truth of the Libel, and so he may
deny the same: and if he prove either of his Defenses, or the Pursuer fail in
proving the Libel, the Defender will be assolzied. But if the Defender propone
an Exception of Payment, it does acknowledge, that the Debt was due: and
therefore the Pursuer needs not prove his Libel, but the Defender is to prove
his Defense; wherein if he succumbe, the Pursuer will prevail, without further
Probation.

In like manner, in a Pursuit of Spuilzie, if the Defender except upon lawful
Poynding, he does acknowledge the Libel, as to intromission with the
particulars in his Exception; but he may deny the rest, or he may deny the
Prices libelled, which therefore the Pursuer must prove. But if the Defender
omit to protest, That he acknowledges not the Qu^ntities and Prices, the
Pursuer will not be put to the proving thereof: but the Defense will be holden
as affirming the Libel. And if the Defender succumbe, he will not be heard to
quarrel the Prices or Quantities libelled, for want of Probation thereof.

As the Exception does sometimes acknowledge the Libel, and sometimes not; so
does the Reply sometimes acknowledge, or not acknowledge the Exception, as to
the Quantities or Prices; and the Proponer will yet be put to the proving
thereof. And the Duply is in the same case, as to the Reply, etc. So that
sometimes the Pursuer will have to prove his Libel and Reply, and the Defender
his Defense and Duply. For instance, in a Pursuit for Debt due by Bond, if the
Defender except upon Compensation, and the Pursuer reply upon a Discharge of
the Debt compensed on, and the Defender allege, That he has right to the Sum
(wherewith he would compense,) as Assigny, and if any such Discharge was, it
was posterior to his Intimation; there the Libel, Exception, Reply, and Duply,
must all be proven. And if the Pursuer succumbe in proving his Libel,
whatsoever be done in the rest, the Defender is assolzied. If the Pursuer prove
the Libel, and the Defender succumbe in proving his Exception; albeit the
Pursuer faill to prove the Reply, he carries the Cause. If the Pursuer prove
the Libel and Reply, and the Defender prove not both the Defense and Duply, the
Defender will be decerned.

In discussing of Processes before Litiscontestation, the Ordinary hears the
Advocats on both sides debate, and if the Point be clear, according to Law and
Custom, he decides. But if it be dubious or new, then he advises with the
Lords. If he decide, the terms he uses are, Sustains the Order, or the Title,
or Libel: or otherwise, Sustains the Alledgences against the same. And if the
Libel be irrelevant, or the Title insufficient, he assolzies simpliciter, or ut
libellatur. If he sustain the Libel, and proceed to the Defense, and find the
same relevant; the terms are, Sustains the Defense, or otherwise Repells the
Defense. And if he find the Reply relevant, and presupposing the Defense; then
he repells the Defense in respect of the Reply. And if the Defense did also
acknowledge the Libel, he assigns a Term to the Pursuer to prove the Reply, and
not the Libel. Or otherwise, he assigns a Term to prove the Libel and Reply. Or
if the Reply be elided by a Duply, presupposing the truth of the Reply, (as the
former Points did of the preceding,) then he assigns only a Term to the
Defender to prove the Defense and Duply: and so forth of the rest. And if he
resolve to advise with the Lords, his term is, you shall have the Lords Answer:
which he will seldom refuse, if the matter be doubtful; especially if the
Defender offer a Daller to be forefault, as an Amande, if his Alledgence be not
sustained.

Before an Interlocutor be reported, the Process is brought to the Ordinary,
who peruseth the same, and prepares it for the Lords. And either Party give
their Informations to the Lords containing the deduction and favor of the
Cause, and the Dispute, which they may enlarge by reasons in their Informations
as much as they please: but may allege no matter of Fact, by way of Defense or
Reply, but what was proponed at the Bar.

The Ordinary does the next Day, or soon after, relate the Cause, and repete
the Dispute to the Lords. And if he find any matter of Fact in the Parties
Informations, which was not proponed at the Bar, he either hears them again
upon it, or he reports and shows to the Lords, that it was not proponed. And if
they find any thing weighty therein, they will desire him to hear the Parties
upon it, either before Interlocutor, or after, as they see cause. Upon report
of the Dispute, the Points that any of the Lords think material, are stated and
ordered, and any of the Lords reason thereanent. And if they be not unanimous,
the Points whereupon they differ, go to the Vote. And then the Ordinary causes
call the Parties in the Outer-house, and reports the Interlocutor, (which is
minuted by the principal Clerk,) and declares what the Lords sustain or repel.
And immediately after, ordains the Defender to insist in his further Defenses,
or the Pursuer in his Replys: and so proceeds from Day to Day, to new
Interlocutors, until the Cause be fully discussed, either by Decree, or
Protestation, or Litiscontestation. And if either Party have omitted any thing,
upon their application to him, before the Sentence or Act be extracted, while
he sits without, he will hear them. And thereafter, if by Bill they represent
any new matter of moment, the same of course is appointed to come to the
Ordinary, and he will hear them thereupon. And if he refuse them, the Lords
upon hearing of the Bill, if they find cause, will ordain the Ordinary, or some
other, to hear it. Each Ordinary does also order the extending of Acts, whereof
either Party gets a Scroll before they be extracted. And if they differ, the
Ordinary determines the same according to the Minutes, and meaning of the Lords.
In all which hardly can any Party get hurt, but by their own negligence, or the
fault of the Clerks, who if they extract any thing unwarrantably, the Lords
will mend the same, even after it is extracted.

In discussing of Processes, it is ordinary for Parties not called, to compear
for their interest: but they will not be heard, till their Interest be
produced; and then they will be heard in the same manner, as if they had been
Parties in the Cause. There arises oftimes upon this occasion, the competition
of many Rights, which are mutually interchanged, and every one of the Parties
admitted for their interest, must see the Productions of all the rest. In which
case, the Lords do frequently ordain all Parties, to produce such Writs as they
will make use of in the Cause, with Certification that they shall not be heard
to produce any thereafter: which nevertheless extends only to such Writs as
they then have in their power. And then the principal Cause proceeds, and is
either referred to some of the Lords to be heard in the afternoon: or
otherwise, the Ordinary sees and compares the Productions of the Parties, and
at the calling of the Cause, he declares what he finds evident and clear, as to
the Preference. And then orders the Parties to dispute, allowing the second
Right to be first dispute, with that which he finds preferable; and which of
them prevails, the rest in order, to compete therewith until all be discussed,
and one only be preferred: or otherwise, some of them jointly, or some of them
primo loco, and others secundo loco, etc.

Competition of Rights, does also come in by Double Poinding: and that either
by way of Suspension, or Action; whereby the several Parties are cited to
produce their Rights, and to hear and see, it found and declared, who has the
best Right; that thereby the Parties liable, may be out of hazard.

The Action of Double Poinding, proceeds on a simple Summons, on six days. The
Suspension is like other Suspensions, but that it suspends the Right of all
Parties till it be discussed.

This is the ordinary way of discussing of Processes, by premitting the Point
of Iusti^ or Relevancy, and then admitting the Point of Verity to Probation,
according to what is found just: and not till it be found just, for frustra
probatur quod probatum non relevat. In the Probation, the benefit or burden
thereof is ordinarily assigned to one Party, without joint Probation. Whereupon
arises the frequent Debate, Who shall be preferred in Probation: especially
where the Alledgences are contrary. As if one offer to prove violently
spuilzied and taken away by force, the other Party alleges voluntarly
delivered and taken away by consent; the question will be, Who shall be
preferred in Probation? wherein the common Rule is, That where the Defense is
contrary to the Libel, he that is in libello is preferred. But even there, and
in all Cases, the most special and pregnant Probation is preferred. As in
Spuilzies, the Pursuer libels violence, the Defender offers to prove lawfully
poinded, which is contrary; yet being to be proven by Writ, ( viz. by the
Executions of the Poinding) the Defender is preferred. Thereafter, the Parties
are ordained particularly to condescend on the Circumstances, and sometimes on
the Witnesses Names, that the most special Condescendence, and the most
unsuspect ^ Witnesses may be preferred.

But in several Cases the Lords premit the Probation to the Discussing of the
Relevancy: and therefore, before Answer, ordain Witnesses ex officio to be
adduced. And where they see it dubious, who ought to be preferred in Probation,
they use before Answer to the Dispute; to ordain Witnesses to be examined hinc
inde, and such Writs and Evidents to be adduced, as either Party will make use
of. And then they advise the Relevancy and Probation together: and must not
admit new Probation or new Alledgences in Fact, competent before the Act; but
the Act before Answer stands, as an Act of Litiscontestation, in all Points,
and has the same Terms to prove, with Litiscontestation.

In Acts of Litiscontestation, not only the Points to be proven are determined,
but also the manner of Probation: which is either by Presumption, Writ, Oath of
Party, or Witnesses. Presumptions are not put to probation in the future, but
are cogno^ced in the very Act, and instantly verified; though from the
Probation it self, Presumption may arise. And therefore the manner of Probation
is ordinarily appropriat to Writ, Witnesses, and Oath of Party, and that which
is presumed, is said to need no Probation.

Presumptions are of three sorts, either juris and de jure, or juris, or
judicis. Praesumptio juris and de jure, is that which the Law determines and
presumes upon the Point of Right: which is so strong, that it is a full Proof,
and admits no contrary Probation. Unto which is reduced fictio juris, that
which the Law, for utilities sake, presupposes to be, and holds to be true,
though it be not. So the Heir is presumed to be one Person with his
Predecessor, and the Defunct's Possession is esteemed the Heir`s Possession,
whereby whatever was possessed by the Defunct, if it was not effectually
transmitted, is repute as possessed by the Heir, though he exercise no possessory
act either of body or mind thereanent. Most of our Certifications are founded
upon such Presumptions: as a Writ is improven for not production, upon this
Presumption, that the Defender keeps it up, because he knows it is forged;
and therefore it is declared to be forged. Which Presumption does not admit
contrary Probation. So a Partie`s being holden as confess`d is founded upon the
Presumption, that by his Oath, he could not deny the truth of what is alleged.
So the using of false Writs proprio nomine, without Protestation, expressing
the way how the Users came by them, is a Presumption of their being accessory
to the Forgery.

Praesumptio juris, is when the Presumption is acknowledged in Law, but
admits contrary Probation. So Dispositions of Movables, Tacks, etc. made to
a Rebell`s Bairns, Friends, or Servants, are presumed by Act of Parliament to
be fraudulent, and to the behoof of the Rebel: yet so as the contrary may be
proven, if any equivalent Cause be instructed. In like manner Dispositions of
Lands, etc. made by Persons Bankrupt, or insolvent, are presumed by Act of Par.
to be fraudulent, and in prejudice of Creditors, without an equivalent onerous
cause. And albeit in themselves, they bear expressly an onerous cause, either
generally, or particularly for Sums of Money, or Deeds done; yet when granted in
favor of conjunct and confident Persons, they are presumed to be without a
true onerous cause, and the Rights themselves, bearing the same, are not
trusted: albeit the contrary may be proven, by instructing the onerous cause,
for which they were granted.

Praesumptio judicis, called also praesumptio hominis, is that Presumption
which is not expressly in Law, but the just Deduction or Consequence, admitted
by the Judge. This Presumption does more easily admit contrary Probation: and
therefore such Presumptions are said, to transfer the onus probandi; that is to
say, they prove sufficiently for the Adducer, unless the contrary be proven, in
which case, presumptio cedit veritati, in comparison whereof it is said to be
but very similitudo, verisimilis veritas, or conjectura. And yet it is not
necessary, that either of the two Alledgences of the Parties, must be true; but
that which ought to be, is presumed, albeit it be not certain: according to the
Maxim of Law, quod inesse debet, inesse presumitur.

In all Summons and Acts, as there is a Will, or Command of the Judge; so there
ought to be a Certification, certifying what the Judge will do, if his Command
be not obeyed, as the sting in all Processes, without which they would be long
of coming to an Issue. For if nothing could be done, but the charging,
denouncing, and incarceration of the Party, (if he were found,) until he gave
Obedience, or declaring him Fugitive, or denouncing him Rebel, or Outlaw for
his Contumacy; little benefit would thence arise to the other Party, and the
contumacious Party might long stand out. And therefore more expedite
Certifications are invented, of which we have as many, as apposite, and as
effectual as any Nation whatsoever. Of which we shall adduce the prime
instances.

The first and most general Certification is, That the Lords will proceed to do
Justice. Whereupon when Defenders appear not, they do proceed to
Litiscontestation, and do admit Probation, and give Sentence, as if the
Defender did appear.

The Romans had no such Certification, and therefore unless the Defender were
compearing willingly, or by compulsion, they could do nothing, but (in some
Cases) put the Pursuer in Possession.

Neither can the English give any Sentence against a Party absent: but if he
compear not, they do no more, but give out an Outlawry against him, declaring
that since he will not obey Law, he shall not have the benefit of Law, in any
Case. As Judges in Criminal Causes in Scotland commonly do, if the Defender
compear not, they declare them Fugitive, which is Outlaw: whereby his Escheat
falls. But our Civil Certification is more equal and apposite: seeing thereby
the Lords in contumacious Defenders absence, do the same that they would if
they were present.

The next general Certification is, either in Summons or Acts, against Parties
cited to give their Oaths, with express certification, That if they compear not
and depone, they shall be holden as confess`d: that is, as if they compeared
and confessed that which is alleged against them. Which is a most usual
Certification, and concludes more Processes than all the other. It is also very
important, and will be hardly rescinded: and therefore it is not sustained,
unless it be particularly expressed, and unless the Party be cited by a
Messenger of Arms, and be personally apprehended, that so his contumacy may be
palpable.

The third ordinary Certification is, against Parties (who have intented any
Process,) to insist, with Certification, That if they insist not they shall
never be heard thereafter. Which is of great use; for thereby Defenders put
themselves to certainty, and are not obliged still to attend the motion of the
Pursuer, who may readily wait his opportunity of the infancy, or evil condition
of the Defender`s Heir, and insist against him when he is least able to defend
himself; and letting the Process sleep, may so continue it, were it never so
long. In opposition whereof, either this Certification, or a Declarator of
Right may be intented by the Defender, to determine the Cause, whilst he finds
himself in a capacity.

There is another Certification in the case, when the Lords by hearing any
Debate, do before answer, ordain the Writs by which either Party will prove
what they have alleged, to be produced; with certification, That they shall
not be heard thereupon thereafter: and that their Alledgence shall be holden as
not proponed. And more generally, at the entry of several Causes, especially in
the Competition of many ^arties, and many Rights, the Lords ordain all the
Parties to produce such Writs as they have in the Cause, with certification,
That they shall not be heard thereafter. But in regard the Terms of Production
are not granted so frequently, and so large as in other Cases; the Lords do
extend the Certification no further, than as to such Writs as the Parties have
in their hands, the time of ^he Certification. Whereupon they do sometimes
ordain the Parties to depone, and if not, if any Party produce and allege upon
a Writ, not produced before the Certification was admitted; if the
Certification be alleged against the same, it will be rejected. But if the
Producer offer to make faith, he had it not the time of the Certification, it
will be admitted.

Sometimes no particular Certification will be expressed, but the Act bear, With
Certification, etc. And the effect thereof is, that the Lords do admit
thereupon such Certification as is just, and ordinary in such Cases. But if
there be no ordinary Certification in such Cases, the Act is ineffectual. As
also other Acts wherein, through negligence, no Certification is expressed;
unless the fulfilling the Desire of the Act concern the Pursuer. In which case
he will get no Process, till he fulfill the same: which is equivalent to
Certification.

In stead of Certification, the Law sometimes allows Protestation: which
differs from Certification in this, that the Certification which is expressed
in the Summons, or Act, besides that which is not ordinary nor proper to be so
insert, is sometimes admitted by way of Protestation. And albeit it be free for
every Party to protest for what he pleases, yet only a few Protestations use
to be admitted; such as Protestations at the instance of Defenders, upon the
short Copies of Suspensions or Summons: wherein albeit there be no
Certification, That if the Pursuer compear not to insist the Defender shall be
freed from the Instance; yet the Defender`s Protestation, as being just and
ordinary, is instantly admitted, as effectually as if there had been a
Certification in the Summons, That if the Pursuer did not insist, he should
fall from that Instance.

Such is the Protestation lately introduced in favor of the Pursuer, whereby
upon the large Copy of the Summons, if the Defender refuse to produce the
Process, the Pursuer protests, That the Copy may be holden as a Principal, and
that the same may be holden as instructed, and proven, and Decree pronounced.
Which Protestation the Lords admit, in respect of the Contumacy of the
Defender's Advocate, who refuses to produce the Pursuer`s Process.

Such also is the Protestation of the Pursuer after Probation, at the
Conclusion of the Cause, whereby when the Defender has produced his Writs, or
Witnesses, conform to the Act of Litiscontestation, he protests, That he may be
admitted to produce no more, and that the Cause may be holden as concluded:
which Protestation the Ordinary admits, whereby the Cause is concluded; and
neither Party can use further Probation regularly. So the Lords will advise
whether the points whereupon Litiscontestation was made, be proven, or not
proven.

In other Cases either Party may protest what they please: but their
Protestation receives no present Answer. The greatest use it has is, that it
be not presumed those who protest, do acquiesce by their silence: nam qui silet
consentire videtur. And therefore when one of the Parties makes any such
Protestation, the other Party uses ordinarily to protest in the contrary: and
there is no Answer given to either of their Protestations: but they use to be
insert, unless they be clearly contrary to Law; in which case they will not be
suffered to be in^^rt. As if the Parties should protest, at the Sentence of the
Lords, for remede of Law, or should protest, That the Lords should not proceed;
these, being against their supreme Jurisdiction, will not be insert: but other
Protestations will. As if any Reason of Suspension be repelled, as incompetent
in a Suspension; the Suspender may protest, The same may be without prejudice
to him to use Reduction. Or if any Defense be repelled, as incompetent in the
first Instance; the Defenders may protest, That it be without prejudice to
them, to make use thereof in the second Instance^ by Suspension, or Reduction.
Or if any Right be reduced, or redeemed; the Defenders may protest, That it be
without prejudice to them of any other Right, whereby they may brook the Lands,
or thing in controversy. Which, is especially done when the Lords do not
express in the Sentence such Reservations, as oftimes they do; and though they
be omitted they are employed in the nature of the thing. But least the silence
of the Parties might import, they pretend no further, they may for their
further security protest.

Protestations are only competent, where Certifications, Defenses, Replys, or
Duply's are not competent. And therefore Protestations upon Copies as
aforesaid, and at the Conclusion of the Cause, and upon incompetency of
Defenses, Replys, Duplys, etc. are only competent. For if these other were
competent, Prote^tations were neither proper, nor effectual. As if when the
Defender`s Defenses, or some of his Reasons of Suspension are discussed; if
Protestation were made, That the Defender might be heard upon other Defenses,
or upon the Reasons not discussed; this Protestation, albeit insert, would be
of no effect, because contrary to Law, which obliges all Parties to propone all
the Defenses and Reasons, that they have, before Litiscontestation. And
therefore in the second Instance, new ones are repelled, as competent and
omited. So that to protest for liberty to omit, or add in a posterior Instance,
is against Law: and those Alledgences being competent in the first Instance,
ought to be proponed, not protested for.

Processes come in before the Lords in the second Instance, by Advocation or
Suspension: and both in the first and second Instance by Reduction. For
Reductions of Decreets or Acts are in the second Instance: but Reductions of
Rights, whereupon no Decree or Sentence has followed, are in the first
instance. Of these therefore in order.

The original of Advocations is this. Of old, Parties were allowed to appeal
from inferior, to superior Courts, when they conceived themselves to have
gotten wrong, which was called Falsing of Dooms. And so there lay an Appeal
from Barons to Sheriffs, and from Sheriffs to the Kings ordinary Council, in
whose place the College of Justice succeeded, and the Senators of which are
therefore designed Lords of Council and Session, from whom there is no Appeal
to King or Parliament. By these Appeals, Processes did stop, till the Appeals
were determined or deserted. And the Superior Court to which the Appeal was
made, did first determine the Appeal, whether been vel male appellatum. The
Cause was remitted to the Judge appeall'd from, unless the Appeal were
sustained; in which case the Judge appeall'd unto, proceeded in the principal
Cause: as is yet accustomed in most Nations. But Appeals have been of a long
time excluded in this Kingdom in any Case, and a far better Remedy introduced
in their place, by Advocation. For by Appeals Processes were stopped, at the
option and fancy of private Parties, which could not but increase animosity and
clamor.

Advocations proceed upon Supplication to the Lords, containing the special
Reasons for which the inferior Judge is incompetent, unequal or unjust: and
concluding that therefore the Cause ought to be advocat, or called from him,
and determined by the Lords, or other competent and unsuspect Judges. Which
Supplications do not pass of course, but are specially advised by the Ordinary
upon the Bills, who considers not only the Relevancy of the Reasons of
Advocation, but the Instructions thereof. For seeing the Party complaining, has
another Remedy, by Suspension, and Reduction; Advocation is not to be granted,
unless the Reasons be not only relevant, but instructed. In which the
Testificates of known Persons of Reputation, will be sufficient to obtain
Advocation, though not to determine the Cause. As if the Defender allege, That
he is not within the Jurisdiction, or that the Judge is of such relation to the
other Party, or that there is open enimity betwixt them: and in all Cases of
difficulty, the Ordinary advises with the Lords. And if any Party appear, he
will get a sight of the Bill of Advocation, and be heard thereupon: and oftimes
the Lords will warrant the Reasons of Advocation to be discuss`d upon the Bill,
and sometimes the principal Cause.

The Lords do sometimes prohibit any Advocation to pass, but in presentia,
during the sitting of the Session, or by three Lords met together in Vacance,
especially near the close of the Session: that Justice be not delayed, or the
inferior Judge discouraged, or prejudged.

The same Reasons, that were of old for Appeals, are now for Advocations. As
first, That the Cause belongs not to the inferior Court`s Jurisdiction: as when
Causes are advocat from Commissaries, as not being consistorial; or when any
inferior Court is proceeding to determine Declarators of Property, or other
important Rights, or the Competitions or Nullities thereof. Secondly, When the
Complainer is not within that Judge's Jurisdiction, but has his Domicile and
Residence elsewhere. Thirdly, When the Complainer is exempted from that Judge`s
Jurisdiction, or has the privilege of Advocation by Office, (as the members
of the College of Justice have by Statute, because of their attendence on the
Session.) And sometimes upon gross Inequality and Injustice, Exemptions are
granted to the Persons injured, not to be conveenable before that Judge.
Fourthly, If the Judge be nearly related to the other Party: whereof the Degree
is not determined, but in arbitrio judicis. It is certain if he be Father, or
Brother to the Party, he may be declined: and if he repel the Declinator,
Advocation will be granted, both upon Incompetency and Iniquity. For by Act of
Parliament, the Lords are declined, if they be of any of those Relations to the
other Party. Fifthly, If the Judge be a Party, or have any interest in the
Cause. Sixthly, If he have showen any malice, or enmity against the Complainer.
Seventhly, If he have committed any Iniquity, by repelling any relevant or
competent Alledgence, or sustaining that which is irrelevant, or incompetent,
against the Complainer.

These, or like Reasons of Advocation, being found relevant, and instructed;
Letters of Advocation are passed under the Signe^^ commanding the inferior
Judge to proceed no further, but to send the Process and all that has been
done therein, to the Lords: for which a Term is assigned. Which being past, the
Pursuer of the principal Cause, and Defender in the Advocation, gives in to the
Clerk a short Copy of the Advocation, and craves Protestation and Remit: which
is admitted of course by the Clerk, if none compear to produce the Advocation.
But if any appear, some Days after are assigned to him to produce, which is
marked by the Clerk upon the Copy: and being again called, with certification,
That if he do not then produce, Protestation will be admitted, and the Cause
remitted to the inferior Judge; at that time, if he produce not, Protestation
will be admitted.

If the principal Advocation be produced, the same is given up to the Defender:
against whom, if he do not return it within four Days, together with the Clame
before the inferior Judge, Protestation is admitted. But if he return it, the
same is enrolled in the Roll of Advocations, according to the Date of the
Return. And when it comes to be called by the Ordinary, the Pursuer of the
principal Cause produces his Clame, with the Copy of the Advocation, which was
returned; and craves Protestation, and Remit: which (if the Raiser of the
Advocation do not compear, or insist not in his Advocation) is accordingly
granted.

But if the Raiser of the Advocation compear, and insist, the Advocate for the
Pursuer of the Principal Cause, does briefly relate the Cause, and before what
inferior Court it was pursued, and craves it to be remitted: and the Advocate
for the Raiser of the Advocation, repetes his Reasons of Advocation, for which
he alleges the Cause ought to be advocat to the Lords; which stand mainly in
the Points before adduced.

The Reason of Advocation, upon Incompetency of the Judge, is most ordinary:
and that either in regard of a personal Privilege of the Party conveened, as
in the case of the Members of the College of Justice, who by Act of Parliament
have the privilege, that they may advocat their Causes from any inferior
Court, to the Lords; or in regard of the matter: so no inferior Judge is
competent to discuss the Nullities of any Right, neither are they competent to
Declarators of Escheat, and several other Actions. The Reason of Incompetency
may also be founded upon the Parties not being within the Jurisdiction.

All these Reasons of Incompetency are elided, by the Partie`s compearing and
proponing any Defense, except it were a Declinator. For by proponing any other
Defense, he acknowledges and homologates the Authority of the Judge: and
therefore cannot question the same, upon the point of Incompetency.

But if the Incompetency arise upon the matter in question, which did not not
appear at first, but appeared thereafter, upon the Debate of the Parties; as if
the Cause dipped upon the discussing and competition of different heritable
Rights; or if there arise a Debate upon the Nullity of any Right: in these
Ca^es, compearance, and acknowledgement of the Auctority, will not exclude the
Reason of Advocation.

The Reason of Advocation upon suspicion of the Judge, as too much interessed
in the one Party, or too much unfriend to the other; stands much in the
arbitrament of the Lords: the precise Degree of Consanguinity or Affinity, or
the acts of Enmity, not being determinat in Law. And it is the same in the case
where there are more Judges, and the Reason meets but with some of them: or
only with the Deputes, or some of them, or only with the Clerk.

When the Reasons of Advocation are dubious, sometimes the Pursuer of the
principal Cause, and sometimes the Ordinary, will offer to the Raiser of the
Advocation, to advocat of Consent; provided the Pursuer of the principal Cause,
will dispute the Cause instantly, or otherwise will dispute the same without
further sight of the principal Process, or extracting an Act of Advocation. For
when otherwise the Parties advocat of Consent, they are to do it when the Clerk
calls: and there must be an Act extracted upon the Consent.

If the Cause be advocat upon the Relevancy of the Reasons, the same must be
instantly instructed: and if they consist in facto, as the Residence of the
Party, the Affinity or Enmity of the Judge; the Raiser of the Advocation ought
either to have Witnesses instantly ready to prove, or at least Testificaets of
Persons above exception, and known to the Lords. For there the question is not,
for deciding of the principal Cause.

Advocations are hardly sustained, after Litiscontestation before inferior
Courts, unless it be upon the Reason of Iniquity, which is always sustainable,
and does sometimes with one breath, determine both the Advocation and principal
Cause.

The Cause being advocat, either of Consent, or by Authority of the Judge, the
principal Cause advocat, being seen by the Raiser of the Advocation, (thereby
become Defender of the Cause) together with the Act of Advocation extracted;
then it comes in as an ordinary Cause, in the first Instance. But the Defender
will be reponed, and heard upon any Defense, which was unj^stly repelled to
him, by the inferior Court, and upon any other he pleases: because one being
unjustly repelled, he was not obliged to propone any further.

The order in discussing of Suspensions is thus. The Charger against whom the
Suspension is obtained, after the Day of compearance in the Suspension is past,
gives a short Copy of the Suspension to a Clerk, and causes call it in the
Outer-House. If none compear for the Suspender, Protestation is admitted of
course.

If an Advocate compear for the Suspender, then the Clerk assigns a short Day
to him to produce the principal Suspension: and at that same time the Charger
may give him out the Charge, being the Decree, or Sentence, obtained. The
first Diet being come, the Clerk calls the Copy again, and assigns a second
shorter Time, with certification, That if he produce not, Protestation will be
admitted. And then calls the third time, and if the principal Suspension be not
produced, with the Charge (if it was given out in time) Protestation is
admitted. All which is marked by the Clerk, on the back of the Copy, and being
put in the Minut-Book and read, it may be extracted the next Day. But during
that time, the Production of the Principal, with the Charge to the Party,
Clerk, or Keeper of the Minut-Book, will stop the Protestation. The which order
is also used for getting back of Advocations, and seeing the principal Cause, if
it be given out when the Copy is first called.

The Charger's Advocate, at the giving out of the Charge, writes on the back
thereof, the D^y that it was given out, and sets his name thereto: and is not
obliged to receive the Suspension, unless the Suspender mark on the Process,
That he has seen and returned the same; but may take out his Protestation, as
if the Principal were not produced.

According to the Date, of the Return of the Charge, the Suspension is
enrolled: and when it comes to be discuss^d, the Cause being called, the
Charger produces the Copy marked by the Clerk, as aforesaid, and thereu^pon
craveth a Protestation from the Ordinary, which he obtains, if the Suspender^s
Advocate produce not. Yet sometimes, the Charger`s Advocate will hold the Copy
for a Principal, and the Suspender will repete his Reasons of Suspension: which
though they be not admittable upon a short Copy, in strict form, (because all
Reasons of Suspension, both principal and eked, ought to be set down in Writ,
and given to the Charger to see;) yet frequently, the Charger will rather
dispute the Cause, than take a Protestation, which is easily suspended again:
and therefore will answer to the Reasons, as verbally repeted.

But if the Suspender compear, and the Charger do not insist, he may produce
the principal Suspension, and crave the Letters to be suspended ay and while
the Charge be produced: which puts him in tuto, that no Protestation can be
taken upon the Copy, till the Charge be produced. Yea, if the Suspender extract
and produce the Charge, and refer his Reasons to the Lords; they will advise
the same: and if they find the Reasons relevant, and proven, will suspend the
Letters simpliciter. In which case, the Decree of Suspension is as other
Decreets in absence; and may be reduced upon a Summons of Reduction: wherein
the Lords will reconsider the Reasons, and hear the Parties debate thereupon;
and may recall what they formerly did, albeit super eisdem deductis: which they
cannot do in Decreets upon compearance. But when the Defender is absent, the
Lords do not so accurately consider the Cause, seeing there is a Remedy: and
likewise because, albeit they find the Reasons relevant, as before; the Party
may elide the same by relevant Answers and Duplys.

If the Charger compear, and also the Suspender, and the principal Suspension
is produced; then the Charger does briefly repete his Charge, or Decree
suspended, and declares what he insists in. And if there be any thing general,
he uses to give in a Condescendence in writ, at the beginning, to be seen with
the Charge; which therefore is called the special Charge. And if the Charge
have in it many Members, he declares what Points he insists in primo loco: and
if he do not, the Suspender may insist upon any Reason of Suspension he
pleases, against any of the Points.

The Suspender in repeting his Reason, should condescend by the number, what
Reason it is; and whether it be libelled or eked. For Suspenders may add or eke
to their libelled Reasons, if they will. So that if the Reason they repete, be
neither eked nor libelled, in strict form, it may be repelled: or if the eked
Reason has not been at first produced, and seen, with the Suspension, it ought
not to be received. Yet many times the Ordinary will indulge that favor, and
cause the Charger either answer it instantly, or take it up till a Day, to see:
which he may do, without expunging of the Cause out of the Roll; but may call
the Cause again at the Day appointed. And if the Charger has seen the Reason,
may proceed.

In like manner, Reasons of Suspension ought to be instantly verified by Writ,
unless they be referred to the Partie`s Oath: in which case, the Charger's
Procurators, to hasten the Process, will take a Day to produce the Charger to
give his Oath. But if the Reason of Suspension be founded upon a Writ, which is
not the Suspenders own Writ; as when Cautioners suspend upon Discharges granted
to the principal Debtor: the Suspender will get a Term to prove; as he will,
when the Reasons of Suspension consist in facto, and are to be proven by
Witnesses.

The first point of Debate in Suspensions is, upon the Relevancy, and
Verification of the Reasons. The next point is, upon the Competency of the
Reasons. For many Reasons are competent by way of Reduction, that are not
competent by way of Suspension; because Suspension stops the Execution of a
Decree already obtained: and therefore the Execution should not be delayed,
except upon Reasons relevant, and a short Probation; but the Execution ought to
proceed. And if the Decree whereupon Execution passed, be reduced; all that
has been taken away by the Execution, will be recovered. So a Reason upon
Minority and Laesion, is not receivable by way of Suspension, but by Reduction.
Neither a Reason upon Inhibition, Interdiction, Iniquity, Nullity; or upon any
Clause irritant, not being declared; (albeit it bear to take effect without
Declarator) except in few Cases.

If the Reason of Suspension be sustained, then the Charger propones the Answer
to the Reason; which is so termed, to difference it from Defenses proponed in
ordinary Actions: because the Reason of Suspension is a Defense in the
principal Cause, and the Answer is a Reply thereto. The Answer being proponed,
is first debated as to the Relevancy, and Competency thereof: but it needs not
be instantly verified, because the Charger may delay himself. Many things are
not competent by way of Answer, which are relevant: as upon Interdictions,
Inhibitions, Minority, and most Nullities, and Clauses irritant, and Failzies;
which require Reduction. But if the Suspender have a Reduction, and will hold
the Production thereof satisfied; he may repete the Reasons by way of Answer,
if coincident with his Reasons of Suspension. If the Answer be sustained, the
Suspender may propone his Reply, which does not consist in any Alledgence
against the Relevancy or Competency of the Answer; but in some distinct Writ,
Clause, or Fact, eliding the Answer, in the same way as the Answer did elide
the Reason: and so the Charger insists in his Duply, and the Suspender may
insist in his Triply, and the Charger in his Quadruply, etc.

Albeit the Suspender be obliged to verify his Reasons of Suspension
instantly, yet he needs not instruct his Reply: because that arises upon the
Charger's Answer, and he will get a Term to instruct the same, or his Quadruply.

Some Reasons of Suspension, do not conclude to suspend the Letters
simpliciter, and so take away the Decree suspended for ever, but to suspend
the same for a time; and then the Decree of Suspension bears, The Lords
suspend the Letters a^ and while, etc. Otherwise (when the Reasons conclude so,
and are sustained) The Lords suspend the Letters simpliciter.

If in discussing the Suspension, there be nothing admitted to be proven in the
future, then the De^reet of Suspension follows: which is the common name both
of Decreets in favor of Suspenders, and of Decreets in favor of Chargers,
whereby the Lords find the Letters orderly proceeded, either simply, or ay and
while such a thing be done. And sometimes the Lords suspend the Letters for a
part, and find the Letters orderly proceeded for the rest.

If any Point be admitted to be proven, either of the Reasons of Suspension,
Reply, Duply, etc. whether it be in favor of on of the Parties only, or of
both, when they have different Points to be proven; then Litiscontestation is
made, and an Act must be extracted, which is an Act of Litiscontestation. But
ordinarily in Suspensions there is a present Decree.

In all Reductions there are several things different from ordinary Processes:
for thereby Decreets, Acts, or other Rights are craved to be reduced or
rescinded either upon Nullities therein, or upon Reasons in facto, or other
Rights eliding the same, albeit of themselves they be not null. So that
whatsoever is competent as a reason of Suspension, is much more competent as a
Reason of Reduction: albeit many things be not competent by Suspension, which
are competent by Reduction. And therefore when that occurrs, Suspenders use
with the Suspension to raise a Reduction, that when the Suspension comes to be
discussed, those things that are not competent by Suspension, may yet be
received in the Suspension, because of the Reduction. Especially if the
Reduction be seen, and the Pursuer hold the production satisfied by the Charge.
Then repeting his Reason of Suspension and Reduction as coincident, he will get
the same Terms in both. But if he will not hold the production satisfied by the
Charge, then he must debate the Reason of Suspension alone: and if they be not
found competent, and sufficiently instructed; the Letters will be found orderly
proceeded in the Suspension, reserving the Reduction as accords. And if the
Reduction be seen, and be probable to be soon ready, and upon relevant Grounds;
then the Decree upon the Suspension will be suspended to be extracted for a
time, that in the mean while the Suspender may insist in his Reduction: which
sometimes is prorogat upon Supplication as the Lords see cause. And when the
Decree of Suspension is extracted, if there be Reduction depending; the
Suspender does oftimes obtain a second Suspension, that he may conclude his
Reduction, but the giving or extracting the second Decree of Suspension is
seldom delayed upon a Reduction, which was either not rised, or not ready, the
time of discussing the first Suspension.

In Reductions the Will commanding the Defender to be cited, is put in the
first place; and then the Writs called for to be reduced, in the next: and
last, the Reasons of Reduction, (which with the Writs called for, are left
blank ordinarily at the raising of the Reduction, and filled up afterward,
before it be given out to be seen) containing such Reasons as the Pursuer
knows, relating in partic^lar to the Writs called for, and such other general
Reasons as commonly may be alleged against any Writ; as wanting Witnesses, or
the Designation of them, or wanting the Designation of the Writer, or being
vitiat in the Date, or other Substantials; which are libelled, mainly, to
compel the Defender to produce: because he is obliged to produce no Writ, but
such against, which there is a Reason libelled. But after the Writs called for
are produced, the Pursuer uses to cut the Summons, and to libel such Reasons
as he sees thence emergent: whereupon the Dispute follows.

But because Certifications upon Reductions alone, do only conclude the Writs
called for, to be reduced ay and while they be produced, which will be
sufficient until the Decree of Reduction be reduced, and till in the Reduction
the Writs reduced, be produced, (for till that time, no use can be made
thereof, against that Right whereupon they were reduced;) and because the
Certification in Improbations is far more absolute, and strong, bearing That
the Writs called for shall make no faith in Judgment, but shall be repute as
false and fenzied, because they were not produced, therefore in the same Libel,
Reduction and Improbation are frequently joined, whereby all the Writs called
for, have a general Reason of Falsehood libelled against them. Which Reason of
Falsehood may not be eiked in the Reduction, but the Improbation must be
libelled upon a Bill passed with the concourse of His Majesty's Advocat as in
crimine falsi.

The calling upon the Copy of Reductions, and obtaining Protestations by the
Defender, is alike as in other Process. And when the Pursuer compears, if the
Defender be absent, the Clerks calling the Summons of Reduction, do admit
Certification of course: and if compearance be made, the Reduction with the
Titles, Grounds, and Instructions thereof, are given out to the Defender's
Advocat. And if they be not returned in due time, the Pursuer causes call upon
the large Copy, to reproduce the Process, against such a Day, and then assigns
another Day, with Certification; and then admits Certification. Which may be
extracted within twenty four Hours after it is read in the Minute-Book, unless
the Process be reproduced. And that Decree is the strongest of any of that
kind, because Decreets of Certification in Reductions and Improbations, require
no Probation, but are granted upon the contumacy of the Defender, who refuses
to produce. And therefore that Certification is intended to force them to
produce, since otherwise the Right will be reduced and improven, and be holden
as false and fenzied.

When Reductions are seen, returned, and enrolled, at the calling thereof by
the Ordinary, the Pursuer`s Advocat does shortly relate his Title, and the
Writs he calls for to be reduced, and improven generally, or particularly, and
then craves Certification contra non producta. The Defender`s Advocat may also
relate the Cause, and does then propone his Defenses against the Executions,
the Pursuers Title, or upon the Interest of either Party, or alleges, That
all Parties interessed are not called, and urges the Pursuer particularly to
condescend on the Writs called for, and debates whether he has interest by his
Title produced, to call for them, either for reducing, or improving of them.
Where there arises many important Debates, which being discuss^d, the Defender
takes a Term to produce, and sometimes the Term is assigned Reserving all the
Defenders Defenses against the Interest of the Party, and the Alledgences
against the Production: which Reservation continues till all the Terms of
Production be run. And when Certification is granted contra non producta, if
the Defender produce any thing, he will then be heard to dispute. Why he ought
to produce no further: and that not only from the Interest of the Pursuer,
whereby he cannot call for any other Writ than what is produced; but also upon
the Ground, That the Defender has produced sufficiently, to exclude all Rights
produced by the Pursuer. In which Case the Lords will sometimes hear the
Parties debate their Rights, even before the Production be closed: albeit it be
more ordinary, and regular, that the Defender should produce what he can upon
his hazard, and Certification should be granted against the rest. So that all
the Writs whereby the Defender can defend himself, being in the field, the
Dispute may be clear, and entire: which otherwise may be drawn out into a very
long endurance. Seeing the Defender, if it be found that he has not produced
sufficiently, may still drop in one single Writ, and renew the Debate
thereupon, and allege he has now produced sufficiently, and make as many
Disputes as he has single Writs, contrary to the intent of this kind of
Process, which is to force Defenders to produce all they have, before they
begin to Dispute. But the Defender will not be heard after the first additional
Production, before Certification: but if what he then produces, does
unquestionably elide the Pursuers Production, he will be assolzied. But if the
matter remain any ways dubious^ the Lords will rather observe the ordinary
Form, by concluding the Production first, and then falling upon the Reasons of
Reduction.

Before the Act of REGULATION there were two Terms allowed in Reductions and
four in Improbations for production of the Writs called for. After the first
Term of Production was come, and the Act extracted, the Pursuer's Advocats
caused the Clerk call thereupon, to satisfy the desire of the Act, and he upon
calling it, assigned a Day for that purpose: and after that called the second
time, and assigned some Diets more, with Certification. But he could go no
further, till the Act was called by the Ordinary, who assigned a second Term,
whereupon a second Act was extracted. The Ordinary upon calling the second Act
in the same manner as the first, was accustomed to assign a third Term, which
being come, and a third Act extracted and called as aforesaid, if the matter
were of consequence, and concerned the Right of many Lands, and that the
Defender would take a fourth Term to close the Production of his own consent,
the Ordinary did give him it: otherwise he would grant Certification contra non
producta conditionally, That what the Defender produced betwixt and such a day
should be received. Which favor was only granted least the Parties and
Advocats should be surprised. But since the Act of Regulation, there are only
two Terms to produce in Improbations, and one in Reductions: which must be
assigned by the Ordinary.

Reductions, unless when they are coincident with Suspensions, are to be
discussed as to the Production in the Outer-House: but because of their
importance, they are privileged only to be discuss`d in the Inner-House, as to
the Reasons of Reduction, unless the Lords upon Supplication grant Warrant to
the Ordinary to hear and discuss the same. And therefore when the Production is
closed, and the Certification concluded, either by the Pursers holding the
Production satisfied with what is produced, or by extracting the Certification
contra non producta; the Cause is again called. but the Defender may propone
his Defenses against the Production, which were reserved in initio litis,
before Certification be extracted, or if he insist not therein, when the
Pursuer repetes his Reasons of Reduction, the Defender will refer the same to
the Lords. And unless there be a Warrant to hear the Cause extra, the Ordinary
will only make a Great Avisandum to both Parties to be ready, to dispute the
Reasons when the Lords call: and in the mean time, ordain the Defender to see
his own Production in the Clerks hands, as he will be served. But if there be a
Warrant to hear the Cause, he will give the Defender some time to revise his
own Production in the Clerks hands, and be ready at the next Calling. This is
called a Great Avisandum in opposition to the ordinary Avisandum, whereby the
Ordinary upon any dubious Point returns ^his Answer to the Advocats, That he
will give the Lords Answer, that he will advise with the Lords.

The main Defense competent in Reduction besides those which are common to all
other Actions, upon the Executions and Order, are first, upon the Pursuers
Title and Production, That it cannot give him any interest to reduce, or
improve any of the Writs called for. And if his interest be sustained, then the
Defense runs upon registrat Writs. If they be registrat in the Books of Council
and Session, ^he Defender alleges, No Certification, because he condescends
upon the time of the Registration, whereby the Pursuer is obliged to search the
Register, and to insist against the Clerks to produce the principal Writs
r^gistrat. But if they be registrat in inferior Courts, Certification will be
granted, unless the Clerk of the Court be called. But if he be called, his not
compearing, or not producing, is upon the hazard of the Defender: and the
condescending on the Date of the Registration, will not be sufficient in that
Case; but the Defender upon his own peril, must search for the principal, and
produce them. But if the Writs alleged registrat in the Books of Session, be
not found therein, according to the Condescendence; Certification will be
admitted against the same.

There is also an ordinary Defense against the Production of Apprisings, That
the Charter and Seasin following thereupon, are produced; and that before the
year 1624. Apprisings were left at the Signet, as Warrants thereof: so that no
Certification can be granted against such. Neither will Certification be
granted against the Executions of Warnings, or other Executions of Summons,
which are small inconsiderable Papers, easily lost) if Reduction or Improbation
be intented long after obtaining of Decreets. But the Registration of Seasins
will not stop Certifications against them, because the principal Seasin is not
left at the Register. The like holds in Reversions, Assignations and Fikes
the^eto, and in Writs registrat during the Usurpation, when the principals were
given back to those that registrat them. But the chief Debate anent Production
is, about the general Clause, whereby it is craved that the Defender may
produce all Writs and Evidents made and granted by the Pursuer`s Predecessors
and Authors of, and concerning the Lands and Rights in question, As to which it
is alleges, No Certification against Writs made by the Pursuer, and his
Authors, unless his Right and Progress from these Authors be produced: which is
sustained, and the Certi^ication so qualified. Albeit it be sometim^s debated
that the Pursuer being Infeft, and in Possession of the Lands; especially if he
can allege, That he has produced a Progress of forty y^ars time, which by
the Act of Prescription 1617. if clad with Possession uninterrupted during that
time, makes an absolute Right, against all deadly; it seems to give interest
to all for, and reduce the opposite Rights made by whomsoever, whether the
Pursuer show that he has Right from the Authors thereof, or not: especially
since the Act of Parliament 1617.

It uses also to be alleged, No Certifi^ation against Writs made to the
Defenders, and their Authors, unlefs these Authors, or some representing them,
were called: which the Lords will sustain, because no man is obliged to dispute
his Author's Right, unless he be called. But it will s^ffice to call his
apparent Heir: and the Rights belonging to the Defenders may be produced,
al^eit they be not actually entered Heirs, or infest. And therefore the general
Clause is sustained as to All Writs and Rights granted to the Defenders and
their Predecessors to whom they may succeed jure sanguinis, or against All
Writs granted in favors of their Authors, and in favors of these that their
^uthors might r^present jure sanguinis, if the Authors, or any that do, or
might represent them be called. But Certification will not be admitted against
Writs granted by the Pursuer's Predecessors, except such Predecessors to whom
he is actually served Heir, immediately, or by progress.

It uses also to be alleged, that no Certification can be granted against the
Writs called for, but such only against which a Reason is libelled: which is
taken off when improbation is included. Because that Reason, That all the Writs
called for, are forged false and fenzied, reaches all: and where Improbation
is not libelled, the common Alledgence upon Nullities, or the like, uses to be
insert. And if a Reason be libelled that may reach them, the Pursuer is not
obliged to dispute, Whether the Reason be relevant ot not. And therefore as the
Nullities upon the Subscription of original Rights, so generally Nullities of
registrat Writs are libelled, as being Acts or Decreets extracted contrary to
the Warrant of the Judge.

There uses also incident Diligences to be raised, and produced to stop
Certification. Which incident Diligences are Summons of Exhibition against the
Havers of any of the Writs called for; especially against the Defenders
Superiors, Authors, and others. For albeit the Superior, and other Authors
might be called; yet if they compear not, the Defenders compearing ought not to
lose their Rights. And therefore Law allows them time to use Diligence for
recovering of their Rights, not only during the Terms of Produ^tion, but also
ay and while the Incident be discussed.

But the Incident will seldom be sustained, for recovering the Defenders own
Writs: because without consideration of the Dependence of the Process, he had
sufficient interest to pursue the Exhibition, and Delivery of these; unless
they were common Writs, of the Defender's Lands and Rights, and of other Lands
and Rights, the custody whereof did not belong to the Defender, by the
agreement of Parties, or because he has the lesser Interest: or unless the
Defender be, or has been minor, and the Writs in the hands of his Tutors, or
Curators. So as it is the Defenders fault that he has not his own Writs: and
therefore cannot thereby delay the Pursuer, but must content himself with the
ordinary Terms of Production.

If the Terms of Compearance in the Incident be not past before the Term of
production in Reductions, or the first Term in Improbations; it will not be
sustained, nor stop the course of the Action. But if the Incident be raised and
execute debito tempore, and all Solemnities and Formalities exact therein, it
will be sufficient: but in the mean time the ordinary Terms will proceed, not
only for the Writs for which the Incident is sustained, but specially for all
other Writs called for. For it were against reason, that after the Incident is
ended, any Terms of Production as to these Writs should then be demanded.

In discussing the Reasons of Red^ction there is little singular from ordinary
A^^ions. For the Reasons are in effect the Libel, and as in any particular
Libels concluding either against diverse W^^^s, or against the same Right super
diuer^^s ^ed^^^. And therefore the Defender's Ex^cep^ions against the Reasons^
are not designed an Answer as in a Suspension, but ^ Defense whereunto the
Pursuer replys, the Defender duplys, etc. until the Points be discussed and
Litiscontestation be made.

The Pursuer may insist against any Writ he pleases, primo loco: and upon any
Reason may make Litiscontestation, and may obtain Decree; and thereafter may
insist against the rest of the Rights. But if he make no preference, the
Defender may propone his Defenses against any of the Reasons of Reduction, he
pleases to choice first.

Upon the discussing of the Reasons of Reduction, Litis^on^^station is never
made for proving any thing by Writ, as the progress of any Right: because the
Certification contra non producta, cuts off all other Writs, but such as are
produced. So that whatever can be alleged upon Writ is instantly verified.

Yet Litiscontestation may be made for proving Points of Fact, as the proving
of Minority, Interruption by possession, Deeds of homologation, and offers,
which may be proven by Oath of Party, or by Witnesses.

Thus Litiscontes^ation is cleared in all kinds of Processes: and it is the
main Point in all of them, fixing the same, and ordering, not only the ^atter
to be proven, but the manner and Terms assigned for Probation.

After Acts of Litiscontestation are extracted, both Parties are in tuto till
the Term pass: if they do take out Diligences for proving the Points admitted
to their Probation; whether it be for exhibition of Writ, for proving of Points
found probable by Writ, or for citing the Parties to compear and depo^e upon
Points referred to their Oaths, with Certification to be holden as co^fess^d,
if they compear not. For albeit in discussing of Suspensions or Advocations^
Chargers do not put Suspenders, or Raisers of Advocation, to ^ake Terms to cite
them, which would give them delay, but their Advocat^ do take the shortest
Terms they can, to produce them to depone; yet in other Cases, when any P^int
is referred to a Partie's Oath, he must be cited by ^ Messenger at Arms,
personally apprehended, with Certification to be holden as ^onfest. And if the
Point to be proven be by Witnesses, Diligences are granted, to compel the
Witnesses to compear. For which there were many Terms granted, and more to the
pursuer (who wa^ not presumed to delay himself) than to the Defender; which
were in the way of Letters of four Forms^ the first being only a Citation to
compear and bear Witness, the second a Citation with certification that Letters
of Horning would be direct, the third a Horning, the fourth a Caption^ But now
these being long out of use in any Case, there are only two Diligences granted
against Witnesses, either for the Pursuer or the Defender; the first by
Horning, the second by Caption.

The Diligence for production of Writs to prove, are either ordinary or
incident. Ordinary Diligences are competent to Part^es, even for recovering of
their own Writs^ but incident Diligences are for recovering of Writs belonging
to others^ at least are in the hands of T^to^^ and Curators. For when Parties
are to prove by other ^ens Writs they have no Title^ (...) them exhibit the
same^ but incident^^ as they may be made use of in ^^oces^^^. And therefore
they are called i^^ident Diligen^es, being in the tenor of an Exhibition of
Writs for in^tructing any Point of Right, or Fact.

Incident Diligences were formerly most tedious, expensive, and wearisome to
Parties. For the user thereof might, for proving that the Party cited had the
Writs he called for, make use of Witnesses; and thereby had four Terms to cite
the Witnesses. And if thereby he obtained Decree of Exhibition, he had Terms
against the Havers, by Horning and Caption, and several Terms also against
Magistrates to put the Caption in Execution. All which Defenders were ready to
pretend necessary, when they knew there was nothing to be found, and did it
only to procure delay.

But by the Act of Regulation these Delays and Pretenses are much cut off. For
as the Subjects in every Society are obliged to promove Justice, by bearing
witness upon their Oaths, so are they obliged to depone, whether they have any
Writs that may prove the thing in controversy, and if they acknowledge the
having thereof; they ought to exhibit them ad modum probationis. Therefore
incident Diligences do now proceed by Horning against the alleged Havers,
charging them to appear and depone whether they have the Writs called for, and
to produce them in so far as they have them: and if they obey not the Charge of
Horning, Letters of Caption are direct to incarcerat them, till they depone,
and exhibit what they acknowledge.

There be three sorts of Oaths: Oaths of Verity, Oaths of Calumny, and Oaths in
litem. Oaths of Verity do affirm or deny, the truth of the point refered
rhereto: wherein if the Deponent deny, he may either do it simply, or
qualifica^e, so far as he knows or remembers; in which case his Oath will not
exclude other Probation. But if his Oath be affirmative, he may not so qualify
the same.

Oath of Calumny does only require the Party to depone, That he does not
calumniously allege any Point, knowing it not to be true: but that he believes
it to be likely. And if by this Oath, he do not so assert the Point offered
thereto, or be holden as confessed for not deponing; it is a sufficient Probation
against him. There is not so much consideration to be had in the Oath of
Calumny, of the Justice of any Point, which the Judge should determine^ but of
the Partie's opinion of the verity thereof. For by our Custom Oaths of Calumny
are not taken, till the Lords sustain the Relevancy. Nor are Pu^suers put to
depone de calum^ia upon the whole Libel, before it be discuss^d. If the Party
be present, whose Oath is craved upon the Libel, or Alledgance, he must either
depone, or be holden as confessed: and if absent, he may be cited by a Messenger,
with that Certification Which goes on as a distinct Process.

Advocats are also put to depone de calumnia, that they do not invent their
Alledgances, but were truly so informed.

When Witnesses are allowed to prove, the Act bears, those Points in which they
are allowed to prove, To be pr^^^^ pr^ ^^ at ^^rt. For by our Law, Witnesses
are not ad^itted to prove matters of importance, where Writ ^^eth^ and may be
interpo^^d to secure against ^erjury, and as a penalty upon the negligence of
these who might have ma^e ^fe of Write, and did not. As the Roman^ did exclude
naked Pactions, without Stipulation; so Witnesses cannot prove the lending or
delivery of Money, above an hundred pou^^ Scots. And they can in no case prove
Promises, Commands, or Warrants. Neither can Witnesses be taken to take away
Writ, except as to delivery of Victual.

The Terms of Probation being come, and bygone, either Party against whom any
Point is to be proven, causes the Clerk call the Act of Litiscontestation, and
the Advocats therein mentioned, and intimats to the parties to satisfy the
Desire of the Act; and thereafter the Act is called by the Ordinary, before
other Causes be discussed.

The Act having been first intimat by the Clerk, and thereafter called by him
before the Ordinary, the Advocats therein mentioned are called to the Bar, and
then the Pursuer's Advocat craves, That the Term may be circumduced: and
ofttimes much time is spent in relating of the Cause, and Tenor of the Act;
especially by the Defenders Advocats, who many times have need to bring
themselves in remembrance of the Cause by speaking of it: for avoiding whereof,
The Sub-clerk who calls the Act should peruse it, and be in readiness to relate
to the Ordinary in a word, what is the Point to be proven: which may be done
without so much as repeting the Process, but only the kind of the Action, and
then whether the same, or a Defense Reply, or Duply was admitted, reading the
interloqutory words of the Act, which expresses what was admitted to Probation.

The ordinary terms accustomed in such Cases are, that the Advocats who cause
call the Act craves, That the Term may be circumduced, or That certification
may be granted, or specially, That the Party may be holden as confessed, if that
be the certification.

Likewise the Pursuer causes call the Act when any Defense, Duply, or
Quadruply is admitted to the Defender's Probation. In which Case he craves, The
Term to be circumduced against the Defender. As also, if the Pursuer be to
prove the Point by the Defender's Oath, then he causes call the Act and
craves, The Defender to be holden as confessed.

If the Point, whether it be the Reply, or Triply, be to be proven by the
Pursuer, then the Defender calls the Act and craves, The Term to be circumduced
against the Pursuer. Or if the Defender be to prove any thing by the Pursuer's
Oath, then he craves, The Pursuer to be holden as confessed. But if there be
Points to be proven hinc inde, as if the Defense do not acknowledge the Libel;
then if the Pursuer call the Act, albeit the Defender call not at the same
time, yet he will allege, That Certification cannot be admitted, until the
Pursuer prove his own Libel, and prove the Quantities, or Prices: which will be
either granted, or at least no Decree can be granted, till the Pursuer's part
be proven; and whatever the Defender produces medio tempore, will be admitted:
but regularly Certification should not be admitted. The same holds in other
Points of the Process, to be proven by the Defender, when the Defenses do not
acknowledge the Points to be proven by the Pursuer. But if the Defense
acknowledge not the Libel, nor the Reply the Defense; then if the Pursuer call,
and renounce Probation as to his Libel, he may crave the Term to be circumduced
for not proving the Defense, though he prove not the Reply, that being only
necessary to be proven in case the Defense be proven. As if the Defense be
Compensation^ and the Reply be Recompensation or discharge of that Debt,
whereupon the Compensation is called; if the Pursuer prove the Debt, he may
crave the Term to be circumduced against the Defender for not proving the Debt,
whereupon he craves Compensation, albeit the Pursuer prove not the Reply. In
this case also the Defender may crave the Term to be circumduced against the
Pursuer, for not proving of his Libel, albeit the Defender prove not his
Defense. But if the Pursuer adduce Probation, or use Diligence for proving of
the Libel, the Defender cannot crave the Term to be circumduced against the
Pursuer, for not proving his Reply, till the Defender prove his own Defense.
The like holds in the Duply, or in any other Point.

The Term may be circumduced, and yet no Decree pronounced. As if the Pursuer
have adduced probation of his Libel, Quantities, and Prices not acknowledged by
the Defense, and renounced Probations, he may crave the Term to be circumduced
against the Defender; to the effect the Cause may be concluded and advised.

In Circumduction of the Term, or granting of Certifications, the Ordinary
uses to do it conditionally, That what shall be produced betwixt and such a
time, shall be received: (especially if the Defender's Advocat declare, that
the Writs called for, are not at present in his power, but that he expects the
same) the time of which Qualification is in the discretion of the Ordinary, who
will give longer time, if any impediment or hinderance appear. Item if the
Point be to be proven by Oath of Party, and at calling of the Act, the Advocat
for the Party who is to give his Oath, produce Testificats of his Sickness or
Infirmity, or other necessary obstacle or impediment: and therefore craves a
further Term, or Commission, which will be granted, if the Testimony be upon
Conscience from known Persons; especially Ministers, and Physicians. Especially
if that obstacle was not known to the Partie's Advocat, when Litiscontestation
was made, but emergent, and new come to Knowledge. And though it be not
sustained, yet if there be any probability therein, the Term will be
circumduced conditionally to such a Time, that the Party holden as confessed may
compear and depone. And these conditional Circumductions the Lords, upon
Supplication, do oftimes prorogat, as they see Cause.

In posterior Diligences, there is only Warrant granted to cite such Witnesses
as were in the former Diligence, unless there be a Warrant for it by the Lords,
upon the emergency of the notice of further Witnesses, or the Death, or Removal
of others before cited: and regularly no more than twenty four Witnesses can be
adduced for the same Points.

Witnesses will be received upon the very Day of compearance assigned for them:
and they are brought judicially to the Bar, and the Parties being also called
to the Bar, their Oaths are taken by the Ordinary, who may hear and discuss the
Objections made against them, or may refer the Objections till the afternoon,
to be received by those who receive and examine the Witnesses. Who, if any
Debate arise upon any Objection, will ordain the Witnesses to attend the next
Day, and in the mean time will advise with the Lords thereane^t. In some cases,
also Witnesses are sequestrat, that neither party may have access to them, that
so they may be more free, and their Testimonies without corruption.

Objections against Witnesses as all other Dilators, must be instantly
verified; Witnesses not being obliged to attend, till the verity of the
Objection be proven. Nor are two Litiscontestations admittable, regularly, in
one Cause. Therefore Reprobators have been sometimes protested for, but the
effect thereof has been very rare.

Requisites of Witnesses are, That they be famous, equal, and inconcerned in
the ^arties, or Cause. Hence arise the Objections: 1. That the Witnesses are
infamous, as being so cognosced and declared by the Sentence of a Judge
competent, as by the Counsel and Session, and Justice General.

2. Upon the same Point of Infamy, Persons known to the Lords to be debauched,
or in no reputation, (albeit they be not so judicially declared,) will be
excluded: and such as are not worthy the Kings Unlaw. Upon which ground it is,
that Beggars are excluded.

3. Witnesses are excluded upon their Interest in the Adducer^ and that either
by Consanguinity, Affinity, or Service. By Consanguinity, Cousin-germans, or of
a nearer Degree, are excluded. And where there is not penuria testium,
sometimes Witnesses adduced of a further Degree, will be excluded, as in
penuria testium, Degrees regularly prohibit, will be admitted.

The Degrees of Affinity are not so clearly determined. But, unless there be
penury, the same Degree is likewise to be observed in Affinity as is
Consanguinity. But there is no affinitas affinitatis: and therefore a man will
not be admitted in the Cause of his Wif`s Brother and Sister, but he may be
Witness in the Cause of his Wif`s Sister`s Husband; because that is but
affinitas affinitatis. Much more in Cases more remote.

As Interest in the Adducer, so Prejudice or Enmity with the other Party, may
exclude Witnesses: who in that case are not presumed to be equal and impartial.

And likewise upon the Point of Interest, not only domestic Servants, but
moveable Tenants, who may be removed at the arbitriment of the Adducer, having
no standing Tack, nor Infeftment; are not ordinarily admitted: but Vassalls, and
Tenants having a Tack are.

Witnesses are also excluded upon inequality, if they have given partial
Counsel, in prejudice of the Party against whom they are adduced; or have
received, (or accepted a Promise of) any benefit or good deed, for bearing
testimony, other then the ordinary Expenses allowed to Witnesses. And therefore
albeit these be not objected against the Party, the Lords use to cause
Witnesses purge themselves of partial Counsel, which they explain to them, not
only of their partiality by good deed, whereby they may be presumed to have
promised, and intended not to be exact in the truth of their testimony; but
also if they have stirred up the Party to the Plea, and promised to bear
Witness for him, and advised him how to manage it.

The Point of Inter^st in the Cause excludes Witnesses, not only if they may
tine or win in the Cause, as being sharers therein; sed si ^oveant consimilem
causam, whereby they may be suspected to give their testimony so, as may
advantage the interest of the like Cause, wherein they are concerned.

But in all Cases, there is much in the arbitriment of the Lords: wherein they
ponder the Moment of the Cause, the antiquity, and capacity of Witn^s^es,
whereby sometimes VVitnesses who by their Circumstances, appear to be ne^essary
VVitness^s, are admitted contrary to the ordinary Exceptions. And albeit in
civil Cases, the Lords do not admit Women; yet in some Cases, wherein they are
necessary VVitnesses, they will be adduced even in matters of greatest Moment.
As if the Question be concerning the return of Tocher, or the Enjoyment of a
Jointure, and if it be alleged, That al^eit the Marriage was dissolved within
year and day, yet there was a living Child born and heard cry and weep; in this
case, the Midwife, and other Women who were present at the birth of the
Child, will be admitted VVitnesses, as being necessary, seeing men use not to be
present at that time.

Sometimes also the Lords will admit VVitnesses cum nota: and generally, when
VVitnesses are examined ex nobili officio, all VVitnesses whatsoever are
admitted, and the Lords consider how far to make use of their Testimonies, at
the advising thereof.

The Probation being closed, the Cause comes to be concluded. Which is two
ways: for either the Pursuer renounceth Probation, and refers the Cause to the
Lords; or otherwise, if the Defender have adduced Probation, and have no more
Terms current, or competent, then the Pursuer does protest, That the Cause may
be holden as Concluded, which also will be admitted.

At the conclusion of the Cause, when Writs are produced, the Producer is not
obliged to dispute that the Writs produced will prove, or not; yet it must
appear, that the Writs have contingency with the Points to be proven: for the
production of any Writs, is not sufficient, and will not stop the
Circumduction of the Term; but notwithstanding thereof, if they make nothing to
the Points to be proven, the Term will be circumduced.

When Commissions are granted to examine VVitnesses in the Country, the Term
will be circumduced if the Report be not produced. And if it be produced, but
contain no Testimony of VVitnesses, but the Procedure of the Commissioners;
there the Dispute arises, whether he who was to report the Commission, or the
other Party have failed or not: for if they have failed, the Term will be
circumduced. And therefore they allege these Reasons to purge their failzies.
1. That the Commissioners, (one or more) necessary to have proceeded, kept not
the Diet, or that having kept it, they refused to examine the VVitnesses in
respect of the other Parties not compearance, upon any Question arising,
whether the Witnesses were receivable, yea or not: wherein the Commissioners
are to follow the common Rules o^ Exceptions against Witnesses as aforesaid:
and if any extraordinary Objections be alleged, they may mention the
Objections, and receive the Witnesses; but they may not reject the Witnesses,
but ought to leave it to the Lords consideration, what use they will make of
the Testimony. And therefore if they reject the Witnesses without the ordinary
Exceptions, the Party grieved will allege, That the Commission ought to be
renewed to them, with order to receive these Witneses which they have refused;
or to other Commissioners; or that the Witnesses ought to be called before the
Lords. Or if the Commissioners refuse to examine the Witnesses, upon the
Interrogators proposed, if the Lords find these Interrogators pertinent, they
will grant a Commission and ordain the Witnesses to be examined thereupon. Or
if any accident has befallen the Party, who was the Adducer of the Witnesses,
or other considerations occur, moving the Lords, they will either grant
Commission de novo, or otherwise a Term to adduce Witnesses before themselves.

When any Party craves Commission to adduce Witnesses in the Country, it is
upon their peril of moving the Witnesses to appear. For in that case they are
not to expect Terms, and several Diligences, as if they adduced them before the
Lords: the very demanding of a Commission importing a passing from the ordinary
Terms, if the same be granted.

Causes being concluded in manner foresaid, there ought to be an Act extracted
thereupon. After which it comes to be advised. The Saturday ordinarily is spent
in advising concluded Causes: and either Party may protest to be heard, at the
advising of the Cause, as they think fit. But whether Parties do protest or
not, the Lords does always call them, and hear them. If the Probation be by
Writ, or by Oath, containing any Quality. But if the Oath be simple and plain,
the Lords will advise without calling the Parties. Or if the Probation be
wholly by Witnesses, the Testimonies are not published unto the Parties: and
therefore the Lords advise the same with closs Doors.

If the Probation be by Writ they are heard, Whether the same prove or prove
not, and the whole Writ, or the Clauses in question, are read in audience of
the Parties.

In like manner Objections are competent against Nullities of the Law, which
are visible in the Writs adduced: as want of Witnesses, or Writer, or Witnesses
not designed, or as vitiat in substantialibus. Yea not only Objections are
competent, but Exceptions that may elide the Writ produced, are also competent;
especially if in the Act there be a Reservation to allege a contra producenda.

And if the Alledgence does elide the Writ produced, it should be such, as
could not have been known the time of the Litiscontestation. But the Alledgence
ought to be instantly verified, except in singular Cases, in which there will
be a new Probation admitted, which makes an exception from the common Rule,
That there cannot be two Litiscontestations in the same Cause.

There are also frequent Debates upon qualified Oaths, Whether the quality
adjected be competent, or not. Wherein this a general Rule, That whatsoever the
Alledgence referred to Oath, relates to any Writ, Fact, or Deed wherein the
Alledger pitches upon what makes for him, admitting the other Points and
Circumstances, when it is proper for the Deponent to express the whole tenor of
the Writ, Bargain, Promise, or Fact, as well that makes against him as for him.
And these are called intrinsic Qualities: because the Qualifications or
Conditions are inherent in the same Fact, or Right. As if a Party be pursued on
an alleged Bargain for delivery of Victual, or Ware, at the prices libelled;
if he depone, It was true the Bargain was made, but with this Condition, if the
Money was not delivered against such a time, the Bargain should be void; And
that it was not delivered, nor offered at that time; this is a competent
Quality. In like manner, if one be pursued for a Debt, or for a Promise made,
or Goods delivered; as the libel, if it be referred to Oath, will not be
relevant, except the Subsumption bear, That the same is resting, owing, or
unperformed, so the Deponent does properly and plainly depone, both upon the
truth of the Debt, Promise, or Receipt, and also that the Debt is not resting,
but was paid and received, either by the other Party himself, or others by his
direction, and warrant. Nor will he be obliged to produce or prove these: seeing
his Obligation is not proven by Writ, or Witnesses. In which last cases, the
Presumption of Not-payment, and Not-performance being negative, transfers the
onus probandi: and therefore Payment or Performance must be proven.

But there are other Qualities extrinsick, and unproper, which will not be
admitted by way of Quality, to be proven by the Deponent's own Oath: but ought
to have been proponed and proven by Exception. As if a Party being pursued for
a Debt, acknowledge the same, but depones^ That the Pursuer was owing him as
much: this is extrinsick, and resolves in an Exception of Compensation. And
therefore will not be regarded in the Oath, but the Defender will be decerned,
reserving his Action for that other Debt as accords. Yet if it be dubious,
whether the Quality be competent or not, the Lords will sometimes find it
relevant as an Exception, and assign a Term for proving thereof, or will
decern, and preserve that Alledgence contra executionem, by way of Suspension.

At the advising of the Cause, many times new Defenses and Alledgences are
proponed, which are received, if instantly verified, but not otherwise, though
emergent or new come to the Proponer^s knowledge, unless he have raised
Reduction of the Act of Litiscontestation thereupon, or upon Nullities: as if
it has been extracted contrary to the Minutes, or meaning of the Lords. But
such Alledgences emergent, or new come to knowledge, may be reserved by way of
Suspension, or Reduction: for thereby the other Party gets Decree, and may use
Inhibition, or other real Execution thereupon, and get Caution before he be put
to dispute these Points.

When the Lords proceed to advise the Cause, they either find the Points
referred to probation proven, or not proven. Or otherwise they find the same
proven simpliciter, or they find the same sufficiently proven ad victoriam
ca^sae, that albeit all that was offered to be proven, be not fully proven, yet
that as much is proven as alone would have been relevant.

If the Lords at the advising of the Cause, find some Points not clear, they
will ordain such further Probation to be adduced by either, or both Parties, as
they see fit. If they find semplenam probationem, they will, ex officio, take
the Oath of either Party for their further evidence of the Truth. And after
this will proceed, ^ill they advise the Cause de novo.

After all that the Lords ^ind necessary for a final Sentence, is done and
they have advised the Cause, they pronounce Decree cond^^natory, or
absolvatory, according as they find proven or not proven by the Probation.
Against which, till it be extracted, either Party by Snpplication may represent
what they desire: which the Lords will take in consideration, and the
Supplication and Interlocutor thereupon, will be insert in the Sentence.

The Decreets of the Lords (being ^he Supreme ordinary Judicatory in all civil
Causes) is unquarrellable upon point of Iniquity: and therefore nothing that
was proponed and repelled, will be admitted in the second Instance super e^sdam
deductis. Whereby it is not meant that those Sentences are not quarrellable,
unless there be new considerations or reasons in jure alleged; but that unless
there be new reasons and new matter in facto. Neither is that receivable in the
second Instance, which was competent in the first Instance: but what is
emergent and was not competent the time of the Litiscontestation.

The Lords are not so ready to reduce or suspend their Decreets upon Points and
Reasons not emergent: but it being alleged, that either the matter of Fact is
new come to knowledge, or at least the Writs or Evidents for proving thereof,
(it being hard to instruct what was, or now is in the knowledge of the Party)
the common Rule is, Praetextu nov^rum instrumentorum non retractantur
sententiae. Yet the Lords will sometimes, when they see it is without all
suspicion of fraud or negligence, admit what is new come to the Parties
knowledge, though not emergent.

Neither will the Lords recall Decreets upon Certification, or Circumduction of
the Term, especially Certifications in Improb^tions; neither any other but upon
singular Reasons impeding the Party to keep the Term, or otherwise upon
emergent Writs, instructing that wherein the Party succumbed, or new come to
knowledge, without any suspicion of fraud, or the Partie's designing to delay.

This is the ordinary Form of Process before the Lords of Council and Session:
then which there can be nothing more rational, more regular; every Form being
the product of long experience, from clear reason and necessity. For the Lords
are still supplying and perfiting, as they see cause: and whatsoever seems
convenient at first, if it prove afterward inconvenient, is laid aside. So that
what is retained, is that which has for a long course been found rational and
convenient.

But besides the ordinary Form, many things are incident, in Processes, which
are extraordinary, and fall not under the ordinary points of Process; at least,
in the ordinary way: which therefore are offered to the Lords by Supplication,
and proposed in the time of the Dispute verbo, not comprehending any Defense,
Reply, or Duply. Such as the Sequestration of Goods in question, or the
Sequestration of Mails and Duties of Lands, or naming Factors for unlifting the
same medio tempore: the taking of the Oath of Parties, or Witnesses, to remain
in retentis, before the ordinary time, if they be sick, or going out of the
Country, or very old: yea when persons are near the point of Death, the Lords
will ordain them to be examined upon Supplication, although the Process be not
so much as called.

Such are also the Production of Writs, or Exhibition of things in question:
the Sequestra^ion o^ R^-ex^mination of Witnesses: and many such Desires as
neither came within the comp^ss of Reply, or Duply.

In like manner Points emergent, or new come to knowledge, are represented by a
Bill at any time during the Dependence, and are then admitted. And also
whatsoever has been forgotten, the Lords will receive, before the Ac^s, or
Sentences be extracted: and before these are extracted they will rectify the
same, upon Supplication, if they have been extracted otherwise then according
to the Minutes of Process, and meaning of the Lords; especially when the
Complainers Advocat has not seen the Scroll, before extracting, or his
Objections thereanent have not been considered. But nothing should come in by
Bill (which is an extraordinary Remedy) where an ordinary Remedy is competent:
and therefore, whilst a Cause is in discussing, Parties are ordained to make
their address to the Ordinary, and ought not to trouble the Lords with Bills.
But if the Ordinary`s time be past, and the Act or Sentence not extracted; if
they have negl^cted any Point, they may represent it to the Lords, by ^ill,
which the Lords of course will refer to the Ordinary, who heard the Cause: who
comparing the Bill with the Process, if he find any thing new therein, will
hear the Parties thereupon. But if the Supplicant rest not satisfied, b^t urge
that he may have the Lords Answer upon the Bill; the Ordinary upon an Am^undae,
will not r^^use it.

Reprobators also, may be used during the Dependence of Process, for rejecting
of Wi^n^s^es, or their Tes^imonies. For seeing no Exception against the
hability of Witnesses is receivable, unless it be instantly verified, when they
are examined; Parties may raise Summons of Reprobator, even before the
Witnesses are examined, when they suspect such Witn^sses as are cited against
him; to the effect that thereupon they may cite VVitnesses to prove their
grounds of Reprobator, at the Term assigned for the VVitnesses to appear. Or
they may protest for Reprobators, when the VVitnesses are examined, and raise,
and insist in the same, before Decree be extracted: which is the most p^^per
way of Reprobators, and whereupon the Lords will supersede to advi^^ the
Testimonies (if they see probable evidence of the inhability of the Wi^nesses)
till the Reprobation be first advised. But if Parties neither raised Summons
before the examination of the VVitnesses, nor do then protest; they are
presumed to acquiesce in the hability of the VVi^nesses, unless the VVitnes^es
be adduced in absence.

But even after Sentence, Reprobators are Competent, though far less
favorable, (and after a considerable time ought not to be admitted;) because
if they be insisted in, sho^tly after Sentence, the Adducer of the VVitnesses,
if any of their Testimonies should come to be rejected upon inhability, might
adduce more VVitnesses for the same Point, unless by the Probation he were
found accessory, to the Corruption of the VVitnesses.

Reprobators cannot proceed upon pretense of the falsehood of the Testimony, but
upon the incapacity, or inhability of that Party to be witness in that Cause.
Which will not be excluded, because the VVitnesses have deponed, either
generally, or particularly, concerning their hability; whether upon the motion
of the Judge, who ordinarily purges all VVitnesses of partial Counsel, or upon
the Alledgence of the Party referring any Objection to their Oath. The reason
of the difference is, because the Testimony in the Cause could not prove,
unless there were other VVitnesses concurring: but as to the hability, there is
no such concourse, every VVitness Deponing for himself. But if the ground of
Reprobature be referred to the Oath of the Adducer of the VVitnesses, it will
be most favorable, and sustained; except the Adducer be alleged author of, or
accessory to the Corrupti^^; which could not only be criminal, but capital: and
therefore he is not obliged to depone thereanent, after Sentence, when the
Corruption has become effectual.

The main ground of Reprobators, is the Corruption, or Prevarication of the
VVitnesses. For if before the Testimony quarrelled, they have sworn
inconsistently therewith, it will canvel the Testimony upon Prevarication, and
infer Infamy; but no Oath emitted thereafter, will weaken the former Testimony.
Especially post sententiam qua jus est acquisitum parti. Albeit in
Re-examinations, recently taken, if there be Prevarication, and Inconsistency;
the Lords proprio motu will reject the Testimony.

Giving or promising good Deed, besides the ordinary Expenses, and prompting,
and instructing VVitnesses how to depone, or threatening them if they do not so,
or so, depone; are pregnant grounds of Corruption and Reprobature.

Civing partial Counsel by instigating the Parties to the Plea, and promising
to depone for him likewise a relevant Reason of Reprobature. And likewise the
Infamy of the Witnesses. as being before condemned for an atrocious Crime, or
declared infamous. And likewise interest in the Cause: whereby the Witnesses
may have a considerable Gain or Loss.

But there be many other Exceptions which might exclude a Witness before
Examination, that will not be sustained by way of Reprobature after: in which
there is a Latitude in arbitrio judicis. As if the Witness were Cousin German
to the Adducer, or were not accounted a virtuous Person, or had given his
opinion to the Party how to proceed, or been present at Consultations. Or if
the Witness, before he were adduced, had declared to the Par^y what he would
depone, without any Pro^ise, or Assurance, so to depone; or instigating the
Plea thereby. For after Process are intented, though Persons express what they
know in the matter, it will will not amount to proditio testimonij.

When Reprobators are sustained, to be proven by Witnesses, they ought to be
condescended upon, and be above all exception. Otherwise Reprobators may get
run round, and leave Causes to a perpetual incertainty.

Upon the Decreets of Session, all manner os Executorials do proceed in course,
by Letters under the Signet. As for arresting the moveable Sums, or Goods to be
made forthcoming for satisfying the Decree: which cannot be Loused upon
Caution, except in singular Cases. Inhibition, hindering the Party decerned
against, to dilapidat his Lands or Heritage.

Horning, for charging him to make payment, and for denouncing him Rebel if he
fail. Poinding, for distraining of his moveable Goods. Apprising, or
Adjudication of his Lands and heritable Rights in satisfaction. And Caption for
incarcerating the person of the Party decerned, if being denouned to the Horn,
he have not performed. All which Executorials may proceed jointly or severally,
except only, that if the Creditor possess by virtue of Apprising or
Adjudication, he cannot detain the Debtor in Prison.

But this Imprisonment, as its last Remedy, admits of Liberation super cessione
bonorum, proceeding upon Humanity, and Mercy. For albeit many Nations do allow
the selling, or using the Debtor as a Slave; yet our Incarceration is designed
but to compel him to do all things, in his power, to satisfy the Debt. And
therefore when he dispones all that he has, heritable, or moveable, to his
Creditors, and delivers the same and the Evidents thereof; he is set at
Liberty, and is ^ecure against all Creditors whom he has cited for that
purpose, as to his personal Freedom. Yet without prejudice to them, to use real
Execution against any Goods that he shall thereafter acquire. And this Decree
does no longer protect him, then he wears for his outmost Garment, the Habit
appointed by the Lords for Bankrupts, in which he must come out of Prison,
unless this be dispensed with upon special consideration, of the manner how he
broke, if it was without fraud or prodigality, (as in the case of Merchants) if
it were by Shipwreck, or Insolvency of Debitors, or by fire, Robbery, or other
accident.

Against this cessio bonorum, there are only two Defenses accustomed: the one
is, That the Bankrupt has dilapidat some part of his Estate, since his
Incarceration, further then his necessary Aliment.

The other, if the Creditors offer to Aliment him in Prison: which can be but a
dilator Defense, till they may have time to discover what latent Rights ha
^ath, or what fraudulent Rights he has made, before or after his
Incarceration. And is with express Condition, that they pay him for his
Aliment, so much as shall be modified weekly, and if they faill one Week, he
will be se^ at Liberty.

FINIS.

