AN Assize Sermon, Preached August 3. 1685.

IN THE Cathedral Church OF St. Peter in York: Before the Right Honorable Sir
Edward Atkins, And Sir Thomas Walcot, His Majesty's JVDGES of ASSIZE for the
Northern Circuit.

By WILLIAM STAINFORTH Residentiary Canon of YORK.

YORK, Printed by John White, for Richard Lambert, at the Crown within the
Minster Gates. 1685.

Imprimatur.

Leon. Welsted Rmo. P. D. Johan. Archiepisc. Ebor. a Sacris Domesticis.

To the Right Worshipful CHRISTOPHER TANKARD Esquire High Sheriff OF THE County of
York.
SIR,
IN mere Compliance with your Earnest Desires I have adventured to Print this
plain Sermon. For though I am sufficiently assured, that no good Man can except
against the Substance of the Discourse, or the bonesty of its Design (which is
to promote Christian Charity, and Christian Loyalty:) Yet I am so sensible of
its Defects upon many other Accounts, that nothing but the irresistible Power
of your Friendship could have overruled and determined my will to this
Publication. I know, Sir, your Overvalue for the whole Composure proceeded
from the perfect suitableness of its Matter to your Principles and Practices,
which are, and always have been Eminently Loyal, even in the worst of Times,
when the Faction was bold and daring and formidable, and all the several Sects
of Religion were united witb the Men of no Religion in one joint accursed
Conspiracy against the Government: When it was accounted a Crime to be a good
Subject, and all the Loyal men, by as gross and foolish a Solaecism, as a
furious and undistinguishing Malice could be guilty of, were Branded with the
odious Names of Tories, Arbitrary Men, Popishly affected, and whatsoever might
expose them to a popular scorn and hatred. But neither their false Pretenses,
nor false Reasonings, nor false Characters could Corrupt your Judgment, nor
shake your Constancy, but you continued firm and immovable in your Duty, and
upon all just Occasions Bore up against the Rudeness and Insolences of the
Faction, with a Courage and Resolution which became you. And this deservedly
got you so Considerable an Interest in the Esteem of his late Majesty of
blessed Memory, that He judged the Power of so large a County, as this of York,
could not be entrusted, at so dangerous a Juncture, in safer hands than your
own. And the faithful Discharge and vigorous Execution of your Trust has
procured you (no doubt) a proportionable Value with His present Majesty. And
that His Majesty may never want a sufficient number of such Loyal Subjects, and
that others may learn to become and continue such, by your excellent Example is
the hearty and unfaign'd Prayer of

Sir, Your most Affectionat and most Humble Servant, WILLIAM STAINFORTH.

1 Timothy 2. 1, 2.
I Exhort therefore, that first of all Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions,
and giving of thanks be made for all men:

For Kings, and all in Authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life
in all Godliness and Honesty.

PRAYER is a Duty, which is founded not upon Mutable and Arbitrary, but fixed
and unchangeable Reasons. It is a Duty, which results from the necessary
Relation which is betwixt the Creator and the Creature, and is a proper
expression of that Homage and Worship, which is naturally due from Man to God
the Maker and Governor of the World: It is a decent Confession of the weakness,
insufficiency, and dependence of Man: It is a just Acknowledgement of the
Infinite Excellencies and Perfections of God, such as his Power, Wisdom, Truth
Holiness, Goodness, Mercy, etc. And therefore the Light of Nature has all along
convinced Men of the necessity of this Duty, and enforced its Practice and
Observation upon them. For no People, who believed a God and Providence, but
testified this Belief by public Adorations of the Deity, and by offering up to
him Prayers and Praises.

And as Prayer is a necessary Duty, so also an inexpressible Favor, an
invaluable Privilege: It is one of the Noblest Exercises, and Divinest
Employments which a Rational Creature is capable of undertaking: For Prayer is
an Address, an Ascent of the Soul to God; It is a Talking and Discoursing with
the Divine Majesty. By it we have our Conversation in Heaven, and maintain and
keep up a friendly intercourse, an humble familiarity and freedom with the
Great Lord and Sovereign of the World.

But Prayer is not only a Favor and Privilege, as it is a Mark of Honor put
upon us by the Allowances and Condescentions of the Divine Goodness, but as it
is a sure and efficacious Means of providing for all our real and substantial
Interests, both as we are Men and Christians. For there is such an invincible
Power and Efficacy in Holy Prayer, that Omnipotency it self seems not able to
resist it. It is represented in Scripture, as if it put a Force upon the
Almighty, and by a pleasing and grateful Violence extorted those Blessings from
him, which otherwise he would not bestow upon us. And this is certain, that if
it be duly performed, both as to the manner and matter of it, it never fails
of its design, never meets with a disappointment, but falls down in a Blessing,
and returns laden'd with Victory and Success. For God has promised Success to
its performance, by assuring us, that if we do but ask, we shall receive. And
Matt. 7. 7.
therefore that we may not be wanting and negligent in a duty so reasonable and
necessary in it self, so much tending to the Honor of God, so much conducing
to our own advantage, so much subservient to the interest and welfare of all
others, St. Paul exhorts Timothy, That first of all, Supplications, Prayers,
Intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all men: For Kings and all in
Authority, etc.

It is generally the Opinion of Interpreters, that those several Words, which
we Translate Supplications, Prayers, etc. have a distinct meaning, and signify
the several Parts and Offices of Prayer. (...), which we render Supplications,
denotes deprecations of Evil, whether of Sin or Punishment and any sort of
Calamity whatsoever. (...), signifies Requests and Petitions for all things
which are good and desirable, which any way concern our welfare and happiness,
and which relate to this World or a better. (...), signifies Intercessions and
Applications in the behalf of others. (...), signifies all manner of Praises
and grateful Expressions, whereby we Celebrate the Divine Goodness, and Mercy
for all his Favors and Benefits bestowed upon our selves and others.

The Words of the Text being thus Explained, they acquaint us with all the
Parts of Holy Prayer, and teach us for what, and for whom we ought to make our
Addresses to Almighty God. And from them we may make these two Observations.

I. We may Observe, That we ought to Pray for all men. II. We may Observe, That
in an especial manner we ought to Pray for Kings, and all that are in
Authority.
1. We may Observe, That we ought to Pray for all men. These are the express
Words of the Text, and therefore there is no need of any other Proofs. or
Arguments to convince us of the truth of the Observation, or to persuade us of
the Obligation of the Duty which is contained in it. But this is no more than
what is clearly intimated, and fairly deducible from those other Precepts of
the Gospel, which enjoin a Catholic Charity, and an Universal Good Will, and
command us to do good unto all men. For Prayer is a proper effect of Charity,
it being in its own nature an undeniable Expression of Good Will to those for
whom it is exercised, and an infallible means, by the appointment and
institution of God, of doing good both to our selves and others. We Pray for
our selves because we love our selves, and therefore if we loved others as we
love our selves, we should be always concerned for their happiness, and as
zealous to promote it by our Prayers, as we are to secure and advance our own.
For Love is a powerful and operative Principle, and can no more fail to Act
according to its Nature, and to Exert it self in instances of Benevolence and
Kindness toward its Objects, than Fire can cease to burn and prey upon
Combustible Matter, or than heavy Bodies can leave off to move downwards, and
to pursue the Natural Tendency of their intrinsic Gravitation, when they are
not resisted by some External impediments and Opposition.

Its true indeed, that our Charity may be greater than our Power, and we may be
limited and restrained in the ways of exercising it for want of Opportunity or
Abilities to show it. Though one man may love all men, yet no man can Benefit
every man by immediate Collation of those Favors which they may stand in need
of. No man can apply Counsel, or Administer Instruction to all who want it. No
man can by his personal Courage or Justice, rescue all who are oppres'd or
persecuted. No man can cloth all that are naked, or feed all that are hungry,
or give Alms to all who are ready to die with want and Poverty: But every man
may Pray for all men, and intercede with God in their behalf. This is a way, in
which any man may exercise his Charity toward all Mankind, and diffuse and
spread it over the whole World. This is a way in which every man may prove an
Universal Benefactor, and derive Blessings upon all men proportionable to their
respective needs and necessities. And certain it is, that if we had a sincere
and hearty Love for all men, if we unfeignedly desired their Happiness and
Prosperity, we should always remember them in our Prayers, and with a suitable
vigor and intenseness of Spirit, recommend them to the Grace and Favor of
Almighty God. The same Divine Charity which enlarged our hearts so as to take
in all mankind, would extend our Prayers to a proportionable compass, and give
every man a share, and an interest in them. Alas! We might as soon forget to
Pray for our selves, as forget to Pray for those whom we love. For Charity (as
I have told you already) is not an idle and unconcerned Passion, but an Active
and Vigorous Principle, full of thought and concern for those on whom it is
terminated, quick to discern, and ready to lay hold on every opportunity of
doing good, restless and unweary in its endeavors to promote the happiness and
prosperity of its Object. And therefore if we loved all men, we should Pray for
all men, and that not only because Prayer is a Powerful means of doing good to
those for whom it is used, but also because we have no other ways left of
exercising our Charity, and doing good to the greatest part of Mankind.

And if we would be accounted the true and sincere Disciples of Christ, we must
thus Love and thus Pray for all men. No consideration of their distance from us
in respect of their Country; no consideration of their difference from us in
Matters of Religion; no consideration of their Alienation from us in point of
Aeffction must make us forbear either to Love or Pray for them. Though they live
in the remotest Parts and Corners of the World; though they are Enemies to God or
our selves; though they are Turks, Jews, Infidels, or Heretics; though they hate
us to death, and prosecute us with all the Expressions of an implacable Malice,
yet still when we Address our selves to the Throne of Grace for our selves, for
our Friends and Benefactors, for our Relations and Acquaintance, for Subjects
of the same Kingdom, and Members of the same Church with our selves, we must
take all the rest of Mankind into our Devotions, and with a sincere Love and
Charity Pray to God for them. And in doing this, we do what is agreeable to the
Dictates of our best Reason, and the Natural Equity of that Golden Rule which
obliges us to do to others whatsoever we would have them do to us. For there
is no man but would have all others love him, and express that love by all such
ways as are in their Power of being Helpful and Beneficial to him, and
consequently to Pray for him, if he is persuaded that any Good can be done him
by such Prayers.

Nay, by Praying for all men we imitate the Divine Nature, and transcribe one
of the most conspicuous Excellencies in it. For nothing can be more evident,
than that God is affected with an universal Benevolence toward Mankind, and
continually dispenses the effects of such an universal Benevolence. For is not
his Mercy over all his Works? Does not his Providence extend to all his
Creatures? and do not all men in a signal and eminent manner partake of the
Blessings of it? Are not we all protected by his Power, Preserved by his Care,
and Fed by his Bounty? and though men daily sin against him, and by studied and
deliberat Offenses affront his Government and Authority, yet does he not bear
with them, and continue his former kindness on them? does he not cause his Sun
to shine upon the just and unjust? Does he not give Rain and fruitful Seasons
to his Enemies as well as to his friends, and do they not partake alike of the
Blessings of his common and unlimited Providence? And is not all this the
effect of his Good Will? Does he not do this to try if he can Reclaim them by
Favor, if his Gentleness and Goodness, and Forbearance will lead them to
Repentance? For God would not have any one Perish, but that all should Repent
and be Saved. So that by Praying for all men we exercise and express a Charity
like to that of Gods, we Copy out his Universal and Unconfined Beneficence, and
in some measure become partakers of the Divine Nature. And is not God's Nature
the Standard and Measure of the highest, the most absolute Perfection? And must
not we then adorn and Enoble our Natures, raise them up to the highest Pitch of
Perfection by being conformable to God in our Universal Good Will, and by
Praying for all men, which is the exercise and demonstration of such Good Will?

Lastly, By Praying for all men, we follow the example of our Blessed Savior,
who had such an hearty and sincere Affection for Mankind, that he laid down his
Life for their Sins, and offered up himself a Sacrifice of Atonement for the
Transgressions of the whole World. For he tasted Death for every man, whether
Friend or Enemy, and shed his Blood for those who spilt it. He endured all the
shame and ignominy, the pains and sorrows of the Cross even for those, who led
and fastened him to it; and while he was under the quickest sense of the
disgrace and torments of his accursed Crucifixion, his love for his Enemies was
so far from suffering any abatement or diminution, that it broke out into the
brightest Flame of Infinite Tenderness and Compassion, and rose as high as
Heaven in a most Ardent Prayer for Pardon and forgive^ness for his very
Persecutors. And the same Benevolent Mind, the same Charitable Spirit appeared
in a most Illustrious manner, in the Primitive Christians to the wonder and
amazement of the Heathen World. For those early Christians lived that Holy
Religion which they Professed, and put on the Loving Nature as well as the
Honorable Name of the Blessed Jesus. No Injuries or Persecutions, no Torments
or Death could overcome their Charity, but this was still invincible as their
Patience; this Prosper'd and Triumphed amidst the strongest Oppositions, and
fiercest Provocations; this held out to the last, and turned their expiring,
dying Breath, into Articulat Prayers for their Enemies, and when they could
live no longer, this closed their Eyes, and Sealed up their Lips, and went
Victoriously with them into another world, there to receive its utmost
Complement and Perfection by being Eternally exercised upon the noblest, the
most ravishing Object, God himself. And if we would be Christians in truth and
reality, as well as in Profession, this Charitable Spirit, which was so
eminently visible in our Blessed Savior and his first Disciples, must live in
and actuate us. For we cannot upon any other terms be either conformable to his
Example, or Obedient to his Laws. And without such Conformity and such
Obedience we may be any thing but Christians. For if we have not the Spirit of
Christ, we are none of his, have no Relation to, no Interest in him. And it is
plain, that Charity is the Spirit of Christ, his frame and temper of mind; Ay,
Charity, as it has all mankind for its Object, and as it expresses it self in
devout and affectionat Prayers for the good and welfare of all men. And this is
sufficient to show that we ought to Pray for all men.

2. We may Observe, That we ought especially to Pray for Kings and all that are
in Authority. Though our Charity ought to reach all men, and though we ought to
express it by Praying for them, yet there are peculiar Reasons, why we ought to
Pray for Kings above all men whatsoever. And these Reasons are such as either
concern Kings themselves, or such as concern us.

First, Such as concern Kings themselves. For if Kings have more need of our
Prayers than other men, then it is plain, that upon their account we ought
especially to Pray for them. And it will appear, that they have the greatest
need of the Prayers and Intercessions of others, if we consider these following
Particulars.

First, Consider that the Duty and Office of a King is an arduous and difficult
Employment. There are in most men an inordinat appetite after Empire and
Dominion, and they greedily desire to bear a Part in the Government of the
World: But few men consider the Difficulties of such a Province, the weight and
encumbrances of such a Burden. For if they did but seriously consider, what are
the proper and Natural Ends of Government, what Abilities and Excellencies are
necessary to qualify a man for the due Administration of it, what infinite pains
and care must be undergon in the faithful discharge and execution of it, such
thoughts, such reflections would mortify the most aspiring Ambition, allay and
extinguish the most violent thirsts after Empire, and make men not only
contented but joyful in the state and condition of Subjects. For it is an easy
thing to obey; there is required no great skill to understand, nor much
industry to perform the duties of Subjection. It is the business of Governors
to contrive the Rules, and prescribe the Measures of Obedience, which generally
lie in a small compass, and are delivered in plain terms, and by a clear
Publication are made known to all, who are concerned to observe them. So that
Subjects need not torture their Brains, nor strain their understandings to find
out and discover their Duties. Their work is Cut out to their hands and laid
before their Eyes, and a tractable Nature, and an humble Spirit, and a
peaceable mind will enable them to practice it with great ease and cheerfulness.

But it is far otherwise with Kings and Princes, who have a large Sphere to
move in, and an infinite variety of Particulars to attend unto, which require an
excellent Understanding, a Solid Judgment, a prudent foresight, a constant
Presence of mind, an active Temper, an unwearyed Industry, a patient Spirit, an
upright Intention, a Courageous Heart, a steady Resolution to dispose and order
and manage them for the public Good, for which Government is Instituted and
Governors are appointed. But alas! It is not for me to Discourse of the Art of
Government, nor to enumerate all those Particular Excellencies and
Qualifications, which are necessary to complete and furnish out a man of
Political Prudence. My business is only to convince you, that it is an hard
thing to Govern wisely, and that so many Gifts and Graces are necessary to make
up and constitute a Prudent Governor, as few men enjoy, and God only can
dispense. And therefore we are under the strongest Obligations of Charity to
Pray for Kings, and to beseech God that he would furnish them with Abilities
proportionable to the difficulties of their Employment, that he would direct
them by his wisdom and assist them by his Power, that in all cases of Public
Concernment he would enable them to judge, determine and Execute in such a
manner as may best comply with the ends of Government, and the Reasons of their
Institution.

2. Consider, that Kings are exposed to more numerous and dangerous Temptations
than other men. Temptation is a state of Danger and Hazard, and no man can be
secure in such a State, who is not endu'd with such a measure of Divine Grace,
as is proportionable to the strength and Violence of the Temptation. And though
it be true, that no condition of life can boast of an exemption from the
Assaults and Incursions of Temptations, yet none is crowded and pressed with
such Numbers and such variety of them, as that of Kings and Princes. As Kings
are born with the same corrupt Natures, subject to the same vicious propensions
and inclinations, and susceptible of the same sinful impressions with other
men, so they are in greater danger than other men of being overcome by their
evil Passions, and led Captive by their exorbitant Lusts and Appetites. For
whatsoever is peculiar to them as Kings, and distinguishes them from the
Common Condition of their Subjects, is a direct Temptation to Vice, and
Ministers both Power and Occasion for the satisfaction of their unreasonable
Lusts and Passions. The greatness of their Authority, and the Incoercibleness
of their Persons, the Vastness of their Power, and the Affluence of their
Wealth and Riches are quick and powerful Incentives to Vice, strong and
vigorous Provocations to evil. For all these Minister Matter and Fuel to
Ambition and Pride, to Malice and Revenge, to Covetousness and
Worldly-mindedness, to all the Sins of Sensuality, softness and Luxury. And we
may be sure that the Devil will be watching all Opportunities to press these
Temptations upon them with all the force and advantage imaginable. For the
Devil very well knows, that the Interest of his Hellish Kingdom and the success
of his Malicious Designs do in an extraordinary manner depend upon the Power,
which he gets over Kings and Princes. For Vice is never so infectious as in
their Examples. This gives Reputation and Authority to it: This renders it bold
and insolent: This procures it avowed Patrons and shameless Assertors of its
Cause and Interests, and makes it spread and diffuse it self in every part of a
Nation with a boundless and uncontrollable License.

To this I may add, That it is not the least part of the Misfortune and Danger,
which Kings labor under, that they have few Friends and many Flatterers: Few,
that will deal plainly with them, that will tell them of their Faults, admonish
them of their Errors, or put them in mind of their Duty; but many, that will
sooth them in their Mistakes, applaud their very Vices, commend their very
Deformities, put the brightest Colors upon their foulest Actions and turn
their shame and reproach to their Glory. So that, these things confider'd, we
have great reason to say, God help Poor Kings, we have great reason to pity
them for the Eminency of their Station and the uncontrollableness of their
Power, which indeed is so Necessary for us, but so dangerous to themselves,
which derives so many daily Blessings upon us, but exposes them to so many
continual Temptations: We have great reason to Pray to God for such
extraordinary measures and supplies of his Grace for them, as may defend them
against their extraordinary Temptations, and secure their Innocence and Virtue
from being overcome by the Violence of their assaults, and the importunity of
their Solicitations.

3. Consider, That Kings have more Enemies, and are in more danger than other
men. Though Kings Administer their Government and manage Public Affairs with
never such an equal hand and prudent a Conduct, yet it is impossible to please
and content the minds of all their Subjects, but still there will be some Sons
of Belial, some factious and seditious Spirits, who either out of Envy or
Ambition, out of Covetousness or Revenge, out of Enthusiastic Principles or
false Maxims in Religion, will be Plotting against their Government and
Conspiring against their Persons. Nay, the justest, the best Princes have
oftentimes the most Enemies, and are in greatest danger of being destroyed by
close and Treacherous Arts, or by open and public Insurrections. For bad men
are uneasy and restless under a just Government, and impatient of those
Restraints, which wholesome Laws and equitable Constitutions put upon them. Good
Laws are against their evil Designs, and therefore they are against good Kings,
who are the Fountains and Guardians of good Laws, and out of their Princely
Goodness take care to have them strictly Observed and Executed. We have had in
our Nation too great a demonstration of this sad Truth in the Accidents, which
befell our two last Kings of blessed Memory; the first of which dyed by the
hands of a bloody Violence, because he would not offer Violence to the public
Laws of the Land and the Religious Dictates of his own Conscience. And the
other had infallibly succeeded him in the calamity of his Fate, as he did in
the Justice and Mercy of his Government, if God by an extraordinary and
Miraculous Providence had not prevented it. So that Kings by the Height and
Eminence of their Station are so far from being Placed above the reach of
Mischief, that they are thereby the more exposed to it, and are only fairer
marks for evil men to take Aim at, to level and direct their Rage and Fury
against them. Kings in this respect are like Tall Oaks, which are the most
obnoxious to the Blasts of Storms and Tempests, to the Strokes of Thunder and
Lightning. And certain it is, that it would be impossible for Kings to sit
safely and peaceably upon their Thrones for any considerable time, if they were
not in a peculiar manner the Care of Heaven, and the Charge of the Divine
Providence. No Guards could secure, no Force could protect them, if God did not
in a particular manner Watch over them, keep them under the shadow of his
Wings, blast the Designs and restrain the Cruelty of their Enemies. It is only
God, who does and can give Salvation to Kings, and delivers David Psalm. 144.
10.
his servant from the peril of the Sword.

And how should this Consideration make us fall down upon our Knees and lift up
our hearts in Prayer to God for the safety and preservation of Kings, for their
defense and Protection from all the evil Designs and bloody Machinations, from
the secret Plots and open Violence of their cruel and implacable Enemies.

2. There are particular Reasons, which concern our selves, and which oblige us
especially to Pray for Kings. For

1. Consider, That it is all our Interests to Pray for Kings. For our Happiness
and Prosperity is bound up and included in theirs, and whatsoever good we do
them by our Prayers or any other means, we all share in the Advantage of it,
and the Blessing, which falls upon them, like the Sacred Oil, which was powered
upon Aaron's head, runs down to the very Skirts of their Garments, descends
upon the meanest of their Subjects, who all enjoy it in some kind and in some
measure or other, in the excellent Effects and Fruits of their Government.

Civil Peace is one of the greatest Blessings of this World: It is that, which
makes our Lives a comfort, and gives relish and sweetness to all our other
enjoyments. But there can be no Peace without Government, nor Government
without Laws, nor Laws without an Authority to Enact and Execute them. Now,
this Authority is Vested in Kings, though as to the Exercise of it, it may be
variously Modified, Bounded and Limited according to the Fundamental
Constitutions of several Kingdoms. So that, we owe all our Peace, and all the
Blessings, which are derivable from it, to Kings and Princes. It is their
Conduct and Government, which secures unto us our Lives, our Possessions, our
Rights and Liberties. It is that which preserves us from being devoured by
others, from being destroyed by our selves. It is that, which prevents and
repells Hostile Invasions and descents from Abroad; It is that, which hinders
Confusions and quells Insurrections at Home: So that all our Temporal Happiness
is bound up in that of the Kings, we prosper and flourish with him, and we all
in common partake of his Felicity or his Misfortunes. And therefore as it is
our Interest, that Kings should enjoy a long and uninterrupted Health, that
they should improve in Wisdom and Knowledge, that they should grow in Goodness
and Justice and all manner of Virtue, that they should increase in Honor and
Reputation and Power both at Home and Abroad, so it is our Interest to Pray for
all these things for them. For in all this we exercise a Charity toward our
selves, we are but our own Benefactors, and all the while are providing for our
own Peace and Safety.

2. Consider, That we are bound in Gratitude to Pray for Kings. The Benefits,
which we receive from their Government, ought to affect us with a suitable
Esteem and Value for their Persons, and oblige us to all the Returns of Love
and Kindness, which we are capable of making. The very Heathens styled their
Governors Benefactors, and looked upon them with a Reverence, and paid them
Honors answerable to such an endearing and obliging Character. And the Holy
Scriptures describe describe and represent Kings under such forms of
Expression, as if all the good things we enjoy, were the issues of their
Providence, the effects of their Wisdom, Care and Bounty. Thus David is styled
2 Samuel 21. 17.
the Light of Israel. As if what the Sun is to the Material World, David was
the same to the Jewish State, dispensing Life and Motion and Vigor to all
within the Orbit of his Sovereign Authority by the quickening Rays, the
cherishing Influences of his Wisdom, Power and Goodness. And though this was said
of David, who was a good King and a man after Gods own heart, yet no less is
said of Zedekiah, who was an Enemy to Goodness and good Men. For even he is
called by the Prophet Jeremy, the breath of our Nostrils: Which plainly
intimates, that Lam. 4. 20.
Kings are as necessary to the Being and Preservation of the Body Politic, as
Air is to that of the Body Natural. And though bad Kings are like bad Air, which
Vitiates the Blood and Spirits, weakens the Faculties and impaires the Strength
and Firmness of the Natural Constitution, yet as the Mischiefs of a bad Air are
not so great and destructive as a total deprivation of it, so the Miseries and
Plagues of Tyranny are not so intollerably calamitous, as those of Anarchy and
Confusion. For where there is confusion, there is every evil work, and when
Government is once broke up, then men are let loose upon one another, and are
at liberty to act all the Villainies and Oppressions and Barbarous Inhumanities,
which their Brutish Lusts and Passions can tempt them to. And it is an Obvious
and common Observation, that more Rapin and Oppression and cruel Outrages have
been Committed, and more Blood has been spilt in our Late Civil Wars, than ever
was done in the Reign of the most Inhuman and Merciless Tyrant, which swayed a
Scepter in any Place whatsoever. So that Tyranny is better than no Government
at all, and though particular Persons suffer by it, yet the far greater part of
the Community is Obliged and receive such Benefits even under such an harsh and
severe Administration, as they could not enjoy in a state of Licentiousness and
Confusion. And therefore the whole Body of the People is bound in Gratitude to
Pray for the safety and Preservation of the worst Kings, because there are none
so bad, but do good to the Nation in general, over which they exercise their
Authority.

And if Subjects are Indebted to the worst of Kings, how much more then to the
good and Gentle, to those who have an universal Good Will for their People, who
exercise a tender and paternal Care over them, and study to preserve them in
Wealth, Peace and Godliness? Such Princes are the greatest Blessings which
Heaven can bestow upon us; for they pursue the natural and proper Ends of their
Authority, and employ their Power for all those useful and beneficial Purposes,
for which it is given them. They do not Rule so much for themselves, as for us,
and are indeed eventually as well as designedly the Ministers of God to us for
good.

And can we ever be too much affected with the sense of their Favors and
Benefits? Can we ever be sufficiently Grateful for them? Or can we express our
Gratitude in too many hearty and affectionate Prayers to God for them? Surely,
we cannot but look upon our selves Obliged to do them all the good we can, who
are the Authors of so much good, the Dispensers of so many Blessings to us. And
therefore, if by our Prayers we can contribute to their Interests and
advantage, We must needs think our selves bound in Gratitude to assist them
with such a cheap, such an easy way of expressing our Good Will and charity
toward them.

3. Consider, That as Prayer is the best means we can use to make Kings wise
and just and merciful and prosperous in their Government, so also Prayer is the
only means allowed us by God for Redressing those Grievances and Mischiefs,
which at any time we may suffer from the violent abuse of their Power, and the
irregular Administration of their Authority. For if Princes are bad Men, and
Oppress their Subjects against Reason and against Law, we have no remedy left
us, but Prayers to God, in whose hands are the Hearts of Kings, and who can
turn and dispose them, as seems best to his Godly Wisdom. They are God's
Ministers and act by his Authority, and therefore for his sake we must be
subject to them. Whatsoever Injuries they heap upon us; whatsoever Violences
and Persecutions we suffer under them, we must not permit our Passions to rise
and swell against them, nor vent themselves in undutifull Language, in indecent
Reflections, in scandalous Reproaches, in Factious Complaints or Seditious
Murmurings; much less must we take up Arms, and by Force Resist their Persons
or Authority. For the Apostle has told us in express terms, That we must be
Subject not only for wrath but conscience. Romans 13.
But all Resistance is inconsistent with Subjection, for it sets us above our
Prince, and makes him accountable at our Tribunal. Nay, the same Apostle, to
discourage us for ever from any Rebellious Attempts and forcible Resistance,
has assured us, that we cannot Resist but at the certain Peril of our immortal
Souls, for they that resist (says he) shall receive to themselves damnation.
So that, how distressed, how afflicted soever our Condition may prove through
the Arbitrary and Merciless Executions of a Tyrannical Prince, we must not make
use of any other Weapons against him, than what God has put into our hands,
which are only Prayers and Tears: We must no otherwise oppose him than by
desiring of God, that he would convert him to the love of Truth and Justice and
Mercy; or at least restrain him from his Violent and Outrageous Practices. And
this very Consideration is sufficient to convince us, That we ought especially
to Pray for Kings.

4. Consider, That by Praying for Kings we do that which in a peculiar manner
is pleasing to God and agreeable to his will. And therefore, not to Pray at all
for them, or to Pray for them with a cold and lazy and unconcerned Indifference
is to be negligent and Remiss in a Duty, which God in an especial manner has
obliged us unto. St. Paul having exhorted Timothy to take care in the first
place that this Duty be performed, he enforces his Exhortation by telling him,
that this is good and acceptable unto God. ver. 3. And we cannot but look upon
it as a thing good in it self to Pray in an especial manner for Kings, because
it is such an Exercise of Charity, such a demonstration of Gratitude: and we
have as much reason to believe it acceptable to God, because it is good in it
self, because it is conformable to the Divine Will, and done in obedience to
God's particular and express Commandment. And therefore if we would live in an
humble Obedience to God, and enjoy his Favor, which is promised only on the
condition of such an Obedience, we must pray especially for Kings, who are
God's Ministers, the Representatives of his Power and Authority, the great
Instruments of his Providence in Governing the World.

1. If we ought especially to Pray for Kings, then this shows how little of
true Christianity, how little of the Gospel Spirit and temper there is in those
people, who are so far from Praying for Kings, that they bear a Malicious
Spite, an Implacable Hatred against them; that Curse the King in their
thoughts and wish him evil in their hearts; that would rejoice at any
disastrous Fate or untimely End, which should befall Him. If this be their
Praying for the King, it is a saying their Prayers backwards, a sort of
Devotion, which those wretched Creatures are said to use, who enter into
Leagues and Compacts with the Devil. And certain it is, That such kind of
Praying is an immediate Disposition, the very next step to Rebellion, which is
as the sin of Witchcraft.

2. From hence we may learn to what causes we may Ascribe the Failures and
Irregularities of Princes, the Mal-administration and Miscarriages of their
Government. Whatsoever is amiss in their Government, we are apt to impute it
solely to their weakness and infirmities, to their Follies and Passions, or to
some prevailing Lust and domineering Vice in them. For, because the Conduct and
management of Public Affairs is in their hands, we never look further for the
Causes of public miscarriages than to their very Persons, from whom they
immediately proceed. And thus we never Consider, how much it is in our Power to
make Kings better or worse, and that the safety of their Persons, the Holiness
of their Lives, the Wisdom and Justice and Prosperity of their Government do in
a great measure depend upon the Charity of our Prayers, the Piety and
Righteousness of our Conversations. For there is such a political Relation,
such a Civil Union between Kings and their People, and their Interests are so
involved and interwoven with one another, that their respective Virtues or
Vices affect each other with a mutual and reciprocal Influence, and recommend
each other to the Favor or Expose to the displeasure of God Almighty. Thus God
sometimes withdraws his Grace and Protection from a good King, and suffers him
to fall into Sin or Mischief for the sake of a wicked and perverse People. This
appears in the Instances of Holy David and that good King Josiah. 2 Samuel 24. 1.
2 Kings 23. 25*


And this may teach us to look at Home, and to search within our own hearts for
the Discovery of the Causes, to which the Errors of Governors, and the
mischief of their Government are owing. For seeing God has appointed us to Pray
in an especial manner for Kings, we may be sure, that there is virtue and
efficacy in our Prayers to enable Governors to discharge their Office and
Administer public Affairs wisely, justly and Religiously; and if at any time
or in any Instance they do otherwise, have we not reason to conclude, that the
fault originally is in our selves, and that it so happens, because we either
neglect to Pray for Kings, or else we do not Pray for them in such a devout,
affectionat and importunat manner as we ought?

3. This shows the excellency of the Liturgy and Public Service of the Church
of England in this point of Christian Doctrine; how Evangelical in this respect
it is in its Frame and Contrivance; how Apostolical in its Composure and
Constitution with relation to the Duty, which we owe to Kings and Princes. For
how amply and largely has it provided for our Devotions in this instance? How
many Collects and Prayers does it contain for the King? And how are we taught
by those Collects and Prayers to Petition God for every thing, which concerns
our King in all his Capacities and Relations, and which are any ways necessary
to make him happy and prosperous as a Man, as a Christian and as a King? And in
what significant Words, and pathetick Expressions are those Prayers delivered,
such as are proper to inform the dullest understanding and inflame the coldest
Devotions? And this perhaps is one great Reason, why those, who are Enemies to
the King, are such Enemies to our Liturgy, and have all along endeavored the
Abolition of the one, as well as the Destruction of the other. But God be
thanked, we have not so learned Christ, as to despise his Public Solemn
Worship, because it is such a friend to the Person and Authority of his
Vicegerent, and is so conformable to the Divine Will in such a main and
important Duty of Christianity. No, we, I hope, shall value more and more the
Liturgy of our Church, and take all Occasions to join in the Public
performance of it, because it is such an excellent Guide to our Devotions, and
teaches us in such various and comprehensive and lively forms to Pray for our
King, and all in Authority under him.

But then withal I must crave leave to tell you, that if we would have our
Prayers, which we either put up for our King or for our selves, to succeed and
Prevail for a Blessing, we must take care, that they be the breathings of a
devout mind, the issues of a pure heart, and proceed from a Soul entirely
resigned and dedicated to the Service of God. For all sin wilfully indulged
vitiates and corrupts the Efficacy of Prayer, disarms it of its strength and
power, and turns it into so much fruitless and insignificant wind, which is
spent to no manner of purpose. For God is an utter and irreconcilable Enemy to
all sin; he cannot look upon it without infinite Abhorrence, nor upon those, who
deliberatly practice it, without a proportionable Aversation. His Ears are deaf
to all their Prayers, and it is neither the number nor Importunity of their
Addresses, which can soften and render him pliant and yielding to them. If I
regard Iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear me, says David; and God
hears not Sinners is a truth, which the blind man in the Cospel could discern
by the light and evidence of his own Reason.

So that if we would Pray successfully, we must live Holily: we must mortify
in us all vicious lusts and affections: we must abstain from all manner of
wilful and deliberat wickedness: we must endeavor an universal and impartial
Obedience to all the Laws of the Gospel. And then our Prayers through the merits
of Christ will be as Incense, a grateful Perfume, a Sacrifice of a sweet
smelling savor to Almighty God: Then all our Prayers for the King will have a
blessed issue and a successful event, and will return in showers of blessings
upon him and upon us, to the great and unspeakable Comfort of all our Lives.

But I must not forget to tell you, that as we ought to Pray for the King, so
we ought to thank God for him. Not only Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions,
but also giving of thanks must be made for all men, for Kings and all in
Authority.

Nothing is more natural than to be grateful to our Benefactors, and he is a
Benefactor to us, who does good to those, whom we sincerely love, and whose
happiness we earnestly desire. Charity, which extends our regards and desires
beyond our own particular interests, multiplies every favor, every mercy,
which is bestowed upon any single individual Person, into as many real
kindnesses and distinct Obligations, as there are men who wish and desire the
Happiness of that Person. And therefore if we had so much charity for the King,
as ardently and devoutly to Pray for his happiness, we could not fail to bless
God, whenever we found our Prayers answered in any instance of his welfare
and preservation.

But mercies and favors, which are bestowed upon the King, are not only
favors to us, because we have a Christian Charity and affection for him, as we
ought to have for every man living; but they are favors to us, because they
enable him to derive upon us all the Blessings of a wise, a just and peaceable
Government. For we are to consider the King as a Public Person, and therefore
besides that moral Union, which is made by Love; there is a Civil and Political
Union between him and us, which results from the Relation, which he bears to
us, as supreme head and Governor. And upon this account every mercy, which God
confers upon the King, is a public mercy, a mercy as universal as his
Government, and Coextensive with his whole Dominions. It is not confined and
limited to his Royal Person, but has an influence upon the whole Community, and
in its effects and emanations reaches every Member of the Body Politic. So
that benefits and favors, which God vouchsafes to Kings and Princes, are in
this respect like fruitful and refreshing Showers, which fall upon high and
lofty Mountains, and then descend and trickle down upon the Plains or Valleys
beneath, and impregnate them with a rare and admirable Fertility.

Now, how great and manifold are the Mercies and Benefits, which God has
conferred upon our Gracious Sovereign? and therefore what strong and
indispensible Obligations do we lie under to praise and adore the Divine
Goodness for him?

How ought we to thank God for the wonderful Preservation of our King
throughout the whole course of his Life, for the Miraculous deliverance of him
from those eminent and apparent dangers, which he has been exposed to both at
Home and Abroad, in his own and in Foreign Countries, at Sea and at Land, in
times of Peace and in times of War? How ought we to thank God for his quiet and
peaceable Succession to the Throne, and that in despite of the extravagant
fears, and wild jealousies, and desperate resolutions; in despite of the rage
and madness of the People?

How ought we to thank God for all those Royal and Princely Virtues, which
enoble his Mind, adorn his Government, and render his Administration so just
and easy, and consequently so great a blessing to his People?

How ought we to thank God for those fixed and unalterable Purposes of his Mind
to Govern us according to Law, to preserve unto us all our Civil Rights and
Spiritual Privileges? And how ought we to thank God for those several and
repeated Assurances, which the King has given the whole Nation of those his
Royal Purposes, Assurances! which can no more fail us, than he can cease to be
that just, that Gracious and Generous Prince, which he is?

How ought we to thank God for that late and entire Victory, which he gave him
over his Rebellious Subjects, and thereby delivered both him and us from the
worst of Enemies, Enemies to our God and Holy Religion! Enemies to all, that
can be dear and valuable to us! Enemies who would have stuck at no Methods,
shrunk at no Villainy to have destroyed the Government both in Church and State.
This is a vast and incomparable mercy, and loudly Proclaims to the whole World,
that God has a more than ordinary tenderness and care for our Gracious
Sovereign, and that whosoever takes up Arms against his Authority, Fights
against Heaven, and not only breaks through all the moral Obligations of the
Divine Will (which has forbid all resistance of the Supreme Power) but even
vainly strives against the natural force and invincible strength of the
Almighty Providence. So that every Rebel has all the reason in the World,
without true and unfeigned Repentance, to expect Damnation both in this life
and in that to come.

And can we now seriously reflect upon these various and infinite mercies, which
God has bestowed upon the King, and not be affected with a due and suitable
sense of them? Or can we be affected with such a sense, and not feel our selves
prompted with all the force and vigor of an ingenuous Gratitude to be thankful
to God for them? Or can we be truly and sincerely thankful for them, and not
make that due use and improvement of them for which they are intended?

Now what is the use, which we ought to make of all these Mercies, but to look
upon them as so many Arguments and Motives to an Holy Life, so many
Encouragements to repent of those Sins, which we have committed against God,
and to continue in that just and indispensible Allegiance which we owe our
Sovereign Lord the King? But how can we do this, so long as we listen to every
disloyal Whisper, and factious Murmurings and spightful Suggestions and
reproachful Insinuations, which are contrived and propagated by disaffected and
evil men to Expose His Majesty's Person and Government to contempt and hatred,
and to dispose and prepare his Subjects for Rebellion and Insurrections?

And therefore, let us have a care, how we give countenance and credit to any
Factious and groundless Stories, how we admit or cherish any Popish fears and
jealousies, which, by as great a Miracle as that of Transubstantiation,
converts every idle Chimaera into a Reality, and every improbable fiction into
a solid Truth; which Robs men of their Senses and their Reason, and will not
suffer them to believe the plain evidence of either. For is any thing more
obvious to Sense, than that His Majesty takes all the measures of his
Government from the Direction of the Laws? And is any thing more reasonable to
believe, than that he will never vary from his present Practice, nor depart
from the Public Constitutions? Have we not the highest moral Assurance of
this, which a breast inspired with sincerity, Justice and Generosity, can give
to the World? What is it then that people would have? Would they be happier,
than God and the King can make them? If not, why do they not study to be quiet,
and do their own business? Why are they not content to enjoy all the Privileges
and Comforts of our holy Religion, and all the Advantages and Blessings of our
excellent Civil Government? Why do they not discourage all seditious Talk and
factious Rumors? Why do they not Pray for the King, and thank God for him, as
Christians ought to do, and which if we could be persuaded to do heartily and
affectionatly, we should be so far from lifting up an hand, that we should not
so much as lift up a thought against the King or his Government, but should be
glorious Ornaments to our holy Religion, by being Illustrious Examples of
Loyalty and Obedience, which God make us through the Power of his holy Spirit for
Christ Jesus's sake, to whom with the Father and Holy Ghost, three Persons and
one God, be ascribed, as is most due, all Might, Majesty, Dominion and Praise
both now and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

