Of Preparation for Death and Judgment.

A SERMON Preached at WHITEHALL January 27. 1694/5.

Before the Right Honorable the Lord Chamberlain, the Ladies of the
Bedchamber; and others of the Household to our late Gracious QUEEN MARY of
Blessed Memory.

By GEORGE STANHOPE, Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty.

Published at the Request of that Honorable Audience.

London: Printed for R. Sare, at Grays-Inn-Gate in Holborn. MDCXCV.

St. Matthew. XXIV. 44. Therefore be ye also ready; for in such an hour as ye
think not the Son of Man comes.


FROM the Disciples showing our Lord the Buildings of the Temple, He takes
occasion, V. 1.
in the beginning of this Chapter, V. 2.
to foretell the lamentable Extermination of the Jewish People, and the utter
Ruin of that Holy Place. Satisfying herein, V. 3, etc.
so far as his Divine Wisdom thought fit, their Curiosity; who desired to know
the precise time of those dreadful Punishments God kept in reserve, for the
malicious Enemies of his Son, and the Truth. But, in regard there was one Day a
more eminent Discrimination to be made, between them that believed in Jesus,
and them that believed him not; a Distinction, not confined to one particular
Place or People, but Universal, and such as none of the Sons of Adam can
possibly be exempted from; a Process and Sentence of that infinite consequence,
that the Tribulation of the Jews, horrible as it was, should be but a faint and
feeble Image of the Vengeance of the Lord, and the Terrors of the Wicked in
That Day; our Savior does therefore prudently improve this Opportunity into a
Discourse concerning That also. In which, he represents it as a Thing of the
highest and most general Concernment; the Last Great Revolution, which the
Persons to whom he spoke, and all Christians after them, were obliged daily and
hourly to expect, and diligently to prepare for. Upon which account it is, that
he expresses himself in such Terms, as might awaken their Souls, and quicken
their Care; by shortening its distance to the Eye, and declaring it not only
certain, but nigh at hand to every one of them. For thus (according to the
known usage of Prophetic style, involving withal, and looking forward to the
Antitype, when the Type is more directly mentioned) I understand that passage;
V. 34.35.
Verily I say unto you, This Generation shall not pass till all these things be
fulfilled; Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my words shall not pass away.

Several remarkable Dispensations of an avenging Providence had been exhibited
to the preceding Ages of the World, which might and should have been abundant
Intimations, V. 37.
that God would not fail to call Sinners to Judgment, and repay them to their
face. These ought to have made Men wary, and prevailed upon them to live, as
becomes those, who know they must render an account of their Actions. But,
notwithstanding so many repeated Instances of a severe Reckoning, V. 38, 39.
our Lord foresaw, that there would be vast numbers still unmoved, and
unprepared; insomuch, that the Son of Man's Coming should not more resemble the
Flood, which drowned the old World, in the Horror and Universal Extent of the
Judgment, than it would in the Surprise and Indisposition of Men to meet him.
Just such another sweeping Deluge shall This prove, as Swift, as Fatal, as
Astonishing, to all, who by timely Thought and due Vigilance are not ready for
the sudden and amazing Separations it shall make. Watch therefore, V. 40.41.
V. 42.
for ye know not what hour your Lord does come. And farther yet; Because we
ought to be much ashamed; that the Children of this World should be so much
wiser in their Generation than the Children of Light; the Example of a careful
Householder is propounded, as a fresh Incentive to our Diligence. For if He
would most certainly have watched, could he but have learned at what time the
Thief would come; how much more ought We to be upon Our Guard against the Son
of Man's coming, V. 43.
which for its own suddenness, and our unpreparedness, is compared to that of a
Thief in the Night. If He, I say, the extremity of whose damage is supposed not
to exceed the Breaking up of his House, and the loss of such Goods, as Time and
Providence have a thousand ways of Restoring; how much rather We, whose
Treasure is greater, and whose Danger is infinitely greater, and whose Loss, if
once sustained, is for ever irreparable! Therefore be ye also ready, for, as at
a time when that Householder is not aware, the Thief rushes in upon him, so in
such an hour as you think not, the son of man comes.

This I take to be the true order and connection of what our Lord has delivered
upon this matter, from Ver. 29. to that of my Text inclusively. Upon which,
that I may discourse in the most clear and familiar, as well as what I conceive
the most profitable manner, give me leave to observe this foll^wing method.

I. First: To propose some Observations leading to a right apprehension of the
Words themselves.

II. Secondly: Coming up to the Point in my Text, To say something of the
Suddenness of the Son of Man's coming, and how that Quality belongs to it.

III. Thirdly: To lay down some Directions, how we may be ready to meet him, at
that Coming of His.

IV. After all which, if the Time will allow me to draw an Inference or two
from the foregoing Heads, I shall fully satisfy my Intentions in the Choice of
this Subject.

I. I begin with some Observations relating to the Words themselves, and
preliminary to the main Business, and immediate Intent of them.

1. And here, first of all, I cannot but take notice, That the Son of Man's
coming, whatever that Expression means, is not at all attempted to be proved,
but declared only, and spoken of as a sufficiently known and uncontestable
Truth. The manner of it indeed, and his Pompous Appearance, are largely
described; the Suddenness of it, and the Improvidence of the World, are
particularly foretold; many importunate Exhortations to qualify, and put our
Souls in due posture for it, very movingly insisted upon; and the end of this
Coming, both in This and the following Chapter, manifestly declared to be, the
taking an account of his Servants, Examining how each of them had acquitted
themselves in their respective Trusts and Capacities, and Awarding to every one
his Portion and Recompense accordingly. From all which it is exceeding plain,
that the last General Judgment is meant by it, when All men shall give account
for their own works, and they that have done Good shall go into Life
Everlasting, and they that have done Evil into everlasting Fire. But of the
Judgment it self, there are no pains taken to argue, and evince, that such a
thing should be; because this was already an established notorious Principle:
And none of those with whom our Savior now conversed, were so bold to call it
publicly into question, or so ignorant, as to admit any doubt concerning it,
in their own private Opinions and Consciences.

2. But secondly. Though by this Coming of the Son of Man the General Judgment
be principally intended, yet to any that shall compare this passage in St.
Matthew, with its parallel in St. mark, it will be very obvious, Mark 13.37
that This cannot be the only thing meant by it. Our Lord adds there, What I
say unto You, I say unto All: Intimating hereby, that the Cautions he lays
down, and the Reason of them concern not some few, or one generation only, but
were equally applicable to every succeeding Age of Christians to the World's
end. It is also evident even to sense, that the Day of Judgment, literally
speaking, did not surprise those very persons, to whom these Oracles were
delivered: There having run out since their deaths, more than sixteen hundred
years already; V. 36.
and at what distance that Day may still be from us, none but God can tell. If
then we can discover any other thing, which every man is equally concerned to
provide for, and which may very justly be termed the Coming of the Lord, there
will be all the reason in the world for extending our Savior's discourse to
That also. Now such in every Circumstance is the Day of our Death; This being
to every single man in particular, what the Last Judgment will be to the whole
world in general. The suddenness of its coming may be the same; the state of
our Souls will be the same, and consequently the Danger of being unprovided
must needs be the same. For these Two have a strict connection, and absolute
dependence upon one another. And for this reason (says St. Augustine) he speaks
to All, Epid. 80. ad Helych.
things which in their literal sense belong to such only as shall be found
alive at his second Coming, because they do really in this respect concern All,
that the Last Day shall find them in the very same condition, that the last day
of their Life left them in. Such as every one dies, such shall he come to
Judgment. And hence it is his duty to watch for the Lord's Coming, because that
Last Coming shall find him unprepared, if his own death found him so. To the
same purpose St. Jerome, in his Comment on Joel 2. By the Day of the Lord, says
he, understand the Day of Judgment, or the Day of every particular man's
Departure out of the Body. For what shall be done in the Day of Judgment to
All, the same is fulfilled, as to each single person, in the Day of his Death.
With these two Fathers agree the Generality of ancient Interpreters, and upon
the same ground too. So little it seems were those Good men sensible of a
middle state for the Purging men's Souls by Fire, or any other way of putting
those into a Capacity for Heaven afterward, who were not so at their Entrance
into the Chambers of the Dead,

3. Thirdly. It is well worth a Remark, That although both these Comings of the
Son of Man be intended, yet That only of the Last Judgment is mentioned. And a
great deal of Reason there is, why it should be so: Because This being the Last
solemn Appearance of Quick and Dead, attended with all that Terror and Pomp,
which we find described in Scripture, would naturally (if any thing would) work
men's minds up to a becoming Sense, and mighty Apprehension of their Danger.
Whereas Death is become so ordinary, that the very Commonness of it, (which
ought in reason to move us the more) has rendered it familiar: And therefore
This would have been mentioned, as it is seen and discoursed of every day,
without any great matter of Efficacy or Impression. To which we must add too,
that, were it not for that Great Audit before God's Tribunal, there can be no
account at all given, why we should be in any degree solicitous to prepare for
Death. For what is This, considered in it self, but only a Dissolution of Soul
and Body, a State of Darkness and Oblivion; a Fate common to all things under
the Sun? And so not worth the least part of our Care and Concern, any otherwise
than as it consigns us over, and leads us directly to that General Hearing. But
upon this account, every body must confess, that we lie under the strictest
Engagements to work, while this short Day of Life continues, because Our Sun
draws toward setting, and the Night comes on apace wherein no man can work: Or,
in the Preacher's Language, to do whatsoever we attempt with the utmost of our
might, because there is no Device nor Knowledge, no Repentance, no Reformation,
or Improvement of our selves, in the Grave, whither we are all going.

From these three Considerations thus premised, you easily discern the
substance of my Text to be this: That it is the Duty of every Christian, as he
values his Safety and his Soul, to bear constantly in mind, and make good
Provision against the Second Coming of the Lord; whether that be the Last Great
Judgment, or, which in effect will be all one to Him, the Time of his own
Death; since this is but a Preface to that Judgment, and only reserves him
bound up in Fetters of Sleep and Earth, till the Almighty Judge shall unlock
our close dark Prisons, and Summon us all to our Trial. For the Coming of the
Son of Man in both these Senses is sure, and therefore it concerns every one to
be ready: Especially if we reflect again, that there is a hazard, nay, a high
probability of his coming in such an hour as we think not, which leads me to the

II. Second Particular I promised to discourse of, The Suddenness of the Son of
Man's Coming, and in what Sense that Quality belongs to it.

Now an Accident is reputed Sudden, either with regard to the Time when it
happens, or the Persons to whom it happens; either when it comes immediately,
and without any notice of it beforehand; or when it overtakes Men unawares, at
a Season in which they least think of it, and before they have competently
armed themselves against it. In the former of these Respects, the Son of Man's
Coming is not, cannot be sudden: For,

1. If by that Coming we mean the General Judgment, Who can have the Considence
to pretend, that This is brought upon the World in a trice, and without
sufficient notice? Did not the Prophet Daniel, above two thousand years ago,
declare to his People what God had showed him in a Vision, Dan. VII. 9, 10.
when his Throne was like a fiery flame, and his wheels like burning fire,
thousand thousands ministered unto him, and ten thousand times ten thousand
stood before him, when the Judgment was set, and the Books were opened? Did not
the same Mouth proclaim aloud in Chap. 12. Chapter XII 2.
That they who sleep in the dust of the Earth shall awake, some to everlasting
Life, and some to shame and everlasting contempt? So that even before the Light
of the Gospel shone forth, there were Intimations in abundance given, that the
Almighty would arise to Judgment, and reward every Man according to his work.
But we have a much surer word than that of Prophecy, The express Testimony of
our Blessed Lord, and his Holy Apostles; Joh. V. 22.
That very Son to whom the Father has committed all Judgment, tells us in the
following Chapter, Chapter XXV. 31, 32.
that He will come in his Glory, and all the Holy Angels with him, that he will
sit on his Throne, and all Nations shall be gathered before him: V. 31.
And in this Chapter, That he will send his Angels with a great sound of a
Trumpet, and they shall gather together his Elect from the four winds, from one
end of Heaven to the other. St. Paul accordingly has forewarned the
Corinthians, and in Them all to whom that Epistle should come, 2 Cor. V. 10.
That we must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, that every one may
receive the things done in his Body, according to that he has done, whether it
be good or bad. He has likewise pressed the Athenians to speedy Conversion and
Repentance, from this most unanswerable Argument, Acts XVII. 31.
that God has appointed a day in which he will judge the world in
righteousness, by that Man whom he has ordained, whereof he has given
assurance unto all men, in that he has raised him from the dead. St. Peter
acquaints us yet farther, That the delay of this Judgment had tempted some
ungodly and inconsiderate Wretches, to question, whether there would ever be
any such thing. But while those Scoffers ridiculed Religion, and rallied this
uneasy Doctrine, with that implous Taunt, Where, 2 Pet. II^ 3, 4.
where is the Promise of his Coming? He teaches Us to entertain quite different
Notions of the matter. Beloved, says he, V. 8, 9, 10
be not ignorant of this one thing, that one day is with the Lord as a thousand
years, and a thousand years as one day. The Lord is not slack concerning his
promise, as some men count slackness, but is longsuffering to usward, not
willing that any should perish, but that all should come to repentance. But the
Day of the Lord will come as a Thief in the night. To all which, and many other
express Testimonies of Scripture, if we add the constant Dictates and private
Impulses, the Applauses and the Reproaches of Conscience, which, according to
the Quality of each moral Action, never fail to strike us with some
expectations of a distant Reward or Punishment; If we reflect upon the
Reasonableness, the Necessity of such a thing, in order to a public
Vindication of the Divine Justice, and a perfect clearing of the dark and
mysterious methods of Providence, which with such seeming Indifference
distributes the Good and Evil Things of this present Life: These will appear so
many evident invincible Proofs of a future Judgment; and we cannot with any
Forehead pretend, that Almighty GOD has been wanting, either to inform us that
it shall be; or to warn and fortify us against it.

2. But Secondly. If by the Son of Man's coming, be understood our own Death,
alas! where do we not meet with fresh Remembrancers of that? Besides, that
Almighty GOD has ordained this Coming, as a necessary Introduction to the
other, Hebr. IX. 27.
for It is appointed unto Men once to die, and after that, the Judgment;
Besides this, I say, every thing we see, or hear, or know, turns our Monitor,
and we must be blind and deaf not to be sensible, and perfectly stupid, not to
apprehend and consider it. Every dying Year, every declining Day, every
drooping Flower, and falling Leaf, are but so many Emblems of our certain
Mortality. And, for fear we should neglect these as Instances too remote, and
too little concerning us, the continual Change of our own Bodies brings the
Matter home, and makes the unwelcome Application for us. For in despite of all
the vain Flatteries, and perverse Reasonings of Flesh and Blood to the
contrary, the unsteady condition of Human Nature is a most sensible, an
ever-present Argument, that as Man comes up like a Flower, Job XIV. 2.
so there is no Remedy, but one way or other he must be cut down like it too.
If he escape the rude Assaults of sad untimely Accidents, if neither Violence
crop him off, nor Sickness blast him in the Bud, yet the Slower decays of Age
will be sure to wither his Beauty, and make his Strength bend and stoop, till
he be forced down into his native Earth again. And yet in all this Comparison
there is, as Job well observes, one mighty Disproportion, V. 7.8.9.10.
That of a Plant or an Herb there is hope, that it will sprout again; The
return of the Year and a kindly Season may cherish it, or the Care of the
Cultivater and Refreshing Moisture may make it bud, and hinder the tender
Branch from ceasing; V. 11.12.
But Man dies and wastes away, he lies down, and rises not, till the
Heavens be no more.

Or if the Examples of other Creatures be not drawn into Consequence, nor the
gradual Decays of our own Persons duly attended to, yet where these have
accomplished their full work, how prodigiously impenetrable must we be, not to
take the Impression? The same common Nature is imparted to all Men, and all are
liable to the same Dangers and Infirmities. Our own late sad Experience has
convinced us, that neither Youth nor Vigor, neither Piety nor Power, is
Defense sufficient against this Fatal Blow. If any Humane Excellence could get
above it; if the most Zealous Prayers, and United Wishes of Good People, could
suspend it; that Royal Pattern of Virtue, whose Life was worth ten thousand of
Ours, had not so soon left us this most afflicting Instance, That not Any, not
even the Greatest, not even the Best, can have any pretense to think themselves
exempted from a Destiny, that is inflicted without Distinction, upon Persons of
all Ages, all Conditions, and all Constitutions. And of this indeed we have
Experiments without number, the fullest Evidence that can possibly be given.
For the last Groans and Agonies of departing Souls, the sad Solemnities of
Funerals, the dejected Looks and mourning Weeds of Melancholy surviving
Friends, and the still more melting Sighs and Tears of the poor Widows and
Fatherless, bereaved of their best Comfort and Support; These are Objects, that
in every time, and every place, do so constantly present themselves to our
view, that a Man must even go out of the World not to meet with them. How then
shall we call that Coming of our Lord sudden for want of sufficient notice,
which we are so many several ways, and so continually reminded of, that without
doing the extremest Violence to our Reason, and our Senses, it is impossible
for us not to expect and daily apprehend it?

But I observed before, that an Accident is sometimes reputed Sudden, as well
in regard of the Person to whom it happens, as of the Time when it happens. And
certainly, that Observation never met with so many Experimental Proofs in any
one Instance, as it does in the Case before us. For it would really amaze any
thinking Man, to reflect how the Generality of the World behave themselves upon
this occasion; and how very small a part of their Care they make it, to provide
for the Coming of their Lord in either of the forementioned Respects. They
commonly profess, to believe a Future Judgment with the highest degree of
Assurance that is possible; They make frequent and pathetical Harangues upon
the Certainty of Death, and the Shortness of the Time permitted us here upon
Earth; They pretend too to be sensible, that upon this fleeting Moment depends
an Eternity of Bliss or Woe; That their Immortal Souls, and all that can be
called Precious, lie at stake, and must be dealt with hereafter, as this little
Span of Life is improved now: But still, as if they had made a Covenant with
Death, and were in League with Hell; their Conversations argue a quite contrary
Persuasion; their Affections and Desires fix and terminate here below; and by a
strange sort of unthinking Perverseness, the perishing Trifles of this World
wholly possess and employ them; while the main End and Business of their
Creation, the Concerns of a Future and Better State, (which are in truth the
only Things worth a Man's Consideration and Pains,) are scarce allowed any
place at all in their Thoughts and Memories.

How Prodigious, and withal how Dangerous a Folly this wretched Negligence is,
you need not be told any more, after what has been already delivered in the
Beginning of this Discourse. And therefore, without farther Enlargement to
represent it here, I shall descend to my

III. Third Particular, Wherein I proposed to lay down some Directions, how we
may escape the Condemnation of such careless Men, and what course we must take,
to be found ready to meet our Lord at his Coming.

And here I shall insist upon such Rules only, as I find given by our Blessed
Savior himself upon this very Occasion. Now they are especially Four; Two of
which are Negative, and regard some Vices, which must be declined; The other
Two are Positive, and prescribe some Duties to be observed. The Vices to be
avoided, are Sensuality, and Love of the World; and against these our Lord
gives this Caution: Luke XXI. 34.
Take heed to your selves, lest at any time your hearts be overcharged with
Surfeiting and Drunkenness, and Cares of this Life, and so that Day come upon
you unawares. In which Words, the Advice is given in such a manner, as at the
same time to discover the Ground upon which it proceeds; and wherein the Danger
of being addicted to such a Course of Life consists. For by this means, it
seems, Men are exposed to Surprise, and apt to have their Hearts overcharged.
My present Intent from hence is to show, that This is the Natural and
Unavoidable Consequence of those Vices, and so that they cannot but be most
pernicious Hindrances to a Christian's Preparation for Death and Judgment.

1. The Former of these is Sensuality, which our Lord has expressed by
Surfeiting and Drunkenness; Intending I suppose hereby, not only those two
Sins, barely considered in themselves; but all the cursed Effects of Gluttony
and Intemperance, and the many vile Lusts, and Mischiefs, that are wont to
follow thereupon. For the Indulging an Habitual Practice of these Vices
discomposes the Inward, no less evidently, than it distempers and destroys the
Outward Man. For as here they pall the Appetite, vitiate the Palate, clog and
dull the Animal Spirits, and in one word, render the Body a Sink of Diseases
and Ill Humors; the very same Effects in Proportion have they upon the Mind
too. From hence Men's Love of God and Esteem for Goodness grow faint and cold;
Their Inclinations and Desires are perfectly changed, and corrupted; They lose
all Relish of true and manly Satisfactions, and can no longer taste any thing
that is Rational, and Heavenly, and Pure. Thus, while they are gorged with
carnal Delights, they become listless, and heavy, and unactive; degenerate into
Flesh and Sense; grow more and more unfit for any Attempt, that becomes Men and
Christians; and at last lie utterly sunk and buried in Spiritual Stupidity and
Sloth. Now all this proceeds, partly from the Intimate Union between the Soul
and Body, and partly from the Opposition between these Two in the Business of
Religion. Hence it comes to pass, that as often as we pamper the Flesh, we do at
the same time not only load our Better and more refined part, but we cherish a
deadly Foe too. Whereas on the Contrary, a Religious Sobriety keeps men awake
and active; gives them leisure to be cool and serious; admits so necessary
thoughts as Death and Judgment; and suggests, that upon Them depends the Bliss
which Immortal Spirits were designed to attain. A Sensual man has only his
Intervals, and short snatches of Thinking, and even in Them, the Bias is upon
his Judgment; and incredibly hard it is to raise him up to any tolerable
Estimate of Heaven and Intellectual Joys. But Mortification and Temperance
leave us free and unprejudiced, give us a right turn of Soul, and Reason room
to exert it self; They inspire us with a generous disdain of all Earthly
Enjoyments, and dispose us to thirst after another World, rather than to take
up with the Treacherous Soothings of This. For by removing our false Optics,
and showing every thing to the naked Eye, they soon convince us, how very
little the Gayest Man here can arrive at; the bitter Conclusion Sinful
Pleasures are like to find; and the many Dreadful Snares and Inconveniences,
which Ease and Luxury betray Men to.

2. The Second Thing our Blessed Savior advises his Disciples against, is the
Love of the World. Luke XXI 34.
Take heed (says he) that ye be not overcharged with the Cares of this Life.
Where, by forbidding to engage too deeply in such Cares, you may be very
confident, it is no part of his meaning, that we should so entirely lay our
selves out upon the next Life, as to look after no provision for a Convenient
Subsistence in This: But, as in Matt. 6. he blames such degrees of Anxiety, as
argue unworthy Distrusts of Providence, and ill suit a Christian's Faith; so
here he condemns that criminal Excess of Care, which disorders Men in their
Duty, and takes their minds off from their own Mortality, and the Regard for
another world. Every ones own Experience would quickly teach him, if our
Savior had not done it to his hand, what inconsistent things the service of
God and Mammon are; and how impossible it is, at one and the same time, to be
extremely solicitous for this world's Goods, and to seek the Kingdom of God,
and his Righteousness with any becoming degree of Affection and Zeal. The
matter indeed is so ordered, that these Cares in any Condition are the most
dangerous snares a Man can fall into. If he be poor, and struggling hard for a
Competency; Then they perplex and distract him, they fill him with a thousand
mean despondencies, and expose him to all the little shifts, and base Arts of
unjust Gain. If he be wealthy, and a Desire of increasing Riches occasion it,
nothing can be more directly opposite to the Duty of Preparation in my Text:
For Abundance and Success commonly inflame those desires, and render the mind
but more Sordid and Abject; They fasten the Soul down to the vanities of this
World, and will not suffer it to soar up to another. But above all, they render
the thoughts of Death, and leaving those beloved Treasures a most tormenting
Consideration. So that every way this immoderate Solicitude is irreconcilable
with a Christian's making ready to meet his Lord. For the Indigent Man that is
overcharged with it, gives himself no leisure to provide for his Coming; and
the Rich Man cannot endure to think of it. And no wonder then if Men thus
clogged and encumbered do not escape that Snare, which the Gospel says that Day
shall prove to all them that dwell, Luke XXI 35
but especially to Them that so dwell, as to set up their Rest, on the Earth.

To the Two forementioned Evils our Lord opposes as many Positive Virtues,
which may assist and further us in our Provision for his Approach.

The Former of these is Watchfulness. By which we are to understand in general,
Frequent Meditations upon, and a continual Regard to that most Important Day. A
having, as the Scripture calls it, Luke XII. 35.
our Loins Girt, and our Lights burning, A discharging our selves from the
burdensome Concerns of Life, and making all here sit easy and loose about us;
and A Weaning our Affections from all such Pleasures, as might detain and
divert us in our Christian Course And as Light is sometimes with a peculiar
Energy called Shining, Mat V. 16
thus it denotes an exemplary Piety, a Graceful Behavior, and extraordinary
Diligence in our Calling; A Conscientious maintaining the Post we are appointed
to, and answering all that can be expected from us in our respective Stations
and Capacities. Thus our Lord explains himself in the Verses next after my
Text, and that one Instance is applicable to infinite others, V. 45.46.
Who is a Faithful and Wise Servant, whom his Lord has made Ruler over his
Household, to give them Meat in due Season? Blessed is that Servant, whom his
Lord, when he comes, shall find so doing.

2. Once more. In regard our Task is difficult, and our Avocations many; our
Enemies Strong, and We of our selves but Weak, but very Weak; we are farther
Advised and Commanded, to be frequent and diligent in calling in Succors from
abroad; and applying our selves for Strength and Help, to Him who alone can,
and who will not fail in his due time to deliver us. Take ye heed, Mark XIII.
33.
(says Christ) Watch and Pray, for ye know not when the Time is. And in another
place, Watch ye therefore, Luke XXI. 36.
and Pray always, that ye may be accounted worthy to escape all those things
that shall come to pass, and to stand before the Son of Man. Our own Endeavors
will do something, and certain it is, that most men might do a great deal more,
than either they do, or think they can do, would they but set about their
Business heartily, and in good earnest.

-- (...). But still, nothing can be a more fatal Injury to us, than the
relying upon our own Strength and Diligence, supposing This to be never so
Faithful, That to be never so Great. For the very Best of us all, (God help us)
does not so far conquer the Infirmities of Humane Nature, as to be always upon
his Guard, but will frequently find himself surprised; and has therefore
abundant occasion to Pray, both that he may be forgiven his former
Inadvertencies, and enabled to stand faster for the time to come. Especially to
Entreat and Implore with all the Earnestness and Holy Passion imaginable, that
In the Hour of Death, and in the Day of Judgment, the Good Lord would deliver
him. That the Last mighty Change, upon which the whole of his future Fate must
depend, may not find him Idle or Unprovided, but Awake and Busy, Discharged of
every Weight, and his Lamp lighted and trimmed, that when the Bridegroom
appears, he may have nothing to do, but to obey his Call, and Go in with him to
the Marriage.

I proceed now in the last place to draw some few Inferences from what has
been said, and so conclude.

1. And First of all. We have here a very fair occasion given us, of
Contemplating the Exceeding Wisdom and Justice of our Universal Judge. His
Wisdom is eminently seen, in taking such a Course to inform Men of this Second
Coming, as is, of all others, the most proper, and likely to put them upon
Preparing for it; and This vindicates his Justice, when he Punishes all those,
who do not Prepare for it accordingly. That he will most assuredly come, as
that respects both our own Death and the Last General Doom, we have all the
Certainty imaginable: But as to the punctual precise time of either of these
Comings, he has left us as utterly uncertain. Now this very manner of Dealing
is the Strongest Argument in the World for Care and Circumspection. For had
that Critical Minute been revealed to every particular Man, this had been the
way to encourage Licentiousness and Security. The Corrupt Inclinations of Flesh
and Blood might have taken mighty Advantage from hence, to persuade Men, that
some little of the last remains of Life, the dregs of a Feeble old Age, would
abundantly suffice to be dedicated to God; and a small matter set all right
between Them and so Gracious, so Forgiving a Master; That it were too much in
all Reason to put themselves under Restraints, and be perplexed for a Thing a
great way off; and therefore they might safely indulge, and live at large, the
Beginning of their Days at least; and thus many would have laid hold on but too
fair a Pretense, for a late Reformation and Deathbed Repentance. We see daily
how apt Men are to run these Risques, as the Case stands now; and may
reasonably presume, they would have been much more bold in venturing their
Souls, had it been otherwise. But as it is, there can be no colorable Excuse
for such a wicked Negligence. For the particular instant of a thing's
happening, is but an Accidental, and Extrinsecal Circumstance, and does not in
the least take off from the Reality and Certainty of the Thing. The Promises
and Predictions of God are unchangeable in this point; Where Eternal Truth
stands engaged, the thing subsists in his Decree already; and what he has so
said shall be brought to pass, we ought to esteem as Certain, (and in truth it
is as certain every whit) as if our own Eyes beheld it now, performed in every
Circumstance. Come he will, That Is beyond all Question. But whether in the
first, Mark XIII. 35.
or the second, or the third, or the fourth Watch, we cannot tell; And for this
reason we ought to be extremely circumspect, and to watch always. Death and
Judgment may overtake our Infancy, or they may snatch us away in the Heat and
Bloom of Youth; or they may crush our riper and more confirmed Years; so that
Health and Vigor will justify no Man's being unprovided; But if they should
delay till the fourth Watch, till Old Age and Gray Hairs shed themselves upon
our heads, yet still this Forbearance does not prove, either that they might
not have broke in upon us sooner, or that they will never do it at all. Against
the former our Savior uses this very Motive to Caution in my Text; and to the
latter I may very properly apply that passage of the Prophet Habakuk concerning
his Vision; Habak. II 3.
It is (says he) for an Appointed Time, at the End it shall speak and not lie,
though it tarry, yet wait for it, because it will surely come, it will not
tarry.

2. Secondly, What has been said upon this Subject may serve for a very just
Reproof to the Unreasonableness and Vanity of such Men, as are eternally
bewailing the shortness of Life, and uttering such Complaints, as seem to
insinuate, that God deals hardly with Mankind, in allowing them no longer a
space for the working out their Salvation. My Brethren let no man deceive you
with vain words, Almighty God is a Fair and a Bountiful Master. He affords
every one abundant Opportunities for the Work appointed him to do. Were They
only to be accounted Long-lived, who have finished the Task and Business of
Life, then (God knows) the Generality of People live but a very little while.
But the Question in this case must not be, whether such Men have actually
wrought out their Salvation, but whether or no, supposing them to make the best
use of their time, they might not have done it, if they would. And the true
Christian way of Computation is to measure Life by the Improvements made of it,
rather than by a Term or number of Years, be they never so many. He that dies
Old in Virtue, can never be so Young, as to die untimely; and he that is a
stranger to this, though he should equal the years of Methusalem, yet as to all
the true purposes of Living, is an Infant still. In a word, If Men will trifle
away their precious Hours, when they are perpetually told how much depends upon
them, the Fault is their own, and who can help it? The shortest Life is
sufficient to bring a Man to Heaven, that will be Diligent and Careful, and
therefore the shortest Life is long enough. For ten thousand Ages can do no
more; and to the Idle, the Sensual, and Secure, even those ten thousand Ages
would be every whit as much too short.

3. Thirdly and Lastly. From what went before it does likewise appear, with
what Prudence and Piety our Holy Mother the Church of England teaches all her
Children to deprecate the Misery, and Judgment of a Sudden Death. Sudden I mean
in respect of its self, when it is not ushered in by any preceding Sickness, or
such visible sinkings of Nature, as God is commonly pleased to send before, for
the more awakening significations of his last great Call. It Is true indeed, not
knowing what hour the Lord does come, we should expect him every hour; and the
Suddenest Death will be no excuse to them that do not so; but yet we have a
great deal of Reason to wish and to pray, that so important a Change may
approach with something of Warning and Solemnity. The best of us all after his
nicest Preparation will find employment enough for his last hours; and I am apt
to believe it is very difficult even for Good men in health and vigor to bring
themselves into so serious a frame of mind, with regard to the next world, as
he may, who sees and feels himself Just upon the brink of it. A new Scene of
things and thoughts then opens it self; such as kindles a Zeal sometimes, where
it was not before; and makes it burn brighter, where it was. And often we see
such glad foretasts of Bliss, as abundantly compensate the bodily pains, and
make all a Good man's bed in his sickness. Besides all This, to be assisted
with the Advice of our Spiritual Guides, to be strengthened with the Viaticum of
the Church, the Sacrament and Seal of our Redemption, to be recommended by the
Intercessions of our parting Friends; These are mighty Comforts and Advantages.
So that a lingering Disease, which usually passes for a great Affliction, is in
this respect a Great Blessing; for while Death makes regular and leisurly
advances, he deals with us like a Fair Enemy, calls aloud to the Field, and
bids us make ready for the Combat. But to be hurried away into Eternity in a
Trice; To have Body and Soul torn asunder at one stroke, without one poor
Minute or two allowed to take leave, without one Lord have mercy upon me at the
last gasp! Jesus defend us! for sure this cannot but seem a dreadful thing to
every considering Christian. We will wish then, and we will pray earnestly,
that God would not deal so with us; but since it is possible, that he may use
This as well as any other Method of calling us to himself, it will be as much
as Heaven and our Souls are worth, to take care that the suddenest Death may
not be sudden in respect of Us, but that we be always watchful and upon our
Guard, Provided and Ready, and therefore especially so, because, as my Text
tells us, In such an hour as we think not, the Son of Man comes.

And now, Were it necessary (as I hope, after what has been said, it is not,)
to urge this Duty yet farther upon you, I promise my self that could not be
done more successfully, than by proposing to Your Imitation that Royal Example,
which ought, and certainly will not cease, to live in our Remembrance and
Admiration, as long as Time and Memory themselves shall last. But the
Endeavoring to represent This, is attended with many Difficulties. For Bright
Patterns in Christianity, and Masterpieces in Nature, are what a Man may show
respectful Intentions in Drawing, but there are few hands so Masterly, that
their Art and Colors can ever come up to the Life. Besides, Your own
Recollection can give you more lively Images of this kind, than all the Words
in the World are able to express; 1 King. X. 8.
and Happy sure were You, her Servants, who stood continually before Her, and
saw and heard her Wisdom and Goodness. Happy indeed, if you so saw, and so
recollect, as in your own Lives to express those Graces, which rendered Her the
Glory and Ornament of her Age, and Sex; the most conspicuous, not of Queens
only, but of Wives and Women; and to every Humble, and Charitable, and Devout
Christian, a Pattern of Prudence, and Piety, and Condescension; of all that
Sweetness and Good Nature, which Religion, and nothing but Religion, can
inspire Men with. But the Enlarging upon This Subject in This Place, and This
Presence, would be apt to provoke a Passion, which, though it might sit well
upon Friends and Attendants; yet ill agrees with the Reflections of a
Christian, upon so Pious, so Majestic a Death. All therefore that I shall add
is only This, That the Last Act of our Lives will depend upon those that go
before; and the only way to Die as your Admirable Mistress did, is to Live as
She did. When we can with Her declare, that our Provisions for Eternity are not
to make at our Last Hours, Then, and not till Then, may we hope to attain to
some competent Degree of Her Magnanimity, and Noble Resignation. Surprise is
the most dangerous Distress, that can possibly befall us in that great Conflict;
and They who have fenced themselves well against This, may with an Easiness and
Composure, like Hers, look the King of Terrors in the Face, and Triumph even in
Death. And may the Illustrious Virtues of our Sovereign excite this commendable
Emulation in us all, That we may not only attend and rejoice about her
Heavenly, as we did here about her Earthly Throne, but (which could not be done
here) that we may partake of, and share That Crown with her for Ever! Which GOD
of his Infinite Mercy grant for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

FINIS.

