A SERMON Preached before the KING AT WHITE-HAL, Septem. the 26th 1675.

By John Standish B.D. And one of His Majesty's Chaplains in Ordinary.

Published by His Majesty's Command.

LONDON: Printed for Henry Brom, at the Gun in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1676.

2 COR. Chap. 5. ver. 20. Now then we are Ambassadors for CHRIST, as though GOD
did beseech you by us, We pray you in CHRIST's stead, be ye reconciled to GOD.


THe matter of the Context which St. Paul infers these words upon, is of such
Transcendent Nature and Momentous Consequence, that it may well bespeak your
attention with that Angel's awakening Preface on the like subject: Fear not,
for behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall be to all
people! It Is such a strange and ravishing piece of News, as Corinth, the Eye of
all Greece, could not see, till our Apostle made the discovery: As the itching
Ears at Athens had never heard before He told it them too, from the UNKNOWN
GOD; nor could it enter into the heart of Jew or Gentile, Man or Angel, to
conceive, till the Eternal WORD came down from Heaven on purpose to reveal it.
It Is that stupendous Mystery hid from Ages; that most Magnificent, and most
Kingly work of God (as Clemens calls it) the Mystery of Man's Redemption; to
wit, That God was in Christ, reconciling the World to himself, not imputing
their trespasses, making him to be sin for us, that knew no sin, that we might
be made the Righteousness of God in him, Rejoice then, and be of good cheer, O
sons of men, for your sins are forgiven, Divine Justice is satisfied, the Debt
paid, the Bond cancelled, the Prison doors set open, and an Act of General
Pardon passed in the Court of Heaven, and sealed on Earth with the Blood of GOD
Himself, to make it more unchangeable than any Decree of the Medes and
Persians. The case is so well altered with the Bankrupt, Outlawed Seed of Adam,
that nothing hinders now; but all men may be saved and made for ever, if they
stand not in their own light: All degrees amongst them, from the Judge of
Areopagus, to the Jailor at Philippi; from the Lord Treasurer of Ethiopia, to
the Beggar at the Temple-gate; from the Elect Lady, to the Widow Dorcas; from
the Household of Caesar, to that of Stephanas; from the KING himself that sits
upon the Throne, to him that grindeth at the Mill, all have an undoubted Right
and Title to God the Father's Mercy, if they will but kiss and reverence the
Son; there is nothing wanting but their own consent to make them all Heirs of
God, Joint-heirs with Christ to everlasting Glory. Consent? Why, will there be
any demur upon that? It Is not to part with, but take possession of an
Inheritance purchased for them: Not to merit or buy, but only to accept and
wear an Immortal Crown. All Is a case; Man is a wilful, wise, and stately
Creature, that must be woed and courted to his own Felicity: And our gracious
LORD (blessed be his name) has made due Provision for that also; for when he
ascended up on high to his former glory, he left not us to the wide World, nor
Himself without a witness in doing us good: For he founded a certain Order of
men on purpose to be his Delegates and Vicars, to preach the Gospel of Peace
every where, and Remission of sins in his name, saying, as my Father sent me,
so send I you, and lo I am with you, and your Successors, to the Worlds end: To
them he committed his Word of Reconciliation, obliging them by all that is
Sacred, to leave no stone unturned, but use all laudable means to persuade and
entreat men (as in his own person) to come in upon Proclamation, that they may
have life. Now then We are Ambassadors, etc.

In the words I shall consider: 1. The Character of the Evangelical Ministry;
which is, 1. General, Ambassadors; and then more special and distinguishing,
Ambassadors for CHRIST. 2. The subject matter, sum and purport of their
Ambassy, be ye reconciled to God. 3. Their manner of Address, in delivering
this Ambassy, as though God did beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's
stead. I begin with the first; and, 1. With their general Character, We are
Ambassadors.

An Ambassador is properly one that represents his KING in a Foreign Country,
as a Deputy or Lieutenant does in his own Dominions; whose business is (...)
(as the old Greeks call it) to manage his Masters Affairs, Power and Polity
abroad; to treat with other great Kings and Emperors upon the most weighty
matters: Whereby (I suppose) he is distinguished from Nuncio's, Agents, and
other modern names of such as are either sent to petty Princes, like those of
Italy and Germany; or if to Sovereigns, upon State-Ceremony, or Messages of
lesser moment.

By this high Metaphor, the Apostle here calls the Evangelical Ministry; and
that (as I conceive) for some or other of the ensuing Reasons.

1. An Ambassador is supposed to be a man of Integrity, faithful to his
Instructions, and true to his important Trust. No Gifts or Pensions can tempt
his impregnable Fidelity to a surrender: He Is not to be practiced upon, or won
to base Compliances with a Foreign Crown; as knowing, that if he be taken
tardy, or make excursions beyond his Line, if by his fraud or falseness, he
lose the least hair of his Masters honor, it may chance to cost him his own
head. Much more is it required of them in the Text, as Stewards of the
Mysteries of God, that they be found faithful unto the death. The false Prophet
said, but true in that, though Balac would give me the house full of Gold and
Silver, I cannot go beyond the Commandment of the Lord. They dare not say,
Peace, peace, when there is no peace; nor flatter any man living in his sins,
to gain half a Kingdom. When they address to one of the Potentates (says
Epictetus) they remember there is Another above, that sees and hears all that
passes; and of the two, they are most obliged to please or fear Him. His surly
Yeomen of the Guard could not force the Lacedemonian Legates to fall down and
worship the mighty Persian Monarch, because against the express Law of
Lycurgus: From whence Origin infers, much less should Men or Devils affright
them that are engaged in this more Divine Ambassy, to give away their Masters
honor to the King of Persin, Greece, or any other, as being contrary to the
whole Tenor of his Everlasting Gospel. Wherefore let all such as Judas-like,
betray their Master for a few shekels of Silver; or teach the Traditions of Men
and Doctrines of Devils, for the Word of God, be (as St. Paul says) Anathema
Maranatha; that is, stand condemned till their Lord come.

2. An Ambassador is presumed to be one of more than common Prudence, Sagacity
and Judgment, that understands his Errand thoroughly, and such Imperial Laws as
concern the Pleas of his Masters Crown. Plutarch is too light and jocular, when
he is for sending them that most desire, and least deserve it, that so they may
be exposed and laughed at: For it is no laughing matter sure, when Crowns and
Kingdoms lie at stake: They had more need be men of good Wisdom and Brains,
that can discern and nick the different Humor and Guise of diverse Countries,
can soar aloft, and treat the Italian in a Circuit of Pompous words (before
they stoop to the Point;) and be as blunt with the Switzers, that hate all
Language: That understand the great Art of Timing things well; there being
(says Solomon) a proper season for every purpose under Heaven. I am sure, our
Lord charges his Ambassadors (saving their Innocence) to be wise as Serpents,
as being to deal with that Politic Old Serpent, and countermine the depths of
Satan. On this account St. Paul became all things to all men, that he might by
all means save some. For one Remedy will not serve for every Disease; nor are
all Truths proper to be spoken at all times. Our Savior did not challenge the
Jews for Idolatry or Usury, but for spiritual Pride, Hypocrisy and Traditions
(where the shoe pincht:) But then his Apostles turning to the Gentiles, fell
foul upon Superstition and Idolatry (their common Distempers) the first thing
they did; to inform their Successors, that they should not spend their breath
in declaiming against sins quite out of fashion, or confuting old obsolete
Heresies (which were much like killing a man that was dead before;) or treating
Christian Assemblies with the same Discourse that might better serve to convert
the Great Turk. They should not handle professed Christians (though never so
Carnal) as Origin, Justin Martyr or Tertullian did rank Heathen; nor lay out
all their pains and oil about the first Elements, though it be to demonstrate
our Religion to be the best of all others, and most perfective of Humane
Nature: For Principles are not to be made cheap, and every day brought upon the
Stage, specially where they were never denied. What though one man commit
Murder, another Adultery, a third Treason, a fourth Blasphemy; must I go prove
in all haste, and upon every turn, that there is a GOD? They all know that as
well as I, unless they will in their Huffs deny their own Being, and belie
their own Consciences: by Arguments too far fetched, or proving too much, we
prove nothing at all, or that which no man questions. Prudence should rather
teach us, with due regard to time, place and persons, to bend our utmost
strength and main counsels against the present and most predominant Errors,
whether in Faith or Morals.

3. An Ambassador should have compentent Eloquence, a Tongue well hung (we say)
for that his proper business is to speak, and he is said to have his Audience
as an Orator. He is to effect that which equity persuades, or necessity
requires by force of Argument, to prevent the force of Arms, and that is not to
be done by a mere noise and flood of words, without one drop of sense; but he
must be able to speak powerfully, to move, charm, lead men's hearts in triumph,
and conquer minds with the pleasing Arms of Eloquence. Antipater therefore
desired the Athenians to send their Orator no more to Him, because by his
prodigious Art of speaking (were the cause right or wrong) he baffled and
topp'd all offers made against him. Now that St. Paul alludes here prfessedly
to this property, I appeal to the very style of the Text: Only there is this
difference between CHRIST'S Ambassadors and all others, that they rely not upon
their own strength of parts and Oratory, nor take up with the common Artifices
and enticing words of man's wisdom; but their chief Rhetoric and height of
Eloquence lies in the Demonstration of the Spirit, Power and Wisdom of God.

4. Lastly, An Ambassador yet lacks one thing more before he goes; that is, a
Commission, to make his Acts Authentic, which were otherwise null and void,
and himself a great Cheat. Demosthenes has left a lasting Brand of Infamy upon
Aeschines, for going Ambassador to Philip on his own head: But whether we
should take the Orator for a faithful Historian in the case, may be perhaps a
question. No question such an Act were crimen laetae Majestatis in all Empires;
nay Treason in a very high degree, it being a greater affront to Sovereignty,
to counterfeit a King's Person, than either his Royal Coin, Hand or Seal. Thus
St. Paul demands peremptorily, How shall they preach, except they be sent? that
is, they are false Apostles, Traitors to God's everlasting Crown and Dignity,
that do presume it. Be a man never so gifted and able, never such a Son of
Thunder, never so Eloquent and Mighty in the Scriptures; yet without due
Authority, he has no part or lot in this matter: For no man takes this honor
to himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron, Heb. 5. Now as the
Apostles were in quality of Ambassadors extraordinary, commissioned immediately
by CHRIST himself, and endued with mighty gifts of the Spirit, necessary for
the first planting of the Christian Faith: So their lawful Successors are
Leigers, and in ordinary called also of God; but by the Mediation of those Men,
on whom the Apostles derived their Mission and Unction they received from
CHRIST.

Thus we see in what sense they are Ambassadors, and pardon me if I hence
infer, that they ought to be received as such, and accounted worthy of single
honor and respect (at least) for their very Work and Office sake.

To assert the Dignity of this Holy Calling amongst Christians, was once indeed
superfluous, when men were ready to adore and sacrifice to them as Gods, and
pluck out their own eyes for them: But is perhaps as necessary now, when the
World is run into the other extreme, and so far from communicating to them all
good things; ( Gal. 6.) that they will hardly give them one good word: When the
Apostate Emperors Scoff is so often laid in their dish, That CHRIST and his
Apostles despised the Wealth and Honors of this World: Though the arguing is
most inconsequent, from their times of Persecution, to ours of Peace; from
Heathen Empires, to Christian Monarchies. Besides, if they take the Context
along with them, they will find, that in those days Lay-Christians had as
little repute or wealth as the Clergy; all they had (though never so much) was
freely laid down at those poor Apostles feet, for the public service of the
Church.

As for those little mighty Wits, and goodly Masters of Reason, that are ever
whetting their Tongues and Pens to expose them to contempt; alas, they utterly
miss their aim; for it is the credit of our Religion and its Ministers, that
Nero spoke, Celsus wrote, and Julian acted against them. They are not moved at
Celsus his prodigious Calumny, that they conjured and dealt with familiar
Spirits; when (God knows) they only cast them out in the Name of JESUS. They
rejoice to suffer shame, and be Nicknamed Fops, Formalists, and Thinking-Fools,
by men of the same spirit with them that said the Son of GOD himself had a
Devil. But yet these Hero's might remember in their cold blood, and sober
intervals (if they have any) that as it is against the Law of Nations to cast
dirt upon, and offer indignities to an Ambassador, so the affront aims chiefly
at his Prince; and such as despise them, despise him that sent them, who will
in due time redeem his own Honor, and pay them that they have deserved: Mean
while we'll be revenged of them too, but only in our Churches Prayer (and God
speed it well!) that it may please him to forgive our Enemies, Persecutors and
Slanderers, and to turn their hearts. But,

2. You need not fear the Sons of Levi should take too much upon them in this
high Title, if you consider their more special Character, as they are
Ambassadors for CHRIST. A King indeed, but one whose Kingdom was not of this
World: Who never used more secular Pomp in all his life, but once riding into
Jerusalem upon an Asses Colt: A King indeed, but his Courtiers poor Fishermen
and Publicans; his Scepter a Reed, his Crown made of Thorns, and his Throne an
ignominious Cross: And his Disciples are not greater than their Lord, they
pretend not to dispose of Crowns and Kingdoms, (let Him at Rome answer for
that, who says, we know by what Right and Precedent, All these will I give
thee:) They claim no Secular Honors or Privileges, but what they owe to the
pious Bounty of Christian Princes, who are graciously pleased to treat them as
Prophets; and shall therefore receive a Prophets reward: Their power (says a
Learned man) is armed only with a spiritual Sword (the wounds whereof are
little felt or dreaded in this World) supported mostly with a mean temporal
Fortune; yet it has stood hitherto against all Opposition, and shall stand for
ever.

But whether they meet with Friends or Foes, Love or Hatred, Frowns or Favors
here, they are sure of a Reward most glorious hereafter, if they can but give
their Master (who is since declared King of kings) a good account of their
great Errand and Business here on Earth. Which leads me to the second thing
considerable, The subject matter, sum and purport of their Ambassy, in those
words, Be ye reconciled unto God.

Reconciliation imports a returning into Favor and Friendship, after a former
Enmity or Falling-out between Parties. Now though man be the sole Party
offending, that made the breach by sin, his own voluntary act; yet God has
been graciously reconciled to Him ever since the hour of CHRIST'S death, which
he accepted as a full and perfect satisfaction for the sins of the whole World:
All the difficulty is (which so many Ambassadors are daily sent about) to
prevail with man to be reconciled to God. Reconciled? Surely that must be an
hard saying, clogged with some impossible Condition, that makes men start so
at, fly from, and not endure to hear on it. Yes, it is so; for it requires them
to do -- What shall I say? to do just nothing, in comparison; rather to be
passive (as the Verb (...) here is) and not hinder God from making them happy.
Yes; it requires them to renounce their own Merits (and that is a mighty piece
of Self-denial for wretched sinners that never had any) and then cry Peccavi,
before they can obtain Mercy: It lays that grievous burden upon them, to be
Friends with God, or rather to suffer God to be so far Lord of their Wills, as
to advance them (like the great Abraham) to be his bosom Friends and
Favorites. In a word, and not to mince the matter, there being no name under
Heaven, whereby we can be saved, but the name of JESUS, it requires us all to
believe steadfastly in, and depend wholly upon Him, both for pardon of our sins,
and power against them. 1. For Pardon, we must sue that out in and through his
Death; for without his precious, Bloodshed, there is no Remission of sins; and
without our acceptance, none for us however. Though there be Balm in Gilead,
and a Physician there, yet if men will not use them, no wonder if they perish,
and their blood be upon their own heads: They may think never so well of their
own Works and Ways, but when all is done, they must take Sanctuary in that new
and living Way, which he consecrated for us through the veil, that is, his
Flesh, Hebr. 10. or they are undone for ever. For as we are not of kin to
CHRIST, but only by the Mother's side, as he is flesh of our flesh, and bone of
our bone, and God the Father does forgive no man's sins, but for Christ's
Merits, offered in our Nature upon the Cross: And so does he convey this and
all other Blessings to us, only through his Son as our Mediator; that is,
through his Humanity, as the only Band by which we are united and reconciled to
the Divine Nature. Wherefore, 2. We must depend upon him also for Grace and
Power against sin, by virtue of his Resurrection and Life, to purify our
Hearts and Consciences, and keep that Tyrant Sin from reigning (at least) in
our mortal Bodies. Never did the most Gracious Prince pardon Rebels, but upon
that one Condition, That they would turn Loyal Subjects: Therefore (says St.
Paul) if any man be in Christ, he is a new Creature; he has a new heart, new
desires, new principles, new life, all things new: He Is not the same man, he is
quite changed, like the Prodigal Son, come to himself, to a sense of his former
follies, and present wants; or like the man among the Tombs, who when the
Devils were gone out of him, sat dutifully at Jesus feet, clothed, and in his
right mind. This is indeed the hardest Chapter in all our Word of
Reconciliation; but yet he that runs may read it, if (with holy David) he takes
the right course, Commit thy way unto the Lord, and put thy trust in him, and
he shall bring it to pass: For is there any thing impossible with God. The
heart of all men, even of Kings (says Solomon) is in the hand of the Lord, as
Rivers of water, he turns it whithersoever he pleases. What though Nature of
it self be weak and impotent, so long as it is now endued with power from on
high? Indeed our Savior tells us plainly (to show us our own insufficiency)
without Me ye can do nothing: But St. Paul as truly answers for himself, and us
also, I can do all things through CHRIST that strengthens me. And when we read
that such Virtue went out of Christ (whilst in the form of a Servant) that it
cured the Woman of her Bloody Issue, upon but touching the Hem of his Garment,
why should it seem incredible that his glorified Humane Nature (now he is Lord
of all) should distill his vertual Presence and Life upon our Souls, to heal our
infirmities? that he should impart his own Graces to us, and derive certain
measures of the same holy Spirit upon us, which himself as man, had without
measure; because in him the fullness of the Godhead dwelt bodily? Why should it
be thought strange, that this holy Spirit that united GOD and Man in one
Person, should as really unite us to our own Nature in CHRIST, the Body to the
Head, the Branches to the Vine, and make him dwell in us, and us in him; him
one with us, and us with him, as the Scripture speaks. If any man think our
Union with CRIST to be merely Political; that is, no more than you may conceive
between King Bramble (in the Parable) and the rest of the Trees his Subjects,
he is in a very novel and gross mistake: To which I shall at present only
oppose the words of two or three sound Divines of our own Church; Though the
Holy Ghost does work Faith and other Graces in our Souls, yet he does not by
these unite our Souls or Spirits immediately to himself, but unto CHRIST'S
Humane Nature: So the profound Dr. Jackson; CHRIST is as truly united to me,
and I to him, as my arm is united and knit to my shoulder: So the Judicious
Hooker in plain English, By the influence of his present life, CHRIST
undergoes, as it were, a second Incarnation, living and dwelling in our hearts
by his Grace, and reigning powerfully in our souls by Faith: So the Learned
Chillingworth, to add no more. So that upon the whole matter, the sum of our
Ambassy is this, That JESUS CHRIST is both the Author and finisher of our
Faith; that he has solemnly promised to give his holy Spirit to them that ask
him; that if men be not wanting to themselves, but resign their hearts to his
Conduct, nay, if they don't forcibly resist him, and quench the holy flames he
kindles in their Souls, through his Servants Ministry, he will make them real
partakers of the Grace of CHRIST, by working in them a firm Hope, fervent Love,
pure Conscience, clean Heart, sober Mind, chaste Body, pious Soul, holy Life,
and first and last, a true Faith in JESUS CHRIST; without which it is
impossible to please, or to be reconciled to GOD.

And if these things be so, I cannot but animadvert a while upon those false
Apostles, and deceitful Workers, who instead of building, are ever pecking at
the Foundation of our Faith with their Axes and Hammers, in great Blasphemies,
and lesser Criticisms, to change the old sound word of Reconciliation, for new
Ideas, and devices of their own, and other men's Brains: That would supplant
Christian Religion with Natural Theology; and turn the Grace of God into a
wanton Notion of Morality; that impiously deny both the Lord that bought them
and his Holy Spirit, that should seal them to the day of Redemption, making
Reason, Reason, Reason, their only Trinity, and sole Standard, whereby to
measure both the Principles and Conclusions of Faith; that preach up Natural
and Moral Religion, without the Grace of God, and Faith in Christ; which is at
best, beginning at the wrong end, and making Superstructures without a
Foundation: For the Jew cannot be saved by the Law of Moses, much less the
Gentile by all the Works of the Law of Nature; which unless actuated by a
lively Faith, are no better than the cutting off a Dogs neck, or the Sacrifice
of a Fool. A Truth that Socrates himself (in an ancient Dialogue ascribed to
Plato) makes no scruple to consent unto, when he says ingenuously -- that no
man can be good and virtuous by Nature, Art, Discipline, Example, or any other
manner of way, but only by Divine Inspiration: So far do they outstrip a very
Heathen, that teach -- a good Life will carry men to Heaven, though they be
Jews, Turks, Antichristians, or never such damnable Heretics in point of
Faith. If any such as these be crept in among us unawares, I am sure there is
as much need of a Test for them (how slily soever they carry it by amusing the
World with other fears) as for the rankest Error in all the Pope's Dominions.
And I beseech you (Brethren in our LORD) beware of them: Ye shall know them by
their Fruits, as He Himself foretells you: He does not mean the Fruits of their
Lives (for they are the closest of all other Hypocrites, they go demurely in
Sheeps clothing too:) But the Fruits and Consequents of their Doctrine; which
are dismal enough (one would think) to make themselves afraid, as Moses was of
his own Rod turned into a Serpent: For they are such as these -- That there is
no such thing as supernatural Grace -- That CHRIST dyed in vain -- That ye are
yet in your sins -- and every man must be his own Savior, or he is damned for
ever. From which -- Good LORD deliver us! and GOD grant, that, by the Wisdom
and Vigilance of the Defender of our Faith, and his Prelates under Him, no such
Foreign Poison may be privily conveyed (through Press or Pulpit) into our
Church: That those black-mouthed Authors bearing date from Irenopolis, may
receive so timely and public a check, as that we shall not need to fear their
growing the only Divines in Vogue by the next Age: That we may never live to
see our Youth trained up in the Cracovian Catechism; never live to hear our
selves called by any other New Name, but that of GOD'S own giving: That as the
Disciples were first called at Antioch, so they may be last called CHRISTIANS
here in England.

And now I come to the third and last part of my Text, The manner of the true
Ambassadors Address; in those words -- As though GOD did beseech you by us, We
pray you in CHRIST'S stead.

Which is first modest and humble: We pray and beseech. Let those Haughty
Polish Envoys swagger themselves and others out of their Creed: Let the
Disciplinarian Agents Reprobate all the World, but their own private Elect: Let
the Pope's Legates a Latere, Lord it over men's Estates and Consciences; let
Them will and require all upon pain of Damnation, to put their necks under his
feet, who in the Pride of his heart writes himself, Servus Servorum, that is
(in the Vulgar Translation) Lord of lords: As for us we have no such Message,
we have not so learned Christ. We only pray you as men for whom CHRIST died,
quit your selves like men, and fly to Mercy speedily, lest you fall into the
hands of Justice, by letting your Sun go down upon the Wrath of God. You have
all a merciful Savior, who never did, never will refuse a sincere Penitent (if
you will take his own word for it) Him that comes unto me, ((...)) I will in
no wise, by no means cast out. We beseech you as Christians, who have not only
heard there is a Holy Ghost, but are baptized into the name of the Eternal
TRINITY; have often tasted of the heavenly Gifts and Powers of the World to
come. We beseech you let the love of CHRIST constrain you, to improve the
Talent put into your hand, and suffer his Holy Spirit to blow up those sparks
of Grace ye have covered over with ashes in your hearts. O let not that Blessed
Comforter depart finally from you for the World, as he did from Saul; (for then
an Evil Spirit will soon possess and vex, and send you to Endor:) But if ye
have neglected his Grace, and fallen into sin (as who can plead Not-guilty? Who
can tell how often he offends?) implore his assistance heartily, wait his
approach humbly, and attend his motions earnestly, and he will raise you again
to Newness of Life, he will bring you fresh Auxiliaries from your glorified
Savior, and in due time unite you so firmly unto Him, that your sins shall be
chargeable only upon Him; His Merits put on your Account, and sufficient Virtue
shall go out of Him to cleanse you from all Unrighteousness.

2. And lastly, be their Address never so humble, it runs in a more then Humane
style; for, We pray you in CHRIST'S stead, and however you put us off till a a
more convenient season: Yet (as the voice from Heaven said) hear HIM; HIM that
once took the Curse of God upon him for you, and is ever at his right hand
interceding for his Blessings on you: HIM, to whom all power is committed both
in Heaven and Earth; who even as Son of Man, is now Lord of Angels, Lord of
all. The Requests of Kings have been used to go for Commands with dutiful
Subjects; And when the KING OF KINGS prays and begs but one thing of you, can
ye possibly deny Him? Sure no Man can be so much a Monster; no Gentleman so
much a Jew. We pray you in Christ's stead: What shall I say more? Yes; not only
the glorified Son of Man, but GOD himself does beseech you by us too. Wonder
not that he speaks to you by men of like-passions with your selves, unless you
wonder at his infinite Mercy: For ye can neither see nor hear HIM and live; one
glimpse (ye know) even of CHRIST'S glorious Body, struck Saul to the ground
blind, and half dead: Speak Thou with us (said Israel to Moses) and let not GOD
speak with us, lest we Die. Besides, it is GOD'S Prerogative alone, to show his
own Strength by the most weak Instruments. It was not a man of mean Person and
Presence, and then a Prisoner at the Bar too, that made the stout Felix shake
and tremble: It was not Elijah's word (a silly plain Prophet) that fell like
Thunder upon the great guilty Ahab, and struck a Palsy into his Joints, and
forced him to his Sackcloth and Ashes; but the Word of the Living God; which
if, as soft Fire, it cannot melt, like a strong Hammer often breaks the Rocky
Heart in pieces. The same GOD does not now thunder and threaten, but pray and
beseech you by us: Hear, O Heavens, and give ear, O Earth! The Almighty Creator
becomes (as it were) an humble Petitioner to his own Creature; and to show he
is in good earnest, because he could not swear by a greater, he has sworn by
himself, upon his own Life and Honor, As I live (says the LORD) I will not
the death of a sinner: Who can despise such ardent Love? Who can spurn at such
infinite tender Bowels? Who can resist that still small Voice, the secret, but
piercing and importunate whispers of his Holy SPIRIT in your hearts, which the
Tongue of Men and Angels cannot express, no, nor all the powers of Men and
Devils (without your own consent) render ineffectual? And what does the Lord
thy God thus require, nay request and beseech of thee, O Man? If he had bid
thee do some great thing, to cure thy natural Leprosy, would thou not have
done it? How much rather then, when he says unto thee, only wash in the blood
of the Covenant, and he clean? Only be reconciled, be hearty friends with thy
God, make what returns thou can of his wonderful Love. Indeed the tinckling
of three little Bells in a Country Steeple, and the Peasants flocking to the
Towns end and crying, GOD SAVE THE KING! adds not much to the Majesty of a
Potent Monarch; yet (as that great Preacher and Prelate observes) it is all
they can do; it shows their honest love, and hearty affections, and so sounds
well, and pleases the Royal ear: Much more will your merciful God accept the
will for the deed: And let but men husband their proportion of Grace as well as
they can; let them but show their integrity of heart, and earnest desires, and
then do their faithful endeavors to serve, love and honor Him, and he asks no
more; being ready to supply all their defects and imperfections, out of the
inexhaustible Fountain of CHRIST'S Righteousness. This is all that God does
beseech you by us; and if any man will deny him this, he must needs confess his
Damnation is just; which GOD forbid, and I have done: For we are Ambassadors
for CHRIST, as though GOD the HOLY GHOST did beseech you by us, We pray you in
CHRIST GOD THE SON'S stead, be ye reconciled to GOD THE FATHER. To which
Eternal TRINITY, ONE GOD, be the Eternal Kingdom, Power and Glory. AMEN.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of some Sermons, etc. printed for, and sold by Henry Brom, since
the dreadful Fire of London, to 1675.
A Guide to Eternity, by John Bona, useful for Families, and fit to be given at
Funerals. Dean W. Lloyd's Sermon before the King about Miracles. 6 d. -- His
Sermon at the Funeral of John Lord Bishop of Chester. 6 d. -- His Sermon before
the King in Lent, 1673. 6 d. The Seasonable Discourse against Popery, in
quarto. 6 d. -- The Defense of it, quarto. 6 d. -- The Difference betwixt the
Church and Court of Rome, in quarto. 6 d. The Papists Apology to the Parliament
answered. 6 d. Mr. Naylor's Commemoration Sermon for the Honorable Col.
Cavendish. 6 d. Mr. Sayers Sermon at the Assizes at Reading. 6 d. Mr. Tho.
Tanner's Sermon to the scattered Members of the Church. 6 d. Mr. Stanhop's four
Sermons on several Occasions, octavo bound. 1 s. 6 d. Papal Tyranny, as it was
exercised over England for some Ages, with two Sermons on the fifth (...)
November, by Dr. Du Moulin, in quarto. 1 s. 6 d. -- His Sermon at the Funeral
of Dr. Turner Dean of Canterbury. 6 d. Bishop Lany's last Sermon, preached
before the King, against Comprehension. Principles and Duties of Natural
Religion. By John Wilkins, late Lord Bishop of Chester. Mr. Farindon's 130
Sermons, in Folio.

