A SERMON Preached March 6. 1675.

In the Cathedral Church of S. Peter in YORK; Before the Right Honorable Sir
TIMOTHY LITTLETON, Knight. AND VERE BERTIE, Esquire, His Majesty's Judges of ASSIZE
for the Northern Circuit.

By William Stainforth, M. A. Rector of St. Mary Bishop-hill the Elder in the
CITY of YORK.

LONDON, Printed for R. Royston, Bookseller to his most Sacred Majesty, and R.
Lambert Bookseller in York, 1676.

To the Right Worshipful Sir EDMUND JENNINGS, High Sheriff of the County of
YORK.
SIR,
IT was by your Command that this SERMON was first Preached, and now Printed;
and I have very good grounds to hope, that so urgent a Reason of its
Publication will secure me against the censure and imputation of Vainglory,
and also recommend the Discourse, and entitle it to a fairer Acceptance; for it
is no inconsiderable advantage to have the Approbation of so discerning, and
yet so unbiassed a Judgment, as you are known to excel in. And as nothing but
this consideration could have tempted me to expose any thing of mine to so
public a View; so seeing this is exposed, I humbly beg that you would continue
to it the Honor and Aid of your Protection: and that you would be pleased to
accept of it as a sincere, though small, acknowledgement of those undeserved
favors, which you have bestowed upon,

SIR, Your most humble and most obedient Servant; Will. Stainforth.

A SERMON Preached before the Right Honorable Sir Timothy Littleton, Knight;
and Vere Bertie, Esquire, His Majesty's Judges of Assize for the Northern
Circuit.
Prove. XXI. 3. To do Justice and Judgment is more acceptable to the Lord than
sacrifice.
AS the Jews were a carnal and fleshly People, so were they chiefly intent on,
and mindful of those Duties, that were most consistent with their earthly Lusts
and Inclinations; and because God had separated them from the rest of the
World, and taken them into his immediate Care and Government, and had given
them particular Laws and Rules for the celebration of his public Worship, they
fondly imagined, that God would be indulgent to them, in an extraordinary
manner: and that if they did but rigorously observe the outward Rites and
Ceremonies of Religion, they should by that means atone for all their other
Guilts, and render God propitious and favorable to them. And this conceit took
such deep Roots in their hearts, and prevailed so generally amongst them, that
though never any people was more regardless of the essential and fundamental
Duties of Religion, nor less concerned for inward Purity and Holiness of mind,
yet never was any more strictly observant of the external and formal parts of
Devotion. Thus they would fast often, and pray much, and think no sacrifices
too chargeable or expensive for them; and yet at the same time they would gripe
and oppress their Neighbors, offer all kinds of injustice and fraud to one
another, cherish in their hearts evil Lusts and foul desires, and offend God by
plain, open, and direct Immoralities. This God often complains of by his
Prophets, and tells them, that for this reason he abhorred and detested all
their religious Formalities and costly Sacrifices; and if they would not reform
and repent, he would withdraw his favor and protection from them, and pour
down the fiercest instances of his Wrath and Indignation upon them: for that
which he delighted most in, was the Purity and Holiness of their minds, and the
observance of such Duties, as tended most to the interest and preservation of
Societies, and the mutual benefits and advantages of one another. And for this
very Reason Solomon tells them, To do Justice and Judgment is more acceptable
to the Lord than Sacrifice.

The Text is one entire Sentence or Proposition, and has within it self a
complete sense (as the rest of the Proverbs of this Book for the most part
have) without either any necessary dependence upon any thing going before, or
reference to any thing coming after. And the words are plain, obvious, and
accommodated to the most ordinary understandings. So that as I need not spend
any time in searching into the Contexture of the words, so neither in examining
the explication of several Commentators and Expositors upon them. And therefore
I shall only further endeavor to confirm the Proposition deduced from the
Text,

1. From other places of Holy Scripture. 2. From the different nature of these
two Duties. 3. From the different ends of them. 4. From the different effects
of them.
I. From other places of Holy Scripture, wherein we find God rejecting and
abhorring their Sacrifices, if they were not accompanied with a real
Repentance, and inward sincerity of mind, and the outward works of Mercy and
Justice. For though God did solemnly enjoin the Jews the use of Sacrifices,
adopted them by his express Command into their Religion and public Worship,
and gave them particular Rules and Canons for their performance and
observation; yet he was so far from intending that they should be either their
only Righteousness, or the principal part of it, that he never accepted of
them, when they were not in conjunction with other Duties. And for this reason,
the Sacrifices of the wicked are said to be an abomination to the Lord,
especially when he brings it with a wicked mind, Prove. 21. 27. and such are all
the sacrifices of unjust and unrighteous men, who have no regard to the known
Laws of Equity, and make no difference betwixt what is profitable, and what is
just; but having rooted out of their minds all sense of moral Honesty, make use
of all the Arts of Cunning, and the force of Power to defraud and oppress, to
undermine and lay hold on the Rights and Properties of others. And accordingly
Micah 6. 6, 7. we have the Prophet putting this Question, Wherewith shall I
come before the Lord, and bow my self before the most High? shall I come before
him with burnt Offerings, with Calves of a year old? will the Lord be pleased
with thousands of Rams, and with ten thousand Rivers of Oil? Shall I give my
firstborn for my transgression, the fruit of my Body for the sin of my Soul?
The Answer to all this is in the Verse following, Viz. He has showed thee, O
man, what is good, and what does the Lord require of thee, but to do justly,
love mercy, and walk humbly with thy God? From whence it is plain, that though
God had commanded sacrifices as the principal part of his external Worship, yet
he had all along the chiefest regard to the Duties of Justice, Mercy and
Humility. These were the most especial Objects of his Delight and Pleasure; and
without the Union and Combination of these Virtues Sacrifice was an Abomination
to him. Sacrifice without Justice was as ungrateful as Robbery; Sacrifice
without Mercy, as provoking as Murder; and Sacrifice without Humility, as
affronting as Hypocrisy. The wickedness of the man shed a guilt into the
Offering; and a Sacrifice of Atonement, when it was brought by an unjust hand,
was so odious and offensive to God, that it stood in need of another for its
expiation. And therefore God speaks to all unjust and unrighteous men, To what
purpose is the multitude of your Sacrifices? Bring no more vain Oblations to
me; Incense is an Abomination to me, Isa. I. 11. From all which places, and
several others which I forbear to mention, it is evident, that God rejected
Sacrifices, though they were Duties of his own appointment, though they were
established parts of his public worship, if they were not accompanied with
Justice and other moral Duties, and consequently that to do Justice is more
acceptable to the Lord than Sacrifice.

II. To do Justice and Judgment is more acceptable to the Lord than Sacrifice
is evident from the different Nature of these two Duties, and the different
Grounds, from whence arises our Obligation to them. For Sacrifice was grounded
upon a positive Precept and Institution: It had its rise from the mere will and
good pleasure of God Almighty; so that if Mankind had not received some express
Revelation concerning the necessity of this Duty, in all likelihood they would
never of themselves have found out any reason for its Observation: But Justice
has its foundation in the Nature of God; and if God had never delivered to
Mankind any promulgate Law concerning Justice, yet the very natural Notion we
have of God and his Essential Justice would have sufficiently instructed us in
our indispensable Obligations to its practide: and both these I shall endeavor
to make appear.

1. Sacrifices were grounded upon a positive Precept, and the Reason of their
Obligation was derived from the Express and Revealed Will of God. It Is true
indeed, that all Nations that have had any sense of God, and owned his Being by
any public Worship and solemn Acknowledgement, have made use of Sacrifices for
this very end and purpose; and from this universal consent in practice some
have inferred Sacrifices to be a Natural Duty, and that it was founded in some
common principle in Reason. So Paulus Burgensis: In qualibet aetate, and apud
quaslibet hominum Nationes, semper fuit aliqua Sacrificiorum Oblatio; Quod
autem est apud omnes, natural est. In all Ages (says he) and among all
Nations, there was always some kind of Sacrifices. Now that which was so
universal, must of necessity spring from some common principle in Nature. Thus
far indeed I confess sacrificing Natural, as it was a solemn and sensible Ri^e
of Worship, because Nature which teaches us to worship God in public, does
also instruct us to express this public Worship by some external Rites and
sensible Instances: But that Nature does so point out and determine the kind,
as to teach us to do this by Sacrifices, which consists in the destruction of
living and the consumption of useful things, none I presume will ever be able
to make out any tolerable proof or evidence to confirm it. For to use the words
of a late Learned Prelate, in his excellent Discourse concerning Natural
Religion: When it is well considered (says he) what little ground there is to
persuade a man, left to his own free Reason, that God should be pleased with
the killing and burning of Beasts, or with the destroying of such things by
fire, of which better use might be made, if they were disposed of some other
way; I say when it is well considered what little reason there is to induce
such a man to believe, that the killing or burning of Beasts or Birds, or any
other thing useful to mankind, should of it self be a proper and natural means
to testify our subjection to God, or to be used by way of expiation from sin;
it will rather appear probable, that the original of this practice was from
Institution, and that our first Parents were by particular Revelation
instructed in this way of Worship, from whom it was delivered down to their
successive Generations by verbal Tradition; and by this means was continued in
those Families who departed from the Church, and proved Heathen in the first
Ages of the World; amongst whom this Tradition was in course of time, for want
of care and frequent renewals, corrupted with many humane superinducements,
according to the genius or interests of several Times or Nations.

And indeed if we consult merely natural Light, we shall discover no necessary
Foundations in that for Sacrifices; for that does not at all teach us, that the
slaying of living Creatures, or the consumption of any useful thing by Fire
should be any way pleasing or grateful to God; or that he should accept of it
as an acknowledgement of our dependence and subjection, or as a satisfaction
for sin and disobedience. For what are Blood and Smoke to the God of Spirits?
or what compensation can the slaying of my Beasts make to Divine Justice for
not mortifying my lusts? Can the Blood of a Bull, which is a corporeal thing,
cleanse the guilt of my Soul, which is a moral defect? Or does the Immortal God
stand in need of Meat and Drink? Some of the Heathens indeed fancied, that
their Gods were delighted and refreshed with the steams and vapors, that
ascended from the Sacrifices; and therefore they used to call their Sacrifices,
(...), the Food of God; but the reason of this mistake, might be, as I humbly
conceive, either First, the malice and cunning of the Devil, who because he
could not wholly root out of men's minds the belief of a God, did therefore
endeavor to adulterate the true Notion of Him; that so men having their Souls
possessed with false conceptions and representations of the Deity, they might
the more easily mistake both the right manner and the true Object of their
Worship; and by that means be more readily drawn to give and appropriate it to
the Devil. Or Secondly, men finding that Sacrifice had been the constant and
general way of Worshipping God; and understanding neither the Original nor the
true Reason of its Practice; they might fondly imagine (since they knew no
better) their Lusts having darkened their understandings) that God might some
way or other be pleased and recreated with the Fumes that rise from the Altar.
But this was a ridiculous mistake and folly, altogether repugnant to the
perfections of the Divine Nature, and the Sentiments of sober Reason, and is
sufficient to convince us, that Sacrifice was a Duty not directed by the light
of Nature, but that it must be derived from some Positive Precept and
Institution.

But now Justice is a Virtue, that has its foundation in the Nature of God: For
as the Notion of God does include in it all possible and conceivable
perfection, so from thence do we discern Justice to be one of his most
Essential Attributes. For it would be unreasonable to imagine, that he who is
immutably good and perfect, could fall under any Temptation of doing any thing,
that would not suit with the strictest Rules of Justice and Equity. And
therefore the Heathens, who had no knowledge of God, but what was conveyed unto
them by the Light of natural Reason, reckoned Justice amongst the fundamental
Properties of the Divine Nature; and Plato affirmed, (...), That cannot be said
in any kind or respect whatsoever to be unjust, but so far as is possible to be
most just. And that this was the general belief amongst them may appear by that
universal Custom of Attesting God by solemn Oaths, whereby amongst other of his
Attributes, they particularly owned that of his Justice, and that he would
certainly avenge all fraud and unrighteousness. And what was thus dictated by
the Light of Nature, is fully confirmed unto us by Gods Revelations in his own
Word; wherein he has made such ample discoveries of his own Nature, and of his
Dealings with men, that we must needs conclude, that Justice is one of the
moral perfections of the Divine Nature, and that God may as soon cease to be,
as fail to be just. Shall not the Judge of all the world Genesis 16. ^5.
do right? says Abraham. Which Question is an emphatical Affirmation that he
will do so. And the Apostle St. Paul rejects all suspicions to the contrary,
with an Absit. What shall we say then? Is there unrighteousness Romans 9. 14.
with God? God forbid! And for this Reason Princes and Governors, Magistrates
and Judges, who are Gods Vicegerents and Representatives, and to whom he has
entrusted the care and government of the People committed to their charge, are
said to Psalm. 82. 6.
be Gods. And Gods they are not so much in respect of the sacredness of their
Character, and greatness of their Power, as in the due exercise of their
Authority and regular Administration of Justice. For when conscience is their
Councellor, and the Law their Rule, and the public Good their End; when they
defend the Innocent and punish the Criminal, and distribute Justice without the
mixtures of Passion, and the corruptions of Partiality, then do they shine with
Divinity indeed, and they resemble God not only in the participations of his
Greatness, but also in the likeness of his Integrity, which adorns their
Office, and justifies their Titles more than all their Furrs and Robes and
Ensigns of Honor. Zeal for Justice and orderly execution of it, is that which
Deifie; Magistrates, exalts their Stations, raises them above the common level
of Mankind, sets a glory and a luster upon their persons, makes them sit
Objects of our Homage and Reverence; and we may justly affirm of such, that
Gods are come down to us in the likeness of men.

But then on the other side, when Magistrates employ their Power to ends
contrary to those for which it was given them, and make use of Gods Authority
in a way repugnant to his Will ( i. e.) when they neglect the Works of Mercy
and Justice, they are no more Gods but Idols, nay, the worst sort of Idols,
which being made to represent, do yet foully reproach the divine Power. Idols
did I say? perhaps you will think them worse, when I tell you, that the Devil is
said (...), to invert the Order of things, to change their natural respects and
Relations, to disgrace Virtue and countenance Vice, to put shame upon Integrity
and security upon Sin, to punish the Innocent and favor the Guilty. And then
whom such Magistrates are like, that are seduced by his Temptations, and
corrupted by his Example, you will find no great difficulty in making a
conjecture; for it is impossible they should any way resemble God, because
Justice is essential to his Nature, and can no more be separated from him, than
he can be divided from himself.

And must it not hence follow, that Justice which is so essential to Gods
Nature, must be more acceptable to him than Sacrifice which depended merely
upon his Will? Is not God best pleased with himself, having all possible and
conceivable Perfections and Excellencies within himself? And must not he then
in an especial manner be delighted with those Duties, that are most like and
agreeable to himself? that bear the Impress of his own Nature, the Character
and Signature of his own Being? and is not Justice of this sort? does it not
make us like God, and partakers of the Divine Nature? and do not Magistrates,
who rule by his Authority, acquire by it a more exalted kind of Divinity,
become Gods to the Public Weal, and subordinate Saviors to the whole
Kingdom? And this is sufficient to prove, that to do Justice and Judgment is
more acceptable to the Lord than Sacrifice.

III. To do Justice and Judgment is more acceptable to the Lord than Sacrifice
is evident from the different ends of these two Duties. For Sacrifice was not
enjoined for its own sake; but Justice always was, and is, and ever will be.

First, Sacrifice was not enjoined for its own sake; For,

1. Sacrifices were ordained to be Types of the Sacrifice of Christ, who was to
be offered up in the Fullness of Time upon the Cross; they were instituted to be
Figures and Shadows (silent Prophesies) of the death of the Messiah; and the
virtue they had of expiating legal Guilt, was a suitable Type of the infinite
efficacy and meritoriousness of the Blood of the Son of God, which was a
sufficient Expiation of the Moral and Eternal Guilt of the Sins of all Mankind.
This is clear from several places of the New Testament, and more especially
from St. Paul's Epistle to the Hebrews.

2. Sacrifices were enjoined to be as a Guard and Security for other Duties, to
be as a Hedge and a Fence for the Moral Precepts, and especially to defend the
Jews against Idolatry: for the Jews were an extremely vain and carnal people,
and very prone to be in love with, and to follow the superstitions and
idolatrous practices of the Gentiles; and therefore rather than God would
suffer them to be enticed, and drawn away with the Vanities of the Heathens, he
gratifies their childish humor by instituting a pompous way of Worship that
was agreeable to their Infant-State and present weakness, and commands them to
offer Sacrifice to himself the true God, lest otherwise through the example of
the Gentiles they should have been tempted to have done it to Idols. And
accordingly Justin Martyr says particularly of the Sacrifices, That the end of
them was to keep the Jews from Idolatry: and this also Trypho acknowledges,
though he was a Jew, and one that vigorously asserted the Law, and mightily
gloried in it. And Tertullian is of the same opinion concerning the end of
their Institution, for he says, Populum pronum Idololatriae Adv. Marcion. l. 2.
ejusmodi officiis Religioni suae voluit astringere.

And this shows that Sacrifices were not commanded for themselves, and that the
goodness of this Duty was not Natural and Intrinsecal, but Relative and
External, and depended merely upon the success that it had in promoting Duties
of a higher Nature, and especially in securing the Jews against Idolatry.

But now Justice always was, and is, and ever will be enjoined for its own
sake: It has a natural Goodness and Beauty in it, which at all Times, and in
all Ages recommends it to the practice of Mankind. Justice is one of those
Duties, that is to be beloved (...) (as Aristotle speaks) for its own self: It
does not stand in need of any borrowed luster to make us enamoured with it; but
its own proper goodness and intrinsique worth sufficiently bespeaks our
Obligations to it, and shows that we cannot be unjust without ceasing in some
degree to be men: For Justice is a Duty that arises from the Moral frame and
constitution of our Souls, and we must offer violence to our selves, if we be
not just to others. He that does to another, what he would not have done to
himself, affronts the Principles of his own Nature, and unsettles his own Peace
by doing wrong to his Neighbor: for Conscience will recoile, when it finds its
indisputable Maxim contradicted by a contrary practice; and a man creates a
mighty uneasiness and disorder in his own mind, when he suffers the Flesh to
resist the inbred Laws of his Spirit, and the Obligations to Justice to be run
down by the Temptations of Revenge or Malice, Partiality or Passion,
Covetousness or Cowardice. Nay, by this means a man does not only disturb the
peace and tranquillity of his own mind, but he does more or less unhinge the
public Quiet: for the security of Government, with the interest of all its
members, does so much depend upon the practice and distribution of Justice,
that all contrary Acts do naturally tend to its dissolution. For wherein lies
the difference betwixt a state of absolute Liberty, and a state of Government?
but that in the one men live according to their boundless Lusts and Passions,
but in the other they are directed by Laws, and restrained by Penalties: In the
one unbridled Will and Appetite is the Principle by which they Act; in the
other equitable Laws and prudent Institutions are the Measures and Rules of
their conversations: The one is a state of Violence and Fraud, because all
things are exposed to an Arbitrary Force and Power; the other a state of Peace
and Settlement, because men's Rights are fixed and Properties determined and
secured against all unjust attempts and invasions. So that Injustice, which
introduces a licentiousness and wildness of living, weakens the Pillars and
saps the Foundations of Government; and because it contradicts the ends of
Civil Society, and hinders all the blessed effects of it, men thereby become
enemies to one another, exert all the hostilities of corrupt Nature and enraged
Passions, and engage in a state of War either to defend or retrieve their
Rights.

And all this happens most certainly, when Magistrates and Judges, who by their
Offices are designed to be Ministers of public Justice, become violaters of
it; for though private injustice does but weaken the Sinews of Government, yet
public Injustice does wholly unbind them; though private injustice is but as
the removing a Pin out of a Building, yet public injustice is as the
subversion of the Foundation it self. And as that man's case is desperate, and
his recovery (without a miracle) impossible, whose Disease is grown to that
height, that it masters all its Remedies, and converts the very Medicine into
its own nourishment by assimilating it to its own Nature; so too it is a sad
but sure Prognostic of the ruin and death of a State, when Magistrates, who
ought to be Remedies of public Evils, become patterns of Corruption; when the
Tribunal, which ought to be a Sanctuary for Innocence, is made a retreat for
Villainy, and a shelter for Oppression; when the Sword of Justice, which is
designed to heal the Wounds of the Commonwealth, has a keener edge set upon it
only to make them wider. And therefore God, who well knew the fatal mischiefs
of such a corrupt Ministry, when he formed a Republic among the Jews, and
gathered them into an holy Commonwealth (over which he himself did immediately
preside) he appointed such Rulers under him, as were filled with a Spirit of
Wisdom and Courage, and inflamed with a Zeal for Justice; such as Moses and
Joshuah, men that were furnished with all the excellent Graces and Qualities
that are necessary for executing the best Laws, or for being eminent Examples
of them.

And as this may teach Magistrates how to behave themselves in their public
Offices and Employments, so it may instruct all Corporations and lesser
Societies, by what measures they ought to be governed in the choice of their
Magistrates and Representatives; for though your Votes are your own, yet you
ought not to dispose of them merely as you please, not as your private piques
and aversations, or particular Friendships and Interests shall suggest unto
you; but with a serious regard had to the common Good and public Welfare: for
the Obligation that every man ows to the Public, and the Relation that every
private person stands in to the whole Community, makes it his Duty to promote,
as far as in him lies; its settlement and security; and consequently that he
give his Voice for such to be Magistrates and Representatives, as he believes
to be endued with Wisdom and Courage, and acted by Principles of Loyalty,
Justice, and Religion: For as Religion in general is the best Reason of State,
so Justice in particular does in a most effectual manner contribute to its
growth and preservation; and the universal practice of it in the private
members, and the impartial distribution of it in the public Ministers is the
strength and ornament, the support and beauty of Government, nay, so essential
is Justice to the Establishment and Interests of Society, that it is but to
repeat an old Remarque, to tell you, that Thieves and Robbers think themselves
obliged to preserve it among themselves. Those wicked Confederacies and
Combinations (that are the Pests of public Weal) could not subsist without
some seeming exercise of it among themselves; nor would they be able to carry
on their unjust Designs upon the Public, except they were faithful to their
unlawful Trusts, and just in the division of their unjust Spoils and
Acquisitions. So that all Societies in this respect have the same common means
of preservation, and what Cement is to a Building, that is Justice to a State;
it binds and knits all the parts together, maintains the intireness of the
Body, and keeps all its Members in a fixed condition and an established Peace.

And this is sufficient to prove, that whereas Sacrifices were commanded with a
respect to other Duties, Justice always was, and is, and ever will be enjoined
for its own sake. And must not Justice then, which has its end in it self, be
far more grateful and acceptable to God, than Sacrifice, whose goodness was
merely relative, and depended upon its subserviency to other Duties? And though
it be true, that among the Jews Sacrifice was a Duty as well as Justice, and
though all Duties, that have the Authority of God's will for their practice,
are pleasing to him; yet we must necessarily conclude, that those Duties are
most acceptable to God, that are founded upon the strongest Reasons, and that
carry their Obligations not in their accidental respects and mutable Relations,
but in their own natural goodness, and unalterable Equity; and such is Justice
and not Sacrifice.

IV. That Justice is more acceptable to the Lord than Sacrifice is evident from
the different effects of these two Duties. Now the effect of Sacrifices was the
expiation of legal Guilt; for God who by his Positive Will had made Natural
Pollutions, accidental Diseases, the touching of a dead Body, etc. criminal and
penal; ordained that the Guilt contracted by those ways should be abolished by
a Sacrifice, and the Offerer thereby restored to his legal Innocence and
Privileges: And though the Sacrifice both argued and expiated Guilt, yet had
it no efficacy to Atone God's anger for sins of a deeper Guilt and a profounder
Malice; such as were Idolatry, Murder, Adultery, etc. for, for these no
Sacrifices were appointed. But we find it otherwise in the distribution of
Justice. An impartial Execution of that in Magistrates and Judges does not only
put a stop to the growth and increase of sin, which provokes Gods anger against
a Nation, but it also appeaseth the Wrath, and disarms the Severity of God; and
prevents the coming down of his dreadful Judgments upon a people for the most
famous sins already committed. A famous instance of this Truth we have among the
Israelites, whom God had smitten with a most grievous Plague, because they were
guilty of two most grievous Sins, viz. Whoredom and Idolatry; and the Plague
continued to devour till Justice was executed; but as soon as Phinehes acted by
an extraordinary Spirit, and an extraordinary Zeal, nailed the Adulterous
Couple to the Ground, and made them public Examples of Justice, because they
had been so of sin, God Psalm. 106. 30.
withdrew his hand, and the Plague was stayed.

And as this shows that Justice is more acceptable to the Lord than Sacrifices;
so it may teach all Princes and Magistrates (if they have any regard to the
Public Weal and Prosperity of the Nation) to put on Justice as a Robe, and
Righteousness as a Diadem, and to let all Offenders (of what Rank or Quality
soever they are, either in respect of their Crimes or Persons) feel the
deserved smart of their Rods, and the just severity of their Laws. For as this
is the End of their Commission, and the Reason of their Institution, so they
shall not only do good to their own Souls by such a faithful discharge of their
Duty, but they shall also prove excellent Instruments of Happiness to the whole
Kingdom, by delivering it from those Judgments that either are already come,
or that are approaching. St. Austin tells us, that the mighty Success, and long
Prosperity of the Romans was a Reward given them by God for their eminent
Justice, Temperance, and other Virtues: and if we examine the Sacred
Scriptures, we shall find no such sure Foundations of public Peace and
Prosperity, as the due administration of Justice and Judgment. Solomon the
wisest of Kings tells us, That if the wicked be taken from before the Prove. 25.
5.
King, his Throne shall be established in Righteousness; Prove. 29. 4.
That the King by Judgment establishes 29. 2.
the Land; That all the people rejoice, when the Righteous are in Authority;
28. 2.
And by a man of Understanding the State of a Land is prolonged. And all this
is true, not only upon the account of the natural tendency of the thing, but
also of the Divine Favor and Benediction: it being the ordinary and usual
method of God's Providence, to bless and prosper those Nations, that have pious
and upright Governors, and to curse and punish those, that have vicious and
corrupt Rulers.

What Reason have we then to bless God, that live under so Excellent a
Government, and so Just a Prince, that rather than Justice should not be
administered, sends his Judges to our own homes, that so Justice (like the Sun,
the great Minister in Nature) may visit all places, and influence all parts of
the Nation with Light, Heat and Vigor? It was Darius's complaint, that his
Empire was like a raw Bull-hide, Tread it down in one place, and it would rise
up in another; But God be praised, this Kingdom is subject to no such
inconvenience, because Justice is sent into all parts of the Land at the same
time, and Judgment is alike administered in every County, and by the Equality
of the Distribution all is kept in an even frame, order and composure.

And now what remains? but as we ought to be thankful for so great a Mercy, so
we ought to pray to God to continue it to us, and to beseech him, who is King
of Kings, and Lord of Lords, and the only Ruler of Princes, that all those, who
bear any part in the Rule and Government of these Nations, may have their
Hearts warmed with Zeal for Justice, and be ready upon all Occasions, in
despite of all Temptations to the contrary, to use their Power and Authority
for the punishment of Evil Doers, and for the praise of them that Do Well.
Which God grant for Christ Jesus sake To whom with the Father and Holy Ghost be
ascribed all Might, Majesty, Dominion, Praise and Thanksgiving now and for ever.

Amen.
FINIS.
Lately Printed for Richard Royston at the Angel in Amen-Corner.
THE Estate of the Empire: Or, an Abridgement of the Laws and Government of
Germany; Farther showing what Condition the Empire was in, when the Peace was
concluded at Munster: Also the several Fights, Battles, and Desolation of
Cities during the War in that Empire: And also of the Golden Bull. In Octavo.
The Sicilian Tyrant: Or, The Life and Death of AGATHOCLES: With some
Reflections on our Modern Usurpers. Octavo. The ROYAL MARTYR, and the Dutiful
Subject. In two Sermons: By Gilbert Burnet. In Quarto. The Generosity of
Christian Love: Delivered in a Sermon, by William Gould. Quarto. The Witnesses
to Christianity: By Sy. Patrick, D. D. Octavo. Ductor Dubitantium: Or, Bishop
Tailors Cases of Conscience. The Fourth Edition. Folio. The Life and Death of
K. CHARLES the First: By R. Perenchief, D. D. Octavo. A Modest Plea for the
Church of ENGLAND. Octavo.

