SALUS POPULI SUPREMA LEX, OR, The Free THOUGHTS of a Well-Wisher, For a good
SETTLEMENT.

IN A LETTER TO A FRIEND.

By James Stewart

Printed in the Year 1689.

SALUS POPULI SUPREMA LEX, OR, The Free Thoughts of a Well-wisher, for a good
Settlement, etc.
Sir,
THe settling of our Government, in this extraordinary meeting of the Estates,
is a matter of that importance; that I cannot but wish I were as able to assist
in it, as I am persuaded it is the duty of every man to contribute his best
endeavors: And seeing it is like to be the grand Question, Whether we should
call back the present King, or, at least, in his absence resolve on such a
Regency, as may consist with the continuance of his Right; or rather plainly
declare the Thron to be vacant, and supply it after Englands Example. You shall
have my Opinion as free from passion, as from particular intrest, which I think
is as little as any man's can be.

I therefore humbly Conceive, that the Estates may, and ought, to declare the
Thron to be vacant, and at the same time supply it, by setting up the Prince
and Princess of Orange, after the example of England without variation.

And my reason is one, and most evident, and demonstrative, viz. Because the
Thron is de facto vacant, as being deserted, and that God from Heaven, presents
to us, and the Highest Necessity determines us, to embrace their Highnessess as
the only Persons that can, and ought possess it. I know it was the method of
England, first to take notice of the King's malversations, and thereupon, and
upon his deserting. to find that he had Abdicat, and thereby rendered the Thron
Vacant: But, though all good Men must perpetually regrate, the King's Fatal
Addiction to the Romish Religion, and the Excesses it has caused him to
commit, and that now undoubtedly is the season to provide against these, and
all other Errors in the Government. Yet seeing that some may be ready to affirm,
that by our late Laws we have too amply empowered, and by our compliance, too
manifestly encouraged him in these very courses, to make these his Majesty's
charge: and that it is more becoming the Respect due to Sovereign Majesty in
all events, and likewayes more easy to our old and National kindness to the
ancient Race, and Line; to forbear such direct and extraordinary accusations.
(leaving these to others) I rather choose, and fix upon the medium of the Kings
deserting as that, which in our case is yet more palpable and clear then in
that of England, and abundantly conclusive of all I would infer from it.

And that the King has deserted the Thron, and us, is so apparent from that
visible State of Anarchy, under which we have Labored these months by past:
That certainly all Considering men, in place of making it a matter of doubt, do
rather Admire, and Praise the good Providence of the Almighty, who has so
graciously kept our peace, and prevented these ruining Mischiefs, to which such
a Lawless condition, Joined to our former intestine Distempers, and Divisions.
did exposeus. Our Kings it is true have of a long time resided in England,
Personally absent from us, and some may say, that his going to any other of his
Dominions ought not to alter the case: But the Desertion we speak of, being not
a simple non-residence, and personal absence, but a manifest abandoning,
leaving us far more negligently, then he did England, without all Cause, Care,
or Concernment; cannot be covered with this Pretense. If upon that great, and
sudden pressure in England, that moved him to take such surprising measures; it
had pleased his Majesty, to give any account of them, with what orders he might
have thought necessary, to his Privy Council in this Kingdom; something might
be alleged to color the Dereliction: But when nothing of this Nature was
done, but the Government quite given up, in our greatest exigence, to the
Conviction and Amazement of his own Privy Council, and all his Officers; who
only increased the common consternation, by following their Master's example,
the thing is but too certain. And therefore I shall only sum up its evidence
with these two remarks. First, that the King's leaving us, as he did, in his,
and our then circumstances, is so unaccountable in all other reasonings; that
it seems plainly to say, that it was his Majesty's good mind toward us, that
we should follow England's fate, whatever it should prove. And next, that there
appears so much of the Divine Sovereignty, overruling the King in the course
he took in his departure; that it cannot but intimat to all Serious Observers,
that thereby God thought good, to prepare the way for the happy choice, that he
now presents.

If then the King has deserted the Kingdom, and its Government, the Thron is
necessarly vacant: And if the Thron be vacant, nothing can hinder to Declare it
to be so, unless Men do prefer Confusion, and Ruin to order and Safety.

But because the Oaths of Allegiance, and Test, with other Engagements, seem to
many, to be still binding; I shall resume the matter more particularly, in
order to their Liberation and Relief. And therefore must, and do affirm from
the most obvious evidence of things, that the Desertion we ly under is not only
total, and absolute; but withal so causless or rather pretenceless, beyond the
case of England, without the least shadow of constraint, or reason; that a
more notable and clear breach of the Fundamental Contract, whereon all
Government, as well as ours, Subsists, can hardly be imagined. I cannot here
digress, to prove the Being, and Nature, of this fundamental contract: All Men
of Sense, do easily apprehend, that Government is a matter of Trust, and not of
property or absolute Dominion; and that, though the ordinance in it self, as also
that of Marriage, be of God, yet the establishing of it in this or that form,
and upon this or that Person, and Family, is, after the parallel of the same
Example, of man's free choice and agreement: It being Impossible to Imagine, how
either the Hostility of conquest should terminat, or the vain old World
pretense of Paternal power, the presumptive force of Prescription, or the true
and genuine virtue of a Surrender, take place to introduce Government, without
the supposition of this mutual Consent, and Contract, either employed, or
expressed. And thus indeed, it is, and no other ways, that the Powers which in
the first Sense, and in the Abstract are by the Apostle Paul truly said, to be
of God; are yet in the second Sense, and in the Concret, Justly called, by the
Apostle Peter, the Ordinances of Man. We have too long been inured, by Men of
Corrupt Designs, and practices, to a certain false Cant, that the King holds
his Crown immediately from God Almighty alone. But now, Blessed be God, all Men
not wilfully blind, do see, and the very Authors of this Language, begin to
confess, that it is otherways; and that Government is founded in Consent, and
truly and only best bound by this Fundamental Contract. Whereof the Essentials
viz. That a King should rule, and Protect, and the People Obey, and Submit, in
Righteousness, for the Glory of God, and the good of the Commonwealth, need no
Record, more then the Necessary duties of Man and Wife in the Contract of
Marriage, as being in both cases inseparable from the very Being of the
Ordinances. And for the Naturals and Accidentals, as Lawyers speak, of this
Contract of Government, they may be seen, and read, in the perpetual
consuetude, and other Laws of the Kingdom; and are all confirmed by the mutual
Stipulations, Promises, and Oaths customary, specially at Coronations, betwixt
King and People.

Our King then, as all others, being King by Contract, acknowledged by his
accepting of the Government, and requiring of us the Oaths of Allegiance, and
other engagements; which express our part of the contract, and no less
necessarly suppose his: It is evident as the meridian light, that if he either
Renounce, Abdicate, or totaly Desert, he wholly breaks his part, dissolves the
Contract, and looses us, from our part, and all the promises, Oaths, and Tests
by which we can be thereto bound. The compact of Marriage is certainly the most
Divine, and binding, known amongst men; and here God is said to join, and in
such a manner, that neither of the Parties tho most free Contracters, and both
consenting, may separate without his warrant: Yet if one of the Parties,
specially the unbelieving, depart the Apostle pronounces distinctly from the
Nature of the Contract, and Gods mind in its institution, let him depart the
other party is not in Bondage in such a case, either to his conjugal promise,
or to any other Supervenient Oath, that may have interveened; But is as free
from the Law of the Departer, or Deserter, as if he were naturally Dead: If
then it be so in the business of Marriage, can any Man hesitat, but it must be
much more so in the case of Government; the tie whereof, in the acknowlegment
of all, falls many degrees short of the formers obligation: But so it is that
the King has deserted causelessly, totally, and absolutely, as has been
declared, and therefore in all Law, Reason, and Revelation, the Thron is
vacant, and we are loosed from his Law, and all other supposable engagements.

But you may say, in the Apostles words, to the same purpose, But God has
called us to peace, and therefore we ought neither to be hasty, nor peremptory,
but seeing we know his Majesty's departure was not his free choice, and that
after this little Secession rather then Desertion, he purposes to return, as he
has signified by his letters, we ought to wait for him; and not so lightly
throw off our Allegiance, to which we are by Nature, and Religion, so strictly
bound. I answer, that what ever was the manner of the Kings departure from
England, yet, as to us, it was a free choice, which hapening in such a
juncture, and exposing us so dangerously to all the miseries of a Dissolution,
is really Irreparable: specially seeing that by the same default of his, res non
est integra. But the Kingdom being oblidged by the most binding Law, to wit,
Salus Populi Suprema Lex esto, and the most cogent necessity of self
preservation, to fly and betake it self to his Highness Heavens-sent
Protection; it is impossible for us to retreat from it, without a most ungrate
perfidie toward the Prince, and Damnable folly toward our selves, in rendering
the whole Kingdom obnoxious to a greater Forfeiture, than can be secured
against, by any offered Pardon and Indemnity, in our present circumstances.
Admitting then, that his Majesty purposes to return; yet I say he must excuse
us, since his offer is too late. But more especially because, as all good Men
hear, and understand with regrate, he makes the offer by his Letters, in such a
manner, as promises nothing, save a threatening Invasion of perfidious and cruel
French and Irish Papists, to destroy our Religion, and make Britain a field of
Blood, and an utter Desolation. Wherefore I must conclude, by way of Retortion,
that seeing both God, and the King, have loosed us from our Allegiance, by his
Majesty's Desertion, as has been proved; and God, as you say, does also call
us unto peace: we should undoubtedly show our selves, the most nottorious
contemners of this sweet and Heavenly call, if after so great a deliverance, we
should again bring back the King, with such a sevenfold worse attendance and
thereby unavoidably render our Last Estate infinitely worse then our First.

But you may still urge, why so peremptory, and severe, you resisted, and
opposed King CHARLES the first, with Arms, and yet, even in the hottest of the
War, when you entered into a League and Covenant for its more effectual
prosecution, you reserved his Majesty's Soveraignity, and just Rights. Why then
should the Kings simple departure, be now accounted worse, to infer a
Dissolution, and justify a Rejection, than what was reckoned in his Father to
be a Hostile Invasion. It Is answered, not to touch upon any invidious
comparison of their Persons, nor yet upon his Majesty's woeful defection from
the true Protestant Religion, whereby he has too visibly brought on himself,
the curse that his Grandfather did, in this case leave, and entail on his
posterity, I say, the Kings Desertion does infer a Dissolution, and warrant a
Rejection, albeit his Fathers supposed Invasion was not carried that length;
Because our wars with the Father were but an incident unhappy quarrel, amongst
our selves, as well as with our King; wherein, as it could not be said, that he
had Deserted the Kingdom, or yet hostilly invaded it, by a Foraigne Force; so
we had all reason to reserve his Soveraignity and just Rights, in the probable
prospect, of a good Composure, and Peace. Whereas our present Kings Desertion
is not only Causeless, Total, and Absolute, leaving the Thron vacant, to the
evidence of every Man's sense; beyond all control, or excuse of reason, in the
same manner as if he had been removed by Death, but in the just construction of
Law, it imports such a voluntary Dereliction, as frees us from our former
Allegiance, and lays on us an Indispensible Obligation of providing for a new
Establishment. Si Rex enim Imperium abdicavit, aut manifest habet pro.
Derelicto, says Grotius, in eum post id tempus, omnia licent quae in Privatum.

Having thus cleared the Nature and Import of the Kings Desertion, and that the
Thron being de Facto Derelinquished, we are in the same manner loosed from the
Law, and Oaths of our Allegiance, as if he were Naturally dead, and his Race
extinguished; specially when we cannot now think of his Return, had his Reign
been ten times more justifieable, without the Horror of all the fatal
consequences of Blood, Confusion and Desolation; it is evident that for the
Estates to declare the thing as it is, and to proceed to a new and necessary
settlement, is not attended with the least difficulty.

And therefore I go on to the second point viz. That in this state of things,
the Estates of the Kingdom ought to supply the vacancy of the Thron, by setting
up their Highnesses the Prince and Princess of Orange, after England's example
without variation. And the Reason I gave for it, was because, that God from
Heaven presents them to us, and the highest necessity determines us to
acquiesce in his good pleasure. And that God presents them, if there be any
voice or language, in his providence, as certainly there is, it amounts in our
case to a manifest Declaration. When after King Solomon's death, the Lord so
ordered the matter in the Treaty betwixt Rehoboam, and the People, that by his
imprudent Answer, he provock'd the ten Tribes to Reject him; the Lord, by a
Prophet, commands Judah to sit still, and desist from fighting, for, says he,
the thing is from me. Can any Man then doubt, that in the concurrence of the
many signal providence (more remarkable both for Number, and Weight, then can
be instanced from all our Histories) which at present surround us to show us
the way, the Persons, whom God thus designs, ought to be Chosen and Embraced.

It was an Inspiration from God, that moved his Highness, and all the
Protestant Princes in Germany to resent so cordially the Distress of the
Protestant interest abroad, and it is Danger here with us. It was also another
effect of the same Divine Influence; that excited his Highness raising up the
Righteous Man from the East, and prevailed upon the Cautious and Warry Estates
of the united Provinces, to set about so great, and incredible an undertaking,
wherein a Man may justly doubt, whether the vastness of the expense, the hazard
of the Seas, season, and tempests, or the Preparations and Forces of the
Adversary, were more discouraging. But that God, should have so happily
conducted through all these difficulties; turned, almost as one Man, the Hearts
of all the People of Britain; and caused all the feared opposition to melt
away, as Snow before the Sun, so that his Highness was without Battle, brought
to London only with Joy and Triumph. This, This is the Lord's doing and it is
mavelous in our eyes! Nor are the succeeding passages of his work, though not
of so great a Luster, of less significancy and moment, as to our present
purpose: That his Majesty left England once and again so obstinatly; neglected
and ^^rgot Scotland totally; made the French King, that Enemy of God, and Man,
his only refuge, and set up all his remaining hopes on Tyrconnel and his Irish
Papists; that the meeting of the Estates in England, did so readily and
unanimously settle the Soveraignity upon their Highnesses. And lastly that our
Countrymen, going to London, with such different Interests, and Designs,
should yet have carried along with them, so much of the Spirit and Sense of the
Nation, as to agree, almost as one Man, to address to his Highness, to take on
him the Government and call the present Convention: All these, I say, laid
together and recommending none other to us, then the very next in blood to the
King that has forsaken us, must, after the vacancy of the Thron above
demonstrate, appear to every one, that regards the work of the Lord, and
considers the operation of his Hands, to be nothing less then so many Lines
from Gods Sovereign Power, and Wisdom, concentring to point out their
Highnesses as the only Persons that ought and can possess it.

I Grant for all that has been said, that providence of whatsoever kind and
number are no Rule of Duty; nor do I here pretend to adduce them as such; but
it being already cleared, that through the Kings Desertion, the Thron is vacant,
the Government dissolved, and the Kingdom brought under the necessity of a new
Establishment; I can hardly believe that any will be found so Refractory, as
not to acknowledge, that such leading and persuasive Providence, are the best
Designations of the Persons on whom we ought to fix.

Yet, lest such there may be, I shall farther consider the last part of the
Argument, and that is, That even the highest necessity determines us to follow
England's Example in this Affair, without variation. And this, I think may
easily be Illustrat, as well from the Inconveniences, and Mischiefs on the one
hand, if we divide: as from the Advantages on the other, if we join entirely
with them. And for the Inconveniences, the long and bloody Troubles, and
Calamities, that this Kingdom suffered in its divided Estate from England, are
yet too fresh in men's Remembrance, to suffer any to desire a relapse into it,
unless it may be in this only prospect, that, according to the great change
happened in our Circumstance, some may thereby now hope, for a speedy Conquest,
as in any terms more desirable, than our best separat condition. The
Conjunction of the two Kingdoms, under King JAMES the sixth, was a Blessing so
long looked for, and acceptable, that when he applied to it, that saying, Quos
Deus conjunxit nemo separet, he but spoke the true sense, and wish of both
Nations: shall we then, when things are so much altered to the worse, be so
unhappy as to aim at this unluckie separation? specially when it is most
certain and visible, that the least apparent difference, betwixt England and
us, at this time, would be a great encouragement to Enemies and discouragment
to Friends, particularly our distressed Brethren in Ireland: And that if we do
not directly call back the King (whereof I am sure the inevitable Evils above
represented do raise in every honest man an extreme horror) We can take no
other course distinct from that of England, without laying our selves open to
all their dangers, with very small assurance of their assistance. I know the
boiling of our Scots blood, upon a little stirring of the old Emulation,
industriously practiced by Papists, and such as affect them, may readily throw
up, What? are not we a free Kingdom, and much more ancient than that of
England? Why should we then be tied to their Measures? specially to reject
totally our King, Who, as to us, in respect of the English, is, as it were, of
our Blood and Kindred. But first, after the recalling of the King, which is
indeed the Point that all the Promoters of this humor aim at, there is no mids
betwixt it, and an absolute rejection, that is not attended with most deterring
Circumstances, as has been already declared. Next, what does all this vain
talk signify? does it add any thing to our strength, for preventing, or
resisting, the abovementioned Inconveniences, which is the point that all Sober
men ought mostly to heed; or is it not rather just like unto the Thistles
Elevation, in King Joash his Parable, which after it had compared it self to
the Cedar, was trod down by a wild Beast that passed by, which infallibly
would be our fate, in attending to such empty Counsels.

Whereas on the other hand, if we go along, and hold with England in this
Re-establishment, we have God to be our Guide and Leader, as has been showed,
and in the next place we may be assured, that as we are already threatened by
the same hazard, and also rather more exposed to them, then they, so the
holding the same course with them will always procure us ready, and effectual
assistance; greatly animat all our Well-wishers, specially our Brethren in
Ireland, and prove a happy Introduction to the long desired Union of both
Kingdoms, which last motive of a good and perpetual Union, is of itself
sufficient, to all Considering men, to preponderat all can be said on this
head: it being indeed the only thing wanting to complete the happiness, and
security of both Kingdoms; and that which seems reserved to the Prince of
ORANGE, as the man of God's right hand, able to surmount, and adjust all the
difficulties of so great a Work, and worthy to bear its Glory.

Thus you have my opinion, and the Lord give all Concerned a true, and right
understanding. If bare Infidelity or Difference in Religion were here adduced
as causes, to make void the King's Title and Authority; the Westminster
confession (though well enough cautioned, by the qualities of Just and Legal to
exempt us from the late imposings) might yet occasion some to scruple: or if
Malversations were the only ground, these might, as I have said, make the
enquiry more uneasy, and the conclusion less unquestionable. But when the King
himself has loosed us, by such a manifest, and irreparable Desertion: And God
from Heaven points out to us so Desirable and Excellent a choice. And Lastly
when the most powerful necessity of the Preservation of all that can be dear to
us, oblidges us to embrace it: What can possibly demurr true Protestants, and
rational Men, to agree to it. Neither ought we to be alarmed at the
Backwardness, and Refractoriness of some whose ill consciences of their former
oppressions and violences, may desperately drive them to a more avowed
opposition. Since beside that it must be in it self contemptible, nothing can
more effectually defeat it, and all our other vain fears, then our Resolute and
Unanimous concluding and adhereing to such a Just, Necessary, and Happy
Re-establishment.

Adieu.

