Practical Discourses On Sundry TEXTS OF SCRIPTURE. Wherein is showed and made
known, The absolute Necessity for all People TO Turn Immediately Unto the Lord
their GOD.

By RICHARD STAFFORD, formerly a Bachelor of Arts of Magdalen-Hall in Oxford.

LONDON Printed, and are to be Sold by Ralph Simpson at the Harp in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1695.

To the Courteous READER.
THE Subject of this ensuing Book (A Call to all the Inhabitants of the Earth,
to turn immediately to the Lord their God) is Great and Good. Even what all the
Words and Preaching that have ever came forth into the World, in all the
several Generations and Countries, have endeavored at.

For Christ also has once suffered for Sins, the Just for the Unjust, that he
might bring us to God, 1 Pet. 3. 8. Besides the Sufferings of Christ, The End
and Intent of all the Words which Christ spoke or made known, and so it is the
same of all the Transactions which have ever passed between God and Man, are,
that he might bring us to Himself, who is God. Though this has been indeed
effected of some few Peculiar People of the several Generations, yet it has
not been of the Multitude and Generality of Mankind. Notwithstanding God was
manifested in the Flesh, and put to Death in the Flesh, but quickened in the
Spirit for this alone End and Purpose. How can it then be expected, that one
who is born out of due Time, and the least of all in the Kingdom of God, can,
by publishing a few words more, accomplish so great a thing, when all the Books
and Preaching in the World have not yet done it? Especially when the Word it
self, which was made Flesh and dwelt among us, Full of Grace and Truth, who
spoke as never Man spoke, did not so bring it to pass that all should, though
some did believe on him. Far be it therefore from me to expect or imagine, That
this little Book or Treatise of mine, will ever have so great an Effect.

But it is only offered as another Mile to be thrown into the Treasury of
Divine Truths. It is the Thoughts of one single Creature which have arose in
his Mind, whereby himself is actually persuaded to God and good things, and to
turn unto the Lord Immediately, Luke 12. 36. As Paul conferred not with Flesh
and Blood, but immediately went to Jerusalem: So for my part I would utterly
lay aside all Carnal and Worldly Considerations, and immediately give up my
self to the Guidance of the Lord, as he leads me in the way to Jerusalem, that
is above, whithersoever that way goes. And I do desire that these same Thoughts
may be published and made known abroad; Out of this Hope and Expectation, If
Peradventure the God of all Truth, who persuades us throughout our Life, in
all the several Circumstances and Conditions thereof, That we may be able to
persuade other Men and Women by the very same Thoughts wherewith our selves are
persuaded of God. He fashioneth the Hearts of the Sons of Men alike, Psalm. 33.
15. and it is commonly seen, That by what one is persuaded, another under the
like Thoughts and Circumstances is Persuaded also. And if the like things were
made known unto, and believed by the mixed Multitude and generality of Mankind,
as is to the elect People and real Servants of God, in all outward Likelihood
and Probability, They would also be brought over unto God.

To this alone End and Purpose are these Words laid before Men, that whosoever.
will may read. And for such who will not read, the Saying among the Latins is,
Pertinaciae nullum Remedium Posuit Deus; So we the Ministers of his Word cannot
tell what to say to it; Nor do we know how to help and remedy it though we
would never so fain. But we can only warn such, Behold ye Despisers, and Wonder
and Perish. Such are in real danger to fall under the same Doom as the Sons of
Eli and Amaziah did. Notwithstanding they bearkned not unto the Voice of their
Father, Because the Lord would slay them, 1 Samuel 2. 25. But Amaziah would not
hear, for it came of God that he might deliver them into the hand of their
Enemies, 2 Chronicles. 25. 20. And so it is, They that will not Hear, Read and
Receive the Words of Instruction, Knowledge and Reproof, It is a certain
foregoing sign, that such will be punished with everlasting Destruction from
the Presence of the Lord, and from the Glory of his Power.

It is commonly alleged that there is no new thing under the Sun; and there is
nothing said (especially in Books) but what has been said before; for my part
I would endeavor somewhat further in what I publish to the World (which as yet
is not so clearly made known in other Books and Sermons) or otherwise I would
not publish at all. Or at least I would seek out acceptable Words, and that
which is written may be upright, even Words of Truth, Eccles. 12. 10. If Words,
or rather Sentences of Truth are indeed brought forth, Although they be without
Method and Connection (as there are very many of this sort in the following
Treatise,) yet they are never the less worth for want of that: All one as
pieces of Gold or so many Pearls are not the less valuable, although they be
not linked and chained together. Again, Although my writing here is not with
enticing words of Man's Wisdom, nor yet according to the exact Rules of Oratory;
But things are expressed so plainly, that they may be understood by the meanest
Capacity: Nevertheless God is more glorified, and the Reader may be more
edified hereby, then in (what is called) more Learned and Polite Discourses.

It was both a puzling and also a sudden Question of Pilate, What is Truth? To
me it seems to be the expressing forth the Nature of things as they are, with
the Connection between themselves, and how they pertain to us Men. Things are
again divided into Visible and Invisible, Present or Future. Now the present
and visible things soon pass away and are but little. But the great Object of
what is commonly called Divine Truth (which is the subject of the ensuing Book)
is only invisible and future things, which are the only thing needful, even the
greatest and nearest Concern. All things are Gods, for he created them; and the
principal Matter here insisted on throughout the whole, is what God requires of
Man, with a Word of Exhortation to enforce him the more to the Obedience and
Observance of the same, and more especially what God will do unto us Men and
Women, the reasonable Inhabitants of this Earth, both hereon in the latter
days, and also after that they are gone off from this Stage of the middle part
of the World.

As to that great Controversy which the Lord has had for so many Generations
past and foregoing, concerning their universal Obedience to Himself their God,
Psalm. 50. 7. which all the words that ever came forth and were made known in
the World heretofore, have not (I do not say could not) accomplished and
brought to pass, How it will be all done suddenly and at an instant, by the
pouring out of the Spirit upon us from on High, may be seen in Page 295. As
also that there will be an end of all Wars and of all Persecution, is showed in
Page 285, 288. which will be a very great Good to Mankind: So that the ^king
known these things, will tend ^re to the real Benefit of Man, than spending
their Money for that which is not Bread, and their Labor for that which
satisfies not, or consuming so much time in other and vain Things.

I need not say much more by way of Preface and Introduction, But here I shall
only add this further, That according as God is now pleased to accompany and
Seal these Truths with the droppings and distillings of that same Spirit, which
hereafter he will pour out. And according as that selfsame Spirit gives
Understanding (for it is too common that the Works and Things of God are not
understood, Psalm. 106. 7. Acts 7. 25.) for these things are Spiritually
discerned. As also there is a need of a distinguishing Judgment, as to discern
and know which are the real Truths of God, from the Imaginations or Sayings of
other mere Humane Writers. Again, According as the following Words of Truth do
approve themselves to the Hearts and Consciences of the Real and Inward (see
Romans 2. 29.) and not so much to the Nominal and outward Christians: And
according as Care, Endeavor, Industry and Diligence, are used in the
publishing and making them known, so accordingly they will meet with Acceptance
or Rejection from the World.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. THE Introduction to the following Book Page 1 CHAP. II. Wherein that
Proposition is at large discussed, That People are not forced and compelled to
the Obedience of God, but they are left herein to their own Free Choice or
Refusal p. 15 CHAP. III. That Surmise and Imagination is spoken unto, whereby
some People think that they have so Grievously offended God that they dare not
come unto him p. 118 CHAP. IV. Therein it is discoursed of that false Thought
in the Hearts of many People, That if they should submit. Presently unto the
Obedience of God, they shall be losers and disappointed of so much Pleasure and
Convenience in the mean while. They shall miss of so much imagined Happiness,
and fall into Vexation, Trouble and Misery. p. 183 CHAP. V. Herein sundry
things are written against them, who will not be persuaded by, nor live
according to Words; and also against following the Multitude. p. 244 CHAP. VI.
It is made known in the general from the Scriptures of Truth (without any
Reflections on Particular Nations or Governments) that at length there will be
an end of all Wars. p. 285 CHAP. VII. As also that there will be an end of all
manner of Persecuting the Servants of God. p. 288 CHAP. VIII. Toward the end
of Time, and in the latter Days, All the Inhabitants of the Earth will be
turned and brought over unto God. Which will be done and accomplished by the
Pouring out of the Spirit upon us from on High. p. 295 CHAP. IX. A Paraphrase
on some of the most Remarkable Verses of Psalm. 18. Showing the Design and
Connection of that whole Psalm. p. 310 Whereunto is subjoyned the shutting up
and Conclusion of the whole Book. p. 314


Practical Discourses: OR AN Earnest Call to all the Inhabitants of the Earth
to turn immediately unto the Lord their God.
As the same is opened and alleged from what is written, Psalm. 18. 43, 44, 45.
Thou have delivered me from the Strivings of the People, thou have made me the
Head of the Heathen: A People whom I have not known, shall serve me. As soon as
they hear of me they shall obey me. The Strangers shall fade away, and be
afraid out of their close Places.
CHAP. I. The Introduction.
IF all Mankind of all Generations and Countries were now summoned together,
and there was a Voice that could reach them all; as God will at the last Day
gather all Nations, and will bring them down into the Valley of Jehoshaphat,
and will plead with them there, Joel 3. 2. By his own Power and uttering forth
his Voice: It would be proper to preach and make known these Words unto them.
But in the mean time he has showed the Way, and he does require it of us under
the Danger and Penalty of Disobedience, that all we should publish the Word,
Psalm. 68. 11. which he has given us, as far as we can. And he has so ordered
that the still Voice of his Spirit should be sent forth into the Hearts of many
People. All things are to be done as far as he has pointed out, and put into
our Power: All we should help whatever we can toward the Furtherance thereof;
for the Work of the Lord is common, and should be the joint Endeavor of all
his Servants.

Ever since the World began, and down until this Time, and what futher remains
on, the Kingdom of Heaven suffers Violence, and the violent take it by Force.
According to our Ability we ought severally to the utmost of, yea, and beyond
our Power to be continually doing the Will of God; bring Glory unto his Name,
to further and carry on with all our Might and Diligence the common Salvation,
to endeavor, by all Means possible, yea, our selves are to act and suffer an
holy Violence, that People may be more brought over and added unto the Lord. As
God is to be loved with all the Soul and with all the Strength, and with all
the Heart, and with all the Mind: So all things we have, or can do, are to be
laid out and resolutely put forth (without any more Intermission or Weariness
than what is absolutely necessary and requisite) in his Service and doing good
unto others. None are to be idle; but as we are warned of, so ought we to avoid
to our utmost, that we fall not under the Doom of the unprofitable Servant. For
behold I come quickly, and my Reward is with me to give to every Man according
as his Work shall be, Rev. 22. 12. And we having but a short Time, might learn
this Wisdom from the Serpent, to improve this our Time to the utmost Advantage,
to oppose and destroy his Kingdom, to turn People from Darkness to Light, and
from the Power of Satan unto God, and to recover those that are already taken
captive at his Will. As he walks about seeking whom he may devour, so is the
Will of the most high God, that his Servants should run to and fro that
knowledge may be increased, Dan. 12. 4. that many may be converted and saved.
And when each Person is converted, then he is to strengthen his Brethren, and
to endeavor what lies in him, that others may be converted also; and so on.
The like Care and Endeavor is to be used and spread abroad, that all Men may
be saved and come to the Knowledge of the Truth. Whatever is dictated to any,
and is tending to good, the same is to be complied with and actually done, and
so on whatever can be reached further, or apprehended more.

Nothing is created in vain, nor yet should lie still and remain to no Purpose,
but the same should answer the very Ends for which each thing was made and
ordained. This is to be observed, not only in natural and common things, but
necessarily and more especially in eternal and spiritual things, and so we
should press unto the Mark of the high calling. God has created and left us in
such a State as to prove whether we will do that to which he has already
enabled us, and does require. If we do not, it is at our Fault and Peril, and
we shall be subject unto Loss and Misery. But yet the Eyes which were made to
see, should and may see; the Ears to hear; and who have Hearts and
Understandings given to perceive, they may perceive, Deuteronomy. 29. 4. As Men
profess themselves to be Servants of the most high God, so they should do his
revealed Will, and perform what he has said in his standing and written Word,
by which he now speaks from Heaven, all one as if we heard outwardly his
Voice. And then they should take hold of the Skirt of their Neighbors, and
cause them to go and hear the Word of the Lord. Using the like Endeavor and
Persuasion drawn only from divine Arguments and Considerations, as the wicked,
and Companions in Sin, do entice one another by their Arts and Means: Yea, and
they should so lay hold of them that they shall not go back unless they rent
some Piece of their Garments, that they may as it were be compelled, Luke 14.
25. to their own Good and Salvation; that if they will still refuse and give
back, it may be with greater Difficulty and Striving: And if they do resist the
first or second Importunity, yet by continual asking and putting in Mind, the
ungodly and wicked may be wearied, Luke 18. 5. till they first hear, and then
they will come to receive and yield unto the Words of eternal Life. Then the
Eyes of the Blind shall be opened, and the Ears of the Deaf shall be unstopped,
Isa. 35. 5. They also that erred in Spirit shall come to Understanding, and
they that murmured shall learn Doctrine, Isa. 29. 24. However, at first this
may be esteemed uncivil and troublesome to the Neighborhood and Community, yet
is very consistent and agreeable with the Welfare and Happiness of Mankind, for
many to join together and severally, that it may be no strange nor singular
thing, to endeavor in all good Conscience, and the greatest Earnestness to
bring People off from Ignorance, Sloth and Deadness in Sin, to Knowledge, be
doing good and the spiritual Life; that coming out of carnal Security, they may
discern and follow the things which belong to their Peace, and thence lead them
up to the holy Hill. It can be no Harm to rescue any from the Place of Torment,
to pull him (though never so much against his Will) like a Brand out of the
Fire.

Ye that make Mention of the Lord; keep not Silence; And give him no Rest till
he make Jerusalem a Praise in the Earth, Isa. 62. 6, 7. So we are to do the
like, and endeavor, what we can, to gather the People, and make them meet and
ready, a People prepared for the Lord. Each Master of a Family may order the
Word of Exhortation and Instruction to be read unto his whole House: Or where
he is backward or negligent, then the Wife of his Bosom, or a Son, or a Servant
who is rightly disposed toward God, they ought to give the House no Rest, but
be urgent and importunate till it be made known unto, and understood by them.
That as our God has given Precept upon Precept, Precept upon Precept, Line
upon Line, Line upon Line, here a little and there a little, Isa. 28. 10. It
being doubly ranked, and several times enforced, yea, and repeated over and
over: So it is to be continually inculcated till it has gotten the Victory
over all rebellious and stubborn Hearts.

And when this or the like Method is used (as the Spirit shall direct or
incline) in our own Nation and every Part thereof, we may assuredly gather,
Acts 16. 10. that God has called us to preach the Gospel unto others. Surely
the Isles shall wait for me, and the Ships of Tarshish first, to bring thy Sons
from far, their Silver and Gold with them, unto the Name of the Lord thy God,
And to the holy one of Israel, because he has glorified thee. And the Sons of
Strangers shall build up thy Walls, and their Kings shall minister unto thee,
Isa. 60. 9, 10. It has been the Way and Method of God's gracious dealing
toward the Children of Men, to help toward their Good by little and little,
to bring them on from less to greater, and still to make beter and increase,
Psalm. 115. 14. their Condition. Who first laid the Foundations of the Earth,
and ordained the gathering together of Waters; who settled the habitable Parts
of the Earth, and divided Country from Country by Rivers, Seas, and Rocks, he
could have made it all one Continent and Plain: Who gave Life and Motion in
such a Degree as now the does, he might have raised it to what Pitch of
Activity and Speed he pleased: By the same Power we might have been made to
walk on the Waters, or to ride on an Horse through the Deep. But he has
established things in wonderful Wisdom and Counsel for great and excellent
Ends, even in those which seem ordinary and common. Seeing many things, but
thou observest not, Isa. 42. 20. As God made every thing, so he gave Man that
Skill and Knowledge to build Boats and Vessels for the Water, and to send forth
from one Place to another. Now consider the utmost End and Design of
Navigation, whether to keep Intercourse and Correspondence with other Nations,
Desire of Gain and their Commodities, or to maintain the busy Nature of Man in
Employment: Yet there is one thing greater than all; that is, to bring down God
from above by the Word of Faith, which we preach; that People may be more
acquainted with him, to give them Knowledge of Salvation, and tell them of the
greater Communion and gathering together of his People, which shortly will be
more than has been ever since the World began; and in the mean while all
things are to be done which may hasten and make ready toward the
Accomplishment thereof: To make known the things which belong to their Peace,
and their eternal Exaltation and Happiness, which is more than all the Gold of
Ophir. To assure them that they shall, and tell them the Way how they may live
blessed for ever, which is more than the best temporal Livelihood: This is the
best Use and End of Navigation.

If we did look up and could see the Heavens opened, that vast and wide Place
to which the great and wide Sea is not so much as a small single Pool of Water
is now to the whole Ocean. Every thing above is so astonishing, that all the
Wonders of the Deep are not so much as the purling of a little Brook or Stream.
To see the King in his Beauty, and to behold the Land that is very far off,
Isa. 33. 17. is infinitely more delightful than the Gaudiness of Eastern
Emperors, or all the pleasant Places of all the Earth. Our Souls shall mount up
there, after they have for some time dwelt in this earthly Cottage. They now
are weary of, and get above all things here, and do apprehend the other by
Faith which will be revealed in Sight and Enjoyment. God does all things in his
own Order. O that thou would rent the Heavens, that thou would come down,
Isa. 64. 1. He might open and display his own Majesty, and make himself seen in
his Glory; or he might infuse his Word and Spirit immediately into the Hearts
of every Soul of every Nation under Heaven to give them Knowledge and Assurance
that these things are so. But he has spoken to the World by the Prophets, his
Son, and Apostles, who lived in the Land of Judea, and others are to receive it
from them, and to publish it forth throughout the World. Thus our Lord and
Savior gave Commission and Direction. And accordingly his Apostles did travel
about on Horses and Ships unto the Places afar off to make known these things,
and so their Words went out unto the End of the World. But we, according to his
good and gracious Promises, do expect a more universal preaching of his Word,
and sending of his Spirit. As He is the Confidence of all the Ends of the
Earth, and of them that are are afar off upon the Sea, Psalm. 65. 5. So he will
manifest and make himself fully known unto them. Our selves as yet know him by
Faith, we hear of him with the Hearing of the Ear, we see it written of him, we
understand and perceive from within, but the Words of Life and Knowledge may be
sent and published unto others. By the Help of Ink and Paper we may speak to
those whom we have not seen, and to the Nations afar off.

Men and Brethren of every Country of the Earth, let me freely speak unto you
of the Patriarch David, that he is both dead and buried: Whilst he lived, he
ruled over one single Nation of small Extent, and he was likely to have been
thrust from that by his Son Absalom, but the Lord sustained him. He had no
foreign and new Conquests, nor did he enlarge Territories. Himself was not
made the Head of the Heathen, nor did People whom he knew not, serve him.
Therefore being a Prophet, and knowing that God had sworn with an Oath to him,
that of the Fruit of his Loins according to the Flesh, God would raise up
Christ to sit on his Throne; He seeing this before, spoke of the Kingdom of
Christ, that it should extend over all: He shall have Dominion also from Sea to
Sea, and from the River unto the Ends of the Earth, and so as is further said
in the Seventy Second and Eightieth Psalms.

Thou have delivered me from the Strivings of the People. It is the general
Style of Prophecies to run in the Present or Preterpefect Tense; which says
things are ready or have been, when it speaks of things to come, which denotes
the great Truth and Certainty thereof, that it will as really be as if it was
at this present Moment, or had been already fulfilled. It is the Word and
Promise of the high and lofty one, who inhabiteth Eternity, to whom all things
are present and before him: Who sits above, and has in his Power the Times and
Seasons. He is above all Difference and Distinction of Times, but according to
our Capacity and Understanding, he expresses himself in this wise:

Yet have I set my King upon my holy Hill of Sion. Ask of me and I shall give
thee the Heathen for thine Inheritance, and the uttermost Parts of the Earth
for thy Possession, Psalm. 2. 6, 8. God has established his Worship and Kingdom
by little and little, and ordained that those who submit unto it, should do it
freely. It was a considerable Time before he brought his first Begotten Son
into the World, and then he endued him with such Power and Excellency, that
others might believe on him as sent from God, and come to serve and honor him;
for whosoever does honor the Son, he does honor the Father also: All People had
sufficient Reason and Invitation to come unto him, yet none is forced. His
Throne was set up in the appointed Place, for the Law shall go forth of Sion,
and the Word of the Lord from Jerusalem. Micah. 4. 2. Every Man or Woman that
will, may be obedient to it. We are to fear the Name of the Lord, whom we have
heard of; and we are to comply with his Will which is made known unto us.
Herein is the Kingdom of God superior and different from that of Men; for we
ought to obey him that is invisible before those whom our Eyes see. And it was
never known nor heard of among the Children of Men, that those did exercise
Authority whom none of their Subjects ever saw. God is a Spirit, and is
manifested unto and in our Spirits, and he is also evident to the outward Eye;
for this sees the things which his Hands has made. Our selves do inhabit in
and discern the Temple wherein also he dwells, and which he fills with his
Presence. Heaven is his Throne, and the Earth is his Footstool: So that we have
as great Assurance that the Lord is King, as that there are Governors over
such particular Nations, or as a Son is assured that he had a Father, or a
Servant that he has a Master: And there should arise the same continued
Obligation of Duty toward our God, as is actually given to those earthly
Relations, according to what is written, Unto thee lift I up mine Eyes, O thou
that dwell in the Heavens. Behold, as the Servants look unto the Hand of
their Masters, and as the Eyes of a Maiden unto the Hand of her Mistress: So
our Eyes wait upon the Lord our God, until that he have Mercy upon us, Psalm.
123. 1, 2. A Son honors his Father, and a Servant his Master: If then I be a
Father, where is mine Honor, and if I be a Master, where is my Fear, says the
Lord of Hosts? Mal. 1. 6. which is the most reasonable and natural thing in the
World; for in him we live, and move, and have our Being; as certain also of
your own Poets have said, for we are also his Offspring: For as much then as we
are the Offspring of God, we ought in all Times and in all Places to give all
Honor and Obedience unto him. And so accordingly we should, if we had the
Knowledge, and did not forget God that formed us, nor receive in wrong
Prejudices and false Apprehensions of his supreme and most excellent Being. Our
Ignorance, Corruption, and Satan's Temptation make us turn aside, and then some
strange Imaginations make us unwilling to return. All which might be discovered
to be Falsehood, Mistake, and Error so soon as they are fully known.

Where God calls unto the Children of Men, they struggle and give backwards,
and are not willing to come, and this is the Strivings of the People. This
Manner of Speech is not intended of Heathens, and such as have not known nor
heard of God (for they are expressed afterward) but it is meant of those who
go under the Name of Israelites, whom he vouchsafes to style his own People.
These have some Faith and Knowledge, but it is dark and imperfect; they
conceive somewhat of God, but it is Error and Falsehood; they apprehend somewhat
of his Law, but not fully; and thence comes to be in them an evil Heart of
standing off from God. The general Deceivableness of Heart which keeps them off
(for there is a Thousand Kind of little Surmises, which may be answered in like
manner) is here reduced unto these Three Particulars.

1. They think, that themselves are as it were forced unto Obedience, and they
do not love to be compelled against their Will. 2. Some imagine that they have
so grievously offended God that they dare not to come. 3. Which is the
principal Reason of all, the Generality of People think, that if they submit
presently unto the Obedience of God, they shall be Losers, and disappointed of
so much Pleasure, Profit, and Convenience in the mean while: They shall miss of
so much imagined Happiness, and fall into Sowerness and Misery.
If these Three Points can be cleared, and the Heart of Man thoroughly satisfied
as to each of them, then it is just and equal that he should not defer one
Moment longer, but turn immediately unto the Lord their God.

CHAP. II. Here that Proposition is at Large discussed, That People are not
forced and compelled to the Obedience of God, but they are left herein to their
own free Choice or Refusal.
FOR the first, Cannot they imagine, That if it was the Mind of God, that any
should be compelled to his Service, could not he have brought the whole World
unto his Obedience before this Time, when they have continued for some
Thousands of Years in their Iniquity and Transgression? He, who fashioneth
their Hearts alike, Psalm. 33. 15. and knows our Frame, Psalm. 103. 14. could
also have put into us the same instant Necessity and Inclination to his Worship
and Service, as to our Meat and Drink, that without it we should grow faint and
perish. He could have determined the Powers of Soul only one Way, as in Brutes,
and have moved them toward his Law and Will, as they are carried by Instinct
to natural and sensible things; he could have implanted into every one that
strong Desire of following the thing that good is, as after Life and Breath;
and they should abhor and flee from Evil with the like Care and Earnestness as
from Death and Destruction. He could have so hedged up all our Ways, that it
were not possible to go from him, if we were never so eagerly bent on
Backsliding, no more than we can now get out of a strong Prison. He might have
so compassed us in of every Side, that we could not avoid fulfilling his
Command, no more than any one does now escape from under a Guard. Neither can
we hide from him who is every where and in all Places. He might give us as
sensible Evidence of his taking Knowledge of all our Ways, as a King does of
any Treason committed in his Presence, for which we should incur his severe
Wrath immediately. Verily thou art art a God that hidest thy self, O God of
Israel, the Savior, Isa. 45. 15. and so have done ever since the World began,
to see what the Children of Men will do. God has discovered himself no more
than what was necessary for to exercise our Faith and Trial. He has just made
known his Name and Power amongst Men; but further, it is left unto them how
they will carry themselves toward the Lord, their Strength and Redeemer.

It is a wonderful thing to consider, how the God who made and fills, and is
all things, should yet be so little manifested unto Men! That he who is all
Brightness and Glory, should not be seen among us. That he who made and
fashioned us, in whom we live and move and have our Being, should not be
perceived by us: That when he fills Heaven and Earth with his Presence, yet
any should live without God in the World. Surely Darkness has covered the
Earth, and gross Darkness the People. The Sun gives Light upon it by Day, and
the Moon by Night, and yet there is a greater Darkness round about which the
dull Element perceives not, there is yet a worse and greater Obscurity in those
who see and walk therein. Strange! that it should not be yet universally
fulfilled in all People. At that Day shall a Man look to his Maker, and his
Eyes shall have Respect unto the holy One of Israel, Isa. 17. 7. for he might
see him with the Eyes of his Understanding being enlightened, all one as he
does with his bodily Eye, see the Works of God, and the Earth which we tread
on. By the Air which a Man breaths and moves in, he might have a Sense and
Resemblance of him who is invisible; who does also beset him behind and before,
and is with him in his going out and coming in, and is acquainted with all his
Ways. There is no going from his Spirit and Presence. If I ascend up into
Heaven, thou art there: If I make my Bed in Hell, behold, thou art there: If I
take the Wings of the Morning, and dwell in the uttermost Parts of the Sea,
even there shall thy Hand lead me, and thy Right Hand shall hold me, Psalm. 139.
8, 9, 10. And so he does equally in the narrow Places of our Abode. Whether we
be on a Journey, or a walking in our Chamber, or in the lower Parts of our
House, whether we be alone or in Company, God is all along present with us, but
through Imperfection the Soul is not well intent on several things together,
and his Creatures too often make us forget the Creator. As we behold them, we
are unmindful of him that is invisible; their Talk and Discourse too often make
us not think of his Word and Law. Nevertheless, these Failings might be
rectified, and we might have a continual Sense of him and of his Commandments,
that we might not fall nor offend. But here it is to be admired, that when
there are so many things to bring to the knowledge and Remembrance of our God,
yet Mankind for several Generations, should be so sottishly ignorant and
unmindful of him. Every thing we see, taste, and handle, is his Work and
Creature, which should renew the Sense of the Creator; yet all these are made
an Occasion to forget him, the least conceiving or inward reasoning would
instantly have led up to the Apprehension of him. That it must be some one who
made all these things; for even as to the Houses which we inhabit, we must
conclude that some one did build them, though it was before we were born: And
so this great House of the World must needs have been framed by him who built
all things; and he that built all things is God. Through Faith we understand
that the Worlds were framed by the Word of God, so that things which are seen,
were not made of things which do appear, Heb. 11. 3. The Heavens continue
standing as they were from the Days of the Creation, yet that once was, and
must needs have been. But then further, the very Continuance and upholding of
the things created, does most plainly demonstrate this eternal Power and
Godhead. For I lift up my Hand to Heaven and say, I live for ever, Deuteronomy. 32.
40. This may be clearly seen, for the vast Roof of the Sky is kept up without
any mighty Beams or Pillars. He stretches forth the North over the empty
Place, and hangs the Earth upon nothing; but then it abides only by his
Support. He upholds all things by the Word of his Power. He forms and gives
Life and Breath to the several things therein. They are born, move a little
between, and then they die one after another. Hereby, giving us to signify
that himself alone is eternal and immortal, without Beginning or any Ending.
They increase, fade, and decay, which is a manifest Token of Difference from
his own infinite Perfection, Fullness, and Unchangeableness. They are divided
and separated from one another, which again distinguishes from him who is all
in all, whose Spirit fills the World. They are very little and small, which
is another Diversity from his infinite Greatness. They are contemptible and
weak, wherefore to him alone belongs all Honor, Glory, Power and Strength: He
has showed himself to be the Lord and a jealous God, by the very Frame of
things, which have been as it were of set Purpose so contrived, that they
should not draw off the least Glory, Excellency, and Admiration from the great
Creator and supreme Majesty of Heaven and Earth.

How all these have been abused and stifled by the most detestable Ignorance
and Folly, by the utmost Malice and Perverseness of Mankind, and by the
manifold Devices of Satan, and by sundry other Ways, will be one Day
particularly disclosed, when all things shall be reckoned up in order as they
have been done and transacted in this Earth. Things have been turned and
perverted just contrary to what they were first intended. O strange Sottishness
and Blindness! O wicked Folly! There is a Rehearsal of it throughout the Thirty
Second Chapter of Deuteronomy; and the Reason of all may be somewhat understood
from the Twentieth Verse, And he said I will hide my Face from them, I will see
what their End shall be, for they are a very froward Generation, Children in
whom is no Faith. If God did not hide himself, or if they had but Faith still
to apprehend him, it is impossible that Mankind should be so unmindful or
negligent of the things pertaining to him.

For they who are thankful for common Mercies and daily Benefits, and catch at
every little thing; if these did clearly apprehend how all things are God's,
and themselves have from him whatever they enjoy, they would also give the same
continual Thanks unto him, and having this Earnest and Pledge, they would seek
diligently after the great things of God. Who admire at every little Novelty,
they would much more be astonished at the Wonders of his Majesty. Who are so
careful to please their Superiors according to the Flesh, least they should
receive Injury or Oppression; and also they are sincere and loving toward
them, if they receive Good and Benefits from them; these same People would be
alike obedient and fearful to displease the Lord their Maker, unto whom the
Inhabitants of the Earth are but as Grasshoppers, or a Compapany of creeping
Worms. If we were made alike thoroughly sensible that as God does good, so he
can punish more than one Man does to another, there would be the like Reverence
and Awe unto him. It is certain that he does give us already whatever we enjoy,
and is not that which we have constantly; even from our Youth up, more than
those little Additions of Kindness we have now and then from another, and
consequently such do require greater Gratitude and Love. And then what he is
further pleased to promise, does not that infinitely exwhatever can be thought
of, or named, or ceed had here: May we not wisely and with Advantage renounce
what now might be had, if it does hinder from the Hope and Expectation of that,
as that same Word (which makes known the great Salvation, and the Means how to
obtain it) does expressly declare. One might run over many Particulars which
would manifestly show, That if the things of God were really believed and
considered of, there would be the same, yea, more earnest Care and Labor after
them, than after the things of this Earth. And we should perform our Duty to
him in all things which he requires of us, as we give Honor and do Offices one
to another.

But this hidden Mystery of the Kingdom of God, and of the Divine Dispensation,
has puzzled the Understandings and Actings of Men. Indeed Man has a confused
apprehension of things, but he knows little distinctly, and acts yet worse
toward his Maker. Either he does not know, or not believe, or he is
inconstant, and imperfect as to both. Or when he knows the hindrances, he
wilfully gives way, and is kept off by them; and when he sees the Temptations,
he does yield unto them; or an unseen Enemy fills him with imaginations and
excuses, and a deceived heart has turned him aside, Isa. 44. 20. We should be
exceeding careful about our Understanding, to have it informed with true and
right Thoughts. If we may rightly apprehend the Dispensation of God's Kingdom,
and the Nature of things before us, which pertain to us. It is called the
Mystery of the Kingdom; and therefore we should Pray for the Spirit to search
and unfold it, to get it thoroughly known and revealed. If we may use such a
familiar comparison, that as by the like Arts and Policy Men get a temporal
Kingdom, Preferment and Riches; so we might endeavor after those things above.
Which is done by Knowledge, Industry, and a resolute putting forth. The first
instructs in the right way, the others set a going and moving forwards. We
should first Pray, and seek unto God, That he would lead us forth by the right
way, that we may go to the City of Habitation, Psalm. 107. 7. and so in all our
Works and Labor in order thereto. And then it may be observed how things are
established, and also to be had upon foregoing means. Here it behooves to learn
diligently, and to know exactly what are the true and right means; for want of
which so many do miscarry in their Designs and Enterprises, as our selves do
perceive afterward; which if thoroughly known before, the thing might have been
accomplished. And also we must understand what means are Just, or not, lawful
or unlawful; for we are to confine our selves only unto the first, and avoid
the other. For I the Lord love Judgment, I hate Robbery for Burnt-offering, and
I will direct their work in Truth, Isa. 61. 8. His work is perfect, for all his
ways are Judgment; a God of Truth, and without Iniquity; just and right is he,
Deuteronomy. 32. 4. And therefore we are to refrain from all manner of sin, nor to use
any indirect Art or Guile: But if any such is offered or suggested, it is to be
looked upon as a Temptation of Satan, to hinder or delay the Work, and to make
us part with our Integrity. There is near the same Connection and Establishment
of all things throughout the whole Creation; and as we see the good things of
the Earth are had by Wisdom, honest Labor and Diligence. So we are to have
Grace and Knowledge that we may obtain the heavenly good things, and so seek
diligently after them. The Kingdom of Heaven suffers Violence, and the
violent take it by force. Only he who now lets, will let, until he be taken
out of the Way, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 7. And as he hinders all that he can, so we should
watchfully observe his Devices in order to frustrate and defeat them. When we
have fully heard what promotes and helps us forward to eternal Happiness; this
we are to do with all our Might and Power, and also we should decline what
hinders, or resolutely work contrary to that: Even from the Resistances of
Satan, we may get Strength and advance further. It may be so overruled and
ordered, that the Light which he would seek to put out, may shine yet more
abroad; that the Truth which he would stifle or wrap up may be yet more
displayed; that all his Devices may fall back upon himself, and he may lose by
what he thought would promote his Kingdom. So they shall make their own Tongue
to fall upon themselves, all that see them shall flee away, Psalm. 64. 8. for it
would be a strange and mavelous thing, that if People were fully sensible
that such an in visible Enemy (who acts by visible Instruments) would deprive
and hinder them of so much good, and deceive into Evil and Misery, and yet they
should give way unto him. Is there an Instance of this to be found in common
Life? That Men should hate their Friends and love their Enemies; especially
when the last appear barefaced as such. Indeed when there is Disguise,
Flattery, and concealing, it may be after that Manner, but it cannot so be when
they openly design nothing but Death and Destruction, and to defeat them of
such an exceeding Good and Reward. And yet such are all the Methods of Satan,
of whatever Nature and Kind they be; whether direct Opposition or keeping back,
whether it be by way of Excuse or Imagination, as indeed all Excuses might at
first be suspected by Christian Knowledge and discerning; because we are
forewarned in the Word of God, that they keep off from coming unto him, and
into the Way of his Commandments. Those invited to the great Supper, did all,
with one Consent, begin to make Excuse, Luke 14. 18. Now it is plain and
obvious, and understood by any one that where People shift, and would excuse
themselves, there is an Unwillingness. But the Phrase of the obedient Servant
is, I will run the Way of thy Commandments, Psalm. 114. 32. which denotes
Readiness and Speed in the same.

The several Actions and Passages of our Life do either lead toward Heaven,
they are a standing still, or a going backwards. They either increase our
Reward, or they do nothing toward it, or they render us liable to Punishment.
Now the standing still and doing nothing, sinks down to the place of
unprofitable Servants; for it is contrary to the Will of our Master, who would
have us to be trading to his use. He seems to be gone afar off, that he may
require an Account, though even now he stands at the door, and is near to
every one of us. He has withdrawn himself out of our sight, and yet he beholds
what we do, though we do not so much regard him; because we see him not. In all
things pertaining to God it is left to us whether we will freely and willingly
do the same, or leave them undone.

The Law given us was ordered to be written in a Book; and now it may be seen
whether Men will take notice, and do thereafter. As for that Law engraven in
the Heart, it may be either stifled through Sloth or Negligence, or it may be
cherished and furthered by giving heed thereunto, and acting accordingly, and
seeking further into it. God might have put into Man as strong an inclination
to Read in his Book, as he has a Natural Desire to behold the Light of the
Sun, and the same constant steadiness to observe the Words of his Law, as to
Eat, Drink, and Sleep, and observe the common Rules and Measures of Life. He
might have given such a lively Sense of his Promises and Threatenings, as any
King now does of his Rewards and Punishments; so that all People should have
been equally, yea infinitely more concerned to have the one and eschew the
other. He might have so inculcated and enforced his Commands, that they should
be had in continual remembrance; and there should have been the like constant
Care and Caution to keep them, as to preserve our selves in Health, and as we
avoid bodily. Hurt or Sickness. The like watchfulness might have been in all,
as is now in some peculiar People. Even the Multitude and Generality might be
led with the same bent and inclination, to live always according to his
Statutes, as now they have to follow their own ways. His Laws are set before us
by his Servants the Prophets, Dan. 9. 10. And in the phrase of another, who
spoke by the same Divine Spirit, Whether they will hear, or whether they will
forbear, Ezekiel. 2. 5. which denotes liberty and freedom of Obedience or Refusal.
As God did formerly suffer all Nations to walk in their own ways, so now having
made known his Mind and Will, they are further proved whether they will receive
the knowledge of it, and do thereafter. He has discovered himself so far to
the World by what is already revealed and made known, that they should seek
after him yet further. His Truth is thus far manifest to the generality of
Mankind, that they also should learn and enquire after it. That the residue of
Men might seek after the Lord, and all the Gentiles upon whom my Name is
called, says the Lord, who does all these things, Acts 15. 17. Still there
must be some act and endeavor in Man. There must be both a willingness and
compliance in him to accept of what God has done for him. Agreeable hereunto
is the whole Divine Revelation, and that form of Speech our Savior makes use
of in reference to himself and his Disciples, He that receives you receives
me; and he that receives me, receives him that sent me, Mat. 10. 40. And he
that despises you, despises me, Luke 10. 10. The one is a willing Act, and
the other a wilful Refusal. So his Servant John speaks unto the World, He
which is filthy, let him be filthy still; and he that is Righteous, let him be
Righteous still, Rev. 22. 11. Not that it is the Mind of God that any one
should continue in his wickedness; for he has no pleasure in the death of a
sinner, but rather that he turn and live. But after former Calls there comes
this kind of Speech, That such an one may choose; he may do what he will, for
God seems to cast him off; and this makes People the more willing to come, as
we have an Example hereof in Judges 10. 13, 14, 15. As on the other hand when
things are proffered and seem to be made easy, they contemn it, and do keep
off.

The whole History of the Church ever since the World began, and also the
Method of his Spiritual Dispensation does plainly show that all Men are left to
their free Liberty and Choice whether they will serve God or not: And if it
seem Evil unto you to serve the Lord, choose you this day whom you will serve;
whether the Gods which your Fathers served: but as for me and my House, we will
serve the Lord, Joshua 24. 15. If thou do well, shall not thou be accepted?
and if thou do not well, sin lies at the door, Genesis 4. 7.

Truly God is the great King over all the Earth, and he has Right to Rule over
all its Inhabitants. He is the Lord and Governor of the World; and it is meet
that he should exercise Authority, and receive Homage from all things which he
has made: How much more from such a small spot, and little part of his
Creation, as the Earth is? Every one who does in the least consider, must
acknowledge God's Dominion most just and due in the general; for our selves
assent unto that Honor and Obedience which are given to those several
Relations of King, Father and Master: Whereas those according to the flesh, and
our own Fellow Creatures, are not so much in comparison of the high and lofty
One, as a single dust of the Balance is to the whole Fabric of the World; or
as a drop of a Bucket to the Sea, or as a single Grasshopper is to all the
Creatures that have Life and Breath: So there should not be the least grudging
at his Superiority and Regining over us. And as our selves like to have things
done readily and cheerfully, so likewise it is reasonable that God should
expect the same of us. Thy People shall be willing in the day of thy Power,
Psalm. 110. 3. God is the same from all Eternity, and has at all times the very
same Power; for he can do all things, and whatsoever he pleases. But as it is
said in another place, Many a time turned he his Anger away, and did not stir
up all his Wrath, Psalm. 78. 38. So likewise he has not yet in this Earth, nor
does now exert all his Power and Might. Indeed sometimes he does make a little
more then ordinary manifestation thereof, as in those Signs and Wonders which
he wrought of Old Time; and then we hear what effect they had; for they did
cause an impression upon the Minds of People; and they were for the time
Reverent, Submissive, and Obedient toward God. He might have continued the
like tokens among them, and have given them a succession of more, which also
should have spoken as sensibly unto them as out of the Cloudy Pillar, That it
was because they kept not his Laws which he gave them. These things were done
once or twice in the several Generations that passed through here; not to every
Generation, but to those in former time, that they might tell their Children to
come, to see if they would be persuaded to keep his Statutes, and observe his
Laws by what they heard God visibly did amongst their Forefathers. Those
Miracles, were soon over, and did not remain long among them: To prove whether
the Remembrance would have the like effect, as when they were present and
before the Faces of People. Who were over-awed by the sight of such dreadful
Things, might still call to mind the same, and perform a free and ready
Service. And so as they did look back, and had heard of the things done
heretofore; so we now living may likewise reflect on the same. And we who now
stand in these latter days on the Earth, may look forward to what may be in our
time, and in the Generations following.

When God shall yet in a more extraordinary manner than since the beginning of
the World, or Man was Created on the Earth, Bow the Heavens and come down,
declare his Power and Presence in a much more visible and eminent manner than
ever of old time; when the Lord God shall dwell amongst us, and Reign before
his Ancients Gloriously.

Who would not fear and obey thee, O King of Nations? forasmuch as thou
containest all the good and excellency which is any where to be found amongst
the best and wisest of the Sons of Men. For thou first gave unto them what is
now loved and honored in them. And therefore more Reverence, and Love, and
Thanksgiving, and good Will belong unto thee, of whom are all things. Thou
did therefore communicate a light and imperfect measure of Good unto the best
of Men; lest they should draw off from looking on thee, who art All in all.

When God himself shall come and appear, even the Rebellious also shall submit
unto him; for they shall be overawed with his Majesty and Greatness; and they
shall be likewise persuaded thereunto by his Goodness and Truth. The desire of
all Nations shall come, and he shall so clearly manifest himself to be indeed
what he has revealed himself, Loving unto every Man; He does good, and fills
our Souls with Food and Gladness: when this is thoroughly known, then all former
Prejudices and Aversation against him shall vanish, and be utterly done away.
In that day shall this Song be Sung by his Elect and peculiar People, This is
the Lord whom we have waited for; and others shall be astonished and confounded
within themselves, how it came to pass that they should either despise or
conceive evil Thoughts against him. They shall bite their Tongues for
Indignation, which did utter hard Speeches against his Majesty. The Lord and
his Saints shall convince them of their ungodly deeds, Jude 15. and they shall
be so vexed within themselves, that they would even of their own accord cut off
both their Hands and their Feet which did offend, and were instrumental to
commit Iniquity, and cast them into the fire. Truly, God is good to Israel,
even to such as are of a clean heart, Psalm. 73. 1. He shall more plainly
demonstrate himself to be thus, than that the Sun does now give Light to the
lower World, or that he gives Rain which wets and moistens the Earth. He shall
sensibly manifest himself to be agreeable unto our Nature. He is suitable unto,
and shall most fully satisfy every Desire in the Soul of Man. Stretch out your
Understanding every way conceive to the utmost, more than is possible to utter;
whatever you want or would have, our God shall be yet more unto us.

This was somewhat discerned before by those who were of a pure Heart. They had
a little Taste and foreconception of his Goodness. The more they did search
into it, the more they did find and were satisfied therein. But the Generality
of Mankind were willingly ignorant of this. They did not like to receive God
into their Knowledge, nor seek after and understand his Nature and Properties.
Thence came to be in them an evil Heart of Forgetfulness and Aversation toward
him, for they could not be unmindful, nor yet have any Estrangedness, had they
known him. How is it possible to forget him who created all things, and is all
in all, who fills Heaven and Earth with his Presence? How can any one refuse
the desiring of him who is the chief and only Good: From whom is derived all
that is really profitable and truly sweet unto us? Who even now is kind, and
pours down his Benefits upon us, but has reserved for us greater and more
enduring things. The things present do justly require our Praise and
Acknowledgment; but the things to come do call for our Obedience and Duty. We
should even now speak out of what we have, and do something for God, in
Expectation of what we shall be Partakers. That we should show forth the utmost
Good Will toward him now we are in the Way, and he has put us in a Capacity
to do it. We may by Faith apprehend, and fully rest in what he promises, so it
is our Wisdom, and will be our Advantage to give all Readiness to perform what
he does require of us. Wherefore Beloved, seeing that ye look for such things,
be diligent that ye may be found of him without Spot and blameless, 2 Pet. 3.
14. Such Wages and Reward are sufficient to put upon doing every Tittle of our
Duty, to cleanse our selves that we may be meet Partakers, and when we have
done all, we come short; for our Services are in no wise proportionable to the
expected Recompense. Not the Thousandth Part thereof could have been thought of
and expected, unless God had been pleased to make known and promise it; and
still we are to wait what he of his own good Pleasure will do for his Creatures.

There are many Considerations, which also should make us willing in the Day of
his Grace and Forbearance, as we shall certainly be in the Day of his Power. If
we would now understand what we shall then be sensible of, we should even at
this present Time do after the required Manner, for the very same Reasons, as
we shall then wish we had done it. What prevails upon his own peculiar People
to do such and such things, would do the same as to others, for they also are
Men of the same Passions and Inclinations, but these were governed and
rectified by the Knowledge and Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ. Even we should
move and press earnestly to the Mark of the high Calling, if we would further
receive and attend unto what would quicken us from within. Paul did labor more
abundantly than the other Apostles, because of the greater Degree of Grace
which was in him, Grace is an active Principle, and stirs up to be continually
doing the Will of God. Yea, there is the like Inclination toward the same in
the Soul, as the Body has after Meat and Drink. Blessed are they which do
hunger and thirst after Righteousness, for they shall be filled, Mat. 5. 6.
When there is the same earnest Appetite after all the things of God, expressed
by that one Word of Righteousness, as others have after the Increase and full
Enjoyment of their Corn and Wine, here is an assured Promise of obtaining and
of full Satisfaction.

Now an earnest Desire (unless it be suppressed by Sloth or Negligence) puts
upon Action, and using the Means to obtain; for in Desire there is Torment, and
we must do something to be freed from that, or else seek to quiet and stupifie
it. Again, This same Desire commonly points out and shows some future and
distant Good, which may be had upon such things to be done before; and also
there is a Want in the Soul of the same thing, which is suitable unto her
Nature. We were therefore put in an imperfect Condition, that we might ascend
up and labor after what is further set before us. There is such a Sense and
Consciousness of this in Mankind, that they do actually endeavor to embetter
their present Condition where there is any Probability and Likelihood, and
where they do not, it is through wretched Sloth or dull Ignorance. In this the
rational Creatures differ from brute Beasts; for these only live to eat and
labor: They just breath and are not sensible of more. Whereas Man acts after,
and can conceive things more excellent. Now if there be the like Assurance and
Certainty to obtain them as the things before us, then it is a reasonable
Inference, That there should be a like and greater Endeavor, because of their
infinitely more Worth and longer Continuance. The greatest worldly Good does
not satisfy when had, and of this we must be certainly deprived in a short
Time; whereas the heavenly good things are proportionable to our utmost
Desires, and shall for ever remain. So that, was there but a doubtful
Expectation of such great and enduring things (a Probability that they were,
and a Possibility that they were not) yet one might give up, and leave these
present things upon the alone Venture (if we may so speak) of those things to
come. Whatever does now pertain to us, and is had by us, does utterly perish
and come to nothing. They are all along passing by, and at length Man dies and
is taken away from them. So the things of this World are no Foundation, for it
slides away, and also our selves are decaying. Now if there was no more, how
come in those Desires after continuing and durable things? When we see every
thing passes away, wherefore do we even now covet after what remains? When our
selves are continually dying, why do we thirst after Immortality? And since we
do, Day by Day, haste to that State where we seem to cease to be, what means
that earnest Inclination to have a Being for ever? There is a strong Persuasion
and assured Confidence that we shall not die, or rather, Thy dead Men shall
live, together with my dead Body shall they arise, Isa. 26. 19. But we shall
only be removed into another Place, or stand here again in these later Days
upon the Earth, when both our selves and this Place also shall be changed into
a more glorious and abiding Condition. That very Knowledge and Desire implanted
into our Nature, of more than is perceived or can be had here, does most
clearly demonstrate that there are real things to which it does relate. It
being so firmly riveted and grafted in, does plainly show that it came from the
Author of our Nature: Even he who made us, has so ordained us; who created the
Flesh, did also form the Spirit. And as that is established to have a Sense of
things sensible, so this has a Knowledge and Conception of things spiritual.
As that tastes and sees the things present, so the Soul does as evidently
perceive and apprehend things to come. And this would equally appear in all
People, if they did in like manner put forth the Powers of their Soul toward
divine and heavenly things, as the Instruments and Members of Body are employed
about the things of the Earth. Then shall we know if we follow on to know the
Lord, Hos. 6. 3. First know somewhat of his infinite and glorious Godhead, and
then how he has created and established things. Also in our selves is
implanted a Power and Capacity to arrive at the Knowledge of them.

It is superfluous to bring many Arguments to prove the things which are true
and real already; but yet because they are concealed and hidden, by searching
they may be found out: when the Evidence of things not seen is brought forth,
it makes as if they were seen. So we find in ordinary Cases, that in a matter
of Fact done heretofore, or in a distant Place, it is as nothing to us; but
when it is declared and told unto us by certain faithful Witnesses, it is in a
manner present, and as if we saw it with our Eyes. Thus it is of historical
Matters and common things done in the World: So it is likewise of God's
wonderful Acts done in former Generations, the Miracles and Signs wrought by
Christ and his Apostles which are conveyed down unto us a^er the same manner,
as public Records, which are either written, or one Generation tells to
another. Now the first is the more certain Way, because that remains when the
Voice and Sound of the Mouth perishes in the Utterance, and many times is
forgotten. There is the express Order of Almighty God, Isa. 30. 8. that these
things be written. Hence his Word is called Scripture, that is, a Writing, and
is so noted in a Book, that it may be for the Time to come for ever and ever.

In which is a Declaration of God's Will unto Men, what he does require of
them, with a Rehearsal and Promises of what he has already, and will yet do
for them. Our selves know what we intend to do such a Time hereafter, if we
have Life, Power, the same Mind and Circumstances continue alike. Now he is the
Everliving Almighty God, with whom is no Shadow of turning; who sits above, and
has the Disposal of all Times and Seasons; who governs and has Power over all
things; who knows all the Hearts of all the Sons of Men, the utmost which is or
can be: Before whom all things, past, present, and to come, are the same. So
what he has said, shall most certainly be. For the Lord of Hosts has
purposed, and who shall disannul it, Isa. 14. 27. I will work and who shall let
it? Isa. 43. 13. However, for a while Satan and his Instruments are suffered to
resist and to try what they can to hinder, yet the Work of God cannot be
utterly overthrown; for notwithstanding all the Malice and Opposition of Men or
Devils, it will come to pass at the last. Has he said, and shall it not come
to pass? Yes assuredly; For that that is determined shall be done, Dan. 11. 36.
For the Vision is yet, for an appointed Time, but at the End it shall speak and
not lie: Though it tarry, wait for it; because it will surely come, it will not
tarry, Hab. 2. 3. But in the mean while we are apt to stagger and distrust,
because we do not see it fulfilled in our Generations. Whereas we are but of a
short Time, and to him a Thousand Years are but as one Day, and he will have a
suitable Space for fulfilling his great and glorious Work. For even the lesser
things are done gradually and in Succession of Time. In this little Space and
short Time, we do not find all things to be so as we are told of; yet
nevertheless we are here so much ascertained of the less, as to build up a sure
Trust and Confidence for the greater. And we shall be translated up thither,
where it shall be said, As we have heard, so have we seen, Psalm. 48. 8. when
Faith shall be turned into Vision; the Substance of things not seen shall be
the Remembrance how our God did promise and keep them out of Sight. But now he
does perform the same, and they are revealed with open Face. Therefore were
they ordered to be future and unseen, to prove whether we would give Credence
unto his Word: If we would be diligent in the Work of the Lord, expecting a
Reward from him in his due Time. But if his great and good things were now
present before us, and to be had as those things of this World now are, what
snatching and running would there be after them? People would never think
themselves too diligent and earnest. They would make haste and not delay the
Time to keep God's Commandments. Had they a through and firm Persuasion of what
he says, Every Man shall receive his own Reward according to his own Labor, 1
Cor. 3. 8. Each Person would then try who shall most abound in the Work of the
Lord. They would lay hold of every Opportunity for well-doing, if they might
partake of his Acceptance and Recompense. They would call to mind what they
had been heretofore a doing. To what End or to what Good were all the past
Actions they had taken under the Sun? What am I at present better for having
had or done this? And is there Expectation of any thing more? Will my
heretofore serving diverse Lusts and Pleasures make me happy now? Wherefore then
do they not satisfy at this Moment? Why do they utterly vanish and disappear?
How comes it to pass that Day by Day they cease to delight, and are less
recreating? Surely, I have been mistaken all along. It is Happiness and
Satisfaction which I desire, and they make a false Show thereof. It is Peace
and Rest which I would endeavor at, and they leave behind Craving and Trouble.

The sinful Profits of this World seem to be somewhat more enduring and real.
But let us reflect upon them either Way, as, Soul, eat, drink and be merry. We
will get so much and then enjoy our selves according as the Phrase of the World
is; or to please our selves with keeping an Abundance as the covetous Mammonist
does. Yet still this is a mere conceit and a Reasonable Creature cannot be
filled or satisfied with that, and here Psalm. 49. 17, 18. lies express against
him, For when he dies, he shall carry nothing away, his Glory shall not
descend after him. Though whilst he lived, he blessed his Soul. All the Service
and Labor after Mammon is evidently determined within this short Time; and it
stands in no stead at all further. Now an Account shall be demanded what we
have done here? What Provision was made against the Time to come? What
Foundation was laid in by good Works? Wherefore was all their Labor about
perishing and temporal things? And not about the eternal which do remain? Every
one is to give account for his Talent and how he improved it to the Glory of
his Master; that he may receive Authority and Commendation proportionable. It
shall be recompensed to every one according to what he has done. Where was
more done, there shall be a greater Reward: so that all the Actions of a Man
tend as much to himself in that State, as what is done in the present Time. The
unprofitable Servant is to be bound Hand and Foot, and to be cast into outer
Darkness. Every one is called to work in the Vineyard; and if any one does not
come as soon as he is called (as those did in the Parable, Mat. 20.) himself
must answer before Almighty God for the Refusal to obey his Commands. And also
People do not attend nor rightly consider how they willingly deprive themselves
of so much Wages and Recompense. Seeing that God has revealed himself to be so
bountiful and good a Master, Servants should show themselves accordingly unto
him; and as it were, meet him in the Way of Righteousness. They are to strive
who should run fastest; who shall perform their Work with a more willing and
cheerful Mind; and to offer themselves who shall make the first Assault, or do
such an Act of Duty; for even thus much is done for our Masters according to
the Flesh. Is not God more gracious and better than they? Are not his Benefits
as valuable? Ought not his Favor and Good Will to be more esteemed?

But his good things are to come; why, whatsoever we now have and enjoy, did
first proceed from God and is his own. Man has the Use of some things, but God
has the Propriety of all. But the greater things also will be actually present
as those things now before us are; and then these present things shall be
utterly done away. So they are upon equal, yea more Advantage than what is now
before our Eyes. Tribulation, Anguish and self-Indignation will be upon every
Soul that did neglect them for perishing Bubbles and empty Nothings: Which then
they find, as before they might have learned, to come to nothing at all; for
they were just had and passed by. And yet by the Nature of them, by the utmost
Certainty and Reality of future and invisible things they might have been
persuaded to seek diligently after them.

For the same Word of Truth, which spoke of the one, has told us of the other
also. By the Word of the Lord were the Heavens made, Psalm. 33. 6. And upholding
all things by the Word of his Power, Heb. 1. 3. which has created and given to
each thing its Nature; and now connects and holds things fast together as they
are The same Word says, For behold, I create new Heavens, and a new Earth,
Isa. 65. 17. so that as certainly as things now are, and stand after this
manner as they do at present, they will be likewise so fulfilled as we are
foretold of. Those gracious Promises in Isa. 45. 17, 18, 19. are confirmed with
the like Reason, which is as it were inserted between them, viz. But Israel
shall be saved in the Lord with an everlasting Salvation: Ye shall not be
ashamed, nor confounded World without End. For thus says the Lord that created
the Heavens; God himself that formed the Earth and made it; he has established
it, he created it not in vain: he formed it to be inhabited, I am the Lord and
there is none else. I have not spoken in secret, in a dark Place of the Earth:
I said not unto the Seed of Jacob, seck ye me in vain: I the Lord speak
Righteousness, I declare things that are right. Here is an Answer and full
Satisfaction given to that common Question and Thought, what do People get by
the Service of God? They expose themselves to prevent Self-denial and Labor,
but what Recompense and Gain? For if others are diligent after worldly things,
they do commonly obtain. But here we are assured of that which cannot be had in
this World, To be saved with an everlasting Salvation. There is no present
Return to exercise our Faith and Waiting. So that now we become liable to Shame
and Disappointment by laboring for nothing: Yet what says the Witness of God?
Ye shall not be ashamed World without End. At long run it shall not be thus. At
the End of Time it shall be otherwise; and this is ratified by what we now see,
even his lesser Works are done for some Purpose, as in the Instance here
assigned, the Earth was created to be inhabited. But here again Faith is
exercised; for some things seem to be created in vain, and a Part of the Earth
is not inhabited, as barren Mountains and the waste howling Wilderness; yet
there are also Creatures of some Sorts, and God may have great Intents and
Purposes herein, which we know not as yet, but shall know. He asserts himself
by his Name, the Lord, to be ALMIGHTY, the chief and only Ruler, and none can
control him; so that he will perform what he has said. If one thinks within
himself to do thus, or makes private Promises, there he may alter his Mind or
Falsify and meet with no Discredit, but only from the Person to whom it was
entrusted. But God declares out of the Thoughts of his Heart, and speaks out
publicly to all the World, that neither the Seed of Jacob, nor any one who
does the Works of Abraham, or comes within the Covenant made to the Patriarchs,
shall seek him in vain. Again, He confirms it further by his righteous Nature,
and declaring the things that are right. So we may be bold to say, that where
in serving him we submit our selves to present Loss or Labor, there God is
pleased to speak in Righteousness; and thence we may assuredly gather, that he
will render a Reward accordingly. But as he is gracious and bountiful, it will
as much exceed our Works, as if one should give a Thousand Pounds to a
Labourer, when he deserves no more than a Penny. God is not unrighteous to
forget your Work and Labor of Love, Heb. 6. 10. He will take notice of every
thing that is done purely for him. Thou tellest my Wanderings, put thou my Tears
into thy Bottle: Are they not in thy Book, Psalm. 56. 8. As he does take
Knowledge of every least Sin and Error; so likewise will he make up abundantly
to us for all the Sorrow and Hardship we have sustained for him. A Book of
Remembrance was written before him, for them that feared the Lord and thought
on his Name, Mal. 3. 16. in which is recorded all the Reproaches they endured
from the wicked, and also every right Work they have done with all the
particular Circumstances thereof. The Apostle advises, Look to your selves that
we lose not those things which we have wrought, but that we receive a full
Reward, 2 John 8. So the like Admonition may be given to those who are as yet
unconverted and in a State of Sin, that they defer not one Moment longer to
turn unto the Lord their God. For besides the Danger of being cut off in their
Sins, and the Doubtfulness of gaining God's Favor and Acceptance; but if they
should obtain, yet they deprive themselves of a greater Reward. Though the long
and habituated Sinner may be saved, that is, only when he turns from all the
Sins which he has committed, and does that which is lawful and right; yet it
will be as by Fire, that is with Difficulty: However, he shall suffer Loss:
That is, it would be better for him throughout all Eternity, if he had never
continued in such a Course of Sin. What Fruit had ye then in those things
whereof ye are now ashamed? Romans 6. 21. There is no Benefit and Advantage in
them. So likewise Time slides away, such Opportunities are irrevocably lost
which might be improved to a blessed Eterntiy. So much might be done in the
mean while toward building up a Mansion in the Heavens. The Foundation may in
due time be laid; and upon this he may build Gold, Silver, precious Stones,
Wood, Hay, Stubble: He may wisely contrive and do the best Works. Every Man's
Works shall be made manifest, for the Day shall declare it, 1 Cor. 3. 13. The
Light shall show of what Kind it is, and how it has been wrought all along,
even when it was in Beginning, and so till the Finishing thereof. It shall be
strictly examined and surveyed, as Gold in the Fire, which purges away the
Dross, when the pure Metal remains, and appears more excellent. If any Man's
Work abide which he has built thereupon, he shall receive a Reward, 1 Cor. 3.
14. If he has been employed about enduring things, here is another Promise and
Confirmation hereof.

What Need of such abundant Mention and giving so full Assurance concerning a
Reward? Why have we not a good God, who gives us now all things richly to
enjoy? May we not do something for him by way of Gratitude and Thankfulness for
former Mercies, without Expectation of any thing more? Where is our Love and
Ingenuity that we cannot act by the Principles of an excellent Nature, but must
be led on by Mercenariness? Our Want and imperfection call for something more
than we have already. But then we should desire somewhat which is worthy. It is
Narrowness of Spirit and Ignorance of Mind to run so greedily after worldly and
present Recompense, or to imagine more therein than really is. It is base
Selfishness to do nothing but for the Sake of Profit in Case we are somewhat
sufficient before. But seeing that most have not and they must live by Labor;
and the Blessing and the Promise is, For thou shall eat the Labor of thine
Hands, happy shall thou be and it shall be well with thee, Psalm. 128. 2. there
it may be honestly sought after and had. In every thing there is Trial (What is
Man that thou should try him every Moment!) And nevertheless it is further so
ordained that the Servant of God may approve himself therein, and yet not be in
Necessity of falling. There are the Wages of Iniquity and Unrighteousness, the
Gifts of Satan, which are offered and had upon unlawful Means if they will
decline from the Law of the most High, consent unto some Evil, and so fall down
and worship the Author thereof: Whereas if they would keep their Integrity;
continue whole and steadfast in his Covenant, God has annexed further unto that
a precious Promise and exceeding Reward.

Who has first given to him and it shall be recompensed to him again? For of
him, and through him, and to him are all things, Romans 11. 35, 36. He has first
furnished us with Means, and enabled with Power to perform whatever we do. He
has given Knowledge, Strength, Inclination and Impulse. It is done by his
assisting and working Grace, and at his Command and Requiring. If I may use
such a plain and common Phrase, least it should be said, God is any thing
beholden to his Creatures he does give them such an overabundunt Requital, even
before we had done what was our Duty to do. And what he is pleased to add
further, is infinitely-beyond our, deserving, neither could we have any
Expectation thereof unless himself had foretold us. By Faith Boasting is
excluded, for Faith is the Gift of God, and also it apprehends things
unutterable and so exceeding great that it is no more Virtue and Excellency to
receive them, than stooping down to the Ground to take up a Diamond, or going
half a Mile for a Bag of Gold and to have it for our Pains. The Prize set
befors us does yet exceed our utmost Endeavor after it. So that the having an
Eye unto the Recompense of Reward, does quite stop our Mouth and take away all
manner of Boasting. For it is evident, when such exceeding great and precious
Promises will scarce move us to Obedience; and where they do, yet not to
perform it continually; much less should we have done such as is commanded if
we had no Promises at all. Even in those things which we think we need not do,
as in Free Will Offerings and what we would do of our own Accord, There is a
secret Hope and Expectation that God would take notice thereof: And a Thought
does arise, at least a Doubt and Staggering, whether if we were assured that he
would not requite it but yet accept and be well-pleased with it, then the Trial
would be whether we would still do the same only out of Love and Thankfulness,
admitting it would further expose us to present Inconveniences and Trouble. Our
Nature is either averse or sluggish that we have need of something to conquer
and stir us up; first to bring us in, and then to quicken us in the right way.
To move us to begin, and then to keep us continually in doing. Now to him that
works is the Reward reckoned not of Grace but of Debt, Romans 4. 4. So it is of
one Man from another as may be gathered from Verse. 2. For if Abraham be
justified by Works, he has whereof to glory, but not before God. If one
labors for another he is not beholden to him for Wages, for the Work is as
profitable and beneficial to the one as Payment is to the other: But the Case
is otherstise between God and us; for first he has wrought all our Works in
us, he brought us into Being, and has fed us up hitherto: And one Way or
another he has prevented, assisted and directed in those things which more
immediately relate unto him, though we are heedless as not to discern it, no
more than we perceive how we live and move in him, which yet we do all along,
that to him belongs all the Glory and Praise thereof. The utmost in Man is his
Liberty of acting and working together with the Grace of God; but still he
first implanted that Power and Ability; and when it turns toward Good, it was
God and his Grace that weighed down the Scale, and overruled it unto the right
and true Way.

Alas! We are such small and finite Creatures, that the utmost we do is very
little and next to nothing: For if the best Performances of the greatest and
most diligent Saints on Earth be considered, what is their Righteousness unto
him? Or what receives he of their Hands? Even they come short of what they
might have done yet more, for they might have further improved their Talent.
Therefore I say unto you, the Kingdom of God shall be taken from you and given
to a Nation bringing forth the Fruits thereof, Mat. 21. 43. But since the
preaching and Promulgation of the Gospel to the World no Nation has yet
brought forth such Fruits (God knows what will be done in the latter Days) as
might be justly expected from it. Nothing has been done answerable to the
precious Truths contained therein. It was the Lord who gave the Word, who
planted the Trees, but the Ground has not brought forth suitable Increase
thereof. The Husbandmen have not manured and dressed it as they should have
done. And what Fruits have been, or shall at length spring up from it, Lord,
thou have but what is thine own: They are but living Instruments, all one as
the Spade or Pruning Hook in the Hands of the Gardener; and at last the Work
suffers Loss and Disadvantoge by Reason of those employed therein. If they do
any thing rightly, it is of God that they do so, but the Weakness and Fault is
of themselves only: God works in us both to will and to do: He has showed us
how; so that all things and all our Works are to be attributed to him only: He
sits above and Christ at his Right Hand, expecting what his Servants will do
for him; in like manner as till his Enemies are made his Footstool: Both which
are consequent one to the other; for by means of his Servants he will overcome
the rebellious and make them submit under him.

The Lord looks down from Heaven upon the Children of Men, to see if there
were any that did understand and seek God, Psalm. 14. 1. That did rightly
apprehend the End of their Being in this World and did look after their Maker,
that by the things known already did ascend yet further. That by what is known
of God, did seek out yet more, if they could find out further Trace and
Footsteps of this invisible Being. As his Way is in the Waters, he rides upon
the Wings of the Wind and the Clouds are the Dust of his Feet, so we may see
God in every thing. To behold him, not only in the Sanctuary, but in every Part
of his Temple, which is Heaven and Earth, and in each Part and Corner thereof.
To behold him in his visible Works, and to perceive him in his invisible
things. To understand that great Relation of the Creator and his Creatures: But
more especially how we are concerned with that God with whom we have all to do.
What he does require of us, and what we are to render unto him. The Phrase of
looking down to see does plainly denote that they are left to their Freedom and
Liberty. The same is likewise signified in the Parable of the Vineyard, Isa. 5.
and Mark 12. 1, 2. where God has done all things that were necessary and
reasonable, and looks what will come of it: Whether those Powers of acting he
has endued the Sons of Men withal will be employed in the right way, or in
extravagant things, or be folded up in Idleness and Sloth.

Every Branch in me that bears not Fruit he takes away, and every Branch
that bears Fruit he purges it that it may bring forth more Fruit, John 15.
2. To all is committed at first some Grace and Power in order to spiritual
things; but who do not use it accordingly, it is withdrawn from them. But to
them who manage aright is committed yet more that they should labor according
to the Strength given them. For whatever is in us is to be used and put forth.
Knowledge is to be communicated, and still further Degrees and Increase thereof
is to be sought after in order to impart that forth again. Truth is to be
declared and spoken out, and this also is to be sought after and received for
the aforesaid End and Purpose. As the Blossom is to the Fruit, so is Knowledge
to Obedience and good Works. The first is the Principle, it goes before and
gives Hope of the Fruit which is better; and accordingly will end in that
unless it be blasted and withered. So this is the Beginning of our Duty; for we
cannot do any thing in order to God unless we know somewhat of him. We cannot
keep his Law till we apprehend what it is: As there is an Unwillingness,
Aversation, Forgetfulness of God and good things; so there should be something
to overcome that, to stir up our Remembrance, to keep this always in the
Imagination of our Heart. O Lord God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob and of Israel
our Fathers, keep this for ever in the Imagination of the Thoughts of the Heart
of thy People, and prepare their Heart unto thee, 1 Chronicles. 29. 18. Nevertheless
it is too often seen through the mavelous Subtilty of Satan (who does every
way endeavor to beguile and to beat off) that many have good and right
Knowledge, but it remains as it were blasted, for it lies dead within and does
not shoot forth into well-doing. Many times it drops off and Perishes, having
no Root or Stalk in them; for taking no Delight, and apprehending no Good
therein, they suffer it to pass through their Understanding as Water running
through a Pipe; which may wet and moisten a little for the Time, but returns to
its former Dryness. They may be a little affected for the Time, but afterward
they do not mind nor give heed thereafter. It makes a goodly Show and
Appearance without, but it is mere Leaf and Color, and nothing worth unless it
grows toward Fruit and Perfection.

God is not to be served by halves. As he requires the whole Man, so he would
have his Work finished and complete, or else a tending toward it, if it be
such as he will accept of. Show me thy Faith without thy Works, and I will show
thee my Faith by my Works, Jam. 2. 18. Faith may be without Works, but Works is
a good Sign of Faith. If they be right spiritual and Divine Works, they must
have Faith and Knowledge for Beginning and Performance of the same; for would
thou know, wherefore they are done by some and not by others? Because, some
understand the Obligation they are under, and the Encouragement they have to
the same. All People would alike do the Will of God if they have the like
Thoughts and Apprehensions concerning the same. There is one Faith and one
Hope. So they might equally believe and have the same Assurance of good things
to come, if they would study and seek diligently after them. If they would
suffer themselves to know their Duty and be in a Readiness to perform the same,
God would reveal it unto them: Provided they do receive the Knowledge thereof,
and not put it off and stifle it: He would incline them to do the same, if they
would yield unto and not resist his Motions. He would give his Spirit if they
would not grieve nor quench it; and if they would preserve their Body in
Holiness and Sobriety, fit for its Habitation, he would enlighten and rectify
their Understandings, if they would draw off the thick Coverings of Ignorance
and Disobedience; which make that either the Mind cannot apprehend at all, or
it is full of Falsehood and Delusions: For the Transgressors having not observed
but departed from the Law of the most High, to save and defend themselves, they
seek out for Excuses and Imaginations; and through the Perplexity and Maze of
them, the Sinner does not so easily apprehend what is good and true. A deceived
Heart has turned him aside, Isa. 44. 20. So it is always, when one starts or
goes out of the good Way: And likewise the same hinders it from coming in; as,
a secret Imagination that it is soon enough, or, pray have me excused for this
and the like Reason. There is an hundred Kind of Surmises or Imaginations.

But in Allusion to what our Savior says, take heed how ye hear, so let
People take heed how they think, for God discerns their innermost Thoughts, as
plainly as if they were wrote upon their Face, or spoken out aloud in the
Marketplace. However they keep them close and concealed from his faithful
People and Ministers, least they should find something in the Word of Truth to
convince them of their Errors and Mistake, so that they need not to go on
therein; yet in the mean while known to God are all of them, and he will one
Day spread them forth before their Faces in the Sight of Angels and Men; and
lay it all open, and detect the whole by his eternal Truth. They are so angry
and vexed at present, as if we could inform God who searches all things out and
knows the very Secrets of the Heart; or as if we did bring their Sins to
Remembrance, when himself has declared that he considers all their Ways,:
Though he does now hold his Tongue, Hab. 1. 13. yet our God shall come and
shall not keep Silence, Psalm. 50. 3. He shall rehearse the Thoughts, Words and
Actions of the whole Life. These things have thou done and I kept Silence: Thou
thoughtest that I was altogether such an one as thy self, but I will reprove
thee and set them in order before thine Eyes, Psalm. 50. 21. The Time, Place,
Circumstances and Aggravations will be all manifested, and as they were Day by
Day committed, so they shall be reckoned up. In the Midst of Transgression
there was no such notice taken of them because God kept Silence; but it might
even then have been known that our God would reprove People for the same;
because even then he did sometimes do it a little by his Word and Servants, and
by the still Voice of his Spirit within them. And though we know nothing of one
another, yet God is pleased to convey into our Mind some secret Intents and
close Imaginations, giving us thereby to understand that he knows them all; for
he gave us this Knowledge. And if the World is now so enraged when only a few
Thoughts of their Heart are revealed, good God, what Fear and Confusion will
they be in? What Terror and strange Amazement will possess them when all the
Thoughts of all the Sons of Men since they have been created on the Earth,
shall be fully manifested. For there is not a Word in my Tongue, but lo, O
Lord, thou know it altogether, Psalm. 139. 4. And then all Evil corrupt
Communications, Lies, vain Swearing, false Oaths, Blasphemies, hard Speeches
against God, Jude. 15. Reproaches of his People, Slander and Backbitings, with
all the Sins of the Tongue, which is a World of Iniquity, shall be summed up:
So he, who considers all their Ways, shall bring up all their ungodly Deeds,
wicked and unjust Actions; the first whereof they did endeavor to hide from
the Saints here on Earth, and the latter even from their common Neighbors. If
they had but the Knowledge of God, they would understand all this at the
present Time; for even now we live under him whose Eyes run to and fro
throughout the whole Earth, and are in every Place beholding the Evil and the
Good. He has given his Word which is a Discerner of the Thoughts and Intents
of the Heart; for that speaks out concerning them, and declare them unto us.
Neither is any Creature that is not manifest in his Light, but all things are
naked and opened unto the Eyes of him with whom we have to do, Heb. 4. 11. Not
only divine Revelation, but common Reason teaches the very same: For as our
Lord argued to the Pharisees, Ye Fools, did not be that made that which is
without, make that which is within also? Luke 11. 40. so he who fashioned every
Part of us, must likewise know all that is therein. He that planted the Ear,
shall he not hear? He that formed the Eye, shall he not see? So he, who created
the Soul with Powers to know, must also much more know himself, and also every
thing which she thinks or does. The Scripture in sundry Places asserts this
all-knowing Property of God. There is no Darkness nor Shadow of Death, where
the Workers of Iniquity may hide themselves: And they which would not commit
Wickedness before such a Man, who perhaps has the faint Image of God within,
as to hate and loath Evil; and therefore, if such a Spy is in their Presence
(as they term him) there is a Secret Awe and Restraint upon their Spirits. But
why might not these understand that there is one greater among them who sees
and beholds all that they do: Who is holy and hates all Wickedness? who is the
Judge of all Men, and will certainly call them to an Account for what they are
now a doing. Yet the Sense of him does not keep them off from evil-doing: Which
happens only from their Ignorance and Forgetfulness of him. For, would not his
Holiness and Purity keep them in perfect Order and Subjection, when one who is
a less Partaker thereof than a Drop to the whole Ocean does cast a Damp and
clog that they cannot so freely enjoy the Pleasures of Sin, nor run on so
uncontroulably in the broad Way which leads unto Destruction. When now they
would refrain to do such a thing if a strict Demand and Account should be
required of them, would they not much more abstain if they were sensibly
assured that the Lord himself shall come with Ten Thousand of his Saints to
execute Judgment upon all. He now sits in the Heavens and prepares his Seat
for Judgment; and as sure as this is the Time of Trial, so there will be a Day
of Examination and rendering unto every one according to his Deeds. Who are now
so averse and afraid to hear or speak of him, when we know but little more than
of his Name and Truth, which we hear with the Ear, and see it thus written of
him, and conceive in the Mind. But how will they fly back and be astonished,
when God himself shall come, and the very things shall be manifested whereof it
is now a Vexation only to understand the Report. Who would not receive the
Kingdom of God when heretofore it was in Word, how must they submit unto it
when it shall be actually in Deed? When he sent a Message to reign over them,
and Officers to set up his Kingdom, but they did not receive that and did evil
entreat them whom he had sent, what will they do when the King himself shall
come with his Armies, and miserably destroy those wicked Men? He now speaks
from Heaven by his Word, and the Time draws nigh when he will fulfill the
same. This Word drops in by way of silent Thought to the Heart; or it is heard
by hearing of the Ear, from a Fellow Creature, or it is conveyed unto us by
Means of Ink and Paper; all which is but a still Voice, whereby God does now
manifest himself unto us. So he sent his only Son the eternal Word, which was
made Flesh, who dwelt here and became as one of us, that God might be more
familiar and acquainted with our Nature; and also to try whether we would thus
receive and obey him. But as many as received him, to them he gave Power to
become the Sons of God, John 1. 12. It is said nothing is more free than a
Gift; so the tendering and offer thereof is free, so likewise the Receipt and
Acceptance thereof is a free Act, for it might be refused.

If God the Father had shown his Greatness and Glory, then People would run
unto him as now they ignorantly stay away for a little shadow and
representation thereof from the World. But when he has revealed himself in a
little contemptible Appearance, this will prove whether they will take their
Lot and Portion with that at present, and expect the greater things to come.
Whether notwithstanding the Vail and Covering drawn over the things of God,
they can yet discern the Glory that excels? whether they will believe this
Word, which has spoken of more than what is now seen or had. Again, If he
should at present reveal himself in his Majesty and Power, then People would
presently yield unto him who is mighty, much more than they now pay Reverence
and Submission to the King and great Men, as he who is King of Kings, and Lord
of Lords, does exceed the greatest and highest of the Sons of Men. Which is so
infinite, that no Compassion can be made to express the just and true distance.
But when this God hides himself, when he seems as one asleep, and takes no
notice; when he does not actually give his Favor presently to them that do
well, nor yet does he immediately Manifest forth his severe displeasure against
them who sin and transgress; when it is alike with Subjects and Enemies. Who
fear God, and who fear him not; this will exercise our Faith and waiting, as
also prove their Rebellion and Contempt.

Indeed there are the Promises and Threatenings annexed, and all must partake of
the one, or they are liable to the other: But yet the Conditions of one are put
into our power; and none, unless by his own fault or wilfullness, does fall
under the other. His Kingdom and Dominion is over all; every thing that can be
named, or does any where exist; but then he rules over them according to their
several Natures. The Winds and Sea Obey him necessarily; Beasts, Birds, and
Creeping things, go constantly according to that Instinct implanted in them;
which is as it were a Law unto them. To Man is committed Revelation and Reason
for to guide him; nevertheless, he may disregard, act contrary, or yield unto
and comply with its dictates. So much is left to his freedom and choice. There
is set before him Life and Good, Death and Evil, with a repeated inculcation to
choose Life. And though when these two opposite things are simply and
abstractedly proposed, every one has so much Understanding as would preserve,
and make him happy: Yet the great doubt and mistake is concerning the way and
means of one or the other; which also are laid before the Sons of Men, and
offered to their choice and liberty, as the End is. It might first of all be
rationally and assuredly concluded, That where the End is Right, Good and
Desirable, so is every thing that necessarily tends toward it; for upon a
rotten Stock and Foundation there can never be a sure Building. So
contrariwise, where the End is dismal, and feared by every one, they might well
suspect the several steps leading toward it, and consequently refrain to move
a step further, which they might if they would. As they evidently see and know
that God has put it into their power at first to go into one way or another;
and when they are in a little, they may stand still or go backwards, or rather
turn aside from out of it: So likewise by God's Grace and Invitation, They may
come unto Life, John 5. 40. and it is of themselves that they fall into Death
and Destruction, Hos. 13. 9.

This last thing being attendant to their refusal of coming unto God and
Obeying his Voice, does seem to imply as if they were forced. But if so, they
would actually do it; for are Men stronger than He? God is Allmighty, and must
prevail, if it were the purpose of his Heart to compel Mankind unto his
Obedience. He could raise up Hell from beneath, and set it evidently before our
Eyes, as Nebuchadnezzar did the Fiery Furnace. He could even now Command his
Angels to sound the Trumpet (as at the last day when the dead shall hear his
Voice) that every Nation, Country and Language, all that are now living, should
fall down and Worship him, or they shall be cast into Hell. He could so order
it even at this present time, That those which do Iniquity, shall be cast
immediately thereupon into a Furnance of Fire; and then the boldest worker
thereof would fear, tremble and refrain. He could stir up those terrible ones
from under the Earth, Devils and infernal Spirits, the Executioners of his
Wrath (who should overawe poor Mortals) all one, as a mighty King with his
Armies does now make them do this or that thing at his pleasure. For has he
not the same power as Man to whom he gave being, and has before committed unto
him the Power of doing whatever he does. Cannot he who sits upon the Circle
of the Earth, and the Inhabitants thereof are as Grasshoppers, do as much, or
rather more, than any twofooted Creature that now walks thereon? Cannot the
High and Lofty One, who sits upon his Throne, and commands over the Armies
in Heaven (who are greater in power and might as that wide place above is
bigger than this spot of ground here where we dwell) send forth his Authority,
and execute the same here? Is this too far off when it is his Footstool? for he
fills all places and all things, even those under the Earth with his
presence. If I make my Bed in Hell, behold thou art there, Psalm. 139. 8. Even
now he sends sorth his Lightning unto the Ends of the Earth, and his Arrows go
throughout the World. But because God does not yet manifest his Power, and show
forth all his Might, a thought does arise in them who know not God, as if he
cannot do this. They, who have a little more knowledge are sometimes apt to
imagine, That because he acts here by outward means, which are but little and
small, that by reason of them is the Defect; and they are unable to atchieve
such great and mighty things? whereas his infinite Wisdom and Glory are here to
be seen in ordaining strength out of weakness. Who first made, he will also
enable them to perform what he would have them to do. He can send forth his
Angels or other Instruments, whom we have not known, nor heard of as yet.

A Temptation does arise, that though God can, yet he will not do thus; for so
we have heard in Old Time, and in our days over and over, and yet all things
continue as they were since the Creation. But the Apostle in 2 Pet. 3. 5, 6.
answers this by what God did of Old, both by Creation of, and Drowning the
World. For this they are willingly ignorant of, That by the Word of God the
Heavens were of Old, and the Earth stamding out of the Water, and in the Water;
whereby the World that then was, being overflowed with Water perished. But the
Heavens and the Earth which are now, by the same Word are kept in store,
reserved unto Fire against the day of Judgment and perdition of Ungodly Men.
That same Word which spoke them first into Being, acquainted Noah, Gen 6. of
the intended Flood; and afterward this same word brought the Waters; for God
Commanded them. The same Word has likewise said, that it shall be thus in the
latter days, to which we now haste.

Thus it is determined upon all those who in the mean time have been Ungodly,
or are, or shall hereafter not give regard to the great God above, or are
disobedient to him; for all such are ungodly, without God in the World, who do
not live in sense of Submission and Duty under him. These might even now
conceive, that as in the beginning the Lord laid the Foundations of the Earth
and it abides, as they find by moving and dwelling thereon. As they see the
gathering of the Waters which is called Sea; and as we behold the Heavens
upheld, and the Stars in their Courses and Places: So surely does the
threatening lie against such, and will be fulfilled, when these things shall be
so changed, as we are further foretold of. As before it was observed of the
stedfastness and immutability of the Promise, from Isa. 45. So from 2 Pet. 3.
it may be gathered of the utmost certainty of the Evil and Good things there
spoken of: They seem therefore to be out of sight, and to come to prove how we
in the mean while will be concerned and affected toward them. There is a
little imperfect Good in the One at present, and a lesser Evil and Harm in the
other; but God will so add further, that the one shall be perfected in Reward
and Happiness, the other shall end in Punishment and Misery. My Son forget not
my Law, but let thine heart keep my Commandments, for Length of Days, and long
Life and Peace shall they add unto you, Prove. 3. 1, 2. and when the first is
ended, there shall succeed Immortality and Glory: And the Peace here shall go
out in Ravishment, Ecstasy and unutterable Rejoicing. So again, Sin, which now
hurts for a moment, does bring on Torment for ever. What occasions Sorrow and
Vexation, does deliver over to the Worm which shall never die. What occasions
Sickness and Pain, does likewise bring forth Death and the Vengeance of Eternal
Fire. All that is seen or had here, is but an earnest of like and worse things
to come. The less do fore-run, and give notice of the greater. And as in the
former case, by the comfort and satisfaction of the one, we should much more
desire and pray after that which exceeds: So by the sensible inconvenience
and trouble of the latter way, we should much more abhor and dread the End
thereof, which is Death. As we now taste and feel it is thus, so we may
believe, and be fully assured it shall be so hereafter, as the faithful and
true VVitness says, Behold I have told you before. By the real Good of one way
we may well depend further upon the substance of things hoped for. By the hurt
and deceitfulness of the other, we may be sufficiently forewarned of the
Destruction and Misery in that way.

The Nature of Rewards and Punishments, Exhortation and Dehortation, Promises
and Threatenings, do denote that Man is left to his Liberty and Freedom. All
these do inform and acquaint him how things stand pertaining to him, That he
might partake of the Good, and avoid the Evil. God has thus established the
Connection and Order of things. They are set before Mankind, and placed so near,
that they are become as closely appendant to him as his Flesh and Spirit, so
they must have the one or the other. His trial is appointed in things
absolutely necessary, which he cannot be without, as Meat, Drink, and Raiment
to the Body, and in Thoughts as to the Soul, which are the very Essence of it;
for the Soul will cease to be, when it shall cease to think. And lest the Soul
should degenerate into Sloth and Bruitishness, of that we are rouzed up to take
heed by the Parable of the unprofitable Servant, whose Doom was, Cast him into
outer Darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashing of Teeth. Who would not
receive and ascend up toward the Light, but walked all his days in the Mist of
Ignorance, He shall be thrust down to the lowest Dungeon, and be confined unto
utter Darkness: For the former seeming Ease and Stupidity, there will succeed
continued self-indignation. His Soul was then employed about somewhat; and if
not about that Talent entrusted with him by the God of the Spirits of all
Flesh, yet he had some little Thought, or seeming excuse for his Refusal and
Disobedience. The knowledge was conveyed in; the Obligation and Necessity
thereof was considered in the Mind, and there was a willing delay and putting
it off. In those debates and reasonings within, there is a manifest thinking
this or that way. Now the Scale turns on this side, and then on that. And as
there is a capacity to think freely, so there is a power to do accordingly, or
a contrary froward going on in his way, or a wretched doing nothing at all.

The Lord knows our frame, Psalm. 103. 14. the disposal and tendency of each
part of our Nature; and accordingly in his Word and Truth application is made
to the Children of Men. To this end are those several kinds of Expostulation in
the Psalms, Prophets, and throughout the Old and New Testament. Some things are
to inform and teach the Understanding, others are to subdue and bring over the
Will; and the several Affections are particularly spoken unto. So that read
where you will, you may find some part of your Soul moved. And then there is
the example of Saints recorded, who were Men of like Passions and Infirmities
with our selves, that we also might do the same, which others have done before
us. God addresseth himself to us as we are Men, to judge of the equality of his
ways, and of what he says and commands us. He brings us up, and implants a
capacity to know the Good, and refuse the Evil. He gives Senses to discern
between one and the other. He acquaints us over and over with the very Nature
of things at present, and also forewarns us of things to come.

Survey the whole Dispensation and Exercise of God's Dominion over us. Consider
each part and method thereof. Look into the mystery of the Kingdom, Remember
his doings of Old Time, Think upon what he does now; and also take in the
Consummation of all what he has said and sworn he will yet perform: Then thou
may understand, that as he made People free, so he would govern them as
such. He would have them serve him with joyfulness and gladness of Heart, and
what they do it should be with a willing and ready Mind; for the Lord loves the
answer of such a Soul, when he says, Seek ye my Face, Thy Face Lord will I
seek. That comes at first as soon as he is called, and afterward is in a
continual readiness to receive further Direction and Command, and then is in an
actual and speedy performance of the same. Where is a willing Mind there is no
seeking out Excuses and Delays. There is no shifting and trying to put it off;
There is no Controversy or Dispute of Mind, whether I should serve God
presently or not. For if there is a right Knowledge of him, and of the Terms
upon which we are to enter into his Service, we come as readily to him as one
that was hired to the best of Masters according to the Flesh, who will give the
greatest Wages, and most kind Usage. Says our Savior unto his Disciples and
Followers, Henceforth I call you not Servants; for the Servant knows not what
his Lord does. But I have called, you Friends, John 15. 15. Here is yet a
nearer Relation and Honor, to be admitted into Friendship with him who is King
of Kings and Lord of Lords. Faith apprehends this exceeding Privilege, and
esteems of it more than to have for assured Friends the King, all the Nobility
and Gentry of this or the Neighbor Nations; Or if Love is lessened when it is
divided into so many Particulars, it is better than to have two, three, or a
few only of the greatest and wisest Personages on Earth. Christ unto the
Believers Soul is the chiefest of Ten Thousand; nay, he is more to her than all
the Persons and Things in the World. Now where is an intimate Love and Union,
(as we expect his Grace and Benefits, and hope for Gifts from him) so likewise
we must do the things he says, and whatever he does require. Our Voice and
Desire is, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly; and his Answer is again to the
Church, And behold I come quickly; and my Reward is with me, to give to every
Man according as his work shall be, Rev. 22. 12. And seeing the time allotted
for that Work is short, though it was spoken to the Traitor Judas, it may be
also applied to his faithful Disciples and Followers, What thou have to do, do
quickly. We have his own Example and Words for it, I must work the Works of
him that sent me while it is Day: The Night comes when no Man can work, John
9. 4. Accordingly he did go about doing good and preaching the Kingdom of God,
making known all things he had heard from his Father. The Wise Man calls upon
us, Whatsoever thy Hand finds thee to do, do it with all thy Might: For there
is no Work, nor Device, nor Knowledge, nor Wisdom in the Grave whither thou
go, Eccles. 9. 10. So whatever God and his Christ commands and requires
of thee, do it with all convenient Speed and as soon as thou can before the
Opportunity slip from thee, or the Means be taken away, or thy self be cut off;
for thou art but Flesh and always dying. After this is done God may have more
for thee: He will proportion thy Reward according to thy Labor. If thou
diminishest ought from that thou will lose so much of a greater Recompense. The
more thou do at this present, the more thou will receive for all Eternity:
What is done each Day or Hour, is laying up a Treasure for many Ages.

There may be somewhat of this signified in the Words of our Savior, who
speaks the same to us as he did to the Disciples, Ye say that there are Four
Months and then comes Harvest: Lift up your Eyes, for the Fields even now are
white unto Harvest, John 4. 35. And he that reapeth, gathers Fruit unto
everlasting Life. We may think and deceive our selves that such a Work is to be
done hereafter, when if we consider thoroughly, all things are now ready for the
Performance of the same. But admitting it were not to be done until then, yet
such good Acts may be done in the mean while which are preparatory to that, as
the Husbandman fits all things in the mean while; or we may in the Space
between serve God to some other End and Purpose: That no Day pass over our Head
without doing some thing to the Glory of God and to the Benefit of Souls. Every
thing here is in order to eternal Life; and as we are here always going toward
that, and the Life we now live is continually hastening toward its Period; so
we should at all times make Provision against this shall fail to be received up
into the other, that we may there continually partake of somewhat which we have
done here. Indeed the Fruits of the Earth do spring up and are ripe at such
certain Seasons of the Year according to the Climate or Country; but still the
Husbandman has some Employment all the Year round. The Kingdom of God over the
Souls of Men is not confined to Times and Seasons, as in such an Age or Part of
Life, to such a Month or Day of the Year. But this Work may be carrying on at
all Times and Seasons. The Word may be preached in Season and out of Season, at
Summer or VVinter, Spring or Autumn, Sabbath or VVeek-day, in the Daytime or
at Midnight, as they are journeying or sitting still, in the Closet, Family or
Congregation. Truth shall spring out of the Earth, Psalm. 85. 11. at what time
it shall please the Lord to open the Fountains of the great Depth. And as the
VVind blows when and where it lists, so he shall give his Spirit to search
it out. So again Righteousness shall look down from Heaven, when the Lord shall
pour down his Spirit from on high; which as he has done several Times already,
so it may acquaint us further of the things there. He may instruct his Servants
as those of old, in what Disposition of Body and Soul they must be in for to
receive it. To get the foregoing Qualifications of Faith, Knowledge, Love of
God, Obedience, Holiness, Humility, convenient Retirement and separating from
their Brethren that they may the more approach unto God. These things do not so
much depend upon the outward Circumstances of set and definite Times of the
Year, but they come to pass at what Time pleases the Father, and we receive
the Grace and use the Means to be Partakers thereof.

Known unto God are the great things he will do for his Church; for they are
fixed in his eternal Purpose and Determination, it is not for us to know the
Times and Seasons which the Father has put in his own Power, Acts 1. 7.
Perhaps the very Reason why these are not clearly revealed and manifested unto
us, is least in the mean while we should neglect our own Concern. Our Minds
might so run upon what things are to be done in the Generations following, that
we should leave undone what ought to be done in this Generation wherein we now
live. As the Woman of Samaria says, When the Messiah is come he will tell us
all things, John 8. 25. so we might be apt to apprehend it, as to refuse to
learn any thing in the mean while: And when it is promised, The Earth shall be
full of the Knowledge of the Lord as the Waters cover the Sea, Isa. 11. 9. We
might content our selves with our former Ignorance, and reject any further
Knowledge and Instruction in the mean while.

Even those great things of old time have been transacted by outward Means; and
we ought still to use those Means which are in our Power, to put them forth
with all our Skill and Might, and then let the Lord do what seems him good.
We know not at first what a Blessing and Success he may give unto them, but we
may somewhat perceive it afterward. Then things may rise up beyond our
Expectations, when in the Beginning we are apt to distrust and faint in our
Mind. Had our selves done nothing, or after we had undertaken it, then let it
fall, then it was our own Refusal that we were not Instruments in carrying on
the Work of the Lord; or he might take it from us, and make choice of and give
it unto others who should thoroughly perform his Will. If the Way is showed unto
us, and we are put in such a Capacity, we have also an Impulse and Pressing of
Mind to the same, and the Work is right and good; as appears evidently from
his Word and the Examples of old, there we may, and indeed ought to walk in
that Way, and actually do according to the Power given us, and also comply
with the Dictates of a rectified and truly informed Conscience. If God may be
glorified by such an Action and Good may be done unto others, this should be
indeed performed: And seeing it should be done by some one, why not by thee to
whom he has given the Knowledge thereof, endued with Ability, and is stirring
thee up by his Spirit. We may learn from Exodus 4. 10, 11, 12, 13. that God is
not pleased with Excuses or Delays, or with alleging our own Imperfections;
for he made us at first, and can also mend and increase what he has begun. He
sent forth further Strength and Ability according as the thing requires. The
stammering Lips may at length speak plain as in the Beginning of Speech. The
Voice, which was hasty and confused, may become clear and distinct: And who
acquaints at first in general with the Errand that he should go to such a
Place, and do such a thing, will afterward according to his own divine Method
in Acts 9. 6. teach particularly what he shall say: And put the very Words into
our Mouth a little before, or in the very same Hour, Mat. 10. 19. just as they
are to be uttered forth: Remembering still that we are but Instruments in the
Hands of God. We are to receive the Thoughts he puts into our Heart, and to
speak them out with our Lips; but we can say no more nor think of pertaining to
him than what he suggests and puts into our Mind. We are to execute what he
puts into the Power of our Hands, but we can do no more. Our God does not
require more than he has given. Those Talents are to be exercised and traded
withal which he has committed unto us; but he will never call us to Account
for more than we have received: So we are to use Diligence and Labor according
to what we can.

In the first Place we should pray unto God, O learn me true Understanding and
Knowledge that I may keep thy Commandments. Now these are either things to be
abstained from, or things to be done. The first are properly Prohibitions or
Forbiddings; but the Word Commandment imports Duty, which is to be done. That
must be discerned and known before it can be begun; and because there may be
Hindrances and Oppositions, those also are to be seen and overcome that it may
be accomplished. In the Way to Heaven there are many Turnings aside, which we
are to be acquainted withal and avoid that we may keep on still in the right
Way; for if we go out there is so much Time and Labor lost to no purpose,
which might have set so far on. The best Use hereof is to be more careful for
the future to keep on right. In every worldly Business and Design there are
such foregoing Means. And if they do at first hit upon those which are true and
prudent, they do sooner perform the matter in hand; but if they make use of
false and foolish Means, they go backward or round about, and so they are
further off or they wander: And then either they do not accomplish, or it is
much a longer Time before they obtain what they would have.

Indeed there is another kind of Method in things pertaining to God than what
is commonly made use of as to the things of this World: For though the same
Wisdom, Diligence and Activity are to be used toward the future and spiritual
things as we see People do in their present Designs and Enterprises, yet we
ought not to venture upon all manner of Means. For the Word of God is right and
all his Works are done in Truth, Psalm. 33. 4. That Word is to be made our
Direction all along, and we are to do nothing for God but what is holy and
good: So we learn manifestly from his revealed Will, and also we find by the
Success and Event thereof, for if his own peculiar Servants do turn aside from
the holy Commandment delivered unto them, or do that which is sinful or
doubtful (not being of Faith and full Persuasion of Mind) it does not prosper
unto them, but they are most commonly defeated; even the Wicked and
Tansgressors, which do most flourish and have the things they desire and
endeavor after, have not a comfortable Enjoyment thereof, or they are given to
vain Imaginations, tormenting Desires, continual Restlessness and Turmoil of
Mind: So they have plenty, but no Satisfaction. If there is but one Achan, a
single Babylonish Wedge, this troubles the whole Camp of Israel, and the
Israelites are smitten before their Enemies. And this is many times a Reason,
not only of the common Afflictions of God's faithful People in their private
Persons, but also his Church has labored under long continued Persecutions
and Adversities; out of which they have attempted to redress themselves by
unwarrantable and evil Means, which have been frustrate and came to naught, and
then by giving occasion to the Enemy to think that they were not so holy as
they pretended; and thereupon they were kept faster in Bondage, and tormented
yet more.

We ought carefully to use the Means, but we are in no wise to trust in them,
nor seek to the Arm of Flesh as to put any Reliance thereon. God is exceeding
jealous of his own Glory, that as all things are of him, so he would have all
ascribed unto him: And therefore he does purposely make use of little outward
Means, that it may be known that they have not done it, but he who sits above.
He acts in an invisible Manner: He works and we see him not. By the silent but
effectual Operations of his Spirit. Which the World receives not because it
sees him not, John 14. 17. They do not understand, but yet they are moved at
the Presence of him in whom they imagine it dwells? His Flesh is the same with
theirs, and yet they narrowly look on and consider him. But if they had a
spiritual Eye, or if they had an inward Sense to perceive somewhat of the same
Nature within themselves, they would be much more overawed with that: And yet
they would be inexpressibly more moved with the Presence of the God of the
Spirits of all Flesh As Wax melts before the Fire, so let the Wicked perish
at the Presence of God, Psalm. 68. 2. which will be really fulfilled when
himself shall bow the Heavens and come down. Even now at the Manifestation of
the Spirit of God, Satan and his Legions do fly and disappear. The Devils
believe and tremble; for they more quickly discern and fear than People in the
Flesh; and being more apprehensive of God's Power, and also being conscious
that they are liable to it, they either make haste to get away, or they lie
under a more grievons Terror and Apprehension thereof against the Time it shall
be executed upon them. The Lord rides upon a swift Cloud, and shall come into
Egypt, and the Idols shall be moved at his Presence, Isa. 19. 1. As Light does
dispel Darkness, one Beam or Ray of the Sun drives it away when it overspreads
the Face of the whole Earth: So it is of the spiritual Light and of the
spiritual Darkness; where the spiritual Light does appear and shoot it self
forth, it makes all Ignorance and Error to utterly vanish away.

The Father of Lights does sometimes send out a Ray and Communication of his
own Nature. O send out thy Light and thy Truth, Psalm. 43. 3. Thou that dwell
between the Cherubims shine forth, Psalm. 80. 1. He now and then appears a
little more, and makes a Discovery of himself. The God of all things, who
hides himself (if I may so express it) behind the Skreen of his Creatures,
does look out a little. Who has put a Vail on his Face, he does a little draw
it aside. Who has dark Waters and thick Clouds to cover him, yet he looks out
from behind the Pillar; and as he troubled the Egyptians of old, so does he
even now seem to disturb the Inhabitants of the Earth; for so they are
disturbed when they have any Apprehension or spiritual Sight of him. And
therefore they avoid it and they shut their Eyes against him. Lord, when thy
Hand is lifted up they will not see, but they shall see, Isa. 26. 11. As long
as they can refuse the Knowledge of God, they will refuse it: As long as they
can resist and despise his Righteousness and Truth, they will do so: But at
length there shall such an abundant Measure thereof be poured down, that they
shall both know and consider, tremble and be astonished do whatever they can.

By the Help of God one of his Saints (who is the same with others) shall put
an hundred to Flight, and Ten shall chase a Thousand. And this shall not be
done by Sword or Spear, by outward Strength or Power of the Hands, but with the
weakest Member and lightest thing in Man, viz. It shall be done by the Tongue
and by the Breath of his Lips. And he shall smite the Earth with the Rod of his
Mouth, and with the Breath of his Lips shall he slay the Wicked, Isa. 11. 4.
The Lord shall put Words into their Mouth that the Ears which hear thereof
shall tingle: And though they are backward to hear, yet he shall cause them to
hear. Now Words are vain, light, and the Sound of them soon passes away: They
may be slighted off when they come from a weak and helpless Man: For, does he
talk of great things who is little and contemptible himself? Does he speak of
Power and Might, who is but Flesh, a feeble Creature, and like a Reed shaken
with the Wind? Does he preach of Rewards and Punishments in whose Power it is
not either to do good or hurt? For the utmost is a slight Pleasure or little
Inconvenience. Does he talk of Kingdoms, Glory and Riches, when perhaps himself
is abject, vile and poor? Many such like things might be objected against us if
we came in our own Name, or if we did promise them by our own Merit, Excellency
and Power. But seeing we come in the Name of the Lord who has created and
ordained all things; who will do nothing, but he will reveal it to his
Servants, the Prophets. Whatever his eternal Purpose and Decree is concerning
Mankind, he will some way make it known unto them, by acquainting it to some
who are to publish it unto others. He has so ordered that it might be known.
They do all hear the Rumor and they might seek after, Acts 15. 17. and find it.

Salvation and the good things of God are forced upon none. They may be brought
nearer and pressed more urgently upon some than upon others, yet still there is
Liberty of Refusal. Again, they are not so far off from any, but they may come
near and receive them; and to whom it is most inculcated and offered, yet it is
not all done to their Hand. For Trial is had whether they will seek yet
further. There must be somewhat of Man's own Act and willing.

God does manifest himself to be friendly and loving unto us, by that constant
Provision of temporal Mercies, and also by doing all that lies on his Part for
spiritual good things. It is expected what we will do reciprocally as to what
he does require of us. Says the Son of God, As the Father has loved me, so
have I loved you. Continue ye in my Love. If ye keep my Commandments, ye shall
abide in my Love, even as I have kept my Father's Commandments and abide in his
Love, John 15. 9, 10. Here we have Assurance of the divine Favor to us; and we
are instructed how we may continue and express our good Will toward him, viz.
by keeping his Commandments. God is no Respecter of Persons; but whosoever of
the Children of Men does this, he is accepted with him. Whosoever does the
Works of Abraham, he is a Friend of God, as Abraham was, James 2. 23. which
Word, Friend, imports that we do a thing presently and readily at his
requiring. By much Importunity we we may get a Kindness from a common
Neighbor; which he will do not out of Affection and Esteem toward us, but to
be freed from the Trouble which we give him by our Importunity. But where is
real Love and Friendship, there is constant Readiness to do mutual Offices even
before the other asks, or upon the least Intimation that such a thing would be
acceptable unto him.

Now to apply the Case as it stands between God and Mankind. As soon as they
hear of me, they shall obey me, Psalm. 18. 44. Nothing can be more just and
reasonable than that he should require Obedience of his Creatures. Is he not
more to all of them and to each singly than one Man is to another? He is
infinitely more kind than Father or Mother, Husband, Friend or Brother; for
even he ordained these Relations, and stirs up, (what he first put in) those
Bowels of Mercy and Compassion one to another. Of God are all things, and now
he orders them as it pleases him: So he is the Author of all good we ever
received; and as he made, he does now sustain us, and loadeth us with Benefits.
May he not expect something from us, even all that we can render unto him: To
acknowledge him in all things and to walk always in the Way he shows unto us,
and to observe those Commandments he gives us. Lord! How strange is it, that a
Creature should make any Dispute or Controversy concerning it? As we live by
him, so it is meet we should live as he would have us: Both the Members of Body
and Faculties of Soul should do according as he made and designed them.
Therefore glorify God in your Body and in your Spirit which are God's, 1 Cor.
6. 20. The Potter makes Vessels to serve for those Uses he intended them; and
other Artificers, which frame moving Instruments, make them turn or go as they
please. Has not the Lord the same Power and Understanding, who has given such
Skill and Capacity to others. And he who fashioned every Part of us might also
have ordained that all within us should necessarily have so moved according to
his Command and Will, as the Pulse continually beats to keep Life and Motion.
Who formed the Heart to turn either way, to Good or Evil, he might have
determined it only to the first; who enabled us to think this or that, he might
have confined us to good only; and he might have kept out from thence
Wickedness and Vanity, all one as we now remain ignorant of many hidden and
unsearchable things.

If we had a right Knowledge of God we might discern how he is the Creator of
us and of all things; who made my single Person, he has made Millions of the
same Sort: And who created Mankind, he has also Ten Thousand times ten
Thousand several Sorts of Creatures both living and inanimate, all which are
for his own Glory and to minister unto him. Who has called the Generations
from the Beginning, Isa. 41. 4. and ordained them to succeed one another after
that Manner as we see they now do. And shall a single Atom, an individual Dust
and Ashes refuse one Moment to comply with his Will? Nay, if several do so
besides, yet it is thine and the other's single Disobedience, which make up and
encourage the Corruption of many. But let their Number be never so great, they
are but as a Swarm of Flies and Locusts: And if they do mutter forth hard
Speeches or commit ungodly Deeds, it is but in very little and sudden Acts. And
what is all this Sin and Wickedness to the whole World of Creatures which
declare the Glory of God, and show forth all his Praise? What are the
refractory and stubborn Worms of the Earth to those Armies of Heaven which
fulfill all the Pleasure of the Almighty? When he commands the Children of Men
to do after this or that manner, they go on frowardly in the Way of their
Heart, yet his Throne is for ever established above the Circuit of Heaven; and
there he sits governing the World; and for ought we know a Thousand others. God
exercises the supreme and alone Authority over all. Who makes his Angels
Spirits, and his Ministers a flaming Fire. The Spirits are for the sudden and
quick Dispatch of what he would have done, and for the effectual Performance of
the same. And the flaming Fire is to burn up and consume all that lets or
hinders; and so make way for his Purpose: He has already fixed and ordained
things in their appointed Courses and Places: He has appointed those several
Motions and Bounds: He has sent forth his Word and given a Law. He garnished
out the Heavens by his Wisdom, and laid out the Foundations of the Earth by his
Understanding: And we see it abides according to his Ordinance; for all things
serve him.

Even Man does all things which he is necessarily obliged unto; nay, which he
could refrain from, but with some visible Inconveniency. Man goes forth to his
Work and to his Labor until the Evening. Now there is as much Difficulty in
that bodily Service as in the other Duty required of him by God, and yet he
readily does that, though it takes up more of his Strength and Time. The utmost
of bodily Labor is for Meat, Drink and Raiment. Which God could have provided
him without his own Labor, as he does for the Ravens and Fowls of the Air. But
now it is so ordered, to see if Man will labor for Food and Raiment, and there
he does. Wherefore do ye spend Money for that which is not Bread, and labor
for that which satisfies not, Isa. 55. 2. The Hand withers, the Work
cease, it is all determined within the several Days, both the Meat and Labor
thereof. The first perishes in the Mouth and is utterly consumed in the
Draught; the other is tiresome and not very material afterward. The Wages are
mean and satisfy not. But now God has promised a Gift and Reward, which is
eternal Life and Blessedness; And this is to be had upon foregoing Conditions;
which may be performed by the Soul, as the Bodily Service is done by the
outward Members. Incline your Ear and come unto me. Hear and your Soul shall
live, and I will make an everlasting Covenant with you, even the sure Mercies
of David, Isa. 55. 3. Here God sends forth an Invitation and Command, with the
utmost Assurance of fulfilling the same. It is observable how the Preface runs,
Incline your Ear and come unto me: Hear and your Soul shall live. He addresseth
to the first Stubbornness and Aversation in Man, to get him to hear the Voice
and Proposals of his Maker, for he does send forth so many gracious Words and
pressing Arguments, that whosoever does attend to them, he must be persuaded.
Our God can give alike and greater Reasons why all Mankind should serve him all
the Days they live here upon Earth, as they do this or that for one another, or
as they have Imaginations to walk in their own Ways.

God is not a Man that he should Lie, Numb. 23. 9. as Courtiers and great
Personages, very free in Promises, but slack in Performances. But he does give
the greatest satisfaction, upon which whosoever considers, he may build the
strongest Assurance that he shall receive greater and more certain things by
keeping close and steadfast to his Covenant than by turning aside from it. From
the Intention and sincere Desire of our Soul, especially when we seek for all
Knowledge and Direction by the Word and Prayer, We may as surely conclude, as
if God spoke openly unto us out of a Cloud, or from the Battlements of Heaven.
The consideration of things to come may at all times weigh down the Thoughts
and Temptation of the present. The Eye may be continually fixed on the
Recompense of Reward, and so disdain and refuse the sudden Pleasures of Sin, or
the little profit of Transgression. Such things may be for ever kept in the
Imagination of the Hearts of People, that they shall seldom or never utterly
turn aside from God's Commandments, and which shall overcome the Temptations of
Satan, the World, the Lusts of the Flesh, the Desires of the Mind, or the
Dictates of Pride, Obstinacy and Frowardness. What does establish and confirm
those who are already therein, will also bring others in the Right Way. God is
able to bring those home who at present are estranged from him, by the same
Method which others have been before. He can use and make known the same
Persuasion, wherewith others are actually persuaded, and they yield to take
upon them the Yoke of his Son. He knows all the Hearts of the Children of Men,
every single Thought afar off, each particular moving and inclination. He
understands all their Works, and sees all their Ways. As also he is not
ignorant of all the Devices of the Enemy, To beat and keep them off from his
Knowledge and Obedience. So that he can take away what lets and hinders, or
overrules it: And that which makes for Good, he can further and complete the
same. I have seen his ways, and will heal him, Isa. 57. 18. who perceives all
the Wanderings, can also lead him back. Who does behold all the stumblings in
Darkness. He can suddenly bring Light into the Soul, that she may see her way.
Who does clearly discover all the imaginations of Evil, He can also presently
scatter and defeat them. If there be any Thoughts of Good, any wishes and
desires toward it; he can cherish them up into acts and habits of doing well.
God, who makes to Will, can also make to Do in his good Pleasure, and in his
own Order, though this is commonly after the other. He brings near that which
was afar off, and inclines what before was averse and unwilling. Who can
understand, and also he does know those close actings and contrivances, the
secret and hidden things of the Heart, those reserved and innermost Thoughts,
the Bottom Imaginations (if I may so express it) or what yet lies under Ground,
or is covered over in the inward Man: The deceitful Windings and Turnings are
more than can be reckoned up. We cannot fathom and comprehend all that lies in
our own Heart, much less in others. But thou, O Lord, know all. I the Lord
search the Heart and try the Reins, to see and discover if there is any thing
more. So he, who knows all things, can also apply things accordingly. He can
adapt his Grace unto their Corruption, his Truth unto their Error, and his
Mercy to all their former Sins. He has a Balm to all their Sores, for who does
perfectly understand the Nature of that, and also the Remedy, there he can
recover whom he will. Now God does know thoroughly the Nature of every thing
which he has made. I have seen his Ways and will heal him: I will lead him
also and restore Comforts to him and his Mourners, Isa. 57. 18.

God does not things suddenly; for our Faith and Waiting are to be exercised in
the mean while; and therefore his gracious Promises are commonly future, what
he does phrase Thoughts of Good, even to give an expected End. Yet in the mean
while he requires that we prepare and be found ready. To be as those that wait
for the coming of the Bridegroom, that when he comes we may open to him
immediately, Luke 12. 36. Agreeable hereunto is the Practice and Example of
those of old. The Disciples all went as soon as ever they were called, and left
their worldly Business. So did the Laborers in the Vineyard go as soon as they
were severally hired. Those converted to the Christian Faith believed and lived
accordingly the first or second Time after they had heard it preached unto
them. So when Paul was called forth; he conferred not with Flesh and Blood, he
had nothing to do with carnal Considerations or worldly Inducements, no present
Motive nor yet a like Danger and Inconvenience did hinder or excuse with him,
but he immediately went to Jerusalem. Undoubtedly all these did for the best
and God was well pleased with them. He did accept and reward them more than
those who seek out for Excuse and Delay, or such who first refuse to hear his
Gracious call; or if they do at any Time hear or it is made known unto them,
yet they will not yield unto it.

The Word of Exhortation stands continually for all People both young and old
to hear and read it. The Spirit and the Bridegroom say always, come, There is
one knocking at the Door of their Hearts for Admission, God is ready at all
Times to set up his Kingdom within us, his Law is already written in our Heart
and inward Parts. He sends his Prophets rising up early and sitting down late.
Who being dead, speak yet unto us in their Writings. There are constant
Dictates of Mind to serve and obey our Maker. There are Examples of those who
do it in our Age and Circumstances of Life. There is hardly a Chapter or Verse
throughout the whole Bible, but some way or other calls and stirs us up. The
Scripture is opened and alleged. The Word preached in the several
Congregations throughout our Land, and in all the Nations of the World are a
Sermon to us also: For we are the same Creatures and stand in the very same
Relation to the great God over all, as those several Persons who hear such and
such Truths with their outward Ears. We might also know and hear more than we
do; and those who hear and understand are to declare it unto us, to acquaint
their Neighbors and Kinsfolks, and they to others: So that the Word of God
might dwell richly and have free Passage among us.

There is a sufficient Call and Warning to all People in their several
Generations and Ages of Life, God now commands all Men every where to repent,
because he has appointed a Day in the which he will judge the World in
Righteousness by that Man whom he has ordained, whereof he has given
Assurance unto all Men in that he has raised him from the Dead, Acts 17. 31.
As every one knows Christ to be a Savior, so there is the same Notice conveyed
that he is to be our Judge: And as God shall bring every secret thing into
Judgment, all the Actions of our Lives, for each single Day will be called to
account: So it will be demanded why such and such did not come when they were
called, as they sensibly knew by a powerful Conviction over their Spirits, when
it was inculcated over and over, to Day if ye will hear his Voice harden not
your Heart. When they might have considered more and more, and themselves did
find that the more they did consider, the more they were pressed instantly to
close with Christ; and therefore they did put off considering their Ways. They
might at such an Opportunity have heard God's Word (which would have urged them
to have turned from their evil Ways, and therefore they would not attend to
them. They might at such a Day and by such Means have learned the Knowledge and
Fear of the Lord, but they would not. His Statutes were laid before them, but
they would not let the Ears hear which were made to hear; nor the Eyes see
which were ordained for that End. And further, when the Thoughts thereof did
recur to the Mind, they would put them far away. When God rises up and enters
into Judgment, how shall Men answer for such things?

And whosoever now looks upon or hears what is written in these Lines, and he
is convinced of the Truth and Sincerity of them, but if he should go away and
not comply with the Purport thereof, or be willingly ignorant, or take no
notice for fear he should be brought over unto God more suddenly than he
otherwise intended, how will he give account to the Judge of all Men for the
same? Even to that God who knows all his Thoughts and Imaginations concerning
this or any other matter, who will reprove and set the things he has done in
order before him; even from the Time he had the Beginning of the Knowledge of
Good and Evil unto the Day of his Death?

God knows all things, but we know not as God knows; and therefore we are so
puzzled and distracted in things pertaining to him. He sees all things in
Heaven and Earth and under the Earth at one Sight, and knows all things to
the utmost as they are known. But we now see one thing and then another, in
order and Succession of Time, as he shows them unto us. Those Things which are
more hidden and invisible, he reveals them by his Word and Spirit; and still we
know nothing perfectly and comprehensively. And it may be all confined to
things pertaining to us Men, which is not the Ten Thousandth Part of the things
to be known, nor yet one Half of what does immediately relate unto and concern
us. The Sum and Comprehension of all is to know God and his Law, our Duty to
him in each particular, and when we do vary from it.

It may be observed that the whole Scripture (which is called the Lord's Book)
may be all reduced to this. Besides the natural imprinted Knowledge, God is
there more discoverd to us, by the History of the Creation of the World, his
Manifestations unto his Servants that worshipped and feared him, his wonderful
Works that he did from Time to Time, the Descriptions given of him in sundry
Places, and also the Commandments enjoined to the Sons of Men. The Law was
given by Moses unto which he added much Exhortation to the Observance thereof:
So did David and the Prophets, whose Writings were to press People unto
Obedience and a Reproof of Transgression. Which last was an orderly Declaration
of Matter of Fact and according to Truth how People did turn aside from the
Commandments delivered unto them. It was a Telling of or Declaration unto the
House of Jacob their Sins and Transgressions. Which was expressed in general or
more particular Terms; but yet so plainly that every Offender might understand
himself was spoken of and called upon for to amend his Doings.

There is a strong Sense and Obligation upon the Heart of Man to keep the Law
of his Creator; and he is sensible of as much every Time he is put in
Remembrance thereof. As on the other hand, he is troubled with Shame, Regret
and Condemnation when he thinks of, and more especially when he is told of his
Sin and Error. This proceeds from the Consciousness of having offended God, and
from the Fear of his Anger and Judgment.

A secret Thought does arise from Ignorance or Unbelief, that either God does
not see or not take notice of such evil Deeds and will not require for them:
But such an one brings their Sin to Remembrance and makes it recorded before
God; which otherwise might fall to the Ground and be forgotten by him. Hence
has arose that Hatred and unkind Usage to the Prophets, Ministers and Servants
of God for speaking of and reproving the People of their several Generations of
their Sin and Disobedience. This alone did put some Check and Stop to
Transgression, and so the less was committed, and consequently there was less
to account for before God. But in those Ages when all Flesh had corrupted its
Way upon Earth, and there was none to oppose the Torrent of Iniquity; yet God,
who sits above, both saw and knew the whole Course of Transgression, all one as
if Ten Thousand of his Saints did cry aloud against it. This will be clearly
manifested at the Day of Judgment, when God will disclose and make known the
several Steps and Degrees of Irreligion and Wickedness, both of Generations and
single Persons, of Countries and Families, whereof we knew and heard nothing at
all. When the Lord shall write and rehearse up all things as they were done
from the Beginning of the World. The Sin of Judah is written with a Pen of
Iron, and graven with the Point of a Diamond; and so it remains before God
although no Man ever spoke thereof by Word of Mouth, or committed it to Ink and
Paper. It may be, that the several Acts are willingly forgotten by the Persons
who committed the same, but God will remember them to the impenitent and hard
of Heart; and he will renew the Memory of them to the Sinner's own Mind and
Conscience. As the Sinner does now act and continue in the same, he does
treasure up unto himself Wrath against the Day of Wrath, and Revelation of the
righteous Judgment of God, who will render unto every Man according to his
Deeds, Romans 2. 5, 6. whether good or evil, as is expressed in the following
Verses.

Here again it appears, that the several Actions of Life will come into
judgment and Retribution shall be made to the Person accordingly. So that in
how many things he does well he will be accepted, and himself would have notice
taken thereof. If he sin, that also lies at the Door: Which will pass either
into Examination and Condemnation, or the utmost to be hoped thereof is Pardon
and Forgiveness, that God would not remember, or not impute it. But this is
certain, for the Scripture affirms positively thereof, that many shall be
actually punished for the same. For, Those that have done Iniquity shall be
cast into a Furnace of Fire, Mat. 13. 41, 42. and They that have done evil
shall arise unto the Resurrection of Damnation, John 5. 29. yet of those who
escape by Repentance, they certainly suffer this Loss. It would be better for
them throughout all Eternity if they had never committed such Acts of Sin
Besides, that the Time wherein they committed Iniquity might have been spent in
well-doing; and so they are deprived of the Recompense they might have had for
that. Though a Sinner do evil an hundred Times and his Days be prolonged, yet
it shall be well with them that fear the Lord, that fear before him. Both
Manner of Ways will come into account, and they will have a different End. It
will be certainly better for them who lived in Obedience and Holiness in those
Days of their Flesh, wherein others did, and themselves might have lived in Sin
and Wickedness. That Son who said to his Father, Lo, these many Years do I
serve thee; neither transgressed I at any time thy Commandment, his Father
answered him, Son, Thou art ever with me, and all that I have is thine, Luke
15. 29, 31. which was a larger and much better Portion and Provision than what
was before, or afterward given unto the prodigal and disobedient Son. Again,
though a Sinner should come to Repentance, yet the sooner he does, it will be
certainly better for him; because he will be more sure of God's Favor and
Acceptance; and also he will sooner bring forth Fruits meet for Repentance,
and make a Way for his own Reward; whereas All his former Days were consumed in
Vanity and Trouble, Psalm. 78. 33, They will not turn to good Account; neither
does he desire that they should come into Judgment; for it will stand in no
stead and turn to no Benefit unto him; but increase the Anguish and Bitterness
of Soul, that he did not in those Days serve the Lord in Righteousness,
Holiness and doing good. For these Works would follow him, when the other
things are absolutely perished, and he wishes that he had never done them.

Here is a real Argument not to continue in Sin one Moment longer; for
notwithstanding the present Pleasure and Convenience, hereby he misses of so
much more Happiness and Advantage. Again, he should not a Minute longer neglect
Obedience and doing good, for he loses so much of a full Reward.

Thus much is signified from the Words, of the righteous Judgment of God who
will render to every one according to his Deeds. And so it is written, Blessed
are ye when Men shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all manner
of evil against you falsely for my sake: rejoice and be exceeding glad, for
great is your Reward in Heaven, Mat. 5. 11, 12, For the Son of Man shall come
in the Glory of his Father with his Angels, and then he shall reward every Man
according to his Works, Mat. 16. 27. And every Man shall receive his own
Reward, according to his own Labor, 1 Cor. 3. 8. Woe unto their Soul for they
have rewarded Evil unto themselves. Say ye to the Righteous that it shall be
well with him, For they shall eat the Fruit of their Doings. Woe unto the
wicked, it shall be ill with him: For the Reward of his Hands shall be given
him, Isa. 3. 9, 10, 11. According to their Deeds, accordingly he will repay,
Fury to his Adversaries, Recompense to his Enemies, to the Islands he will
repay Recompense, Isa. 59. 18. The great God that formed all things, both
rewards the Fool and rewards Transgressors, Prove. 26. 10. As thou have
done, it shall be done unto thee, thy Reward shall return upon thine own Head,
Obad. 15. Receiving in themselves that Recompense of their Error that was
meet, Romans 1. 27. Like as the Lord of Host thought to do unto us according to
our Ways and according to our Doings, so has he dealt with us, Zech. 1. 6. And
all the Churches shall know that I am he which searches the Reins and Hearts:
And I will give unto every one of you according to your Works, Rev. 2. 13.
There are sundry other like Places in Scripture, which the more they are
considered and looked into, they do the more demonstate the present Doctrine,
how that the future Retribution and Recompense shall be proportioned and
adjusted according to the Deeds of Men, as it will be yet more clearly seen at
the Revelation of the righteous Judgment of God. It shall be openly disclosed
and showed unto every one. Though it has been hitherto hidden from some
because they would not search the Scriptures, for there they might have found
it so, and accordingly have prepared to have given up their Accounts. The good
may be hence quickened to do more, to take hold of every Opportunity, to lay up
a greater Foundation against the Time to come, to seek and do the Work of the
Lord diligently, and to improve every Talent to the utmost: And the evil might
presently have ceased to do wickedly, turn and be more zealous in the other Way.

Faith apprehends so of things future, as Memory and Recollection is to the
past. Herein appears the Excellency of the Understanding and reasonable Soul,
that she sees things afar off and remembers those behind. But those things here
are scarce worth our Remembrance; but what things we are further told of, they
are all Wonder and Astonishment; because they are so exceeding great and
enduring: Which will fill the Soul though opened wide and to the utmost, and
satisfy every Wish and Desire, and these things are always to remain. When
these things shall be present before us, we shall admire and be vexed within
our selves that we did not more toward the obtaining them. Even thus it will
be of those who considered and did most that usually Men do. Our Fathers
received the Promises and saw them afar off, they now stand more abundantly
confirmed unto us, being so indubitably made known that we are more fully
persuaded of them, and do embrace them. So the Exhortation runs yet more
forcible, to cleanse our selves from all Filthiness of Flesh and Spirit,
perfecting Holiness in the Fear of God, and to do all things that we may be
found accepted of him at the last Day.

Even thus much we may discern at present, that the Lord sits above all his
Creatures. He has revealed how we the Inhabitants of the Earth are to behave
our selves toward him. He has prepared his Seat for Judgment and his Kingdom
rules over all, neither is any Creature that is not manifest in his Sight: But
all things are naked and opened unto the Eyes of him with whom we have to do.
We cannot know him as he knows us, for he sees us and all our Ways clearly;
but we now see through a Glass darkly. And as we are mere Creatures, who have
nothing but what we have received, so we know nothing but what he first made
known and revealed unto us.

Our Savior abode on the Earth Forty Days after his Passion on the Cross and
Resurrection from the Grave, speaking of the things pertaining to the Kingdom
of God, Acts 1. 3. very few of which are recorded. And though many things are
written which he made known in the Course of. his Ministry, yet the beloved
Disciple John says, Many other things truly did Jesus in the Presence of his
Disciples, which are not written in this Book. John 20. 30. So before his
coming into the World God discovered his Will by Prophets, and holy Men spoke
as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. And there have been since further
Manifestations of divine Knowledge and Truth: And yet still the Skies will be
more opened and Righteousness shall be poured down. Drop down ye Heavens from
above and let the Skies pour down Righteousness: Let the Earth open, and let
them bring forth Salvation, and let Righteousness spring up together, I the
Lord have created it, Isa. 45. 8. He shall come down like Rain upon the mowen
Grass, as Showers that water the Earth, Psalm. 72. 6. Truth shall spring out of
the Eorth, Psalm. 85. 11. Both as to the Element it self, and also as to the
Inhabitants thereof, Let the People praise thee, O God, let all the People
praise thee. Then shall the Earth yield her Increase, and God, even our own God
shall bless us, Psalm. 67. 5, 6. He shall make known those Arts and Means that
the Earth shall yield her Increase so abundantly, that there shall be no hungry
and empty Soul; but there shall be more than sufficient for every Creature
whatever. He shall give such a plentiful Fleece on the Sheep, and may discover
those other Ways for clothing as to cover all the naked in our Land. Bring ye
all the Tithes into the Storehouse, that there may be Meat in mine House, and
prove me now herewith, says the Lord of Hosts, If I will not open the Windows
of Heaven, and pour ye out a Blessing that there shall not be room enough to
receive it, Mal. 3. 10. Mankind has been hitherto proved, wihther they will
obey and trust in their God. The poor has been a long while suffered among
them to see whether they will will provide for and do them good; and they have
not yet been so obedient and trusted unto him as they should. But let them once
do so, let all the People praise him, and then prove him whether he will not do
those great things for us: Whether he will not deal yet more bountifully even
in those things, for the sake of which People now transgress against him. The
Earth is the Lord's and the Fullness thereof, Psalm. 24. 1. The Silver is mine,
and the Gold is mine, says the Lord of Hosts, Hag. 2. 8. so he can disclose it
whenever he will, perhaps more than has been yet seen and talked of. And I
will give thee the Treasures of Darkness, and hidden Riches of secret Places,
Isa. 45. 3. He can show us where are the several rich Mines, and some way bring
to our Knowledge whatever Worth and Excellency lies hid at present in the
Bowels of the Earth. So there may be sufficient, yea and abundance for all. And
there may be such exceeding Plenty, even of the formerly beloved Mammon, that
they shall even loath and not esteem it, because there is no such intrinsic
Goodness in it as was supposed. And things will be as readily done without, as
heretofore they were greedy and eager after it. The Nature and End of every
thing relating to us shall be perfectly understood, and how they conduce to our
real Good and Happiness. As things shall be fully made known which tend to the
Use, Well-being and Delight of the Body; so the same will be discerned
concerning the Soul. The hidden Man of the Heart will come forth, and as that
even now does clearly appear in the Sight of God, so it will be yet more
manifested to our View, that we may also know what is in Man as we see his
outward Face. The Thoughts of many Hearts shall be revealed, so we may as
evidently perceive them, as we behold the working of their Hands, or their
goings up and down upon bodily Feet.

The Lord says, behold, all Souls are mine, Ezekiel. 18. 4. He challenges a
peculiar Property in them; and yet he has sent forth a peremptory Decree, The
Soul that sins it shall die. The Soul has a Knowledge of this which cannot
be shaken off; so imprinted, that though it may be somewhat defaced, yet it
cannot be worn out. The Desire and Tendency rises up to somewhat which we see
not, but yet know, believe and hear of. There is a Consciousness of Duty to one
above, all one as the Servant has to his Master; and as there do arise Joy and
Satisfaction, when his Duty is rightly performed, so there is Regret and
Condemnation when it is neglected. There must be some Thought or a stupid
Forgetfulness; and even for that there is some Imagination or secret Excuse.
But if that is distrusted, as it may; for God will not allow of any
Dispensation from not serving him, and there cannot be any thing more needful
to a Man or Woman, than how to secure his or her own eternal Welfare: So
Negligence is the certain Way to miscarry, and so sink into eternal and
remediless Misery. And thereupon the Soul is stirred to arise up and be doing.
She must forecast and look out how to secure her self in this most important
Concern.

And when she is put upon thinking and seeking, there is one above who does see
and consider all her Motions. Who offers to assist and guide her; who causes
her to know the Difference between Thought and Imagination. The first
apprehends a thing really as it is; but the other is hood-winked by Delusion
and Appearance, and conceives things otherwise than they are. This imagines too
much in earthly things, and too little in heavenly.

In all the Circle and Amusement of Mind, there is one who would bring us out.
In all the Ignorance and Perplexity of Soul, we might at length come to
Knowledge and Assurance. As we are confounded and distracted in the things
below, we might lift up our Ears and hearken unto him that now speaks from
Heaven, This is Life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and
Jesus Christ whom thou have sent, John 17. 3. The same God who gave us a Being
here, and lent us a short Time on Earth, has prepared and ordained the other
also, and told us what we may do that we may lay hold of it. All our Knowledge
is to be derived from this Beginning, from the Creator who is most worthy, we
may descend down to the Creatures. And because many things hinder, darken and
obscure this Knowledge, we are therefore to take heed of and avoid them.
Casting down Imaginations and every high thing that exalts it self against
the Knowledge of God, and bringing into Captivity every Thought to the
Oebdience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10. 5. God and Christ discerns every Thought and
Imagination as plainly as if they were wrote upon Tables of Stone; and when
these Imaginations are brought forth and spread before the Faces of those who
conceive them, they fall of themselves, and eve-Thought submits to the
Obedience of Christ, as the former Disobedience is laid open and the
Unreasonableness thereof is showed.

What is that high thing which exalts it self against the Knowledge of God?
If it be truly examined it will be brought low. Can any thing be higher than
the most high? Or greater than him who made and comprehends all things? Yet
there does lie in the Heart of Man a most absurd, strange and false
Imagination, that it as it were a condescending to him to know and seek after
his Maker. The wicked through the Pride of his Countenance will not seek after
God, Psalm. 10. 4. He is already high and exalted in his own Esteem, and he
would not lose ought from that; but if he should once have a true Understanding
and spiritual Light of God, he would Repent and abhor himself in Dust and
Ashes, Job. 42. 5, 6. It would utterly take off from the Conceit of his own
Excellency. God is most worthy of our Knowledge, so of Honor, Glory and
Praise; for he has created all things, and for his Pleasure they are and were
created. Also our selves were made by him, and endued by him with Power and
Capacity to know even inferior things; and by them we should ascend up to him
who is all in all. If any thing is worth knowing, he does infinitely exceed
even in that Respect, for which such a thing is to be known. And he further
contains in himself those innumerable Excellencies and Perfections, a little
Part and Shadow whereof is scattered up and down in the several Creatures. The
more we know God, the less we esteem of all other things; for they come so
exceeding short of his exceeding Greatness and Glory that in Comparison of him
they are mere Vanity and less than nothing. Indeed those who are alienated from
the Life of God, who have no Sense nor Apprehension of him, may be like those
in a low Dungeon, or a dark Room, where is no Beam of Light; and such may
esteem the shining of a Glowworm or the dim burning of a Candle before the Sun
which they never saw. And so are all the fantastic Apprehensions or Conceits
of the things before us, separated from Faith and the Knowledge of God. Then he
may think himself his own, the chiefest and most lovely in the lower Creation.
But if God does once show himself, then all those former Imaginations presently
vanish away. If the natural and ungodly Man can but conceive in his Mind
concerning the high and lofty one who inhabiteth Eternity. Heaven is his Throne
and the Earth his Footstool, let it be asked, what was it that ever any Man
fancied to be higher and greater than this? If the natural Man can but discern
the Works of God, how that in Wisdom he made them all, and formed also Man with
a reasoning and contriving Faculty, how that he established that Order and
Connection of things which is throughout the World and each Part thereof. How
can any Soul conclude any thing pertaining to God to be Foolishness, only
because himself does not clearly apprehend it, when in every thing which he
discerns somewhat more, there also he sees great Wisdom and Knowledge. Shall
Mortal be more wise than his Maker? Who gave him and all the Generations of
Mankind the Knowledge of whatever they seem to know. If all those Thoughts of
Heart and Conceits of Mind, which have been entertained and cherished in the
Hearts of the several Sons and Daughters of Adam were brought forth, as they
shall be one Day when God shall evidently display himself with the very Reality
and Truth of things, they will be vastly different one from the other.

Out of Sion the Perfection of Beauty, God, has shined, Psalm. 50. 2. When he
makes but a small Appearance of himself and we know but in Part, yet then he
may be discerned to be wonderfully great and glorious, what will he be when he
shall unfold himself wholly and then we shall know, even also as we are known?
We shall know God as he now knows us, and we know one another. Behold, now we
are the Sons of God, and it does not yet appear what we shall be; but we know
than when he shall appear, we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is,
1 John 3. 2. We now hear of the Name of God, which is great, wonderful and
holy: That is to the outward Ear; but then is a Conception of him in the Mind,
and our Eyes are to publish forth his Name. We see with our very Eyes his Works
and the things which his Hand has made, and by the Dimension of them we may
ascribe Greatness unto our God. He is the same still, who abides of old, from
everlasting to everlasting. He is nothing the more for being published, nor yet
greater for our most ample and large Expressions concerning him which possibly
can be spoken. Even the holy Men of old have had diminutive and little
Conceptions of him; which have increased yet higher according as more
Revelation came into the World, as appears from the Order and Succession of
Scripture. They were surprised and amazed at the Presence of his Angel. And
what is one of them to Thousands of Angels? Or what are they to the Lord of all
which has ten thousand Times ten thousand ministering Spirits before him. David
says, The Lord is a great God, and a great King above all Gods, Psalm. 95. 3.
which Gods may be the Princes of the Earth or Idols. Jeremiah witnesses, Among
all the wise Men of the Nations, and in all their Kingdoms, there is none like
unto thee, Jer. 10. 7. The Prophet, in Isa. 40. declares somewhat more, and so
does Daniel in his seventh Chapter. And yet all these come exceeding short of
his true Majesty and Greatness. It being such as Eye has not seen, nor Ear
heard, nor entered into the Heart of Man to declare God as he is. I am that I
am. He is known to himself and by his Name, I AM. His only begotten Son, who is
the eternal WORD, has declared him: And also he did before reveal himself by
his Spirit, but it was by condescending unto and helping our Infirmities: And
therefore the Spirit uses such Expressions as we can receive, but withal
gives us to understand that the things of God are unutterable; for the Tongue
cannot speak forth that which our finite. Understandings cannot apprehend,
because it is infinite and incomprehensible.

But yet so far as we know and apprehend we ought to set forth the same; to the
intent that our Children may show forth the same unto their Children, and to
those which are yet unborn. And God may so enlarge their Hearts that they may
receive yet further Knowledge of him; what they had from their Forefathers, may
grow up yet higher. Obedience is the Follower of Knowledge. And they that know
thy Name, will put their Trust in thee; for thou Lord, have not forsaken them
tbat seek thee, Psalm. 9. 10. and so it is of all other Duties; and if we may
rely on God as to the past, where he does not assist much further than just to
perform our Duties, and that also through Difficulty and Temptation to exercise
our Trust and Dependence on him much more may we do the same as to the future,
when we verily know and are assured that he is a Rewarder of them that
diligently seek him. The things prepared for those that wait for him are
described to be more and greater than Eye has seen, Ear has heard, or has
entered into the Heart of Man, so that the greater Apprehension and more full
Assurance we have of these things, we also are the more quickened and stirred up
to do whatever our God requires of us in the mean while.

Says David, I will run the way of thy Commandments when thou shall enlarge my
Heart, Psalm. 119. 32. which denotes Freedom and Speed.

I will, that is his own Act. Run, does shut out all Delay and putting it off,
for it presently begins and pursues it with Strength and Vigor. The Word
Enlarge, does also signify in the Original to persuade. God shall enlarge (in
the Margent it is persuade) Japheth, Genesis 4. 27. for the Apprehension of those
great things do incline and weigh down the Mind. As before there was an high
thing which did exalt it self against the Knowledge of God, which was only a
wrong Imagination, but now there comes a real higher thing, which leads and
invites unto his Knowledge, which is stronger and does prevail. In the Margent
of 2 Cor. 10. 5. It is Reasonings opposite to the Word Imaginations in the
Text: For let Men once come to this and the things of God will outreason with
them. People may sit down and stop under a sudden and false Thought, or be held
under Frowardness, Humor and Inconsideration; or only examine one Side, the
present seeming Pleasure and Advantage. But if they would give their Thoughts
full Scope, and stay a little to see whether Truth will come in, reflect
whether in this he is not under the Command and Direction of the great Lord
over all, and then consult with his Word and Spirit; Take in the Consideration
of future Judgment and Account, when there shall be an exact Retribution to
every Man according to his Works and the Matter of this or that Day shall be
particularly discussed. The more these things are understood and considered of,
they press yet more forcibly; and what were heretofore rebellious and supposed
to be in the Man's own Power, do fall and submit by degrees, till every Thought
is brought into Captivity unto the Obedience of Christ.

The Soul is first brought unto Obedience in the General, and then the same
Reason which brings in some Thoughts, does the other also, till the whole does
come in and yield Conformity to it. For the same God and Father, who is in all
and above all and through all, he does require to be loved with all the Heart,
with all the Soul, with all the Strength and with all the Mind. The same Lord
Jesus Christ expects that we observe all things whatsoever he has commanded,
Mat. 28. 20. And so whether this shall be done presently or hereafter, there
are so many Considerations for the present Performance of the same, that whosoever
suffers them to be debated in his Mind, they forthwith turn the Scale against
all dilatory Pleas and Excuses. For seeing we must all appear before God to
give Account of our several Persons before him, let our selves judge this one
thing in the mean while, whether God will not be better pleased with and sooner
accept of those who make no tarrying to turn unto the Lord, and who do not put
it off from Day to Day; or with them who trifle with and despise him in the
mean time. Or whether it will not be better for them whilst Time is before them
and Opportunity is present, so to employ that Opportunity in doing those things
whereof is Hope and Expectation to which God has annexed a Promise and a
Reward. Or to be still running after those things whereof they are ashamed in
the Act; which heighthens their Doubt and Fear of the divine Threatening and
Punishment, which is established by the same Word and Truth as the other. So
they are either tending toward Good, or procuring Loss and Evil to themselves.

Every one Desires good to himself and would avoid evil, Hurt and
Inconveniency. As he is a Man of Understanding and Prudence to let him Judge
and do according to the most likely Way to obtain the one and avoid the other.
See, I have set before thee this Day Life and Good, and Death and Evil: I call
Heaven and Earth to record this Day against you, that I have set before you
Life and Death, Blessing and Cursing: Therefore choose Life that thou and thy
Seed may live, Deuteronomy. 30. 15. Whoever reads or hears these Lines, whether thou
examinest them in thy Closet or by a casual View; whether this Book be read to
thee by another, or few or many be present. To each Man or Woman singly I do
apply my self, and I call the Angels to witness that these things be set home
to thy Heart, that this does not turn for a Testimony against thee, and when
such things were laid before thee, thou would not mind but refuse, Thou Man
or Woman of whatever Rank or Degree, of whatever Age, State or Condition of
Life, young Men or Maidens, yea and Children that can in the least apprehend
what I say, I speak to you all severally, and jointly even in this very Moment
of Time, in this very Instant, now even in the same Day that this is declared
unto you, I speak to every one of you in the Prophet's Phrase. BEHOLD YOUR GOD.
And I do most humbly and earnestly entreat of his divine Majesty, which he is
more ready to do than I to ask him. O Lord God Almighty, behold thy Sons and
Daughters, that from this Hour and Day they may take thee for the Lord their
God, consecrate themselves entirely and universally unto thy Service, improving
this and all their remaining Days for every Opportunity to do good, and
carefully watch against and eschew all Occasions of evil. Hence forward to mind
nothing but God, and the things pertaining to him, how they may most please and
be accepted with him. If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them.

Yea, blessed is he that reads; or they that hear that they may know these
Words, and immediately without any Delay keep and observe the things written
therein.

CHAP. III. That Surmise and Imagination is spoken unto, whereby some People
think that they have so grievously offended God that they dare not come unto
him.
THe second Hindrance which keeps People off and was proposed to be spoken unto
in the Beginning of this Book, is, that some imagine that they have so
grievously offended God that they dare not come unto him.

The first Example of this we have in our Father Adam. And the Lord God called
unto Adam and said unto him, where art thou? And he said, I heard thy Voice in
the Garden, and I was afraid, because I was naked and I hid myself, Genesis 3. 9,
10. A Consciousness of his Guilt and Disobedience did make him keep off, yea,
and unwilling to approach unto God when he was called. Perhaps he thought that
God knew not his Transgression, but would discern it by some outward Sign when
he came somewhat nearer. Whereas God both saw and heard them talking under the
Tree in the midst of the Garden, and did more clearly discern their Temptation
and Sin than he could inquire and be informed afterward. But he came and would
examine the matter after the Manner of Men. Both to vindicate his Justice, and
also to manifest that he yet continued his Grace and Familiarity to our Nature:
For even in the Curse and Punishment pronounced Mercy is intermixed. A most
precious Promise is conveyed into what may seem a terrible Sentence. It shall
bruise thy Head, and thou shall bruise his Heel, Genesis 3. 15. Thus Mercy
rejoices against Judgment; and even overcomes it at last. And whereas it is
said, I will greatly multiply thy Sorrow and thy Conception. In Sorrow shall
thou eat of it all the Days of thy Life, Verse. 16, 17. Here also is somewhat
released of the pronounced Punishment; for God, who is sovereign, does not
execute in so severe a Degree as his Words did seem at first to import, for
though indeed there is Trouble, Pain and Sorrow in our coming into and
Continuance in this World; yet blessed be God, it is not altogether so
continually grievous as what might have been expected when the Words first
proceeded forth. Thus is the Lord merciful and gracious, even when he is
righteous and just: And as his Mercy is over all his Works, so it comes in as
a Balm to mollify his Vengeance. God first calls upon our sinful Parents to
show that he had not quite cast them off, and that they should not languish
under a perpetual Separation from their Maker. He finds out a Method of
Reconciliation and Accommodation: Though withal he ordained them and us a
Punishment, yet we may truly say, the Lord has punished us less than our
Iniquities do deserve. Hence we may learn and be encouraged that if we have not
heretofore obeyed the Voice of his Commandment, yet still we ought to come when
he calls us; and it shall not be worse but better for us.

Thus says the Lord, behold I frame evil against you, and devise a Device:
Return ye now every one from his evil Way, and make your Ways and your Doings
good. And they said, there is no Hope, but we will walk after our own Devices,
and we will every one do the Imagination of his evil Heart, Jer. 18. 11, 12.
When People have committed much already, their Conscience is accused of Sin;
and they are sensible how that they are obnoxious to God's Wrath and
Punishment; and fearing they shall one Day suffer under it, they think it the
same if they suffer for much as for little, and so they fall from one
Wickedness to another. Nay, with some there is a most strange and horrid
Imagination, as Persecutors and such like, who conceiving an Hatred and Enmity
against God, but dreading withal he will be stronger than they when they come
to meet him; and therefore they take Advantage in this Time of Trial and
Forbearance, as it were out of foregoing Revenge to act stubbornly,
rebelliously and contemptuously against him as eve^ they can. It is written in
the Revelations of those who gnawed their Tongues for Pain, and blasphemed the
God of Heaven; because of their Pains and Sores, and repented not of their
Deeds, Rev. 16. 10, 11. Some again did give Glory to God for his Judgments. The
first Sort, whilst they were yet in the Way, did provoke him yet more, who at
length was too hard for them and has delivered them over unto the Tormentors.
Like as we have known or heard of some desperate condemned Rebels, who might
have their Pardon if they would sue and make Supplication for it, but they
would not through Stubbornness or a pretended Bravery, and therefore they did
all the Mischief they could before they died. In this Case the more usual Way
is to try all Means to obtain a Reprieve or Forgiveness; and if that cannot
possibly be had, then indeed the former Resolution was the more excusable. But
if it might have been obtained unless for such provoing Attempts, or they would
use them of set Purpose, here it is the very Height of Folly and Madness. For
they wilfully bring upon themselves such Evil and Misery under which they
smart, only for a slight and sudden Humor which soon passes away, and for
which they are condemned by all understanding Men. Thus it is as concerning
Offenses between Man and Man: But yet it is ten Thousand times more
unreasonable as to Sins against God. For, do we provoke the Lord to Jealousy?
Are we stronger than he? If any are perversely resolved against him, they will
see and feel, who will repent of it first, God or themselves. The Lord will not
spare him, but then the Anger of the Lord and his Jealousy shall smoke against
that Man, and all the Curses that are written in this Book shall lie upon him,
and the Lord shall blot out his Name from under Heaven, Deuteronomy. 29. 20. All this
may be done at this present time, even when he knows not or is not sensible
thereof. But now it would be better if he were sensible of as much, because
then he might fear and tremble, submit, and then endeavor to be reconciled
unto him; in the mean while, Lay hold of his Strength and make Peace with him,
who says, Fury is not in me, Isa. 27. 4. But if this be neglected, what will
the poor Creature do when the Anger and Jealousy of the Lord which before did
smoke to give Warning, shall burn out with fiery Indignation to consume the
Adversaries when all the Curses that are written in this Book, and now lie
against him shall be actually executed upon him.

For behold the Day comes that shall burn as an Oven, and all the Proud (such
as will not submit in the mean while) yea, and all that do wickedly shall be
Stubble, and the Day that comes shall burn them up, says the Lord of Hosts,
that it shall not leave them Root nor Branch, Mal. 4. 1. Let them at present he
never so great in their own Opinion or many for Number: Yet when the Earth and
all the Works thereof shall be burnt up, they shall be likewise devoured in the
general Conflagration. What is a single Potsherd to stand before him when he
shall sweep away with one Beesome of Destruction all the Generations of the
wicked since the World began? Thou carriest them away as with a Flood, they are
as asleep, Psalm. 40. 5. Thus we evidently perceive of those Generations,
whereof one comes, another goes, and the single Persons flourish and grow up
again. They are cut down at any Time, or wither. And in the mean time, By thy
Wrath are we troubled, Verse. 7. It is now revealed from Heaven. We now and then
perceive some Glimpses thereof, and we do startle and fear. Those who are
farthest off and most exempted from this Wrath, yet they commonly have most
Thought and Apprehension thereof. As again, to whom it is most due and
threatened by reason of their evil Deeds, they do what they can to shut out the
Sense and Knowledge thereof. For otherwise it would press in so hard and close
upon them that then they must not continue in Sin.

Even in those who fence and harden themselves most, yet ever and anon a sudden
Flash of divine Vengeance darts into their Minds, which strikes them with Dread
and Horror, and by the trembling and Astonishment it gives, it does
sufficiently convince, there is one mightier than they. Our God indeed now
keeps Silence, and is out of Sight, as also he forbears in this Time of Trial,
yet he has declared and made known, that he is angry with the wicked every
Day, Psalm. 7. 11. who again Day by Day transgress against him: For they speak
and do those things against God, which they dare not do against their
Fellow Creature. But when Man has finished his Time of sinning, the Number of
the Days of Transgression are accomplished, and God comes to reckon for them
altogether. For the Destruction of the Transgressors and of the Sinners shall
be together, Isa. 1. 28. Then whatever he thought or did as concerning this
almighty Judge, when the things concerning him have an End, then the most mad
and profane Wretch that ever trod on the Earth, will be forced to take up
Julian's Confession and Acknowledgment, Vicisti Galilee, and in another Sense
then the Prophet spoke in. O Lord, thou art stronger than I, and have
prevailed, Jer. 20. 7. Why thus much may be clearly discerned in the mean
while, for let Man consider himself, or who made him; his Flesh is as Grass
which grows up toward withering: His Breath is in his Nostrils, and who
breathed it in, he can take it out whenever he will. His Strength is confined
to such a Degree, beyond which he cannot do more: His Stature, bodily
Dimension, and every thing he has is limited to such a Size. And certainly he
who has determined him on every Side, has Power over him. Who made all Men,
he can do more to such a single Person, than one Man or Thousands can do to
another. There is one Lawgiver who is able to save and to destroy. As he does
good, so he can punish: He can do both in a greater Degree and more eminent
Manner, than any of the Sons of Men can do one to another. Even to the utmost
that we are capable to receive and to endure, For as the Heavens are higher
than the Earth, so are my Ways higher than your Ways, and my Thoughts than your
Thoughts, Isa. 55. 9. This is brought in to confirm his Promise of Pardon and
Acceptance, Verse. 7. So again is his Punishment and Requital. He can contend
and be wroth so long, even just till the Spirits shall fail before him, and the
Souls which he has made. Which also he can uphold and continue yet longer to
sustain his Vengeance, as long as himself is pleased to inflict the same. His
Loving Kindness is better than Life, for it extends yet further; so likewise
the Power of his Anger is more to be dreaded than Death, for it is even beyond
that. Upon all Respects God's Displeasure and Punishment does exceed Man's
Displeasure and Punishment, and consequently it is more to be feared and more
Care ought to be taken that it be avoided.

The several Actings and Obligations toward God rise greater and higher than
to the best and greatest of Men, for God is more than all. So neither is that
Rebellion and Contempt to be used toward him, which Men will not admit of from
one another. God is greater than Man: Yea; all Nations before him are as the
Drop of the Bucket. He will keep the Feet of his Saints, and the wicked shall
be silent in Darkness, for by Strength shall no Man prevail. The Adversaries of
the Lord shall be broken in Pieces, 1 Samuel 2. 8. Strength may sometimes prevail
against the Son of Man who is weak as we are, but yet many times, a wise
Submission will do more. But neither Strength nor yet further Provocation shall
in the least prevail against God, when true Repentance will always avail and
stand in stead. Remarkable is that Counsel of our Lord and Savior, And I say
unto you my Friends, be not afraid of them that kill the Body, and after that
have no more that they can do. But I will forewarn you whom you shall fear,
fear him which after he has killed, has Power to cast into Hell, yea I say
unto you fear him, Luke 12. 4, 5. The utmost of Men's Malice and Cruelty extends
only to this short Time and to this weak Flesh, and they use it accordingly in
this their Hour and Power of Darkness. Whereas God suffers, Acts 13. 18. Men's
evil Deeds here in the Body, but when they are dislodged from that he calls
them to Judgment and Account, and he has the Length of a whole Eternity, for
to inflict Vengeance both on Body and Soul for the same. Even here we perceive
that at the first time of suffering or when it is short, Men may bear up and
not sink under it; but it is not so of a long and continued Misery. But what
our God has threatened is such that if the wicked were Brass and Iron it would
make them submit and yield, much more will it Flesh and Bone. Can thine Heart
endure, or can thine Hands be strong in the Days that I shall deal with thee? I
the Lord have spoken it and I will do it, Ezekiel. 22. 14. There is none who does
not sometimes labor under Sorrow and Vexation of Thought, much more must they
groan under the Worm which shall never die, and they can no way be freed from
the Sense and Feeling thereof.

Surely the Wrath of Man shall praise thee, the Remainder of Wrath shall thou
restrain, Psalm. 76. 10. God first endued him with Power to rage and to be
furious to that Degree he now is; and as before he did not ordain it further,
so even now he can curb what he has made. He will shorten and make it quite to
cease. When their Rage is against him, he will put an Hook in their Jaws, and
lead them till they shall torment, even till they shall quite weary themselves.
There is no good to be done that way. Hear then what the Psalmist says next,
Vow and pay unto the Lord your God: Let all that be round about him bring
Presents unto him that ought to be feared, Verse. 11. Submit and be obedient
unto him, have a good Mind and show all the good will toward him which you
can, now you are a little while in the Way. Draw near and be reconciled ye who
were sometimes afar off, and averse toward him. Let all that former Aversation
be done away and come to the Throne of Grace with Reverence and Godly Fear.
Look diligently lest any Root of Bitterness springing up trouble you: Lest
there be any Remainder of that which was heretofore in you. Cut it off Root and
Branch; for it does wholly spring up from your Sin and Ignorance.

God is good and the same still from everlasting to everlasting: Neither does
he alter or change with our several Apprehensions or Assertions concerning him.
But by our Sin and Iniquity we made him our Enemy: The Consciousness whereof
did raise a slavish Fear and Dread. The less we did know of him, the less we
did discover of his Goodness and Love toward the Children of Men: As again the
more we know of him, the more that does appear forth unto us. When we seek
diligently and come yet more near unto God, we do as really perceive Goodness,
Mercy, Love, Peace and Joy to flow from him, all one as Virtue did proceed
forth from the Garment of Christ, and all one as we perceive the Heat of the
Fire when we make toward it, or when we go abroad in a bright shining Day to
see the Light of the Sun.

If Man were verily persuaded of thus much at first, he would never depart and
go astray from his Maker; as when he is truly informed and thoroughly satisfied
hereof. He would instantly return unto him. For who is he that desires not Good
and Happiness, and would not willingly at first go the ready way to it? Indeed
with the show and appearance thereof he is presently turned aside to
transgression, and the pleasures of Sin. But then it is not long before he
finds by sensible experience, the vanity and vexation thereof at present; and
he is further forewarned of Destruction and Misery. And then he may alter his
steps into the way of Peace and Comfort, which leads unto, and ends in Glory
and Happiness. We may taste and see that the Lord is gracious; for we do
evidently feel and behold with our Eyes, that thus it is now at this present
time, as to what he does require of us, and as to what he has forbidden. And
so his promises and threatenings of what are further consequent to the same, are
confirmed by the Word and Oath of him for whom it is impossible to lie.

Those who are enlightened, do clearly discern all this; and they who come to
true Repentance, when they have set aside all prejudice and carnality, and are
thoroughly separated from the perversities of the Spirit; When they come to
themselves, Luke 15. 17. and are such as Men should be, They do likewise judge
that it is so as here spoken of; for it is evident to their real Sense and
Disposition. Who have experience both of the Way of the Lord, and also of the
Way of Sin and Satan, They do affirm that the first is better. The Temptation
wherewith Men are drawn over to Irreligion and Ungodliness, is, that it has a
show of Liberty and Briskness: As again, to such the knowledge and fear of the
Lord does seem a confinement and dullness, and therefore they refuse and cast it
off. But this is a most grievous Sin and Provocation to turn Rebel against
their God. It is monstrous and unnatural to forget God that formed them and all
things. It is most detestable impiety, and the utmost ill-deserving, to live in
no sense of, and subjection unto the Governor of the World. This is infinitely
worse, and more inexcusable than for Subjects to rise up in Arms against a good
and lawful Prince; for Children to be Rebellious and Froward to a kind, good,
just and wise Father; or as is any Action of the most ungrateful Servant
against the best of Masters. Yet all this proceeds from want of a right
knewledge of God, and of a true Understanding what his Fear is. I speak this to
show the Shame and Degeneracy of Mankind. Even those must have their Thoughts
altered concerning God and lifted up toward him; or he will raise them up to
Shame and everlasting Contempt, and cast them into a bottomless Pit to suffer
the Vegeance of eternal Fire. In God is first contained, and from him is
derived every good and perfect thing; even what is enjoyed, or can be further
desired by the Sons of Men.

O Lord, the Hope of Israel, all that forsake thee shall be ashamed, and they
that depart from me shall be written in the Earth, because they have forsaken
the Lord, the fountain of living waters, Jer. 17. 13. God sends Rain upon the
just and the unjust. He gives common Mercies promiscuously and indifferently
to all, but there is somewhat more and greater in being the Hope of Israel.
Somewhat is hidden and reserved there only for those who come unto him; as
again, who forsake him miss thereof. And when this shall be opened and actually
given, then Shame, Vexation and Anguish will possess those who by their former
demerits and provocation have lost their share and portion in this matter. They
that depart from me shall be written in the Earth. When they have left and gone
aside from him above, they must cleave unto and pursue after somewhat. And they
cannot follow after any thing, but what is in this place where they live. And
seeing they have chosen the Earth, either the Men or Things therein, let them
make the most thereof. But what will they do when the Earth and all the Works
thereof shall be burnt up? When themselves and others who inhabit here shall
die. And if they thought themselves well enough, because though the things herein
are perishing, yet themselves are perishing likewise, and they serve for their
Time, Nevertheless they must remain elsewhere, for they have immortal Souls and
returning Bodies. And what shall they do throughout the Length and Space of
Eternity, when all the things wherein they before trusted, are utterly gone and
removed from them. Even the Men of this World, which have their Portion in this
Life, Psalm. 17. 14. might thus know and conclude, As they thought it worth
their while to secure this Place and Time, who were for getting the best and
fattest things that they might live happily and comfortably, who were for the
greatest and wisest Company in the whole Country of their Abode, they might
have looked up and have learned to be acquainted with thee, O King of Nations;
for as much as among all the wise Men of the Earth, and in all their Kingdoms
there is none like unto thee. They might understand and seek after the Lord,
whose is not only the Earth but the whole World and all that is therein; for he
made Heaven and Earth and all things. Who whilst they lived, did bless their
own Soul, Psalm. 49. 18. did so hug themselves with the Comforts and
Conveniences of this short Time, they might much more hope for and endeavor
after the good things of Eternity, and take a more diligent and greater Care
how themselves might live blessed for ever. They might have further trusted
unto him, who (as they experimentally found) did good, giving them Rain from
Heaven, filling their Souls, with Food and Gladness: So the Lord will perfect
that which concerns them, Psalm. 138. 8. Those perishing and fading Comforts
were an Earnest and Assurance that he would give the true and enduring
Happiness for such who should endeavor to be found worthy for to receive the
same. If therefore ye have not been faithful in the unrighteous Mammon, who
will commit to your Trust the true Riches, Luke 16. 11. As he provided them
with the meat which perishes, which was had by Labor, Dressing, and other
forgoing Means, and that did preserve Health and Life for the Time, so likewise
he afforded the Meat which endures unto everlasting Life, which also was to he
had by using such Means of Grace. And as many as did receive and comply with
the Workings of that Grace, they shall be crowned and actually invested with
the other to which it did tend and grow up.

As he is the God of the Earth, so of the Heavens also. And as he has
determined our Dwelling and Abode here for a Space, so he will take us up unto
the Heavens for evermore. Here we have no continuing City, but now we desire
that which would continue, and that must be an heavenly. Wherefore God is not
ashamed to be called their God, for he has prepared for them a City, Heb. 11.
16. which like himself must remain for ever. He took us out of our Mothers
Womb, and does hold us up from the Cradle unto the Grave. In the mean while he
renews his Mercies and Preservation every Morning, and there is still
something more than all this. Blessed be the Lord who daily loadeth us with
Benefits, even the God of our Salvation. He that is our God is the God of
Salvation, and unto God the Lord belong the Issues from Death, Psalm. 68. 19,
20. In that Word Salvation is comprised more than can be possibly had in this
World. Salvation imports to be free from all Evil, Fear and Danger, which none
is in this World. For, consider of those who are in the most safe Condition,
and think themselves so, yet the last Enemy waits for them, which is Death, and
thence is Fear and Doubt. But we have Assurance from our God, who brought us
into Being, who carries us through here, who is Lord of Life, and has Power
over Death, that he will give a Rising and Deliverance from that. Now we have
the most doubtful Apprehensions concerning Death and the future State. For
though on this Earth we are encompassed about with Fear, Pit and the Snare, yet
we know what is the utmost of things here, and what usually happens unto
others: So we are contented and freed from Terror and Amazement. But further
on, if we did consider rightly, we have more Hope and Security from the Lord
being our Hope, and the God of our Salvation. And there he declares beforehand,
that neither he nor we shall be ashamed. For hereby he will do more for us than
we can ask or conceive, and we shall find it to be infinitely more than we
could expect, and which will make an abundant Compensation for whatever
Difficulty, Loss or Trouble we did sustain in coming to be Partaker thereof:
And though our God shall cause us to inherit high Places, Isa. 58. 12. yet we
shall not be in the least Danger or Suspicion of falling. Thou shall be far
from Terror, for it shall not come near thee, Isa. 54. 11. We shall be more
strongly secured from every Evil or Misery, and be wholly exempt from the
Thought and Apprehension thereof, as we shall be let into the Possession and
Enjoyment of all Good and Excellency, so the Continuance thereof to
everlasting, that we shall never lose nor be deprived of it, will be made so
sure and ratified unto us, as they are certain of that Moment wherein they have
it; or as we are at present sensible that we live and breath, or that we have
what we grasp at this Instant. It will be a much stronger Assurance than any
had of the House which he called by his own Name, and continued in his Family
for most Generations. Here our Bodies are dying, the Timber and Walls do waste
and decay, but as we now perceive this, so there will be the same Certainty,
that the House in the Heavens is eternal and will never sink, for the Lord will
be its Support and keep it as long as himself is God, which is for ever and
ever. But thou art the same, and thy Years shall have no End.

This may seem strange and new Doctrine to those who were not particularly told
of it before, or did not believe, or did not thoroughly consider, but it will be
evidently set before our Eyes. We shall as clearly know, perceive and be
thoroughly made sensible thereof as of the Life we now live, and of things
wherein at present we are concerned and acquainted with. We shall be equally,
yea, and much more affected with them as of the things whereof the Men of this
World take most Thought and Care. Even they who heretofore were so careless and
indifferent as to heavenly and spiritual things, yet when they shall come to
discern how nearly they did belong to them, and of how much greater Moment they
were even as to immediately relate unto their own selves, their eternal
Happiness or Misery, Then will succeed the utmost Indignation and Anguish for
their former Neglect or Refusal. And there will be the most earnest coveting,
yea and seeking even unto Tears for to partake thereof. They shall know and see
that it is an evil thing and bitter that thou have forsaken the Lord, and that
my Fear is not in thee, says the Lord of Hosts, Jer. 2. 19. They were
alienated from the Life of God through the Ignorance and Blindness that was in
them. They did not conceive what God was, though his visible and standing Works
were a continual Witness before them. And further, they might have sought and
read out of his Book, and have looked into their own Souls which were made in
his Image; and therefore from within her self she could have some Apprehension
of her Maker. Indeed God hides himself in all these, but yet he might be
somewhat found out by those who would seek and feel after him; but when himself
shall appear oppenly and fully discover himself in his true Nature, then those
shall be strangly incensed and confounded, who heretofore would not receive the
Knowledge of him through Prejudice and strange Imaginations: For then we would
never have carried our selves after such a Manner toward him: We would have
sought diligently and enquired after God, and we would have liked to have
retained him in our Knowledge. We would have chosen his Fear if we had then
apprehended, It was all really so, as now we see and are fully convinced it is.
Why of this you were or might have been truly informed in the Beginning.

Though in the State of Absence and Darkness we could not behold God clearly as
he was, yet when the King was afar off, we could perceive so much of his Beauty
that we could conclude it to be certainly real and much more than what we did
at that Time see. For we had then those manifest Glimpses of his Greatness and
Glory that we might be most fully satisfied that all was so, which did pertain
to him. Like as we have heard so have we seen, and infinitely much more; for
not the one Half, nor yet the thousandth Part was told us. All things are
better and greater than the most knowing Saint did believe, yea more than the
Prophets themselves who searched diligently and enquired after these things,
could apprehend. As we believe, so have we spoken. We now act and Labor if we
may attain to them, so then they will be found much exceeding our utmost
Knowledge and Labor. Now it is in our searching after understanding and
seeking the Knowledge of God as in traveling from one Place to another, or in
new Roads, there does every now and then open a fresh and further Prospect. We
pass over new Ground, and we find something more to confirm us in the Judgment
we had before of this good Land. So if we seek for God in his Works, Word,
Grace and inward Manifestation, he appears to be most great, true, good and
gracious, worthy to be known and received. Indeed we cannot by searching find
out the Almighty to Perfection, because of that weak, frail, dark and imperfect
State we are are now in: We shall know more in the first Minute after we are
dislodged from this Tabernacle than we could attain unto by Prayer, diligent
seeking and by intense thinking all our Lifetime before. But seeing that God
has now allotted us such a Space on Earth, to understand and seek after him,
Psalm. 14. 2. that we may be careful all along to perform exactly the same, and
in such manner as near as we can attain, which implies an actual Endeavor to
do it, even so as God does require it of us. The Desire of our Soul is to thy
Name, and to the Remembrance of thee, Isa. 26. 8. So the End and Intention of
all our Thoughts, Words and Actions is to be unto his Glory, and to have them
ruled and squared by his Word. It is evident that when Men are as they should
be, that is, freed in good Measure from Sin and Ignorance, the very Desire of
their Soul rises and makes toward God. Which is a most sure and certain Token
that he is good and agreeable to our Nature, for else he could not be desired
by us. There is indeed a Consciousness of Imperfection and Absence, somewhat
more we would have, and to somewhat more we would be yet more nearly united.
Now God will make up all this to every one of us. He will satisfy and
replenish to the utmost (brimfull and running over) every Desire. He will
triumph and reign before his Saints gloriously. For though they did come short
of what was expected and required from them, yet God considers they were but
Dust which passes away and comes not again. Such Occasions did suddenly pass
by and not return again. They were amidst Temptations and Hindrances, by which
they were overtaken and kept off; so our God will restore such and supply what
was wanting. Yet himself is God and not Man. He lies under no Disadvantages but
will perform every Part of his Covenant to the utmost, that it shall be
returned to our selves with incredible Gladness and Rejoicing, Lo, this is the
Lord we have waited for.

Truly God is good to Israel, even to such as are of a clean Heart, Psalm. 73.
1. Those Promises and gracious Expressions in Scripture, and what the Holy
Ghost says concerning God, they are penned in a modest and less Degree, that
even the thing may exceed what we were told of; that what was in a little
Measure reported of, might be found mavelous and extraordinary. So it will be
of all things contained in that Book which we are now required to believe, and
they are much beyond what Words do express of them. Here it is said simply, God
is good to Israel. A plain Assertion, but himself will manifest and show
particularly, that he is transcendently good to his People, both as to what he
does for them at present, and what he has further provided for them. Even what
the World are apt to esteem less, I mean those spiritual Blessings in heavenly
Places in Christ Jesus, which are in Preparation and Order to those great
things to come. The sensual Man does taste and perceive how sweet and desirable
it is to gratify the Flesh which hinders from discerning the things of the
Spirit. But he that is spiritual does exceedingly relish the Knowledge and
Meditation of the most high; and he does more esteem of the Light of God's
Countenance and the Gladness which he puts into the Hearts of his People, than
what arises from the full Enjoyment of Corn and Wine. In a more especial
manner, God is good to such as are of a clean Heart, that is, when it is
cleansed from all Filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, when it is freed from Sin and
Ignorance, when it comes out from among the Pots, Psalm. 68. 13. when it is
lifted up from the Earth, and disintangled from the Affairs of this Life, then
it does also clearly know and perceive the Goodness and Loving Kindness of the
Lord. Those, who were heretofore alienated through wicked Works come to be
acquainted with God when once such wicked Works are truly repented of and
forsaken. Who were by reason of them slavishly afraid, but when once they are
assured of actual Forgiveness and Pardon, then they are in Peace. Who were kept
off by wrong and false Apprehensions and Prejudices, when they know him truly
and certainly, they find nothing but Loveliness and Excellency in him. If they
ever came to Repentance, they will be really sensible and actually persuaded of
thus much at last. But why will they not suffer themselves to know and be
assured of thus much at first? What need of departing away from our God, Isa.
59. 13. when we might abide well with him all the mean while; and if we go away
we must return again, or be eternally miserable. Why should we provoke or make
him our Enemy, when there is no need of it at all? Is he worthy to be sought
unto at last and not at first also? Though many go astray and return, there may
be indeed more Joy and Welcome at first, yet it will be better with those who
continually serve God, Neither transgress they at any Time his Commandment, or
in as few Instances as possible. Son thou art ever with me, and all that I have
is thine, Luke 15. 31. The whole and continued Current of God's Favor is upon
these.

God will proportion his Reward according to Men's Deeds: For the Son of Man
shall come in the Glory of his Father, with his Angels, and then he will reward
every Man according to his Work, Mat. 16. 27. The Laborers in Mat. 20. came
all as soon as they were called. Neither did they stand idle a Moment longer,
and so they received equal with those who bore the Burden and Heat of the Day.
But in this Christian Nation none have that Excuse of not being called or
hired. For every one in every Place may come to the Knowledge and Service of
God as soon as they will. It is unnatural to be unmindful of the Rock that
begat thee, and to forget God that formed thee; especially when we more lately
sprung up from him, and the Sense of him was fresh and perceptible in our
tender Years and his new Workmanship. So we conclude that it is most acceptable
to retain and increase that Knowledge which we had from the beginning; to
remember and abide continually by the Root from which we spring; to be ever
mindful that we are Plants of our heavenly Father's planting; to be Branches of
his Vine, to be purged by him, and be growing up in him, till we bring forth
Fruit; to derive our Sap and Fatness from him, and as we partake thereof from
him, so to be glad and rejoice therein, to hear of the loving Kindness of the
Lord early in the Morning, my Soul shall make her Boast thereof and be glad. To
recount youthly Experiences of divine Favor wherein is to be had more real and
lasting Satisfaction than in all the Vanity and Folly of our first Years. How
sweet is it to recollect, Through thee I have been holden up ever since I was
born. Thou art he that took me out of my Mother's Womb. My Praise shall
continually be of thee, and so it has ever since my Tongue could speak plain,
or I did conceive the Words which I uttered forth. Thou art he with whom I have
been acquainted in the Days of old. That is no Confinement, whose Heart is
enlarged, and whose Understanding opened to conceive of the great things of God
and Eternity: Whilst others thought of hungry and insipid Recreations, or the
short and empty Delights of Sin. His Body was at Liberty to go here and there,
but kept off from what would occasion Weariness and hasten Destruction. He did
glorify his God thereby and not make it an Instrument of Sin unto Iniquity. He
did preserve it in due Health, Strength and Sobriety, by declining those things
which naturally bring on Weakness and Diseases: And then, by living under the
continued Sense and Apprehension of a good God, He is just so as a reasonable
Creature should be, for he can rejoice in the God of his Salvation. Be thankful
and take Comfort in the things before him. Men may live with the same Content
and Freedom under his Government, as Subjects under a lawful and an excellent
Prince, and Children under a good and loving Father.

God is infinitely and essentially good, and also loving to Mankind; for he
does actually communicate forth his Benefits unto them. That he is so in his
own Nature none can deny, nor have the least Doubt. But is he so as pertaining
to us? Why we taste and find it so. The more any one partakes of the divine
Nature and Approaches unto his Likeness, he is carried out with the more
earnest Desire of doing good to his Brethren and Fellow Creatures; and he
actually does the same according to the Power and Opportunity put into his
Hands. Now this is a manifest Token of the infinite Goodness of the Godhead,
because he has put such a Spirit and Mind into his Servants to do the very
same. His Goodness does as much exceed that of the greatest Saint on Earth, or
of that Person who was ever most beneficial unto the World, as the whole Sea
does exceed a single Drop. It Is God, who does manifest and show forth one Ray
of his Goodness and Truth through such an individual Creature, and cause him to
do whatever he does. Here we are in the Dominion of the Prince of the Power of
the Air, even where Satan's Seat is; and he does hinder, or resist, or defeat
all the Good he can. His Devices are subtle, and his Instruments many; so he is
the Cause of all the Evil and Misery which are scattered up and down in the
Earth. God suffers it to be thus for our Trial and other wise Reasons, that by
our overcoming he may have the greater Glory. But because of this many are apt
to doubt of God's Love to the World. Whereas by this means he does prove the
Children of Men toward him: For by their being amidst Temptation and evil, the
Trial of their Faith may be had whether they will follow the thing that good
is. Whether they will still resolutely put forth and countermine the Devices of
the Enemy, and so make them of none effect, or cause him to fall, and that he
shall lose more than he got thereby. God suffers many things to come to pass
for our Trial (whereof we are apt to stagger concerning his Love and Goodness
to Mankind) but thereby he has showed how they may approve themselves more
than Conquerors, and then he designs to crown them with greater Glory and
Happiness. This may be applied to the particular and several Dispensations
which happen of whatever Kind they be, each may be observed by a discerning
Person to exercise our Faith and Trust. Now for a Season (if need be) ye are in
Heaviness through manifold Temptations, that the Trial of your Faith being more
precious than of Gold that perishes might be found unto Praise, and Honor,
and Glory at the appearing of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1. 6, 7. It is irksome at
present, and we are apt to have hard and distrustful Thoughts, but this is
because we know not all the Reasons thereof, and how our End shall be yet more
excellent and happy. Who led thee through that great and terrible Wilderness,
wherein were fiery Serpents and Scorpions and Drought, where there was no
Water. Who brought thee forth Water out of the Rock of Flint. who fed thee in
the Wilderness with Manna which thy Fathers knew not that he might humble thee,
and that he might prove thee, to do thee good at thy latter End, Deuteronomy. 8. 15,
16. This will be really found though it be hid from some, and they are not
sensible thereof all along. Indeed this makes the rejoicing more at the End
because it happens better than was expected; but yet to know thereof beforehand
makes that we fail not nor be discouraged, Isa. 42. 5. That we do not grow
weary nor faint in our Mind, nor abate one Tittle of our Duty, nor yet desist
waiting on the Lord; not to be tempted so as to say with that profane King,
This Evil is from the Lord, what should I wait for the Lord any longer, 2 Kings
6. 33. but rather to make the contrary and right Conclusion, This Trouble,
Opposition and Resistance is from Satan the Adversary, I will endeavor through
God's Grace to resist him more vigorously until he is bruised down under my
Feet.

Thou shall tread upon the Lion and Adder; the young Lion and the Dragon shall
thou trample under Feet: because he has set his Love upon me, therefore will I
deliver him. I will set him on high because he has known my Name. He shall
call upon me and I will answer him. I will be with him in Trouble, I will
deliver him and honor him, Psalm. 91. 14, 15, 16. As long as any one is in
God's Way, he is safe to carry him through all Difficulty and Danger, that he
may overcome and be crowned at the last. It is said before, He shall give his
Angels Charge over thee to keep thee in all thy Ways, Psalm. 91. 11. This
Promise is exceeding particular, and even so is the whole Psalm, for Safety and
Preservation over and from the several and successive Kinds of Evil
there-mentioned: So that we may trust and conclude that by what God has done
hitherto, he will go on to establish and finish the same. Cast not away
therefore your Confidence which has great Recompense of Reward, Heb. 11. 35.
It is not an hasty nor a fond Presumption, nor yet a vain Conceit: for it
relies upon the whole Truth and Authority of God's Word: which also speaks of
the Evils and Hardships which we meet with in the mean while, which we find to
be so. That same Word does also assure us of Strength to hear and go through
with, and at last of perfect Deliverance and Victory out of them. This is the
Favor which the Lord bears unto his People, until he does actually visit
them with his Salvation, Psalm. 106. 4.

But for those who have sinned with their Fathers, who have committed Iniquity
and done wickedly, how is it with them? Will not the following Verse give them
a Glimpse of Hope and Comfort? Our Fathers understood not thy Wonders in Egypt,
they remembered not the Multitude of thy Mercies, but provoked him at the Sea,
even at the Red Sea, Psalm. 106. 7. If the Question should be asked, wherefore
do all Mankind sin and transgress against the Lord? Have they not a present
Temptation and Desire of seeming Good which they imagine God would hinder them
of: Not knowing that God has provided greater Pleasure and Happiness for them,
and more Peace and Comfort in the mean while. They are ignorant of this, for
otherwise they would receive the Good that exceeds: They do not understand
the greater Multitude of God's Mercies, for then they would not behave
themselves rebelliously and contemptuously toward him. Like Words unto those
of Peter in Acts 3. 17, 18. may be applied to Mankind of past Generations, And
now Brethren, I wot that through Ignorance ye sinned thus, as did also your
Father Adam. A present desire of pleasure and greatnessled him into the
Transgression, and so his Sons and Daughters ever since have had some seeming
Reason why they committed Sin against God. To be advanced a little more and
better from their present imperfect State. Now were they assured that what God
would do for them, would be beyond all this, then they would endeavor to
continue steadfast in his Covenant. Were they fully ascertained that they should
have greater Good by keeping his Judgments at all times than by declining from
or walking contrary unto them, either they would not transgress at all, or in
fewer Instances than now they have done.

God knows all things. As he suffers, so he does likewise behold the whole
course of sinning ever since he created Man upon the Earth until this day, with
the several Temptations, Excuses, Circumstances belonging to it; as also to
what degree of Extenuation or Provocation it might have, and also the measure
of Ignorance and Imperfection. He does not need to be informed thereof, for He
likewise discerns that Willing Ignorance, that contempt and refusal of
Instruction of set purpose. The way of the just is uprightness, Thou most
upright do weigh the path of the just. Isa. 26. 7. In like manner he does
consider all the ways of the wicked, and takes in what measure of abomination
and evil deserving is therein; and also, how much is to be allowed unto Satan's
Temptation.

Now the Serpent was more subtle than any Beast of the Field which the Lord God
had made. Genesis 3. 1. And so he continues still to be more cunning than the
children of Eve, as they are merely such without the assistances of the Grace
and Spirit of God from above, and he befools them. Now again, they might from
the Wisdom and Word of God know his devices, and so escape, yea, and frustrate
them. The Lord looks down from Heaven upon the children of Men, he
considers all their ways, and understands all their works, whither good or
evil, with whatsoever does belong to them, to reward, pardon or punish: He now
sits above, and takes notice of them in order as they are done. But he has
reserved to himself the Power, and appointed a Day to Judge of all, and to
distribute unto every one according to his works. This is the alone Prerogative
of God above, which he has kept in his own power: For he alone searches the
heart, and knows all things; whereas we do only perceive a little in a false
and imperfect manner by doubtful report and mistaken observation. And then we
cannot thoroughly apprehend a thing wherein many are concerned; so that we can
give no perfect Judgment and Determination. But the Lord will rehearse it when
he writes up his people. He has a Book of all Nations, Families and single
Persons, with the account of time and place they stood here on the Earth: as
also, he notes the things that they have done.

The Scripture makes frequent mention of this particular summing up of our
deeds, and that our God does take regard of them, and will bring every secret
thing into Judgment, even the most hidden passages of our Life. Thou have set
our iniquities before thee, our secret sins in the light of thy countenance,
Psalm. 90. 8. Each single one; for why not one as well as another? nay, every
wrong thing and turning aside, even our errors and misdeeds, which we pass over
for Inadvertencies and small Neglects; those which we suddenly act, and do not
much mind our selves. Thus much is signified from what is written, Who can
understand his errors? Cleanse thou me from secret faults: Keep back thy
servant also from presumptuous sins, let them not have dominion over me; Then
shall I be upright, and I shall be innocent from the great transgression, Psalm.
19. 12, 13. Here the several degrees and diversities of sin are specified, by
the words Errors, secret Faults, presumptuous Sins, and the great
Transgression. A consciousness that God does even now search us, and is
acquainted with all our ways; and then that we must pass into a strict
Examination and Judgment is apt to raise doubtful and despairing thoughts in
our mind. How strange is it that any People should be heedless and unconcerned
about those things whereof they must be called to an account. If thou, Lord,
should mark iniquities, O Lord, who might stand? And he might do so if he
pleased; but then in his sight no man living will be justified. For no man has
been so watchful, circumspect, and inoffensive in his Life and Conversation,
but has in several instances transgressed against, or despised the Lord his
God: and as himself has regret and vexation afterward as he looks back, so he
would tremble to have them set in order before him.

By thy wrath are we troubled. Psalm. 90. 7. And again we are comforted,
(blessed be his Divine Majesty,) because that same word which speaks of God's
Displeasure and Indignation against Sin, does likewise assure us of his
Reconciliation and Pardon. Thereby is to be seen a mixture of his Justice and
Mercy. And it is observable, That where are expressions even to terrify and
cast down, there is somewhat close by said to give hope and comfort, and to
lift up again; where is Reproof and Threatening, there either commonly goes
before, or succeeds presently after, an invitation to return, and a promise of
forgiveness So we have the very same assurance and certainty that God is to be
Reconciled unto the World through Jesus Christ, either to the multitude in
general, or to single persons: For God sent not his Son into the World to
condemn the World, but that the World through him might be saved. And he came
not to call the Righteous but Sinners to Repentance. This is as evident and
clear, as that God was ever angry with the World, or with any single Man for
his sin and wickedness.

But this withal is to be considered, That if the World will be saved in and
through Jesus Christ, they must in the mean while submit to his Scepter and
Kingdom, obey his Laws, and observe his Sayings. For as heretofore they have
not gave heed unto, nor been governed by them, which has occasioned his Wrath
and sore Displeasure, Psalm. 2. 5. so to avoid that, and obtain his mercy and
favor, they must now do what heretofore they left undone, and ought to have
done, and refrain from what they were forbidden, and yet heretofore they did.
Leave off all manner of Transgression and Disobedience, and henceforward
perform all Duty and Service. Kiss the Son lest he be angry, and ye perish from
the way when his wrath is kindled but a little. Blessed are all they that put
their trust in him. Psalm. 2. 12. Submit, and be reconciled unto him, lest you
miss of that Path of Life which he leads in. He knows if you despise him, and
you must take him for a Guide and Savior to follow him whether soever he
goes. For ye were as Sheep going astray, but are now returned to the Shepherd
and Bishop of your Souls. 1 Pet. 2. 25. Without this actual Returning and
Amendment, there is no Salvation and Mercy.

If men will not do what is first required, it is vain to talk of, or hope for
Pardon and Forgiveness; if they will not perform the necessary foregoing
Conditions and Qualifications, they have no lot nor share in this matter; not
one good thing does belong to them; not one Iota, or Tittle of God's Mercy,
precious Promises, and comfortable Truth, is applicable to them until they do
indeed begin the work of Repentance. God is not their Father, nor does he look
with an Eye of Goodness and Compassion upon them till they are indeed returning
and coming unto him. And indeed, when one does really arise, and is coming
toward God, then our Heavenly Father may see him yet a great way off, and go
out to meet him. Luke 15. 20. Love and Forgiveness are kindled at the very same
moment when his resolutions are of going home, and these do happily meet
together.

The end of telling People their Transgressing, is because many times they are
blinded, and insensible of them. Indeed they may know a little slightly and
confusedly, but another may better lay the Law before them, and then themselves
may consider their variation from it. Sometimes they are at a stand, and as it
were amazed, and they know not what to do; they may first see, and fully
perceive, and then acknowledge, according to that Example in Ezra 10. 2. We
have trespassed against our God, and have taken strange Wives of the People of
the Land; yet now there is hope in Israel concerning this thing. So of every
Iniquity, Transgression or Sin, whether it is complicated or single, whether
many or few are concerned therein, still there is hope that God will do what he
declares, which he also will as certainly as he is God. For he is abundant in
goodness and truth, keeping Mercy for Thousands, forgiving Iniquity,
Transgression and Sin. But then they must make a Covenant with their God to
forsake their sins for the time to come, and hence forward to tremble at his
Commandments, and to do according to the Law. But if they cover their sins, if
they keep and hold fast to them, then they are still guilty, whom the same
Truth has here said, That he will by no means clear, Exodus 34. 7. The word
Forgiving, respects what is past, but does not allow for the present or future.

What then? Shall we continue in Sin that Grace may abound? God forbid That God
may show the more mercy in our manifold and greater sins, that we may love
much, when much is to us forgiven. But this, and such like, is a perverse,
wicked, proud and disdainful way of Reasoning, Because God will forgive, we
will sin yet more; because he is Gracious, therefore we will provoke him;
because he is Good, we will presume to offend him yet more; because he will
pass by the Transgression of the remnant of his Heritage, and make it up again,
we will break, and at no time continue steadfast in his Covenant. And knowing
that he will pass it over, we will forget the Name of the Lord, and hold up our
hands to strange Gods; we will idolize and labor to please Men, without any
regard had to him. Shall not God search this out, for he knows the secrets of
the heart? He does see and discern all such kind of Imaginations, which shoot
forth into alike practices.

We should do well to consider with our selves, Wherefore do we desire any
forgiveness at God's hands? Because we would partake of his Mercy, and avoid
his Wrath. We would be happy, and are unwilling to be miserable. Why, know we
not that the mercy of the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting upon them
that fear him; to such as keep his Covenant, and to those that remember his
Commandments to do them, Psalm. 103. 17, 18. And the wrath of God is revealed
from Heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, Romans 1. 18. and
Disobedience, Colos. 3. 6. And therefore we must fear God if we would partake
of his gracious Attribute, and carefully eschew all the other, that we do not
fall under the severity of his Vengeance. If we would be happy, we must be
holy; and to prevent misery, the only way is to sin not.

We are but mere Creatures. All that we have is from God; and so is all that we
expect further. We are but perishing and imperfect at present; and we shall be
yet somewhat more, as our hopes and desires, our fears and aversations, give us
notice of. So that if we would have the good will and love of God, the
consequent is natural and easy, for our selves to show love and good will
toward him in the mean while. And then we must sin as little against him as
possible. Ye that love the Lord bate evil, Psalm. 97. 10. And ye are to decline
every false way: we are to endeavor to set forth his glory, and to honor him;
which shuts out all manner of stubbornness, and the least despising of him.

Wherefore, we receiving a kingdom which cannot be moved, let us have Grace
whereby we may serve God acceptably with reverence and godly fear, Heb. 12. 28.
We have the Promise and Assurance of that Kingdom, and to us is committed in
the mean while, what is preparatory to that. The work and service is given and
showed that we may do it: and as we are put in the condition of Servants to so
great and honorable a Master as he is in Heaven, so it is required of us that
we be faithful and willing; that is, true in the management of what is
committed unto us, and ready in the performance of the same. Another Character
that belongs to a Servant, is, That he be Wise, whereof our Savior speaks and
promises to set such over his Household. Accordingly the Apostle intimates as
much negatively; See that ye be not unwise, but understanding what the will of
the Lord is, Ephesians. 5. 17. This must be in order to do the will of the Lord: And
also, we are to be in a readiness against his time of coming to demand an
account. By doing of God's Will, we learn to know it better, and the
performance is more easy; we can correct what was amiss heretofore, and
perform it more exactly for the time to come.

From the quality of Servants, we come to a more intimate Relation of Sons;
which the Scripture to assure us of God's Love and Familiarity to Mankind, does
more often make use of, than the other comparison of Servants. I will spare
them, as a Man spares his own Son that serves him, Mal. 3. 17. Now former
miscarriages are passed over and forgotten, when there is a sincere and actual
service for the time to come; where there is a constant desire to please, and
be accepted with God. Agreeable hereunto is the style of the promises and calls
to Repentance. Thus says the Lord, shall they fall and not arise; shall he
turn away and not return? Why is this people of Jerusalem slidden back by a
perpetual backsliding? They hold fast deceit, they refuse to return, Jer. 8.
5. But if they do return, they have forthwith assurance of Pardon and
Forgiveness, according to what is written: But if the wicked will turn from all
his sins that he has committed, and keep all my statutes, and do that which is
lawful and right, he shall surely live, he shall not die, Ezekiel. 18. 21. Let the
wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him
return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, and to our God, for he
will abundantly pardon, Isa. 55. 7.

There are innumerable Promises scattered up and down in the Old Testament, and
also in the New, to give hope and encouragement unto sinners to return unto the
Lord their God, which do answer all their particular doubts and fears. Whatever
be their multitude and aggravation; If they have played the harlot with many
lovers, yet return again to me says the Lord, Jer. 3. 1. Or if their sins be
as scarlet or crimson, of the deepest die and guilt, he will make them white as
snow, Isa. 1. 18. Which whiteness is an emblem of Innocence; or, whatever harm
they have done, they shall be as wool, which hurts none, but warms and
cherishes. There are abundant Examples which do ratify and confirm the same:
God was often displeased with his own People the Israelites, and yet he was
appeased and reconciled again. The time would fail me to speak of the Harlot
Rahab, Sampson, and Manasseh the Idolatrous King; as also, of those who came
and confessed their deeds, and were baptized of John in Jordan; of Mary
Magdalen, whose sins were many, and yet they were forgiven; yea, even the
wicked Jews, who delivered up our Savior Christ to be Crucified: Yet these are
called upon to repent and be converted, that their sins may be blotted out,
Acts 3. 19. And so persecuting Saul obtained Mercy. These things are written
not to give license or presumption to Sin, but who heretofore have sinned
ignorantly or unadvisedly, they are hereby showed and exhorted to come out
quickly, lest they be swallowed up with overmuch sorrow, and they sink under
the burden of their sins. They may cast off the burden of sin, or get from
under it as soon as they will.

It is hard to state and apply those many gracious Texts in Holy Sccipture in
such manner, that on the one hand the Grace of God may not be turned into
Lasciviousness, or be a further occasion of continuance in sin. so on the other
hand, that all may be invited, and have assured Hope and Comfort to be
Reconciled unto God.

Many People are apt to think that they have an allowed time of Transgression;
that they have a space of disobedience and refusal of Subjection unto Almighty
God, wherein they may walk in their own ways, and according to their own
thoughts; yea, and they are angry to be entrenched upon, and to be deprived of
that. To maintain and keep up this Liberty and Privilege, as they imagine it,
they are unwilling to hearken and come over immediately unto God: but they do
not withal consider, that God knows those and alike thoughts, every
imagination in the mind, and also those sudden conceits which are presently
hushed and stopped, but the Man is resolved to act by them. God discerns all
these, and can point them out by their names, who are for being rebellious,
setting up of themselves, and would live without God in the World; and though
they will submit at last to save themselves, yet God understands why they
would not in the mean time before: And it may be there is so much provocation
and contempt therein, that God will not accept of what is offered unto him as a
refuse at last; who stand out, they may stay away, and not come at all. For if
you would indeed have the Favor of God, if you have not done it heretofore,
you must Repent and do his Will: and if when first his Will is made known unto
you, you have an Aversation and Backwardness to it, you must shake off that and
do it nevertheless. So if you make an hasty and sudden Promise to one of God's
Servants, or to himself immediately, that you will live obediently according to
his Word and keep his Commandments; but afterward you dissemble like those in
Jer. 42. 20. with him, because they will be out of Sight and Knowledge, or
forget and not mind your Vows which you have made to the Almighty; yet he sits
above and also searches your Heart to see and know whatever you do as
pertaining to this. Nothing can be hid or concealed from God, who in his
appointed Time will manifest the Counsels of the Heart, and bring forth the
most reserved and strange Imaginations.

The Prophet did intend somewhat alike what is aforementioned, when he uses
that Phrase and Kind of Words, Hearken unto me, ye stout-hearted that are far
from Righteousness, Isa. 46. 12. that will not submit as it were out of a Piece
of Pride and Bravery, and they do of set Purpose keep off. I bring near my
Righteousness, it shall not be far off, and my Salvation shall not tarry, Verse.
13. But they will go further off and stand more at a Distance, and delay the
more that they may not see it. A Perverse and contrary Manner of act^ng, which
God does behold and will also recompense it upon them. There are some who let
God do what he will, send forth his Light and make further Manifestations of
Truth, give more pressing Motives and Arguments, send his several Sorts of
Judgments, yet they will not return to the lord. And so notwithstanding all his
Methods of Mercy and Truth, when there are already great Multitudes brought
over and converted, yet they reckon it as it were a greater Piece of Gallantry
and Honor, that for all that they will not be persuaded. In that exceeding
Glory of the Church by the vast Multitude of the Gentiles coming in, yet some
will still be rebellious, yea, and refuse to come. And therefore it is, that a
Denunciation and Threatening is put as it were just in the Middle of all those
Blessings and Promises; for the Nation and Kingdom that will not serve thee
shall perish; yea, those Nations shall be utterly wasted, Isa. 60. 12. If that
be their Humor and Resolution, so it may be to kick against the Pricks, to run
their Heads violently against a Stone-Wall, to set themselves as it were
against their God. When he has prophesied and foretold of such an universal
Reformation, they will, what lies in them make God a Liar, for themselves will
yet still refuse to be reformed. O wicked Fools! Poor ignorant Souls! This you
cannot do, but confirm his Word the more. For his holy Spirit does foresee this
Stubbornness and Refractoriness of yours, and even speaks of it some Thousands
of Years before your selves practice it. That the Purpose of God might stand,
and what himself has said shall be fulfilled. Nevertheless for your evil
Intent and Malice of Heart you shall smart and be punished for the same. They
shall perish, yea, and be utterly wasted; and then themselves shall know
whether it would not have been better for them to have served God, than (as
they did) to have went on in their Perverseness and Opposition.

There are two main Ends, the Glory of the great God and the Good of his
Creatures. This last is dependant and consequent to the other, and with respect
to himself Man is to reflect all back from whence it first came. God does make
those precious Promises of good and continuance unto us. They shall inherit the
Land for ever, the Branch of my planting, the Work of my Hands that I may be
glorified, Isa. 60. 21. Now if any should act ignorantly, out of a selfish but
mistaken Spirit, consult only for their own Good and Safety, not thinking so
much of the Glory of God; This is to alter and transverse his Method, and by
their thus doing themselves will have the less Good, if they do not miss of
all. These act unworthily and contemptuously. But yet they do much worse, and
are worthy of sorer Punishment, who are not contented to let God alone, but
they have a secret Purpose as it were to dishonor him. If they think that God
may be glorified by such a thing, they will with a secret Imagination what
lies in them, cross that Intent and Purpose. Who will endeavor to disannul
what he has said, and try to defeat what he has purposed and intends to bring
to pass. Whom God has exalted, they consult to cast him down from his
Excellency. They bless with their Mouth, but they curse inwardly, Psalm. 62. 4.
Who after the manner of Hypocrites talk of God and his Glory, but at the same
time they both think otherwise in their Hearts, and also practice contrary in
their Actions. God has vowed to punish such Iniquity. He does first defeat and
then overruled their wicked Imaginations and Practices to his own greater
Glory. He that sits in the Heavens shall laugh, the Lord shall have them in
Derision, Psalm. 2. 4. He does behold all the cunning Contrivances and Actings
of Men toward him. For the Lord is a God of Knowledge and by him Actions are
weighed, 1 Samuel 2. 3. of whatever Kind they be, whether good or Evil, whether
they please or provoke him. He knows with what Heart and Intent each thing is
done.

Strange! That any of the Sons of Men who are but mere Creatures, who are weak
and dying, subject to Pain here and Misery hereafter; liable to Death here and
Damnation hereafter; so likewise they are capable of receiving Good and
Happiness, and these come from without or can be manifested from within; yet
they should not endeavor at all times to behave themselves rightly toward the
great Lord and Disposer of all things in the whole World. All that we have
already is from God, and he has reserved more which he can dispense forth
according to his own good Will and Pleasure. His Favor and loving Kindness are
most worthy to be sought after, for it gives Peace and Assurance at present,
and is better than Life it self, which does relish and perceive all things, and
then transmits over to an eternal State of Blessedness. Who would not partake
of this? For even the Desire and Enjoyment of Sensuality, the Endeavors after
being great and highly esteemed, redounds all to this at last, that he may be
an happy Man. To be so for all Eternity is rather to be chosen, than to be so
only for a short Time. Nay, an assured Hope and Expectation of that is to be
preferred before the present Pleasure of Sin; for as every one feels within
himself, and is sensible of, there is a certain fearful Expectation of the End
of that which is Death and Punishment. Who will show us any Good? Psalm. 4. 6.
is the Language of every one: Where and how it may be had, is the great Thought
and searching of Heart; yea, and there is an actual Endeavor after it where it
may be had with some little Pains and Labor, as appears by the several
Actions, Ends and Designs of Mankind. And though the Generality of the World
has been long settled on the Lees, and they do still continue so. They are
sunk down into Earthliness and this present Life: And they being wholly taken
up with the Conveniences and small perishing Pleasures of this Life; they do
not care to rise and ascend up higher. But yet they would do well to give heed
unto those Workings and Movings of their Soul; for that equally reaches after
Happiness, and covets after somewhat which is wanting in order to it, as the
Body desires Food and Health toward Preservation of its Life here.

This is only the Time of Trial and State of Preparation. If we can show our
selves faithful and overcome, but all our Acts here are in Order and Tendency
to somewhat hereafter. They are but Means toward the End, and as a Scaffold
toward the building up an House eternal in the Heavens. Nothing here is
complete and for it self. All we are still passing on, and like wayfaring Men,
who have a Refreshment but no Abode; who make some Stop, but no continued
sitting down. And when we would as it were rest and fix up our Abode; yet the
very Succession, Change, Perishing and Weariness of our Acts teach us thus
much. The Times and Seasons instruct us in this; the Four Quarters of the Year,
Spring, Summer, Autumn and Winter: The constant Course of Day and Night, also
Infancy, Childhood, Youth, Manhood and declining Age; the Times of Labor,
Recreation, Eating and Drinking; all these pass on. Too many are like Men
amazed and astonished, they know not what all this means. They know not, neither
will they understand, they walk on in Darkness, all the Foundations of the
Earth are out of course, Psalm. 82. 5. Though the Light has shined and
manifested what their End is of being here, and what is required of them, yet
they are willingly ignorant, but go on as the rest do. This is the Manner of
the Inhabitants of the Earth that dwell carelessly, that say in their Hearts, We
are and none besides us, Zeph. 2. 15. There is a secret disowning of God above,
or if they acknowledge him by a few Acts of outward Worship, yet they confine
all to that; but they have not to do with him in the common Actions and general
Course of their Life. Here they conclude that they are left to themselves, and
these things they imagine are in their own Power. Some others will have Respect
unto God in little trivial Concerns, but for those of greater Moment, they do
not take Counsel of him; nor yet are directed by his Law, nor yet do they
consider rightly for his Glory. Were Men verily persuaded and did they act
accordingly, That God is to be obeyed in all things and at all Times; not only
in his Presence in the Sanctuary, but also when they are more Apt to forget him
at home and abroad, in their going out and coming in. Not only before his
Saints and Servants, as Paul did intimate concerning the Philippians, but also
when they are absent and afar off: The Lord's Name is to be praised from the
rising of the Sun unto the going down thereof: So in Man's going forth unto his
Work and Labor until the Evening. And then we are to lie down in Remembrance
of him, and to rise up again to glorify him To think upon him whilst in Bed
and awaking; and as others Devise Iniquity in their Beds, so our selves should
forecast which Way we shall most serve and honor him. If this were universally
practiced by all Persons in all Places, we should see another kind of World,
than as yet has been. And do we not think it would be better and more happy
with Mankind if they did thus, then as now they do in living securely and
negligently.

The Mistake and Error is, that they do not see the different and miserable
Effects till it is come upon them. So the Prophet says in Zeph. 2. concerning
Nineveh. That when she shall be desolate and uninhabited, then People shall
reflect and look back upon what has brought this Judgment on her. And so when
the World comes to be punished for their Evil and Iniquity, then they shall
call to remembrance and consider what brought all this Misery upon them. But
then it is too late and to no Purpose but to aggravate their own Folly, and to
torment them yet more. And so contrariwise, It would have been well with them
if they had done after this and that Manner. Why, you were told and warned of
as much by the Word of God for whom it was impossible to lie. So that they
might even then have been assured it would as certainly be as now they find it
present upon them. It was necessary to be told of it before, because they might
have done some things for which they should have been worthy to escape, Luke
21. 36. and also obtain Good for which they did labor and endure, the
foregoing Conditions should be performed; they should be in the mean while
rendered meet which the same God did press unto by the same Word and Truth,
which spoke beforehand of these things.

People are apt to stumble and be blinded at the Doings of God. Our Fathers
understood not thy Wonders in Egypt, Psalm. 106. 7. till after they were over.
And so it was of their Dealings toward his Servants the Prophets, whom they
did persecute unto Death, and afterward they acknowledged them to have been
faithful Messengers sent from God So whilst the Messiah lived and dwelt amongst
Men, they doubted whether it was he. But after they had crucified and put him
to Death, then they understood it. Now when the Centurion and they that were
with him, watching Jesus saw the Earthquake, and those things that were done,
they feared greatly, saying, truly this was the Son of God, Mat. 27. 54. Now
Jesus did in his Lifetime both by his Doctrine and Miracles, manifest
sufficiently before the Jews that he was the holy one sent from God. No Man can
do those Miracles that thou do except God be in him, John 3. 2. The Works
which the Father has given me to finish, the same Works that I do, bear
Witness of me, that the Father has sent me, John 7. 36. And so they were
amazed at his Doctrine, for it was with Power, and he taught as one having
Authority, and not as the Scribes. It was sublime and divine, and and so they
might even then be convinced and apprehend it. Those many, great and wonderful
things done throughout the whole Course of his Ministry, were as evident a
Demonstration of his being the Son of God, as what appeared afterward. And
when they did oppose him continually from Time to Time, and still they were
more and more convinced of his Truth and Divinity, yet still to go on and to
the utmost Pitch of their Malice and Rage as to kill the Body. And when the
whole Time of Trial is over, then to acknowledge that they were in a Fault, and
would not have done it; to pretend Ignorance for an Excuse or Mitigation of
their Sin, when it was either willing Ignorance, or a false Plea, God who
knows the Hearts will judge of all this. Our Savior notably confutes such
gross Hipocrites and Dissemblers, Mat. 23. 29, 30, 31, 32. Who say, if we had
been in the Days of our Fathers, we would not have been Partakers with them in
the Blood of the Prophets; when at that very Time they did the same against
Christ (whom the most moderate Fame did say, he was one of the Prophets risen
again, but others Christ, and others Elias) as their Fathers did against the
Prophets. And so it was clearly manifested that themselves did not only allow
the Deeds of their Fathers; but themselves at that Instant did the same. And as
they were Witnesses against themselves that they were Children of them which
killed the Prophets, so they did afterward fill up the Measure of their
Fathers, for they proceeded and did kill him also of whom God spoke to Moses, I
will raise them up a Prophet from among their Brethren like unto thee, Deuteronomy.
18. 18. who was more than all the Prophets, or the Angels, yea the very Christ,
the anointed one of God.

This is the Abomination of Hypocrisy, that when they do wickedly against God,
they would justify themselves before Men, and make a Show as if they had not
sinned, nor done corruptly. They would first hide their Sin as Adam, but if it
is known as public Acts are, then they would put a Color and Pretext to it.
But what are your Sins to us, or what are we that ye should plead with or
extenuate your selves before? Your Sins are against the Lord, and he is the
Judge himself. Oh let the Wickedness of the Wicked came to an End, but
establish the Just: For the righteous God tries the Hearts and Reins, Psalm. 7.
9. He observes the several Steps and Gradations thereof. He sees how far it
will go. And it may be, that is one Reason why he suffers it to proceed so far,
that the Folly thereof may be more manifest, that Sin may appear to be
exceeding sinful; that when he comes to dissect and lay it open with his
eternal Truth, we may see the infinite Guilt and Aggravation thereof. Like a
putrefying Sore, which the longer it is let alone, the worse it grows.

If God should arise in his Anger and lift up himself, Evil and Transgression
could never have proceeded so far as now it has done. If God had spread out
his Light universally to reprove the Deeds of Mankind, there had not been so
much Sin and Ungodliness. If his Truth were clearly, universally and fully made
known, it would prevent a great deal of Sin and Error. Neither then had all
Flesh corrupted its Way upon Earth as now it has done. But there has been the
Hour of the wicked, and the Power of Darkness, Luke 22. 53. In which things
have been suffered so to be. That Hour draws toward its End, and the Light
does begin to shine. Then also Sin and Iniquity will have its Period. It will
make an End of Transgression and bring in everlasting Righteousness. For he
will finish the Work and cut it short in Righteousness, because a short Work
will the Lord make upon the Earth, Romans 9. 28. What has been some Thousand
Years in Agitation and Continuance, may be brought to an utter End within the
Compass of a Year or less. Even as we see, that he who has been a Sinner all
his Life long, is converted in an Hour or a Minute. By one full and clear
Conviction of the exceeding Evil and Danger of Sin, he may be induced and
brought over imediately to forsake it. If we were thoroughly made sensible of
the infinite Goodness and Glory of God, and how he is dishonored by the
breaking of his Law, this alone Consideration should move any one, who has the
common Sense and Knowledge of him, to refrain from Transgression. If we did see
after the Manner of Men, from the Example of an enraged Prince who has the
Power to be revenged on ungrateful Rebels, and is constant to what he swears or
says: God is angry with the wicked every day; if he turn not, he will whet his
Sword, he has bent his Bow and made it ready, Psalm. 7. 11, 12. He is more and
more displeased day by day; and as the Creature continually provokes him, God
only forbears to execute his Vengeance, to see whether he will turn or not. The
longer man puts it off, it will be worse for him: How grievous and abominable
is it to stand, as it were, at defiance and opposition with God? For a worm to
contest with, and to wriggle against its Maker; for a Potsherd to strive with
the Lord of the World. He justly declares himself to be an Enemy to such wicked
doers. Ah! I will ease me of mine Adversaries, and avenge me of mine Enemies,
Isa. 1. 24. He only sends out his Word to give notice thereof to see if they
will submit. He sends out the Son of his Love with an Offer of Reconciliation,
to prove whether they will receive his Message and Counsel, who says, Agree
with thine Adversary quickly, least the Adversary deliver thee to the Judge,
and the Judge deliver thee to the Officer, and thou be cast into Prison:
Verily, thou shall not come out thence till thou have paid the utmost Farthing,
Mat. 5. 25, 26. The more quickly thou agreest with thine Adversary, the more
sure thou art to be reconciled unto him. Thou must be reconciled to him first
or last, or thou will be eternally miserable. The longer thou stand off,
thou do the more provoke and enrage him. And would thou resist him in the
mean while, whom thou must at length submit unto? Nay, when thou art willing to
be at Peace with him. Even those who are now reconciled, and were once afar
off, are vexed within themselves that ever they should have the least Enmity
against so gracious and so good a God. The Adversaries of the Lord shall be
ashamed. And if thy self do come to be agreed with him, thou will not only
repent and be grieved for all thy former Ignorance, strange Imaginations, but
even for this Opposition and Doubting whether thou should presently come over
unto thy God. Consider he is stronger and mightier than thou, He is all-wise
and jealous of his Honor, and also he will be glorified in his Creatures. And
shall they offend him now, because they hope hereafter to please and pacify
him? Or will they take Advantage over him also as some do over his Servants, to
affront them the more because they know beforehand, such will forgive. Is it
good that God should search you out, or as one man mocketh another, do ye so
mock him? Job 13. 9. Thine hand shall find out all thine Enemies; thy right
hand shall find out those that hate thee, Psalm. 21. 8. That is, find them out
to punish them; and therefore God certainly knows them with the measure and
degree of Hatred, they conceive against him. The sin is against him, and also
the pardon belongs to him; and also, he is the God to whom Vengeance belongs.
Now what is the Reason why he does spare some, and punish others? He will do
according to what he has said, He shall Judge the World with Righteousness,
and the People with his Truth, Psalm. 96. 13. And by that Truth he takes an
estimate of People even now.

God, who knows the hearts, will put a difference between Infirmity and
Perverseness, between unavoidable and willing Ignorance, what is to be allowed
to the temptation, and what is their own fault: He does apprehend all the
meaning of his own Law and Word, and also all the doings of all the Sons of
Men, every motion and thought of their Soul, and all that is within them. The
heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked, who can know it? I
the Lord search the heart, and try the reins, even to give to every man
according to his ways, and according to the fruit of his doings, Jer. 17. 9,
10. He takes exact account and cognizance of all things; and here it is said
that it is in order to give to every Man according to the fruit of his doings;
so that certainly it must be the better way to submit instantly. For the
present refusal and neglect does provoke him, in the mean while those
strugglings and contests do displease him; when he exhorts and admonishes, if
they rebel and vex his holy Spirit, he will turn to be their enemy, Isa. 63.
10. and fight against them. We know not when this will be, and therefore People
should be exceeding cautious how they do in the least displease him: When the
Scripture speaks of God being angry, the same Word invites again to
Reconciliation with him. Can two walk together except they be agreed? Amos 3.
3. Now God is continually with us, though many are not sensible thereof; for he
is with us in our going out and coming in, and he is with us in all our ways;
and this would be a continued fear and trouble to the mind, unless we are at
peace with him, and then it is a comfort and an assurance: And therefore those
who are afar off, do not think of God, but forget him, not knowing that they
might have the thoughts of God, and the remembrance of his Name; be as
familiar, yea, and as delightful as now they go on in their own darkness and
imaginations; for here is danger and continued doubt. They might come to live
under the continued sense of God, with the same, yea, and more exceeding
comfort, than others do with the thoughts of any thing; as the Bridegroom
rejoices over the Bride, so shall thy God rejoice over thee, Isa. 62. 3. And
reciprocally his people may live comfortably, and rejoice in the Lord their God
He is a shadow from the Heat, as a great Rock in a weary Land, a shelter from
the Storm, an house of Defense, or strong Habitation, whereunto we may
continually resort, Psalm. 71. 3. And many such like expressions the Holy Ghost
makes use of. As a woman takes care of her sucking Child, and a Hen gathers
her Chickens under her wings, so is the Lord God to his People, to assure them
of his continued Preservation, Love, and Familiarity toward them.

And any one may come over to be amongst his People; as they that were not of
his People do come to be of them, so we do warn, testify and exhort all men
every where, of every age, or condition of life, whatever their past sins be,
and of whatever nature or multitude their present temptation and circumstances
are, yet still they are invited to partake of the loving kindness of the Lord.
What hinders? Let the thought, imaginanation, or excuse be what it will, we
could speak and give a sufficient answer unto it, from the Grace and Truth of
God: We could reason even from the very first Principle of Action, and make
even the man himself, whether he be in a mere natural state, or if he knows
what we say, whether he be learned or unlearned, yet we could leave it to every
man to judge what is best even for himself to do, and which is lIkely to tend
most unto his own good.

Nothing is more certain and evident, Then that there is no fruit of Sin. It is
like dross, Psalm. 119. 119. which melts and slides away. The pleasure or profit
thereof passes away, and comes to nothing at all; there is nothing therein
which does remain and endure; nothing which will abide the Fire, or stand in
any stead in the evil day: Not the least comfort or happiness can possibly
arise from it: Wherefore then should any one continue in Sin? Or, why should
any one go to add Iniquity to Iniquity? To draw it on as with a Cart-Rope; when
hereby he does not only lose so much good, but bring on himself the more guilt
and misery: If he has offended God by former sins, he does yet more by present
continuance in the same; if he has been filthy he will be worse, by wallowing
yet further in the mire; and the sooner he draws back from the ways of
wickedness, he will abate God's displeasure against him. No flesh can stand
under the power of his Anger; they cannot endure, nor are their hearts strong
in the day when the Lord shall deal with them: And seeing we must all appear
before him to receive Good or Evil, to be sentenced unto Life or Death, What
can be done too much to entreat our Judge in the mean while, that we may have
him favorable and propitious, and be found accepted with him? What
intercessions and care should be used against this great day of Trial and
everlasting Decision? How should we in the mean while behave our selves toward
him, that now sits above to take notice of those who fear him and think on his
Name, and also expecting till his Enemies be made his Footstool? Those who will
not submit willingly at first, must at length by force; who will not do it of
their own accord, shall be made to do it: Wherefore should any debate or doubt
arise in the minds of men concerning this? Had they not better forthwith close
in with that God of whom it is graciously written, Who is a God like unto thee,
who pardons Iniquity, and passes by the transgression of the remnant of his
heritage? He retains not his anger for ever, because he delights in mercy,
Micah 7. 18. He would wink at, and pass by former Iniquities, if People would
be careful to please him for the time to come; if they would not perversely
abuse things as to stir up his Anger so much the more, because he does not
retain it; nor yet to presume upon that Mercy which he delights in. The right
consequence is, That if God does not retain his Anger, then they should not
retain their Sins; if he delights in Mercy, they should both Pray, and also
endeavor to be Partakers thereof; to meet God, as it were, in the way of
Goodness; to have good will toward him, that he may show Mercy toward them;
with what Affection thou behavest thy self toward God, he will manifest the
same toward thee. With the merciful thou will show thy self merciful; with an
upright man thou will show thy self upright: With the pure thou will show thy
self pure, and with the froward, thou will show thy self froward, Psalm. 18. 25,
26. According as men are, so will God be toward them.

Now seeing that every one knows that it is in the power of God to save or
destroy, to do good or to punish, no man can be indifferent as to which he
would partake of; for he would have the good, and avoid the evil: let him then
go the most likely way to obtain the one and eschew the other; and that is not
to be determined by a sudden thought, or slight apprehension of things; for
such may be the temptation and delusion of Satan. But consult the Word of God,
the very truth and reality of things; for seeing that God made, does now
govern, and will dispose of all things, we may rest fully assured that so it
shall be as he has said and decreed; where his Word does promise Forgiveness,
there the man may be assured thereof; as again, where it threatens Punishment,
there he has just cause to fear and dread it.

Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let
him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, and to our God, for
he will abundantly pardon, Isa. 55. 7. But the wicked think that this may be
done hereafter; so that he is for keeping to his own way in the mean while.
Then he will continue and go further in a wrong way, out of which he must at
length come, or perish; the longer he goes on therein, the more way it is to
come back; those things which he now does, must be undone. He must endeavor to
please and be reconciled with that God, whom now he provokes and sets afar off.
He must have an awful Regard and Reverence for him, whom he now despises. What
strangeness and contradiction would it be to do those things now, which he
shall hereafter really wish and desire that he had never done: Repentance comes
in upon a better and more truly informed Judgment. When the prodigal came to
himself, Luke 15. 17. then came in him the resolution of going home, and
framing right Principles of Life hence forwards: Then it is discerned that he
was in an Error heretofore, that he had chosen the worst part, but now he would
mend, and lay hold of the better; then he verily assents, and is really
resolved, That if such a thing were to do again, he would not do it. But how
can this be, that when either he does already, or might know as much, yet he
does the same?

The whole does depend upon a full and true knowledge, That God is to be obeyed
and pleased in all things; and that it is best for men in all circumstances,
and at all times so to do. If in one instance, so likewise in another, and then
in a third, and so throughout all parts of our Duty. It is better to be
temperate in all things, than to run to the full excess of Riot, to do
Righteousness at all times, Psalm. 106. 3. then to practice wrong or deceit at
any time: It is better to observe the several parts and stated seasons of
Worship, than to live in irreligion or contempt of God: It is grievous to have
forsaken God, and it is good to draw near and hold fast unto him in every
thing; this may be known by that long series and trial, how it is with the
condition of Mankind; those several dispensations and accidents, the sundry
changes and chances of this mortal Life, the temptations, and what may seem
severe trials, are to instruct in thus much. When the History of God's Church
and People is rehearsed, with an account of what things happened unto them.
This, or the like inference, is made, That they might keep his Statutes, and
observe his Laws, Psalm. 105. 45. And this is recorded for their Children, and
to us, To the intent that we should not forget God, nor turn aside from his
Covenant. And as Moses allowed Divorce to the Jews, for the hardness of their
hearts; so it may be supposed that God does admit Mankind to Repentance for
their Ignorance and Imperfection; that if when they did not at first apprehend
the excellency of his ways, yet if when they are convinced of the misery and
deceitfulness of their own ways, and when they have some trial and experience
of God's ways, and there they find a real Worth and Goodness, then they should
yield, and come over unto God.

CHAP. IV. Herein it is discoursed of that false Thought in the Hearts of many
People, That if they should submit presently unto the Obedience of God, they
shall be losers, and disappointed of so much Pleasure and Convenience in the
mean while: They shall miss of so much imagined Happiness, and fall into
Vexation, Trouble, and Misery.
MAN has some seeming Reason or Excuse why he stands off; Produce, and let it
come forth, if an Answer and Satisfaction may be given unto it. Produce your
Cause, says the Lord, bring forth your strong Reasons, says the King of
Jacob, Isa. 41. 21. No excuse will serve with the God with whom we have to do,
before whom all things are naked and opened, who understands our thoughts afar
off, even what is at the bottom of that Excuse. He requires Obedience and
Subjection from every Creature, and from that there is no Dispensation or
Allowance. Now every least excuse or delay, is a seeming kind of denial, and
God discerns it as such. There is some ground of that backwardness and
unwillingness; If he would but consider his own thoughts, he may apprehend
wherefore he refuses: Is it not the third thing assigned, viz. People think
that if they submit presently unto the Obedience of God, they shall be losers,
and disappointed of so much Pleasure and Convenience in the mean while; they
shall miss of so much imagined Happiness, and fall into Vexation, Trouble, and
Misery.

What a strange Imagination does here present it self at first; That Men should
be losers by the Service of God; for they do not discern a future Reward, which
will be a more abundant compensation for all present disadvantages; the
consideration of a future Reward, and present convenience, do quite take off
all manner of Excellency and Deserving in any of the doings of the Children of
Men. When God shall rehearse and give a true account of the nature of his
Government, and our Subjection, with an Historical Relation of it since he
created Man upon the Earth, The Lord alone shall be exalted in that day. For
therein will appear his Bounty and Goodness in a most eminent manner, without
the least Thanks or degree of Merit due to any of his Creatures. For by Reason
of our Imperfection and Want, there is so much Articling and Selfishness in us,
that we will as it were do nothing for God, but what we are forced unto to keep
our own Peace, or out of the Prospect of Good and Recompense. As on the other
hand, a little Frightning of Pain or seeming Inconvenience does keep us off
from our Duty unto him: What shall I get by it is the Question of almost every
one in what he takes in Hand? And as the Assurance of Profit and Advantage
shall engage him in such a Work; so again, the Fear of Loss and Inconvenience
shall make him refrain.

Pleasure and Pain are (if I may so express it) the two moving Wheels of
Action; which do actually incline to follow such things, and fly from others,
and thus he does in common Matters. Now herein seems to be comprised the
Mystery of God, That though in all things he requires of Men, there is a real
Goodness and Worth, yea, and they are to be desired; yet again, through wise
Disposal for a State of Trial, they have a Show of Evil, Loss, and there is an
Aversation to them: The Things of God are found most excellent, both upon full
Examination and and Experience, yet they appear as harsh and awkward to the
Generality of Mankind; which makes them fly off and keep so at a Distance. Now,
were they informed of the Truth of the Matter, they would act so as to the
things of God, as now they do to the common things of this World: And even what
appears harsh and frightful, they would undertake it, if it would tend to a
greater Good if it would (as we commonly say) tend unto Account, then they
would be for it: All manner of Ease and Sloth slides away at the present; there
can no Good come possibly of it. Now by Hardship and Diligence many great and
good things are accomplished. People might thus think and reason within
themselves, That when they give way to sin and idleness, for seeming good and
pleasure, yet if by a contrary manner of Life, there would accrue more real
Good and lasting Satisfaction, this should with them turn the Scales, and make
them seek after the other; not only to confine unto the present, but withal
take into consideration the Things to come; not to be fixed only upon what is
just before them, but to have an Eye unto the Recompense of Reward; to have
respect all along unto the Good and Glory which excels; to forbear and let
slip a little present convenience, out of foresight and assurance of future and
real Good. As again, To willingly suffer Loss, or endure Hardship in the way of
Duty, that God may make up for all in the Day of Retribution.

Indeed, all the actions of Man's Life are little, and may be done; there is
nothing required of us but what may be performed, and is soon over; so that we
may boldly undertake it upon the Divine Command, upon God's Promise of Grace
and Strength, to go through therewith; and also, from his further Favor and
Encouragement. Whatsoever thine hand finds thee to do, do it with all thy
might. In whatever Work thou may be accepted by God, as having the direction
of his Word, and the teaching of his Spirit, perform it readily and speedily,
during this Life of Vanity; before thy hands and feet are tied and bound up
with grave Clothes, whilst thou have powers of Action. Or if thou be ^nwilling
and would be excused, beware lest the Thing be taken from thee, and given to
another, who will perform the same, and so thou losest the designed Reward, and
thou at last be judged as one afraid, or as one who would not do the Will of
God.

Upon his being our Creator and our Lord, our Father and our Master, he might
command us to do such a thing, and we should, as obedient Children and
Servants, forthwith do the same. Agreeable hereunto was the practice of God's
Servants of old Time, as Noah, Lot, Abraham and Jacob, they did Serve and
Worship God, and did many things purely out of his Command, without reasoning
and mercinariness. That is, without knowing wherefore, and also without a
particular Promise of any more Reward from the hands of God. With such
Obedience, or Service, God was well pleased; and they are recorded for our
admonition and ensample, upon whom the ends of the World are come: That albeit
Glory and Immortality, and Eternal Life, are more clearly discovered and made
known unto us than they were to our Fathers, yet we should be altogether as
zealous and diligent in the Work of the Lord as they were, without so much
consideration had to what is further promised and assured unto us; but we
should do it only because the Lord requires it, and then leave it unto him
whether he will make any Recompense; yea, and be contented if he should give
none. We should acknowledge our selves unprofitable Servants, we have done only
what was our duty to do It was God who brought us into being, and gave us power
thus to act: so it is but a due return of our being formed by him, even for the
Engine to move as he would have it: It is just to comply with the End of our
Maker; or, if this be left to our choice and freedom, it is better when so
performed of a willing and ready mind; for God loves such a disposition of
Soul. And if there be such an Heart in People, all the future Discourse would
be in vain, for they would both offer and act willingly, without being pressed
to it: Let the way be only showed, they will both walk, yea, and run in it,
without being pricked forward; let it be declared what they have to do, and
they will forthwith actually do it, without so much argument and persuasion. If
any one thoroughly assures, and clearly demonstrates unto them, That the Lord
has said and enjoined them thus, there is need of no more words, for we will
do it. Truly God is good, and all things shall work together for good to them
that love God, and that are called according to the purpose of his Will, Romans
8. 28. And we will trust in the general, without being particularly told how
the several things are so: We will commit our way unto the Lord, and keep
steadfast in his Covenant, come Life or Death, Shame or Dishonor, good Report
or evil Report, Loss or Advantage; being assured that God will so overruled
things in his Providence, that even these contrary things shall tend yet more
to our real and enduring Happiness. Those Saints of old, who were hungry and
thirsty, are now come to that place where they are filled, and they do enjoy
the fullness and fatness of God's House. It is a greater degree of Happiness to
have been miserable, to reflect that the contrary Evil is done away, and there
succeeds in the room a greater good and fullness; so that even Self-denial and
Hardship do make way for more Enjoyment and Rest. Let this mind be in you which
was in Christ Jesus, who went about doing good; whose Meat and Drink it was to
do the Will of his Heavenly Father, who did not much regard the perishing
Comforts of this World, as to be fully employed in and faithfully discharge
that Message he was sent about. So Job did more regard the Words of God's Mouth
than his necessary Food. For the one was of more Concernment and greater
Advantage to himself than the other, as it was found at last. And though this
might not be at first apprehended, yet the sense of his Duty to God did make
him give the Esteem and Preference. Where is Love and Good Will toward God,
this makes that his Commandments do not seem grievous. They are indeed
represented so by the Tempter, who would keep off from the Observance of them;
but they are not so in themselves. And this has been at sundry times cleared
and manifested both by the inspired Men, who wrote as they were moved by the
Holy Ghost; and also by other Laborers in God's Vineyard, who out of their
VVritings, and from the very Reality and Reason of things, have brought out the
Truth. The like also we have endeavored by God's Grace and Assistance to show,
and even to demonstrate unto the most natural and ungodly Man. Who keeps off
because of this Frightning and Temptation, and therefore we addressed unto him,
if he would but judge of what he is vainly afraid to practice; for then his
former Fear and Aversation would wear off, and he would experimentally find the
Truth and Reality of things, as they are there spoken of. The Subject is, Of
Happiness; wherein it is fully and particularly manifested that the greatest
Happiness of this Life consists in the Fear of God and keeping his
Commandments, in Opposition to the Pleasures of Sin, or the pretended
Convenience of Disobedience. By Richard Stafford. Which is showed as to the
present Evil and Pain of several Sins there named, and also of the Good and
Excellency of the commanded Duties there instanced in. And the like may in the
same manner be demonstrated of all the rest, either mentioned in the Word of
God, or ever heard of, even as to all the Actions and Doings of Men, whatever
they are concerned in, so it is differently of the Good and Evil, Duty and Sin,
of what is commanded or what is forbidden. Therefore I esteem all thy Precepts
concerning all things to be right, and I hate every false Way, Psalm. 119. 128.
The like Nature runs through them all that they are really good and desirable,
yea, and to be observed. So in every false Way there is Destruction and Misery
which should be avoided. And was there a like Observance of all God's Precepts,
and an abstaining from all Appearance of Evil, any one would both judge and
experimentally find the same, as the Man after God's own Heart did. But by
reason of that abundant Sin and Corruption which is every where, and has
spread it self over all Nations and Men; yea, and there is also a reserved
Iniquity in those who seem to be Worshippers and Servants of God; which like
the Herb that caused Death in the Pot, so this occasions Sowerness and Misery:
And therefore this great Truth is scarce discernable.

O that thou had hearkened to my Commandments; then had thy Peace been as a
River, and thy Righteousness as the Waves of the Sea, Isa. 48. 18. Then shall I
not be ashamed, when I have Respect unto all thy Commandments, Psalm. 119. 6. I
shall not live in Doubt and Misery: I shall not be disappointed of so much
pretended Good or Convenience, as may be thought to be had in the Transgression
of this or that Commandment, as the Sinner thinks expedient. In the
forementioned Place of Isa. 48. 18. It is first said, Thy Peace had been as a
River, and then thy Righteousness as the Waves of the Sea, which mounts up and
ascends on high. So it is here said in the following Verse of this Psalm last
quoted, I will praise thee with Vprightness of Heart, when I shall have learned
thy righteous Judgments. Both which are given to signify, and from hence we
may learn that the Happiness of God's chosen does not only consist in a perfect
Peace and true Satisfaction of Mind, though these are things very desirable, and
beyond what the World gives. But it breaks forth into Singing and Joy
unspeakable, full of Glory. That I may see the Good of thy chosen, that I may
rejoice in the Gladness of thy Nation, Psalm. 106. 5. Here are ascending Steps,
one after another. There is not only a Freedom from Evil and Misery, nor yet
only a Stayedness and full Content of Mind; but it has further Delight and
Refreshment, and also can express it self forth, as others show forth outward
Signs of Rejoicing. So that when the World shall be perfectly obedient, and
what is consequent to that, reconciled unto God, when his People shall be all
righteous, Isa. 60. 21. and each Man and Woman throughout the Earth observe all
Parts and every least Tittle of their Duty to God, they shall not be dull nor
yet in deep Silence. But they shall be more merry, talkative and pleasant in
speaking of and praising God for his wonderful works, than now they are, or
have ever yet been about other things. Their Heart shall rejoice as through
Wine, their Heart shall rejoice in the Lord, Zech. 10. 7. which will very much
exceed the Mirth of Tabret or Harp; or the Joy of Feasts. Their Talking shall
be of God's Doings, declaring his Truth and singing forth the Praises of the
Lord: In which they shall find more Variety, yea, and agreeable Satisfaction,
than heretofore in spending their Time in hearing or telling of some new thing,
some little Novelty, idle Story, or foolish Jesting. They shall more rejoice in
the several Parts of Duty, than formerly in the Pleasures of Sin for a Season.
All the Briskness and pretended Merriment of that compared with the Joy and
Exstacy of God's Chosen, shall be darkened and exceeded as the Light of the
Moon is by that of the Sun; or as the small and faint burning of a Candle is to
the Lights of Heaven. The seeming Activity of Soldiers and men of Valor; all
that Show of Briskness, Renown and Courage, whereby in Times past the Abaddon
and Destroyer has stirred up Thousands to butcher and kill one another shall
be infinitely exceeded by the Lord of Hosts, and by his Army of Saints,
according to what is written, They shall run like mighty Men, They shall climb
the Wall like Men of War, and they shall march every one on his Ways, and they
shall not break their Ranks, They shall run to and fro in the City, they shall
run upon the Walls, they shall climb up upon the Houses: They shall enter in at
the Windows like a Thief; and the Lord shall utter his Voice before his Army,
for his Camp is very great; for he is strong that executes his Word; for the
Day of the Lord is great and very terrible, and who can abide it, Joel 2. 7, 9,
11. Their Speed, Resolution and Order shall as much exceed that of the most
excellent and victorious Army which was ever heard of since the World began,
as they do a Flock or Herd of Sheep.

God is glorified by Action; when the Powers which he has given, are exerted,
and then he will give yet more; when little Creatures do great things; when
what before lay hid, is put forth. Thy People shall be willing in the Day of
thy Power, Psalm. 110. 3. The Lord himself shall again awake as one out of
Sleep, and like a Giant refreshed with Wine. As he endues every thing that
has Life and Breath with Powers of Action or Motion, so himself will cause
that that it be manifested forth, he will subdue his Enemies in the hindermost
Parts, and put them to a perpetual Shame. Those tormenting Passions shall be
stretched out and come sorth in the Wicked: So again, the delighting
Affections shall be stirred up in the Good, and vent forth in the utmost
Gladness and Pleasure. Thou shall increase my Greatness, and comfort me on
every Side. I will also praise thee with the Psaltery, even thy Truth O my God,
unto thee will I sing with the Harp O Thou holy One of Israel. My Lips shall
greatly rejoice when I sing unto thee, and my Soul which thou have redeemed,
Psalm. 71. 21, 22, 23. Here in this World of Opposition, Sin and Temptation, we
do meet with great and sore Troubles; but when once those are done away, there
will succed a more than proportionable Degree of Joy and Consolation. This is
figured by that Phrase so usual in the Prophets, of Joy in the Harvest. It is
but a faint and imperfect Comparison to set forth the Transports and Ecstasies
which shall be of God's People. As a Bridegroom rejoices over his Bride, so
shall the Lord rejoice oves his People; and they reciprocally shall joy in the
God of their Salvation, who were formerly possessed with Horror and Dread,
they do at length arrive at Reverence and Good Will, and then their Souls do
greatly rejoice in God, and he does put Gladness into their Hearts more than
can be expressed by Corn and Wine, or any worldly thing. When we do sincerely
and actually endeavor to be holy, as he that has called us is holy, then he
is perfectly reconciled unto us. Notwithstanding his infinite Greatness, he
does humble himself to become familiar to our Nature. All former Averseness and
Enmity are vanished away: And we being fully resolved to keep his Commandments
at all Times, and that our Lord shall guide us continually, he does according
to his gracious Promise, keep him in perfect Peace, whose Mind is stayed on
thee, because he trusts on thee.

We may see and perceive a tittle Representation hereof in the Communion of
Saints here on Earth; who, when they are obedient and like-minded, do find
exceeding Joy and Sweetness with one another, as they talk of and derive it
down from the God above. The like will be much more in the Times of universal
Reformation, when the whole Earth shall be at Rest and Quiet, it shall break
forth into Singing, Isa. 14. 7. the one before the other. The Pleasures of Sin,
or the Laughter of the World are not so much to that as sounding Brass and
tinkling Cymbal compared with the best Music. All carnal Joy is now sudden,
mixed and unsatisfying: But what comes down from the Father of Spirits, or
arises from doing his Will, that does remain and is sincere, gives a blessed
Expectation till we awake after his Likeness and are satisfied with it. The Joy
is suitable with our imperfect Condition here, it increases as we grow up
toward Perfection; and is in us a Well of Water springing up unto eternal
Life. This Kind of Joy does transmit over to Enjoyment. It is a little Foretast
of that, wherewith we shall be happy for ever. It is sensibly in us according
as we have Assurance, and approach near to the receiving thereof.

There is an Agreeableness between our Work and Reward. Now our Work is to keep
the Commandments of God, and be doing his Will. The Commandments are for our
Good always; as every thing must be which proceeds from him, who is most
perfectly and essentially good. Blessed are they that keep Judgment, and he
that does Righteousness at all Times, Psalm. 106. 3. It is better so to do at
present; for they have more Peace and Satisfaction, as also the Promise of
future Recompense.

Many things are here suffered in this Time of Trial, and Hour of Temptation
which is come upon them that dwell on the Earth, but yet it goes well with them
that fear the Lord, that fear always before him; who when they are tried are
found faithful and obedient, these shall receive the Crown of Life which the
Lord has promised to them that love him, Who can now withstand and overcome
the Temptation, and trust unto the Lord for a greater Recompense. If the Sin
had been consented unto, the Pleasure or Profit thereof could never have
countervailed the Loss of present Peace of Mind and the blessed Expectation
further on. All things are derived in order to Contentment and present
Happiness: Now our God does furnish us with every thing pertaining to this,
whilst we continue in the Way of Duty, and we do not turn aside from his
Commandments to the Right Hand or to the Left. To each of them singly, and to
all together jointly, there is annexed strong Consolation and Assurance; the
one as to the present, and the other as to what shall be hereafter. We are
truly pleased in doing what we ought, and we have a sure and certain Hope of
good things to come. Whereas in Transgression is Doubt and Restlesness, and
fearful Expectation. And so in abstaining from evil and forbidden things, There
may be a little Regret and Unwillingness through corrupt Nature; but afterward
there succeds more Content and Satisfaction in the Denial of it, than if one
had yielded unto the Temptation. And further, there is a looking for the
blessed Hope and glorious Enjoyment, which shall be to those who do now comply
with the Will of God.

If we go through the several Parts and Steps of our Duty, as also the several
Degrees and Sorts of Sins, we shall sind this to be trne. Indeed, in the first
there may be a little Irksomness and Aversation, which cannot make miserable,
for it instantly passes away. It may be resolutely gone through with and
overcome, and this would lay up a Foundation for a greater Happiness and
Reward. So in the latter there may be a slight Semblance of Pleasure and Ease,
which cannot make happy, for this soon passes away and comes to nothing, and
also it tends unto an exceeding Condemnation and Loss; and further, it involves
into eternal Pain and Punishment: Besides, the Consideration of a different
Futurity, It may be observed at this prefent Time, that though in the Way of
Duty there may be Labor and Trouble to the Flesh, yet there is Joy and Peace
in the inward Man, which abundantly countervails for that: So in Wickedness and
Transgression, there may be a small Gratification and pleasing of the Body, but
to it is annexed Fear and Vexation of Soul, which is as a bitter Allay to the
other. The Soul is the Man, and he that would build up for himself a real Good
and Happiness, must consult for that especially. For besides; that it is the
more enduring Substance and survives the Body, so even now it gives the
Resentment of Good or Evil, Happiness or Misery. Indeed, all the Happiness or
Misery of this present Time is not to be accounted of; for whatever delights or
vexes, soon passes away, and we are gone: It is transitory and in continual
hasting by; but seeing that further we are to receive for the things done in
the Body, whether good or evil, the Reward of one, and Punishment of the other
must indeed make eternally happy or miserable. We ought to take the utmost
Heed, least by declining what may seem a little harsh or laborious. what may
render liable to a small suffering or Shame, we do hereby lose the Recompense
of Reward. So again, by giving Way to the Pleasures of Sin for a Season, or the
present Profit of Unrighteousness, we may plunge our selves into eternal Pain
and Loss. The Pleasures of Sin do not truly content at the very Moment, when
there is a real and sensible Delight inreceiving the things of God according to
his Laws and prescribed Rules. So in the Gains of Wrong and Injustice, in
taking Bribes or undue Rewards, he may be a little pleased for a while, yet
there is Regret and Fear, the one for what is already done, and the other for
what is to come. So that whatever Plenty or Abundance the unjust Man has, yet
his State and Condition is not comparable to the peaceable Fruits of
Righteousness, to that Man who observes the true and strict Rules thereof, and
has only the Blessing and Increase of his honest Labor and Diligence.

Sin and Disobedience will not admit of a through Consideration, but must go on
with Hurry and Neglect; whereas Obedience and Righteousness will prove its own
Work and find a rejoicing therein, Gal. 6. 4. It desires the most particular
Thought and Examination, and still it has sincere Comfort and a blessed Hope
and Assurance. Even those, who do not act by a Sense of Duty toward God, are
led by present Pleasure, Profit, Convenience or Advantage. And were they alike
persuaded, that there was more abundantly to be had in the Ways of God, these
same Persons would be moved to walk therein. Reduce all things to a Man's self,
his own Good and Happiness: This, though it be somewhat further about, and it
is not altogether upon so noble and excellent a Principle, yet it may bring him
over unto good. But the right and direct Way is for a Man to give up himself to
God in the first Place sincerely and unfeignedly resolving to live in Obedience
and Duty unto him in all things, come what will thereof, and trust wholly unto
God for the Event of all things; for thus one may keep whole and steadfast in
his Covenant, and not turn aside from his Commandments to the right hand or to
the left. He may go through with and understand those doubtful Dispensations of
Providence which are therefore given to exercise our Faith and Trust on him at
all times. To hold on still in every Affliction, Trouble or Disappointment,
being assured however cross or contrary they may seem at present, yet we know
that All things work together for good to them that love God, to them that are
the called according to his Purpose, Romans 8. 28.

Whereas those who seek their own good directly and immediately in the first
place, and have more respect unto that than to the Glory and Law of God, they
are apt to mistake sudden Ease and Pleasure, or present Convenience for real
Good, and to measure their Obligations and Rules of Duty by what seems to make
for or against that. If they imagine the thing may expose them to Danger and
Trouble, then it is asked, Does the Lord require it of them? And they will find
out a Delusion, or conceit to themselves that he does not, or they would
willingly be excused, nay, some run into that Danger and common Error, seeing
that the Lord has commanded all his Commandments for our good always; they
think such an Instance is not for their good, and from thence they would
conclude that it is none of God's Commandments The Error lies in their own
Mind and wrong Imagination; for the thing is true as God has established it;
Whatsoever he has commanded is for our present Peace and Comfort and future
Recompense. But many through want of Knowledge, Faith, and Trust on God, do not
discern it is so. Certainly present Peace and future Glory is much beyond the
utmost good that was ever had by Sin and Transgression. The first is sensible,
and of the other we have assured Hope and Evidence from the same God whom it is
impossible to love; and even now gives us the things which we taste, see,
handle, and enjoy. Such Food is nevertheless good and wholesome though a sick
Stomach cannot relish it so; but it may seem to that evil and bitter. And when
by Reason of Iniquity the whole Head is sick and the whole Heart is faint, then
it cannot so clearly apprehend and perceive the Sweet and Goodness of Obedience
and Duty. The things are nevertheless real and the very same though Blindness
does not see them, and Ignorance does not know them. And so it is of the whole
divine Will and Commandment, which is excellent and Profitable. Her Ways are
Ways of Pleasantness, and all her Paths are Peace, Pro. 3. 17. Albeit, those
who are alienated from the Life of God do not thoroughly conceive how it is so.

It was God who put this Goodness into things, for that is the Return made upon
the several days Work of the Creation, And God saw that it was good, Genesis 1,
12. so it was in their original Nature, and so it is in their further
Establishment and Order; for they are Derivations from his own Essence. God,
who is infinitely good, cannot make any thing but what good is. Thus it is as
to all his Works and Doings. He cannot command any thing but what is also good.

Indeed, through the Intermixture of Sin and Evil, which came in afterward,
there may be Trouble and Resistance: Through the Wiles and Hindrances of Satan,
and the Powers of Darkness, there may be Care and Vexation; but to avoid and
overcome is Joy and Glory. To countermine and resolutely go on still, to behold
Satan falling from Heaven as Lightning, and to have the Spirits subject unto
us, Here is exceeding Triumph and praising God on this Behalf. Our Nature loves
to have Opposition, and rejoices to get over it. The utmost here is but the
like Pain and Trouble, which others willingly undergo for the things of this
World, and they are contented, though they act upon Uncertainty and
Expectation; and if they should at length obtain, yet they cannot keep but must
be taken away from it. But for the good things God has promised, the Way to
come at them is chalked out in his Word, and showed in our Mind. And we know
when we do accordingly, as plainly as when a Master commands his Servant to go,
he hears his Voice and goes accordingly. There is alike and greater Comfort
of Mind in doing the Will of God as a Man has when he returns from his daily
Work in the Evening. And there is the full Assurance of Faith and Hope unto the
End, as when one has done something more toward it, and expects to see an
End, and enjoy the Fruits of his Labors.

The present Acts are little and sudden; but the good and evil are more remote
and distant, yet assuredly consequent to them. This will render either happy or
miserable; and as the several Actions will do this more or less, so they are to
be desired or avoided. Is such a thing for our present Happiness or Misery,
which is for a Moment? But how stands it as to our future Happiness or Misery,
which is exceeding and eternal, And this should chiefly sway and determine us
in whatever we take in hand, knowing that the Time to come will be equally
present and remain longer before us, than this Moment in which we now live. The
less Concern must give way to the greater. Eternity is to be preferred before
Time; for our self is as nearly concerned in one as in the other.

The Commandments of God are said to be for our good always, even now,
henceforth, and for ever and ever. The good which is now only in Beginning does
increase, till it ascends up into eternal Life and Blessedness. But as to the
Neglect and Violation of them, the utmost pretended Benefit thereof is only a
sudden Convenience or momentary Sweetness, which soon ends in Regret of
Bitterness; and unless God's Mercy and our own Repentance does interpose, it
renders us liable unto endless Pain and Punishment. In Obedience and
Righteousness there is even at this present Time a sensible Comfort, Joy and
Peace. Now what more can be desired in this World? What is more valuable than
perfect Peace? Or that full Assurance and Stayedness of Mind, which is
contented with the present, but withal desires after better and greater things
to come. Even now to delight in God, and to pant and thirst after a more full
and close Enjoyment of him. To walk with Cheerfulness and Pleasure in the Way
of his Commandments. To have a further hungring after Righteousness, but yet a
most earnest coveting after the heavenly Reward and Blessedness. To take with a
quiet Mind all the several Dispensations and kinds of Providence, holding our
Faith and trust still. I will hope yet continually, and praise thee yet more
and more. To magnify and bless God still, when things seem contrary; for there
will yet be a right and an expected End. Although the Fig Tree shall not
blossom, yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my Salvation,
Hab. 3. 18. The apprehension of him above, makes all things here below sweet,
and the worst, such as may be endured: For God will in the mean time give
strength to bear, and assured deliverance out of it.

By this may be seen the weakness of our condition, that we are so very fearful
of every Evil that can, or we imagine may do us the least hurt. And also there
is a sense of our want and imperfection, of our poor and low Estate, that we
are so greedy, and catching after every small thing which we think may do good,
or please us a little. We are lovers of our selves, and consult only for our
selves, more than what the Lord our God does require of us. Now indeed,
self-love is not to be blamed, for it is the great Law of Nature, and was
undoubtedly implanted in us by the Author thereof. No Man hates his own Flesh,
but loves and cherishes it. But the Error and Mistake is, That we do snatch at
the Lesser Good, instead of the greater; and so by declining, and avoiding a
less Evil; we run upon a greater, and subject our selves to more loss. We do
not in the first place seek the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness, and
trust that all these things shall be added unto us. Nor do we observe our Duty
to him in all things, and depend upon him for the Event of all. We are to seek
after a true, proper, and enduring Happiness; and consequently, to do, and
embrace every thing which makes for that, and decline what is contrary, or an
hindrance.

In every thing we take in hand, remember the End, and thou shall never do
amiss; and at present examine as to each single Action we are engaged in,
Whether the Good or Evil consequent to us thereby will be greater? Taking in
the consideration of the future, as well as of the time that now is. For that
is as much longer, and of greater concern, as Eternity does exceed Time, which
is more than our whole Life is to the twinkling of an Eye, and consequently
deserves so much the greater regard and concern, even of those things which are
done out of Humor, Opposition, Lust or Pleasure, the supposed good or
convenience instantly passes away, but the danger and evil is great; for by
Reason of these things the wrath of God comes on the children of Disobedience.
The pain and punishment will more than sufficiently requite for gratifying
their own will and concupiscence. Though they hug themselves, and they walk in
the false peace and imagination of their Heart, yet a day of Recompense will
assuredly come, when it shall be rendered unto them for all the sweet and
pleasure of their Sin and Transgression. So on the other hand, all the seeming
trouble, or loss of Obedience and Righteousness, shall be recompensed with a
proportionable Reward. As for those who go on in a more blind hurry and
neglect, their Time and Life passes away, and Satan thus deceives them into
Ruin and Perdition. This short Question might be still put to our Souls, and
should ever be in our Mind, What do I propose to my self? What Good will come
of it? Is such a Profit or Pleasure to be attained? Why, the like has been had
already, it satisfies not at the very time, it quickly passes away, and comes
to an utter end. But if it is the effect of Disobedience and Transgression;
why, This has a just Recompense of Reward annexed to it, which will be
bitterness in the End, and a severe compensation for whatever unlawful delight
or gain he has had. As the several steps to a Journey, so the single and
several Actions of our Life tend unto Happiness or Misery; they do either set
forward the one, or make liable unto the other. It is a laying in a good
foundation against the time to come, or a treasuring up wrath against the day
of wrath. Who would commit sin if he did consider that he should receive doubly
for it? When there is no fruit at the time, and certain punishment to come. And
so, who would not go on, and continue in all Duty, seeing that he shall have
assuredly such encouragement and reward?

Every one proposes to himself Happiness and Good as the End of his Actions;
but he would do well to take heed whether he does endeavor after a true and
enduring Happiness, instead of a seeming and sudden convenience? Whether he can
discern what is really good and profitable all the days of his vain Life which
he spends upon Earth as a shadow? And not confine himself only to those
Actions which perish in the using, and it would be better if they had never
been done. All the pretended advantage of them is soon over, the guilt remains,
but the worst is to come, viz. To suffer the due Reward of their deeds. If the
punishment were presently annexed to sin and wickedness, all would refrain from
it, as many do from Religion and Duty, because they imagine it harsh and
irksome. But because the little and insipid pleasure of sin is present, and the
pain to come; they greedily catch at the first, and blindly and ignorantly
venture upon the other.

What is to come, is not as yet, but it will as certainly be, and also remain,
when all these things are passed away. The World passes away, and the fashion
thereof, both the lust and trouble therein. The first is only an husk, shell,
or an appearance of Happiness, so is the other of Misery; nay, all here is but
as Imagery and Varnish, and mere Outside. Surely every Man walks in a vain
show, Psalm. 39. 6. In the Margent there it is, In an Image. Our Bodies are as
shadows, our Souls little more than nothing. Surely every Man in his best
estate is altogether vanity. And yet this is flecting and hastes away; day
after day, and night after night, our Time passes, and our flesh waxes old, as
does a garment. Nothing here does remain, or endure with us; and yet we covet,
and earnestly desire after what is so. Indeed if we were to pass by, and to be
no more for ever, then we should make the most of these temporal and perishing
Things; but seeing they are in order to what is Eternal and Enduring, we should
so use and manage our selves toward these earthly and temporal Things, that we
may come to the Enjoyment and Possession of the Heavenly and Eternal; so to
approve our selves in the time of Trial, that we may have the acceptance of
our God; to be as obedient Children, that he may give unto us the Heavenly
Portion and Inheritance; so to demean our selves here in Time, that we may
attain unto a Blessed Eternity. God, who established and ordained all things as
they are, sent us here to prove what is in our heart, and what we will do; He
has set different things before us, to see what we will choose; He has
afforded us the means and capacity of Knowledge, if we would but learn and
know; if we would Obey the Lord our God, and walk in all his ways, and rely
upon that gracious Promise, I will be your God, and ye shall be my People, Jer.
7. 23. He will so order, dispose, and give us things, as shall tend to our
comfortable Being here, our Crown and Glory, the utmost and continual Rejoicing
hereafter.

If we can be happy at last, and for evermore, that is all which we desire; if
we can pass on, and go through this World, we are contented to suffer Labor
and Weariness, knowing that we shall come to the Rest which the Lord has
promised: And that will be more sweet and refreshing, the more pain and
difficulty we have sustained in these few and evil days of our Pilgrimage. If
they were good and pleasant, they sensibly fly away as a Post, and it is
melancholy and regret to find, that what delights should pass away. It is yet
more anguish and sorrow, that it must be at length wholly determined, and come
to an utter End. It is the utmost Despair, and inexpressible Vexation, That for
the unlawful use of those good things he had in this Life, he must, when that
is ended, come to the Place where he shall be tormented. But now, on the other
hand, to Rest from their Labors, to be comforted for the evil things they had
here, this indeed is the Great and True Blessedness.

This should teach us to use the things of this World as if we used them not;
but above all, carefully to observe every tittle and part of our Duty, to
abstain from all appearance of Evil, for it may be all continually done from
time to time, with a very little irksomness, trouble and loss, and there is a
most happy End of all. This third time citing that place, is the more to
enforce the observance thereof, Blessed are they that keep Judgment, and he
that does Righteousness at all times, Psa. 106. 3. In keeping of them there is
great Reward, Psa. 19. 11. The word, keep, denotes a constant adhering to them,
come what will thereof. Who is resolved with full purpose of Heart to cleave
unto God, and to observe all his Statutes, notwithstanding any Temptation,
Difficulty, or Hindrance to the contrary. The Temptation may be overcome, for
it might indeed please a little, but that would be sudden at the Time, and
unsatisfactory in the Conclusion thereof, and consequently, the not yielding to
it, can be no great loss or misery. But then is a content and approbation of
Mind afterward, and also the vast consideration of the time to come: Also, the
difficulty may be conquered, and the hindrance taken away, without much trouble
or pain, without diminution or lessening of present Happiness; but it
exceedingly furthers as to the Future and Eternal Blessedness.

If it was thoroughly inculcated, and continually repeated upon our mind, How
that the best things which happen here will not make us happy, nor the worst
miserable; If we had a right knowledge of all things in their own nature, not
heightened in Imagination, we might easily go through all parts of Duty, and
avoid the several Instances and Acts of Sin, as the one does occur, and the
other present themselves. Indeed such a thing being the Will and Mind of God,
should presently silence all other considerations drawn from selfishness, or
the love of our selves. But (as was before somewhat hinted) to shut out all
boasting and merit, That the Lord alone may be exalted in that day, we do
little or nothing purely for him, but all out of respect had to our selves; and
if we were sufficiently convinced, it would as much redound to our own good and
benefit, we would then obey the Lord our God, and walk in all his ways. This is
evident, For the very reason why People walk in their own ways, is, because of
the supposed advantage and convenience thereof. Now alike, and greater Profit
would turn them into the right way. Present Peace, and Future Glory, do
surmount all the Pleasure and Profit which can be had here; and Glory and
Immortality are rather to be sought after, than blind dangerous
inconsideration, or the fearful expectation of the end of those things which is
Death. It is better to sin not, and be innocent, than to give way unto the
doing of those things whereof we must give account; for hence arises doubt and
fear. We may quickly find and perceive the utmost good and delight, which
spring up from Disobedience and Transgression; the same has been had before.
It melts away like dross, leaving a foulness behind, which turns into nothing.
This may be observed of the several Acts of Sin and Temptation; which go out
like the snuff of a Candle in noisome darkness. How can men expect Happiness
from those things by which they die and become miserable? What Fruit had ye
then in those things whereof ye are now ashamed? It it is all but trash, which
instantly perishes in the going down, and does not nourish; which is as
insignificant as a mere Tale that is told, or expires as a Dream when one
awaketh; which is but faint and languishing in the Act, and bitter in the
Remembrance.

If there was previous Thought and Consideration of these Things, Men would not
so much yield to them. But alas! They discern it most commonly by the Effects
and Consequents; and that not thoroughly, till it is too late. When the time of
Trial is over, then they know how they should behave themselves; and when he
will prove them no longer, then they would approve themselves unto God. The
Matter is understood at the End, but not at the beginning; whereas this is too
late if it is but once laid before us, as such are the concernments of
Eternity. We being proved in this Life only, but many other Things of this Life
are often and successively laid before us; and this should reach us to amend
our former Errors, and carry our selves Right at the next Opportunity and
Trial. To have the free use of our Reason and Faculties, and our Senses
continually exercised to discern between Good and Evil, That we may seek after
and embrace all that can be had of the one, and as studiously decline all the
hurt and defilements of the other. To know and practice all those things for
which we shall have the Voice of our Lord, Well done good and faithful Servant:
And again, carefully avoid and leave undone all those things which tend to sad
account and condemnation. What profit is there of all the Labor that a Man
takes under the Sun? In Truth none at all; unless it be in order to future
Life. And when we come to fully know and perceive as much, We should direct all
our Actions accordingly. That like as the Men of this present Time do think in
whatever they take in hand, What Good or Profit will accrue to my self hereby?
So the same may be continually thought of as to the time to come. What
advantage or stead will this Thing stand me in when I shall come to give
account of my self to God? The consideration of Things to come, by reason of
their so much exceeding Greatness and Duration, should swallow up all the care
and concern of this present Time. We do not so much value how things go with us
now, so it may be well with us hereafter. We are not so much concerned for
whatever we may miss of in this Time and Place, so we may lay hold of Eternal
Life. It is no matter whatever Trouble, Pain, or Striving we endure, if we may
hy any means attain unto the Resurrection of the Dead. And then, we should not
so much Article for Happiness or Misery in the mean while, if we did look out
to this vast and enduring State. Lord Jesus give me a Portion and Interest in
That, and dispose of all other things with me as thou please in the mean
while. Nothing here can be properly called Happiness or Misery; for it may be
rather termed a transient Delight, or small Vexation, which as the shadow upon
the top or surface of the Earth, presently hastes by; it may slightly affect
the Imagination, or uppermost Thought; but it should not reach, nor descend
into the depth of the Heart; for that should take Thought of greater Things
than what are to be had here: Or rather consider the Disposal and Establishment
of them, and so likewise use them in subordination to things to come. Even
according to the Law and Direction of the Most High God, and by observing the
Commandments and Sayings of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

Good God! what abundant Exhortation is there to this? How many Repetitions,
Inculcations and Inforcements must there be, only to do what a Subject does
readily for his Prince, a Child for his Parent, and a Servant for his Master.
Is not God, and his Son Jesus Christ, greater and better to us, than any of
these Relations? Shall we not get as much by his Service as by theirs? Are not
his Promises as sure? And does not his Reward extend further? Is not his Work
as excellent? And the things he has said as good and fit to be done? Yea, they
are more agreeable and reasonable than any thing we now do in this World. His
Commandments are not grievous, but such as may be performed, and there is a
greater Benefit annexed to the doing of them than is to be had in the most
generous and highly esteemed Actions according to the World. For besides many
other Disadvantages, whatever is done here in order to the things here, is
certainly and evidently determined within this short Time; but for those who
shall do the Will of God, it is not yet known what their Recompense shall be.
It is higher than the Heavens and reaches even to the Length of Eternity. It is
revealed unto us in great and mavelous Words' sufficient to raise our utmost
Affection, Desire and Endeavor. But we are further assured from Isa. 64. 4.
that it is yet more than we can now expect or conceive, For the Son of Man
shall come in the Glory of his Father with his Angels, and then he shall reward
every Man according to his Works, Mat. 16. 27. This is told us before that we
may prepare and fit our Works accordingly; that we may have a greater Measure
and of the best Sort of Works, so we may know what we have to do, and also be
diligent in the Exercise thereof. First, not to spend our Money for that which
is not Bread, nor yet our Labor for that which satisfies not: Not to be only
or principally busied about vain and perishing Things; which it is impossible
they should content or make happy, for they do not remain. To draw off from the
things of this World, and to employ our Care and Labor about the things to
come. And then we are to search the Scriptures that we may understand rightly
how we may have eternal Life, and put in through God's gracious Promises for
the different Degrees of Glory, even according as we have more or less abounded
in the Work of the Lord; so that we should not be so much concerned how much
Happiness we shall have in this mean while, or what Misery we are liable unto;
but still give heed and take care for that which is to come.

As the future Life succeeds and is annexed to this present Life, so we should
not think of one without the other. For that is the general Fault and Mistake,
that we are so sunk and confined within this Life that we have no constant
Regard to that Life which is to come. We do wholly consult for the present, to
the Neglect and Unmindfulness of the future: Whereas if Consideration be taken
of both together, then we shall manage things rightly: And when there is any
Contrariety and Competition between them, there always Preference ought to be
had to the greater, for more Concern ought to be had for a Year than for a
Minute only. The Disproportion is much more in all the several Instances
between the things of this Life and the other. Albeit, they are now at this
present Time had or seen: And the others are future, to be expected and
believed. But yet these things shall be past and utterly done away, when the
others shall ever remain, It is evident we must all be taken away from the
things of this World, and then the whole Action and Business of our Life will
seem and signify no more than of the past Time already, as to which, how that
is we can conceive in our Mind. But then comes Judgment, when those Thoughts,
Words and Actions, which are over and almost forgotten, shall come to be
examined and Distribution shall be made accordingly.

Then the Disguizes and contrary Appearances of things shall be pulled off, and
they shall be seen and under^ood in their true Nature. What do contribute to
our Welfare, and what do tend to our Hurt, and this is to be measured, not
according to false Thought or wrong Apprehension, but from the very Reality and
Event of things. And again, Judgment is to be made, not so much from the ^d
seeming contrary or middle Issue, but from the utmost and last End of things,
for Satan may at first endeavor to defeat, but he can never overthrow it; so
he may try to turn it into Harm and Inconvenience, but yet cannot possibly
hinder so far that it shall not do us good at the latter End.

The Purpose of God stand firm, and he will certainly bring it to pass, though
in the mean while, through the Wiles and Opposition of Satan, some things may
seem to let and hinder: And they may at first seem to bring the contrary to
what they shall end in at the last. When God promises, I will deliver him and
Honor him, with long Life will I satisfy him and show him my Salvation, Psalm.
91. 15, 16. He may at first seem to be delivered over to the Will of his
Enemies, and be overwhelmed with Shame: He may do those things, which in common
Probability will endanger and shorten his Life, and to be esteemed smitten of
God and forsaken; so that he has not then so full and clear a Discovery of the
divine Will and Counsel. Now if we had Faith, Knowledge and Patience, as to
believe, discern and quietly expect as much, then we might easily in the mean
while submit to Hardship, Inconvenience and Disappointment, knowing assuredly
that that there will be an expected End. And by this doing we shall lay in more
Stock and Foundation for our real and enduring Happiness, whilst we cont^nually
study and labor that we may be accepted of and approved by God, but neglect or
disregard the Pain or Pleasure of the present, but refer all to future and
endless Life. Whilst we look not at the things which are seen, but at the
things which are not seen, for the things which are seen, are temporal, but the
things which are not seen, are eternal. The first indeed are felt, we being now
in the midst of them; and we sensibly know that they are little, vain, and
hastily passing away; for they are either taken from us, or we from them: So
they are but temporal. But to the other we daily approach nearer, we now
apprehend them by Faith and Reason; and blessed is he that seeks diligently,
for there shall be a certain Performance and obtaining of them.

It is the easiest thing in the World to be understood and most reasonable to
be practiced, that the less should, give way to the greater, and we should be
most concerned about that which is of most Importance to every one of us. And
hereupon the things of God and our Universal Duty to him, have the Preference
infinitely before all other things whatever. For conceive what is most highly
esteemed or sought after amongst Men. The highest Honor, greatest Riches, or
the most valuable Pleasures cannot hold the least Competition with that
Exaltation which we expect from our God, the Inheritance that fades nor away,
reserved in the Heavens for us, and that Fulness, of Joy and the Pleasures which
are at God's Right Hand for evermore.

God first gives things in a lesser Degree for our Trial; and then afterward
he adds that which is full and perfect for our Crown and Reward. That by the
lawful Use of the things which he has allowed we may be contented, and quietly
wait till we shall be made most happy at last. There is a wanting of somewhat
at present to prove whether we will reach after somewhat more in Lust or
forbidden things, there is a little Consciousness of Want as well as an
Appearance of Good, whereon to ground the Temptation and Trial. There is an
hasty Desire and coveting which coveting which craves to be satisfied, which by
giving way unto, is yet more urgent, as contrariwise it diminishes and ceases
by Denial and crossing of it. If we did thoroughly consider how little there is
in those things when had, as also how small Pain and Irksomeness it is, when
they are resolutely denied: We should more constantly keep within the Tenor
and Bounds of Christian Sobriety.

We are now to receive things to the very full, for we are not as yet to come
to the Marriage-Supper of the Lamb, nor to the Feast of fat things upon the
Lees well refined: Neither should we here expect a tarrying or sitting dow; For
we are not as yet come to the Rest which the Lord our God has promised. We
must be content to be fed with Tears and Sorrow, having Hope and Expectation to
come to that Place where they shall be done away. If God does at present Give
us Tears in great Measure, he will at length make it up in as large a Cup of
Consolation and Rejoicing.

These three make up our Condition here, Sorrow, Joy, or Contentedness between
them both, and in one or the other, we pass all the Days of our Pilgrimage. The
last is most desirable, for its Constancy and Duration, for though we eagerly
covet after Mirth and Delight, yet that is wearisome if had long together; as
also Grief, if it is continually upon us, it sinks down the Soul. Now indeed
the Worst may be born and submitted unto, if it be in order to good things to
come. If we sow in Tears, so that we may reap in Joy; if we go on in our Way
weeping so that we may come again rejoicing and bringing our Sheaves with us.
Here is the Faith and Patience of the Saints: Here seems to be the great Trial
and Exercise of Mankind; because they forego the good things of this Life, and
subject themselves unto the evil; they take up the Cross here when as yet they
do not see any thing more. They are not indubitably certain to the contrary;
for often such a Staggering or Doubt does return, that here is their All, that
after this Space they shall be no more for ever: And therefore some think that
if they are bereaved of this, they are absolutely deprived of all. Or what is
to succeed hereafter; They say, That is of doubtful Expectation; or If it is in
a more particular Manner at God's Disposal, then he may withold his Hand and
not seem to grant as he does here. So that to renounce a Certainty for an
Uncertainty, to expose himself to present and sensible Labor and Pain (when it
may be declined) only for future and conceived Rest and Refreshing, this does
not seem reconcilable with the Wisdom of this world. But the Apostle says,
That the Wisdom of this World comes to naught, 1 Cor. 2. 6. so likewise all
this may be answered from the true Dictates of Wisdom, and by reducing all to
our selves. For it is evident that if we had all the good things of this Time,
and we did both say, and also put in practice, Soul* eat, d^ink and be merry,
for thou have Goods laid up for many Years; yet all these will be expired and
gone as the past Days already are. And what is the result of all? What do they
signify at last? That can be no Happiness which has an End. And seeing that
we have immortal Souls and returning Bodies, as our Maker and Creator has told
and assured us, We must, or should have something to stand in stead when all
these shall fail. It can be no loss to miss of these things; for if had, yet
they certainly perish, and come to nothing, and we die and go away utterly from
them. Now if we were to be no more for ever, it would be almost the same thing,
if we did appear here for a longer or shorter Space, seeing that at length it
must be utterly determined, and come to an utter End. Remember how short my
Time is, wherefore have thou made all Men in vain? What great difference is
between a quick, or more slow motion? When each passes by, and is gone for
ever. Wherefore came I forth into Light, to know Vanity, Sorrow, and Evil, nay,
it seems better, the less abode we make with them. It is well that it passes,
and we must be taken away from it, or we should be wearied therewith.

Even this Knowledge and Tiresomeness does point out something more; for this
is the earnest Expectation of the Creature: Which must be after something more,
and also more excellent than what is had here. It has likewise some, though an
imperfect Apprehension thereof; otherwise there could be no Desire and Waiting.
Thus is enforced that Exhortation of our Savior in Mat. 6. from Verse. 26. to
the End. Therefore take no thought for your Life, what ye shall eat or what ye
shall drink, is not the Life more than Meat; aod so in V. 32. it is inculcated,
for after all these things do the Gentiles seek. They know nothing more, no do
they discern much more in Life than Meat, Drink and Raiment just to receive and
use these things and rise up to play. But seek ye first the Kingdom of God and
his Righteousness, for that is more and of longer Concern, and this Life and
the things thereof is only in order to that. A Space only to prove and see
whether we will therein seek after Immortality and Glory. Sufficient unto the
Day is the Evil thereof. It brings more Evil than Good; so it is not desirable
to live only for living sake, but to do the Work which the Lord has sent us
here to do.

And yet such is the false and contrary Practice of Worldlings, that they are
more concerned hew it goes with this Moment and Inch of Time, than how it shall
be with them throughout the whole Length of Eternity. They are wonderfully
careful and afraid of losing a little Good, and suffering some small Evil at
the present Time, then they are fearful least they come short of the true and
enduring Blessedness, and least they fall into the Damnation of Hell. What
means that greedy and earnest catching at all the Pleasure or Profit that can
be had, and running away from all manner of Evil, without regard to the Means,
whether they be sinful or not? This is no Consideration, or at least no
Hindrance to the doing as they list. Like natural Brute Beasts, they are only
mindful of what is just before them; but regardless of what is to succeed. They
act perversely, and go just contrary to the Command and Counsel of our Lord and
Savior, for they take thought for to morrow, and think themselves never
sufficiently diligent in making Preparation for the Residue of this Life, and
how it shall go with them in the few remaining Days, but they do not stretch
their Care and Provision further, not giving Heed to be received up into the
heavenly Kingdom when all these things shall fail. Nor do they learn and
practice the Righteousness thereof, which would stand in stead: Whereas Meat,
Drink and Raiment are for the Body; but this Body shall at length drop from
them, and they shall have no need thereof.

One would admire how it comes to pass that so much Time and Labor are spent
about the things of this Life, as usually is: When the Meat and Drink are soon
received, and the Raiment is quickly put on: So that there is Time to spare to
mind other things, but they do as it were procrastinate and lengthen it out of
set Purpose. They seek out for superfluous and more than necessary things, and
hope to have this for an Excuse for not minding the one thing needful. Nay, who
have those outward things without their own Care and Labor, and have them
brought to their Hand; yet these do rather consume their precious Time in Sloth
or sinful Pleasures, or hungry Recreations, or vain things. But they are not
employed in the Work of the Lord, nor do they seek after the Pleasures of his
House; nor yet do they contemplate and seek to get an Interest in the Substance
of the things hoped for, which only are true and enduring. They have some Fancy
or seeming Reason for their present Manner of Life. It has a Show of Pleasure,
Ease and Quietness; but the Christian Course seems to them to meet with
Opposition, Trouble, Hardship, and Disturbance. Whereas the former sensibly
comes to nothing, and to the other is promised a great Reward and an exceeding
Weight of Glory. But even now the idle or sinful Life is vexatious or tiresome:
It is accompanied with Restlesness and Dissatisfaction, for the Mind of Man
covets after something more, and also has Regret when he is not conversant
about what he ought. The Mind soars up above these lower things, and though
kept down or turned aside through the Policy and Deceivableness of Satan, yet it
is with Pain and Displeasure. Those many silent Thoughts and Upbraidings of
Spirit, that self-Indignation, the continual Fear and Doubt of Mind, as often
as it considers of God above, or casts a Glimpse toward Eternity and future
Life, there is Horror and strange Amazement. Every one, nay the Worst Sinner or
profane Person does sometimes think of these things: And even who is most sunk
into Earthliness or Ignorance, his Life is continual Weariness and Vexation.
And they are willingly more cumbred with the things of this Life. They do of
set Purpose give way to it and consume the greater Part of their Time herein.
Because worldly Business is a Diversion from that Sorrow and Fear of Soul which
they would otherwise labor under. If we could bring out the several Things and
Passages of their Life we should discover the manifold Misery of Ungodliness
and Disobedience even at this present Time, besides the Wrath of God, which is
now revealed from Heaven, and shall be executed upon the Guilty when the Lord
comes with Ten Thousand of his Saints. But on the other Hand, in the several
Steps of the Christian Warfare there is Contentedness Peace, Hope and
Assurance. It has the Strength and Comfort of God at present, and also
Application of the Promises, which shall be made good and fulfilled hereafter.

The utmost that can be done in this vain Life, which passes away as a Shadow,
is but little; and if we can possibly do any thing for which we may have the
Acceptance of our God, and obtain Good at the latter End, it it is highly worth
our greatest Pains and Labor. At is is better to have it hereafter than now at
present; for (as has been heretofore often observed) every thing had now, does
pass away, but what is to be revealed hereafter, does ever remain. Certainly
they have the best Portion, and make the wisest Choice, who are for the greater
and more durable things, who let the Shadow pass by, but make sure of the
Substance; who are contented to foregoe some things, which may endanger or
lessen from their heavenly Inheritance. Nay, if it be strictly and properly
considered, there is no great Loss or Suffering in this; for though the Means
may be somewhat diminished or taken away, yet our God, through his gracious and
and bountiful Nature, by his wonderful and overruling Providence does supply
what is wanting; and he does nevertheless give the thing it self, for which the
others are esteemed necessary and sought after. Such things are desired in
order to Contentment and present Happiness; and again, we decline others, lest
they should bring on Evil and Misery. Now God (who makes all things to work
together for Good, to them that love and fear him) can, and also does give the
same Contentment without them; and also takes away, or softens the pain when
the nature of such a thing would inflict it.

And further, When we are in the way of certain Duty we have strong Consolation
and Approbation of Mind, as we may know by the direction of God's Word, and
sensibly by the Law written in our own Hearts. But hereby we may know if we do
those Things that are not required, if they have no plain Footstep or Warrant
from the Word; as also, there is a weariness and doubt of Soul. A Man may run
out of Breath in a wrong Road, or in a blind furious Zeal, but in keeping close
and diligent to the Lines of known Duty, there God gives Grace and Glory; the
first to enable, and the other for Encouragement and Recompense. And no good
thing will he withold from them, that always act obediently to his Will.
Indeed we may grow weary in Well-doing, through some Unbelief, or Distrust of
the after Recompense; and also at present we may somewhat fail, and be
discouraged in our Mind, for want of that Success and Event to our Labors,
which we did before expect and desire for. But we are only to put forth his
Grace, and use all the outward means, and then commit the thing to God, that he
may bring it to pass. We may Plant or Water, but then we should Pray, and leave
it to God to give the Increase. Neither is he that Planteth any thing, nor he
that Waters, but God that gives the Increase, 1 Cor. 3 7. He suffers us,
as it were, to labor in vain, and to spend our Strength for naught, and in
vain, that he may cut off all occasion of boasting from our selves, that we
should not ascribe to our selves in any thing as if we did it.

We do greatly err and mistake, in reckoning upon Things being done more
suddenly than they are; for in Planting and Watering, the growth and fruit are
by degrees; nay, it first rots, and sinks deeper, before it rises up to
springing and increase. It may seem quite lost and perished, until it appears
forth visible and great. Cast thy Bread upon the Waters, for thou shall find it
after many days, Eccles. 11. 1. But in the mean while there may be sorrow,
vexation, and murmuring for fear and distrust, lest there should no good come
of it. God sees all things at once, and knows the Things which are not yet, but
will be; he speaks of them before they are, yea, and declares them whilst they
are yet springing forth. He does give us gracious Promises and Assurance, That
there shall be a blessed Effect at last, upon which we may even now Hope and
Rely; notwithstanding contrary things do happen, which may even tempt us to
cast away our confidence, unless we were foretold by him, whom we have all
Reason to believe, That it has a great Recompense of Reward. We do hardly
guess aright at the things before us, as to the very nature and reason of them;
but we know not at all of the things to come; for most commonly they happen
contrary, but always otherwise than we did at first imagine. And whilst we
swell up big and high in expectation, the vexation is yet greater by a
Disappointment. There are many things in common Life, but much more in a
Christian Course, which raise the different Affections of Joy and Sorrow, which
make us now to be lifted up, and then cast down, Psalm. 102. 10. But between
both extremes, and variety of condition, we may rub through, and go on still,
we may have respect unto all God's Statutes, observing all manner of Duty, and
avoid all sin of Omission or Commission, and submit to our God for the Event of
all. Whatever pain, doubt, fear, sorrow, or any other manner of Evil we may
meet with, yet all is such that a Man armed with Grace may endure. For God will
suffer none to be tempted above that he is able. Now for a season (if need be)
ye are in Heaviness through manifold Temptations, That the trial of your Faith
being more precious than of Gold that perishes, might be found unto Praise,
and Honor, and Glory, at the appearing of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1. 6, 7. And so
contrariwise, whatever Comfort or Good we shall receive at any time, we are to
thank our God for it, and to go on more cheerfully and diligently in all
Righteousness.

This is the way to Happiness, which will be sooner thus attained, than it can
be had in pleasure or profit, pride or humor, in activity about unnecessary
things, or by giving way to sloth and ease. And because the Reward shall be
answerable, and proportioned to the work, use thy utmost diligence in the mean
while to abound more in well-doing, and lay up for thy self a greater degree
and foundation of good Works, against the time to come. Cast about, and
consider thoroughly in thy mind, which way thou shall most glorify God, and do
good to Mankind. And when thou have found out, or art directed in the right
manner, then arise up, and be doing thereafter. Remember that thou do serve
and labor for thy God, Whose Reward is with him, and his Work before him, Isa.
40. 11. It shall be recompensed to thee much beyond what thou can do, though
thou should employ in his service, every Hour and Minute of thy Life. Be not
careful, or afraid, how much Happiness thou shall miss of in the mean while, or
what misery thou May involve thy self in, or art liable unto, but trust thy
God, who shall abundantly make up for all. Men may (for there are found those
which actually do) go through the several changes and chances of this mortal
life; and yet they have no such expectation to come. So that we may keep
Innocence, and take heed unto the thing which is right all along; for it will
give peace at the last, which is further consummated in Eternal Glory. We
should not confer with Flesh and Blood, which is for present ease, and shrinks
at the least seeming pain, but immediately do the thing we are called unto.
Neither should we stand to examine the Events and Consequents to our selves,
but resolutely do our Duty, come what will thereof. And whatever ye do, do it
heartily, as to the Lord, and not unto Men, knowing that of the Lord ye shall
receive the Reward of the Inheritance; for ye serve the Lord Christ, Col. 3.
23, 24. In each single Action let the Intention be unto God: Even those things
which we do for one another, may be ordered and stretched up, that we may
always consider how we shall Glorify and Please God hereby. As of Sin the Act
is little and soon passes over, so the Act of Duty is somewhat longer, but may
be performed, and then this also is passed by; but of both the Guilt and
Expectation does stick and remain, the Punishment or Reward are to come. And
also the present sensible Good or Evil, do sooner go away than the Morning Dew,
and signifies nothing at all afterward. So that it cannot be said or
pronounced, What Man is Happy or Miserable, but he is only to be denominated
and found thus, as it shall be with him in the things to come. Envy thou not
the Glory of a Sinner, for thou know not what shall be his End. Neither do
thou Pity and be grieved at the poor and low Estate of God's Faithful People,
for thou do not discern how Graciously he will be pleased to deal with them
at the last. When the Lord comes to rehearse up his People, and to make
Restitution and Dispensation of all things, then this Man shall be pronounced
Blessed and another Accursed, though this last whilst he lived, he counted
himself an Happy Man, and the other's Life was esteemed Madness, and his End
without Honor.

Our Reason and Understanding can fetch in things afar off, and make them seem
all one as if they were near: We can conceive of things Future, as if they were
already Present: That as we know we should do, and as even then we shall verily
and indeed wish we had done. That we should so behave our selves in the midst
of our Trial, as we shall desire we had done when we come to an Account, and it
shall be rendered to every one according to his Deeds. We are upon our Good
Behavior all this mean while. And as it was said to Cain immediately before
his Wicked Fact, so it is told to every one of us, before we enter upon the
Actions of our Life, If thou do well, shall thou not be accepted? and if thou
do not well, Sin lies at the door, Genesis 4. 7. Accordingly from Time to Time,
we are to lay hold of every Opportunity for welldoing, and as carefully avoid
the Occasions of all manner of Evil.

This is repeated over again, for indeed it had need be as often inculcated, as
Moses in the Book of Deuteronomy does repeat over and over again to the
Israelites God's Law, for them to observe and do it. To write the same things
over again unto Good Minds is not Grievous; but to them it is Safe. And though
it may seem nauseous and irksome to the Evil and Ungodly, so it would be but
once to mention what they have no Mind to know, and no Heart to do. All is
comprised in the Observation of God's Law, and it is of Absolute and
Indispensable Necessity, so that it can never be pressed or repeated too much.
We should have it always in our Remembrance; and as it should be written and
ingrafted in us, so it should stir up and be continually sensible in our Minds,
that we may know how to act, and have wherewithal to answer every Temptation,
and drawing aside to Evil; and also have that which would quicken and actually
stir us up unto Good.

The World makes enquiry, and seems to be desirous after Good; and when it is
pointed out, and showed unto them, they will not accept and embrace it: This is
not the sort they would have, or it is too High and Excellent for them, through
Ignorance they do not desire it. They are for abundance of Corn and Wine, or
for Carnal and Sensual Pleasure; but for the Light of God's Countenance, for
that Gladness he puts into the Heart, for Spiritual Joy and Eternal Peace;
These things the Worldly Man knows not, neither does he apprehend the just
Worth and Excellency in them: But a little outward Mirth, in the midst whereof
the Heart is Sorrowful, or sudden Flashes of Rejoicing, which end in Darkness,
this is what he does catch and seek after. A Thousand or Ten thousand repeated
Acts of this Nature, do not make up the True Happiness; for each is
unsatisfactory at the very time, it is interrupted, and all determined at last.
In Truth, None is to be blamed for endeavoring to make his Life as Comfortable
as he can, for passing on these few and evil Days of his Pilgrimage with the
lesser Trouble and Sorrow. But in the mean while great Heed and Care should be
taken, as to the Means, whither Sinful or not; and so whither several parts of
Duty are not left undone upon this Pretext. If we do fulfill all Righteousness,
and walk in all the Commandments of the Lord Blameless; If we do take heed to
our ways, that we Offend or Sin not, in God's Name let us rejoice our selves as
much as we will. If we Sanctify the days of our Feasting, and use our utmost
Watchfulness and Circumspection that we Sin not, nor Curse God in our Hearts,
Job 1. 5. because he does not allow it to be so with us always, then we are to
Praise our God, and we may give way unto Honest Mirth and Cheerfulness: And so
in the other extreme Condition, If in Cold and Nakedness, Hunger and Thirst, we
can Bless our God and be contented, let us trust him further, whither he will
not bring us to True and Enduring Happiness.

Whilst others are busied, and conversant only about the Present, let us look
out to the End: Nay, Let us secure that, and then let the Present take care for
the things of it self. Shall we make it an Article or Doubt, Whither we shall
immediately set upon the keeping of God's Commandments, for fear of losing so
much Pleasure and Ease in the mean while, and subjecting our selves to Pain and
Irksomness. Know we not, that if it were so, our God will abundantly make up
for all by his Recompense at the last, as he does give an Earnest, by the
Sweetness and Comfort we perceive even now: For if we consider that Approbation
of Mind, that strong Consolation and lively Hope, and take in one thing with
another, we have more Good now, than possibly could be attained by any
Variation or Disobedience. It is both agreeable and satisfactory to our Nature,
if we reflect upon it according to Truth, and without its Corruption; for God
who made us, and knows our Frame, has fitted his Laws and Commandments
accordingly. What the Apostle says, I had not known Sin but by the Law, for I
had not known Lust, except the Law had said, Thou shall not Covet, Romans 7. 7.
So in not a much unlike manner it may be applied, That if we did thoroughly know
the very Nature of Sin and Lust, we should not so much give way or consent unto
either; for that which led our Forefathers into the Transgression, is the same
that does entice us at this very day. The Woman saw that the Tree was good for
Food, and that it was pleasant to the Eyes, and a Tree to be desired to make
one Wise, Genesis 3. 6. Here was an Imagination of Good, Pleasure, and of
bettering ones present State; and this prevailed to yield unto the Temptation.
Now if more of each sort of all these three, were to be had by keeping within
that Station and Bounds God has set, then a mere Selfish and Wise Man knows
what he has to do. Nay, there is each of this sort to be had in the other
Trees of the Garden. God has already sufficiently provided for the well-being
of Mankind in the lawful use of those things he has given; and it is known
unto God, and we are to wait his good Pleasure, what he will do yet further for
his Creatures. He gives us all things richly and sufficiently to enjoy, and
hinders from nothing which is really Good and Profitable for us. Nay, Lust and
Coveting is but an Extravagant and Unreasonable Desire, for we had enough
before, and whatever is more is Evil.

If we did instance in the several kinds of Sin, with the way how they did
prevail over Man, we should find that it did proceed from a wrong and false
Imagination of more Good than really is therein; and they make a show of
Happiness which they do not perform. All those Works of the Flesh, recited in
Gal. 5. 19, 20, 21. carry with them a little Pleasure, seeming Good and
Advantage, which are thought necessary to make Man Happy. So Covetousness, with
its several kinds of Injustice and Wrong, do promise Gain and Profit, which
likewise are supposed to contribute unto the same end. The like may be observed
of Pride and Vain Glory, and all other kinds of Evil; they come in to Please
and Gratify, or they are some ways esteemed convenient. Now Happiness is the
End, and more than all these put together; but they are ignorantly and falsely
judged, as several parts to constitute unto the whole, and that each does
conduce somewhat toward it.

Herein may be perceived the Usefulness and Excellency of a right and thorough
Knowledge, for that apprehends the same thing before, which the Man is fully
convinced of afterward by Practice and Experience. If he comes to Repentance
(otherwise he is Damned and Miserable.) This includes hearty Sorrow and Shame
for what is past, and a real unfeigned Resolution to do so no more. Seeing he
now knows it to be as it is, he does really and sincerely wish that he had
never done it, and he is fully resolved not to do so any more. It is truly
said, a Wise Man should never do any thing to repent of it, for he should know
beforehand what would be the evil Consequent of such a thing, and this should
oblige him at first to refrain and not to do it. Now all of us should first
look up, and have respect unto God above, and consider how that we are
Creatures under him, and we should obey him and keep his Commandments, which
extend unto all that we have here to do in this World. And we may thus judge,
either this is reasonable and fit to be done, or it is not. No Man dare or will
deny, that God is to be obeyed, and that presently and at all Times: Neither
can they gainsay, but that his Commandments are Holy, Just and Good; which if a
Man do, he shall even live by them. They are suitable unto and preserve our
Nature, and lead up unto Eternal Life and Blessedness. Now this may be
discerned at first as well as at last. And so he may conclude it both
reasonable, and make it his actual determined Choice to observe them, I have
Sworn, and I will perform it, that I will keep thy Righteous Judgments, Psalm.
119. 106. And if this be done at first, there is no need of Repentance. It is
certainly better to Sin not than to have sinned; for otherwise those many
Commands, Cautions and Directions in Scripture, of abstaining from all
appearance of Evil, would not have been for our Good. So he is in the more
Happy Condition, who has kept himself Innocent all along, according to the
Tenor of Gospel. Righteousness, who never did continue in Sin, and therefore
cannot so properly turn from, or repent of it.

This is the thing which God requires of Man, is well pleased with him now, and
will reward him hereafter: That he should be enlightened, and fully apprehend
God's ways, and also walk in them: That he should make his word the constant
Rule of his Actions, to do thus because of such a Commandment or Direction; and
again to refrain from that which is either Forbidden or Doubtful, or does no
ways tend to God's Glory. In whatever he takes in hand, to have a secret
Respect unto God's Statutes, according to which he will live, and act, and
suffer, that the Lord shall guide him continually, and then be sure to follow
his Guidance If the Man is indeed persuaded that it is better for him thus to
do, he will also sincerely endeavor to do thereafter; for there are so many
things which ^urge to this, that whosoever considers, must act accordingly. In the
several times of Trial and Deliberation, he might thus Reason within himself,
which is better and safer to be done, Had I not better wait on and seek after
the Lord than let it alone? If I should neglect at this Moment, shall I not
hereafter wish that I had not neglected? Will not an Hour and so of the residue
of my Time spent in the Service of God, turn to better account, than if the
same had been lavished away in Sloth or Neglect, impertinent Business or Vain
Pleasures, or in hungry Recreations? And so, would it not be better accepted
with God, if I were governed by his Commandments, than if I did walk after mine
own Thoughts, according to mine own Stubborn Will, or Vain Humor? All that we
have already is from God, and therefore Thankfulness does oblige to as much;
and what we expect further is from him; and then Hope, and a due Preparation
for our selves, do forcibly exhort to Duty.

We are now in an imperfect and wanting Condition, which desires for what is
Perfect and Complete; and of whom should we seek for this, but of the God who
made us, he also has promised, that he will perfect that which concerns us,
Thy Mercy, O Lord, endures for ever: Forsake not the Works of thine own hands,
Psalm. 138. 8. What did move him at first to Create, the same does continue, and
will engage to add yet more, until he has finished the Work in Perfection and
Happiness. But he will be sought unto, and also we must endeavor to please him
before he grant this thing, The Lord is good to them that wait for him, to the
Soul that seeks him, Lam. 3. 25. All the things of this World cannot make a
Man Happy, for they are not satisfactory, nor yet enduring. The first would be
more perceived, if Men were not after the manner of Beasts, transformed into
Sloth and Stupidity, or sunk into gross Darkness and Ignorance: The latter is
sensibly felt by every one. Neither the Pleasures of Sin, nor Profits of
Transgression, nor the seeming Ease or Convenience of Irreligion and
Ungodliness, not each singly, nor yet all put together, can give the true
Happiness; therein is esteemed more Good than really is; and if it were not so
much as imagined, yet even that could not render satisfied and truly Blessed.
Nay contrariwise, Destruction and Misery are in their ways, and the way of
Peace they have not known. It is a Deviation and Wandering from the way of
Salvation and Happiness: It may for a while promise Safety and Pleasure, but
does lead into Danger and Punishment, as we are assured by that God who made
and knows all things.

If such a thing does certainly deprive of more Good, and involve into a
greater Evil, than now it makes a Pretense to bring or hinder from, a Man who
is endued but with common Understanding and Caution for himself, knows what he
has to do, even to decline and avoid that thing as is ordinarily done in
worldly Matters. If you do but stretch this very same Principle of acting a
little further than this present Time, and it will engage to renounce those
very things, which others so greedily catch and seek after. We are but in a
Maze and ignorant Perplexity, whilst we look after, or are swayed by the
Effects and Consequences of things; for we may indeed imagine, but we know not
what they will be; and by vain Surmises and Fears, we may be kept off from
doing Righteous things and what we ought. But let us first mind what is
written, How read thou? And in Simplicity of Soul, and according to the best
of our Knowledge, How understandest thou? And according to what the Lord
Commands or Directs in his Word, so will we speak and do. Showing our selves as
obedient Children, and then let the Lord to do with us as seems him good:
Observing all manner of Duty, come what will thereof, They that know thy Name
will put their Trust in thee, for thou, Lord, have not forsaken them that seek
thee, Psalm. 9. 10. Were we assured of this, and could we fully depend upon it,
we should not use irregular or unlawful means to prevent at first, nor
afterward to be relieved out of our Distresses. Neither should we so much fail
and be discouraged in our Mind; but be sure not to leave off waiting on the
Lord. Did we verily and undoubtedly bel^eve at first what the Lord will perform
at last, with what Cheerfulness and Activity should we go on? But the clear
Manifestation of this is somewhat hidden and concealed from us, to exercise our
Faith and Trust, and to prove our Obedience in the mean while.

We should always act by foregoing Thought, even in the least and more
Inconsiderable Actions of our Life; and at every time have a right Knowledge,
and also an overruling Thought, which should actually incline us to the better
and safer side; That our Hearts may be as the Vineyard of our Lord, which he
will ^ter every Moment with the continued Distillings of his Grace and
Goodness, which may prevent and help against the Suggestions and Imaginations
of Sin and Evil; and it may be thoroughly applied to fulfill thy Statutes, always
even unto the End. If God suffers us sometimes to be in Temptation, we should
constantly discern when we are so; and have a Thought continually, whereby we
may overcome, and not be led away by it. If we can come off Conquerors at one
time, why not at another, and so a third; and thus pass through the several
Seasons of Trial. The thing is possible, and that Satisfaction of Mind of
resisting the Temptation is much greater than the Pleasure would have been in
yielding unto it. By what Thought of Good thou did prevail at one time, thou
may likewise at another; and in all the Questions and Doubts of Mind, thou
may have still what shall determine thee to God and Duty. When thou do well
and rightly, Thank thy God for it, and keep this still in the Imagination of
thy Heart, that it may again help to serve in time of Need and Trial; having
always in Mind a Divine overruling Thought, which may actually persuade it
against all manner of Temptation, Lust or Hindrance.

The Moralist observes, that it is better to have a few good Precepts of Life
for a Man to constantly act by, than a great multitude of them; for those are
more easily retained in Mind, whereas a Multiplicity does confound or perplex,
or we let them slip, or each has not so forcible a Constraint over us. And
indeed a few right Principles of Good, which are kept continually and pondered
in the Heart, which are general and extend to our several Actions, and will
indeed engage our Practice accordingly: These will more help to our Salvation,
than all the Variety of Knowledge; which last may indeed furnish the
Understanding, but the practical part does exercise unto Godliness, and
preserves the patient Continuance in well-doing. What keeps in Obedience, and
maintains Good Works, will be found more Useful and Beneficial to Mankind than
any other thing, However it be highly esteemed amongst Men, and this is
lessened and despised, for it obtains the greater Good, and serves to the more
excellent End.

The great Matter is to rightly understand every tittle of our Duty now that we
may do it, and also the manner of Distribution, how it shall be rendered to
every one according to his Work at the end of things, that we may not lose any
future Reward for the present Pleasures of Sin or Gains of Unrighteousness, or
by any Omission of what we should do. To know the utmost in all things present,
and have such a lively Faith in things to come, as to be persuaded of them, and
embrace them, Heb. 11. 13. and also act in pursuance after them. We are as much
assured as that we now live, and we have the same certainty as of the things we
see, handle and converse withal, that God has provided better things for us;
even so very great and enduring, that it is not possible for us little and
mortal Creatures to conceive. Nay, the little member of the Tongue, which
boasts of great things, cannot utter them forth to the very extent and reality
as they are; and they being reserved in God's hand and disposal, according to
his good Word and precious Promises, wherefore we labor to the utmost that we
may be accepted of him. The more we know of our present weak, little, imperfect
and miserable Condition here in the Body, it does press us more urgently so to
have our Conversation in this World, that it may be changed into the contrary
and desirable Qualities of Good and Perfection. Our manifold Affliction does
make us the more earnestly desire (and that is in vain unless we use the means
accordingly) that we may come to that place where we shall be comforted for the
evil things we had here. Every thing we meet withal, does carry Instruction and
Exhortation, if we had that Heavenly and Spiritual Art to observe and improve
them accordingly. That we may be always put in remembrance of and quickened in
our Duty. That whilst we are among the things here below, we may refer them all
upwards. Though our Body is confined to this place, yet our Spirit conceives as
wide as the vast Air. The Mind conceives and enters within the Vail, and is
always thinking against the time she shall fly out hence, how she may secure
her Rest there: If I may by any means attain to the Mansions above. I am
contented to act or suffer any thing, so I may be received up into Abraham's
Bosom. And he saw that Rest was good, and the Land that it was pleasant, Genesis
49. 15. Seeing that there is such an exceeding Good set before us, show us any
way that we may come at it. What shall I do to be Saved? I am for looking out
whether there is any thing more: And I am still for giving Diligence, how I may
make my Calling and Election more sure; for such an infinite and eternal Good
cannot possibly be made too sure of; and this should stir up all Labor,
Earnestness and Care, till we be actually invested therewith. Be Sober, be
Vigilant, for your Adversary the Devil walks about, seeking whom he may
devour. He watches for an Opportunity to turn you aside, and if possible, to
deprive you of your Acceptance and Reward, but however of such a part and
degree thereof, that you may lose somewhat of the Things you have wrought, 2
John 8. and so you miss of that fullness of Reward, which otherwise you might
have been a partaker thereof. And therefore know and make void his Devices,
that you may be nothing hindered or deceived by him. There is that in the
Christian Life, which will exercise all our Time and Labor. As Servants are
employed all the day in the Work of their Master, and as a Maid does
continually attend upon the Business of her Mistress, so we are to wait on the
Lord all the day, Psalm. 25. 5. and to be in the fear of the Lord all the day
long, Prove. 23. 17. When the Child Jesus was carefully sought by his Parents
according to the Flesh, he replies to their Admiration, Wist ye not that I must
be about my Fathers business, Luke 2. 49. and in another place he says, I have
Meat to eat that ye know not of, John 4. 32. And when they understood not the
Saying, he explains it, My Meat is to do the Will of him that sent me, and to
finish his Work, Verse 34. So likewise as we have him for our Lord, we are to
obey his Will; and as we have him for our Example, we are to do as he did; as
he laid the Foundation, so we are to build thereon: As Jesus Christ himself
does say, in reference to him who is the Great Lord over all, My God and your
God, My Father and your Father: So likewise he has committed to every one of
us as Servants and Children some work to do, for the Glory of our Master and
Father which is in Heaven. The great King has committed to every one of us,
some Gifts and Talents to be occupied in the mean while, till he shall come to
require an Account. Obedience to his Laws, and Improvement of our Grace and
Knowledge to the utmost Advantage, will take up what Time and Leisure we have
here, if it were more than rea^ly it is: To keep the Heart with all Diligence,
To receive all God's Words into it, To have them appear forth and be sensible,
that the Man may always do accordingly; To bring them forth for the Edifying
and Instruction of others: To grow in Grace and Knowledge, till the Man of God
is thoroughly furnished for every Good Word and Work, and many other things of
like nature will take up that space here on Earth, which is lent unto Man to
understand and seek after his God. And the time thus expended will turn to
better account than any thing which can be thought of or named under the Sun.

Make thou thy Servant to delight in that which is Good. Which is accordingly
granted by Custom and Continuance in the same. That Self-sufficiency and
Contentedness does arise from God and Duty. The Meditation of him is Sweet, and
there is Joy and Satisfaction in doing his Will. So that the Man who is
exercised therein, does not envy nor is troubled for the seeming Prosperous
Condition of others; but he is rather grieved that they also do not come, and
taste and see that the Lord is Good: Blessed is the Man that trusts in him,
Psalm. 34. 8. Our selves (the Lord is Witness, who knows all that is in the
Hearts of all the Children of Men are chiefly grieved because People do always
err in their Heart, Heb. 3. 10. That whilst they desire and seek for it in
every thing besides, they will not be persuaded nor trust accordingly, that
this Happiness is to be had in God only; That they will not come over to
partake of his Goodness. When they have at any time right inclinations and
dispositions to Obedience, this one thing is needful, that they would but
continue the same, O that there was such an Heart in them that they would fear
me and keep all my Commandments always, that it may be well with them, and with
their Children for ever, Deuteronomy. 5. 19. To keep all his Commandments always does
begin their Happiness here, which is continued as long as they are on this
Earth; it is derived down to their Posterity, and is for ever consummated in
the Heavens.

This seems to be a plain and positive Assertion of the Holy Ghost, that it
shall be well with Mankind to keep all his Commandments always. But it is
contrary to our Thoughts, for we often think it expedient to break and not to
give heed unto them; but yet God is True, tho every Man is Wicked and
Disobedient. What he has said, he will perform; and it shall be fulfilled, tho
we are apt to distrust and Murmur. Those Irregular thoughts and our other Sins
do hinder that it is not so well with us, as it would be otherwise. If we did
wait on th Lord and keep his way, Psalm. 37. 34. Do his will and Trust in him at
all times, Psalm. 62. 8. Believe in him without wavering and doubt, how
contentedly and cheerfully might we go on in the execution of those things he
does command us? If we did resolutely and vigorously put forth, using the right
and good means, we might behold Satan falling from Heaven as Lightning, and the
Spirits would be subject unto us. This would be no small Comfort, for they do
hinder and defeat our good Purposes. But then we should further rejoice that
our Names are written in Heaven, That we are Servants of Almighty God, That we
fulfill all his will and do his pleasure. What pleases our God to command or
direct us in that we are likewise pleased to do. when we have a frame and
temper of Spirit Subject to his Will, when our Hearts are once conformed to his
Word and Commandments, we may serve him with joyfulness and gladness of mind.
When we consider diligently what he does already give and provide for us. When
we believe firmly what he has further promised, when we observe narrowly the
secret and hidden ways of his overruling Providence, how that all things so
work that we may just perform our Duty and be comforted in the mean while: So
that it is well and better with us, than with them who flourish and increase
most in worldly Goods. May we not more surely rely upon God's infallible Word
that it shall be well with us, than the vain and deceitful Promises of others,
or our own Imaginations in our own Designs and Enterprises, for we know by
experience that we are often beguiled and mistaken as to both; but the Lord
never said to the House of Jacob, Seek ye my face in vain. Neither is he
wanting (as some are apt to doubt) to make good his Promises at the present
time. But they do err in misapprehending of them; for the great and precious
Promises are yet a far off. And now the Divine Goodness is only engaged so far
as to give us all things pertaining to Life and Godliness, to preserve Health
and Strength of Body; and he puts Grace and Consolation into the Soul that we
may Perform. And if we are at any time cast down, yet we should not then be so
discouraged as to neglect utterly and leave from Duty. In the name of God let
us go on and take whatever we shall meet withal, for the time is short and
hasteneth away. VVnither we Rejoice or Rejoice not, whether we Laugh or Mourn,
whether we are in good plight and steadfastness of Mind, or are heavy and cast
down, It all goes on and we fly away. And whatever is done here it is for
Eternity. Either it passes into Condemnation, or it makes way for Repentance.
There is one Event to him that Sacrifices or him that Sacrifices not, and
this is found so by daily Experience. But the same word of Truth says, That we
must appear before the Judgment Seat of Chist to receive for the things we have
done whether they be Good or Evil. It is certain that the Lord God of
Recompenses shall surely requite, Jer. 51. 56. And this will much exceed both
as to the delightful or tormenting Nature, whatever is esteemed so here. The
Acts are suddenly over, and so the Joy or Sorrow of of them is suddenly slipped
by. And indeed it is strange that a reasonable Creature should be so much
concerned as to that fugitive thing of Joy or Sorrow; but his care and
solicitation should be to what it tends at last. Nothing is so good as to be
truly desirable, and nothing is so bad but what may be endured. And therefore
the first is not to be eagerly catched after, but to be carefully avoided if it
should lead and beguile into Misery; and likewise the other may be chosen and
submitted unto if it makes for and increases our Crown and Reward. I mean as to
the Delights and Pleasures of Sin, so of the seeming pain and trouble of Duty.
The first are nevertheless to be abstained from, the others to be willingly
undertaken if they help unto good in the latter end. And tho this may seem
harsh and uncouth at first, yet it is both Practicable and easy to him who is
exercised therein. It is thus by custom and continuance, and afterward it
grows up into Delight and sincere Satisfaction. Notwithstanding all vain fears
and surmises, anxious care or sinful distrust, yet by thus doing he shall have
more Happiness, yea, and be sensible of less Misery even as to this present
time, than possibly the one can be had or the other avoided by all Irreligion,
or the pretended wisdom and caution of any Disobedience.

Much more might be said as to this Point. But as the truth may be cleared, so
again the force and persuasion thereof may be lost by multiplicity of words,
and therefore it is convenient to add no more upon this particular Head of
Discourse, especially there having been so much demonstrated in the forecited
Book of Happiness, and as to the several Heads of Good and Evil there treated
of, so that he who will not perceive nor be convinced by what has been already
said, neither would he be persuaded if ten thousand words were more added to
the same purpose.

CHAP. V. Herein sundry Things are written against them who will not be
persuaded by, nor live according to Words; and also against following the
Multitude.
BUT why do I mention this? In vain is the Pen of the Writer or the Tongue of
the Speaker; for some obstinate and stubborn Souls do therefore refuse it. They
will not be tied and confined to live according to Words; either they will be
despisers or stubborn, not to mind at all, or practice just contrary, or
otherwise.

Indeed one would admire by what kinds of method Satan's Kingdom does stand; by
what slender Threads he holds Men Captive at his will; for do but once examine
and touch them, and they will fall and snap asunder. Those Imaginations which
he puts into the Hearts of Men and Women, and thereby works in them with all
deceiveableness; yet when they are once known they are presently confuted. The
falsehood and danger of them are so clearly laid open that themselves may see
it; and so they need not miscarry through all his Delusions, if they would but
receive the knowledge of the Truth that they might be Saved.

Amongst the several things which Satan, Who deceives the whole World, Rev. 12.
9. does suggest, and each Man keeps close in the deep of his Heart. That
aforementioned is a common and generally received Imagination, which they hug
and hold fast! And to confirm them the more therein, they will have a seeming
excuse for it, because so many go about troubling Christians with Words, and
there is such a multitude of words in the World, such hold it the better way
once for all to reject them, and not to be limited or confined to live
according to Words. But they should do well in the first place, to consider
what it is they thus set at naught and cast off even what they shall not
prosper nor be blessed in, Their root shall be as rottenness, and their blossom
shall go up as dust, because they have cast away the Law of the Lord of Hosts,
and despised the word of the holy one of Israel, Isa. 5. 24. These are the
words which they will not be guided by, nor give heed unto. They refuse
obedience and subjection unto Almighty God, just like their fore Fathers, A
stubborn and rebellious Generation that kept not the Covenant of God and
refused towalk in his Law, Psalm. 78. 10. They rebelled against the words of God
and contemned the Counsel of the most High, Psalm 107. 111. Now these words of
God are contained in Scripture, which is his Statute-Book for his government of
the World. All Scripture is given by Inspiration of God, 2 Timothy 3. 16. As says
another Apostle, For the Prophecy came not in old time by the will of Man, but
holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 1. 21. At
this the People are so impatient and will not be governed by it, which is
downright Disobedience and manifest Sin, and shall receive a due Punishment
thereof; for Sin is the transgression of the Law, either going over and beyond
it, or doing otherwise than that has prescribed, or not doing what that has
enjoined. So that those stubborn Souls who will not live according to Words,
are convinced as transgressors and offenders of the Law of the most high God,
and they shall be dealt with accordingly, for now they are under the Threatening
and Curse, and they shall hereafter be sensible of the Punishment and Misery.
Who is he that says, he will not obey the Law of God? If any should do so as
to the Laws of the King and our Country, judgment would be executed upon him of
Death or Banishment, or loss of Liberty or Member, according to the several
sorts of Punishment among us. And albeit our God does keep Silence for a while,
and does not execute Sentence speedily upon the Sons of Men, yet it will be far
worse with them who shall thus behave themselves toward the great King of all
the Earth, the Lord God Almighty. It is near the same thing whether they speak
out with a loud voice, or say so in their Heart, or practice it in their Life
and Manners, that They will not have God to reign over them. see Luke 19. 14.
Who set themselves against the Lord and against his Anointed, saying, Let us
break their bands asunder and cast away their Cords from us, Psalm. 2. 2, 3. For
they will not be holden in by invisible Restraints, nor be kept away from their
own doings by sense of any Divine Law and Obligation. Our lips are our own, who
is Lord over us? Psalm. 12. 4 But those who think and act after this manner are
the worst sort of Sinners, who do presumptuously and sin with an high Hand. Few
will own as much, though more do so.

The general course of Transgression is by way of Excuse and Delusion, and
these do take up the forementioned Plea, That because of the multitude of
Words, and the falsehood, Vanity and Evil of many of them, therefore they do not
live according to Words. But as the Apostle says, There are it may be so many
kinds of Voices in the World, and none of them is without signification, 1 Cor.
14. 10. So a Word is but as it were a Voice expressed and articulated. And
every word (if it be proper and taken singly) is significative, but when they
are connected together in a Sentence, and are to show forth the sense and
meaning of somewhat, then they are to be judged of and discerned. There is
Truth and Fulshood, right Words and wrong. But we should in no wise reject the
Truth and Right, because there are of the other worse sort, for if we do that,
we certainly run into the other; and so out of a show to avoid Falsehood and
Wrong, it is so managed by the cunning delusion of Satan, that we do hereby
fall into it. The World and all the things we have to do with here are made up
of Intermixture and Contraries, where is Right and Wrong, Good and Evil, Truth
and Falsehood, Apparent and Real: So that if we have not the one, we must have
the other. If we have not the better we shall meet with the worse. And
therefore if we would indeed have the better we must know and choose it
accordingly; but not despise and set at naught the more excellent things; for
this is submitting unto the worse. According hereunto the Wisdom of God
teaches, If thou shall learn to put a difference between the Holy and
Profane, the Clean and the Unclean, then shall ye be meet to come into mine
House. Such shall be meet to partake of the Inheritance with the Saints in
Light, who can thus seek out and discern things in this place of Darkness. They
shall be fit for Heaven who can and also do escape the Corruption that is in
the World through Lust, and thus order their Conversation aright here on Earth.
The Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a Net that was cast into the Sea, and
gathered of every kind, which when it was full they drew to shore and sat down,
and gathered the good into Vessels, but cast the bad away, Matt. 13. 47, 48.
And so whatever thoughts arise or are suggested to our mind, we are to
entertain and nourish the Good, but to extinguish, cast forth and not admit the
Evil. In like manner it should be of the words we hear or read; we are to
gather and receive the good words into our Hearts, but to cast the bad away.
The Wheat is to be gathered and laid up in the Treasure of our Heart, but the
Chaff is to be blown away. Knowledge and Truth are to be sought after and
received; but Imagination and Falsehood are to be thrown out. They are both
mixed together; for as by Learning and by right Consequences we come to the
knowledge of the Truth, so a false and deceitful kind of Reasoning will present
it self, and fallacious and mistaken Consequences will arise through the
Sephistry of Satan and his Instruments, which we are likewise to discern before
we pronounce Judgment, and try before we Believe. Now every Man has either the
right and true Promises or others which are not: And because all People pretend
unto and would have the first through Pride and Self-conceit, they mistake
which they have already for them, and so they will have no more nor better. The
fear of the Lord is the beginning of Knowledge, but Fools despise Wisdom and
Instruction, Prove. 1. 7. When our Heart and Understanding is first lifted up
toward God, and then looks down and sees things as he sees them; which must be
in their very Nature; for certainly he knows them who made and Established
them. When the Apprehensive Faculty is enlightened from above and endued with
that which comes down from the Father of Lights, we do first know and consider
of the Great God over all, and then how all other things were Created by him,
but now they are under him to Govern and Rule according to his good Pleasure,
both the things in Heaven, the things in the Earth, and the things under the
Earth.

Some have not the knowledge of God; I speak this to your Shame, 1 Cor. 15. 34.
Neither have they the understanding of his Law, this is to their worse
deserving. And whatever they pretend unto others or seem to themselves to know,
it is separated from them both. That is, they discern somewhat of the Creatures
without the Creator. And because they understand not his Law, neither do they
perceive that Obligation they are under, and the true connection of things one
to another. So they are destitute of the true and useful Knowledge, and in the
Language of the Holy Ghost, they are direct Fools Understand, ye Brutish among
the People and ye Fools, when will ye be wise? Psalm. 94. 8. Which it is
impossible they should be, as long as they despise and reject the means of
Being so. What is real Wisdom and Instruction, may seem to them as Folly and
Impertinency; when that indeed is so with which they please and content
themselves. So that Word does pronounce which is to Judge and determine of
every Man's State and Condition, and according to which he is to receive.

We are but Creatures upon Trial, and in that same word it is set down how God
will be pleased to deal and add further with every one of us. So that tho our
different Thoughts and Apprehensions do not signify much as to one another,
yet we must give Account to that God with whom we have to do, who is Judge of
all Men and of all Things; and he has expressly foretold us that we shall
receive according to the Good or Evil we have done. And tho in this wicked
corrupt World they call Evil Good and Good Evil, Isa. 5. 20. Because they have
the Multitude and Fashion to bear them along with it, yet God is Judge himself,
Psalm. 50. 6. Who will sweep away the Refuge of Lies, Isa. 28. 17. and adjust
all things according to Righteousness and Truth. If Men do at present contemn
and refuse what he does command and esteem of; and again they do honor and
seek after what he has forbidden and is an Abomination in his Sight. But God's
Thoughts are not as our Thoughts, and his ways are not as our ways. He is not
beholding to his Creatures. He is great and highly Exalted; And what are a
parcel of Worms of the Earth unto him? But yet themselves shall know and feel
what they get by this their opposition and contrariety to their Maker. If there
was not Stubbornness and Rebellion in their hearts they might understand. For
as the Eye does discern Light from Darkness, and the Taste does perceive Sweet
from Bitter: So likewise in this diversity of things the Soul of Man can
discern between Good and Evil, Truth and Falsehood, Wisdom and Folly. Every
Scribe that is instructed into the Kingdom of God, is like an Householder who
brings out of his Treasure things New and Old. Both sorts are wholesome and
good, which were first received in and he produces forth upon occasion.
Therefore shall ye lay up these my words in your Heart and your Soul, Deuteronomy. 11.
18. He means the words of the Spirit of God and of Truth. The greater number
whereof the Mind is furnished withal, so much the better; That as the desire of
the Righteous is only good, Prove. 11. 13. Let him sincerely and diligently
endeavor that all the thoughts of his Heart may be good, true and
significative at all times, thereby shutting out Evil, Falsehood and Vanity. A
good Man out of the good treasure of the Heart brings forth good things,
Matt. 12. 35. which may spring up into suitable Words and Actions. Sanctify
them through thy Truth, thy Word is Truth, John 17. 17. And People may discern
what is rightly opened and alleged, what is necessarily inferred from this
Word of Truth, for that also is true and will be fulfilled.

And tho many false Christ's and false Prophets and Deceivers, have and are gone
out into the World, as this same Word of Truth has foretold, and it has been
verified by the experience of every Age, yet they deluded more by their Signs
and Wonders, by their forged Miracles and lying Legends (as thereby has
increased the Roman Church) more than by their Doctrine. For that of our Savior
is Remarkable, If it were possible they shall deceive the very Elect, Matt. 24.
24. But it is not possible to deceive them, for we have a standing Word which
is as a Rule or Touchstone, to try the Doctrins whether they be of Men or no;
and by setting our Consciences in the sight of God, and by the Spirit he has
given us we can search out and know the hidden things of Dishonesty, and the
practice of those who handle the Word of God Deceitfully. But when the Truth is
manifested, it will appear so to us. For great heed is to be taken lest under
the pretense of avoiding Deceivers we do refuse and turn away from him that
speaks from Heaven, and so we shall not escape, Heb. 12. 25. But be in danger
to be excluded from thence. For this slanderous Report and false Imputation of
a Deceiver was fastened on our Savior Jesus Christ, Matt. 27. 63. and his
chosen Prophet, Jer. 20. 7. and his Apostles, 2 Cor. 6. 8. and upon almost all
faithful Preachers and Writers ever since. Such is the Subtlety of Satan and
his Instruments, by which he deceives the Nations, That he will first throw
out that Reproach and Calumny falsely on others, to ward off divert and turn
aside that Imputation which truly falls back upon himself. Who are Deceivers
indeed, they will call those so who teach the way of God in Truth. For these
last being obliged in the course of their Ministry to lay open every thing that
helps forward the Salvation of Mankind and to hinder their Destruction as much
as possible, they must also herein be like their great Master, as to give a
caution to People to take heed what they hear, and to beware of those who are
Men-pleasers more than the Servants of Christ. Nay, we must admonish of every
thing which dishonours God and brings danger unto Men, as unfaithful Teachers
do both. But these again through Pride and unwillingness to be Reformed, seeing
they hate Instruction, Psalm. 50. 17. will endeavor to stop the way against the
true handlers of the Word of God; for the former sort being secretly conscious
of what may be proved and manifested against themselves, they will try to be
beforehand and falsely accuse or surmise such to be guilty of that, which is
truly their own Sin and Fault. This is one cause of that Reproach which has
fallen on God's holy Prophets and People since the World began. As also it
shows the perverseness and Disobedience of Mankind that they will as it were,
Reply against God, Romans 9. 20. In the Margin it is Answerest again and
disputest with God, which is to resist his will, and it is a token of an
unmannerly, proud and disobedient Servant. When they break his Laws and God
tells them thereof by his Word and Spirit, which he sends forth through some
of their Fellow Creatures, yet they are angry thereat and will retort upon
them. Again, they have a mind to continue and go on still in Disobedience: But
this telling them is a kind of stop and interruption which they do not like,
and so they had rather remain Disobedient, and have this for an excuse that
they did not know it. They would willingly be forgiven by God, yet what they do
in this manner is a further Sin and Provocation. But God will search it out
(though we cannot so particularly and exactly discover it) for he knows the
very Secrets of the Heart. Who is wise and he shall understand these things,
Prudent and he shall know them; for the ways of the Lord are right, and the
Just shall walk in them, but the Transgressors shall fall therein, Hos. 14. 19.
The Wise and Prudent know the difference between vain words, Exodus 5. 9.
(those there were not so tho a Proud, Ignorant and Ungodly Pharaoh did call
them so) and the words of Truth and Duty; the Wise and Prudent know the
difference between what words pertain to real Instruction, and what words are
of empty Speculation; what serve unto Godliness, or tend unto vain Jangling;
what is good unto the use of Edifying, or ministers only unto Idleness and
Vanity.

But Sinners do contrariwise in all these. They choose and are employed in the
worse, instead of the better. And though they make their boast not to regard
nor live by Words, yet they are acted by Thoughts; which Thoughts are made up
of Evil and Vanity, Falsehood and Folly. And even all their Thoughts might be
uttered and written in Words as themselves know what they think, and by what
they are guided, which they could speak forth or set down, and then they become
words. But if these did appear in like manner, how ridiculous and foolish and
vain would they be? Destroy thou them, O God. let them fall by their own
Counsels: Cast them out in the multitude of their Transgressions, for they have
rebelled against thee, Psalm. 5. 10. Which is accordingly fulfilled, for they go
on in their own Counsels till they fall and are Destroyed, and they are
entangled in the multitude of their Transgressions till they actually drop into
Punishment and Misery. The Holy Ghost calls them a Rebellious People, which
walks in a way that is not good after their own Thoughts, Isa. 65. 2.

This is the Question and Controversy which the Lord has with the Inhabitants
of the Earth, whether they shall do according to his revealed Will and
Commandment, or go after their own Thoughts. Indeed they are for the last
because it has a show of Pride, Humor and Convenience; but this is their
Reward and utmost they will have, for it will never attain to any real and
lasting Good. And when a single Worm of the Earth shall prefer and follow his
own will against that of the great Lord of the World, it does Provoke the Lord
to Anger conninually, Isa. 65. 3. As if their own Thoughts were better than
God's Thoughts. They will strive for Masterdom and have their own Imaginations
and Sayings above the Will and Commandment of God. This is plain Walking
contrary to him, to which is threatened that he will bring seven times more
Plagues upon them according to thiir Sins, Lev. 26. 21. And again it is further
added, Then I will walk contrary also unto you in Fury, and I even I, will
chastise you seven times for your Sins, Verse 28. If ye walk contrary, etc.
Their manner of doing is expressed in the Present Tense, For now is the time of
their Trial, but how God will deal with them is Future, for it shall be rendered
accordingly. As also to prove in the mean while whether they will be reformed
from their Sin and Iniquity, and do according to his Law.

Indeed all People do one or the other. Either they live according to what is
contained or directed in the word God, or according to what is thought and
Imagined in the Hearts of Men. Which (as aforesaid) might be expressed forth
in words, so it is near the same thing. Or the Men are led by the Temptations
and Suggestions of Satan, which also as they appear to the Mind in an
intelligible manner, so they might be spoken forth. But none will plead
outwardly for them; and therefore the Question in short turns upon this Point,
Whether we shall go according to Divine or Human Words; for all People High
and Low, Rich and Poor, are guided continually by one or the other. Which of
the twain is our bounden Duty, and which is the best and also which is the
wisest way for the attainment of Good and Happiness that has been largely
before demonstrated. There is Line upin Line, Line upon Line, Precept upon
Precept, Precept upon Precept. Here a little and there a little, Isa. 21. 10.
throughout the whole Book of God. And yet more in quantity and number of words
has been delivered from the Tongue and Pen of his Saints of the several
Generations since the World began. So much has been said and done to make this
appear unto the ungodly and disobedient in order to restrain them from the
Error of their ways, that if it was all written, (as indeed a great deal
thereof is) I suppose that a Man's whole Life would not suffice to Read it.
Nay, they seem to reject it because of that seeming multitude of words touching
this Matter, yet themselves go according to their own Thoughts, though these
are more than what do occurs to their Mind concerning Goodness and Duty. They
are acted and led by the multitude of their own Thoughts, and they do not
refuse to go according to them for all their vast number. Like Brute Beasts
made to be taken and destroyed; They follow the Herd not knowing whether they
go, for they perceive not when they are pressing on to be Killed and Destroyed.
And there are also to be found too many called Reasonable Creatures, who remain
altogether as Ignorant, when they are in the way to Death and Hell. The way of
Ungodliness and Sin leads directly to it; and yet too many continue therein
without fear. They have the Multitude and Fashion on their side, and they are
for doing what the most do, especially those of the Richer sort: They are for
going according to the course of the World, though they should be condemned
with the World, 1 Cor. 11. 32. And they think it good to swim with the Stream,
not knowing that it tends to the bottomless Pit.

Satan, who deceives the whole World, Rev. 12. 9. has found out this device
to blind them in his and their own Deceivings (so called 2 Pet. 2. 13.) For
they imagine that they do not Err, because they have so many of their side;
however they shall fare as well as the most, and they shall be in the same
condition with others according to whom they do in this present World. To do as
others do is one Thought by which the Men of this World act; and it is here
expressed forth in words: So it is the same principle of Action which they hold
unto, tho it be not spoken out or written. But to do barely as others do
without regard had to Good or Evil, Duty or Sin, to what is Commanded or what
is Forbidden, is Transgression and Folly now which ends in Punishment and
Misery hereafter. Alas! such do not consider there is a great God over all, who
now looks from Heaven upon all the Inhabitants of the Earth, and considers
all their Works; who has given a Law for them to live by, and he is to judge
and render to every Man according to his Deeds.

If People did consider thoroughly, and would do acccording to the Most, they
should do according to God's Will, for himself is more than all the Generations
of Mankind, and so more than all that are now living. He is more than ten
thousand times ten thousand kind of Creatures, which are any where in the
World, above the Firmament, or in the vast and spacious Air, in the habitable
parts of the Earth, or any where underneath and without the visible World; for
all things were created by him, whether Visible or Invisible, Thrones or
Dominions, Principalities and Powers. Thy Will be done, in Earth as it is in
Heaven, Matt. 6. 10. So it is more Universally as Heaven is greater than Earth,
which is but a part and next to nothing. The Innumerable Company of Angels,
Heb. 12. 22. Those many sorts of Creatures, whether Animate or Inanimate; Those
ten thousand of his Saints, whereof Enoch prophesies, Jude 14. The hundred and
forty four thousand of all the Tribes of the Children of Israel, and that
great Multitude, which no Man could number of all Nations and Kindreds, and
People and Tongues, Rev. 7. 4, 9. All these obey and fulfill the Word of God,
and they do his Pleasure. And those are many more than all those Rebels now
living upon the Earth, or those Generations of sinful Men since the World
began, Whom the Lord has carried away as with a Flood, Psalm. 90. 5. to be
delivered over to the Lake of filth and stink, or like the Grass which in the
Evening is cut down and withers, Verse 6. and is to be burnt with
unquenchable Fire. And so it will be of all those which are yet to succeed,
until there be an End made of Transgression, and the Sinners be consumed out of
the Earth, and the Wicked be no more, Psalm. 104. 35.

A little after the Creation All Flesh had corrupted its way upon the Earth,
Genesis 6. 12. which caused the Flood, whereby the World that then was, being
over-flowed with Water perished. But the Heavens and the Earth which are now,
by the same Word are kept in store, reserved unto Fire against the Day of
Judgment, and Perdition of Ungodly Men, 2 Pet. 3. 6, 7. As certainly as the
Flood came upon those in the days of Noah, so certainly shall the whole World
be consumed by Fire. The Punishment and Vengeance of God are executed by Fire
and Water, which do drown and consume many as well as few. And Death that
consigns them over unto it, has reigned from Adam ever since. Hell has
enlarged her self and opened her mouth without measure; and their Glory, and
their Multitude, and their Pomp, and he that rejoices shall descend into it,
Isa. 5. 14. which has been and continues unto this day to be fulfilled. So it
is a vain Shelter and foolish Safety, to think to escape with the Many, for God
can and does as easily deal with them as with few. We sensibly know, that
within seventy or eighty Years, within the compass of the Age of a Man, he does
quite empty the Earth of all its Inhabitants, and causes others to spring up
in their stead; whom again he takes away in his own order. And though now they
assemble themselves in Companies to commit Wickedness, and gather by Troops to
do Mischief; Yet they drop away one by one into the Bars of the Pit, and he
scatters them that they fall severally, until they all die away and come to
nothing. He does now give his express Command by his Servant Moses, Thou shall
not follow a Multitude to do Evil, Exodus 23. 2. and forewarns us by the Son of
his Love, whom he sent to Redeem and Preserve us from it: Wide is the Gate, and
Broad is the Way, which leads unto Destruction, and many there be which go in
thereat, Matt. 7. 13. So that who is for being amongst the Multitude, He will
be amongst them also, and so he will miss of that narrow way which leads unto
Life. Nor will he be one of those few who find it.

Indeed there is an Inclination in Man to do as the rest of his Brethren do,
but then he has some seeming Reason for it, or he is void of Understanding as
to have no set and inward Principle of Action; and then he can just conceive
what others do, and order himself to do according. Example is a sensible and
visible thing, and thereupon it has such a strong Prevalency over most; and it
is yet stronger over those who know not what it is to live by Faith, nor act by
hope of unseen things. But they are most led on thereby, who least think within
themselves. A Multitude is made up of several distinct Persons, which conspire
in one thing or near the same. But it was received of one or few before it is
made known unto and embraced by many, and then the like Disadvantage lay
against it, as now they conceive on the other side. But it is said now, it has
the more general Acceptance. Why, the most do swallow it without Examination.
And who admit thereof, must have some Rule. Then which God has given none
other unto Men besides his Word, which is to try Good and Evil, Duty and
Transgression, as also what may be discerned from the Truth and Reality of
things. There is no other way under Heaven, whereby we may be Happy, but this
only.

Now every one desires to be Happy, that is, To enjoy what Good he can, and to
avoid Evil. Even those have that Wish and Intention who turn aside every one to
his own Way. Who live as their Neighbors and Acquaintance, and as the rest of
the World do; why this has a show of Peace and Good Will, and they do hereby
avoid the odious thing of Singularity, and the Irksomness of Reproach. But they
should do well to consider in the first place, of Glory to God in the Highest.
How is that annexed to their kind of Peace on Earth, and Good Will toward Men.
Their Hearts should be lifted up with Angels and the Heavenly Host toward him,
who sits above and remains King for ever, And how is he honored by such a
kind of Life as the Inhabitants of the Earth lead, which is made up of
Forgetfulness of their Maker, Sin and Sloth. How are his Statutes kept and his
Laws observed? Are Peace and Truth met together as in the days of Hezekiah? see
Isa. 39. 8. Or is it like the Hills of the Robbers, the Assemblies of the
Ungodly and Wicked, an Agreement together to preserve their old accustomed
Ignorance, Corruption and Error? And then those who would teach Knowledge and
guide into Truth, shall be reputed Enemies to Civil Society, and Troublers of
Israel, the Church of God. And what is the commonly called Good Will, but to
let every one do what is right in his own Eyes. Not to meddle with their Sins
and Transgressions, To avoid Sound Doctrine, Reproof, Correction, Instruction
in Righteousness, for all this has a show of Disturbance. It is said to spoil
Family-Peace and good Neighborhood. Even in this Antichristian Age wherein
things are turned upside down, such are thought not to seek the Welfare of this
People but the Hurt, Jer. 38. 4. who are not willing that any should Perish,
but that all should come to Repentance; who Study, Pray and Teach, and do use
all the outward means possible to help forward the common Salvation. But this
is our Comfort and Encouragement, that the Spirit of God witnesses the same
(which we also find and wish in our Hearts) That they do indeed bring Good
Tidings and publish Peace, and also that they have Good Will toward Men,
notwithstanding they are esteemed and reproached contrariwise by the World.
Even the Savior thereof (unto whom this and all Scripture has more especial
Relation) witnessed what himself found; The World hates me, because I testify
of it that the Works thereof are Evil, John 7. 7. But this is a double
Iniquity; first to do Evil, and then what is yet worse, To hate him, even
Jesus, whom God sent to bless them, in turning away every one of them from his
Iniquities, Acts 3. 26. In order to which it is first necessary to tell and
show them thereof. When God would have Men turn from their evil doings, they
kill and evil entreat those whom he sends on his Message. They hate him that
rebukes in the Gate, and they abhor him that speaks uprightly, Amos 5. 10.
They cannot endure to be interrupted in their course.

But is their course Good or Evil, right or wrong? If the World did that which
is Good and Righteous, they need not be afraid of the Ministers of God; for
then they would meet with Praise and Encouragement from them, instead of what
they now look upon as Trouble and Disturbance. Then indeed all three would meet
together, Glory to God in the highest and on Earth Peace, Good Will toward
Men, Luke 2. 13. When the People are gathered together and the Kingdoms to
serve the Lord; when they walk and agree in his Fear and Obedience, then they
have R^st and Comfort. Then we may do as others do as long as they keep unto
the same Rule; and so long we have Peace and rejoicing one with another. But
then we do after this or that manner, not because others do the like, but we
see it thus written, and we are so directed.

This is one considerable difference between the Good and Evil, Righteous and
Wicked, that the first have a set Rule of Action, God and his Word; whereas
the Evil and Wicked have not so much regard to that, but they are led on by
the Example of others and by their own Imaginations. The Example is the
Multitude of the Richer sort, who though fewest in Number, yet have Influence
on many, for these crave after VVorldly Goods and have their Their Persons in
Admiration, the which they bestow and convey down to have others that are thus
beholding unto and dependant on them. So that here it may be reduced, that for
Profit and Interest they act after this manner.

But even this Argument (if stretched out thoroughly) would bring them into the
right way. What is a Man profited if he should gain the whole World and lose
his own Soul? Matt. 16. 20. Is not Happiness and Salvation more than present
Gain and Advantage? And what if that should be lost by omission of Duty and
commission of Sin? They misemploy that Diligence and precious Time, which might
be spent on a more excellent thing and would tend to better account. For every
Man shall bear his own Burden, Gal. 6. 5. And likewise every one shall receive
the reward of his own Labor. And therefore what others do, what is that to
thee? Mind thy self and thine own things. Thou would have good to thy self
and avoid Misery, why then go in the way, and use the Means accordingly.
Another Happiness extends not to thee; for it rather raises Envy and a greater
Resentment. So that the Misery of others is but a poor Reiief and Comfort to
thine own. Still as thou art divided from others, so thou must labor to secure
and embetter thine own Condition abstracted and separated from that of Others.

The whole World lies in Wickedness, 1 John 5. 19. Which as sure as God's Word
is true, will involve them into Condemnation and Misery. Even those who now are
for living according to the vain Manners and Customs of the World, would not
willingly have such an End. But it is the particular Sins of several Persons
which make up the general corruption of Many; and they are subject to that
Punishment which is now denounced from Heaven, and will be inflicted
accordingly at the time spoken of. Can thine Heart endure, or can thine Hands
be strong in the days that I shall deal with thee? I the Lord have spoken it,
and will do it, Ezekiel. 22. 14. When thou criest, let thy Companies deliver thee:
But the wind shall carry them all away, Isa. 57. 13. They are under the same
smart and pain themselves and cannot case thee, but rather increase your
Howlings and cause a deeper sense of that Misery which ye are all plunged into.
It will not be a sufficient exchange for the loss of Eternal Happiness, to be a
little puffed up with following the humors and ways of the Multitude; for the
utmost advantage and convenience thereof, at present, cannot recompense for the
Danger of what is to come. The reputation of Good Nature, of being Sociable and
Compliant, All the Ease, gain and Profit thereof, cannot countervail so great a
Loss and Pain. Much less will not those things whereof there is no benefit at
all but only to gratify a sudden transient Humor, and barely to conform unto
the Example and Practice of others.

Of which nature are those several things of Ungodliness, and that fashioning
and corrupting the several parts of the Worship of God. The chief Reason why so
many continue Ungodly and do not tread God's Courts, or they do it only on the
Lord's day, and not every day, as was the manner of the first Christians to
Continue daily in he Temple, Acts 2. 46. Is because they see that most do the
like of the same Age and Circumstances with themselves. And they are for not
varying from the because, they would not be accounted odd and singular, nor
have their Reputation lessened. Now to examine this and other things of like
Nature by that often mentioned Rule, In every thing one takes in hand or admits
of, and so in all Debates and doubts of Mind it might be reduced to this,
Whether the good or evil of a thing will be greater? Whether it is better to
do, or to leave such a thing undone. And that taking in the consideration of
the time to come as well as the present; for that will as certainly be present
also. And then a Wise Man knows what he has to do or not, to Choose or
Refuse. Now if in the present Case, that single Thought only will do a Man as
much good, and stand him in as much stead throughout a whole Eternity, as it is
now supposed in the days of his Flesh, then indeed it is vain to go into the
Sanctuary, and it is no profit to walk Mournfully before the Lord of Hosts and
constantly to keep his Ordinances, according to the surmise of the Profane
Sinners in Mal. 3. But surely his Word and Promise, those many immutable things
in which it is impossible for God to Lie, for the Reward to those who
diligently seek and serve him, all these may be more surely trusted unto than
what is only imagined, in the vain, false and wicked Minds of Men. This may be
sensibly perceived as a manifest token and forerunner of a greater loss, that
their Ungodliness at this present time comes to nothing at all. It has a
regret at the several times it is practiced, which is more bitter than the
imagined tediousness of Religious Duty; and they do again falsely hope that it
will be passed over in Forgetfulness or Excuse. A Book of Remembrance is
written, Mal. 3. 18. That it may be discerned between them who serve God and
who serve him not. And so between those wha do it more or less, with the
several Circumstances belonging thereunto.

Though there is now the same Event to him that Sacrifices or Sacrifices not,
yet the Judge of all the Earth shall do Right. Though a Sinner does Evil an
hundred times and his days be prolonged, yet surely I know it shall be well
with them which fear God, which fear before him, Eccles. 8. 12. In that day
there is none but would be of the Lord's Jewels if they might, and they would
be willingly spared by him as a Man spares his own Son that Serves him. But
then they must endeavor to please and find acceptance with him in the mean
while, for if there should never so much be done in things pertaining to God,
and he should not like nor accept thereof, it profits nothing. As again, if
he is well pleased with our Sacrifices and Works, we have the utmost that we
can desire on this side of Heaven, for we have the earnest and assured hope of
his Favor and Reward,

That we may not Serve him with Doubt and Ignorance, we are to take heed that.
We do all things according to the Pattern in his Word. As Moses was admonished
of God when he was about to make the Tabernacle; for see (says he) that thou
make all things according to the Pattern showed to thee in the Mount, Heb. 8.
5. For this is according to his express Command, and also it is agreeable to
the Duty of a Son or Servant to do according as it is Commanded and directed
unto him, or they know assuredly such the continual Employment which their
Father or Master would have them to do. But when Men choose their own ways,
Isa. 66. 3. it is in God's Sight and Estimation, as Cutting off a Dogs Neck, or
as Offering Swines Blood; which is an Abomination, and does displease him yet
more. Or if they do a great multitude of mere Acts of outward Religion, yet
when these Works come to be examined of what sort they are, instead of a
Commendation and Reward, it may be demanded of them, Who has required this at
your Hand to tread my Courts, Isa. 1. 12. It Is not the Much speaking of the
Heathen, nor yet The Superstition of Jew or Papist, nor those several kinds of
Worship to the One God, or Many that are observed by the several Nations of the
World, which makes God to hear or accept thereof. But known unto God are the
Works of all Men, and it is left unto him how he will be pleased to deal with
them accordingly. As Bodily Exercise profits nothing, so outward Services are
little available; but the Heart is that which God looks unto, and with what
Mind they are done. It must be with an intention to please him, and to please
him only. Thereby shutting out all Custom and Conformity to the World, Romans 12.
2. Unless before they are agreed in a Right thing. In things pertaining to God
no respect must be had unto Men; For God will not give his Glory unto another,
nor any part of his Worship to Men of the same Likeness with our selves. And
yet how common is it in the World, to do thus and thus in Religion, because
those which have the Reputation of Great Learned and wise Men, do the fame.
Whereas, we do not understand nor consider thoroughly that these have provoked
God to Jealousy and Displeasure with their Inventions, and now he suffers them
to err from the right way, For seeing they were not contented with that Rule
which God had given them, but despised it for the seeming plainness and
Simplicity thereof: And they would find out something which should seem
outwardly more Wise and make a greater show, than a true and Spiritual Worship
does. It pleased God to let a poor and mean People Serve him and be Saved after
this manner; but the others are left still to go on in their own ways, in which
they mistake and Perish! God is the same still; His Thoughts are not as our
Thoughts, He has chosen the foolish things of the World to confoudd the Wise;
and God has chosen the Weak things of the World to confound the things which
are Mighty; and Base things of the World and things which I are Despised has
God chosen, yea, and things which are not to bring to naught things that are:
That no Fleshk should glory in his Presence, 1 Cor. 27, 28, 29. See that whole
Chapter. Cast abroad the rage of thy wrath, and behold every one that is Proud
and abase him, Job 40. 11. That he may cut off all occasion of Boasting. There
is no obliging of God with any thing exabundant, or with doing more than is
commanded; for we have all sinned and come short of that, nor yet should we
presume to do besides what is required, for he does disown and is displeased
with all that. Any thing that savours the least of Pride, is an Abomination to
God, and so what would make any pretense to Merit or deserving all this is
rejected by him.

Man was at first the work of God's own Hands. Yet I had planted thee a noble
Vine, wholly a right Seed. How then art thou turned into the Degenerate Plant
of a strange Vine unto me, Jer. 2. 21. For since that every Imagination of the
Thoughts of his Heart was only Evil continually, Genesis 6. 5. Man has been so
universally Corrupt throughout, that till he is Renewed again after the Image
of him who Created him, which in Righteousness and true Holiness, he stands not
only distinguished from, but as it were in perfect contrariety unto God. Said
our Savior to one of his Disciples, Get thee behind me Satan thou art an
Offense unto me, for thou Savourest not the things that be of God, but those
that be of Men, Matt. 16. 23. As if the things which did savor of Men were a
Stink and evil Smell and a Smoke in his Nose, Isa. 65. 5. which he could not
endure, and would have behind or a far off from him. Indeed the infinite
Holiness and Uprightness of God is in no wise reconcilable to Man's Sin and
Corruption; and he does the more abominate and loath it when he beholds it
covered with the Mask and Visour of Hypocrisy. Who is all-Wise and all
Knowing, he does pity and despise our Folly and Ignorance; but it is a further
Aggravation, so that he cannot or rather will not endure therewith when Worms
of the Earth would be wise beyond their Maker, or pretend to know otherwise
than he knows and has decreed or purposed; It does provoke him justly to
Anger, That when the Sun, Moon and Stars, and the whole Family in Heaven so
much Greater and more Excellent Creatures than we, do observe the Law which he
has made. And seeing he has given unto Men Laws, which are Holy, Righteous
and Good; he has showed unto us strait ways, yet stubborn and disobedient Man
will not keep and walk in them, but every one is for walking after the
Imagination of his own evil Heart. And as they live and are joined together in
Civil Society, so this carries on the course of the World, and each Person does
make a part of and contribute unto the universal Sin and Wickedness.

The word Imagination, does import no set Rule of Action, but it is a Wandering
or Guess. Now it thinks it may be thus, but is afterward mistaken. And this is
so much the worse as the End is more excellent which it aims at. Now that End
is Good and Happiness. Every Soul (as aforesaid) is in pursuit thereof, and his
several Actions are intended accordingly. There is One God over all, One rule
of Action in his Word, One End of everlasting Happiness or Misery; and all the
deeds done in the Body, are as so many Steps to one or the other. This is
actually so though too many perceive it not; nor consider thereof in the time
of Probation and Trial. To walk all along in a vain and false Imagination, and
be deceived at last when this is but once for all Eternity, when there is no
possible Redress of this Error, must very much enhanse the Folly and Misery of
such a Man. The first Error and Evil is in having departed from God and
casting away his Fear, and exempting himself from his Obedience. For though it
is so suffered in this Life to prove Mankind more perfectly, that it may be
seen, It is possible for him to run out his days here without having due regard
and respect to his Maker and Preserver; yet it is known unto God and also
Revealed unto us how he will be pleased to deal further with them. Even
according as we order our Conversation, and as our doings are. That Word by
which we are to Live, be Judged, and receive accordingly, does now forewarn and
acquaint us that things will be otherwise or contrary to what they appear now.
For that which is highly esteemed amongst Men, is abomination in the sight of
God, Luke 16. 15. And so what is universally received and fashionable among us,
will be rejected and even loathed by him.

He has left another Rule to follow than the Multitude or the mere Example of
others. An Holy Man of God does speak on this wise, Be ye followers of me, even
as I also am of Christ, 1 Cor. 11. 1. But no otherwise, for Christ had done no
Violence, neither was any deceit found in his Mouth. He was the Holy one of
God, and in him was found no Sin. So that if we do the same which he did, we
may be assured that it is not Sinful. Again, his Meat and Drink was to do the
will of God, and he did always the things which pleased his Heavenly Father: So
that if therein we follow his Steps as we have him for an Example, and do the
like things that he did, we may hereby know that we do the will of God also,
and what is pleasing and acceptable in his Sight. But every Man besides is a
Liar; for they have all (both Saint and Sinner, none excepted) varied and gone
aside either in some single transient Instances, or in many continued ones from
the Word of Truth and from the right way. It is Written, And thou shall not go
aside from any of the Words which I command thee this day to the right hand or
to the left, Deuteronomy. 28. 14. That is neither to one Extreme nor yet to the other.
But where is the Man or Woman, who have not gone aside from any of the words
which the Lord God has Commanded in the Bible, both as it comprehends all that
is written in the Old and New Testament. Both Jews and Gentiles, yea all
Mankind of every Generation and Country are under Sin, and have come short of
what God requied in his Law. So that whoever does follow any of these Examples
in all things, even of the most Perfect and Upright among the mere Sons of Men,
he will go aside with them even unto the Transgression: So that the word of God
is to be our Rule, and not the Example of others.

However prone and subject the People of the World are to follow the Examples
of their Fellow Creatures and to do what others do of near the same Age,
Condition and Circumstances of Life; yet in these times of the Universal
Reformation of the World, which is now drawing on in these latter days, we must
labor and endeavor Mightily to beat off and dissuade People from acting
according to that dangerous and mistaken Principle of following the Multitude
and being led by the Example of others. For besides that to follow the
Multitude, is a sure token that such are amongst those many which go in the
Broad way which leads unto Dsstruction; and they are not amongst those few in
the Narrow way which leads unto Life, Matt. 7. 13, 14. This seems to lie as
the greatest Prejudice against the ways of God, That though all his
Commandments are Just, Holy and Good; And it is meet and right for all People
at all times to observe the same; Yet still nevertheless very few People do
observe them. When the Scripture speaks of those glorious times Thy People also
shall be all Righteous, Isa. 60. 21. And how that the Sinners will be consumed
out of the Earth, and the wicked will be no more, Psalm. 104. 35. For in what
Prayer the Spirit of Truth does Dictate, is included a Promise that so it shall
be. As we read these and alike Places, what in the Prophet's Phrase, is a very
lovely Song, Ezekiel. 33. 32. And Peter recites from the faying of others, As if
the Scriptures were a cunningly devised Fable. So in our way of speaking, those
Scriptures seem to be as a pleasant Romance, which contain things that were to
be indeed wished and desired; but at first sight they do not seem to be
grounded on Truth; for the thing neither as yet is so, and there is no such
great outward likelihood and probability that it will ever be so. What, thy
People shall be all Righteous, when now not more than One in an Hundred are
strictly and universally so. And for the Sinners to be consumed out of the
Earth, and for the Wicked to be no more, How can this be, when all places are
now full of them? But yet as the Waters of Noah did once cover the Earth, and
so a common Flood does now cover several parts thereof and the lower Grounds,
which goes off again: So that Deluge of Sin and Ungodliness, which has so long
for many Years and Generations overspread the face of all Nations, will at
length quite go off and never return again.

An Inlet and preparatory to this glorious day of Righteousness and Holiness
throughout the Earth will be when People shall once begin to leave off living
by Examples, but they shall live according to the Word of God and the Dictates
of the Spirit.

Tho Satan's Kingdom has stood a long time yet it has been all along upheld
as it were by Threads, or as the Spider's Web, or as Brittle Glass. I mean,
that it has been erected upon so slender a Foundation, and holden up by such
weak Props, that if any thing had touched and beat vehemently upon it, it would
have fallen in that part thereof; for as soon as it had been touched or
grappled with, it would have presently broken and snapped asunder: And when
when it was made up again, it was as Thread or Tow tied together, or like a
Spider's Web made over again, or as the broken pieces of Glass set together
again which was somewhat weaker than the former. To these and suchlike
Similitudes all those Thoughts and Imaginations in Men and Women may be
compared; by which the infernal and unseen Spirit did work in the Children of
Disobedience, for it was all either Evil or Falsehood. And whenever Grace and
Truth had also an entrance into their Minds, and did once begin to close and
grapple therewith, it did put it all to flight and overcame the Temptations and
Suggestions of the Evil one, which he would bring on again after the aforesaid
manner.

As heretofore observed, almost all Satan's Temptation is comprised in that
which he used to our Grandmother Eve, And when the Woman saw that the Tree was
good for Food, and that it was pleasant to the Eyes, and a Tree to be desired
to make one Wise, she took of the Fruit thereof and did Eat, Genesis 3. 6. So that
Goodness, Pleasure, Desirableness, (which last may be also expressed by
convenience or Expediency, are the three Baits, which the Serpent who is more
Subtle than any Beast of the Field, does make use of to fish for and catch the
Souls of Men and Women; and where he also tempts them to any Sin or act of
Disobedience; which does not seem either Good, or Pleasant, or Desirable; But
it is either Humor or Frowardness, or VVillfulness, or they know not what
reason they have for it, but they do it for all; There commonly it is Company
and Example of others, like natural brute Beasts, Oxen or Sheep, which go on
with the Drove and as they see others before them, not knowing where or
wherefore. To do as others do, seems convenient or expedient, which comes under
one of those three Heads of Goodness, Pleasure and Desireableness; for it is
thought Safe, and also it prevents that Hatred and Ill Will which is commonly
annexed to Singularity. Who do not in all their Actions seek to please God,
yet commonly these same Persons endeavor to please other Men, or their own
selves, that is, Their own Lust and Will, or the sinful Desires of the Flesh.
By which is shown forth that Principle ingrafted in them by the God who formed
them of Pleasing some one, which should be terminated and arise up to their
Maker and Creator only; but with them it is turned aside to their
Fellow Creatures, or to themselves.

Casting down Imaginations (in the Margent it is Reasonings) and every high
thing that exalts it self against the Knowledge of God, and bringing into
Captivity every thought to the Obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10. 5. To express
sorth these several Imaginations and every Thought, would swell this Treatise
to a prodigious bulk. And indeed many of the Thoughts of Men are so vain and
trivial, that they are not worthy to be spoken out, or to be set down in Ink
and Paper. But for those Imaginations which carry a show of Reasoning with
them, if the Reader would narrowly and attentively observe, how each of them is
answered and cast down, by the like words of Truth as that is effected, any
other new Imagination as it shall arise, may in the same or like manner be
answered and cast down also. The Metaphor of casting down is (I suppose) in
allusion to Wrestling at the Olympic Games, which were in use among the
Corinthians, and there sometimes a Tall Boasting Fellow would come into the
Ring, whom another less Man who had more Skill (though not equal in outward
Appearance) would oftentimes gives the Foil unto and cast him down. And so for
bringing into Captivity every Thought to the Obedience of Christ. This is also
a Similitude (in which the Holy Ghost delights, Hos. 12. 10.) taken from
Warriors, where both the Adverse Parties contend and fight together; and they
try with all their Strength and Skill who can kill or take one another Captive.
There is a very near resemblance between things Visible and Invisible; for so
it is likewise (as we may see with the Eyes of our Understanding being
enlightened) between the Thoughts of Good and Truth, and the Suggestions of
Satan and the Dictates of Evil and Falsehood. All these are contrary one to the
other, and they do fight and contend together in the Soul of Man. They strive
there for Mastery, which shall prevail, which the Man shall be lead and
governed by. And according as this is, so is the Discrimination to be made of
Godly and Ungodly, Righteous and Wicked, they that serve God, and they that
serve him not; for the Godly and Righteous and the Servants of God, are ever,
or for the most part led and governed by the Words of his Grace and Truth. And
when there is a War and Contest in their Souls, whether they shall overcome, or
the Temptation of the World, the Flesh and the Devil, the Lust of the Flesh,
the Lust of the Eyes, and the Pride of Life; Their Faith in the unseen God, and
their Knowledge and Fear of him, and the sense of his Law written in their
Hearts, do constantly, or at least most commonly overcome all the other
Assaults of the Evil one. Whereas the Ungodly, and the Wicked and Rebels, have
indeed a faint remembrance, and a small sense of that Obedience they owe unto
God and his Law. But in all these Temptations, or for the most part, they show
themselves to be Servants of Sin and Evil; By consenting unto and doing the
several Acts thereof, as often as they were proved and tried. They are a
Rebellious People, which walks in a way that was not Good, after their own
Thoughts, Isa. 65. 2. and not according to the Directions of God's Word and the
Dictates of his Spirit. Unto which they did owe an Allegiance as soon as they
were born, and an Obedience as soon as ever they came to the Knowledge of Good
and Evil. But casting off and giving no heed to that, they are here truly and
properly termed Rebellious.

Thou have delivered me from the strivings of the People. Which strivings of
the People are those Struglings and Doubts, and givings back in the Heart of
Man, before he yields up himself unto the Obedience of God and of his Christ.
These Strivings would dethrone God and Christ out of the Soul; And so they have
strove and endeavored for many Generations successively in the Hearts of the
several People thereof. To which the answer of the Lord is ever since the days
of Noah unto this time, My Spirit shall not always strive with Man, for that he
also is Flesh, Genesis 6. 3. for himself has heretofore, and does still strive
with the Hearts and Consciences of Men. In which I will by no means so express
it as to say, That the Spirit of God has been overcome, But they have rebelled
and vexed his Holy Spirit, Isa. 63. 10. They have quenched the Spirit, 1 Thessalonians.
5. 19. for that thing may and has been done, which we are there cautioned and
commanded against) so that God does declare, His Spirit shall not always strive
with Man, that is, He will leave off Fighting and Contending with Man for to
come to his Obedience, but give him over, for that he also is Flesh, that is,
wholly given unto Evil and Corruption, and to falling away and turning aside.
Yet his days shall be an hundred and twenty Years, and afterward in the time
of Moses it is reduced to threescore and ten and fourscore Years (see Psalm.
90.) whereby we are given to understand, and it is as much as if God should
say, whether Man will obey me or not, whether he will yield unto the strivings
of my Spirit, or provoke me to withdraw it, yet his days shall be near the
same, he shall live out however the appointed Time according to the Age of a
Man. And though the Multitude of the People, both Men and Women of all the
former and present Generations, have done thus perversely and contrariwise with
God, Do ye thus requite the Lord, O foolish People and unwise, is he not thy
Father that has bought thee? Has he not made and established thee? Yet as he
had one good and godly Family in the midst of a whole ungodly and idolatrous
Generation, whom he was sure of, and who were according to his Mind, For I know
Abraham that he will command his Children and his Household after him, and they
shall keep the way of the Lord to do Justice and Judgment, that the Lord may
bring upon Abraham that which he has spoken of him; Genesis 18. 19. So amongst so
many rebellious and sinful Generations of Men and Women, which have been
successively one after another since the World began, and the like is at this
day, and it may be a very few more are to succeed; Yet after all these, God who
calls the Generations from the beginning, Isa. 41. 4. has one peculiar
Generation in his Eye; all of which, like Abraham their Father, in all their
Families and Places, will take care that every one of them, not one excepted,
shall keep the way of the Lord, To do Justice and Judgment, That the Lord may
bring upon them all those things which he has before spoken of in his Word,
concerning the Times of Universal Reformation, when Thy People shall be all
Righteous, The Sinners shall be no more; When he will make an end of
Transgression, and bring in Everlasting Righteousness. And that God has such a
Generation in his Eye and foreknowledge, is expressed in Psalm. 22. 30, 31. on
this wise, A Seed shall serve him; It shall be accounted to the Lord for a
Generation. They shall come and shall declare his Righteousness unto a People
that shall be born, That he has done this. So that as it was said of Abraham,
He will command his Children and Household after him: So they will teach their
Children and Posterity. They shall declare this unto a People that shall be
born, That the Lord has done this. What is that? Why, when the whole Earth
heretofore was Corrupt, Evil and gone aside, he has brought them all to rights
again; as appears and is manifest by that Seed then living upon the Face of the
Earth which shall serve him.

And whereas heretofore, The People of some Generations and Countries did serve
him for a spurt as we commonly express it. Upon God's sending forth some
Judgment, The Inhabitants of the Earth did learn Righteousness, or upon his
doing some extraordinary and more than usual thing in the World, they would
serve him earnestly and diligently for the present Season, or for a few Days,
VVeeks, Months or Years. But here was the fault and failure, that afterward
they would return again to their former Sin and Ungodliness, and to their
Formal Customary Worship. Though they did keep the Commandments indifferently
well for a very little while, yet they did again quickly go aside from the
Commandments of God. And so things have gone on after this rate and manner ever
since the Creation. But it will be better and otherwise, when those Times of
Universal Reformation shall come from the pouring out of the Spirit of the
Lord. They shall fear thee as long as the Sun and Moon endures, throughout all
Generations, Psalm. 72. 5. That is during all their own Lifetime, and down
forward during that of their Children and Posterity, which shall ever succeed
henceforward. The Children of thy Servants shall continue and there Seed shall
be established before thee, Psalm. 102. 28. This is in opposition to that common
and true Saying heretofore and now. That Grace does not go by Inheritance; for
many Godly and Gra^ious Persons have Ungodly and Graceless Children. Whereas
the Promise here speaks, The Children of the Servants of the Lord shall
continue in the fear of the Lord, all one as their Fathers did, and their Seed,
(that ir further down) shall be Established before thee. That is, they shall be
fixed and firm in the Worship and Service, in the Obedience and doing the
Work of the Lord, as their Immediate Fathers and Grandfathers were.

CHAP. VI. It is made known in the general from the Scriptures of Truth,
(without any Reflections on particular Nations, Governments) that at length
there will be an end of all Wars.
THere is a time of War and a time of Peace, Eccl. 3. 8. And so the course of
the World has went on interchangeably, sometimes one and sometimes another,
ever since that Battle we Read of in Genesis 14. Where Abraham returned from the
Slaughter of the Kings. But when God shall do that last and great Act, as to
cause that Nation shall not lift up a Sword against Nation, neither shall they
learn War any more, Isa. 2. 4. Which Scripture has not been as yet fulfilled:
But is to be fulfilled according to that Divine Method and Dispensation, The
Word and things of God shall be fulfilled in their Season, Luke 1. 20. Then the
Lord brings forth the Chariot-Horse, the Army and the Power: They shall lie
down together, they shall not rise, they ore Extinct, they are quenched as Tow,
Isa. 43. 17. God will bring them forth to show only, and not for Use and
Service; That this righteous and peaceable Generation may just see what kinds
of Instruments their Forefathers a Rebellious and stubborn Generation did make
use of to kill and destroy; which they, who shall feed like Lambs after their
manner, Isa. 5. 17. will hardly believe without seeing them, that ever so much
Violence and Mischief should be in the Hearts of Men, or that such Instruments
of Cruelty and Destruction should be found in their Habitations. But as the
Lord commanded that a Pot full of Manna should be laid up before the Lord in
their Generations, that they may see the Bread wherewith I have fed you in the
Wilderness, when I brought you forth from the Land of Egypt, Exodus 16. 32, 33,
34. So it is convenient and requisite, that some of each sort of those Weapons
and devices of War should be kept for a Testimony, that the Generations
following may just see, how it was with the Earth, when God Created the Smith
that blows the Coals in the Fire, and that brings forth an Instrument for
his Work, and that had created the Waster to destroy, Isa. 54. 16. When at thy
Rebuke, O God of Jacob, the Chariot and Horse are cast into a dead Sleep, Psalm.
76. 6. Never to awake out of it again. For it is before said, The stout hearted
are spoiled, they have slept their Sleep; they are bereaved and stripped of those
Engines wherewith they did execute their Revenge and Terror in the Land of the
Living. And now they have slept their sleep; they have done all their do, which
they must never do again. What they did then do was as much at random and
uncertainty from the true and proper ends of Man's Life (which was intended for
Preservation, and not for the Destruction of others, and at last of themselves
by so doing) as Sleep is now different from Waking; for in Sleep we Dream and
think confusedly without the use of Reason and Knowledge. But they shall lie
down together, they shall not rise. There is an utter end of all that, they are
extinct as Tow the Wrath of Man which did heretofore kindle all this, God shall
restrain. Surely the Wrath of Man shall Praise thee: the remainder of Wrath
shall thou restrain, Psalm. 76. 10. So as it shall go no further, and then it
will sink and come to nothing of it self. They are quenched as Tow. If it would
begin to smoke again, God will take care to put it out that it shall burn no
more. Where his Prophet uses these kind of pertinent and significative Phrases,
he immediately adds, Remember ye not the former things, neither consider the
things of old. Behold I will do a new thing, now it shall spring forth, shall
ye not know it, Isa 43. 18, 19. This is as much as if God should say, Ye may
just see and think of those former things, but they are not worthy of your
Remembrance and Consideration, in comparison to that new thing which God will
do, which shall be both more pleasant Entertainment to the Minds of his
Creatures; and it shall be infinitely more satisfactory for them to be employed
therein, than heretofore in making Preparations for War, or hearing tidings
from the Camp. I will even make a way in the Wilderness and Rivers in the
Desert. The Holy Ghost seems here to allude unto the March of an Army with
their Power; who being to pass through a Wilderness or Deserts, send those
before them to make way, as by cutting down the Woods and Briars, and making
rough places plain, and removing great Stones or Rubbish. As also to guide and
conduct them in the intricate way. As also to seek out Forage, Food and Water
for Man and for Beast; if they can find out Springs and Rivers in the Desert,
wherein is least likelihood of any, and therein is most want of them. But God
will supply all this to his Creatures, or make up unto them what is signified
thereby. The Beasts of the Field shall Honor me, the Dragons and the Owls,
Because I give Waters in the Wilderness, and Rivers in the Desert, to give
drink to my People, my chosen, V. 20. Besides that Satisfaction and Content,
which without doubt is in the irrational but sensible Creatures upon Gods being
their Creator and Maker, and also for his providing all things necessary and
convenient for them. Hereby also may be signified, That when those ungodly Men
and Women who have been transformed after the manner of Beasts, and have those
inward Qualities and likeness unto Dragons and Owls, as to love Destruction and
hate the Light, do come to see and know what God does for his Elect People,
They will come to Honor and have an inward reverential Esteem of him also.
This People have I formed for my self, They shall show forth my Praise, Ver.
21. Here is the drift and design, the End and Consummation of all, that as God
made Men and Women, They should even now as in the latter days, they shall be
purely formed for himself; They shall show forth his Praise. That is, They
shall have no other End but God, and to lay out themselves for him, and God
shall be their All in All, and nothing shall be heard amongst them, but
Praises, Praises to the Lord. Then the World will be as it should be.

CHAP. VII. There will be an End of all manner of Persecuting the Servants of
God.
WHen the Earth shall be reformed and become Righteous, this effect will also
be seen and perceived, There shall be no more Hatred of, and Persecution
against the Servants of God. They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my Holy
Mountain, for the Earth shall be full of the Knowledge of the Lord, as the
Waters cover the Sea, Isa. 11. 9. It has been always and in all places found,
That where is most of the Knowledge of the Lord (that is, such Knowledge as is
true, Saving and Sanctifying) there has been least Persecution; as again where
has been most Ignorance and Darkness, there the Persecuting work has gone
forward and abounded. But when the World shall be thus universally replenished
with the Knowledge of the Lord, there will not be the least degree nor manner
of it; not so much as to hurt Body or Soul, as to lay any hardship or restraint
upon the first, nor yet to tempt or cause the Soul to Sin, or be wanting in
Duty. Both which do now occasion Vexation of Spirit. But they shall see and be
ashamed for the Envy of the People, Isa. 26. 11. That is, whereas heretofore
the World did envy at the People of God (from whence did spring up their Hatred
and unkind usage of them) thinking that such would be more Happy and Blessed
than themselves in the end But when God shall also manifest unto them the
Favor that even the Wicked had, That even they might have learned
Righteousness and beheld the Majesty of the Lord (see the foregoing Verse) They
shall be so ashamed for ever having maligned and done despitefully against his
Servants, as they shall never do it more. And whereas also heretofore the
Churches had sometimes Rest from their Enemies, and again at other Times they
were made Havoc of and Persecuted. This did happen interchangeably and
successively, as was before observed, that at some times some Countries would
fear the Lord greatly, and then remisly or negligently, and not at all. And as
there was a time of War and a time of Peace among the Nations; so likewise as
to this we have the certain and assured Promise of the Lord. Also I will ordain
a place for my People Israel, and will plant them, and they shall dwell in
their place; neither shall the Children of Wickedness waste them any more, as
at the beginning, 1 Chronicles. 17. 9. He will make an utter end, Affliction shall
not rise up the second time, Nahum. 1. 9. This (as may be seen from the two
foregoing Verses) is spoken as to that day of Trouble which has come upon his
Servants that trusted in the Lord their Strong-hold, which was stirred up and
occasioned unto them by the Enemies of the Lord (emphatically and truly called,
his Enemies) though they did show themselves so to his Church, that is, his
People. And when as to many of his Prophets, his Son Jesus Christ, his
Apostles, Ministers and People, Affliction did arise up not only the second
time; but even in Job's Phrase, The Lord was with them even to seven Troubles,
Job 5. 19. Yea and to Seventy times seven; for their whole Life was a continued
Train and Series and Succession of Trouble and Affliction, How then was this
found true? Affliction shall not rise up the second time. And indeed it cannot
be otherwise understood and believed, but that God has another day shortly
coming, in the which he will fulfill and make good this his Word, when God will
Return, How long? This question shows how impatient and desirous our Nature is
of it (How long! O Lord Holy and true do thou not judge and avenge our Blood
on them that dwell on the Earth, Rev. 6. 10. And shall not God avenge his own
elect which cry day and night unto him, though he bear long with them. I tell
you that he will avenge them speedily, Luke 18. 7, 8. So that it will Repent
him concerning his Servants, O satisfy us early with thy Mercy, that we may
rejoice and be glad all our days, and make us glad according to the days he
has afflicted us, and the years wherein we have seen Evil, Psalm. 90. 13, 14,
15. for the Lord shall judge his People and repent himself for his Servants,
when he sees that their Power is gone; and there is none shut up or left,
Deuteronomy. 32. 36. Like Sheep they are laid in the Grave, Death shall feed on them,
and the Upright shall have Dominion over them in the Morning, Psalm. 49. 14. Now
to make the like Application of all these Scriptures here laid together, as
Peter did in Acts 1. 16. Men and Brethren (who shall read or hear this) these
Scriptures must needs be fulfilled, which the Holy Ghost spoke by the Mouth of
Moses, David, Isaiah, and Jesus Christ has spoken before concerning that poor
afflicted and persecuted Condition of the People of God, How they shall take
them Captives whose Captives they were, and they shall rule over their
Oppressors, Isa. 14. 2. The Power of these Oppressors shall be utterly gone,
and the Upright shall have Dominion over them. God shall repent himself for
that hard Condition he suffered his Servants to go through with, and he will
satisfy and make them glad for it. Now it being manifest that all this good
Word is not as yet performed on this Earth and in this Life, from the like
Reasoning which the same Apostle Peter makes use of, Acts 2. 29, 30, 31. Acts
3. 21. We may assuredly gather and believe, That in the Resurrection and
Restitution of all things, God will most certainly make good this his Word,
That all things which are written may be fulfilled. And that there will be a
beginning and entrance into this Blessed State toward the latter days here on
the Earth, when the Lord shall reign before his Ancients gloriously And all
things shall exactly so come to pass according as he has aforespoken of in his
word. When the Wolf also shall dwell with the Lamb, Isa. 11. 6. and there shall
be a Concordance and Agreement between the most fierce and devouring Natures of
Men and Women, with the most calm, meek and peaceable Dispositions, according
to what is further written and confirmed. The Wolf and the Lamb shall feed
together, and the Lion shall eat straw like the Bullock, and dust shall be the
Serpents meat: They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my Holy Mountain, says
the Lord, Isa. 65. 25.

To make way and prepare for this glorious day of universal Holiness and
Righteousness, is the end of all our Preaching and Writing, and laying before
Men and Women all the Words of Truth which we can. The Lord says, I will come
near to you to Judgment, Mal. 3. 5. So according to the goings forth and
Emanations of his Eternal Truth, God does come nearer to the Children of Men,
both for Good and Comfort to his Saints and Servants, as also for Terror and
Punishment to the Ungodly and Disobedient. For that thy Name is near, Thy
wondrous Works declare, Psalm. 75. 11. God in Scripture is sometimes said to be
afar off, and he is invisible. So that he cannot be otherwise shown forth and
made known unto others, but in his Works and by his Name. Both which are
declared by fit, proper and true words. So that the Reader need not to be
offended at the multitude of them here used, if they help to make the invisible
God more known unto the Inhabitants of the Earth, and render him as it were
visible, yea and sensible unto their Souls. If we do not darken counsel by
words without knowledge, but according to the measure of the gift in us, our
words become instrumental that the things pertaining to God's Kingdom are
rendered yet clearer and clearer, that the Children of Men may more easily
understand and perceive them, than we do the Work and Will of God, As I do
this day, the Father to the Children shall make known thy Truth, Isa. 38. 18.
If Righteousness and Holiness were ingrafted into the Hearts of all Men, so
that they did live and were led by it at all times and in all places, The
Spirit of God would dwell in them, 1 Cor. 3. 16. As God has said, I will dwell
in them and walk in them, and I will be their God and they shall be my People.
And I will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my Sons and Daughters, says
the Lord God Almighty, 2 Cor. 6. 16, 18. What is requisite to all this we may
read in the first Verse of the following Chapter, Having therefore these
Promises (both those aforementioned are included, for it is expressed in the
plural number) let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the Flesh and
Spirit, Perfecting Holiness in the Fear of God, 2 Cor. 7. 1. Be ye clean ye
that bear the Vessels of the Lord, Isa. 52. 11. And from what is written, Thou
have taken Captivity Captive. We learn that God has taken even Sin and
Corruption Captive, which heretofore did hold the Children of Men in Slavery
and Captivity. But when every Thought in them also is brought into Captivity
unto the Obedience of Christ, God will plant somewhat else in the room thereof,
Thou have received Gifts for Men, (even the qualifications of his Grace, and
the fruits of his Spirit) Yea, for the Rebellious also, that the Lord God might
dwell among them, Psalm. 68. 18. So that though Men and Women have been
Rebellious and Disobedient formerly; yet when those Rebellious Thoughts and
Imaginations are brought into Captivity, when the Gifts of God are first lodged
in the Soul, to make it ready and meet beforehand, the Lord God himself will
come and dwell amongst them also.

So that whereas it was before mentioned, And the Lord said, My Spirit shall
not always strive with Man, for that he also is Flesh, Genesis 6. 3. And the
reason hereof was assigned because the Flesh did so very often overcome the
Spirit, when the Children of Men did Rebel, and Vex, and Grieve and Quench the
Spirit; yet the Blessing and Saying of Gad is made good, and herein is found
true, A Troop shall overcome him, but he shall overcome at last, Genesis 49. 19.
So a Troop of Lusts and a Legion (for they are many) of Temptations have
overcome the Spirit, but the Spirt shall overcome them at last. And the Spirit
shall have that Dominion and Prevalency in the hearts of all Men, that all its
Dictates and Motions shall be so willingly and immediately obeyed and complied
withal, that there shall be no striving of the Spirit with Man; for he shall
forthwith and presently go as that commands him to go, and come as that bids
him to come, and do this or that according as the Spirit says, without any
such thing as Reasoning and Persuasion, or striving in the Heart, for there
will not be the least Reluctance or Unwillingness. God who sees and knows the
things afar off, does foresee this also; that even Flesh will become so
Spiritual, that they shall obey all his Commands, and execute his Statutes,
without any striving of the Spirit, but only upon the first motion and making
of it known unto their Hearts.

CHAP. VIII. Toward the end of Time and in the latter days, All the
Inhabitants of the Earth will be turned and brought over unto God. Which will
be done and accomplished by the Pouring out of the Spirit upon us from on High.
IF it be asked, But when shall these things be? I Answer, Tho there may be
some tendency and preparation thereto in the mean while, yet we must not expect
nor look for it absolutely and fully, Until the Spirit be poured down upon us
from on High, Isa. 32. 15. Which shall acquaint us with the things of God and
of Heaven in a most wonderful and plentiful manner, that we shall then know
them as clearly, distinctly and truly as now we do the common things of this
Earth, which are now visible and present before us, My Doctrine shall drop as
the Rain My Speech shall distill as the Dew, as the small Rain upon the tender
Herb, and as the showers upon the Grass, Deuteronomy. 32. 2. After that very manner
has the Word and Spirit of the Lord came to the several Men and Women of the
former Generations, by Droppings and Distillings like small Rain, and as the
Dew or Showers. But this pouring forth of the Spirit upon us from on High, will
be like great Drops running on continually together, or raining down Bucket
fulls at once (as the common proverbial Speech is) When all the Fountains of
the great Deep shall be broken up, and the windows of Heaven shall be opened,
Genesis 7. 11. In this sense also. So that all the things that are in the Earth or
Sea, or in the Hearts of the Children of Men, shall be openly disclosed and
made known: And the windows of Heaven shall be opened, so that we shall as
clearly see and perceive the things there, as now by looking through the Window
thereof, we see the things that are in such a Room of an House, as when we are
in it, and look through the Casement, we see the things in the next adjoining
Court: And that it will be all thus made known Universally at once, we are
given to understand by what is Written, Drop down ye Heavens from above, and
let the Skies pour down Righteousness: Let the Earth open and let them bring
forth Salvation, and let Righteousness spring up together: I the Lord have
Created it, Isa. 45. 8. God has made and ordained, that it shall be so; that
the Heavens shall drop down the things contained therein. They shall be so made
known unto and had by us, as if they were actually dropped down and next to us.
The Earth also shall open and bring forth the things contained in her; which
heretofore lay underneath and hidden. All this shall be done together. And it
is observable how they are all expressed by these two Words, Righteousness and
Salvation. By the first is shown forth the nature of them as they are fixed and
connected together, after the Image of him who Created them, that is, in
eternal and immutable Righteousness. And because that in the Earth those things
are, which now hurt and destroy; therefore God who, causes Light to shine out
of Darkness, and by his own way of working, Which is mavelous in our eyes,
will cause that both Heavens and Earth do open and let them. (It is expressed
in the Plural Number, and therefore both of them shall have an hand and part in
it) As to bring forth Salvation and Righteousness is to spring up together with
it; Intimating, that besides that Righteousness which the Skies shall pour
down, another Righteousness shall spring up together with it. By the Phrase of
Springing up, we learn that this will proceed out of the Earth. Truth shall
spring out of the Earth, and Righteousness shall look down from Heaven, Plal.
85. 11. That is, both from out of the Hearts of the Inhabitants of the Earth,
as also from the Element it self. And Righteousness shall look down from Heaven
more clearly and visibly than ever it has done yet.

But wherefore is it that we hear so very much that in the last days of all,
God will pour out his Spirit upon us from on High, Isa. 32. 15. For I will pour
Water upon him that is Thirsty and Floods upon the dry Ground: I will pour my
Spirit upon thy Seed, and my Blessing upon thine Offspring, Isa 44. 3. And it
shall come to pass afterward (in the last days says God, Acts 2. 17.) that I
will pour out out my Spirit upon all Flesh, Joel, 2. 28. And there is not
altogether so much mention made of the Word then: For after Jesus Christ who
was the Word, and the Word was God, was taken away in his Bodily Presence from
among Men, he ordered that his Disciples should tarry at Jerusalem until they
had received the promise of the Father, and were endued with Power from on
High. And so in the beginning was the Word, and all things were Created by it
that were Made. And during all this, mean while they are upheld by the word of
his Power. And whilst these Generations pass through here, the Word is to them
all in all, toward the making them a People prepared for the Lord, and to give
them an Inheritance amongst all them which are Sanctified. But at the very
ending, Conclusion, and shutting up of all things, The Spirit is to do the main
and principal Office. But we read not altogether so much of the Word then as
aforetime. Besides that, the Word is in Order and Succession of Time before
the Spirit; for Jesus Christ came first into the Flesh, and then afterward the
Holy Ghost was given according to that Emphatical Remark of one of the Inspired
VVriters; for the Holy Ghost was not yet given, because that Jesus was not yet
Glorified. Another great Reason hereof may be assigned, That as the Angel swear
by him that lives for ever and ever, who created Heaven and the things that
therein are, and the Earth and the things that therein are, and the Sea and the
things which are therein, that there should be Time no longer, Rev. 10. 16. For
Time will be lost and swallowed up in Eternity, as a River or Brook is now lost
when it empties it self into the wide Ocean: So we may easily gather and
understand, that when all these things here mentioned, shall be so perfectly
and wholly made known and seen face to face; when what is now afar off and
Future, shall be Present and just before us; when Faith shall be turned into
Vision, and Hope into Fruition, when Prophesies shall fail, Tongues cease, and
Knowledge shall vanish away: When the whole Creation of God shall be new and
changed from material and sensible things, into Spiritual, then we may conclude
also, That WORDS shall be NO LONGER. But the things themselves (heretofore
expressed and apprehended by them) shall succeed and be given unto the
Creatures. God does all things in his own Order. He first made known unto his
Creatures the Words of Eternal Life, and then afterward he invests them with
the thing it self of Eternal Life; and then it is consequent that the words
thereof should cease and fail, as the Scaffold falls down, or is taken away
when the Building is Perfected and quite Finished. Like as now in common Life
there is great talk of such a Person's coming, as of the Messiah among the
Ancient Jews; but when he is come indeed, then all that talk perishes which
did relate thereto. For since the beginning of the World Men have not heard nor
perceived by the Ear, neither has the Eye seen, O God besides thee, what he
has prepared for him that waits for him, Isa. 64. 4. But when that great and
enduring thing shall be actually given to the Creature by that God whom he has
waited for, then all the thoughts of Heart and words of Mouth that were before
concerning it, will cease and come to an utter end. What Truth we now see
written in a dead Letter, or we hear in an outward Airy Sound, or we conceive
in our Mind, will one day appear as a shining Ray of Light. For Whatever does
make manifest is Light, Ephesians. 5. 13. And all things then will appear in the
Light of the Lord.

And so this great Matter which we are contending for all along and persuading
People unto, shall be instantly and altogether done by the Spirit. So that
Jesus Christ the Son of God, shall be delivered from the Strivings of the
People, and be made the Head of the Heathen, and a People whom he has not
known shall serve him. As soon as they hear of him, they shall Obey him. So
that there is not need of many more words to enforce the Exhortation. But by
Words, Knowledge, or Notice has been given, that one day so it shall be; for
all things which are written in the Scriptures of Truth must be fulfilled. And
also there is this further benefit and use of words, that we are hereby taught
and put in mind to be in a Readiness and Preparation for the same. The Word
does convert Sinners from the Error of their way, like the droppings of Rain,
or the distillings of Dew; that is, it does now and then bring in some
individual Persons; and that also is done by degrees and in succession of time.
But the pouring out of the Spirit from on High, shall bring them in by shoals
and multitudes, and do the Work Instantly and Immediately. As soon as they
hear of me they shall Obey me. Then thou shall see and flow together, and thine
Heart shall fear and be enlarged, because the abundance of the Sea shall be
converted unto thee, the Forces of the Gentiles shall come unto thee. The
Multitude of Camels shall cover thee. All the Flocks of Kedar shall be gathered
together unto thee. Who are these that fly as a Cloud, and as the Doves to
their Windows, Isa. 60. 5, 6, 7, 8. By all which kinds of Speech we are given
to understand, that very many in number shall flow and come over and be
Converted unto God. And the Sons of Strangers shall build up thy Walls. This is
near to the same purport and meaning as what is said in our great Scripture;
out of which I have here opened and alleged things all along. The Strangert
shall submit themselves unto thee: The Strangers shall fade away, and be afraid
out of their close Places. Those are Strangers who before had not known God nor
Christ. For although known unto God are all Men and Women as they are his
Creatures; yet God and Christ does not know them as to be in Covenant with
them; I never knew ye, depart from me ye that work Iniquity, Matt. 7. 23. But
they remain Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, who are without Hope,
without God in the World. And yet here is the assured Promise, that these shall
come to be acquainted and submit themselves (that is to yield Obedience) unto
God and his Christ, according to what he has before spoken of in another
Scripture, I will say to them which were not my People, Thou art my People, and
they shall say, Thou art my God, Hos. 2. 23.

The Strangers shall fade away and be afraid out of their close Places. Besides
that abundant Conversion of them at last; those which shall be converted before
they shall so fade away and come off from their former Strangeness toward God,
as that it shall not be perceived: Like Men Ashamed, which Steal and flee from
Battle, so they shall be ashamed of their former Ungodliness and sinful doings.
So that they would rather seem on the contrary as if they had obeyed and served
God from the very first. When these come to be acquainted with, and to believe
a future State and condition of Happiness and Misery, they shall look about how
to make sure for themselves that they may be happy and sure therein: And they
shall be afraid out of their close Places, or of those Imaginations and Deceits
in which heretofore they trusted and built a false Hope on. Thou put away
all the wicked of the Earth (observe the Particle All) like Dross, Psalm. 119.
119. As wax melts before the Fire, so let the Wicked perish at the presence
of God, Psalm. 68. 2. All this will be done more suddenly and as it were at an
instant, when the times of universal Reformation come on, and God does bow the
Heavens and come down, and he pours out his Spirit upon all Flesh; Then all
Wickedness will so vanish and disappear, that the place thereof shall know it
no more, and it will seem as if there had been never any such thing on the
Earth. All that gross Darkness and Error will be utterly and for ever gone off
from the face of it, when this true Light shall begin to shine universally and
openly in all the habitable parts thereof. The People shall then show forth
their Zeal for the Lord God of Hosts; Who is he that said but so much as in
his Heart, Shall the invisible God reign over me? Or shall I obey his standing
and written word? Let these People be brought forth, that the Saints of the
most High may inflict some Punishment on them. But they shall not do it in the
least, For Vengeance belongs unto me, I will recompense, says the Lord. And
again, The Lord shall judge his People, Heb. 10. 30. Deuteronomy. 32. 35, 36. And the
Lord will not begin to execute it then presently, when he is glorified in his
Saints, and had in Honor by all that are round about him. As an unknown
Malefactor amongst a great multitude of People when he is asked for, who did
such a Theft or Murder: Which being known and evident, must be concluded that
some one did it, he is sure to keep Silence and seem all one as the other
innocent People, lest he should be betrayed and discovered. In like manner it
will be when the Lord shall Plead with the Inhabitants of the Earth (who will
be a vast number gathered together of all Generations and Countries) and he
makes Inquisition for so much Sin, Iniquity, Transgression and Wickedness as
has been actually done on the Earth. So much has been committed, and it must
have been by some Persons, Who was it by Name that did it? Then shall they be
exceeding sorrowful and afraid, and begin every one of them to say, Lord, is it
I? The particular Guilty themselves shall keep Silence, and they shall be found
Speechless, Matt. 22. 12. Or if they are asked as concerning another Matter,
then they will perhaps speak out or deny, hereby to wave and take of the
suspicion of that also whereof they were indeed Guilty. In that day there will
hardly be found any who will own themselves to have been amongst the Enemies
and Adversaries of the Lord. The Adversaries of the Lord shall be ashamed;
which as they shall be then conscious of themselves, so they will endeavor to
hide it as much as they can. But they shall be afraid out of their close Places
of shelter and absconding, whether it be the Clefts of the Rocks, or the Holes
of the Mountains. For though their Fellow Creatures would be puzzled hereby end
be at a loss and difficulty to whom to assign such hidden things of Dishonesty,
or many secret acts of Sin and Wickedness. And when even the Persons themselves
who committed the same, shall make such a goodly outward show of having
Worshipped, Honored and served the Lord, and they not knowing the limits of
his Mercy, nor the periods of Time of holding forth his Scepter of Grace; nor
yet discerning (for the Heart of every one is deep) the reality and sincerity
of their Repentance; it is hence impossible that they should either find out or
judge Righteously, and render accordingly to the several People. But the Judge
of all the Earth will do Right. He is not as Man, but a God of Knowledge, by
whom Actions are weighed, 1 Some. 2. 3. Who sees Hearts as clearly as we see the
outward Faces; and he knows things long since past, or yet to come, as we do
the present Moment. In opposition to their Hiding, Concealing and Dissembling,
Thine hand shall find out all thine Enemies, Thy Right hand shall find out
those that hate thee; thou shall make them as a fiery Oven in the time of thine
Anger, the Lord shall swallow them up in his Wrath, and the Fire shall devour
them, Psalm. 21. 8, He will first find and set them out, and then afterward
take his own time to punish them. According to that Divine Method, Having a
mind to revenge all Disobedience, when your Obedience is fulfilled. So he will
first have that Seed which shall serve him, It shall be accounted to the Lord
for a Generation. And when the days of their Obedience and Service are
fulfilled, then he will begin to call to account the former Generations: For it
is first said Zion shall be redeemed with Judgment, and her Converts with
Righteousnesness, and then afterward it follows, And the destruction of the
Transgressors and of the Sinners shall be together, Isa. 1. 27, 28. And I will
punish the World for their Evil, and the Wicked for their Iniquity, Isa. 13.
11. But like as it is written, I will leave a few Men of them from the Sword
and from the Pestilence, that they may declare all their Abominations among the
Heathen, whither they come, and they shall know that I am the Lord, Ezekiel. 12.
16. So here it may be supposed, that God will have one Righteous Generation
after so many Rebellious and Sinful ones; that by comparing both those
Contraries together (I do here speak after the manner of Men) He may know how
to proceed to Recompense, and Punishment. We read, that when God saw that the
wickedness of Man was great in the Earth, it repented the Lord that he had made
Man upon the Earth, and it grieved him at his Heart, Genesis 6. 5, 6. But after
that the Lord smelled a sweet Savor, and the Lord said in his Heart, I will
not again curse the Ground any more for Man's sake; for the Imagination of
Man's Heart is evil from his Youth; neither will I again smite any more every
thing Living, as I have done, Genesis 8. 21. This was said upon Noah, (a Righteous
and Perfect Man) his building an Altar unto the Lord and offering burnt
Offerings on that Altar. So that we see and find that it fares better with the
wicked World for the sake of the Righteous. And after the same similitude of
things we may conceive, that when the Lord has been long and sore displeased
with the Heathen of former Generations who were at Ease (under which word
Heathen are comprised all those who know not, or who obey not the Lord) when
the Earth was much corrup^ed by reason of their Transgression which did sit
heavy upon it, so that it became as a Smoke or Stink in his Nostrils. (When the
House of Israel dwelt in their own Land, they defiled it by their Ways and by
their doings: Their way was before me as the uncleanness of a Removed Woman,
Ezekiel. 30. 17. After God has born with this a long time, then comes and
succeeds the Righteous Generation, who build an Altar and offer Burnt Offerings
on that Altar, which like Frankincense and Myrrh does take away all the former
Stink that the Lord does smell a sweet Savor from them; whereupon he does
abate and mitigate somewhat from that intended Punishment which he had before
thought to lay and inflict on the wicked World; That he will not stir up all
his Wrath, nor yet pour on them all and the utmost Evil, which he had before
purposed to have done. Though withal, by seeing the exceeding Goodness of the
one, compared with the Exceeding Sinfulness, Evil and Provocation of former
Generations, it is necessary that some Punishment and Vengeance be actually
inflicted on them, For the day of Vengeance is in mine Heart. (Hereby is
denoted the futurity thereof, and that it is to succeed after the other) and
the Year of my Redeemed is come, Isa. 63. 4. Which being expressed in the
Present Tense, though it is spoken of after the other, yet in order of time, it
will be before that; to which agrees the Gospel, And the Dead in Christ shall
rise first, These. 4. 16.

For it is the day of the Lord's Vengeance, and the Year of Recompenses for the
controversy of Sion, Isa. 34. 8. What is this controversy of Sion? It is even
the Lord's Controversy with the Inhabitants of the Earth, That all, both Jew
and Gentile, Heathen, and all other People, of every Nation, Country and
Language, and of every Generation, should obey him the Lord their God. And here
it comes to pass that some do Obey him and some do not; from whence it is
appositely styled Recompenses in the Plural Number, there being two sorts of
them, that is to say, a Recompense of Good to those that shall be found to have
Obeyed him, and a Recompense of Evil to such who have not Obeyed him; For the
Lord God of Recompenses shall surely requite, Jer. 51. 56. To all People of
every Country, Kindred and time, one of these two ways. So that in short, if
People do not Obey God, it is a Controversy, which will be decided to their
own Misery, as themselves will find in the day of the Lord's Vengeance. But if
they do obey him (unto which knowing the Terrors of the Lord, we persuade Men)
it will be abundantly made up to them in the Resurrection of the Just, in the
Year of Recompenses for the controversy of Sion.

This Controversy the Lord has been pleading with Men and Women by his Word
and Spirit; by his Prophets, Son Jesus Christ, Apostles, Evangelists, Pastors
and Teachers, Ministers and Servants, ever since Man was first Created on the
Earth. The same lot has fallen unto me, from the Forty third, Forty fourth and
Forty fifth Verses of the Eighteenth Psalm, which I have here endeavored to
Handle Faithfully and Truly according to the Grace and Knowledge, according to
the Ability and Measure which the Lord has given and committed unto me,
according to the proportion of Faith, and according to that distribution of
Spiritual Qualifications and Endowments which was allotted, (and here I stand
in my Lot, Dan. 12, 13.) to me a single Creature. What I write unto others, I
write unto my self also; that I may be found obedient in all those things
whereunto I exhort others. And whilst the desire of my Soul is to this, and the
same is the endeavor of my Hands, it is a well-grounded hope and assurance,
that both my self and my Works may be accepted of the Lord. If the Lord who
has the residue of the Spirit, Mal. 2. 15. does stir up others also in like
manner as he has done mine, This may somewhat prepare and make way for the
Universal Reformation of the Lives and Manners of Men. And they that be wise
shall shine as the brightness of the Firmament, and they that turn many to
Righteousness, as Stars for ever and ever. But thou O Daniel shut up the Words
and seal the Book even to the time of the End. Many shall run to and fro, and
Knowledge shall be increased, Dan. 12. 3. 4. So that after all, these Words
also may be shut up, and this Book may be Sealed until the appointed time draws
near and is actually come, when God will indeed bring the same to pass, even at
the time of the End, in the very last days and shutting up of all.

When Christ the Son of David, the root and offspring of David, the Bright and
Morning Star, shall be delivered from the hands of all his Enemies, and from
the strivings of the People, when his Enemies shall be made his Footstool, and
shall be cast out as the dirt in the Street; when all his Members, Disciples
and Followers shall be delivered from the Hand of Saul. (See the Title of Psalm
18.) that is in a Spiritual Signification from the Devil; that like as Christ
their Head was preserved from and not overcome by his Temptations, so he stall
see the Travel of his Soul and be satisfied, for in that himself has suffered,
being Tempted, he is able to Succor them that are Tempted, Heb. 2. ^8. Whom he
does accordingly so Succor and Preserve in the hour of Temptation and in the
day of Trial, till at length they become Conquerors, and they are delivered
from the hand of all their Enemies, and from the hand of the Tempter.

CHAP. IX. A Paraphrase on some of the most Remarkable Verses of Psalm 18.
Showing the Design and Connection of this Psalm. Whereunto is Sub-joined the
shutting up and the Conclusion of this whole Book.
SO that, in that day the words of this Song may be spoken unto the Lord, I
will love thee, O Lord, my Strength, the Lord is my Rock and my Fortress, and
my Deliverer, my God, my Strength, in whom I will trust, my Buckler and the
Horn of my Salvation, and my high Tower. And so they may go on to declare and
make a Rehearsal in order of the several great and good things which God has
done in his works of Creation and Redemption, how that from the Forming and
Transgression of Adam unto Jesus Christ being manifested in the Flesh, and from
thence to the Pouring out of the Spirit upon us from on High, till the very
last days; it went on all along with Men and Women in all the Habitable parts
of the Earth, and throughout all the several Generations, till at last it came
to this Blessed upshot, Conclusion and Period, Thou have delivered me from the
Strivings of the People, and thou have made me the Head of the Heathen. (By
which two Words, People and Heathen, are comprehended all those who Worship God
and who Worship him not; as also both them who Worship him in a true or in a
false manner) for when David Prays in another Place to to Visit all the
Heathen, Psalm. 59. 5. He includes under that Word, Heathen, also those sinful
and Wicked Jews whom he there speaks of; and amongst whom he dwelt. Even as
there have been all along Those of the Synagogue of Satan, who say they are
Jews, but are not, but do lie, Rev. 3. 9. Which say they are Christians and
Servants of the Lord, and are not, but do lie; for they are Heathen in Manners
tho not in Worship. And such for all their Name of Christian, are not known of
Christ, they being workers of Iniquity; but many of them shall cease to be
such, and then he shall begin to own and know them. When such and all others
come to serve him; When the People are gathered together and the Kingdoms to
serve the Lord, Psalm. 102. 22. When that which has been said will be
fulfilled, A People whom I have not known shall Serve me, I am sought of them
the asked not for me, I am found of them that sought (...) not. I said, Behold
me, Behold me, unto a Nation that was not called by my Name, Isa. 65. 1. And
when the Prophet does afterward complain, I have spread out my hands all the
day unto a Rebellious People, He says the first of the Gentiles, but this last
and worst Character he gives of the Jews. By which is intimated forth and
confirmed that old and true Observation, That as good People do commonly meet
with more Kindness and Civility from mere Strangers than from Acquaintance and
Kinsfolks: So it is a more easy matter to convert and bring over unto God mere
Heathen and Infidels, than to Reform obstinate Jews, superstitious or formal
Christians, from the Error of their ways, and to bring them off from their vain
and sinful Customs. So God speaks unto Ezekiel, Son of Man go get thee unto the
House of Israel, and speak with my Words unto them, for thou art not sent unto
a People of a strange Speech, and of an hard Language, whose Words thou can
not understand; Surely had I sent thee unto them, they would have hearkened
unto thee. But the House of Israel will not hearken unto thee, for they will
not hearken unto me, Ezekiel 3. 4, 5, 6, 7. And so God does elsewhere take notice
how they did Pollute his Name among the Heathen, which before was Sanctified
among them. It is a more easy matter to instruct them in the true Knowledge of
God who never heard of him before, then it is to them who have heard him
Preached and Talked of all their Lives long, and yet they have not the
Knowledge of God. I speak this to their shame: For manysuch are found to be in
this Christian Nation, who know nothing more of him than in a general way, what
they have heard only with the outward Ear, or they have received in false
Notions and Apprehensions concerning him; for in this case so many things must
be unlearned again, and so many Errors must be removed out before the Truth can
come in; That one who is a pure Man, not before prepossessed with wrong
Imaginations, but has the common Principles of Nature and Powers of Knowledge,
when such an one is instructed truly and perfectly in the ways of God, he will
forthwith assent unto them, and he will judge it the most reasonable thing in
the World to do according to what is written, At that day shall a Man look to
his Maker, and his Eyes shall have respect unto the Holy One of Israel, Isa.
17. 7. That Mortal Man should be Subject and Obedient unto the Almighty and
everlasting God; for a Creature to be Governed by his Creator; especially when
he sees, hears and finds it in his Heart to be enforced with that Demonstration
and Power as it may be: As soon as they hear of me they shall Obey me. The
Strangers shall submit themselves unto me: The Strangers shall fade away and be
afraid out of their close Places. There is a manifold Wisdom of God, and so
there is a manifold Sense and Interpretation of his Word, (which yet is all
true and genuine) so besides that meaning of the word Strangers, before
assigned: There may be intended also such as are Jews, Christians, and Servants
of God in Name or Profession only; for they are Strangers or strange Children,
Psalm. 144. 7. Who pretend and seem outwardly to own and serve God, when indeed
and in truth they do not serve and obey him. Whatever Thoughts, Deceits, or
false Imaginations such have in their Minds; they shall fade and come off from
them, and they shall be afraid thereof, when the Earth shall be full of the
knowledge of the Lord, and of the things pertaining to his Kingdom; all their
own Reasonings and Imaginations shall Vanish and be utterly Abolished, and
every High thing that heretofore exalted it self against the Knowledge of God,
shall be cast down and fall to the Ground, that the Lord alone may be exalted
in that day, and every thought both in Man or Woman will be brought into
Captivity unto the Obedience of Christ. As soon as they hear of me, they shall
Obey me.

The CONCLUSION.
THE Wickedness and Rebellion of former Generations did endeavor to Dethrone
God and Christ. Nay, it did put Christ to Death who was the Prince of Life,
whom God again loosed from the Pains of Death, it being not possible that he
should be holden by it, for God raised him up. And the very same degree of
Rebellion and Wickedness, would (if such a thing were possible, which was not)
with Reverence be it spoken, have Killed God himself. Yea, they would what lay
in them, Ungod him, from whence they are properly called Ungodly Men, for they
would not that God should reign over them. Hence did arise up those Strivings
of the People. But herein the Heathen did rage, and the People did imagine a
vain thing: For after all this long Fight and Controversy with the Inhabitants
of the Earth, wherein the Lord did Fight against them with the Sword of his
Mouth; even that two edged Sword which is called the Word of God; And these
Rebels did again fight with him, with all their Ungodly deeds, which they have
Ungodly committed, and with all their hard Speeches, which ungodly Sinners have
spoken against him, Jude 15. Yet after all God has the better and upper Hand.
Though they did as it were Murder his own Divine Majesty, in putting to Death
his Prophets, Son and Servants; God has raised up his Son already, and he will
also raise up all them again, and bring them along with him Alive to Judgment,
when When he will tread down his Enemies in his Anger, and Trample them in his
Fury, Isa. 63. 3. and He will slay them, Luke 19. 27. serving them as they did
his Anointed and his Chosen ones. Still the Lord lives, and Blessed be my
Rock, and let the God of my Salvation be Exalted. The Psalmist goes on to speak
in the Person of Christ (who must Reign till he has put all his Enemies under
his Feet.) It is God that avengeth me and subdueth the People under me: He
delivers me from mine Enemies; yea, thou liftest me up above those that rise
up against me. Which was eminently fulfilled when those that rose up against
him lifted him up upon the Cross, and afterward God lifted him up from the
Grave wherein they had put him into the highest Heavens in his Ascension, and
sitting now at his Right hand, where he is now lifted up infinitely above all
his Enemies. Thou have delivered me from the violent Man, who is as contrary to
the Meckness and Gentleness of Christ as a Wolf is to a Lamb. But here God, the
Everlasting Shepherd, who brought again the Lord Jesus from the Dead, did
deliver and restore this Lamb of God safe again from out of their Mouth, after
they had taken him and with wicked Hands Crucified him. Therefore will I give
thanks unto thee, O Lord, among the Heathen, and sing Praise unto thy Name:
Great deliverance gives he to his King (who in that day in reality and very
deed shall be King both of the Jews and also of the Gentiles, yea, of all the
Earth) and to his Anointed (which is the very Christ) to David and to his Seed
for evermore. By which last word the Son of David is included; of whom as
concerning the Flesh, Christ came, and also all the Seed and Children whom the
Lord has given him from the Beginning, from thenceforth and for evermore, in
the most Universal, comprehensive and extensive Signification, throughout all
the Earth, and to the end of Time, from thenceforth throughout all Eternity.
Which is here so expressed for our Understanding and Apprehension. For there is
no passing throughout all Eternity; for into that is an entrance, and in that
is a continuance, but no going through any part of what is without Succession
of days or ending of time; but like God himself the Ancient of days, abides
continually the same.

And they sung a new Song, saying, Thou art worthy to take the Book and open
the Seals thereof, for thou wast sla^n and have redeemed us to God by thy
Blood, out of every Kindred and Tongue, and People and Nation. And have made us
unto our God Kings and Priests, and we shall Reign on the Earth. Worthy is the
Lamb that was slain to receive Power and Riches and Wisdom, and Strength, and
Honor and Glory, and Blessing. And every Creature which is in Heaven and on
the Earth, and under the Earth, and such as are in the Sea, and all that is in
them, heard I saying, Blessing and Honor and Glory and Power be unto him that
sits upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and ever, Rev. 5. 9, 10,
12, 13. After this, I beheld and lo a great Multitude which no Man could number
of all Nationt and Kindred and People, and Tongues, stood before the Throne and
before the Lamb, clothed with white Robes and Palms in their Hands, and cried
with a loud Voice saying, Salvation unto our God, which sits upon the
Throne, and to the Lamb, Blessing and Glory and Wisdom, and Thanksgiving and
Honor and Power, and Might be to our God for ever and ever. Amen. Rev. 7, 9,
10, 12.

FINIS.
Practical Books Written and Published by Richard Stafford.
OF Happiness: Wherein it is fully and particularly manifested, That the
greatest Happiness of this Life consists in the Fear of God and keeping his
Commandments, in opposition to the Pleasures of Sin, or the pretended
convenience of Disobedience. Rules and Directions for the prevention of and
Recovery out of Sickness. A Discourse against Partial Obedience: Or that
dangerous Deceit so universal amongst them, who call themselves Christians of
keeping some of the Commandments of God and neglecting others. Some Thoughts of
the Life to Come: With a brief account of the state of Religion, as it (...)
now in the World. The great Benefits of Christ to all that Believe on and Obey
him: Being a Treatise on Hebrews 2. 15. Wherein it is showed and made known
how People may be freed and delivered from that slavish fear of Death, whereby
they are subject to Bondage throughout their Lifetime: And also how they may be
saved and preserved from the Evil and Danger of Death when it shall approach
nigh and come actually upon them. An earnest Call to all the Inhabitants of the
Earth, to Turn immediately to the Lord their God.

