A DISCOURSE OF THE Misery of Hell, AND Happiness of Heaven, Grounded from the
following Words.

Matthew. 25.46. And these shall go away into Everlasting Punishment, but the
Righteous into Life Eternal.

THE foregoing part of the Words is to be understood of the Goats, of those of
all Nations, v. 32, 33. and Generations, who shall be placed on the Left Hand:
That is, as it is spoken in other places of ^cripture; such as shall then be
found to have been Sinners, ^nbelievers, Hypocrites, the Children of
Disobedience, ^icked and Ungodly, and such like. According as is writ^^n, The
Hour is coming, in the which all that are in the Graves ^^all hear his Voice,
and shall come forth. They that have done ^ood unto the Resurrection of Life,
and they that have done Evil ^^to the Resurrection of Damnation. We are told,
and warned that the final Condition of Mankind will be, and what ^t shall be
allotted to the one, and what shall be allotted (...) the other. Now, as we are
in the Body, we are con^med herein; and in short, every one of us must go to
^^e of them, either to Heaven, or to Hell. They go to Hell, ^f whom it is
written, And these shall go away into Ever^asting Punishment.

And here this word, Everlasting Punishment sounds terrible and dismal at the
very first; for alas! so weak and little, so ^etful and impatient is our
present Nature and Condition, that we cannot, or at least we do not care to
endure, or undergo any short Pain or Punishment now; how much more intolerable
must that then be which is Eternal? Who now think it so irksome to tarry a few
and evil Days here on Earth, although they have several good ones intermingled?
How can they endure to be in Hell for Thousands and Millions of Years, without
an Hour of Comfort or Freedom from Misery? Even now, although there are the
Intervals of Sleep, and those necessary and common Actions of Life, which
divert from the Sense and Feeling thereof, yet still a wounded and troubled
Spirit who can bear? Much more may the Question be asked, Can thine Heart
endure under the gnawing of the Worm which shall never die? To whom every least
spark of Fire that falls upon any part of the Body is so painful, Can thine
Hands be strong? or how can they abide to lie down in Everlasting Fire? Or how
can they rest in a Cradle of Flames? Or to be refreshed in that Fire, which the
Breath of the Lord like a stream of Brimstone does kindle. It is as bad, as bad
can be: For lay together all the Evils, Pains, Torments, Fears, Diseases,
Afflictions, Crosses; and such like, which are throughout the whole Earth, and
they do not make up the ten thousandth part so bad as the Damnation of Hell.

It will be one of the Torments of Hell to be deprived not only from the
Beatifical Vision, but even from the sight of the Heavens of God, ( Persecute
and destroy them in Anger from under the Heavens of the Lord, Lam. 3.66.) which
must needs be very melancholy and uncomfortable, not so much as to see the
outside of that place, where Blessedness dwells. For if one should be kept in a
very low Pit, without Light or Company: What a restless thing would this be; or
as they took Jeremiah, and cast him down into the Dungeon that was in the Court
of the Prison; and they let down Jeremiah with Cords; and in the Dungeon there
was no Water but Mire; so Jeremiah sunk in the Mire, Jer. 38.6. Here were
Sufferings indeed, which would make ones Heart ache to thoroughly think of it;
much more would it fill the Soul with Anguish and Restlesness to undergo it.
And what is it to be in a Dungeon for a few Days or Years, in comparison to be
in the lowest Hell for all Eternity? The other is Light, and as nothing in
comparison unto it.

As to all the Devices and Places of Torment, Vexation and Misery, which People
now use one to another; all these are but Instruments in the Hands of God, who
created the Waster to destroy, and made all those Places and Things, which are
now used for Pain and Punishment: And if he has created such on this Earth, as
we sensibly know and see; much more has he created alike Things under the
Earth, and in Hell beneath: He is the great lawgiver, who is able to save, and
to destroy: As he does Good, so likewise he can, and does punish. There are on
this Earth some things, which are very grievous and irksome; but as long as
there is Life, even in the worst Evils that befall the Children of Men; there
is no such thing as perfect, absolute and complete Misery; I mean such Misery
as is without any Good or Comfort. There is no such thing on Earth as utter
Darkness, or the Blackness of Darkness; for in the most cloudy and misty Night
some little of Light may be still perceived, especially if you look up toward
Heaven. Again, on this Earth all things are short, and passing away: But in
Hell it is perfect, complete, and absolute Misery: That is, It is Misery
wholly, throughout, and nothing but Misery. The Egyptians had for three Days
such Darkness which may be felt, even thick Darkness, Exodus 10.21, 22, 23. But
in Hell there is utter Darkness, cast the unprofitable Servant into utter
Darkness, and the Blackness of Darkness for ever. Which word for ever is the
greatest Sting and Aggravation of the Torment and Punishment hereof; for herein
it infinitely exceeds, and is worse than all the Evils and Pains on this Earth,
and of this State; for whereas they all pass away, either they go off again
from the Sufferer, or else they make an end of the Sufferer; so as to kill him;
and render him in such a Condition, that he becomes past feeling thereof. It
will be otherwise as to Hell; for there, if the Spirit should fail before him,
and the Souls which he has made, yet they are kept alive, still to undergo and
endure the Severity of God's Vengeance. It is called Death, the Second Death;
for it is a State of ever dying, and never dead. In that Day shall Men seek
Death, and it shall flee from them. Now Death is the worst and most terrible
thing in the World; for all other things are so much the more feared, as they
may the sooner occasion, or bring on this thing of Death; But the second Death,
or Death Eternal, is indeed worse than any Tongue of Man can express forth. I
cannot pencil forth Shadows dark enough to set forth the utmost Horror and
Misery thereof. The Lord preserve every one that will be sure to comply, and to
work together with his Grace from doing those things; the end whereof is Death
Eternal: So that the Reader may not know and feel how bad indeed it is. One
says well, Let us not flee from Sermons of Hell, that we may flee from Hell;
and by that manner of Speech of John Baptist, who has warned you to flee from
the wrath to come, Mat. 3.7. We learn that it is a great part of the
Ministerial Office and Duty, to warn People, that they flee from, and avoid,
and use all Care and Diligence, lest they fall into Hell, and to testify unto
them, lest they come to the place of Torment, Luke 16.28. Accordingly I do take
such to record, who shall Hear or Read this, that they do cease and abstain
from all Appearance of Evil, and be sure not to do those things, to which this
same future Punishment is annexed and threatened. We are told, that the Sinners
of Zion are afraid; fearfulness has surprised the Hypocrites; who among us
shall dwell with devouring Fire? who amongst us shall dwell with Everlasting
Burnings, Isa. 33.14. They that do Iniquity shall be cast into a Furnace of
Fire, Mat. 13.41, 42. The wrath of God comes on the Children of Disobedience,
Col. 3.6. so that the Consequence is Natural, Certain, and Necessary, That if
we would not dwell with devouring Fire, and with Everlasting Burnings, nor yet
be cast into a Furnace of Fire, nor yet fall under the Wrath of God; we must be
sure to avoid all these four Things, Sin, Hypocrisy, Iniquity and
Disobedience; and also, in order to escape Hell, set forth by all these kinds
of Expression; we must avoid Apostasy, or falling away, which I ground from
this following Scripture: For if we sin wilfully after that we have received
the knowledge of the Truth, there remains no more Sacrifice for Sins; but a
certain fearful looking for of Judgment, and fiery Indignation, which shall
devour the Adversaries, Heb. 10.25, 26.

As we here see and know what we must avoid and eschew in order to escape from
everlasting Punishment, (I will repeat them over again for more abundant Safety
and Care) It is Sin, Hypocrisy, Iniquity, (which signifies doing those things
that are not equal) Disobedience, Apostasy, or Falling away. So on the other
hand, we are showed from out of the same Scriptures of Truth, what we are to do
to obtain Eternal Life; If thou will enter into life, keep the Commandments,
Mat. 19.17. Blessed are they that do his Commandments, that they may have Right
unto the Tree of Life, and may enter in through the Gates into the City, Rev.
22.14. Or, as it is written, The Righteous shall go into life eternal.

Righteousness is a Comprehensive Word, and signifies a Conformity to all the
Words of Gods Law in Scripture. And it shall be our Righteousness, if we
observe to do all these Commandments before the Lord our God. as he has
commanded us, Deuteronomy. 6.25. And as Sin, Hypocrisy, Iniquity and Disobedience do
lead toward Hell, so this thing of Righteousness (through God's gracious
acceptance thereof,) furthers toward Heaven. The Happiness and Blessedness
whereof is called Life Eternal. Now there can be nothing better, and more
desirable than Life. For by Life we receive, feel, and are rendered capable to
enjoy all other things which can be had by Man. Accordingly, the Word of God
which matle Man, and the Spirit of God which knows what is in Man, do so
express it. For by Life at first he is enabled to perceive Peace, Joy,
Satisfaction and all those Good things. Said Jesus Christ. Who, is the Bread of
God which comes down from Heaven, and Gives Life unto the World, John 6.33. I
am come, that bey might have Life more abundantly. This is meant of that Godly
and Spiritual Life on Earth, In order to an Eternal Life in the Heavens.

As it has been before observed, How the Everlasting Pu^ishment is set forth by
all those things which are Evil and Painful; so it is contrariwise as to Life
Eternal, for that again is described by all those things which seem Good and
Delightful unto us, as by Meat, Drink, Riches, Pleasures, Gold, Peace, Joy, and
such like. Labor not for the Meat which perishes, but for the Meat which
endures unto Everlasting Life. And so it is most commonly expressed by the
addition of that Epithet (Everlasting) to distinguish ^t from the short and
perishing Pleasures here. In thy presence is fullness of Joy. This is opposite
unto, and distinct from that short and empty measure thereof, we have some
times here, when the end of our Joy is Grief, and there is a mixture of
Heaviness even in the midst of it. And at thy right hand there are pleasures
for evermore, Psalm. 16.11. Which is a great and remarkable diversity from those
sudden and perishing Pleasures here. It is called Everlasting Joy, Isa. 35.10.
whereas all Joy here is but for a Moment, and for the present time. It is
called pure Gold, in opposition to that mixture of Dross which is with it here.
And Perfect Peace, Isa. 26.3. To distinguish it again from that broken and
interrupted Peace here. This Life is but Vain, and as a Vapor and continues
not; But the future Life is so substantial and enduring that it shall have no
End. Whatever we meet with here which is delightful or pleasing, yet still we
should Prefer Jerusalem above our chief Joy, Psalm. 137.6. So this should be the
only Standard or Measure of all our Comfort or Vexation, as it furthers or
hinders in the way to Heaven. So we should be contented or pleased therewith,
and give God thanks for the same. As again, when it hinders or obstructs, or
stops up the way against our going or Arriving there, this should be Grief and
Vexation of Spirit. And we should endeavor as much against it as we can.
Truly, mine own easiness or uneasiness of mind, does wholly depend and turn
upon this Point. As I do any thing which sets me one step forward in the way to
Heaven, which I know assuredly from the Word of Truth (which shows and makes
known the way of Life) as also from the approbation of mine own Conscience,
being guided thereby; herein I rejoice, and give God thanks on this behalf.

Again, It is unexpressible anguish and vexation of Soul, when any thing
happens which turns me backward, or sets me out of the right way. Which again I
know by the very same manner as I do the other, by its being against the
Scriptures; as also, I find thereupon mine own thoughts accusing me, even a
sensible Regret and Condemnation. Notwithstanding in this rejoice not, that the
Spirits are subject unto you, (which yet is a good cause of rejoicing, for
those Spirits do very much let, resist and hinder, in our doing the Will of
God) but rather rejoice, because your Names are written in Heaven, Luke 10 20.
For by your Names being enrolled there, you are much more sure of coming to
Heaven from the Decree of God, than the Spirits can possibly hinder. And so the
same Reasoning is, Whatever your worldly Privileges and Advantages are,
whether thou have Riches, or respect from Men, whether thou have Wisdom;
Beauty, Health, or whatever is now usually desired, or esteemed by the Children
of Men. In this rejoice not, but rather rejoice, because thou have a well
grounded Hope to go to Heaven, because the Promises do belong to thee, and thou
art within the Covenant, and also to thee pertains the Adoption inasmuch as
thou art so long a Son and Servant of God, as thou do his Will, and obeyest
his Commands. The Scripture does make known the place of Heaven, and also the
way which each one must walk in, if he would arrive at, and enter therein, viz.
by keeping the Commandments of God, which are written and recorded in that same
Book.

The People of old time, and of former Generations, did talk and preach of the
things pertaining to the Kingdom of God, after the same manner as we do now.
Such as were his Saints and Children did live by Faith, Hab. 2.4. and died in
Faith; Not having received the Promises, but having seen them afar off, and
were persuaded of them, and embraced them, Heb. 11.13. And even the ignorant
and ungodly Multitude of former Generations, have also passed through the Door,
or Gate and Entrance into the invisible World: I mean Death. And as the Devils
believe and tremble. And as the Souls of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, do at this
Day live; so their Souls also live and exist, and they have a more clear
knowledge and apprehension of the Decree of God concerning Mankind than they
had, or we have in the days of our Flesh, so that in them who sin wilfully,
what was formerly Ignorance or Unbelief, is now a certain fearful looking for
of Judgment, and fiery Indignation, which shall devour them for having been
God's Adversaries. But such as in the Days of their Flesh were willing and
obedient, they shall eat the good of the Land, Isa. 1.19. even of the new
Heavens and new Earth, where Righteousness dwells. And as those who did refuse
and rebel, shall have a certain fearful looking for of Judgment, so unto the
Upright there arises Light in the Darkness, even after they are passed the
darkness of the shadow of Death, and they have a comfortable expectation of
good things to come. The Children of Men will then remember how that the
Sinners, and Ungodly, and merry Men of the World, did in their life time
receive their good things, that is, they received their Portion in this Life,
Psalm. 17.14. Because by them their Portion is fat, and their Meat plenteous,
Hab. 1.16. And the Godly and Righteous received evil things, Persecutions,
Afflictions, Poverty, but now they are comforted, and the others are tormented,
Luke 16.25. As is the condition of those who are already gone off from the
Stage of this Earth, so will ours be in a short time; they are dead, and we are
dying.

As for my part I was young, and now am elderly, tho not old, and I am fearful
and apprehensive every Week of tasting of this bitterness of Death. But I do
yet more exceedingly fear and quake, lest my Soul should be shut under Harches
by Death, before I have a better and more assured Hope whither it would go. As
it is written, Gather not my Soul with Sinners, Psalm. 26.9. So it is the
continued Desire and Prayer of my Soul, as the same should be my utmost
endeavor throughout this life. O Lord, our Creator, the Invisible One, when
this Body must return to the Earth as it was, and the Spirit to God that gave
it, O then do Thou not gather my Soul with the Sinners and Transgressors of
former Generations. Which Prayer as I did write down, and lift up my Soul unto
God for the same, it was thereupon immediately answered, directed, and dictated
unto me, That if thou would not have thy Soul gathered with the Sinners and
Transgressors of former Generations, then thou must be sure not to be one of
their number; that is, thou must not be a Sinner and Transgressor in that
Generation wherein thou now live. But this is my Request, and my coveting,
and the thing that I long for, That the Lord would be pleased to bind up my
Soul in the bundle of Life. Into thy Hands I commit my Spirit, for Thou have
Redeemed me, O Lord God of Truth, that my Soul may be gathered up unto the
Father of Spirits; and that when I do depart, or decease from out of this Body,
I may come unto Mount Sion, and to the City of the Living God, the heavenly
Jerusalem, and to an innumerable Company of Angels, to the general Assembly and
Church of the Firstborn, which are written in Heaven, and to God the Judge of
all, and to the Spirits of Just Men made perfect.

My Flesh and my Heart fails; but God is the strength of my Heart, and my
Portion for ever, Psalm. 73.26. It is certain that this Flesh does fade as a
Leaf, wax old like a Garment, and wither as a Stick, and it will not long hold
the Soul in; and therefore against the time that this our Heart and our Flesh
fails (yea, our Heart fails already, and beforehand at the thorough
Thought and Apprehension thereof). It must be our best and wisest, and most
excellent way to have God for the Strength of our Heart, and for our Portion
for ever. That against the time this Tenement of Clay fails, by mouldering and
falling down into the Dust; He may take us unto his own Home, and receive us
into Everlasting Mansions, which are in our Father's House. That as it is
written, And ye shall go forth, and grow up as the Calves of the Stall, Mal.
4.2. So we may be fixed and seated in Stalls and Apartments of Glory. For the
Lord's Portion is his People; Jacob is the lot of his Inheritance; He found him
in a desert Land, in the waste howling Wilderness, Deuteronomy. 32.9, 10. This last is
just like our Condition now here on Earth, where God finds and culls out such
and such of the Sons and Daughters of Men (the Lord knows them that are his)
as are his People, and Jacob for the lot of his Inheritance. Now a Lot takes
some, and leaves others, even a few, and single ones from out of the Multitude:
So of old time he took out Jacob for his peculiar People from the rest of
Mankind. Now therefore if ye will obey my voice indeed, and keep my covenant,
then shall ye be a peculiar people unto me above all people, for all the earth
is mine, Exodus 19.4. And so he does at this day take out by Lot as it were his
peculiar People from all Nations, Countries, and Languages of Mankind, even only
those who obey his Voice indeed, and keep his Covenant. Both the Voice and
Covenant showed and manifested within them; as also what is written in Ink and
Paper in the lively Oracles, the Book of the Lord, which we commonly call the
Bible.

There is a very great deal said in the Old. Testament concerning Heaven,
Immortality, and Eternal Life; yea, much more then many People are aware of;
for Heaven, Immortality and Eternal Life are there couched and comprehended
under all those several Expressions (which are repeated over innumerable times
in the Books of Moses, the Psalms, and the Prophets,) The Lords portion is his
people; the Lord, the hope of their fathers, Jer. 50.7. Happy is that people
whose God is the Lord, Psalm. 144.15. Happy is he that has the God of Jacob for
his help, whose hope is in the Lord his God, Psalm. 146.5. And by all such
Phrases and Forms of Speech there, which the Holy Ghost makes use of, to show
that such of his Creatures as serve and obey him, they have also an Interest
and Propriety in him. He is their God, or my God, or such like. In all these as
under a Vail is contained Heaven, Immortality, and Eternal Life. For there is a
way of assuredly gathering and reasoning out of the Scriptures, to bring out
such and such Truths, although they seem to speak nothing thereof in plain and
express Words. Even so it is here, for by the same way of assuredly gathering
and reasoning out of the Scriptures as is used in Heb. 11.16. He was not
ashamed to be called their God, (so far goes the Text there cited out of the
Old Testament, but then says the Reasoning by the Spirit further) for he has
prepared for them a City. From this very place we lay down and establish that
grand Position and Affirmation, which is certainly true, That wherever in the
Old Testament God is said to be their God, therein is contained the Promise of
Heaven, Immortality, and Eternal Life; this being that City which he has
prepared for them. And to make this Matter a little more plain and clear, the
Reason hereof stands on this wise, He is not ashamed to be called their God,
for he has prepared for them a City. That is, They had Confidence and
Assurance that God would do somewhat more for his Servants than Temporal and
present Mercies, for they were also common unto others: But as he is just and
good, so he would make some Requital for Obedience, and for that Hardship and
Inconvenience his Servants meet with from the World for his sake, which they
did expect hereafter in another place, and that is Heaven; and also themselves
should remain, or else be raised up again into a State capable to receive and
partake of that great Good God had prepared for his Creatures, which must be by
continuing or giving them Life again. For they were sensibly bereaved of this
present Life, and here they did not continue, by reason of Death: So that of
Necessity therein must virtually be contained the Promise of Immortality and
Eternal Life; and therefore Paul says appositely and pertinently to the Matter
here treated of, in Hope of Eternal Life, which God, that cannot lie promised
before the World began; but has in due time manifested his Word through
preaching, Tit. 1.2. for discovery has been made thereof by little and little.
It was contained in those general Expressions aforementioned; the Lord their
God, I am the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and such like. God was the same
then, and his Decrees alike sure, although they were not so clearly made known
unto Men. And therefore now it is called Hope, which enters into that within
the vail, Heb. 6.19. a better hope, Heb. 7.19. a lively hope, 1 Pet. 1.3. all
in opposition to those faint Guesses, and imperfect Knowledge they had thereof
under the Law. It is speaking plainly under the Gospel, according to John
16.25. in opposition to those dark Speeches, which God spoke by Moses, or those
Parables and Proverbs, which he spoke by his Servants, the Prophets. They under
the Old Testament Dispensation had but a dull and glimmering Prospect beyond
the Earthly Canaan: But now the appearing of our Savior Jesus Christ has
abolished Death, and has brought Life and Immortality to light through the
Gospel, 2 Timothy 1.10.

And tho in the Gospel it is spoken more plainly concerning Heaven,
Immortality, and Eternal Life, and also more suitable unto our Carnal
Apprehensions, and Fleshly Mind, in describing it by the outward
Representations of a Marriage Supper, Gold, Honor, Pleasure, Satisfaction,
Blessedness, and such like; yet there is also somewhat spoken of these things
in the Old Testament: But all that, and much more than all that, is
comprehended under that one saying; The Lord our God, the Lord is my Portion
for ever.

Perhaps the Hearer or Reader may expect, that now I am a discoursing of the
Happiness of Heaven; here I should be unto thee as a very lovely Song of one
that has a pleasant Voice, and can play well on an Instrument, Ezekiel. 33.32.
This being so very delightful a Subject; that if here thou can not tickle the
Ear, and please thy Auditory, thou never wilt.

But now suppose I should here use Ten Thousand Words in Rhetorical Flourishes,
in the greatest Eloquency, and Wit of Man, with the most smooth Language, with
the greatest Connection, and Exactness of Style, and all concerning this best of
Subjects, the Happiness or Joys of Heaven; yet as it is said, That she who cast
her two mites into the treasury, cast in more than all they who gave of their
abundance: So here it would be, there would be more said concerning Heaven in
these four or five words only; the Lord my God, or the Lord is my Portion for
ever. For all these are the Words which the Spirit did dictate, so that there
is more contained in them than in five Millions of other Words concerning it.

This will also further appear from this following significancy and Reasoning,
viz. If the Lord is our God, or if the Lord is my Strength, and my Portion for
ever, thence it follows also of consequence, That all that Blessedness,
Happiness, Goodness, Delight, Satisfaction and Immortality, which is in God the
Everlasting Creator of the Ends of the Earth, (as it is all in him, which is
any where in the World; for they are all but Rays and Emanations from this
infinite Fountain of Life and Being;) I say, all these are communicated, and
imparted forth, (even as far as the small Vessel is capable to receive
brimfull, and running over) to such of his Creatures and People, to whom he is
the Lord their God, and they are his Portion, and the Lot of his Inheritance,
^s they can reciprocally say, The Lord is my strength, and my portion for ever.

There is but one thing in the World which hinders all the reasonable Creatures
on the Earth, from this Blessedness and Union with their God, and that is Sin..
O accursed thing! which we gather assuredly from what is written; Repent ye
therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out when the times
of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord, Acts 3.19. As the
foregoing part of the Verse does illustrate and show that, so by the latter
part of the Verse, the Holy Ghost does signify, that such of his Creatures as
shall then be more nearly and immediately in the Presence of God (where is
fullness of Joy, and at whose Right Hand are Pleasures for evermore;) all
Refreshing, Content, Satisfaction, yea, and Happiness does arise from him; as
Waters do flow from the Fountain, Light does proceed from the Sun, or as Heat
does issue forth from Burning Fire to the things that are next unto it.

As on the foregoing part of our Being he is our Creator, and he is our
Preserver in the mean while, who holds our Soul in Life all the time that it is
in the Body; and afterward also he that first breathed into us the Breath of
Life, can, and also does preserve it when it is gone forth: So in his being our
Portion for ever, he will take Care of and do good for us in the time to come,
and throughout the succeeding Eternity. Unto God shall all flesh come, Ps.
65.2. that is, good and bad promiscuously to appear before him in judgment; but
unto him shall the gathering of the People be, Genesis 49.10. This in a particular
manner is meant of his own particular Elect, Redeemed and Chosen People, who in
this Life, and on this Earth do gather, and make toward God by Faith and
Obedience, by Love, Trust, and Adherence; and hereafter they shall flow back
unto (as Rivers again to the Sea, from whence they did first arise) and be
admitted into his immediate Presence to the nearest Communion, and closest
Union with the Godhead himself. He will gather all Souls which are his, which
he has made, and which he has redeemed, that is from Sin here, and from Death
and the Devil hereafter, as nearly, and as closely to himself, as a Hen does
gather her Chickens under her Wings. It is somewhat too gross an Expression to
say, that the Souls of the Righteous shall be incorporated with the Deity, for
that denotes somewhat too material a Conception of such Spiritual and
Immaterial things. But the Union will be as near, and as close as what is
ingrafted into such a Stock, is near and close to the same stock, and it
becomes as one, and the same with it. And the nations of them that be saved,
shall walk in the light of it, Rev. 21.24. But this is not all; for further,
they shall be one, and as it were the same with God himself. Holy Father keep
thorough thine own Name those whom then have given me, that they may be one as
we are: And now I come to thee, that they may be all in one, as thou Father art
in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us, Joh. 17.11, 13, 21. This
being one, and as it were the same with God, (who shall then be all in all, but
the Creatures have and derive it from him by Union and participation) will be
the highest and greatest, and only Happiness in Heaven. The Truth whereof may
be hence understood, for God is a most happy Being: For he created all
Happiness and Good, and he is comprehensive of all Happiness and Good; so that
all Happiness and Good do reside and lodge in him, as in their Foundation Stock
or Fountain; from whence do flow forth all Derivations and Emanations of Good
and Happiness; So as when any one is nearer to the Sun, he is nearer to the
Light and Heat; so the Nations and Persons of those who are saved, who are
nearer to God, are also thereby nearer to Good and Happiness. Himself in a
peculiar and eminent manner is styled the Blessed, Art thou Christ the Son of
the Blessed, Mark 14.61. And as Christ himself does promise, Where I am there
shall my servant be; if any man serve me, him will my father honor, John
11.26. That they may be all one, as thou, Father, art in me, and I in thee;
that they also may be one in us. And the glory which thou gave me, I have
given them, that they may be one, even as we are one, John 17.22, 23. which
Prayer of Christ is heard and granted; accordingly he elsewhere calls him, My
Father and your Father, my God and your God, Joh. 20.17. By expressing of
which, on this wise he shows himself to be the first born of many Brethren,
that Christ in all things should have the Pre-eminence: But from all this put
together, it may be most surely Argued and Reasoned, that if Christ be the Son
of the blessed, then they that are Christ's, are the Sons of the Blessed; and
accordingly the Scripture does elsewhere expressly averr the same, Behold, now
are we the sons of God, 1 John 3.2. and if they are the Sons of the Blessed,
then we know that when he shall appear, we shall be like him; for we shall see
him as he is. This Reasonng out of the Scriptures is right preaching, for so
did Paul reason out of the Scriptures concerning several things; and so are we
allowed to bring out all those many Truths, relating to the Kingdom of God, and
man's Salvation. We know further that some of his blessedness will be derived
from him, and conveyed and communicated forth unto us. The least Drop or Ray
whereof will then suffice us; for we are but little Beings, and that is of
infinite Contentment and Satisfaction. As the Apostle argues, Furthermore, we
have Fathers of our Flesh which corrected us, and we gave them reverence, shall
we not much rather be in subjection to the father of spirits, and live? for
they verily for a few days chastened us after their own pleasure; but he for
our Profit, that we might be partakers of his holiness, Heb. 12.9, 10. From
which very last words I do reason, that if we may be partakers of his Holiness
here (as this Text does most plainly import, that we may) then assuredly we
shall be partakers of this Happiness and Blessedness hereafter. From whence
note, That the only way to Happiness is by Holiness, because of what is said in
this same Chapter, Without holiness no man shall see the Lord, ver. 24. who
have not Holiness here, that man or Woman will not have Happiness or
Blessedness hereafter.

Concerning this future and everlasting Happiness of Blessedness, many things
do arise in the Mind which are hard to be uttered, and hard to be conceived.
For since the beginning of the World, Men have not heard non perceived by the
heart, neither has the Eye seen, O God, besides thee, what he has prepared
for him that waits for him, Isa. 64.4. (As we do this Day in this Ordinance
of Hearing his word) or that love him. But God has revealed them unto us by
his Spirit. Which same Spirit spoke by the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles,
out of whose Words and Writings this same description of Heaven, and the Joys
thereof, has been brought forth.

And what shall I say more? where I begun and found it, there I must leave it.
If I should multiply never so many Words, I cannot say more than what I have
said already, That the whole of Heaven, and the Happiness thereof, is comprised
in these very few Words, The Lord our God, the Lord is the strength of my
heart, and my Portion for ever. Or in the Language of the Gospel. We (that is,
only his Elect) shall ever be with the Lord, 1 Thessalonians. 4.17. If you set aside
these kind of Expressions, and then if you Read, or Hear never so much
concerning Heaven; yet when you come there, you will affirm, as the Queen of
Sbeba did of the Wisdom of Solomon, The one half was not told me. But if you
once add and mention, The Lord shall be my Portion for ever: Or, We shall ever
be with the Lord, therein the whole and utmost of Heaven was told unto thee
before hand, and the Souls of such as shall be Saved, and admitted there, will
make their return, As we have heard, so have we seen, in the City of the Lord,
of Hosts, in the City of our God, God will Establish it for ever. Selah. Psalm.
48.8.

When the Apostle Paul, in 1 These. 4. does mention how we shall ever be with
the Lord; He thereupon immediately annexes and subjoyns, Wherefore comfort (in
the Marginal Reading, there it is exhort) One another with these Words. And as
it is here said, God will establish it (that is, the City he has prepared for
his People, for ever Selah. So it is Meet and Right, that by the way of
Retaliation and Common good Will, ( Paul Calls it a Good Mind toward God) this
little while that we are in the way, that his Servants and their Seed should be
established before him, in his Worship and Service, in finishing his Work and
doing his Will. They should be settled, fixed and rooted herein.

Be thou faithful unto Death, and I will give thee a Crown of Life, Rev. 2.10.
But he that shall endure unto the end the same shall be saved; Mat. 24.13.
Hereby also People will be enabled in this World of Trial and Temptation, to
choose rather to suffer affliction with the People of God, than to enjoy the
pleasures of sin for a season; esteeming the Reproaches of Christ greater
Riches than the Treasures of Egypt. For he had respect unto the recompense of
reward, Heb. 11.25, 26. So they will go through the course (of what is imagined
the dullness, irksomness, and tediousness of a Religious Life, which indeed is
real Peace and Satisfaction to the Heart of Man, to such who universally comply
and conform unto it all along, although the World, and Strangers to this Joy,
and also our fleshly corrupt Nature are apt to call it so) rather than to enjoy
the outward Mirth, Recreations and Pleasures of Sin for a season, knowing that
all the Reproaches and Inconveniences which we meet withal, for holding and
continuing in this our good way, are greater. Riches than the Treasures of the
World, for we have respect unto the recompense of reward. Keep an Eye still to
that, and this will prevent that we wax not weary in well doing; for we shall
reap, in due season, if we faint not. Whilst, let others do what they will, we
do all along follow, propose and endeavor after an end which is worthy, viz.
To serve God here with all our Mind, Body, and Estate that we may enjoy Him
hereafter, and so ever be with the Lord, Amen.

Written by Richard Stafford
FINIS
LONDON: Printed, and are to be Sold by E. Whitlock, near Stationers' Hall, 1697.


