Gods Sword drawn forth AGAINST Drunkards and Swearers, Blasphemers of Gods
Holy Name, Whore-Mongers, Sabbath Breakers, and other lewd Livers of all sorts.

In which is set forth the Abominable and beastly sin of Drunkenness, with its
attendant vices.

In Forty Three terrible Examples of Gods immediate Judgments upon several
Drunkards, and other Impenitent Sinners.

Necessary to be had in all Houses, being a caution to Young and Old.

St. Austin says, That Drunkenness is a bewitching Devil, a pleasant Poison,
and a sweet Sin. St. Origin says, That drunkenness makes a Man a Beast, a
strong man weak, and a Wise man a fool. By J. Srenock, B. D.

Woe to them that rise up early, and sit up late, to follow after strong drink.
Licensed and Entered according to Order.

Printed for Joshua Conyers at the Black Raven in Duck Lane: 1677.

1 Corinthians. 6. Chap. 9. 10, Verses. Neither Fornicators, nor Adulterers, nor
Thieves, nor Covetous, nor Drunkards shall inherit the Kingdom of God.
Reader,
TO warn all from the devouring Gulf of vice, wherein so many are ship-wrackt,
is the design of this sheet, by showing various Examples, how God by the Sithe
of Divine Vengeance, has cut down and destroyed many immediately in their
sinful Courses: and to warn thee (Christian Reader) to beware thou fallest not
as these have done before thee; for how do thou know, O besotted Drunkard,
but the next time thou art swilling in the midst of thy Cups of Jollity,
Swearing and Blaspheming God's name, thou may be cut off, and sent to Eternal
flames in the very Act; and added as another terrible Example to these we have
here set down, (most of which I had from the certain information of godly
Ministers, and the rest observed with grief and terror my self) yet so far,
alas has the Devil bewitched Men to this Sin, masking it under the Title of
Good fellowship, Merry-making, and the like; that though the holy Scripture
says expressly, no Whoremongers, Drunkards, etc. (without Repentance) shall
enter into Heaven: yet instead of repenting for, or leaving of this swinish
sin, they glory in it, and revile not only those that out of Conscience reprove
them for it, but also those that out of charity to their Souls warn them
against it. I shall represent this Sin in its Nature, by proving it to be most
detestable.

1. By Scripture; As you may read in Joel 1. verse. 5. Away ye Drunkards, and
weep and howl all ye drinkers of Wine. Nahum 1. 10. And while they are Drunken
as Drunkards, they shall be devoured as stuble fully dry. Deuteronomy. 29. 20, 21.
and. 2. 16. and 20. 11. This our Son is Stobborn and rebellious, he will not
obey our voice, he is a Glutton and a Drunkard; and all the men of his City
shall stone him with stones that he dye. Isa. 5. 11. Woe unto them that rise up
early in the morning that they may follow strong drink, that continue until
night, till wine inflame them. And so read Prove. 23. 31, 32. of Belshazzer,
Dan. 5. 4, 5. Heb. 2. 15. Luke 21. 34. Romans 13. 13. Gal. 5. 21. With many more
Scriptures against this grievous and beastly Sin of Drunkenness. Secondly, by
example.

2. In Northamptonshire I lived not many years since at Desborough in that
County, which I saw with my eyes; as I was walking along, there rides by me on
the Road a Man very much in drink, but as he rid he fell off his Horse, and
never spoke more, but being carried to the next Town, he lay in a sad condition
for a day or two, and so dyed.

3. How many have destroyed themselves with immoderate drinking of Brandy, a
Drink which has been lately introduced into England, and as much destructive
to Men's bodies as any liquor that has been used for these many years. In the
immoderate use of it: how many strong men have been slain by it? Every year
scores, I could instance in many, they be so well known; I shall here forbear
mentioning of them, but look upon this by way of Caution.

4. Not long since a Soldier in Salisbury in the midst of his health, drinking
and carousing in a Tavern, drank a Health to the Devil, saying, That if the
Devil did not come and pledge him, he would not belive that there was either
God or Devil; whereupon his companion, stricken with horror, hastened out of the
Room; and presently after hearing a hideous noise, and smelling a stinking
savor, the Vintner ran up into the Chamber, and coming in missed his guest,
and found the Window broken, the Iron Bar in it bowed and all bloody, but the
man was never heard of afterward.

5. I saw, says Acosta, two men coming Drunk out of a Tavern, which for a
trifle killed one another.

6. A Butcher in Hastinfield having heard his Minister enveigh against
Drunkenness, in his Cups at the Alehouse fell a jesting and scossing at the
Ministers Sermons, but as he was Drinking Gods hand fell upon him, for the
Drink stoping in his Throat choked him that he dyed presently.

7. A Vintner that accustomed himself to swearing and Drunkenness, as he was on
the Lords day standing at his door with a Pot in his hand to invite Guests,
there came suddenly such a Whirlwind as carried him up into the Air, after
which he was never seen more.

8. At the Plow in Barnwel, near Cambridge, a lusty young man with two of his
Neighbors, and one Woman in their company, agreed to drink up a barrel of
strong Beer, which accordingly they did; but within four and twenty hours,
three of them dyed and the fourth hardly escaped after long Sickness.

9. On the tenth day of August 1629. one Thomas Willson a Labourer, a known
Blasphemer of Gods name by Oaths and Curses, and given much to drinking and
excess, upon a sl^ght occasion moved to displeasure against his Wife, and not
willing to do much violence unto her, turned it unto himself, and with a Knife
stobbed himself, many of his Friends and Neighbors being present, and so he
dyed.

10. A young Gentleman being drunk, as he rod homeward, was thrown by his
Horse, and had his Brains beat out with the pomel of his sword.

11. At Tenby in Pembrook-sh^re, a Drunkard in his drink fell from an high and
steep Rock, whereby he was dashed to pieces.

12. One Vintner at Godmanchester in 1628. a known drunkard, and one that in
his drink would talk profanely of Religion and good men, fell from the top of
a Pear Tree to the ground, and broke his Neck.

13. At Kesgrowe near Ipswitch, three Servingmen having been drinking hard, the
Hostess would needs persuade them to stay, and drink three Outs, Wit out of
their heads, Money out of their Purses, and the drink out of the Barrel; and as
she was coming to them with a Pot in her hand, God suddenly struck her sick and
speechless, her Tongue also swelling in her head; she never recovered her
Speech, but dyed the third day after.

14. One in Norfolk, a notorious Drunkard, was drowned in a shallow Brook of
water, with his Horse by him.

15. On the eighth of February, a company of drunkards, whose names are
recorded as follows: Adam Gibbens, George Kespel, John Koysel, Peter
Horsdroff, John Warner, Simon Heamkers, Jacob Hermons, Hermon Frow: these eight
Drunkards, in contempt of the blessed Sabbath, agreed to go to the Tavern on
the Lords day to be merry, and coming to the house of one Anthony Hodge, an
honest godly man, they called for burnt wine, sack, claret, and what not: the
good man refusing to give them any, advised them to go to Church to hear the
Word of God: but they all save Adam Gibbens refused, saying they loathed that
exercise. Whereupon the Host departed, who being gone to Church, they began to
curse and ban, wishing he might break his neck ere he returned, and wishing the
Devil might break their necks if they went from thence till they had some Wine:
whereupon the Devil in likeness of a young man appeared unto them, bringing in
his hand a flaggon of wine, and so drank to them, saying, Good fellows be
merry, you shall have wine enough; you seem lusty Lads, and I hope you will pay
me well: who answering, said, they would either pay him, or engage their necks
for it, yea, rather then fail, their bodies and Souls: Thus these men continued
drinking and swilling so long, till they could hardly see one another: at last
the Devil their Host told them, that now they must pay for all; at which their
hearts waxed cold: but the Devil bid them be of good cheer, for now they must
drink fire and brimstone with him in the pit of hell for ever. At which the
Devil brake their necks asunder, and destroyed them. And thus ended these
dr^nkards their miserable days, which may serve for a Cavet for all drunkards
for ever.

16. Two examples I have known by Children, that have Murdered their own
Mothers when they were in Drink; and one notorious D^unkard, who attempted to
kill his own Father, of which being hindered, he fired his Barn, and was after
executed.

17. On the third of August one T. Aldred of Godmanchester in Huntington-stire,
a Butcher, and an accustomed drunkard, being desired by a Neighbor to unpitch
a load of Hay, and being at that time in drink, let his Pitchfork slip out of
his hand, and reaching to take it up, fell down with his head foremost, and
fell upon his fork Tines, being upwards, and struck himself to the Heart, and
so dyed suddenly.

18. One John Bone of Ely Coachman, being given exeedingly to swearing and
drunkenness, drank himself so drunk on the Lords day that he fell out of the
Coach-box, and the horses trod him to death. See Clarks Examples.

19. A Bailiff of Hendly upon the Lords day, being drunk at Melford, got upon
his horse to ride through the streets, saying, that his horse would carry him
to the Devil, and presently his Horse cast him and broke his Neck.

20. A Glasier in Chancery Lane not long since so overcharged his Stomach with
wine, that coming home he fell a Vomiting in so exteraordinary a manner, that
he broke a Vain and dyed two days after.

21. In the Year 1674. some Children near Lambeth, on the Lords day, having (as
I was credibly informed) got a pot of Drink amongst them, drank a health to the
Devil, saying that he was a Son of a whore if he came not to pledge them; but
before they had drank round, their invited guest the Devil appeared unto them,
ready to pledge them, which almost frighted them out of their Wits, and they
lay in a sad condition for some time afterward.

22. So great are these Sins of Drunkenness and Whoredom, and Sabbath-breaking,
that it has brought several persons to ruin, and unto untimely and shameful
ends. As for an Example; The young man that was hanged for murdering his
fellow servants, by name Thomas Savage, confessed that the sin of Druhkenness,
Whoring, and Sabbath-breaking brought him to that untimely end.

23. Also likewise the Captain and Lieutenant of the Pirates that were executed
in 1674. confessed that Whoring and Ill company brought them to that untimely
end.

24. So a young man that was hanged in Chains in Kent, March last 1674. for
murdering his sweetheart and her son, confessed at the Gibbet that Drunkenness
and Sabbath-breaking brought him to that untimely end.

25. So also the Two Men that Hang in Chains, the one at Hampstead, and the
other between High-gate and Islington, this last year, all these confessed at
the Gibbet with much grief of heart, that these too common sins of Drunkenness,
Whoredom and excess, has brought them to their untimely ends; how d^d they
with grief of heart exhort all others to take warning by them, who are made
public spectacles of shame and Infamy.

26. And truly there is hardly any of those persons that are executed at Tyburn
every month, but confess the same, that those sins have been their ruin.
Consider of these things, O thou Drunkard and Whoremonger, and repent before it
be too late, and take warning by these sad examples, lest thou fall with these
persons, and partake of these punishments.

Think not that those on whom the Tower of Shilo fell, were greater sinners
then ye, but except you repent, you shall likewise perish, Luke 10.

27. Some Examples against Whoredom and Adultry, both from Scripture and
History. 1. It is forbidden of God, as you may read, Exodus 20. 14. Thou shall
not commit Adultry, Luke 8. 20. thou know the Commandme^, do not commit
Adultry, complained of in Jer. 9. 1. Romans 2. 2. Prove. 30. 20. Threatened, Psalm.
50. 18. Read Mal. 3. 5. Heb. 13. 3. Whormongers and Adulterers will God judge.
Read Prove. 6. 16. For by means of whorish women a man is brought to a morsel of
bread, and the Adultress will hunt for the precious Life. Punished, Levite. 20.
10. Prove. 6. 32. David, the Sword never departed his house, 1 Samuel 2. 4. Ely's
Sons. 1 Samuel 2. 4. With many other Scriptures against this beastly and filthy
Sin, so much gloried in this Age to their very great shame. See these following
Examples, the truth of which I could relate.

28. The Egyptians used to cut off the nose of the Adultress, where to the
Prophet alludes in Ezekiel

29. Anno Christi 1583. In London two Citizens were committing Adultry together
on the Lords day; who were immediately struck with fire from Heaven in the very
act of uncleanness: Their bodies were found half burnt up, and sending forth a
most filthy savor.

30. Mr. Cleaver reports of one whom he knew, that had committed the act of
uncleanness, whereupon he fell into such horror of Conscience, that he hanged
himself, leaving it thus written in a Paper, Indeed (says he) I do acknowledge
it to be utterly unlawful for a Man to kill himself, but I am bound to act the
Magistrates part, because the Punishment of this Sin is Death. See more in the
book the sins of Whordome and Adultery condemned.

31. Lastly, God will make his Plagues wonderful against these sins; his curse
will overtake the Swearer, and Blasphemer, in their Souls and Bodies, persons
and prosperity, in their goods and houses: when he begins he will not spare, he
will make an end, he will do that that will make the Ears of them that hear to
tingle, as is verified in these ensuing Examples.

32. One Ann Avires, in the City of London Widow, forswore her self for a
little money that she was to give for six pound of Tow, at a shop in
Woodstreet, for which she was suddenly surprised by the judgment of God, and
she fell down speechless immediately, and cast that upwards which by nature
should be voided downward, and so dyed, to the terror of all perjured and
forsworn wretches. See Clerks Examples more at large.

33. An Innokeeper in the Town of Rutlingvin, who received a Budget of money
from a passenger to keep for him, forswore the same before a Judge, giving
himself to the Devil if he swore falsely, and was (by two that testified against
him, which indeed were two finds of hell) presently in the presence of the
Judge hoisted up into the Air, where he was never seen more.

34. Michael a Blasphemous Rabin, as he was Banqueting with his companions,
fell to Blaspheming of Christ, and his Mother Mary, boasting that he had gotten
the Victory over the Christians God: But as he went out of the Room he fell
down Stairs and broke his neck. See Fencilus.

35. The same Author reports what happened in Megalapole near to Voildstate, in
the time of the celebration of the Feast of Pentecost, Anno 1651. The people
being set on drinking and carousing, a Woman in the company commonly named the
Devil in her Oaths, till the Devil being so often called upon, carried her
through the gate alost in the Air before them all, and hanging a while in the
Air, they found her fallen dead upon the ground without the Town. See Beards
Theater.

36. I shall relate one example more, which hundreds of people near London can
testify the truth of, in October 1675. at Saltpeter bank near Well Close,
lately lived a Woman very much adicted to Drunkenness, Swearing, and
uncleanness, this Woman as her self afterward confessed wronged a woman of two
shillings, taking it away from her Child, and being taxed with it (forswore it
before a Justice) wished the ground to open and swallow her a live if she had
it, and at an other time wished that God would damn her if she had it, or knew
any thing of it, and now God dealt with her accordingly, for the Devil suddenly
possessed her and would several times have choked her and destroyed her, thus
she continued some time in a miserable condition. One Sunday coming to a
Meeting in Gravel Lane she cried out to the Minister as he was going up into
the Pulpit, Oh good Master pray for me, pray for me! Sometimes she would be
lifted from the ground, and then a rattling in her throat, crying out, he
choakes me; sometimes she would strive with the Devil with all her strength,
and cry, be gone thou Rogue, I will serve God, in this manner she continued all
the Prayer, and in the midst of the Sermon she was flung down violently
headlong to the ground, and was taken up dead. God grant this may be a warning
to all rash forswearers, and other lude livers.

7. A Credible Author relates of a swearing Courtier at Mans-field, who in the
midst of his blasphemous Oaths, was taken up and carried away by the Devil.

38. The German History tells us, that at Tubinga a desperate Boy devised new
Oaths that were not Common in use. But the Lord sent a Canker, or some worse
disease, that eat out his tongue, even the very instrument where with he
blasphemed God.

39. How common are these and such like speeches in too many peoples mouths: As
the Devil take me if I do such or such things, God consume me body and soul; or
the plague, or the ^^x take or rot me. And abundance of other hellish Oaths:
And vild wishes to them which I would have all persons to avoid, as they Tender
their Immortal souls welfare.

40. At Wittenberg, before Martin Luther and other learned Men, a Woman, whose
Daughter was possessed with a Spirit, confessed by her curse that Plague was
fallen upon her: for being angry at a time, she bad the Devil take her, and she
had no sooner spoke the word but he took her indeed, and possessed her after a
strange sort. Infinite examples I might mention more, as that of the choleric
Father that wished that his Son might never stir from that place, it was no
sooner said but done; his son stuck fast to the place, and could never be
removed during life which he continued with a post at his back four years, and
so dyed.

41. The Romans were wont to have their funerals at the Gate of Venus Temple;
to show that Lust was the harbinger and hastner of death.

42. In Germany a Gentleman of note solicited a Citizens wife to uncleanness,
which her Husband being informed of, watched them so narrowly that finding them
in bed together, first slew the Adulterer, and then his own wife. Lut. Col.

43. Before Moses time it was a custom to burn the Adulteress in the fire, as
appears in the case of Thamer, Genesis 38. 24. Prove. 7. 27. Speaking of Whorish
Women; Her house is the way to Hell, going down to the Chambers of Death.

44. How does this Sin of Whoredom reign amongst us, that many boast of this
their shames, and are so hardened in this their Wickedness, that they go on'to
the utter destruction of soul and Estate. Let me tell thee, Oh Whoremonger, and
all filthy Harlots! that God will surely punish thee for this filthy Sin! and
remember that for all this, God will bring thee to Judgment, and without
Repentance, to the Lake that burns with Fire and Brimstone, where there is no
redemption.

To conclude, let us learn by these sad and terrible examples to fear God; and
take warning by them, and pray for Church and Kingdom, and a blessing upon our
Children and families, Amen.

FINIS.

