A Supplemental Tract of Government to be annexed unto the Book of Happiness,
etc. Chap. 3. Circa Page 147. Which may be applied to all Nations; But this is
now particularly referred to the Consideration of the Lords and Commons
assembled in this present Parliament at Westminster, January 4. 1689/90.
CHrist, according to what is written of him, Isa. 9. 6, 7. has laid down sure
and lasting Foundations of Government, To order it, and to establish it with
Judgment, and with Justice, from henceforth even for ever; the Zeal of the Lord
of Hosts will perform this. The Lord has given such Laws, Rules and Directions
to the World, that, if they were observed, would produce a perpetual Peace and
Settlement throughout the whole Earth; But by Disobedience and turning aside
comes in confusion, and every evil Work, as may be seen in the foregoing
Discourse, wherein the Nature o^ Government is particularly stated in order to
Preservation and outward Peace.

And having there manifested the Truth, and showed those Relational Duties
between King and Subjects, I come now to apply it to the People of England,
viz. In the late Revolution of putting down one King, and setting up another,
in this They are a Nation that have not done Righteousness, but they have
forsook the Ordinance of their God; They have actually departed from that
Established and fixed Order of Things he has set up. So they are in danger to
dye in their Sins, John 8. 24. And shall utterly perish in their own
Corruption, 2 Pet. 2. 12. Their several Persons shall appear before the
Judgment Seat of God, to give Account, and receive for what they have done
concerning this Matter. Seeing they despised the Oath, by breaking the
Covenant, (when lo, they had given their Hand) and have done all these things,
they shall not escape. Therefore thus says the Lord God, As I live, surely
mine Oath that they have despised, and my Covenant that they have broken, even
it will I Recompense upon their own Head, Ezekiel. 17. 18, 19. This place of Holy
Writ is full and direct to the present purpose; for it is spoken as to the King
of Babylon, who was an Heathen, and as much an Idolater and Estranged from God
as a Popish Prince: But the Almighty does take the more notice, when through
his own People his Name is profaned or blasphemed amongst the Heathen. He
calls it in a Peculiar manner, Mine Oath and my Covenant: It is yet a greater
aggravation to hold the Truth in Unrighteousness: It is worse to give occasion
for the Way of Truth to be evil spoken of. And therefore, when those of the
pure reformed Religion had sworn a solemn Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy to a
King, (whom they then knew to be a Papist) his lawful Heirs and Successors, in
so strict and particular manner, as Words can well express; When they had
Crowned him, and performed ^ealty; which probably was a like Ceremony which the
Prophet here calls (when to, he had given his Hand). To despise this Oath, and
break this Covenant, makes Protestanism stink, and be evil spoken of throughout
the World, and offends every one who is zealous for his God, and has a right
sense of his infinite Holiness and Uprightness.

In this Alteration, They did take Counsel, but not of the Lord, Isa. 30. 1.
They had respect unto what they thought present Convenience, but did not
consult his Word, nor seek unto him ^or Direction by Prayer and Humiliation:
But it was done by their own Councils and manner of Vote. And afterward they
would cover with a Covering, but not of my Spirit, that they may add Sin to
Sin. The Scribes and Pharisees of our Time have found out several Glosses,
Distinctions, Restrictions, and Sentiments of their own devising, by which they
would slubber over Perjury, and sanctify Injustice. It is manifest by Deuteronomy.
32. 4. Hab. 1. 13, 14. Isa. 5. 16. and 61. 8. Job ^3. 7. Psalm. 33. 4. and 111,
7, 8. and 145. 17. Romans 3. 8. And sundry other places of his Revealed Word,
That This Revolution is none of God's Work or Doing in which he is well
pleased: Only what he suffers, as he does all the Sin and Wickedness in the
World, and so he did the Manners of the Israelites Forty Years in the
Wilderness.

Then they did abrogate the former Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and
impose a new one. Shall such escape by Iniquity? And have done all these
Things, they shall not escape. For my own part, I have been as it were retired
from the World, and know not those particular Proceedings from the very
beginning to this Time; But yet, The Lord looks from Heaven, he beholds all
the Sons of Men; from the place of his Habitation he looks upon all the
Inhabitants of the Earth; He considers all their Works: So he knows every
Thing they have done Day by Day, all the several Occurrences, all the Lying
Stories and False Accusat^ons, the close and hidden Acts of Hypocrisy, all the
tricks of Machiavelian Policy, and the several kinds of Sin and Wickedness.
These things have you done, and I kept silence; but I will Reprove, and set
them in order before you. As they were committed from Time to Time, so will he
bring every secret thing into Judgment.

Therefore thus says the Lord God, as I live, surely mine Oath that they have
despised, and my Covenant that they have broken, even it will I Recompense upon
their own Head. Here the Threatening is confirmed as much as possible, As I
live, which is as sure as he is God, which again is as certain as that there is
a World, and any thing in it, so certainly will he Recompense it upon your own
Head. As you have already despised his Oath, so you may here despi^^ his Words;
But beware lest that also come upon you, Behold ye Despisers, and Wonder, and
Perish: Take heed lest you provoke him yet more, and so fall into a greater
degree of his Wrath and sore Displeasure. It is an easy matter to slight it
all off, and put away his Statutes from you; but you cannot possibly avoid your
own Particular Deaths, whereby you fall into the Hands of the Living God, and
then he will account with all those who behave themselves stubbornly and
contemptuously against him. You may now drive these Melancholy Fancies out of
your Mind, Eat, Drink, and be Merry, have recourse to Company, and so forget or
harden your selves against what is now offered unto you. When the two Prophets
shall be slain, They that dwell upon the Earth shall rejoice over them, and
make merry, and shall send Gifts one to another; because these two Prophets
tormented them that dwelt on the Earth, Rev. 11. 10. But it would be some
advantage and help for them, if they could eat or drink any thing which would
make themselves Immortal, that they should not dye, and so prevent their own
coming to Judgment: But now as the case stands, they had better hearken, and
also comply with those who would have hindered their own approaching Ruin and
Destruction; who do only exhort and testify that Mankind do repent and forsake
those Sins which do cause present Vexation, and render them liable unto future
Misery.

We have sinned with our Fathers, We have committed Iniquity, We have done
Wickedly. This Nation has slain the Lords Anointed, for which is kept an
Anniversary Day of Humiliation and Repentance. His Son was 12 Years kept out of
his Kingdom, and afterward restored, for which also is an Anniversary day of
Thanksgiving, with forms of Prayer and Devotion answerable to it. His Brother,
who has the same Right, stands now excluded. Be not deceived, God is not
mocked: Though he does now hold his Tongue, and seems to be gone afar off; yet
even now he speaks unto us out of his Word, and is not far from every one of
us: However, we must meet with and appear before him, when the Judge shall
testify himself, and give a clear account how we have Trespassed against our
God, by Transgressing his Laws, changing the Ordinance, and breaking the
everlasting Covenant.

Yet now there is hope in Israel concerning this thing, Ezra 10. 2. We learn
hence and from other places of Scripture, That there is no other way to Escape,
but to Repent, and undo what we have done; for that is the Nature of true
Repentance, that if it were to do again we would not do it; and also to undo a
Fault as much as we can. Accordingly your selves being now assembled in
Parliament, may give order for a Day of Humiliatiou throughout this Kingdom,
and then take Counsel from God, and seek out of his Word and Commandment,
Whether you ought not in Duty to send Commissioners, and restore your late King
James to the Seat and Throne of his Ancestors. Implore the Mercy and
Forgiveness of Almighty God for all your Sins, and especially of Falsehood and
Unrighteousness* This you must do whilst you are here a little while; otherwise
for your contempt and refusal, every one of you shall give account to God at
the Judgment of the great Day.

A Word to the Present King William and Queen Mary, and to the Clergy.
LEt the King de facto be told, seeing that he is so desirous of a Kingdom, let
him take heed ^est by endeavoring to keep that which is tottering and moveable
here on Earth, he lose that Eternal Kingdom above, which cannot be shaken.

Put the Queen in Remembrance, Honor thy Father and Mother, which is the first
Commandment with Promise, That it may be well with thee, and thou may live
long on the Earth, Ephesians. 6. 2, 3. Which does imply, that if she does not, she
will not be long Settled and Established here.

The Archbishop of Canterbury, and the residue of the Governors of the
Church, with the inferior Clergy, are to consider and Tremble at what is
written; The Lord saw it, and it displeased him that there was no Judgment. And
he saw that there was no man, and wondered that there was no Intercessour, Isa.
59. 15, 16.

He that is placed over this Diocese, should not have returned Evil for Evil,
for so have we not learned Christ.

And now having laid these things before you; To send me unto Prison, or
proceed against me as an Evil-doer, This is to add Iniquity to your Iniquity,
and not to come into the Way of Righteousness; It is to kick against the
Pricks, which the more fiercely you do, the more you will wound your selves.
When God is dishonored by the breach of his Law, Those who have a Love, Zeal,
and Fear of his sacred Majesty should bear forth Testimony against it, both to
keep up his Government over the World, and also to assert (notwithstanding all
Transgression) the immutable Rules of Judgment and Righteousness: Accordingly
to all that is before written I do here set my Name,

RICHARD STAFFORD, A Servant of God, and the Lord Jesus Christ.

FINIS.

