The Christian's Inheritance.

A SERMON AT THE FUNERAL Of the Reverend GABRIEL TOWERSON, DD. Late Rector of
St. Andrew Undershaft, and of Welwyn in Hertford-shire.

Preached at Welwyn, October. 21. 1697.

By GEORGE STANHOPE, D.D. Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty.

LONDON, Printed for Matt. Gillyflower in Westminster Hall; H. Bonwick at the
Red-Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard; R. Sare, at Gray's- Inn-Gate in Holborn;
and Matt. Wotton, at the Three Daggers in Fleet Street. School.

ROMANS viii. 17. If Children, then Heirs, Heirs of God, and Joynt-heirs with
Christ.


BEhold what manner of Love the Father has bestowed upon us, that we should be
called the Sons of God! says St. John, (1 Ep. III. 1.) but as if even that
Love, wonderful as it is, were yet too little, behold another and greater
Privilege asserted to us by St. Paul! For, whereas among Men, though Parents may
extend their Affection to all their Offspring equally, yet Custom and
Convenience give Advantage to some Children above others in Point of Interest
and Fortune, Our Heavenly Father's Bounty is as diffusive as his Family, and
the Prerogative of this Spiritual Race set much above that of Common Sons. For
it is the unparalleled Privilege of Christians, to be like so many Firstborn;
We are not only admitted to the Title of Children, but are joined with God's
Only-begotten in his Royalties and Possessions too, and have a Right of
Inheritance conveyed to every one of us: Insomuch that the Apostle here makes
This to be a necessary Consequence of the former; The Spirit it self (says he)
bears witness with our Spirit, that we are the Children of God, (Ver. 16.)
from whence he infers in the Words of my Text, And if Children, then Heirs,
Heirs of God, and Joynt-heirs with Christ.

My Intention from these Words at present is, I. First, To give some Reasons,
why the Title of Good Men to the Happiness and Rewards of the next World,
should be represented to us under the Notion of an Inheritance. II. Secondly,
To show what Influence this Consideration ought, and may reasonably be
expected, to have upon us: and then, III. Lastly, To apply my self, from the
foregoing Particulars, to the Occasion of our assembling here together at this
time. Of These as fully, and yet as briefly too, as the Dignity of the Subject,
and the Shortness of my Warning will permit.


I. First, I will lay before you some Reasons, why, among other Representations
of our Happiness and Rewards in the next World, This in particular of an
Inheritance should be made choice of for the Comfort and Encouragement of Good
Men: And They (among others which perhaps might properly enough be insisted
upon) seem to be more especially these Four that follow.

First, This might be done out of a gracious Design, to confirm our Hope, and
establish even an assured Expectation of our future Happiness. We are told
elsewhere in this Epistle, that Chapter VI. 23.
Eternal Life is the Gift of God; And so it most eertainly is, and we are bound
to believe, and thankfully to receive it as such; But in the mean while had
This been propounded only as a Gift, that Term could never be a just
Foundation, for so firm and great a Degree of Confidence, as frail and wretched
Mortals stand in need of, to carry them through all the Hardships and
Temptations of a dangerous and troublesome World. For a Gift naturally implies
something so free and arbitrary in the Giver, as that it should depend entirely
upon his own mere Motion and Grace, whether it ever be bestowed or not. But now
by terming it an Inheritance, we are referred to the Method of Father's settling
Estates upon their Sons, for a true Understanding of Our Case. We can make out
our Title, and produce the Deeds of Conveyance, even the sure, the glorious
Promises of Him who cannot lie, and whose Gifts are without repentance. The
Ancients, we know, never adopted any, but with a design of conferring all the
Advantages of Natural-born Children upon them; and for that reason they took
this Remedy, as a Supply for issue of their own. Our Heavenly Father has
adopted Us with the same kind Intentions, though he could not be driven to it
by the same Necessity: And in thus doing he has wonderfully interwoven His
Bounty and Our Right. To that Bounty alone it is, that we owe our having any
Title at all to everlasting Blessedness. But since he has thought fit to admit
us into the quality of Children, we are thenceforth allowed to put in our
Claim. And, provided we be guilty of no Offense, which may evacuate this Right,
and provoke him to cut off the Entail; he is so far from condemning our Claim
of Arrogance and Presumption, that he requires us to depend upon him for the
making it good, and commends our Faith and filial Trust when we do so.

Secondly, As this manner of Expression might be intended to beget in Good Men
a more steadfast Expectation of their future Happiness, so might it likewise be
chosen to check all unreasonable opinion of their own Performances. When the
the Scriptures, in some other Passages, declare That Happiness to be the Reward
of Men's Obedience, Partiality, and the dear Love of our Selves, are apt to
step in, and blow us up with lofty Imaginations of I know not what mighty
Desert in us. How apt Humane Nature is to indulge these Swellings of the Mind,
and to persuade it self, that even the Word of God has countenanced such
Vanity, we need not go far to learn. The wicked, and but too successful Pains
will teach us, which have been taken in some other Communions Si quis dixerit
Hominis justificati bona opera ita esse dona Dei, ut non sint etiam bona ipsius
justificati merita, aut ipsum justificatum bonis operibus -- non vere mereri
augmentum gratiae, vitam aeternam, and ipsius vitae aeternae-consecutionem
atque etiam gloriae augmentum, anathema sit. Conc. Trident. Sess. VI. Can.
XXXII.
, to bring Men off from the too mean and mortifying thoughts of their own
Unworthiness, and to exalt them with a Belief that they are able even to Merit
at the Hands of their Great Master and Maker. Thus far is true indeed, That God
requires Sincerity and Good-works, and has appointed These as the Condition of
our Happiness: But alas! there is a very wide difference between bestowing that
Happiness, for the sake, and strictly upon the account of our Services, and
declaring, that he will not bestow it without them. And, if we rightly consider
the Matter, it will be found, I think, that the Promising Heaven under the
Notion of an Inheritance, does effectually overthrow all such insolent
Pretensions. God has not hereby engaged to admit the Disobedient and
Refractory: It Is true. Stubbornness or Apostasy may alter the Case still, and
blast our most promising Hopes: but it will not follow from thence, that those
hopes of Inheriting have our own Works, (even as done in obedience to, and by
the Grace of Christ) for their proper, and adequate, and only Foundation.
Suppose a Servant of the greatest Diligence imaginable, His Behavior may
possibly deserve better of the Family, than That of any Child in it: But yet
the greatest Diligence will not procure that Servant an equal Share of
Affection with those Children, nor any Title to the Estate among them. This
Instance makes it plain, that the standing in such a Capacity, and bearing such
a particular Relation to the Master and Disposer of those Possessions, is the
true and fundamental Ground of Inheritance; and accordingly we find the Stress
of St. Paul's Argument in my Text laid here, If Children then Heirs.

The Doctrine then of meriting by Works, properly so called; and the Notion of
inheriting the Kingdom of Heaven, can never stand together; Because our
Pretensions to inherit commence with our Sonship, and depend upon our Second
and Spiritual Birth. Now it is acknowledged on all hands, and affirmed by this
Apostle (Ver. 15.) that we are the Sons of God by Adoption, and that this is a
Privilege owing wholly to Christ, and peculiar to Faith in Him. It is also
confessed, that we become Sons, and consequently Heirs in our Baptism. So that
(by the Practice of even Those who stand up for the merit of Good Works) the
Generality of Christians are now admitted to a Right of Inheritance, at a time
when they cannot have any Works of their own at all. And though it should be
granted, that what is promised then, be, in the Eye of God, looked upon as
performed, with regard to the Intention of the Engagers, and the present
Incapacity of the Party promised for, yet even those Works which follow after,
are not so much the Cause, as the Proof of our being Children. They demonstrate
us to be faithful indeed; They convince the World that we answer our Character;
and They support the Conscience with unreprovable Assurances, that provided we
persevere in doing so, we shall not fail hereafter to be in actual Possession,
those happy glorious Heirs, which at present we can but be in Expectation and
Reversion only.

Thirdly, By being styled Heirs of God, we are informed, how stable and lasting
a Good this Happiness will prove. The Certainty of it with respect to Us I have
already spoken to in my First Particular; That which I regard at present is the
Continuance and Certainty of the Thing in it self. All other Tenures are
subject to Limitations, and determine at a certain Period of Time; but Estates
of Inheritance know no term of Years; These descend on in the same Line, and
are as sure as any thing, in the changeable State of Affairs we now live in,
can possibly be made. When therefore the Holy Spirit makes choice of this
Comparison, he justifies those Comforts Good Men take, that a small Matter will
not shake their Title to Heaven at this distance; And that, when once those
Joys are in our Hands, nothing can ever deprive us of them more. I know very
well, they have enough to command our Esteem, and engage our very vehement
Pursu^^, without respecting then Continuance; and that a longer or a shorter
Term does not change the nature of Things, but is a foreign and additio^^
Perfection only. But yet methinks we may allow this Consideration to have more
weight with regard to Another World, than it can possibly carry in any temporal
Enjoyment whatsoever: And it may be said with great (...) that the Life to come
could never make us ^appy, if it were not Eternal. (...) it could no^ but be a
terrible Disturbance and Damp to those Pleasures, to think that they must one
Day be parted with. And, though that Day were set at never so great a distance,
yet the Mind of (...) is perpetually looking for ward and ^^^ally d^^posed to
anticipate (...) own Lo^^es (...) Miseries. I need not ^rge with Argaments
(...) what all of (...) feel at this very Moment, and (...) M^^tality now
before us, (...) have what we highly value, and (...) love, torn from us. And
the more (...) Concern this present Affliction gives us, the mo^^ easily may we
convince (...) the Loss, and how (...) losing That Bliss must needs be, to
which no Good on Earth can bear any Proportion.

So then, The more re^in'd and worthy (...) ceptions we have of Heaven in other
Respect^, the more absolute necessity we find, for the co^^ pleating our
Happiness there, to conceive off (...) a Continuing City, and a Mansion of
Ev^^lasting Glory. For it could not be Heaven, (...) for our Contemplations and
Hopes to dwell upon it, with a perfect Acquiescence, and untroubl'd
Satisfaction, were we not well assured, that the Joys of it outlive the utmost
stretch of Time, and are such as no Man takes from us.

Fourthly, By this Similitude of an Inheritance the Scripture might design to
intimate, the sufficient, the plentiful, the exceeding abundant Provision, made
for every Heir of this Bount^^ Heavenly Father. Younger Branches of a ^^^ly, we
know, must be content with such Proportions, as their Parent's Wisdom thinks
fit to set out for them: And this is most commio^ done with great Tenderness
and Caution; reseving the Honor and Estate of the House to be supported by the
Heir himself. But We, (...) seems) are All of us Heirs of God, and Joy^^ Heirs
with Christ; not put off with the too ^^ring Distributions of a partial Father,
but admitted into a full and equal Enjoyment of the Whol^. For, though the
Inheritances upon Earth are consigned to One, or a very Few, and must be for
because they are short and narrow, yet the Heavenly one is much otherwise, by
reason of its infinite. Nature and Extent; A Nature and Extent for large and
vast, that not no one Person has a wh^^ the less for any other Persons great
Abundance. It is an Excellency peculiar to this Heritage, that (according to
Haereditus, in qua Christi coheredes sumus, non mirtuitur copia Possessorum;
nec fit angustior numerositate cohaeredum; sed tanta est multis quanta paucis;
tanta singulis, quanta omnibus Comm. in Psalm. XLIX.
St. Austine's description of it) The Plenty which the Possessors find and use
there, never diminishes the Thing possessed: Nor does the innumerable Multitude
of Partakers cramp up any Man's Enjoymant, or incroach upon his Partion. It is
as large to Many as to Few; (...) each single Possessor enjoys it as fully as
all put together.

Indeed the Proportions of our Bliss are so (...) from being scanty there, that
all considering (...) sons have believed one part of it to consist in (...)
Enlarging and Exalting our Faculties, and putting us into a Condition of
receiving more then, than now we are capable so much as of imagining. Should
those Joys be imparted to us in this mortal imperfect State, a small measure of
(...) in comparison, would overwhelm (...) let in Pleasures, Torrents of
Pl^^ces too many and too exquisite for frail Nature (...). What vast Idea's
then should we (...) to forth; what a thankful Sense should we alway^, preserve
of our Gracious Father's Love, whose (...) all we can receive; and, rather than
we (...) be stinted in our Happiness, prepares and qual^^fies our Minds to
receive yet more and (...) What Care can be too (...) an Inheritance as This?
What Esteem, what Desire, what Eagerness too great? What noble and excellent
Effects should the very hope and ^^spect of it, even at this distance, (...)
upon (...) More indeed and greater tha^ ^e possible for me worthily to
describe, or convenient at this time to attempt; let it suffice therefore (...)
touch upon Four, in proportion to (...)siderations already treated of, and more
immediately resulting from them. And the representing these to you was what I
propounded in the beginning of this Discourse, for my Second General Head.

II. First then, From the Confirmation of our Hope and Assurance of Everlasting
Blessedness arising from its being represented as an Inheritance, it is plain
there ought to proceed a just Value and Veneration for those Divine Writings,
which ascertain this Title to us. For, besides the Advantage which the
Scriptures have above all other Books, considered barely as a Rule of Manners
there is this unquestionable Preference due to them, that they discover to us
the Nature of (...) Souls, and their Condition in another World, much more
clearly, than Mankind ever did or could have found without them. Life and
Immortality are most truly said to be brought to light through the Gospel,
since here alone we meet with a distinct Account of all God's Dispensations
concerning us, and can trace the several dark mysterious Steps both of our
Misery and Salvation: What we were originally by Nature, What afterward by
Corruption, and What since by Grace; How full of Death and Despair our
Condition was formerly; and to what a lively hope this Heavenly Father has now
begotten us again. So that from hence we derive all our Dependencies; and in
this Great Charter of Mercies and Privileges are contained both our Conveyances
of Right, and the Conditions of our obtaining it.

And now, If These be the Contents of this most Holy Book, O! with what
Reverence should we embrace, O! with what Diligence should we peruse it?
Observe the pardoned Malefactor, what respect he pays to that Act of Grace,
which gives his forfeit Life; see the longing Heir, how tenderly he values his
Deeds of Settlement and Entail; or imagine, if that be possible, what delight
the greedy Worlding takes in his Bills, and his Bonds, and his Mortgages, with
what gle^^ he spends Hours and Days in considering the Advantages to be made
from them, and providing against any Forfeiture, which might be incurred by
neglecting the Terms of his Covenants; And then give me leave to acquaint you,
that all these (...) of Esteem, and Gratitude, and prudent Car^ are much more
due to the Blessed Wh^^ings of God. For These are the Instruments (...) Release
from a Misery worse than ten thousand; Deaths; and Settlements of an
Inheritance incoruptible, undefiled; and that fades not away for ever in the
Heavens.

Is it not then a most intolerable Reproach (...) Christians shall suffer this
Divine Volume (...) neglected? That They, whose best Hopes are ^^ly here, shall
so far forget the consequence of it to them, as even to (...) it a ^ull (...) a
Weariness to lay out any part of (...) Pains upon a right understanding of it?
^^^ay (which is most absurd (...) monstrous) that Any who call themselves by
(...) Name, should (...) their impotent Malice and wicked, (...) Flaws in their
own (...); and (...) to make the World believe, that these Instruments are no
better than Frauds and Forgeries, and that the only Mark of Men of Sense, is to
reason themselves out of Heaven and Immortality? But I have neither Time nor
Inclination to pursue that just Indignation any further, which no good Man can
be insensible of at these daring Profanations of God and his Revealed Will;
such as ought not even to be named but with detestation, and cannot be endured,
without exposing not only Men's Sold but even their Civil Rights and Temporal
Sa^^ to manifest hazard and inconvenience. For Corruption of Principles
naturally slides into Di^^luteness of Manners; and some of the Groun^ upon
which Revealed Religion is rejected, if ^^su'd through all their just
Consequnnces, will ce^tainly destroy the Natural too; and over thro^ not only
the Communications, but even the (...) Being of God Himself. But to return from
this most unwilling Digression, (which Woe to this wicked Generation among whom
we live; the there is any occasion for:) I proceed to put you (...) Mind,

Secondly, That, As the representing our Title to Heaven by an Inheritance
might be intended to abate all unreasonable Opinion of our (...) Merits, So the
result of it is An Obedience recommended by true Thankfulness and profound
H^mility. Almighty God has taken the Course of all prudent Fathers, who, though
they deny their Children no Testimony of their Affection that can in reason be
thought fit for them; yet al^^s, keep it in their own Power to punish their
Ob^^nacy and undutiful Behavior. And thus We Christians want no Ground for
Hope, but we have not the least foundation for Security and Presumption. Our
Condition is that of Children indeed, and This implies much Tenderness and
great Compassion; that our Weaknesses shall be pitied, our Heats of Youth
pardoned, our Spots overlooked, provided still they be Spots of God's,
Children; such only as proceed from Inadvertence, or Infirmity, and not from
any settled purpose to offend. The right use therefore of this. Title is to
improve such Kindness into the strictest and most effectual Engagements of Love
and Duty to so good a Father; To remember, that we are still upon our good
Behavior, and though Heirs (...) Heirs expectant only; That even our being
such is merely from Another; that our Sonship, not our Desert, conferred the
Title; and that it is wholly and solely through the Only Begotten and Beloved,
that We have this access to, or are at all accepted of the Father. That so
glonours a Reward then is appointed for our poor and partial, our imperfect and
unworthy Labors, we owe to the Grace and Munificence of the Almighty Disposer
Si gratia vocatur, gratis datur: si gratis datur, nuli^ praecesserunt merita
tua, ut detur. Nam si praecesserunt merita tua, me^ces non imputatus secundum
Gratiam, sed secundum Debitum. Si ergo dicis praceffisse merita tua, te vis
laudari, non Deum: -- Conve^ ergo te ad merita^, vid^ illa mala fuifse; ut non
tibi deberetur nisi supplicum, non praemiu^. (...) videris quid tibi per
meritum debeatur, agnoscis ^^id per gratiam (...) sacrificio laudis glorificas
Deum. Augustine. in Psalm. (...). in fine.
, and the inexpressible Love of the Maritorious Purchaser: But still God's
hands are not tied up by this exuberant Goodness, so as that no Contumacy
should cancel our Title; nor is He that is greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven
above acknowledging himself less than the least of all the Mercies, and of all
the Truth, which he condescends to show his obedient Children, and faithful
Servants.

Thirdly, Look upon this Notion of an Inheritance as denoting the Continuance
of our Happiness in the next World; and thus it may reasonably be expected to
reconcile the Thoughts of Death to our Minds. So, I mean, as both to ^^tigate
our own Fears of it, and to abate our Concern for the Friends who are taken
away from us. And This would be a very considerable Advantage indeed; For it is
certain, that no Case stands more in need of Consolation and Supp^^ than when
we either come to die our selves (...) to part with Those who are very useful
and dear to us.

Now the natural Aversion to Soul and Body separating, may well be allowed to
cost us some Disorder, when we find there is no Remedy but these two kind
Companions must be torn asunder, and that the great Encounter with our last
dreadful Enemy approaches. And yet (...) Miseries of the present Life are so
many, the ^^joyments and Advantages of it so difficult to (...) attained, and
so defective if ever they be attained, that Many considering Heathens have
thought leaving the World no such mighty matters; A World, which, to all who
make a true estimate of it, is so vain at best, and withal so uncertain, that
it could never appear worth a considering (...) while to take up his rest, and
abide for ever^^t.

But, I confess, Christianity has discovered another very just ground of Fear,
which the Heathen World could not be so sensible of. For if Death be considered
as that which consigns us over to Judgment, and if upon that Judgment depend
(...) Doom irreversible to all Eternity; No wonder if this cast some Men into a
mighty Consternation and Dread. Such whose Lives have been what they cannot
think of rendering any tolerable account for; but are sentenced by their own
guilty Consciences beforehand, and sadly sensible, that to die will be so far
from finishing, that it is like to prove to Them the beginning of Sorrows. Now
I desire it may be considered; that my present Argument is of no force to abate
of (...) Fear; nor has either my Text nor any Passage in the whole Gospel, one
Syll^ge of Comfort, for Men that die in the Terrors of obstinate and unrepented
Wickedness. The only help for wicked Men is this, not to spend their time in
vai^ Lamentations and idle Amazements, begin in good earnest to amend their
Lives. And then as they grow more fit for Death and Judgment, by the very same
Proportions they will feel their fear of these things grow less.

My Business therefore is with Christians, not barely in Word and Profession,
but also in Deed and in Truth. And whatever Loathness to leave the World these
Men may find in themselves, may be very much brought ^^er by serious and
frequent Reflections upon (...) heritance (...) now under Consideration and by
(...) Scriptures, which descri^^ and recommend and promise, and assure it to
us. Their Heart by this means will be where their Chief Treasure is Their Souls
will loosen by degrees, and their Affections be weaned from this World, and all
it can pretend to, upon a thorough Conviction, how false and floating, how
empty and trifling all is here below; and how pure and exalted, how fixed and
durable, how solid and satisfactory those Pleasures are, which God has
prepared for Good Men; How ample a Recompense they make even his the most
difficult Services; and how far they one weigh all that we can possibly undergo
for the obtaining them. Outweigh, did I say? pardon me for putting them into
the Balance together: To name them at the same time is in some (...) to
disparage them; for so St. Paul has told us in the very next Verse; I reckon
that the Sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be ^^^red with that
Glory which shall be revealed (...) us.

And now, What should hinder the Mind of ^ good and a considering Man from
meeting Death with Courage and Comfort, and looking upon the Sickness which
ushers it in, as the Messenger of Good News to him? For, Is it not so, to (...)
translated, not only to the End, but to the Fruit and exceeding great Reward of
all his Care and Toil? Is it not so, to exchange a decaying and troublesome
State, for One, whose most ex^^site Joys are without any Interruption, without
any Conclusion? And, though Flesh and Bloo^ will start and give back, and even
This so (...) change cannot yet be made without the ^^ing Ceremonies of Agonies
and Convulsions, yet the Comforts of a Devout Mind must needs he much enlarged
upon the nearer approaches to Bliss; as that new Scene of Things opens upon it
by degrees, and gives a more distinct View of that glorious and beautiful Place
into which the Man is entering. And We; whose Office calls us to wait about
Deathbeds, can sometimes observe such Peace of Conscience, such Calmness and
Content, such Lightnings of a Soul upon its Flight, such overflowing Comforts,
and ravishing Transports, as, notwithstanding all the fallacy of that disorder
and painful struggle in the visible and outward Man, do fully persuade us, that
no Men stay behind in the World, half so happy, or so well satisfied, as These
Men go out of it.

The Blessings of our Future ^^e, even in this distant Prospect, might
reasonably ^^e expected to put us upon the Wing, and tempt us almost to run
into the Arms of Death, out of mere Impatience to get at them. But our wise
Crout or has put the Bar of Flesh and Blood, and senfual. Appetite betwixt;
and commands, that we should at least be contented to wait his good Leisure of
calling us to himself. But, although to hasten our own Passage by violent
Means, be in effect to shut our selves out from Heaven for ever; yet since we
have these Hopes and Promises to support us in the Conflict, we ought methinks
at least not tamely to bewail and deprecate that very thing, which must put us
into the actual possession of our Hopes. For is it nostrange Ins^^uation to be
in love with Labor and Hazard to be sorry that the Evening, the time of
receiving our Wages is come? and all this upon that idle and vulgar Pretense,
that Death is the ghastly Destroyer of Mankind, and the King of Terrors; whereas
in truth he is so only to the Guilty and the Unprepared. But serious Piety, and
Peace with God, and a quiet Conscience, These have the power to make him tame
and gentle, They overcome and bind that grim strong Man, and take from him all
his Armor wherein he trusted.

Again. The same Consideration which ought to have such Efficacy in removing
these Fears for our selves, does likewise extend it self to ou^ Griefs for
Others. Our immoderate Griefs I mean; For Christianity places no Excellence in
the s^^fling all natural Affection, and rendering Men (...) sensible of any
tender Impressions. It only r^quires that the Rein should be kept always in o^^
own hands, and, when that Debt of Tears is paid, which Nature and Decency
require, that we should then suffer our Minds to be composed by Reason, and
hearken to the Corrections and Comforts of Religion. And what can administer
more substantial, more successful Comfort, than to consider the Joys of
Eternity, and, that the Friends who^^ absence we deplore, are removed to the
Company of Saints and Angels, to the blessed Presence of the Almighty, to the
same happy Mansions of pe^fect Knowledge, and Love, and Joy, with the So^ and
Lamb of God himself? That they are no^ above the Hazards of Fortune, the
Troubles, and Cares, and Perplexities of the World, and (which is best of all)
freed from all danger of o^ending God, and wounding their own Consciences by
Sin any more. If we have a serious Belief, that such is the Condition of our
deceased Brethren, and yet all This will not appease our Sorrows, how just is
that reproach of Absalom to Hushai upon another occasion, 2 Samuel xvi. 17.
Is this thy kindness for thy Friend? a Does it become the Tenderness of a
Relation, to lament without ceasing, not like her in the Prophet, for those
that are not, but for those who now have begun to be in Perfection, Who after
the Waves and Tossings of a tempestuous World, are now themselves rejoicing,
because they are at rest, and God has brought them to that Haven, where They
and every good Christian would be. Let us then in such case suppose, that we
hear the released Soul admonishing us, in our Savior's Terms to the Daughters
of Jerusalem, Luke xxiii. 28
Weep not for me, but weep for your selves: For our Selves indeed, who are
still floating upon the Billows, driven to and fro by the violent Gusts of
Passions and Lusts, of Cares and Temptations, and in continual danger of making
shipwreck of faith and a good Conscience. In a word, It Is easy to convince our
selves, how absurd all Excesses of this kind must needs be, by this single
Reflection; That the End of all God's Promises, and our own most painful
Endeavors, is to put Us hereafter into That which we believe to be Their
Condition now. And, (O monstrous Inconsistence of extravagant Passion!) we
refuse to be comforted, because They are what We, when in our right Mind, would
give ten thousand Worlds to be: Blessed for evermore far above all our
Imaginations, far above all their own Hopes.

In the mean while, till God's own good time come of making Us so too, let us
remember in the Fourth and last place, that this Inheritance, as importing the
Sufficiency of that Provision made for us by our Heavenly Father, ought to
inspire us with Meekness and Contentment under any Disposals of Providence in
this present Life. What St. Paul tells the Galatians, Gal. iv. 1, 2.
that the Heir, so long as he is a Child, differs nothing from a Servant,
though he be Lord of all, but is under Tutors and Governors, until the time
appointed of the Father, is equally applyable to our Case. We are here in a
State of Nonage and Education, under the wise discipline of One, who nicely
understands our several Tempers, and suits his Methods accordingly. Some are of
ingenuous and easy Dispositions and Them he wins by soft indulgent means,
Others are rugged and tough, and to Those a firmer hand is necessary: And if a
Third sort, not to be wrought upon either way, do not yet feel the Rod so often
as their Fellows, this is not because they deserve it less, but because they
are given over as incorrigible. By this easy and familiar Allusion, we are
taught what Interpretations to (...) of God's Providence, and how to justify
the different Proceedings of it toward us. Imagine w^^^ your selves, what an
accomplished Generation we should have, if the Fondness of Mothers, and the
Humors of Children were to prescribe Rules of Education; and then you cannot
but discover abundant reason for submitting to the Disposals of a Father, who
tempers his tenderest Affection with unerring Prudence.

Nam pro jucundis aptissima quaeque -- Almighty God weighs our Case and our
Wants; He aims not so much at our Ease as our Improvement, and distributes such
things, and in such Measures, as he sees most proper and profitable; without
troubling himself to consider what would be most acceptable. He admits of no
such Heirs, as are a Scandal to their Estates, and a Reproach to their
Families; but trains all his true Sons up in the School of Piety and Virtue,
teaches them to understand the value of their Portion, and brings them to a
resemblance of their Father. When they are ripened th^^ for Heaven, and made
fit Company for Saints and Angels, he then receives them to himself, and
abundantly compensates the short Hardships of their Education, by putting into
their hands the Fruit and End of all their Patience, even their glorious and
eternal Inheritance.

I have now finished what I designed from the Text, and shall not fear that
you will think I detai^ you too long upon my Third General Head, which relates to
the Occasion of our present Meeting.

III. The proper End of Discourses of th^^ (...), I never took to be that of
framing nauseou^^ (...) nygyricks upon our departed Friends: If any thing can
add to the inde^ency of ^^ttery from a Pulpit, it is the employing it, (...),
Persons of a (...) fession, which of all others ought (...) most above it. But,
al^^ this Consi^^^^^ and ought to temper what I have to say; yet, when God has
given us the Advantage of excellent Examples, it may justly seem Ingratitude to
Him, and Injustice to our selves, not to mention some part at least of those
Commendable Qualities, which Good Men have left behind them, as a Pattern
worthy our diligent Imitation.

The Audience and Place in which I stand may seem more particularly to require
This at my hands; which yet I shall endeavor so to manage, that You, who have
had the Happiness of a longer and more intimate Acquaintance with our deceased
Brother, than my self, shall not only bear wi^ness to the truth of it, but
confess at the same time, that I bear a due regard to the Modesty so pec^^ar in
Him, whose Virtues I am about to give a very brief and imperfect Representation
of. And to make the short remainder of my Discourse the more methodical and of
a Piece with what has gone before; it shall be my care to consine my self to
those particular Effects, which I told you this Consideration of Eternal
Happiness being proposed in the quality of an Inheritance ought in all reason
to have upon every one of us.

The First of These, you well remember, was just Value, and profound Veneration
for the Holy Scriptures. And how agreeable This was to ^^s Character, not You
alone, who lived under (...) more immediate Care, and enjoyed the Benefit of a
long and painful Ministry from him, but the Nation in general have been
convinced by those ^^^thy Labors, which appear in Public W^^tings, so much
the more valuable, as the Subject and Design of them is of greater and more
general Importance, That of establishing the most concerning Truths of the
Christian Religion; and illustrating those common Principles, which our
Excellent Church has thought necessary for forming the Lives and Judgments of
all her Members. And this he has done, if not by all the artful and enticing
Words of Man's Wisdom, yet with solid and substantial Arguments from Reason,
with proper Authorities from Scripture and Antiquity, and with such happy Force
and full Conviction, as to deserve a Recommendation from one of our Lord Bishop
of Sarum in his Pastoral Care.
Reverend Prelates, for the Study and Instruction of those, whose business it
is to instruct others. To render his indefatigable Pains of yet more diffusive
Influence, he has likewise composed a Tractat. in Epist. ad Philipp.
Tract in a Language more generally understood, which not only our own, but
other Countries may I hope shortly reap the benefit of. In a Word, His Time was
employed, and his Delight seemed wholly to be placed in Divine Studies; These
were his Business, his Entertainment, his Company, his Diversion; So careful
was he to employ the Hours of a most retired Life, in the best and most
beneficial manner; These were his Comfort in Afflictions, his Support under
Hardships and Cares; These preserved his Mind from all criminal degrees of
Anxiety, and, (as himself has professed with great Satisfaction) softened those
Troubles which a Man more addicted to the World must even have been swallowed
up in; But by Their means his Soul was disengaged, and raised above the World,
and his Conversation in Heaven: Happily indeed for himself, though in the common
Judgment of Flesh and Blood less so for those he left behind, since those
unwearied Labors, which manifestly contributed to his more speedy removal
thither, has deprived Them of his longer Direction and Assistance upon Earth.

The Second good Effect I mentioned, as naturally flowing from my Text, was
That of an Obedience full of Thankfulness and Humility. And this appeared so
eminently in Him, that notwithstanding all the Goodness so conspicuous in his
Conversation, no sign of Censoriousness or Spiritual Pride was to be found in
him. But, though this Particular relate more immediately to Men's deportment
toward God, yet I must beg leave in the Application to extend it something
farther.

Gratitude to God is due, not only for Spiritual, but Temporal Mercies; for He
is our Great Benefactor, and the sole Author of all our Blessings of every
kind. And, Since those Blessings are often conveyed to us by the ministry and
mediation of Men, no Man can be truly thankful, who is wanting in his
Acknowledgments to those Persons, whose Hearts God has disposed to become the
Instruments of handing down his Kindness to us. Here also our deceased Brother
performed the part of a truly good Christian, and took due Care to let no good
Offices of any sort be buried in Oblivion. He could not content himself with a
silent and private Sense of them, but had in particular prepared Epist.
Dedicator. to his Tract on the Philipp. to Archbishop Tillotson.
a lasting and public Expression of his Thanks, to our late Excellent Primate;
Who, among other Marks of his Care to prefer worthy and useful Men, procured
his promotion to another Benefice, and endeavored to make his Worth more
visible, by placing him in our Capital City. Nor did he think it any Indecency,
in an Address to so Great a Man, to make grateful and honorable mention of
that seasonable Addition to his Fortunes, made by a Dr. Tudor, late Rector of
Tewing in Hertfordshire
Reverend Person in this Neighborhood. So sollicitous was he upon all
Occasions, that no Man's Friendship, who had remembered him, should leave
behind it the Reproach of not being as respectfully transmitted to Posterity,
as it had been worthily placed at the first Disposal.

Thus again; His Humility gave a peculiar luster to the rest of his.
Accomplishments: For in the midst of all those Endowments both Natural and
Acquired, he seemed the only Person insensible of his own Worth. His Temper was
Easy and Gentle, so engaging and inoffensive, as to win over even Strangers,
and Men of different Opinions, to a sensible Concern and Kindness for him: His
Conversation Affable and Courteous, full of Deference and modest Reserve: And,
which of all other Qualities best proves a true Greatness of Soul, so Free and
Communicative, and Improving withal, so perfectly void of Envy, and engrossing
any sort of Knowledge or Commendation to himself, that he seemed to have copied
after that great Pattern of Meekness, Moses, who Numb. xi.
rebuked the Narrowness of those Spirits, who grudged the Advantages of others
for his sake, and wished with all his Soul, that all the Lord's People were
Prophets.

Thirdly. Another Virtue resulting from the Text, was abating the Fears of our
own Death, and moderating our Concern for That of Others. Of the former, that
general Resignation of Temper, very observable in him upon all Occasions, was
an abundant Proof; and that Indifference for Life, which I have often heard him
cheerfully express, excepting only for the sake of Those, whom yet he committed
to God, with a becoming Dependence upon his Providence over them. And more
bright no doubt this Virtue would have shone in his last Hours, had not the
Disease of which he died, so violently attacked his Understanding, and left him
only some few, and those very short Intervals for the exercise of it: So few,
and so short, as allowed no time sufficient for the Performance of those Duties
most necessary and usual in his Condition. But we ought in all Reason and
Charity to presume, that, as his Life was the Life of the Righteous, so had the
Faculties of his Mind been free, his Death would, in a very exemplary manner,
have manifestly appeared to be the Death of the Righteous too.

For the other Branch of this Argument, Many here present, I suppose, can
recollect, with what a Mixture of tender Affection and Christian Constancy he
supported the loss of his nearest and dearest Relation; And this too, though it
found him then smarting under the fresh deep Wound of a sad and A Son drowned
in the Mote of his House.
surprising Disaster; and happened at a time, when upon all other
Considerations the Circumstances of his Family could not but render that Blow
very sensible and heavy upon him. One Instance whereof relating to my self, I
must beg your leave to mention: It Is, that presently upon that occasion,
proffering him my Assistance in the supply of his Cure, he made me this (to me
then) surprising Answer, That Blessed be God for his Grace, he had soon
conquered the disorderly part of his Grief, and found no Relief so great as
employing himself in his Study, and the attendance upon his Duty. This I
confess to One who thought it always common and easy for Men to talk like
Philosophers, but rare and difficult to be so in good earnest, gave me that
Idea of his Piety, and Patience, and Firmness of Mind, which made me then begin
to know the Man, and raised my Honor for him ever after.

Lastly, The only remaining Inference, That of Contentedness with the Disposals
of Almighty God in this World, was likewise very visible and exemplary in him.
That equality of Mind, with which he struggled under a narrow Fortune, and a
numerous Family, many now present must needs be well acquainted with; and a
Temper, so far from Greedy, that even in things of right his own, he rather
chose to depart from what he could ill be without, than have recourse to Rigor
and extreme Justice. He has frequently declared, that he wanted no increase of
Honor or Preferment for himself, but purely for the sake of his Children; nor
did he upon Their Account desire more than might preserve them from Contempt,
and set them above the Temptations of Want and hard Necessity. And This was so
modest and so remarkable in a Person of such Learning and Labor in his
Profession, that it engaged Men's Wishes at least, and Affections, in his
Favor: Insomuch that He, I believe, was one of those few, whose any Additions
of Good Fortune gave a general Satisfaction, and instead of envying, every body
who knew him, would have rejoiced to have seen them more and greater.

What now remains, but that Each of us from hence gather such Inferences, as
may make this Example of Benefit to us, by applying it to our own respective
Circumstances: More particularly,

1. That You, first, the Orphans of this Deceased, imitate his Patience and
Meekness, and Holy Resignation to the Will of God: His Charity, and Justice,
and great Industry. The Generation of the Righteous shall be blessed, and a
good Man leaves an Inheritance for his Children, says the Scripture. Even the
best of all Inheritances, the Love and tender Regard of him, who is the Father
of the Fatherless. Think not then his Virtues are lost and buried with him; no,
They will live, and, as He, We ought not to doubt, now reaps the unspeakable
Advantage of them in Heaven, so will they shed a happy Influence upon You on
Earth too; Provided always, that they live in your Practice and careful
Imitation also; and keep you effectually from all things, which would be a
Reproach to the Children of such a Father.

2. That You next of this Parish seriously consider, how far you are
accountable for the long and laborious Ministry of such a Pastor; that a
faithful and painful Guide of Souls, is One very considerable, among those
Talents, which God will reckon with Men for at the last Day. And therefore it
highly concerns you to recollect and practice those Doctrines, with a Diligence
proportionable to His that inculcated them: For, if so much good Seed through
your neglect produce not much good Fruit, the Ground, assure your selves, will
be cursed and condemned for its Barrenness: And the more you might have learned
and done; by the Influence of such Instruction and such an Example, the heavier
shall Your Account be, and the more deservedly dreadful Your Condemnation.

3. That We, Thirdly, who have the Honor of the same Profession, do, like him,
dedicate our Lives and Labors entirely to the Service of God, and the
Promotion of his Glory, by setting forward the love and practice of Virtue, and
the Salvation of Mankind. Especially, that we make it our chief Care to
establish and secure the essential and most necessary parts of Religion; which
the shameless Insolence and Impiety of the profligate Age we live in, seems
now, as much as ever, to require from us. And, though all of us cannot do this
with His Learning and Abilities, yet it will be our own Fault, if we do not all
attempt it with a Diligence and Zeal equal to His. Which if we do, our faithful
Endeavors will be accepted and approved, even of Men; but if this Expectation
should fail us too, and we find our selves unable to effect the Good we intend,
yet it is Encouragement sufficient for us, to abound in the Work of the Lord,
that we are sure our Labor shall not, cannot be in vain in the Lord.

With these Reflections and Holy Resolutions, let us commit the mortal Remains
of this Reverend, Worthy, Good Man, to the Dust, In sure and certain hope of a
Resurrection to Life Eternal; and that, if we be careful, thus as you have
heard, to approve our selves God's Children, we shall not fa^l in his due time,
to be made in the best, the most beneficial, and most perfect and glorious
Sense of the Text, Heirs of God, and Joynt-Heirs of Child. Which he of his
infinite Mercy grant for the sake of the Same Jesus Christ his Dear Son and our
P(...) Savior: To whom with the Father and Holy Spirit, Three Persons and One
God, be all Honor and Glory, Thanksgiving and Praise now and for evermore.

FINIS.
SEcond Remarks upon an Essay concerning Humane Understanding; In a Letter
addressed to the Author. Being a Vindication of the First Remurks, against the
Answer of Mr. Lock, at the End of (...) Reply to the Lord Bishop of Worcester.

The Occasional Paper: Numb. I. II. III. IV. V. VI. VII.

Printed for M. Wotton, at the Three Daggers in Fleetstreet.


