MATHEMATICAL Collections and Translations: In two TOMES.

THE SYSTEME OF THE WORLD: IN FOUR DIALOGUES, Wherein the Two GRAND SYSTEMES OF
PTOLOMY and COPERNICUS are largely discoursed of: And the REASONS, both
Phylosophical and Physical, as well on the one side as the other, impartially
and indefinitely propounded: By GALILEUS GALILEUS LINCEUS, A Gentleman of
FLORENCE: Extraordinary Professor of the Mathematics in the UNIVERSITY of
PISA; and Chief Mathematician to the GRAND DUKE of TVSCANY.

Englished from the Original Italian Copy, by THOMAS SALUSBURY.

ALCINOUS, (...).

SENECA, Inter nullos magis quam inter PHILOSOPHOS esse debet aequa LIBERTAS.

LONDON, Printed by WILLIAM LEYBOURNE MDCLXI.

To the most Serene Grand DUKE OF TUSCANY.
THough the difference between Men and other living Creatures be very great,
yet happly he that should say that he could show little less between Man and
Man would not speak more than he might prove. What proportion does one bear to
a thousand? and yet it is a common Proverb, One Man is worth a thousand, when
as a thousand are not worth one. This difference has dependence upon the
different abilities of their Intellectuals; which I reduce to the being, or not
being a Philosopher; in regard that Philosophy as being the proper food of such
as live by it, distinguishes a Man from the common Essence of the Vulgar in a
more or less honorable degree according to the variety of that diet. In this
sense he that has the highest looks, is of highest quality; and the turning
over of the great Volume of Nature, which is the proper Object of Philosophy is
the way to make one look high: in which Book, although whatsoever we read, as
being the Work of Almighty God, is therefore most proportionate; yet
notwithstanding that is more absolute and noble wherein we more plainly deserne
his art and skill. The Constitution of the Universe, among all Physical points
that fall within Humane Comprehension, may, in my opinion, be preferred to the
Precedence: for if that in regard of universal extent it excel all others, it
ought as the Rule and Standard of the rest to go before them in Nobility. Now
if ever any persons might challenge to be signally distinguished for
Intellectuals from other men, Ptolomey and Copernicus were they that have had
the honor to see farthest into, and discourse most profoundly of the Worlds
Systeme. About the Works of which famous Men these Dialous being chiefly
conversant, I conceived it my duty to Dedicate them only to Your Highness. For
laying all the weight upon these two, whom I hold to be the Ablest Wits that
have left us their Works upon these Subjects; to avoid a Solecisme in Manners,
I was obliged to address them to Him, who with me, is the Greatest of all Men,
from whom they can receive either Glory or Patrociny. And if these two persons
have so far illuminated my Understanding as that this my Book may in a great
part be confessed to belong to them, well may it also be acknowledged to belong
to Your Highness, unto whose Bounteous Magnificence I owe the time and leisure
I had to write it, as also unto Your Powerful Assistance, (never weary of
honoring me) the means that at length I have had to publish it. May Your
Highness therefore be pleased to accept of it according to Your accustomed
Goodness; and if any thing shall be found therein, that may be subservient
toward the information or satisfaction of those that are Lovers of Truth; let
them acknowledge it to be due to Your Self, who are so expert in doing good,
that Your Happy Dominion cannot show the man that is concerned in any of those
general Calamities that disturb the World; so that Praying for Your Prosperity,
and continuance in this Your Pious and Laudable Custom, I humbly kiss Your
Hands;

Your Most Serene Highnesses Most Humble and most devoted Servant and Subject
GALILEO GALILEI.

To the Noble and most perfectly Accomplished Sr. JOHN DENHAM Knight of the
Noble Order of the BATH, And Surveyor General of his Maties Works, etc.
SIR,
I Humbly beg your Pardon for bringing this Book under your Protection. Were
it a Work of my own, or I any thing but the Translatour, I should master my
Thoughts to a meaner Dedication; But being a Collection of some of the greatest
Masters in the World, and never made English till now, I conceived I might
sooner procure their VVelcome to a person so eminent for Noble Candor, as well
as for all those Intellectual Excellencies wherewith Your Rich Soul is known to
be furnished. I resolved to be as kind to this Book as I could, and seriously
considering which way to effect it, I at last concluded to prefix Your Name,
whom His Majesty and all his Subjects, (who have a higher Sense and Judgment
of Excellent Parts) know best able to defend my Imperfections. And yet I
confess there is one thing makes against me, which is your eminent Integrity and
great Affection to Truth, whereby my Lapses in a Work of this Nature might
justly despair of Shelter, but that the Excellency of Your Native Candor
strives for Predominancy over all Your great Abilities. For it is all-most
impossible to think what Your Matchless Wit is not able to Conquer, would Your
known Modesty but give leave: therefore Galileus, Kepler, and those other
Worthies in Learning are now brought before You in English Habit, having
changed their Latin, Italian and French, whereby they were almost Strangers to
our Nation, unless to such as You, who so perfectly master the Originals. I
know you have so much and great employment for His Majesty, and his good
Subjects that I shall not robb you of another Minutes loss; besides the liberty
of subscribing my Self;

SIR, Your Honors Most Humble and Most obedient Servant THOMAS SALUSBURY.

MATHEMATICAL COLLECTIONS AND TRANSLATIONS: THE FIRST TOME. IN TWO PARTS. THE
FIRST PART; Containing, I. GALILEUS GALILEUS His SYSTEM of the WORLD. II.
GALILEUS His EPISTLE to the GRAND DUCHESS MOTHER concerning the Authority of
Holy SCRIPTURE in Philosophical Controversies. III. JOHANNES KEPLERUS His
Reconcilings of SCRIPTURE Texts, etc. IV. DIDACUS a STUNICA His Reconcilings of
SCRIPTURE Texts, etc. V. P. A. FOSCARINUS His Epistle to Father FANTONUS,
reconciling the Authority of SCRIPTURE, and Judgments of Divines alleged
against this SYSTEM.


By THOMAS SALUSBURY, Esquire.

LONDON, Printed by WILLIAM LEYBOURN, MDCLXI.

MATHEMATICAL COLLECTIONS AND TRANSLATIONS. THE FIRST TOME. THE FIRST PART;
Containing, I. GALILEUS GALILEUS, His SYSTEME of the World. II. GALILEUS, his
EPISTLE to the GRAND DUCHESS Mother concerning the Authority of Sacred
SCRIPTURE in Phylosophical Controversies. III. JOHANNES KEPLERUS, his
Reconcilings of SCRIPTURE Texts, etc. IV. DIDACUS a STUNICA, his Reconcilings
of SCRIPTURE Texts, etc. V. P. A. FOSCARINUS, his Epistle to Father FANTONUS,
reconciling the Authority of Sacred SCRIPTURE, and Judgments of Divines
alleged against, etc.


By THOMAS SALUSBURY, Esquire.

LONDON, Printed by WILLIAM LEYBOURNE, MDCLXI.

READER,
MAthematical Learning (to speak nothing touching the necessity and delight
thereof; has bin so sparingly imparted to our Countrymen in their native
English, especially the nobler and sublimer part, that in Compliance with the
Solicitations of several of my noble and learned Friends, and the Inclinations
of such as are Mathematically disposed, more especially those, who either want
Time or Patience to look into the vulgar and unstudied Languages, I did
adventure upon this Work of Collecting and Translating from amongst the
excellent Pieces that are so abounding in the Italian and French Tongues, some
of those that my own observation and the intimation of Friends were most
useful and desired, and with all most wanting in their Own.

I was, indeed, at first seriously Conscious, and am now, by experience, fully
convinced how disproportionate the weight of the Enterprise is to the weakness
of the Undertaker, but yet the Passion I ever had to be subservient to my
Friends and Compatriots in their Inquisition after these Sublime Studies, and a
Patience which I owe to the Phlegm that is predominant in my Constitution,
joined with a nine-years conversence in these Languages, as also an unhappy and
long Vacation that the persecutions of the late Tyrants gave me from more
advantageous employments so prevailed with me, that I resolved to improve even
my very Confinement to serve those Friends, whom, as the Times then stood, I
could not see.

The Book being for Subject and Design intended chiefly for Gentlemen, I have
bin as careless of using a studied Pedantry in my Style; as careful in
contriving a pleasant and beautiful Impression. And when I had considered the
hazard, and computed the charge of the undertaking, I found it to exceed the
ability of a private Purse, especially of mine, that had bin so lately emptied
by the hand of violent enemies, and perfidious friends; not to make mention
here of the Sums that a Loyal Reflection upon my Princes Affairs had at the same
time drawn from me; and judged that the most safe, easy, and reasonable way was
to invite those Persons who had appeared desirous of the Book, to be
contributary to their own Contentment, by subscribing toward the charge of
this Publication.

And for the better management of the Work, I joined to my self a Printer,
whose Genius having rendered him Mathematical, and my overtures of profit
having interessed his diligence, I was induced to promise my self a more than
common Assistance from him: and at his door I with reason lay all miscarriages
that concerns his Profession in the Business.

In this Work I found more than ordinary Encouragement from that public
spirited Person the Reverend and Learned Dr. Thomas Barlow, Provost of Queens
College Oxford, and Margaret Professor in that University, as also from those
two able Mathematicians and my Real Friends Major Miles Symner, and Mr. Robert
Wood of Trinity College Dublin, and some few others whose Modesty has
expressly enjoined me a concealment of their Names.

Well, at length I have got to the end of my first Stage; and if I have not rid
Post, let my excuse be that my long stay for my Warrant caused me to set out
late; and being ill mounted, and in a road full of rubbs, I could not with any
safety go faster; but hope to get it up in the next Stage, for in that I intend
to shift my Horses.

The names of those Authors and Treatices which I judged would most grace our
Language, and gratify Students, are particularly expressed in the General Title
of the two Tomes. Distinct Tomes they are as consisting of several Pieces:
Collections I call them, because they have bin so published, dispersed, and worn
out of Print, that they very rarely meet in one hand: and Translations I own
them to be, as not pretending to any thing more than the disposure and
conversion of them: those Tracts only excepted which compose the second Part of
the second Tome.

The first Book which offers it self to your view in this Tome is that singular
and unimitable Piece of Reason and Demonstration the Systeme of Galileo. The
subject of it is a new and Noble p^rt of Astronomy, to wit the Doctrine and
Hypothesis of the Mobility of the Earth and the Stability of the Sun; the
History whereof I shall hereafter give you at large in the Life of that famous
Man. Only this by the by; that the Reader may not wonder why these Dialogues
found so various entertainment in Italy (for he cannot but have heard that
though they have been with all veneration valued, read and applauded by the
Judicious, yet they were with much detestation persecuted, suppressed and
exploded by the Superstitious) I am to tell him that our Author having assigned
his intimate Friends Salviati and Sagredo the more successful Parts of the
Challenger, and Moderater, he made the famous Commentator Simplicius to
personate the Peripatetick. The Book coming out, and Pope Urban the VIII.
taking his Honor to be concerned as having in his private Capacity bin very
positive in declaiming against the Samian Philosophy, and now (as he supposed)
being ill dealt with by Galileo who had summed up all his Arguments, and put
them into the mouth of Simplicius; his Holiness thereupon conceived an
implacable Displeasure against our Author, and thinking no other revenge
sufficient, he employed his Apostolical Authority, and deals with the
Consistory to condemn him and proscribe his Book as Heretical; prostituting the
Censure of the Church to his private revenge. This was Galileo's fortune in
Italy: but had I not reason to hope that the English will be more hospitable,
on the account of that Principle which induces them to be civil to (I say not
to dote on) Strangers, I should fear to be charged with imprudence for
appearing an Interpreter to that great Philosopher. And in this confidence I
shall forbear to make any large Exordium concerning him or his Book: and the
rather in regard that such kind of Gauderies become not the Gravity of the
Subject; as also knowing how much (coming from me) they must fall short of the
Merits of it, or him: but principally because I court only persons of Judgment
and Candor, that can distinguish between a Native Beauty, and spurious Vernish.
This only let me premise, though more to excuse my weakness in the menaging,
than to insinuate my ability in accomplishing this so arduous a Task, that
these profound Dialogues have bin found so uneasy to Translate, that neither
affectation of Novelty could induce the French, nor the Translating humor
persuade the Germans to undertake them. This difficulty, as I conceived, was
charged either upon the Intricacy of this manner of Writing, or upon the
singular Elegance in the style of Galileo, or else upon the miscarriage of the
unfortunate Mathias Berneggeius who first attempted to turn them into Latin
for the benefit of the Learned World.

I shall not presume to Censure the Censure which the Church of Rome past upon
this Doctrine and its Assertors. But, on the contrary, my Author having bin
indefinite in his discourse, I shall forbear to exasperate, and attempt to
reconcile such persons to this Hypothesis as devout esteem for Holy Scripture,
and dutiful Respect to Canonical Injunctions has made to stand off from this
Opinion: and therefore for their sakes I have at the end of the Dialogues by
way of supplement added an Epistle of Galileo to Her Most Serene Highness
Christina Lotharinga the Grand Duchess Mother of Tuscany; as also certain
Abstracts of John Kepler, Mathematician to two Emperors, and Didacus a Stunica
a famous Divine of Salamanca, with an Epistle of Paulo Antonio Foscarini a
learned Carmelite of Naples, that show the Authority of Sacred Scripture in
determining of Philosophical and Natural Controversies: hoping that the
ingenious and impartial Reader will meet with full satisfaction in the same.
And least what I have spoken of the prohibiting of these Pieces by the
Inquisition may deter any scrupulous person from reading of them, I have
purposely inserted the Imprimatur by which that Office licenced them. And for a
larger account of the Book or Author, I refer you to the Relation of his Life,
which shall bring up the Rear in the Second Tome.

What remains of this, is that Excellent Discourse of D. Benedetto Castelli
Abbate di San Benedetto Aloysio, concerning the Mensuration of Running Waters,
with other Treatises of that Learned Prelate, and of the Superintendent
Corsini. Some may allege, and I do confess that I promised to publish the
Life of Galileo in this place: But the great miscarriages of Letters from some
Friends in Italy and else where, to whom I am a Debtor for several Remarques,
and from whom I daily expect yet greater Helps concerning the History of that
famous Personage: these disappointments, I say, joined with the undeniable
Request of some Friends, who were impatient to see Castelli in English,
together with a consideration of the disproportionate Bulk that would otherwise
have bin betwixt the two Volumes, persuaded me to this exchange. This deviation
from my Promise I hope is Venial, and for the expiating of it I plead
Supererrogation: having in each Tome made so large Aditions (though to my great
expense) that they make near a third part more than I stood by promise bound to
Publish. That this is so will appear by comparing the Contents I here prefix
with the Advertisment I formerly Printed. For not to mention those Epitomes of
Kepler and a Stunica, the whole second and following Books of Castelli, were
not come to my hands at the time of my penning that Paper; yet knowing how
imperfect the Volume would be without them, they being partly a supplement to
the Theoremes and Problemes which the Abbot had formerly Printed, and partly
experiments that had procured him and his Doctrine a very great Reputation,
knowing this I say, I apprehended a necessity of publishing them with the rest:
and hope that if you think not the service I have done therein worth your
acknowledgement, you will yet at least account the increase of my expense a
sufficient extenuation of the Trespass that those Additions have forced me to
commit upon your Patience in point of Time.

As for the second Tome, I have only this to assure the Generous Readers; 1
that I am very confident I shall be much more punctual in publishing that, than
(for the reasons above related.) I was able to be in setting forth this: 2 that
they shall not be abused in advancing of their moneys, (as has bin used in the
like case) by selling the remaining Copyes at an under rate; and 3 that I have
a very great care that no disesteem may by my means arise unto this way of
publishing Books, for that it is of excellent use in ushering Great and Costly
Volumes into the World.

To say nothing of the disadvantages of Translations in general, this of mine
doubtless is not without it is Errors, and oversights: but those of the Printer
discounted, I hope the rest may be allowed me upon the score of Human
Imbecilitie. The truth is, I have assumed the Liberty to note the Mistakes in
the Florid Version of Berneggerus in the Margent, not so much to reproach him,
as to convince those who told me that they accounted my pains needless, having
his Latin Translation by them. The like they said of the whole two Tomes: but
they thereby caused me to question their Understanding or Veracity. For some of
the Books were yet never extant: As for instance; the Mechanics of Monsieur
Des Carts, a Manuscript which I found amongst the many other Rarities that
enrich the well-chosen Library of my Learned and Worthy Friend Dr. Charles
Scarburgh; the Experiments of Gravity, and the Life of Galileo, both my own:
Others were included in Volumes of great price, or so dispersed that they were
not to be purchased for any money; as those of Kepler, a Stunica, Archimedes,
Tartaglia, and the Mechanics of Galileo: And the remainder, though easyer to
procure, were harder to be understood; as Tartaglia his notes on Archimedes,
Torricellio his Doctrine of Projects, Galileo his Epistle to the Duchess of
Tuscany, and above all his Dialogues de Motu; (never till now done into any
Language) which were so intermixed of Latin and Italian, that the difficulty of
the Style, joined with the intricatnesse of the Subject rendered them
Unpleasant, if not wholly Unintelligible, to such as were not absolute Masters
of both the Tongues.

To conclude; according to the entertainment that you please to afford these
Collections, I shall be encouraged to proceed with the Publication of a large
Body of Hydrography; declaring the History, Art, Laws, and Apendages of that
Princely Study of Navigation, wherein I have omitted nothing of note that can
be found either in Dudley, Fournier, Aurigarius, Nonius, Snellus, Marsennus,
Baysius, Morisetus, Blondus, Wagoner, abroad, or learnt amongst our Mariners at
home, touching the Office of an Admiral, Commander, Pilot, Modellist,
Shipwright, Gunner, etc.

But order requiring that I should discharge my first Obligation before I
contract a second; I shall detein you no longer in the Portall, but put you
into possession of the Premises,

November. 20. 1661. T. S.

THE AUTHOR'S INTRODUCTION.
Judicious Reader,
THere was published some years since in Rome a salutiferous Edict, that, for
the obviating of the dangerous Scandals of the present Age, imposed a
seasonable Silence upon the Pythagorean Opinion of the Mobility of the Earth.
There want not such as unadvisedly affirm, that that Decree was not the
production of a sober Scrutiny, but of an illinformed Passion; and one may hear
some mutter that Consultors altogether ignorant of Astronomical Observations
ought not to clipp the Wings of Speculative Wits with rash Prohibitions. My
zeal cannot keep silence when I hear these inconsiderate complaints. I thought
fit, as being thoroughly acquainted with that prudent Determination, to appear
openly upon the Theater of the World as a Witness of the naked Truth. I was at
that time in Rome; and had not only the audiences, but applauds of the most
Eminent Prelates of that Court; nor was that Decree Published without Previous
Notice given me thereof. Therefore it is my resolution in the present case to
give Foraign Nations to see, that this point is as well understood in Italy,
and particularly in Rome, as Transalpine Diligence can imagine it to be: and
collecting together all the proper Speculations that concern the Copernican
Systeme, to let them know, that the notice of all preceded the Censure of the
Roman Court; and that there proceed from this Climate not only Doctrines for
the health of the Soul, but also ingenious Discoveries for the recreating of
the Mind.

To this end I have personated the Copernican in this Discourse; proceeding
upon an Hypothesis purely Mathematical; striving by all artificial ways to
represent it Superior, not to that of the Immobility of the Earth absolutely,
but according as it is mentioned by some, that retein no more, but the name of
Peripateticks, and are content, without going farther, to adore Shadows, not
philosophizing with requisite caution, but with the sole remembrance of four
Principles, but badly understood.

We shall treat of three principal heads. First I will endeavor to show that
all Experiments that can be made upon the Earth are insufficient means to
conclude it is Mobility, but are indifferently applicable to the Earth moveable
or immovable: and I hope that on this occasion we shall discover many
observable passages unknown to the Ancients. Secondly we will examine the
Celestial Phoenomena that make for the Copernican Hypothesis, as if it were
to prove absolutely victorious; adding by the way certain new Observations,
which yet serve only for the Astronomical Facility, not for Natural Necessity.
In the third place I will propose an ingenuous Fancy. I remember that I have
said many years since, that the unknown Problem of the Tide might receive some
light, admitting the Earths Motion. This Position of mine passing from one to
another had found charitable Fathers that adopted it for the Issue of their own
wit. Now, because no stranger may ever appear that defending himself with our
arms, shall charge us with want of caution in so principal an Accident, I have
thought good to lay down those probabilities that would render it credible,
admitting that the Earth did move. I hope, that by these Considerations the
World will come to know, that if other Nations have Navigated more than we, we
have not studied less than they; and that our returning to assert the Earths
Stability, and to take the contrary only for a Mathematical Capriccio, proceeds
not from inadvertency of what others have thought thereof, but (had we no other
inducements) from those Reasons that Pi^ty, Religion, the Knowledge of the
Divine Omnipotency, and a consciousness of the incapacity of man's Understanding
dictate unto us.

With all I conceived it very proper to express these conceits by way of
Dialogue, which, as not being bound up to the riggid observance of Mathematical
Laws, gives place also to Digressions that are sometimes no less curious than
the principal Argument.

I chanced to be several years since, at several times, in the Stupendous
City of Venice, where I conversed with Signore Giovan Francesco Sagredo of a
Noble Extraction, and piercing wit. There came thither from Florence at the
same time Signore Filippo Salviati, whose least glory was the Eminence of his
Blood, and Magnificence of his Estate: a sublime Wit that fed not more hungerly
upon any pleasure than on elevated Speculations. In the company of these two I
often discoursed of these matters before a certain Peripatetick Philosopher who
seemed to have no geater obstacle in understanding of the Truth, than the Fame
he had acquired by Aristotelical Interpretations.

Now, seeing that inexorable Death has deprived Venice and Florence of those
two great Lights in the very Meridian of their years, I did resolve, as far as
my poor ability would permit, to perpetuate their lives to their honor in
these leaves, bringing them in as Interlocutors in the present Controversy. Nor
shall the Honest Peripatetick want his place, to whom for his excessive
affection toward the Commentaries of Simplicius, I thought fit, without
mentioning his own Name, to leave that of the Author he so much respected. Let
those two great Souls, ever venerable to my heart, please to accept this
public Monument of my never-dying Love; and let the remembrance of their
Eloquence assist me in delivering to Posterity the Considerations that I have
promised.

There casually happened (as was usual) several discourses at times between
these Gentlemen, the which had rather inflamed than satisfied in their wits the
thirst they had to be learning; whereupon they took a discreet resolution to
meet together for certain days, in which all other business set aside, they
might betake themselves more methodically to contemplate the Wonders of God in
Heaven, and in the Earth: the place appointed for their meeting being in the
Palace of the Noble Sagredo, after the due, but very short complements; Signore
Salviati began in this manner.

The CONTENTS of the FIRST TOME.
PART THE FIRST.
Treatise I. GALILEUS GALILEUS, his SYSTEME of the WORLD: in Four DIALOGUES.
II. HIS EPISTLE to her SERENE HIGHNESS CHRISTIANA LOTHERINGA GRAND DUCHESS
of TUSCANY, touching the Ancient and Modern DOCTRINE of HOLY FATHERS, and
JUDICIOUS DIVINES, concerning the AUTHORITY of SACRED SCRIPTURE in
PHYLOSOPHICAL CONTROVERSIES. III. JOHANNES KEPLERUS, his RECONCILINGS of TEXTS
of SACRED SCRIPTURE that seem to oppose the DOCTRINE of the EARTHS MOBILITY:
abstracted from his INTRODUCTION unto his LEARNED COMMENTARIES upon the PLANET
MARS. IV. DIDACUS A STUNICA, a learned SPANISH DIVINE, his RECONCILINGS of the
said DOCTRINE with the TEXTS of SACRED SCRIPTURE; abstracted from his
COMMENTARY upon JOB. V. PAULU^ ANTONIUS FOSCARINUS, a CARMELITE, his EPISTLE
to SEBASTIANUS FANTONUS, the GENERAL of his ORDER, concerning the PYTHAGOREAN
and COPERNICAN OPINION of the MOBILITY OF THE EARTH, and STABILITY OF THE SUN;
and of the NEW SYSTEME or CONSTITUTION of the WORLD: in which he reconcileth
the TEXTS OF SACRED SCRIPTURE, and ASSERTIONS of DIVINES, commonly alleged
against this OPINION. A Table of the most observable Persons and Matters
mentioned in the First Part.
PART THE SECOND.
I. D. BENEDICTUS CASTELLUS, ABBOT OF S. BENEDICTUS ALOYSIUS, his DISCOURSE of
the MENSURATION OF RUNNING WATERS: The First BOOK. II. HIS LETTER to GALILEUS,
representing the state of the Lake of PERUGIA in TUSCANY. III. HIS GEOMETRICAL
DEMONSTRATIONS of the MEASURE of RUNNING WATERS. IV. HIS DISCOURSE of the
MENSURATION OF RUNNING WATERS: The Second BOOK. V. HIS CONSIDERATIONS
concerning the LAKE OF VENICE. In two DISCOURSES. VI. HIS RULE for computing
the quantity of MUD and SAND that LAND-FLOODS bring down to, and leave in the
LAKE of VENICE. VII. HIS LETTER to Father FRANCESCO DI S. GIVSEPPE, wherein, at
the instance of PRINCE LEOPALDO, he delivers his judgment concerning the
turning FIUME MORTO (a River near PISA in TUSCANY) into the SEA, and into the
River SEARCHIO. VIII. HIS second LETTER in answer to certain OBJECTIONS
proposed, and DIFFICULTIES observed by SIGNORE BARTOLOTTI, in that affair of
the DIVERSION of FIUME MORTO. IX. HIS CONSIDERATION upon the DRAINING of the
PONTINE FENNS in CALABRIA. X. HIS CONSIDERATION upon the DRAINING of the
TERRITORIES of BOLOGNA, FERRARA, and ROMAGNA. XI. HIS LETTER to D. FERRANTE
CESARINI, applying his DOCTRINE to the MENSURATION of the LENGTH, and
DISTRIBUTION of the QUANTITY of the WATERS of RIVERS, SPRINGS, AQUEDUCTS, etc.
XII. D. CORSINUS, SUPERINTENDENT of the GENERAL DRAINS, and PRESIDENT of
ROMAGNA, his RELATION of the state of the WATERS in the TERRITORIES of BOLOGNA
and FERRARA. A Table of the most observable Persons and Matters mentioned in
the Second Part.
The CONTENTS of the SECOND TOME.
PART THE FIRST.
Treatise I. GALILEUS GALILEUS, his MATHEMATICAL DISCOURSES and DEMONSTRATIOMS
touching two NEW SCIENCES, pertaining to the MECHANICS, and LOCAL MOTION:
with an APPENDIX of the CENTER of GRAVITY of some SOLIDS in Four DIALOGUES. II.
HIS MECHANICS; a New PIECE. III. RHENATUS DES CARTS, his MECHANICS;
translated from his FRENCH MANUSCRIPT; a New PIECE. IV. ARCHIMEDES, his Tract
DE INSIDENTIBUS HUMIDO; with the NOTES and DEMONSTRASIONS of NICOLAUS
TARTALEUS, in Two BOOKS. V. GALILEUS his DISCOURSE of the things that move in
or upon the WATER. VI. NICOLAUS TARTALEUS his INVENTIONS for DIVING UNDER
WATER, RAISING OF SHIPS SUNK, etc. in Two BOOKS.
PART THE SECOND.
I. EVANGELISTA TORRICELLIUS, his DOCTRINE OF PROJECTS, and TABLES of the
RANGES of GREAT GUNNS of all sorts; wherein he detects sundry ERRORS in
GUNNERY: An EPITOME. II. T. S. his EXPERIMENTS of the COMPARATIVE GRAVITY OF
BODIES in the AIR and WATER. III. GALILEUS GALILEUS, his LIFE: in Five BOOKS,
BOOK I. Containing Five Chapters. Chap. 1. His Country. 2. His Parents and
Extraction. 3. His time of Birth. 4. His first Education. 5. His Masters.
II. Containing Three Chapters. Chap. 1. His judgment in several Learnings. 2.
His Opinions and Doctrine. 3. His Auditors and Scholars.
III. Containing Four Chapters. Chap. 1. His behavior in Civil Affairs. 2. His
manner of Living. 3. His moral Virtues. 4. His misfortunes and troubles.
IV. Containing Four Chapters. Chap. 1. His person described. 2. His Will and
Death. 3. His Inventions. 4. His Writings. 5. His Dialogues of the Systeme in
particular, containing Nine Sections. Section 1. Of Astronomy in General; its
Definition, Praise, Original. 2. Of Astronomers: a Chronological Catalogue of
the most famous of them. 3. Of the Doctrine of the Earths Mobility, etc. its
Antiquity, and Progress from Pythagoras to the time of Copernicus. 4. Of the
Followers of Copernicus, unto the time of Galileus. 5. Of the several Systemes
amongst Astronomers. 6. Of the Allegations against the Copern. Systeme, in 77
Arguments taken out of Ricciolo, with Answers to them. 7. Of the Allegations
for the Copern. Systeme in 50 Arguments. 8. Of the Scriptures Authorities
produced against and for the Earths mobility. 9. The Conclusion of the whole
Chapter.

V. Containing Four Chapters. Chap. 1. His Patrons, Friends, and Emulators. 2.
Authors judgments of him. 3. Authors that have writ for, or against him. 4. A
Conclusion in certain Reflections upon his whole Life. A Table of the whole
Second TOME.


GALILAEUS Galilaeus Lyncaeus, HIS SYSTEME OF THE WORLD.
The First Dialogue.
INTERLOCVTORS. SALVIATUS, SAGREDUS, and SIMPLICIUS. SALVIATUS. IT was our
yesterdayes resolution, and agreement, that we should to day discourse the most
distinctly, and particularly we could possible, of the natural reasons, and
their efficacy that have been hitherto alleged on the one or other part, by
the maintainers of the Positions, Aristotelian, and Ptolomaique; Copernicus
reputeth the Earth a Globe like to a Planet.
and by the followers of the Copernican Systeme: And because Copernicus placing
the Earth among the moveable Bodies of Heaven, comes to constitute a Globe for
the fame like to a Planet; it would be good that we began our disputation with
the examination of what, and how great the energy of the Peripateticks
arguments is, when they demonstrate, that this Hypothesis is impossible: Since
that it is necessary to introduce in Nature, Celestial substances that are in
alterable and Elementary that be alterable, art necessary in the opinion of
Aristotle.
substances different betwixt themselves, that is, the Celestial, and
Elementary; that impassible and immortal, this alterable and corruptible. Which
argument Aristotle handles in his book De Coelo, insinuating it first, by some
discourses dependent on certain general assumptions, and afterward confirming
it with experiments and particular demonstrations: following the same method, I
will propound, and freely speak my judgment, submitting my self to your
censure, and particularly to Simplicius, a Stout Champion and contender for the
Aristotelian Doctrine.

And the first Step of the Peripatetick arguments is that, Aristotle makes the
World perfect, because it has the threefold demension.
where Aristotle proves the integrity and perfection of the World, telling us,
that it is not a simple line, nor a bare superficies, but a body adorned with
Longitude, Latitude, and Profundity; and because there are no more dimensions
but these three; The World having them, has all, and having all, is to be
concluded perfect. And again, that by simple length, that magnitude is
constituted, which is called a Line, to which adding breadth, there is framed
the Superficies, and yet further adding the altitude or profoundity, there
results the Body, and after these three dimensions there is no passing farther,
so that in these three the integrity, and to so speak, totality is terminated,
which I might but with justice have required Aristotle to have proved to me by
necessary consequences, the rather in regard he was able to do it very plainly,
and speedily.


SIMPL. What say you to the excellent demonstrations in the 2. 3. and 4. Texts,
Aristotle's demonstrations* to prove the dimensions to be three and no more.
after the definition of Continual? have you it not first there proved, that
there is no more but three dimensions, for that those three are all things, and
that they are every where? And is not this confirmed by the Doctrine and
Authority of the Pythagorians, The number three celebrated amongst the
Pythagorians
who say that all things are determined by three, beginning, middle, and end,
which is the number of All? And where leave you that reason, namely, that as it
were by the law of Nature, this number is used in the sacrifices of the Gods?
And why being so dictated by nature, do we atribute to those things that are
three, and not to less, the title of all? why of two is it said both, and not
all, unless they be three? And all this Doctrine you have in the second Text.
Afterward in the third, Ad pleniorem scientiam, Omne, Totum and Perfectum.
we read that All, the Whole, and Perfect, are formally one and the same; and
that therefore only the Body, amongst magnitudes is perfect: because it is
determined by three, which is All, and being divisible three manner of ways,
it is every way divisible; but of the others, some are dividible in one manner,
and some in two, because according to the number affixed, they have their
division and continuity, and thus one magnitude is continuate one way, Or Solid.
another two, a third, namely the Body, every way. Moreover in the fourth Text;
does he not after some other Doctrines, prove it by another demonstration?
Scilicet, That no transition is made but according to some defect (and so there
is a transition or passing from the line to the superficies, because the line
is defective in breadth) and that it is impossible for the perfect to want any
thing, it being every way so; therefore there is no transition from the Solid
or Body to any other magnitude. Now think you not that by all these places he
has sufficiently proved, how that there is no going beyond the three
dimensions, Length, Breadth, and Thickness, and that therefore the body or
solid, which has them all, is perfect?


SALV. To tell you true, I think not my self bound by all these reasons to
grant any more but only this, That that which has beginning, middle, and end,
may, and ought to be called perfect: But that then, because beginning, middle,
and end, are Three, the number Three is a perfect number, and has a faculty of
conferring Perfection on those things that have the same, I find no inducement
to grant; neither do I understand, nor believe that, for example, of feet, the
number three is more perfect then four or two, nor do I conceive the number
four to be any imperfection to the Elements: and that they would be more
perfect if they were three. Better therefore it had been to have left these
subtleties to the Rhetoricians, and to have proved his intent, by necessary
demonstration; for so it behooves to do in demonstrative sciences.


SIMPL. You seem to scorn these reasons, and yet it is all the Doctrine of the
Pythagorians, who attribute so much to numbers; and you that be a
Mathematician, and believe many opinions in the Pythagorick Philosophy, seem
now to contemn their Mysteries.


SALV. That the Pythagorians had the science of numbers in high esteem, and
that Plato himself admired humane understanding, Plato held that humane
understanding partook of divinity, because it understood numbers.
and thought that it pertook of Divinity, for that it understood the nature of
numbers, I know very well, nor should I be far from being of the same opinion:
But that the Mysteries for which Pythagoras and his sect, had the Science of
numbers in such veneration, are the follies that abound in the mouths and
writings of the vulgar, The Mystery of Pythagorick numbers fabulous.
I no ways credit: but rather because I know that they, to the end admirable
things might not be exposed to the contempt, and scorn of the vulgar, censured
as sacrilegious, the publishing of the abstruce properties of Numbers, De
Papyrio p^aetextato, Gellius 1. 2. 3.
and incommensurable and irrational quantities, by them investigated; and
divulged, that he who discovered them, was tormented in the other World: I
believe that some one of them to deter the common sort, and free himself from
their inquisitiveness, told them that the mysteries of numbers were those
trifles, which afterward did so spread amongst the vulgar; and this with a
discretion and subtlety resembling that of the prudent young man, that to be
freed from the importunity of his inquisitive Mother or Wife, I know not
whether, who pressed him to impart the secrets of the Senate, contrived that
story, which afterward brought her and many other women to be derided and
laughed at by the same Senate.


SIMPL. I will not be of the number of those who are over curious about the
Pythagorick mysteries; but adhering to the point in hand; I reply, that the
reasons produced by Aristotle to prove the dimensions to be no more than three,
seem to me concludent, and I believe, That had there been any more evident
demonstrations thereof, Aristotle would not have omitted them.


SAGR. Put in at least, if he had known, or remembered any more. But you
Salviatus would do me a great pleasure to allege unto me some arguments that
may be evident, and clear enough for me to comprehend.


SALV. I will; and they shall be such as are not only to be apprehended by
you, but even by Simplicius himself: nor only to be comprehended, but are also
already known, although happily unobserved; and for the more easy understanding
thereof, we will take this Pen and Ink, which I see already prepared for such
occasions, A Geometrical demonstration of the triple dimension.
and describe a few figures. And first we will note [Fig. 1. at the end of this
Dialog.] these two points AB, and draw from the one to the other the curved
lines, ACB, and ADB, and the right line AB, I demand of you which of them, in
your mind, is that which determines the distance between the terms AB, and why?


SAGR. I should say the right line, and not the crooked, as well because the
right is shorter, as because it is one, sole, and determinate, whereas the
others are infinite, unequal, and longer; and my determination is grounded upon
that, That it is one, and certain.


SALV. We have then the right line to determine the length between the two
terms; let us add another right line and parallel to AB, which let be CD, [Fig.
2.] so that there is put between them a superficies, of which I desire you to
assign me the breadth, therefore departing from the point A, tell me how, and
which way you will go, to end in the line CD, and so to point me out the
breadth comprehended between those lines; let me know whether you will
terminate it according to the quantity of the curved line AE, or the right line
AF, or any other.


SIMPL. According to the right AF, and not according to the crooked, that being
already excluded from such an use.


SAGR. But I would take neither of them, seeing the right line AF runs
obliquely; But would draw a line, perpendicular to C D, for this should seem to
me the shortest, and the properest of infinite that are greater, and unequal to
one another, which may be produced from the term A to any other part of the
opposite line CD.


SALV. Your choice, and the reason you bring for it in my judgment is most
excellent; so that by this time we have proved that the first dimension is
determined by a right line, the second namely the breadth with another line
right also, and not only right, but withal, at right-angles to the other that
determines the length, and thus we have the two dimensions of length and
breadth, definite and certain. But were you to bound or terminate a height, as
for example, how high this Roof is from the pavement, that we tread on, being
that from any point in the Roof, we may draw infinite lines, both curved, and
right, and all of diverse lengths to infinite points of the pavement, which of
all these lines would you make use of?


SAGR. I would fasten a line to the Seeling, and with a plummet that should
hang at it, would let it freely distend it self till it should reach well near
to the pavement, and the length of such a thread being the streightest and
shortest of all the lines, that could possibly be drawn from the same point to
the pavement, I would say was the true height of this Room.


SALV. Very well, And when from the point noted in the pavement by this pendent
thread (taking the pavement to be level and not declining) you should produce
two other right lines, one for the length, and the other for the breadth of the
superficies of the said pavement, what angles should they make with the said
thread?


SAGR. They would doubtless meet at right angles, the said lines falling
perpendicular, and the pavement being very plain and level.


SALV. Therefore if you assign any point, for the term from whence to begin
your measure; and from thence do draw a right line, as the terminator of the
first measure, namely of the length, it will follow of necessity, that that
which is to design out the largeness or breadth, touches the first at
right-angles, and that that which is to denote the altitude, which is the third
dimension, going from the same point forms also with the other two, not
oblique but right angles, and thus by the three perpendiculars, as by three
lines, one, certain, and as short as is possible, you have the three dimensions
AB length, AC breadth, and AD height; and because, clear it is, that there
cannot concur any more lines in the said point, so as to make therewith
right-angles, and the dimensions ought to be determined by the sole right
lines, which make between themselves right-angles; therefore the dimensions are
no more but three, and that which has three has all, and that which has all,
is divisible on all sides, and that which is so, is perfect, etc.


SIMPL. And who says that I cannot draw other lines? why may not I protract
another line underneath, unto the point A, that may be perpendicular to the
rest?


SALV. You can doubtless, at one and the same point, make no more than three
right lines concur, that constitute right angles between themselves.


SAGR. I see what Simplicius means, namely, that should the said DA be
prolonged downward, then by that means there might be drawn two others, but
they would be the same with the first three, differing only in this, that
whereas now they only touch, then they would intersect, but not produce new
dimensions.


SIMPL. I will not say that this your argument may not be concludent; In
physical proofs ^e^metrical exactness is not necessary.
but yet this I say with Aristotle, that in things natural it is not always
necessary, to bring Mathematical demonstrations.


SAGR. Grant that it were so where such proofs cannot be had, yet if this case
admit of them, why do not you use them? But it would be good we spent no more
words on this particular, for I think that Salviatus will yield, both to
Aristotle, and you, without farther demonstration, that the World is a body,
and perfect, yea most perfect, as being the greatest work of God.


SALV. So really it is, therefore leaving the general contemplation of the
whole, Parts of the world are two, according to Aristotle, Celestial and
Elementary contrary to one another.
let us descend to the consideration of its parts, which Aristotle, in his
first division, makes two, and they very different and almost contrary to one
another; namely the Celestial, and Elementary: that ingenerable,
incorruptible, unalterable, unpassible, etc. and this exposed to a continual
alteration, mutation, etc. Which difference, as from its original principle, he
derives from the diversity of local motions, and in this method he proceeds.

Leaving the sensible, if I may so speak, and retiring into the Ideal world, he
begins Architectonically to consider that nature being the principle of motion,
Local motion of three kinds, right, circular, and mixed.
it follows that natural bodies be endued with local motion. Next he declares
local motion to be of three kinds, namely, circular, right, and mixed of right
and circular: and the two first he calls simple, Circular, and straight
motions are simple, as proceeding by simple lines.
for that of all lines the circular, and right are only simple; and here
somewhat restraining himself, he defines anew, of simple motions, one to be
circular, namely that which is made about the medium, and the other namely the
right, upwards, and downwards; upwards, that which moves from the medium;
downwards, that which goes toward the medium. And from hence he infers, as he
may by and necessary consequence, Ad medium, a (...), and circa medium.
that all simple motions are confined to these three kinds, namely, to the
medium, from the medium, and about the medium; the which corresponds says he,
with what has been said before of a body, that it also is perfected by three
things, and so is its motion. Having confirmed these motions, he proceeds
saying, that of natural bodies some being simple, and some composed of them
(and he calls simple bodies those, that have a principle of motion from
nature, as the Fire and Earth) it follows that simple motions belong to simple
bodies, and mixed to the compound; yet in such sort, that the compounded incline
to the part predominant in the composition.


SAGR. Pray you hold a little Salviatus, for I find so many doubts to spring up
on all sides in this discourse, that I shall be constrained, either to
communicate them if I would attentively hearken to what you shall add, or to
take off my attention from the things spoken, if I would remember objections.


SALV. I will very willingly stay, for that I also run the same hazard, and am
ready at every step to lose my self whilst I sail between Rocks, and boisterous
Waves, that make me, as they say, to lose my Compass; therefore before I make
them more, propound your difficulties.


SAGR. You and Aristotle together would at first take me a little out of the
sensible World, The definition of Nature, either imperfect, or unseasonable,
produced by Aristotle.
to tell me of the Architecture, wherewith it ought to be fabricated; and very
appositly begin to tell me, that a natural body is by nature moveable, nature
being (as elsewhere it is defined) the principle of motion. But here I am
somewhat doubtful why Aristotle said not that of natural bodies, some are
moveable by nature, and others immovable, for that in the definition, nature
is said to be the principle of Motion, and Rest; for if natural bodies have all
a principle of motion, either he might have omitted the mention of Rest, in the
definition of nature: or not have introduced such a definition in this place.
Next, as to the declaration of what Aristotle intends by simple motions, and
how by Spaces he determines them, calling those simple, that are made by simple
lines, which are only the right, and circular, The Helix about the Cylinder
may be said to be a simple line.
I entertain it willingly; nor do I desire to tenter the instance of the Helix,
about the Cylinder; which in that it is in every part like to it self, might
seemingly be numbered among simple lines. But herein I cannot concur, that he
should so restrain simple motions (whilst he seems to go about to repeat the
same definition in other words) as to call one of them the motion about the
medium, the others Sursum and Deorsum, namely upwards and downward; which terms
are not to be used, out of the World fabricated, but imply it not only made,
but already inhabited by us; for if the right motion be simple, by the
simplicity of the right line, and if the simple motion be natural, it is made
on every side, to wit, upwards, downwards, backwards, forwards, to the right,
to the left, and if any other way can be imagined, provided it be straight, it
shall agree to any simple natural body; or if not so, then the supposion of
Aristotle is defective. Aristotle accommodates the rules of Architecture to the
frame of the World, and not the frame to the rules.
It appears moreover that Aristotle hinteth but one circular motion alone to be
in the World, and consequently but one only Center, to which alone the motions
of upwards and downwards, refer. All which are apparent proofs, that Aristotle's
aim is, to make white black, and to accommodate Architecture to the building,
and not to modle the building according to the precepts of Arthitecture: for if
I should say that Nature in Universal may have a thousand Circular Motions, and
by consequence a thousand Centers, there would be also a thousand motions
upwards, and downwards. Again he makes as has been said, a simple motion, and
a mixed motion, calling simple, the circular and right; and mixed, the compound
of them two: of natural bodies he calls some simple (namely those that have a
natural principle to simple motion) and others compound: and simple motions he
attributes to simple bodies, and the compounded to the compound; but by
compound motion he does no longer understand the mixed of right and circular,
which may be in the World; but introduces a mixed motion as impossible, as it
is impossible to mix opposite motions made in the same right line, so as to
produce from them a motion partly upwards, partly downwards; and, to moderate
such an absurdity, Right motion sometimes simple, and sometimes mixed according
to Arist.
and impossibility, he asserts that such mixed bodies move according to the
simple part predominant: which necessitates others to say, that even the motion
made by the same right line is sometimes simple, and sometimes also compound:
so that the simplicity of the motion, is no longer dependent only on the
simplicity of the line.


SIMPL. How? Is it not difference sufficient, that the simple and absolute are
more swift than that which proceeds from predominion? and how much faster does
a piece of pure Earth descend, than a piece of Wood?


SAGR. Well, Simplicius; But put case the simplicity for this cause was
changed, besides that there would be a hundred thousand mixed motions, you would
not be able to determine the simple; nay farther, if the greater or less
velocity be able to alter the simplicity of the motion, no simple body should
move with a simple motion; since that in all natural right motions, the
velocity is ever increasing, and by consequence still changing the simplicity,
which as it is simplicity, ought of consequence to be immutable, and that which
more imports, you charge Aristotle with another thing, that in the definition
of motions compounded, he has not made mention of tardity nor velocity, which
you now insert for a necessary and essential point. Again you can draw no
advantage from this rule, for that there will be amongst the mixed bodies some,
(and that not a few) that will move swiftly, and others more slowly than the
simple; as for example, Lead, and Wood, in comparison of earth; and therefore
amongst these motions, which call you the simple, and which the mixed?


SIMPL. I would call that simple motion, which is made by a simple body, and
mixed, that of a compound body.


SAGR. Very well, and yet Simplicius a little before you said, that the simple,
and compound motions, discovered which were mixed, and which were simple bodies;
now you will have me by simple and mixed bodies, come to know which is the
simple, and which is the compound motion: an excellent way to keep us ignorant,
both of motions and bodies. Moreover, you have also a little above declared,
how that a greater velocity did not suffice, but you seek a third condition for
the definement of simple motion, for which Aristotle contented himself with one
alone, namely, of the simplicity of the Space, or Medium: But now according to
you, the simple motion, shall be that which is made upon a simple line, with a
certain determinate velocity, by a body simply moveable. Now be it as you
please, and let us return to Aristotle, who defines the mixed motion to be that
compounded of the right, and circular, but produces not any body, which
naturally moves with such a motion.


SALV. I come again to Aristotle, who having very well, and Methodically begun
his discourse, but having a greater aim to rest at, and hit a mark,
predesigned in his mind, then that to which his method lead him, digressing
from the purpose, he comes to assert, as a thing known and manifest, that as to
the motions directly upwards or downwards, they naturally agree to Fire, and
Earth; and that therefore it is necessary, that besides these bodies, which are
near unto us, there must be in nature another, to which the circular motion may
agree: which shall be so much the more excellent by how much the circular
motion is more perfect, then the straight, but how much more pefect that is
than this, he determines from the greatness of the circular lines perfection
above the right line; The circular line perfect, according to Aristotle, and
but the right imperfect, and why.
calling that perfect, and this imperfect; imperfect, because if infinite it
wants a termination, and end: and if it be finite, there is yet something
beyond which it may be prolonged. This is the basis, ground work, and
master-stone of all the Fabric of the Aristotelian World, upon which they
superstruct all their other properties, of neither heavy nor light, of
ingenerable incorruptible, exemption from all motions, some only the local,
etc. And all these passions he affirms to be proper to a simple body that is
moved circularly; and the contrary qualities of gravity, levity,
corruptibility, etc. he assigns to bodies naturally moveable in a straight
line, for that if we have already discovered defects in the foundation, we may
rationally question what soever may farther built thereon. I deny not, that
this which Aristotle hitherto has introduced, with a general discourse
dependent upon universal primary principles, has been since in process of
time, reinforced with particular reasons, and experiments; all which it would
be necessary distinctly to consider and weigh; but because what has been said
hitherto presents to such as consider the same many and no small difficulties,
(and yet it would be necessary, that the primary principles and fundamentals,
were certain, firm, and established, that so they might with more confidence be
built upon) it would not be amiss, before we farther multiply doubts, to see if
happily (as I conjecture) betaking our selves to other ways, we may not light
upon a more direct and secure method; and with better considered principles of
Architecture lay our primary fundamentals. Therefore suspending for the present
the method of Aristotle, (which we will reassume again in its proper place,
and particularly examine; The world is supposed by the Author to be perfectly
ordinate.
) I say, that in the things hitherto affirmed by him, I agree with him, and
admit that the World is a body enjoying all dimensions, and therefore most
perfect; and I add, that as such, it is necessarily most ordinate, that is,
having parts between themselves, with exquisite and most perfect order
disposed; which assumption I think is not to be denied, neither by you or any
other.


SIMPL. Who can deny it? the first particular (of the worlds dimensions) is
taken from Aristotle himself, and its denomination of ordinate seems only to
be assumed from the order which it most exactly keeps.


SALV. This principle then established, Straight motion impossible in the world
exactly ordinate.
one may immediately conclude, that if the entire parts of the World should be
by their nature moveable, it is impossible that their motions should be right,
or other than circular; and the reason is sufficiently easy, and manifest; for
that whatsoever moves with a right motion, changes place; and continuing to
move, does by degrees more and more remove from the term from whence it
departed, and from all the places through which it successively passed; and if
such motion naturally suited with it, then it was not at the beginning in its
proper place; and so the parts of the World were not disposed with perfect
order. But we suppose them to be perfectly ordinate, therefore as such, it is
impossible that they should by nature change place, and consequently move in a
right motion. Right motion nature infinite.
Again, the right motion being by nature infinite, for that the right line is
infinite and indeterminate, it is impossible that any moveable can have a
natural principle of moving in a right line; Motion by a right line naturally
impossible.
namely toward the place whither it is impossible to arrive, there being no
prae-finite term; Nature attempts not things impossible to be effected.
and nature, as Aristotle himself says well, never attempts to do that which
can never be done, nor essaies to move whither it is impossible to arrive. And
if any one should yet object, that albeit the right line, and consequently the
motion by it is producible in infinitum, that is to say, is interminate; yet
nevertheless Nature, as one may say, arbitrarily has assigned them some terms,
and given natural instincts to its natural bodies to move unto the same; I will
reply, that this might perhaps be fabled to have come to pass in the first
Chaos* Right motion might perhaps be in the first Chaos.
where indistinct matters confusedly and inordinately wandered; to regulate
which, Right motion is commodious to range in order, things out of order.
Nature very appositely made use of right motions, by which, like as the
well-constituted, moving, disorder themselves, so were they which were before
depravedly disposed by this motion ranged in order: but after their exquisite
distribution and collocation, it is impossible that there should remain natural
inclinations in them of longer moving in a right motion, from which now would
ensue their removal from their proper and natural place, that is to say, their
disordination; we may therefore say that the right motion serves to conduct the
matter to erect the work; but once erected, that it is to rest immovable, or
if moveable, Mundane bodies moved in the beginning in a right line, and
afterward circularly, according to Plato.
to move it self only circularly. Unless we will say with Plato, that these
mundane bodies, after they had been made and finished, were for a certain time
moved by their Maker, in a right motion, but that after their attainment to
certain and determinate places, they were revolved one by one in Spheres,
passing from the right to the circular motion, wherein they have been ever
since kept and maintained. A sublime conceit, and worthy indeed of Plato: upon
which, I remember to have heard our common friend the Thus does he cover^ly and
modestly style himself throughout this work.
Lyncean Academick discourse in this manner, if I have not forgot it. Every
body for any reason constituted in a state of rest, but which is by nature
moveable, being set at liberty does move; A moveable being in a state of rest,
shall not move unless it have an inclination to some particular place.
provided withal, that it have an inclination to some particular place; for
should it stand indifferently affected to all, it would remain in its rest, not
having greater inducement to move one way than another. From the having of this
inclination necessarily proceeds, The moveable accelerates its motion, going
toward the place whither it has an inclination.
that it in its moving shall continually increase its acceleration, and
beginning with a most slow motion, it shall not acquire any degree of velocity,
before it shall have passed through all the degrees of less velocity, or greater
tardity: for passing from the state of quiet (which is the infinite degree of
tardity of motion) there is no reason by which it should enter into such a
determinate degree of velocity, The moveable passing from rest, goes through
all the degrees of tardity.
before it shall have entered into a less, and into yet a less, before it entered
into that: but rather it stands with reason, to pass first by those degrees
nearest to that from which it departed, and from those to the more remote; Rest
the infinite degree of tardity.
but the degree from whence the moveable began to move, is that of extreme
tardity, namely of rest. Now this acceleration of motion is never made, The
moveable does not accelerate, save only as it approaches nearer to us term.
but when the moveable in moving acquireth it; nor is its acquist other than an
approaching to the place desired, to wit, whither its natural inclination
attracts it, and thither it tends by the shortest way; namely, by a right
line. We may upon good grounds therefore say, That Nature, to confer upon a
moveable first constituted in rest a determinate velocity, uses to make it
move according to a certain time and space with a right motion. Nature, to
introduce in the moveable a certain degree of velocity, made it move in a right
line.
This presupposed, let us imagine God to have created the Orb v. g. of Jupiter,
on which he had determined to confer such a certain velocity, which it ought
afterward to retain perpetually uniform; we may with Plato say, that he gave
it at the beginning a right and accelerate motion, and that it afterward being
arrived to that intended degree of velocity, Uniform velocity convenient to the
circular motion.
he converted its right, into a circular motion, the velocity of which came
afterward naturally to be uniform.


SAGR. I hearken to this Discourse with great delight; and I believe the
content I take therein will be greater, when you have satisfied me in a doubt:
that is, (which I do not very well comprehend) how it of necessity ensues, that
a moveable departing from its rest, Betwixt rest, and any assigned degree of
velocity, infinite degrees of less velocity interpose.
and entering into a motion to which it had a natural inclination, it passes
through all the precedent degrees of tardity, comprehended between any assigned
degree of velocity, and the state of rest, which degrees are infinite? so that
Nature was not able to confer them upon the body of Jupiter, his circular
motion being instantly created with such and such velocity.


SALV. I neither did, Nature does not immediately confer a determinate degree
of velocity, howbeit she could.
nor dare say, that it was impossible for God or Nature to confer that velocity
which you speak of, immediately; but this I say, that de facto she did not do
it; so that the doing it would be a work extra-natural, and by consequence
miraculous


SAGR. Then you believe, that a stone leaving its rest, and entering into its
natural motion toward the center of the Earth, passes through all the degrees
of tardity inferior to any degree of velocity?


SALV. I do believe it, nay am certain of it; and so certain, that I am able to
make you also very well satisfied with the truth thereof.


SAGR. Though by all this days discourse I should gain no more but such a
knowledge, I should think my time very well bestowed.


SALV. By what I collect from our discourse, a great part of your scruple lies
in that it should in a time, and that very short, pass through those infinite
degrees of tardity precedent to any velocity, acquired by the moveable in that
time: and therefore before we go any farther, I will seek to remove this
difficulty, which shall be an easy task; for I reply, that the moveable
passes by the aforesaid degrees, The moveable departing from rest passes
through all degrees of velocity without staying in any.
but the passage is made without staying in any of them; so that the passage
requiring but one sole instant of time, and every small time containing
infinite instants, we shall not want enough of them to assign its own to each
of the infinite degrees of tardity; although the time were never so short.


SAGR. Hither to I apprehend you; nevertheless it is very much that that Ball
shot from a Cannon (for such I conceive the cadent moveable) which yet we see
to fall with such a precipice, that in less than ten pulses it will pass two
hundred yards of altitude; should in its motion be (...) joined with so small a
degree of velocity, that, should (...) to have moved at that rate without
farther (...) it would not have past the same in a day.


SALV. You may say, nor (...), nor in ten, no nor in a thousand; as I will
endeavor (...) you, and also happily without your contradiction, to some (...)
simple questions that I will propound to you. Therefore tell me if you make any
question of granting that, that that ball in descending goes increasing its
impetus and velocity.


SAGR. I am most certain it does.


SALV. And if I should say that the impetus acquired in any place of its
motion, is so much, that it would suffice to re-carry it to that place from
which it came, would you grant it?


SAGR. I should consent to it without contradiction, provided always, that it
might employ without impediment its whole impetus in that sole work of
re-conducting it self, or another equal to it, to that self-same height as it
would do, The ponderous mover descending acquireth impetus sufficient to
recarry it to the like height.
in case the Earth were bored through the center, and the Bullet fell a thousand
yards from the said center, for I verily believe it would pass beyond the
center, ascending as much as it had descended; and this I see plainly in the
experiment of a plummet hanging at a line, which removed from the
perpendicular, which is its state of rest, and afterward let go, falls
toward the said perpendicular, and goes as far beyond it; or only so much
less, as the opposition of the air, and line, or other accidents have hindered
it. The like I see in the water, which descending through a pipe, re-mounts as
much as it had descended.


SALV. You argue very well. And for that I know you will not scruple to grant
that the acquist of the impetus is by means of the receding from the term
whence the moveable departed, and its approach to the center, whither it motion
tends; will you stick to yield, that two equal movables, though descending
by diverse lines, without any impediment, acquire equal impetus, provided that
the approaches to the center be equal?


SAGR. I do not very well understand the question.


SALV. I will express it better by drawing a Figure: therefore I will suppose
the line AB [in Fig. 3.] parallel to the Horizon, and upon the point B, I will
erect a perpendicular BC; and after that I add this slaunt line CA.
Understanding now the line CA to be an inclining plain exquisitely polished,
and hard, upon which descends a ball perfectly round and of very hard matter,
and such another I suppose freely to descend by the perpendicular CB: will you
now confess that the impetus of that which descends by the plain CA, being
arrived to the point A, may be equal to the impetus acquired by the other in
the point B, after the descent by the perpendicular CB?


SAGR. I resolutely believe so: The impetuosity of movables equally
approaching to the center, are equal.
for in effect they have both the same proximity to the center, and by that,
which I have already granted, their impetuosities would be equally sufficient
to re-carry them to the same height.


SALV. Tell me now what you believe the same ball would do put upon the
Horizontal plane AB?


SAGR. It would lie still, Upon an horizontall plane the moveable lies still.
the said plane having no declination.


SALV. But on the inclining plane CA it would descend, but with a gentler
motion than by the perpendicular CB?


SAGR. I may confidently answer in the affirmative, it seeming to me necessary
that the motion by the perpendicular CB should be more swift, than by the
inclining plane CA; yet nevertheless, if this be, how can the Cadent by the
inclination arrived to the point A, have as much impetus, that is, the same
degree of velocity, that the Cadent by the perpendicular shall have in the
point B? these two Propositions seem contradictory.


SALV. Then you would think it much more false, The velocity by the inclining
plane equal to the velocity by the perpendicular, and the motion by the
perpendicular swifter than by the inclination.
should I say, that the velocity of the Cadents by the perpendicular, and
inclination, are absolutely equal: and yet this is a Proposition most true, as
is also this that the Cadent moves more swiftly by the perpendicular, than by
the inclination.


SAGR. These Propositions to my ears sound very harsh: and I believe to yours
Simplicius?


SIMPL. I have the same sense of them.


SALV. I conceit you jest with me, pretending not to comprehend what you know
better than my self: therefore tell me Simplicius, when you imagine a moveable
more swift than another, what conceit do you fancy in your mind?


SIMPL. I fancy one to pass in the same time a greater space than the other,
or to move equal spaces, but in lesser time.


SALV. Very well: and for movables equally swift, what is your conceit of them?


SIMPL. I fancy that they pass equal spaces in equal times.


SALV. And have you no other conceit thereof than this?


SIMPL. This I think to be the proper definition of equal motions.


SAGR. We will add moreover this other: Velocities are said to be equal, when
the spaces passed are proportionate to their time.
and call that equal velocity, when the spaces passed have the same proportion,
as the times wherein they are past, and it is a more universal definition.


SALV. It is so: for it comprehends the equal spaces past in equal times, and
also the unequal past in times unequal, but proportionate to those spaces. Take
now the same Figure, and applying the conceit that you had of the more hasty
motion, tell me why you think the velocity of the Cadent by CB, is greater than
the velocity of the Descendent by CA?


SIMPL. I think so; because in the same time that the Cadent shall pass all CB,
the Descendent shall pass in CA, a part less than CB.


SALV. True; and thus it is proved, that the moveable moves more swiftly by the
perpendicular, than by the inclination. Now consider, if in this same Figure
one may any way evince the other conceit, and find that the movables were
equally swift by both the lines CA and CB.


SIMPL. I see no such thing; nay rather it seems to contradict what was said
before.


SALV. And what say you, Sagredus? I would not teach you what you knew before,
and that of which but just now you produced me the definition.


SAGR. The definition I gave you, was, that movables may be called equally
swift, when the spaces passed are proportional to the times in which they
passed; therefore to apply the definition to the present case, it will be
requisite, that the time of descent by CA, to the time of falling by CB, should
have the same proportion that the line CA has to the line CB; but I understand
not how that can be, for that the motion by CB is swifter than by CA.


SALV. And yet you must of necessity know it. Tell me a little, do not these
motions go continually accelerating?


SAGR. They do; but more in the perpendicular than in the inclination.


SALV. But this acceleration in the perpendicular, is it yet notwithstanding
such in comparison of that of the inclined, that two equal parts being taken in
any place of the said perpendicular and inclining lines, the motion in the
parts of the perpendicular is always more swift, than in the part of the
inclination?


SAGR. I say not so: but I could take a space in the inclination, in which the
velocity shall be far greater than in the like space taken in the
perpendicular; and this shall be, if the space in the perpendicular should be
taken near to the end C, and in the inclination, far from it.


SALV. You see then, that the Proposition which says, that the motion by the
perpendicular is more swift than by the inclination, holds not true
universally, but only of the motions, which begin from the extremity, namely
from the point of rest: without which restriction, the Proposition would be so
deficient, that its very direct contrary might be true; namely, that the motion
in the inclining plane is swifter than in the perpendicular: for it is certain,
that in the said inclination, we may take a space past by the moveable in less
time, than the like space past in the perpendicular. Now because the motion in
the inclination is in some places more, in some less, than in the
perpendicular; therefore in some places of the inclination, the time of motion
of the moveable, shall have a greater proportion to the time of the motion of
the moveable, by some places of the perpendicular, than the space passed, to
the space passed: and in other places, the proportion of the time to the time,
shall be less than that of the space to the space. As for example: two
movables departing from their quiescence, namely, from the point C, one by the
perpendicular CB, [in Fig. 4.] and the other by the inclination CA, in the time
that, in the perpendicular, the moveable shall have past all CB, the other
shall have past CT lesser. And therefore the time by CT, to the time by CB
(which is equal) shall have a greater proportion than the line CT to CB, being
that the same to the less, has a greater proportion than to the greater. And
on the contrary, if in CA, prolonged as much as is requisite, one should take a
part equal to CB, but past in a shorter time; the time in the inclination shall
have a less proportion to the time in the perpendicular, than the space to the
space. If therefore in the inclination and perpendicular, we may suppose such
spaces and velocities, that the proportion between the said spaces be greater
and less than the proportion of the times; we may easily grant, that there are
also spaces, by which the times of the motions retain the same proportion as
the spaces.


SAGR. I am already freed from my greatest doubt, and conceive that to be not
only possible, but necessary, which I but now thought a contradiction: but
nevertheless I understand not as yet, that this whereof we now are speaking, is
one of these possible or necessary cases; so as that it should be true, that
the time of descent by CA, to the time of the fall by CB, has the same
proportion that the line CA has to CB; whence it may without contradiction be
affirmed, that the velocity by the inclination CA, and by the perpendicular CB,
are equal.


SALV. Content your self for this time, that I have removed your incredulity;
but for the knowledge of this, expect it at some other time, namely, when you
shall see the matters concerning local motion demonstrated by our Academick; at
which time you shall find it proved, that in the time that the one moveable
falls all the space CB, the other descends by CA as far as the point T, in
which falls the perpendicular drawn from the point B: and to find where the
same Cadent by the perpendicular would be when the other arriveth at the point
A, draw from A the perpendicular unto CA, continuing it, and CB unto the
interfection, and that shall be the point sought. Whereby you see how it is
true, that the motion by CB is swifter than by the inclination CA (supposing
the term C for the beginning of the motions compared) because the line CB is
greater than CT, and the other from C unto the intersection of the
perpendicular drawn from A, unto the line CA, is greater than CA, and therefore
the motion by it is swifter than by CA. But when we compare the motion made by
all CA, not with all the motion made in the same time by the perpendicular
continued, but with that made in part of the time, by the sole part CB, it
hinders not, that the motion by CA, continuing to descend beyond, may arrive to
A in such a time as is in proportion to the other time, as the line CA is to
the line CB. Now returning to our first purpose; which was to show, that the
grave moveable leaving its quiescence, passes descending by all the degrees of
tardity, precedent to any whatsoever degree of velocity that it acquireth,
re-assuming the same Figure which we used before, let us remember that we did
agree, that the Descendent by the inclination CA, and the Cadent by the
perpendicular CB, were found to have acquired equal degrees of velocity in the
terms B and A: now to proceed, I suppose you will not scruple to grant, that
upon another plane less steep than AC; as for example, AD [in Fig. 5.] the
motion of the descendent would be yet more flow than in the plane AC. So that
it is not any whit dubitable, but that there may be planes so little elevated
above the Horizon AB, that the moveable, namely the same ball, in any the
longest time may reach the point A, which being to move by the plane AB, an
infinite time would not suffice: and the motion is made always more slowly, by
how much the declination is less. It must be therefore confessed, that there may
be a point taken upon the term B, so near to the said B, that drawing from
thence to the point A a plane, the ball would not pass it in a whole year. It
is requisite next for you to know, that the impetus, namely the degree of
velocity the ball is found to have acquired when it arriveth at the point A, is
such, that should it continue to move with this self-same degree uniformly,
that is to say, without accelerating or retarding; in as much more time as it
was in coming by the inclining plane, it would pass double the space of the
plane inclined: namely (for example) if the ball had past the plane DA in an
hour, continuing to move uniformly with that degree of velocity which it is
found to have in its arriving at the term A, it shall pass in an hour a space
double the length DA; and because (as we have said) the degrees of velocity
acquired in the points B and A, by the movables that depart from any point
taken in the perpendicular CB, and that descend, the one by the inclined plane,
the other by the said perpendicular, are always equal: therefore the cadent by
the perpendicular may depart from a term so near to B, that the degree of
velocity acquired in B, would not suffice (still maintaining the same) to
conduct the moveable by a space double the length of the plane inclined in a
year, nor in ten, no nor in a hundred. We may therefore conclude, that if it be
true, that according to the ordinary course of nature a moveable, all external
and accidental impediments removed, moves upon an inclining plane with greater
and greater tardity, according as the inclination shall be less; so that in the
end the tardity comes to be infinite, which is, when the inclination concludes
in, and joyneth to the horizontal plane; and if it be true likewise, that the
degree of velocity acquired in some point of the inclined plane, is equal to
that degree of velocity which is found to be in the moveable that descends by
the perpendicular, in the point cut by a parallel to the Horizon, which passes
by that point of the inclining plane; it must of necessity be granted, that the
cadent departing from rest, passes through all the infinite degrees of tardity,
and that consequently, to acquire a determinate degree of velocity, it is
necessary that it move first by right lines, descending by a short or long
space, according as the velocity to be acquired, ought to be either less or
greater, and according as the plane on which it descends is more or less
inclined; so that a plane may be given with so small inclination, that to
acquire in it the assigned degree of velocity, it must first move in a very
great space, and take a very long time; whereupon in the horizontal plane, any
how little soever velocity, would never be naturally acquired, since that the
moveable in this case will never move: but the motion by the horizontal line,
The circular motion is never acquired naturally, without right motion precede
it. Circular motion perpetually uniform.
which is neither declined or inclined, is a circular motion about the center:
therefore the circular motion is never acquired naturally, without the right
motion precede it; but being once acquired, it will continue perpetually with
uniform velocity. I could with other discourses evince and demonstrate the same
truth, but I will not by so great a digression interrupt our principal
argument: but rather will return to it upon some other occasion; especially
since we not assumed the same, not to serve for a necessary demonstration, but
to adorn a Platonic Conceit; to which I will add another particular
observation of our Academick, which has in it something of admirable. Let us
suppose amongst the decrees of the divine Architect, a purpose of creating in
the World these Globes, which we behold continually moving round, and of
assigning the center of their conversions; and that in it he had placed the Sun
immovable, and had afterward made all the said Globes in the same place, and
with the intended inclinations of moving toward the Center, till they had
acquired those degrees of velocity, which at first seemed good to the same
Divine Mind; the which being acquired, we lastly suppose that they were turned
round, each in his Sphere retaining the said acquired velocity: it is now
demanded, in what altitude and distance from the Sun the place was where the
said Orbs were primarily created; and whether it be possible that they might
all be created in the same place? To make this investigation, we must take from
the most skillful Astronomers the magnitude of the Spheres in which the Planets
revolve, and likewise the time of their revolutions: from which two cognitions
is gathered how much (for example) Jupiter is swifter than Saturn; and being
found (as indeed it is) that Jupiter moves more swiftly, it is requisite, that
departing from the same altitude, Jupiter be descended more than Saturn, as we
really know it is, its Orb being inferior to that of Saturn. But by
proceeding forwards, from the proportions of the two velocities of Jupiter and
Saturn, and from the distance between their Orbs, and from the proportion of
acceleration of natural motion, one may find in what altitude and distance
from the center of their revolutions, The magnitude of the Orbs, and the
velocity of the motion of the Planets, answer proportionably, as if descended
from the same place.
was the place from whence they first departed. This found out, and agreed
upon, it is to be sought, whether Mars descending from thence to his Orb, the
magnitude of the Orb, and the velocity of the motion, agree with that which is
found by calculation; and let the like be done of the Earth, of Venus, and of
Mercury; the greatness of which Spheres, and the velocity of their motions,
agree so nearly to what computation gives, that it is very admirable.


SAGR. I have hearkened to this conceit with extreme delight; and, but that I
believe the making of these calculations truly would be a long and painful
task, and perhaps too hard for me to comprehend, I would make a trial of them.


SALV. The operation indeed is long and difficult; nor could I be certain to
find it so readily; therefore we shall refer it to another time, and for the
present we will return to our first proposal, going on there where we made
digression; which, if I well remember, was about the proving the motion by a
right line of no use, in the ordinate parts of the World; and we did proceed to
say, that it was not so in circular motions, of which that which is made by the
moveable in it self, Finite and terminate circular motions disorder not the
parts of the World.
still retains it in the same place, and that which carries the moveable by
the circumference of a circle about its fixed center, neither puts it self, nor
those about it in disorder; for that such a motion primarily is finite and
terminate (though not yet finished and determined) but there is no point in the
circumference, In the circular motion, every point in the circumference is the
beginning and end.
that is not the first and last term in the circulation; and continuing it in
the circumference assigned it, it leaves all the rest, within and without
that, free for the use of others, without ever impeding or disordering them.
This being a motion that makes the moveable continually leave, and continually
arrive at the end; Circular motion only is uniform.
it alone therefore can primarily be uniform; for that acceleration of motion
is made in the moveable, when it goes toward the term, to which it has
inclination; and the retardation happens by the repugnance that it has to
leave and part from the same term; and because in circular motion, the moveable
continually leaves the natural term, and continually moves toward the same,
therefore, in it, the repugnance and inclination are always of equal force: from
which equality results a velocity, neither retarded nor accelerated, i. e. an
uniformity in motion. From this conformity, and from the being terminate,
Circular motion may be continued perpetually.
may follow the perpetual continuation by successively reiterating the
circulations; which in an undeterminated line, and in a motion continually
retarded or accelerated, cannot naturally be. Right motion cannot naturally be
perpetual.
I say, naturally; because the right motion which is retarded, is the violent,
which cannot be perpetual; and the accelerate arriveth necessarily at the term,
if one there be; and if there be none, it cannot be moved to it, because nature
moves not whether it is impossible to attain. I conclude therefore, that the
circular motion can only naturally consist with natural bodies, parts of the
universe, and constituted in an excellent disposure; and that the right, at the
most that can be said for it, is assigned by nature to its bodies, Right motion
assigned to natural bodies, to reduce them to perfect order, when removed from
their places.
and their parts, at such time as they shall be out of their proper places,
constituted in a depraved disposition, and for that cause needing to be redu^^d
by the shortest way to their natural state. Hence, me thinks, it may rationally
be concluded, that for maintenance of perfect order amongst the parts of the
World, it is necessary to say, that movables are moveable only circularly;
and if there be any that move not circularly, Rest only, and circular motion
are apt to conserve order.
these of necessity are immovable: there being nothing but rest and circular
motion apt to the conservation of order. And I do not a little wonder with my
self, that Aristotle, who held that the Terrestrial globe was placed in the
center of the World, and there remained immovable, should not say, that of
natural bodies some are moveable by nature, and others immovable; especially
having before defined Nature, to be the principle of Motion and Rest.


SIMPL. Aristotle, though of a very perspicacious wit, would not strain it
further than needed: Sensible experiments are to be preferred before humane
argumentations.
holding in all his argumentations, that sensible experiments were to be
preferred before any reasons founded upon strength of wit, and said those which
should deny the testimony of sense deserved to be punished with the loss of
that sense; He who denies sense, deserves to be deprived of it. Sense shows
that things grave move to the medium, and the light to the concave.
now who is so blind, that sees not the parts of the Earth and Water to move,
as being grave, naturally downwards, namely; toward the center of the
Universe, assigned by nature her self for the end and term of right motion
deorsum; and does not likewise see the Fire and Air to move right upwards
toward the Concave of the Lunar Orb, as to the natural end of motion sursum?
And this being so manifestly seen, and we being certain, that eadem est ratio
totius and partium, why may we not assert it for a true and manifest
proposition, that the natural motion of the Earth is the right motion ad
medium, and that of the Fire, the right a medio?


SALV. The most that you can pretend from this your Discourse, were it granted
to be true, is that, like as the parts of the Earth removed from the whole,
namely, from the place where they naturally rest, that is in short reduced to a
depraved and disordered disposure, return to their place spontaneously, and
therefore naturally in a right motion, (it being granted, that eadem sit ratio
totius and partium) so it may be inferred, that the Terrestrial Globe removed
violently from the place assigned it by nature, It is questionable whether
descending weights move in a right line.
it would return by a right line. This, as I have said, is the most that can be
granted you, and that only for want of examination; but he that shall with
exactness revise these things, will first deny, that the parts of the Earth, in
returning to its whole, move in a right line, and not by a circular or mixed;
and really you would have enough to do to demonstrate the contrary, as you
shall plainly see in the answers to the particular reasons and experiments
alleged by Ptolomey and Aristotle. Secondly, If another should say that the
parts of the Earth, go not in their motion toward the Center of the World, but
to unite with its Whole, and that for that reason they naturally incline
toward the center of the Terrestrial Globe, by which inclination they conspire
to form and preserve it, what other All, or what other Center would you find
for the World, The Earth sperical by the conspiration of its parts to its
Center.
to which the whole Terrene Globe, being thence removed, would seek to return,
that so the reason of the Whole might be like to that of its parts? It may be
added, That neither Aristotle, nor you can ever prove, that the Earth de facto
is in the center of the Universe; but if any Center may be assigned to the
Universe, The Sun more probably in the center of the Universe, than the Earth.
we shall rather find the Sun placed in it, as by the sequel you shall
understand.

Now, like as from the consentaneous conspiration of all the parts of the Earth
to form its whole, does follow, that they with equal inclination concur
thither from all parts; Natural inclination of the parts of all the globes of
the World to go to their center.
and to unite themselves as much as is possible together, they there
spherically adapt themselves; why may we not believe that the Sun, Moon, and
other mundane Bodies, be also of a round figure, not by other than a concordant
instinct, and natural concourse of all the parts composing them? Of which, if
any, at any time, by any violence were separated from the whole, is it not
reasonable to think, that they would spontaneously and by natural instinct
return? and in this manner to infer, that the right motion agrees with all
mundane bodies alike.


SIMPL. Certainly, if you in this manner deny not only the Principles of
Sciences, but manifest Experience, and the Senses themselves, you can never be
convinced or removed from any opinion which you once conceit, therefore I will
choose rather to be silent (for, contra negantes principia non est disputandum)
than contend with you. And insisting on the things alleged by you even now
(since you question so much as whether grave movables have a right motion or
no) how can you ever rationally deny, The right motion of grave bodies manifest
to sense.
that the parts of the Earth; or, if you will, that ponderous matters descend
toward the Center, with a right motion; whenas, if from a very high Tower,
whose walls are very upright and perpendicular, you let them fall, they shall
descend gliding and sliding by the Tower to the Earth, exactly in that very
place where a plummet would fall, being hanged by a line fastened above, just
there, whence the said weights were let fall? is not this a more than evident
argument of the motions being right, and toward the Center? Arguments of
Aristotle, to prove that grave bodies move with an inclination to arrive at the
center of the Universe.
In the second place you call in doubt, whether the parts of the Earth are
moved, as Aristotle affirms, toward the Center of the World; as if he had not
rationally demonstrated it by contrary motions, whilst he thus argues; The
motion of heavy bodies is contrary to that of the light: but the motion of the
light is manifest to be directly upwards, namely, toward the circumference of
the World, therefore the motion of the heavy is directly toward the Center of
the World: and it happens per accidens, Heavy bodies move toward the center
of the Earth per accidens.
that it be toward the center of the Earth, for that this striveth to be
united to that. The seeking in the next place, what a part of the Globe of the
Sun or Moon would do, were it separated from its whole, is vanity; because that
thereby that is sought, To seek what would follow upon an impossibility, is
folly.
which would be the consequence of an impossibility; in regard that, as
Aristotle also demonstrates, the celestial bodies are impassible,
impenetrable, and infrangible; so that such a case can never happen: Celestial
bodies neither heavy nor light, according to Aristotle.
and though it should, and that the separated part should return to its whole,
it would not return as grave or light, for that the same Aristotle proves,
that the Celestial Bodies are neither heavy nor light.


SALV. With what reason I doubt, whether grave bodies move by a right and
perpendicular line, you shall hear, as I said before, when I shall examine this
particular argument. Touching the second point, I wonder that you should need
to discover the Paralogism of Aristotle, being of it self so manifest; and that
you perceive not, that Aristotle supposes that which is in question: therefore
take notice.


SIMPL. Pray Salviatus speak with more respect of Aristotle: for who can you
ever persuade, that he who was the first, only, and admirable explainer of the
Syllogistick forms of demonstration, Aristotle cannot equivocate, being the
inventer of Logic.
of Elenchs, of the manner of discovering Sophisms, Paralogisms, and in short,
of all the parts of Logic, should afterward so notoriously equivocate in
imposing that for known, which is in question? It would be better, my Masters,
first perfectly to understand him, and then to try, if you have a mind, to
oppose him.


SALV. Simplicius, we are here familiarly discoursing among our selves, to
investigate some truth; I shall not be displeased that you discover my errors;
and if I do not follow the mind of Aristotle, freely reprehend me, and I shall
take it in good part. Only give me leave to expound my doubts, and to reply
something to your last words, telling you, that Logic, as it is well
understood, is the Organe with which we philosophate; but as it may be
possible, that an Artist may be excellent in making Organs, but unlearned in
playing on them, thus he might be a great Logician, but unexpert in making use
of Logic; like as we have many that theorically understand the whole Art of
Poetry, and yet are unfortunate in composing but mere four Verses; others enjoy
all the precepts of Vinci A famous Italian Painter.
, and yet know not how to paint a Stool. The playing on the Organs is not
taught by them who know how to make Organs, but by him that knows how to play
on them: Poetry is learnt by continual reading of Poets: Limning is learnt by
continual painting and designing: Demonstration from the reading of Books full
of demonstrations, which are the Mathematical only, and not the Logical. Now
returning to our purpose, I say, that that which Aristotle sees of the motion
of light bodies, is the departing of the Fire from any part of the Superficies
of the Terrestrial Globe, and directly retreating from it, mounting upwards;
and this indeed is to move toward a circumference greater than that of the
Earth; yea, the same Aristotle makes it to move to the concave of the Moon, but
that this circumference is that of the World, or concentrick to it, so that to
move toward this, is a moving toward that of the World, that he cannot
affirm, unless he supposes, That the Center of the Earth, Paralogism of
Aristotle, in proving the Earth to be in the Center of the World.
from which we see these light ascendent bodies to depart, be the same with the
Center of the World; which is as much as to say, that the terrestrial Globe is
constituted in the midst of the World: which is yet that of which we were in
doubt, and which Aristotle intended to prove. And do you say that this is not a
manifest Paralogism? The Paralogisme of Aristotle another way discovered.



SAGR. This Argument of Aristotle appeared to me deficient also, and
non-concludent for another respect; though it were granted, that that
Circumference, to which the Fire directly moves, be that which includes the
World: for that in a circle, not only the center, but any other point being
taken, every moveable which departing thence, shall move in a right line, and
toward any whatsoever part, shall without any doubt go toward the
circumference, and continuing the motion, shall also arrive thither; so that we
may truly say, that it moves toward the circumference: but yet it does not
follow, that that which moves by the same line with a contrary motion, would
go toward the center, unless when the point taken were the center it self, or
that the motion were made by that only line, which produced from the point
assigned, passes through the center. So that to say, that Fire moving in a
right line, goes toward the circumference of the World, therefore the parts
of the Earth which by the same lines move with a contrary motion, go toward
the center of the World, concludes not, unless then when it is presupposed,
that the lines of the Fire prolonged pass by the center of the World; and
because we know certainly of them, that they pass by the center of the
Terrestrial Globe (being perpendicular to its superficies, and not inclined)
therefore to conclude, it must be supposed, that the center of the Earth is the
same with the center of the World; or at least, that the parts of the Fire and
Earth descend not, save only by one sole line which passes by the center of
the World. Which nevertheless is false, and repugnant to experience, which
shows us, that the parts of Fire, not by one line only, but by infinite,
produced from the center of the Earth toward all the parts of the World,
ascend always by lines perpendicular to the Superficies of the Terrestrial
Globe.


SALV. You do very ingeniously lead Aristotle to the same inconvenience,
Sagredus, showing his manifest equivoke; but withal you add another
inconsistency. We see the Earth to be spherical, and therefore are certain that
it has its center, to which we see all its parts are moved; for so we must
say, whilst their motions are all perpendicular to the Superficies of the
Earth; we mean, that as they move to the center of the Earth, they move to
their Whole, and to their Universal Mother: and we are still farther so free,
that we will suffer our selves to be persuaded, that their natural instinct is,
Grave bodies may more rationally be affirmed to tend to the Center of the
Earth, than of the Universe.
not to go toward the center of the Earth, but toward that of the Universe;
which we know not where to find, or whether it be or no; and were it granted to
be, it is but an imaginary point, and a nothing without any quality. As to what
Simplicius said last, that the contending whether the parts of the Sun, Moon,
or other celestial Body, separated from their Whole, should naturally return
to it, is a vanity, for that the case is impossible; it being clear by the
Demonstrations of Aristotle, that the celestial Bodies are impassible, The
conditions and attributes which differ the celestial bodies from Elementary,
depend on the motions assigned them by Arist.
impenetrable, unpartable, etc. I answer, that none of the conditions, whereby
Aristotle distinguishes the Celestial Bodies from Elementary, has other
foundation than what he deduceth from the diversity of the natural motion of
those and these; insomuch that it being denied, that the circular motion is
peculiar to Celestial Bodies, and affirmed, that it is agreeable to all Bodies
naturally moveable, it is behoofull upon necessary consequence to say, either
that the attributes of generable, or ingenerable, alterable, or unalterable,
partable, or unpartable, etc. equally and commonly agree with all worldly
bodies, namely, as well to the Celestial as to the Elementary; or that
Aristotle has badly and erroneously deduced those from the circular motion,
which he has assigned to Celestial Bodies.


SIMPL. This manner of argumentation tends to the subversion of all Natural
Philosophy, and to the disorder and subversion of Heaven and Earth, and the
whole Universe; but I believe the Fundamentals of the Peripateticks are such,
that we need not fear that new Sciences can be erected upon their ruins.


SALV. Take no thought in this place for Heaven or the Earth, neither fear
their subversion, or the ruin of Philosophy. As to Heaven, your fears are vain
for that which you your self hold unalterable and impassible; as for the Earth,
we strive to enoble and perfect it, whilst we make it like to the Celestial
Bodies, and as it were place it in Heaven, whence your Philosophers have exiled
it. The disputes and contradictions of Philosophers may conduce to the benefit
of Philosophy.
Philosophy it self cannot but receive benefit from our Disputes, for if our
conceptions prove true, new Discoveries will be made; if false, the first
Doctrine will be more confirmed. Rather bestow your care upon some
Philosophers, and help and defend them; for as to the Science it self, it
cannot but improve. And that we may return to our purpose, be pleased freely to
produce what presents it self to you in confirmation of that great difference
which Aristotle puts between the Celestial Bodies, and the Elementary parts of
the World, in making those ingenerable, incorruptible, unalterable, etc. and
this corruptible, alterable, etc.


SIMPL. I see not yet any need that Aristotle has of help, standing as he does
stoutly and strongly on his feet; yea not being yet assaulted, much less foiled
by you. And what ward will you choose in this combat for this first blow?
Aristotle's discourse to prove the incorruptibility of Heaven.
Aristotle writes, that whatever is generated, is made out of a contrary in
some subject, and likewise is corrupted in some certain subject from a contrary
into a contrary; Generation and corruption is only amongst contraries,
according to Arist.
so that (observe) corruption and generation is never but only in contraries;
If therefore to a Celestial Body no contrary can be assigned, for that to the
circular motion no other motion is contrary, To the circular motion no other
motion is contrary.
then Nature has done very well to make that exempt from contraries, which was
to be ingenerable and incorruptible, This fundamental first confirmed, it
immediately follows of consequence, that it is inaugmentable, inalterable,
Heaven an habitation for the immortal Gods.
impassible, and finally eternal, and a proportionate habitation to the
immortal Deities, conformable to the opinion even of all men that have any
conceit of the Gods. He afterward confirms the same by sense; Immutability
of Heaven evident to sense.
in regard, that in all times past, according to memory or tradition, we see
nothing removed, according to the whole outward Heaven, nor any of its proper
parts. He proves that the circular motion has no contrary.
Next, as to the circular motion, that no other is contrary to it, Aristotle
proves many ways; but without reciting them all, it is sufficiently
demonstrated, since simple motions are but three, to the medium, from the
medium, and about the medium, of which the two right, sursum and deorsum, are
manifestly contrary; and because one only has only one for contrary,
therefore there rests no other motion which may be contrary to the circular.
You see the subtle and most concluding discourse of Aristotle, whereby he
proves the incorruptibility of Heaven.


SALV. This is nothing more, save the pure progress of Aristotle, by me hinted
before; wherein, besides that I affirm, that the motion which you attribute to
the Celestial Bodies agrees also to the Earth, its illation proves nothing. I
tell you therefore, that that circular motion which you assign to Celestial
Bodies, suiteth also to the Earth, from which, supposing that the rest of your
discourse were concludent, will follow one of these three things, as I told you
a little before, and shall repeat; namely, either that the Earth it self is
also ingenerable, and incorruptible, as the Celestial bodies; or that the
Celestial bodies are, like as the Elementary generable, alterable etc. or that
this difference of motion has nothing to do with Generation and Corruption.
The discourse of Aristotle, and yours also contain many Propositions not to be
lightly admitted, and the better to examine them, it will be convenient to
reduce them to the most abstracted and distinct that can be possible; and
excuse me Sagredus, if happily with some tediousness you hear me often repeat the
same things, and fancy that you see me reassume my argument in the public
circle of Disputations. You say Generation and Corruption are only made where
there are contraries; contraries are only amongst simple natural bodies,
moveable with contrary motions; contrary motions are only those which are made
by a right line between contrary terms; and these are only two, that is to
say, from the medium, and toward the medium; and such motions belong to no
other natural bodies, but to the Earth, the Fire, and the other two Elements:
therefore Generation and Corruption is only amongst the Elements. And because
the third simple motion, namely, the circular about the medium, has no
contrary, (for that the other two are contraries, and one only, has but only
one contrary) therefore that natural body with which such motion agrees, wants
a contrary; and having no contrary is ingenerable and incorruptible, etc.
Because where there is no contrariety, there is no generation or corruption,
etc. But such motion agrees only with the Celestial bodies; therefore only
these are ingenerable, Its easier to prove the Earth to move, than that
corruption is made by contraries.
incorruptible, etc. And to begin, I think it a more easy thing, and sooner
done to resolve, whether the Earth (a most vast Body, and for its vicinity to
us, most tractable) moves with a speedy motion, such as its revolution about
its own axis in twenty four hours would be, than it is to understand and
resolve, whether Generation and Corruption arises from contrariety, or else
whether there be such things as generation, corruption and contrariety in
nature. And if you, Simplicius, can tell me what method Nature observes in
working, when she in a very short time begets an infinite number of flies from
a little vapor of the Must of wine, and can show me which are there the
contraries you speak of, what it is that corrupts, and how; I should think
you would do more than I can; for I profess I cannot comprehend these things.
Besides, I would very gladly understand how, and why these corruptive
contraries are so favorable to Daws, and so cruel to Doves; so indulgent to
Stags, and so hasty to Horses, that they do grant to them many more years of
life, that is, of incorruptibility, than weeks to these. Peaches and Olives are
planted in the same soil, exposed to the same heat and cold, to the same wind
and rains, and, in a word, to the same contrarieties; and yet those decay in a
short time, and these live many hundred years. Furthermore, I never was
thoroughly satisfied about this substantial transmutation (still keeping within
pure natural bounds) whereby a matter becomes so transformed, that it should
be necessarily said to be destroyed, so that nothing remains of its first
being, and that another body quite differing therefrom should be thence
produced; Bare transposition of parts may represent bodies under diverse
asp^cts.
and if I fancy to my self a body under one aspect, and by and by under another
very different, I cannot think it impossible but that it may happen by a simple
transposition of parts, without corrupting or ingendring any thing anew; for
we see such kinds of Metamorphoses daily: so that to return to my purpose, I
answer you, that inasmuch as you go about to persuade me that the Earth can not
move circularly by way of corruptibility and generability, you have undertook a
much harder task than I, that with arguments more difficult indeed, but no less
concluding, will prove the contrary.


SAGR. Pardon me, Salviatus, if I interrupt your discourse, which, as it
delights me much, for that I also am gravel'd with the same doubts; so I fear
that you can never conclude the same, without altogether digressing from your
chief design: therefore if it be permitted to proceed in our first argument, I
should think that it were convenient to remit this question of generation and
corruption to another distinct and single conference; as also, if it shall
please you and Simplicius, we may do by other particular questions which may
fall in the way of our discourse; which I will keep in my mind to propose, and
exactly discuss them some other time. Now as for the present, since you say,
that if Aristotle deny circular motion to the Earth in common with other bodies
Celestial, it thence will follow, that the same which befalls the Earth, as
to its being generable, alterable, etc. will hold also of Heaven, let us
enquire no further if there be such things in nature, as generation and
corruption, or not; but let us return to enquire what the Globe of the Earth
does.


SIMPL. I cannot suffer my ears to hear it questioned, whether generation and
corruption be in rerum natura, it being a thing which we have continually
before our eyes, By denying Principles in the Sciences, any Paradox may be
maintained.
and whereof Aristotle has written two whole Books. But if you go about to
deny the Principles of Sciences, and question things most manifest, who knows
not, but that you may prove what you will, and maintain any Paradox? And if you
do not daily see herbs, plants, animals to generate and corrupt, what is it
that you do see? Also, do you not continually behold contrarieties contend
together, and the Earth change into Water, the Water turn to Air, the Air into
Fire, and again the Air to condense into Clouds, Rains, Hails and Storms?


SAGR. Yes, we see these things indeed, and therefore will grant you the
discourse of Aristotle, as to this part of generation and corruption made by
contraries; but if I shall conclude by virtue of the same propositions which
are granted to Aristotle, that the Celestial bodies themselves are also
generable and corruptible, as well as the Elementary, what will you say then?


SIMPL. I will say you have done that which is impossible to be done.


SAGR. Go to; tell me, Simplicius, are not these affections contrary to one
another?


SIMPL. Which?


SAGR. Why these; Alterable, unalterable; passible, Or, Impatible.
impassible; generable, ingenerable; corruptible, incorruptible?


SIMPL. They are most contrary.


SAGR. Well then, if this be true, and it be also granted, that Celestial
Bodies are ingenerable and incorruptible; I prove that of necessity Celestial
Bodies must be generable and corruptible.


SIMPL. This must needs be a Sophism.


SAGR. Hear my Argument, Celestial Bodies are generable and corruptible,
because they are ingenerable and incorruptible.
and then censure and resolve it. Celestial Bodies, for that they are
ingenerable and incorruptible, have in Nature their contraries, which are those
Bodies that be generable and corruptible; but where there is contrariety, there
is also generation and corruption; therefore Celestial Bodies are generable
and corruptible.


SIMPL. Did I not say it could be no other than a Sophism? This is one of those
forked Arguments called Soritae: The forked Syllogism called (...).
like that of the Cretan, who said that all Cretans were liars; but he as being
a Cretan, had told a lie, in saying that the Cretans were liars; it followed
therefore, that the Cretans were no liars, and consequently that he, as being a
Cretan, had spoke truth: And yet in saying the Cretans were liars, he had said
true, and comprehending himself as a Cretan, he must consequently be a liar.
And thus in these kinds of Sophisms a man may dwell to eternity, and never come
to any conclusion.


SAGR. You have hitherto censured it, it remains now that you answer it,
showing the fallacy.


SIMPL. As to the resolving of it, and finding out its fallacy, do you not in
the first place see a manifest contradiction in it? Celestial Bodies are
ingenerable and incorruptible; Ergo, Celestial Bodies are generable and
corruptible. Amongst Celestial Bodies there is no contrariety.
And again, the contrariety is not betwixt the Celestial Bodies, but betwixt
the Elements, which have the contrariety of the Motions, sursum and deorsum,
and of levity and gravity; But the Heavens which move circularly, to which
motion no other motion is contrary, want contrariety, and therefore they are
incorruptible.


SAGR. Fair and softly, Simplicius; this contrariety whereby you say some
simple Bodies become corruptible, resides it in the same Body which is
corrupted, or else has it relation to some other? I say, if, for example,
humidity by which a piece of Earth is corrupted, resides it in the same Earth
or in some other body, which must either be the Air or Water? I believe you
will grant, that like as the Motions upwards and downwards, and gravity and
levity, which you make the first contraries, cannot be in the same Subject, so
neither can moist and dry, hot and cold: you must therefore consequently
acknowledge that when a body corrupts, Contraries which are the causes of
corruption, reside not in the same body that corrupts*
it is occasioned by some quality residing in another contrary to its own:
therefore to make the Celestial Body become corruptible, it suffices that
there are in Nature, bodies that have a contrariety to that Celestial body;
and such are the Elements, if it be true that corruptibility be contrary to
incorruptibility.


SIMPL. This suffices not, Sir; The Elements alter and corrupt, because they
are intermixed, and are joined to one another, and so may exercise their
contrariety; Celestial Bodies touch, but are not touched by the Elements.
but Celestial bodies are separated from the Elements, by which they are not
so much as touched, though indeed they have an influence upon the Elements. It
is requisite, if you will prove generation and corruption in Celestial bodies,
that you show, that there resides contrarieties between them.


SAGR. See how I will find those contrarieties between them. The first fountain
from whence you derive the contrariety of the Elements, is the contrariety of
their motions upwards and downwards: it therefore is necessary that those
Principles be in like manner contraries to each other, Gravity and levity,
rarity and density, are contrary qualities.
upon which those motions depend: and because that is moveable upwards by
lightness, and this downwards by gravity, it is necessary that lightness and
gravity are contrary to each other: no less are we to believe those other
Principles to be contraries, which are the causes that this is heavy, and that
light: but by your own confession, levity and gravity follow as consequents of
rarity and density; therefore rarity and density shall be contraries: The stars
infinitely surpass the substance of the rest of Heaven in density.
the which conditions or affections are so amply found in Celestial bodies,
that you esteem the stars to be only more dense parts of their Heaven: and if
this be so, it follows that the density of the stars exceeds that of the rest
of Heaven, by almost infinite degrees: which is manifest, in that Heaven is
infinitely transparent, and the stars extremely opacous; and for that there are
there above no other qualities, but more and less density and rarity, which may
be causes of the greater or less transparency. There being then such
contrariety between the Celestial bodies, it is necessary that they also be
generable and corruptible, in the same manner as the Elementary bodies are; or
else that contrariety is not the cause of corruptibility, Rarity and density in
Celestial bodies, is different from the rarity and density of the elements.
etc.


SIMPL. There is no necessity either of one or the other, for that density and
rarity in Celestial bodies, are not contraries to each other, as in Elementary
bodies; for that they depend not on the primary qualities, cold and heat, which
are contraries; but on the more or less matter in proportion to quantity: now
much and little, speak only a relative opposition, that is, the least of
oppositions, and which has nothing to do with generation and corruption.


SAGR. Therefore affirming, that density and rarity, which amongst the Elements
should be the cause of gravity and levity, which may be the causes of contrary
motions sursum and deors^^m, on which, again, depends the contrarieties for
generation and corruption; it suffices not that they be those densnesses and
rarenesses which under the same quantity, or (if you will) mass contain much or
little matter, but it is necessary that they be densnesses and rarenesses
caused by the primary qualities, hot and cold, otherwise they would operate
nothing at all: but if this be so, Aristotle defective in assigning the causes
why the elements are generable and corruptible.
Aristotle has deceived us, for that he should have told it us at first, and
so have left written that those simple bodies are generable and corruptible,
that are moveable with simple motions upwards and downwards, dependent on
levity and gravity, caused by rarity and density, made by much or little
matter, by reason of heat and cold; and not to have staid at the simple motion
sursum and deorsum: for I assure you that to the making of bodies heavy or
light, whereby they come to be moved with contrary motions, any kind of density
and rarity suffices, whether it proceed from heat and cold, or what else you
please; for heat and cold have nothing to do in this affair: and you shall upon
experiment find, that a red iron, which you must grant to have heat, weighs
as much, and moves in the same manner as when it is cold. But to overpass this
also, how know you but that Celestial rarity and density depend on heat and
cold?


SIMPL. I know it, because those qualities are not amongst Celestial bodies,
which are neither hot nor cold.


SALV. I see we are again going about to engulph our selves in a bottomless
ocean, where there is no getting to shore; for this is a Navigation without
Compass, Stars, or Rudder: so that it will follow either that we be forced to
pass from Shelf to Shelf, or run on ground, or to sail continually in danger of
being lost. Therefore, if according to your advice we shall proceed in our main
design, we must of necessity for the present overpass this general
consideration, whether direct motion be necessary in Nature, and agree with
some bodies; and come to the particular demonstrations, observations and
experiments; propounding in the first place all those that have been hitherto
alleged by Aristotle, Ptolomey, and others, to prove the stability of the
Earth, endeavoring in the next place to answer them: and producing in the last
place, those, by which others may be persuaded, that the Earth is no less than
the Moon, or any other Planet to be numbered amongst natural bodies that move
circularly.


SAGR. I shall the more willingly incline to this, in that I am better
satisfied with your Architectonical and general discourse, than with that of
Aristotle, for yours convinces me without the least scruple, and the other at
every step crosses my way with some block. And I see no reason why Simplicius
should not be presently satisfied with the Argument you alledg, to prove that
there can be no such thing in nature as a motion by a right line, if we do but
presuppose that the parts of the Universe are disposed in an excellent
constitution and perfect order.


SALV. Stay a little, good Sagredus, for just now a way comes into my mind, how
I may give Simplicius satisfaction, provided that he will not be so strictly
wedded to every expression of Aristotle, as to hold it heresy to recede in any
thing from him. Nor is there any question to be made, but that if we grant the
excellent disposition and perfect order of the parts of the Universe, as to
local situation, that then there is no other but the circular motion, and
rest; for as to the motion by a right line, I see not how it can be of use for
any thing, but to reduce to their natural constitution, some integral bodies,
that by some accident were removed and separated from their whole, as we said
above.

Let us now consider the whole Terrestrial Globe, and enquire the best we can,
whether it, and the other Mundane bodies are to conserve themselves in their
perfect and natural disposition. It is necessary to say, (...) that it rests
and keeps perpetually immovable in its place; or else that continuing always
in its place, it revolves in its self; or that it turns about a Center,
moving by the circumference of a circle. Arist. and Ptolomey make the
Terrestrial Globe immovable.
Of which accidents, both Aristotle and Ptolomey, and all their followers say,
that it has ever observed, and shall continually keep the first, that is, a
perpetual rest in the same place. It is better to say, that the Terrestrial
Globe naturally rests, than that it moves directly downwards.
Now, why, I pray you, ought they not to have said, that its natural affection
is to rest immovable, rather than to make natural unto it the motion The word
is, all' ingiu, which the Latin version renders sursum, which is quite
contrary to the Authors sense.
downwards, with which motion it never did or shall move? And as to the motion
by a right line, they must grant us that Nature makes use of it to reduce the
small parts of the Earth, Water, Air, Fire, and every other integral Mundane
body to their Whole, when any of them by chance are separated, and so
transported out of their proper place; if also happily, some circular motion
might not be found to be more convenient to make this restitution. In my
judgment, this primary position answers much better, even according to
Aristotle's own method, to all the other consequences, than to attribute the
straight motion to be an intrinsic and natural principle of the Elements.
Which is manifest, for that if I ask the Peripatetick, if, being of opinion
that Celestial bodies are incorruptibe and eternal, he believes that the
Terrestial Globe is not so, but corruptible and mortal, so that there shall
come a time, when the Sun and Moon and other Stars, continuing their beings and
operations, the Earth shall not be found in the World, but shall with the rest
of the Elements be destroyed and annihilated, I am certain that he would answer
me, no: therefore generation and corruption is in the parts and not in the
whole; Right Motion with more reason attributed to the parts, than to the whole
Elements.
and in the parts very small and superficial, which are, as it were, incensible
in comparison of the whole mass. And because Aristotle deduceth generation and
corruption from the contrariety of straight motions, let us remit such motions
to the parts, which only change and decay, and to the whole Globe and Sphere
of the Elements, let us ascribe either the circular motion, or a perpetual
consistance in its proper place: the only affections apt for perpetuation, and
maintaining of perfect order. This which is spoken of the Earth, may be said
with the same reason of Fire, and of the greatest part of the Air; to which
Elements, The Peripateticks improperly assign those motions to the Elements for
Natural, with which they never were moved, and those for Preternatural with
which they always are moved.
the Peripateticks are forced to ascribe for intrinsical and natural, a motion
wherewith they were never yet moved, nor never shall be; and to call that
motion preternatural to them, wherewith, if they move at all, they do and ever
shall move. This I say, because they assign to the Air and Fire the motion
upwards, wherewith those Elements were never moved, but only some parts of
them, and those were so moved only in order to the recovery of their perfect
constitution, when they were out of their natural places; and on the contrary
they call the circular motion preternatural to them, though they are thereby
incessantly moved: forgeting, as it seems, what Aristotle often inculcateth,
that nothing violent can be permanent.


SIMPL. To all these we have very pertinent answers, Sensible experiments to be
preferred to humane Arguments.
which I for this time omit, that we may come to the more particular reasons,
and sensible experiments, which ought in conclusion to be opposed, as Aristotle
says well, to whatever humane reason can present us with.


SAGR. What has been spoken hitherto, serves to clear up unto us which of the
two general discourses carries with it most of probability, I mean that of
Aristotle, which would persuade us, that the sublunary bodies are by nature
generable, and corruptible, etc. and therefore most different from the essence
of Celestial bodies, which are impassible, ingenerable, incorruptible, etc.
drawn from the diversity of simple motions; or else this of Salviatus, who
supposing the integral parts of the World to be disposed in a perfect
constitution, excludes by necessary consequence the right or straight motion of
simple natural bodies, as being of no use in nature, and esteems the Earth it
self also to be one of the Celestial bodies adorned with all the prerogatives
that agree with them; which last discourse is hitherto much more likely, in my
judgment, than that other. Therefore resolve, Simplicius, to produce all the
particular reasons, experiments and observations, as well Natural as
Astronomical, that may serve to persuade us that the Earth differs from the
Celestial bodies, is immovable, and situated in the Center of the World, and
what ever else excludes its moving like to the Planets, as Jupiter or the Moon,
etc. And Salviatus will be pleased to be so civil as to answer to them one by
one.


SIMPL. See here for a beginning, two most convincing Arguments to demonstrate
the Earth to be most different from the Celestial bodies. First, the bodies
that are generable, corruptible, alterable, etc. are quite different from those
that are ingenerable, incorruptible, unalterable, etc. But the Earth is
generable, corruptible, alterable, etc. and the Celestial bodies ingenerable,
incorruptible, unalterable, etc. Therefore the Earth is quite different from
the Celestial bodies.


SAGR. By your first Argument you spread the Table with the same Viands, which
but just now with much ado were voided.


SIMPL. Hold a little, Sir, and take the rest along with you, and then tell me
if this be not different from what you had before. In the former, the Minor was
proved a priori, and now you see it proved a posteriori: Judge then if it be the
same. I prove the Minor, therefore (the Major being most manifest) by sensible
experience, which (...) that in the Earth there are made continual generations,
corruptions, alterations, etc. which neither our senses, nor the traditions or
memories of our Ancestors, ever saw an instance of in Heaven; therefore Heaven
is unalterable, etc. and the Earth alterable, Heaven immutable, because there
never was any mutation seen in it.
etc. and therefore different from Heaven. I take my second Argument from a
principal and essential accident, and it is this. That body which is by its
nature obscure and deprived of light, Bodies naturally lucid, are different
from those which are by nature obscure.
is diverse from the luminous and shining bodies; but the Earth is obscure and
void of light, and the Celestial bodies splendid, and full of light; Ergo,
etc. Answer to these Arguments first, that we may not heap up too many, and
then I will allege others.


SALV. As to the first, the stresse whereof you lay upon experience, I desire
that you would a little more distinctly produce me the alteration which you see
made in the Earth, and not in Heaven; upon which you call the Earth alterable,
and the Heavens not so.


SIMPL. I see in the Earth, plants and animals continually generating and
decaying; winds, rains, tempests, storms arising; and in a word, the aspect of
the Earth to be perpetually metamorphosing; none of which mutations are to be
discerned in the Celestial bodies; the constitution and figuration of which is
most punctually conformable to that they ever were time out of mind; without
the generation of any thing that is new, or corruption of any thing that was
old.


SALV. But if you content your self with these visible, or to say better, seen
experiments, you must consequently account China and America Celestial bodies,
for doubtless you never be held in them these alterations which you see here
in Italy, and that therefore according to your apprehension they are
inalterable.


SIMPL. Though I never did see these alterations sensibly in those places, the
relations of them are not to be questioned; besides that, cum eadem sit ratio
totius, and partium, those Countries being a part of the Earth, as well as
ours, they must of necessity be alterable as these are.


SALV. And why have you not, without being put to believe other men's relations,
examined and observed those alterations with your own eyes?


SIMPL. Because those places, besides that they are not exposed to our eyes,
are so remote, that our sight cannot reach to comprehend therein such like
mutations.


SALV. See now, how you have unawares discovered the fallacy of your Argument;
for, if you say that the alterations that are seen on the Earth near at hand,
cannot, by reason of the too great distance, be seen in America, much less can
you see them in the Moon, which is so many hundred times more remote: And if
you believe the alterations in Mexico upon the report of those that come from
thence, what intelligence have you from the Moon, to assure you that there is
no such alterations in it? Therefore, from your not seeing any alterations in
Heaven, whereas, if there were any such, you could not see them by reason of
their too great distance, and from your not having intelligence thereof, in
regard that it cannot be had, you ought not to argue, that there are no such
alterations; howbeit, from the seeing and observing of them on Earth, you well
argue that therein such there are.


SIMPL. I will show so great mutations that have befaln on the Earth; that if
any such had happened in the Moon, they might very well have been observed here
below. The Mediterranian Sea made by the separation of Abila and Calpen.
We find in very ancient records, that heretofore at the Streights of
Gibraltar, the two great Mountains Abila, and Calpen, were continued together
by certain other less Mountains, which there gave check to the Ocean: but
those Hills, being by some cause or other separated, and a way being opened for
the Sea to break in, it made such an inundation, that it gave occasion to the
calling of it since the Mid-land Sea: the greatness whereof considered, and the
diverse aspects the surfaces of the Water and Earth then made, had it been
beheld afar off, there is no doubt but so great a change might have been
discerned by one that was then in the Moon; as also to us inhabitants of the
Earth, the like alterations would be perceived in the Moon; but we find not in
antiquity, that ever there was such a thing seen; therefore we have no cause to
say, that any of the Celestial bodies are alterable, etc.


SALV. That so great alterations have happened in the Moon, I dare not say, but
for all that, I am not yet certain but that such changes might occur; and
because such a mutation could only represent unto us some kind of variation
between the more clear, and more obscure parts of the Moon, I know not whether
we have had on Earth observant Selenographers, who have for any considerable
number of years, instructed us with so exact Selenography, as that we should
confidently conclude, that there has no such change happened in the face of the
Moon; of the figuration of which I find no more particular description, than
the saying of some, that it represents an humane face; of others, that it is
like the muzle of a Lion; and of others, that it is Cain with a bundle of
thorns on his back: therefore, to say Heaven is unalterable, because that in
the Moon, or other Celestial bodies, no such alterations are seen, as discover
themselves on Earth, is a bad illation, and concludes nothing.


SAGR. And there is another odd kind of scruple in this Argument of Simplicius,
running in my mind, which I would gladly have answered; therefore I demand of
him, whether the Earth before the Mediterranian inundation was generable and
corruptible, or else began then so to be?


SIMPL. It was doubtless generable and corruptible also before that time; but
that was so vast a mutation, that it might have been observed as far as the
Moon.


SAGR. Go to; if the Earth was generable and corruptible before that
Inundation, why may not the Moon be so likewise without such a change? Or why
should that be necessary in the Moon, which imports nothing on Earth?


SALV. It is a shrewd question: But I am doubtful that Simplicius a little
alters the Text of Aristotle, and the other Peripateticks, who say, they hold
the Heavens unalterable, for that they see therein no one star generate or
corrupt, which is probably a less part of Heaven, than a City is of the Earth,
and yet innumerable of these have been destroyed, so as that no mark of them
has remained.


SAGR. I verily believed otherwise, and conceited that Simplicius dissembled
this exposition of the Text, that he might not charge his Master and
Consectators, with a notion more absurd than the former. And what a folly it is
to say the Celestial part is unalterable, because no stars do generate or
corrupt therein? What then? has any one seen a Terrestrial Globe corrupt, and
another regenerate in its place? And yet is it not on all hands granted by
Philosophers, that there are very few stars in Heaven less than the Earth, Its
no less impossible for a star to corrupt, than for the whole Terrestrial Globe.
but very many that are much bigger? So that for a star in Heaven to corrupt,
would be no less than if the whole Terrestrial Globe should be destroyed.
Therefore, if for the true proof of generation and corruption in the Universe,
it be necessary that so vast bodies as a star, must corrupt and regenerate, you
may satisfy your self and cease your opinion; for I assure you, that you shall
never see the Terrestrial Globe or any other integral body of the World, to
corrupt or decay so, that having been beheld by us for so many years past, they
should so dissolve, as not to leave any footsteps of them.


SALV. But to give Simplicius yet fuller satisfaction, and to reclaim him,
Aristotle would change his opinion, did he see the novelties of our age.
if possible, from his error; I affirm, that we have in our age new accidents
and observations, and such, that I question not in the least, but if Aristotle
were now alive, they would make him change his opinion; which may be easily
collected from the very manner of his discoursing: For when he writes that he
esteems the Heavens inalterable, etc. because no new thing was seen to be
begot therein, or any old to be dissolved, he seems implicitly to hint unto
us, that when he should see any such accident, he would hold the contrary: and
(...), as indeed it is meet, sensible experiments to natural reason: for had he
not made any reckoning of the senses, he would not then from the not seeing of
any sensible mutation, have argued immutability.


SIMPL. Aristotle deduceth his principal Argument a priori, showing the
necessity of the inalterability of Heaven by natural, manifest and clear
principles; and then stablisheth the same a posteriori, by sense, and the
traditions of the ancients.


SALV. This you speak of is the Method he has observed in delivering his
Doctrine, but I do not bethink it yet to be that wherewith he invented it; for
I do believe for certain, that he first procured by help of the senses, such
experiments and observations as he could, The certainty of the conclusion
helps by a resolutive method to find the demonstration.
to assure him as much as it was possible, of the conclusion, and that he
afterward sought out the means how to demonstrate it: For this is the usual
course in demonstrative Sciences, and the reason thereof is, because when the
conclusion is true, by help of resolutive Method, one may hit upon some
proposition before demonstrated, or come to some principle known per se; but if
the conclusion be false, a man may proceed in infinitum, and never meet with
any truth already known; but very often he shall meet with some impossibility or
manifest absurdity Pythagoras offered an Hecatomb for a Geometrical
demonstration which he found.
Nor need you question but that Pythagoras along time before he found the
demonstration for which he offered the Hecatomb, had been certain, that the
square of the side subtending the right angle in a rectangle triangle, was
equal to the square of the other two sides: and the certainty of the conclusion
conduced not a little to the investigating of the demonstration, understanding
me always to mean in demonstrative Sciences. But what ever was the method of
Aristotle, and whether his arguing a priori preceded sense a posteriori, or the
contrary; it suffices that the same Aristotle prefers (as has been often
said) sensible experiments before all discourses; besides, as to the Arguments
a priori their force has been already examined. Now returning to my purposed
matter, I say, that the things in our times discovered in the Heavens, are, and
have been such, that they may give absolute satisfaction to all Philosophers;
forasmuch as in the particular bodies, and in the universal expansion of
Heaven, there have been, and are continually, seen just such accidents as we
call generations and corruptions, being that excellent Astronomers have
observed many Comets generated and dissolved in parts higher than the Lunar
Orb, besides the two new Stars, Anno 1572, New stars discovered in Heaven.
and Anno 1604, without contradiction much higher than all the Planets; and in
the face of the Sun it self, by help of the Telescope, Spots generate and
dissolve in the face of the Sun.
certain dense and obscure substances, in semblance very like to the foggs
about the Earth, are seen to be produced and dissolved; and many of these are
so vast, that they far exceed not only the Mediterranian Straight, but all
Africa and Asia also. Solar spots are bigger than all Asia and Afric.
Now if Aristotle had seen these things, what think you he would have said, and
done Simplicius?


SIMPL. I know not what Aristotle would have done or said, that was the great
Master of all the Sciences, but yet I know in part, what his Sectators do and
say, and ought to do and say, unless they would deprive themselves of their
guide, leader, and Prince in Philosophy. As to the Comets, are not those Modern
Astronomers, who would make them Celestial, convinced by the Astronomers
confuted by Anti-Tycho.
Anti-Tycho, yea, and overcome with their own weapons, I mean by way of
Paralaxes and Calculations, every way tried, concluding at the last in favor
of Aristotle, that they are all Elementary? And this being overthrown, which
was as it were their foundation, have these Novellists any thing more wherewith
to maintain their assertion?


SALV. Hold a little, good Simplicius, this modern Author, what says he to the
new Stars, Anno 1572, and 1604, and to the Solar spots? for as to the Comets, I
for my own particular little care to make them generated under or above the
Moon; nor did I ever put much stresse on the loquacity of Tycho; nor am I hard
to believe that their matter is Elementary, and that they may elevate
(sublimate) themselves at their pleasure, without meeting with any obstacle
from the impenetrability of the Peripatetick Heaven, which I hold to be far
more thin, yielding, and subtle than our Air; and as to the calculations of the
Parallaxes, first, the uncertainty whether Comets are subject to such
accidents, and next, the inconstancy of the observations, upon which the
computations are made, make me equally suspect both those opinions: Anti-Tycho
wresteth Astronomical observations to his own purpose.
and the rather, for that I see him you call Anti-Tycho, sometimes stretch to
his purpose, or else reject those observations which interfere with his design.


SIMPL. As to the new Stars, Anti-Tycho extricates himself finely in three or
four words; saying, That those modern new Stars are no certain parts of the
Celestial bodies, and that the adversaries, if they will prove alteration and
generation in those superior bodies, must show some mutations that have been
made in the Stars described so many ages past, of which there is no doubt but
that they be Celestial bodies, which they can never be able to do: Next, as to
those matters which some affirm, to generate and dissipate in the face of the
Sun, he makes no mention thereof; wherefore I conclude, that he believed them
fictious, or the illusions of the Tube, or at most, some petty effects caused
by the Air, and in brief, any thing rather than matters Celestial.


SALV. But you, Simplicius, what answer could you give to the opposition of
these importunate spots which are started up to disturb the Heavens, and more
than that, the Peripatetick Philosophy? It cannot be but that you, who are so
resolute a Champion of it, have found some reply or solution for the same, of
which you ought not to deprive us.


SIMPL. I have heard sundry opinions about this particular. One says: They are
Stars which in their proper Orbs, Sundry opinions touching the Solar spots.
like as Venus and Mercury, revolve about the Sun, and in passing under it,
represent themselves to us obscure; and for that they are many, they often happen
to aggregate their parts together, and afterward separate again. Others
believe them to be aerial impressions; others, the illusions of the chrystals;
and others, other things: But I incline to think, yea am verily persuaded, That
they are an aggregate of many several opacous bodies, as it were casually
concurrent among themselves. And therefore we often see, that in one of those
spots one may number ten or more such small bodies, which are of irregular
figures, and seem to us like flakes of snow, or flocks of wool, or moaths
flying: they vary fire amongst themselves, and one while sever, another while
meet, and most of all beneath the Sun, about which, as about their Center, they
continually move. But yet, must we not therefore grant, that they are generated
or dissolved, but that at sometimes they are hid behind the body of the Sun,
and at other times, though remote from it, yet are they not seen for the
vicinity of the immeasurable light of the Sun; in regard that in the eccentrick
Orb of the Sun, there is constituted, as it were, an Onion, composed of many
folds one within another, each of which, being The Original says [tempestata
si muove] which the Latin Translation, (mistaking Tempestata, a word in
Heraldry, for Tempestato,) rendereth [incitata movetur] which signifies a
violent transportmeut, as in a storm, that of a Ship.
studded with certain small spots, does move; and albeit their motion at first
seems inconstant and irregular, yet nevertheless, it is said at last, to be
observed that the very same spots, as before, do within a determinate time
return again. This seems to me the fittest answer that has been found to
assign a reason of that same appearance, and withal to maintain the
incorruptability and ingenerability of the Heavens; and if this does not
suffice; there wants not more elevated wits, which will give you other more
convincing.


SALV. If this of which we dispute, were some point of Law, or other part of
the Studies called Humanity, In natural Sciences, the art of Oratory is of no
force.
wherein there is neither truth nor falsehood, if we will give sufficient credit
to the acuteness of the wit, readiness of answers, and the general practice
of Writers, then he who most abounds in these, makes his reason more probable
and plausible; but in Natural Sciences, the conclusions of which are true and
necessary, and wherewith the judgment of men has nothing to do, one is to be
more cautious how he goes about to maintain any thing that is false; for a man
but of an ordinary wit, if it be his good fortune to be of the right side, may
lay a thousand Demosthenes and a thousand Aristotle's at his feet. Therefore
reject those hopes and conceits, wherewith you flatter your self, that there
can be any men so much more learned, read, and versed in Authors, than we, that
in despite of nature, they should be able to make that become true, which is
false. And seeing that of all the opinions that have been hitherto alleged
touching the essence of these Solar spots, this instanced in by you, is in your
judgment the truest, it follows (if this be so) that all the rest are false;
and to deliver you from this also, which doubtless is a most false Chimaera,
over-passing infinite other improbabilities that are therein, An Argument that
necessarily proves the Solar spots to generate and dissolve.
I shall propose against it only two experiments; one is, that many of those
spots are seen to arise in the midst of the Solar ring, and many likewise to
dissolve and vanish at a great distance from the circumference of the Sun; a
necessary Argument that they generate and dissolve; for if without generating
or corrrupting, they should appear there by only local motion, they would all
be seen to enter, A conclusive demonstration, that the spots are contiguous to
the body of the Sun.
and pass out by extreme circumference. The other observation to such as are
not situate in the lowest degree of ignorance in Perspective, by the mutation
of the appearing figures, and by the apparent mutations of the velocity of
motion is necessarily concluding, that the spots are contiguous to the body of
the Sun, and that touching its superficies, they move either with it or upon
it, and that they in no wise move in circles remote from the same. The motion
of the spots toward the circumference of the Sun appears slow.
The motion proves it, which toward the circumference of the Solar Circle,
appears very slow, and toward the midst, more swift; the figures of the
spots confirms it, The figure of the spots appears narrow toward the
circumference of the Suns discus, and why.
which toward the circumference appear exceeding narrow in comparison of that
which they seem to be in the parts nearer the middle; and this because in the
midst they are seen in their full luster, and as they truly be; and toward the
circumference by reason of the convexity of the globous superficies, they seem
more compressed: And both these diminutions of figure and motion, to such as
know how to observe and calculate them exactly, precisely answer to that which
should appear, the spots being contiguous to the Sun, and differ
irreconcileably from a motion in circles remote, though but for small intervalls
from the body of the Sun; as has been diffusely demonstrated by our Under this
word Friend, as also that of Academick, and Common Friend, Galilaeus modestly
conceals himself throughout these Dialogues.
Friend, in his Letters about the Solar spots, to Marcus Velserus. It may be
gathered from the same mutation of figure, that none of them are stars, or
other bodies of spherical figure; for that amongst all figures the sphere never
appears compressed, nor can ever be represented but only perfectly round;
and thus in case any particular spot were a round body, as all the stars are
held to be, the said roundness would as well appear in the midst of the Solar
ring, as when the spot is near the extreme: whereas, its so great compression,
and showing its self so small toward the extreme, and contrariwise, spacious
and large toward the middle, assures us, The Solar spots are not spherical,
but flat like thin plates.
that these spots are flat plates of small thickness or depth, in comparison of
their length and breadth. Lastly, whereas you say that the spots after their
determinate periods are observed to return to their former aspect, believe it
not, Simplicius, for he that told you so, will deceive you; and that I speak
the truth, you may observe them to be hid in the face of the Sun far from the
circumference; nor has your Observator told you a word of that compression,
which necessarily argues them to be contiguous to the Sun. That which he tells
you of the return of the said spots, is nothing else but what is read in the
forementioned Letters, namely, that some of them may sometimes so happen that
are of so long a duration, that they cannot be dissipated by one sole
conversion about the Sun, which is accomplished in less than a month.


SIMPL. I, for my part, have not made either so long, or so exact observations,
as to enable me to boast my self Master of the Quod est of this matter: but I
will more accurately consider the same, and make trial my self for my own
satisfaction, whether I can reconcile that which experience shows us, with that
which Aristotle teaches us; for it is a certain Maxim, that two Truths cannot
be contrary to one another.


SALV. If you would reconcile that which sense showed you, with the solider
Doctrines of Aristotle, One cannot (says Aristotle) speak confidently of
Heaven, by reason of its great distance.
you will find no great difficulty in the undertaking; and that so it is, does
not Aristotle say, that one cannot treat confidently of the things of Heaven,
by reason of their great remoteness?


SIMPL. He expressly says so.


SALV. And does he not likewise affirm, Aristotle prefers sense before
ratiocination.
that we ought to prefer that which sense demonstrates, before all Arguments,
though in appearance never so well grounded? and says he not this without the
least doubt or haesitation?


SIMPL. He does so.


SALV. Why then, the second of these propositions, which are both the doctrine
of Aristotle, Its a doctrine more agreeing with Aristotle, to say the Heavens
are alterable, than that which affirms them inalterable.
that says, that sense is to take place of Logic, is a doctrine much more
solid and undoubted, than that other which holds the Heavens to be
unalterable; and therefore you shall argue more Aristotelically, saying, the
Heavens are alterable, for that so my sense tells me, than if you should say,
the Heavens are ualterable, for that Logic so persuaded Aristotle. We may by
help of the Telescope discourse better of coelestical matters, than Aristot.
himself.
Furthermore, we may discourse of Celestial matters much better than
Aristotle; because, he confessing the knowledge thereof to be difficult to him,
by reason of their remoteness from the senses, he thereby acknowledges, that
one to whom the senses can better represent the same, may philosophate upon
them with more certainty. Now we by help of the Telescope, are brought thirty
or forty times nearer to the Heavens, than ever Aristotle came; so that we may
discover in them an hundred things, which he could not see, and amongst the
rest, these spots in the Sun, which were to him absolutely invisible; therefore
we may discourse of the Heavens and Sun, with more certainty than Aristolte.


SAGR. I see into the heart of Simplicius, and know that he is much moved at
the strength of these so convincing Arguments; but on the other side, when he
considers the great authority which Aristotle has won with all men, and
remembers the great number of famous Interpreters, which have made it their
business to explain his sense; and sees other Sciences, so necessary and
profitable to the public, to build a great part of their esteem and reputation
on the credit of Aristotle he is much puzzled and perplexed: The Declamation^
of Simplicius.
and methinks I hear him say, To whom then should we repair for the decision of
our controversies, if Aristotle were removed from the chair? What other Author
should we follow in the Schools, Academies and Studies? What Philosopher has
writ all the parts of Natural Philosophy, and that so methodically without
omitting so much as one single conclusion? Shall we then overthrow that Fabric
under which so many passengers find shelter? Shall we destroy that Asylum, that
Prytaneum, wherein so many Students meet with commodious harbor, where without
exposing themselves to the injuries of the air, with the only turning over of
a few leaves, one may learn all the secrets of Nature? Shall we dismantle that
fort in which we are safe from all hostile assaults? But I pity him no more
than I do that Gentleman who with great expense of time and treasure, and the
help of many hundred artists, erects a very sumptuous Palace, and afterward
beholds it ready to fall, by reason of the bad foundation; but being extremely
unwilling to see the Walls stripped which are adorned with so many beautiful
Pictures; or to suffer the columns to fall, that uphold the stately Galleries;
or the gilded roofs, chimney-pieces, the freizes, the cornishes of marble, with
so much cost erected, to be ruined; goes about with girders, props, shoars,
butterasses, to prevent their subversion.


SALV. But alas, Simplicius as yet fears no such fall, and I would undertake
to secure him from that mischief at a far less charge. Peripatetick Philosophy
unchangeable.
There is no danger that so great a multitude of subtle and wise Philosophers,
should suffer themselves to be Hectored by one or two, who make a little
blustering; nay, they will rather, without ever turning the points of their
pens against them, by their silence only render them the object of universal
scorn and contempt. It is a fond conceit for any one to think to introduce new
Philosophy, by reproving this or that Author: it will be first necessary to
new-mold the brains of men, and make them apt to distinguish truth from
falsehood. A thing which only God can do. But from one discourse to another
whither are we strayed? your memory must help to guide me into the way again.


SIMPL. I remember very well where we left. We were upon the answer of
Anti-Tycho, to the objections against the immutability of the Heavens, among
which you inserted this of the Solar spots, not spoke of by him; and I believe
you intended to examine his answer to the instance of the New Stars.


SALV. Now I remember the rest, and to proceed, Methinks there are some things
in the answer to Anti-Tycho, worthy of reprehension. And first, if the two New
Stars, which he can do no less than place in the uppermost parts of the
Heavens, and which were of a long duration, but finally vanished, give him no
obstruction in maintaining the inalterability of Heaven, in that they were not
certain parts thereof, nor mutations made in the ancient Stars, why does he set
himself so vigorously and earnestly against the Comets, to banish them by all
ways from the Celestial Regions? Was it not enough that he could say of them
the same which he spoke of the New stars? to wit, that in regard they were no
certain parts of Heaven, nor mutations made in any of the Stars, they could no
wise prejudice either Heaven, or the Doctrine of Aristotle? Secondly, I am not
very well satisfied of his meaning; when he says that the alterations that
should be granted to be made in the Stars, would be destructive to the
prerogative of Heaven; namely, its incorruptibility, etc. and this, because the
Stars are Celestial substances, as is manifest by the consent of every one;
and yet is nothing troubled that the same alterations should be made Extra
Stellas.
without the Stars in the rest of the Celestial expansion. Does he think that
Heaven is no Celestial substance? I, for my part, did believe that the Stars
were called Celestial bodies, by reason that they were in Heaven, or for that
they were made of the substance of Heaven; and yet I thought that Heaven was
more Celestial than they; in like sort, as nothing can be said to be more
Terrestrial, or more fiery than the Earth or Fire themselves. And again, in
that he never made any mention of the Solar spots, which have been evidently
demonstrated to be produced, and dissolved, and to be near the Sun, and to turn
either with, or about the same, I have reason to think that this Author
probably did write more for others pleasure, than for his own satisfaction; and
this I affirm, forasmuch as he having shown himself to be skilful in the
Mathematics, it is impossible but that he should have been convinced by
Demonstrations, that those substances are of necessity contiguous with the body
of the Sun, and are so great generations and corruptions, that none comparable
to them, ever happen in the Earth: And if such, so many, and so frequent be
made in the very Globe of the Sun, which may with reason be held one of the
noblest parts of Heaven, what should make us think that others may not happen
in the other Orbs.


SAGR. I cannot without great admiration, Generability and alteration is a
greater perfection in the Worlds bodies than the contrary qualities.
nay more, denial of my understanding, hear it to be attributed to natural
bodies, for a great honor and perfection that they are Impatible.
impassible, immutable, inalterable, etc. And on the contrary, to hear it to be
esteemed a great imperfection to be alterable, generable, mutable, etc. The
Earth very noble, by reason of the many mutations made therein.
It is my opinion that the Earth is very noble and admirable, by reason of so
many and so different alterations, mutations, generations, etc. which are
incessantly made therein; and if without being subject to any alteration, it
had been all one vast heap of sand, or a mass of Jasper, or that in the time
of the Deluge, the waters freezing which covered it, it had continued an
immense Globe of Crystal, The Earth unprofitable and full of idleness, its
alterations taken away
wherein nothing had ever grown, altered, or changed, I should have esteemed it
a lump of no benefit to the World, full of idleness, and in a word
superfluous, and as if it had never been in nature; and should make the same
difference in it, as between a living and dead creature: The like I say of the
Moon, Jupiter, and all the other Globes of the World. But the more I dive into
the consideration of the vanity of popular discourses, the more empty and
simple I find them. And what greater folly can there be imagined, than to call
Jems, Silver and Gold precious; and Earth and dirt vile? The Earth more noble
than Gold and Jewels.
For do not these persons consider, that if there should be as great a scarcity
of Earth, as there is of Jewels and precious metals, there would be no Prince,
but would gladly give a heap of Diamonds and Rubies, and many Wedges of Gold,
to purchase only so much Earth as should suffice to plant a Gessemine in a
little pot, or to set therein a China Orange, that he might see it sprout, grow
up, and bring forth so goodly leaves, so odiriferous flowers, Scarcity and
plenty enhanse and debase the price of things.
and so delicate fruit? It is therefore scarcity and plenty that make things
esteemed and contemned by the vulgar; who will say that same is a most
beautiful Diamond, for that it resembles a clear water, and yet will not part
with it for ten Tun of water: Incorruptibility esteemed by the vulgar out of
their fear of death.
These men that so extol incorruptibility, inalterability, etc. speak thus I
believe out of the great desire they have to live long, and for fear of death;
not considering, that if men had been immortal, they should have had nothing to
do in the World. The disparagers of corruptibility deserve to be turned into
Statua's.
These deserve to meet with a Medusa's head, that would transform them into
Statues of Dimond and Jasper, that so they might become more perfect than they
are.


SALV. And it may be such a Metamorphosis would not be altogether unprofitable
to them; for I am of opinion that it is better not to discourse at all, than to
argue erroniously.


SIMPL. There is not the least question to be made, but that the Earth is much
more perfect, being as it is alterable, mutable, etc. than if it had been a
mass of stone; yea although it were one entire Diamond, The Celestial bodies
designed to serve the Earth, need no more but motion and light.
most hard and impassile. But look how much these qualifications enoble the
Earth, they render the Heavenly bodies again on the other side so much the more
imperfect, in which, such conditions would be superfluous; in regard that the
Celestial bodies, namely, the Sun, Moon, and the other Stars, which are
ordained for no other use but to serve the Earth, need no other qualities for
attaining of that end, save only those of light and motion.


SAGR. How? Will you affirm that nature has produced and designed so many vast
perfect and noble Celestial bodies, impassible, immortal, and divine, to no
other use but to serve the passible, frail, and mortal Earth? to serve that
which you call the dross of the World, and sink of all uncleanness? To what
purpose were the Celestial bodies made immortal, etc. to serve a frail, etc.
Take away this subserviency to the Earth, and the innumerable multitude of
Celestial bodies become wholly unuseful, Celestial bodies want an
interchangeable operation upon each other.
and superfluous, since they neither have nor can have any mutual operation
betwixt themselves; because they are all unalterable, immutable, impassible:
For if, for Example, the Moon be impassible, what influence can the Sun or any
other Star have upon her? it would doubtless have far less effect upon her,
than that of one who would with his looks or imagination, lignifie a piece of
Gold. Moreover, it seems to me, that whilst the Celestial bodies concur to
the generation and alteration of the Earth, they themselves are also of
necessity alterable; for otherwise I cannot understand how the application of
the Sun or Moon to the Earth, to effect production, should be any other than to
lay a marble Statue by a Woman's side, and from that conjunction to expect
children.


SIMPL. Corruptibility, Alterability, etc. are not in the whole Terrestrial
Globe, but in some of its parts.
alteration, mutation, etc. are not in the whole Terrestrial Globe, which as to
its whole, is no less eternal than the Sun or Moon, but it is generable and
corruptible as to its external parts; but yet it is also true that likewise in
them generation and corruption are perpetual, and as such require the heavenly
eternal operations; and therefore it is necessary that the Celestial bodies be
eternal.


SAGR. All this is right; but if the corruptibility of the superficial parts of
the Earth be nowise prejudicial to the eternity of its whole Globe, yea, if
their being generable, corruptible, alterable, etc. gain them great ornament
and perfection; why cannot, Celestial bodies alterable in their outward parts.
and ought not you to admit alteration, generation, etc. likewise in the
external parts of the Celestial Globes, adding to them ornament, without
taking from them perfection, or bereaving them of action; yea rather increasing
their effects, by granting not only that they all operate on the Earth, but
that they mutually operate upon each other, and the Earth also upon them all?


SIMPL. This cannot be, because the generations, mutations, etc. which we
should suppose v. g. in the Moon; would be vain and useless, and natura nihil
frustra facit.


SAGR. And why should they be vain and useless?


SIMPL. Because we clearly see, The generations and mutations happening in the
Earth, are all for the good of Man.
and feel with our hands, that all generations, corruptions, etc. made in the
Earth, are all either mediately or immediately directed to the use,
convenience, and benefit of man; for the use of man are horses brought forth,
for the feeding of horses, the Earth produces grass, and the Clouds water it;
for the use and nourishment of man, herbs, corn, fruits, beasts, birds, fishes,
are brought forth; and in sum, if we should one by one dilligently examine and
resolve all these things, we should find the end to which they are all
directed, to be the necessity, use, convenience, and delight of man. Now of
what use could the generations which we suppose to be made in the Moon or other
Planets, ever be to mankind? unless you should say that there were also men in
the Moon, that might enjoy the benefit thereof; a conceit either fabulous or
impious.


SAGR. That in the Moon or other Planets, The Moon has no generatings of
things, like as we have, nor is it inhabited by men.
there are generated either herbs, or plants, or animals, like to ours, or that
there are rains, winds, or thunders there, as about the Earth, I neither know,
nor believe, and much less, that it is inhabited by men: but yet I understand
not, because there are not generated things like to ours, that therefore it
necessarily follows, that no alteration is wrought therein, or that there may
not be other things that change, In the Moon may be a generation of things
different from ours.
generate, and dissolve, which are not only different from ours, but
exceedingly beyond our imagination, and in a word, not to be thought of by us.
And if, as I am certain, that one born and brought up in a spacious Forest,
amongst beasts and birds, and that has no knowledge at all of the Element of
Water, He that had not heard of the Element of Water, could never fancy to
himself Ships and Fishes.
could never come to imagine another World to be in Nature, different from the
Eatth, full of living creatures, which without legs or wings swiftly move, and
not upon the surface only, as beasts do upon the Earth, but in the very bowels
thereof; and not only move, but also stay themselves and cease to move at
their pleasure, which birds cannot do in the air; and that moreover men live
therein, and build Palaces and Cities, and have so great convenience in
travailing, that without the least trouble, they can go with their Family,
House, and whole Cities, to places far remote, like as I say, I am certain,
such a person, though of never so piercing an imagination, could never fancy to
himself Fishes, the Ocean, Ships, Fleets, Armado's at Sea; thus, and much more
easily, may it happn, that in the Moon, remote from us by so great a space, and
of a substance perchance very different from the Earth, there may be matters,
and operations, not only wide off, but altogether beyond all our imaginations,
as being such as have no resemblance to ours, and therefore wholly
inexcogitable, in regard, that what we imagine to our selves, must necessarily
be either a thing already seen, or a composition of things, or parts of things
seen at another time; for such are the Sphinxes, Sirenes, Chimaera's. Centaurs,
etc.


SALV. I have very often let my fancy ruminate upon these speculations, and in
the end, have thought that I had found some things that neither are nor can be
in the Moon; but yet I have not found therein any of those which I believe are,
and may be there, save only in a very general acceptance, namely, things that
adorn it by operating, moving and living; and perhaps in a way very different
from ours; There may be substances in the Moon very different from ours.
beholding and admiring the greatness and beauty of the World, and of its Maker
and Ruler, and with continual Encomiums singing his praises; and in sum
(which is that which I intend) doing what sacred Writers so frequently affirm,
to wit, all the creatures making it their perpetual employment to laud God.


SAGR. These are the things, which speaking in general terms, may be there; but
I would gladly hear you instance in such as you believe neither are nor can be
there; which perchance may be more particularly named.


SALV. Take notice Sagredus that this will be the third time that we have
unawares by running from one thing to another, lost our principal subject; and
if we continue these digressions, it will be long ere we come to a conclusion
of our discourse; therefore I should judge it better to remit this, as also such
other points, to be decided on a particular occasion.


SAGR. Since we are now got into the Moon, if you please, let us dispatch such
things as concern her, that so we be not forced to such another tedious journey.


SALV. It shall be as you would have it. And to begin with things more general,
I believe that the Lunar Globe is far different from the Terrestrial, though in
some things they agree. I will recount first their resemblances, and next their
differences. The Moon is manifestly like to the Earth in figure, The First
resemblance between the Moon and Earth; which is that of figure; is proved by
the manner of being illuminated by the Sun.
which undoubtedly is spherical, as may be necessarily concluded from the
aspect of its surface, which is perfectly Orbicular, and the manner of its
receiving the light of the Sun, from which, if its surface were flat, it would
come to be all in one and the same time illuminated, and likewise again in
another instant of time obscured, and not those parts first, which are situate
toward the Sun, and the rest successively, so that in its opposition, and not
till then, its whole apparent circumference is enlightened; which would happen
quite contrary, if the visible surface were concave; namely, the illumination
would begin from the parts opposite or averse to the Sun. The Second conformity
is the Moons being opacous as the Earth.
Secondly she is as the Earth, in her self obscure and opacous, by which
opacity it is enabled to receive, and reflect the light of the Sun; (...) Moon
is (...) and (...) as the Earth.
which were it not so, it could not do. Thirdly, I hold its matter to be most
dense and solid as the Earth is, which I clearly argue from the unevenness of
its superficies in most places, by means of the many eminencies and cavities
discovered therein by help of the Telescope: of which eminencies there are many
all over it, directly resembling our most sharp and craggy mountains, of which
you shall there perceive some extend and run in ledges of an hundred miles
long; others are contracted into rounder forms; and there are also many craggy,
solitary, steep and cliffy rocks. But that of which there are frequentest
appearances, are certain Banks (I use this word, because I cannot thing of
another that better expresses them) pretty high raised, which environ and
enclose fields of several bignesses, and from sundry figures, but for the most
part circular; many of which have in the midst a mount raised pretty high, and
some few are replenished with a matter somewhat obscure, to wit, like to the
great spots discerned by the bare eye, and these are of the greatest magnitude;
the number moreover of those that are lesser and lesser is very great, and yet
almost all circular. Fourthly, Fourthly, The Moon is distinguished into two
different parts for clarity and obscurity, as the Terrestrial Globe into Sea
and Land. The surface of the Sea would show at a distance more obscure than
that of the Earth.
like as the surface of our Globe is distinguished into two principal parts,
namely, into the Terrestrial and Aquatick: so in the Lunar surface we discern a
great distinction of some great fields more resplendant, and some less: whose
aspect makes me believe, that that of the Earth would seem very like it, beheld
by any one from the Moon, or any other the like distance, to be illuminated by
the Sun: and the surface of the sea would appear more obscure, and that of the
Earth more bright. Fifthly, like as we from the Earth behold the Moon, one
while all illuminated, another while half; Fifthly, Mutation of figures in the
Earth, like to those of the Moon, and made with the same periods.
sometimes more, sometimes less; sometimes horned, sometimes wholly invisibly;
namely, when its just under the Sun beams; so that the parts which look toward
the Earth are dark: Thus in every respect, one standing in the Moon would see
the illumination of the Earths surface by the Sun, with the same periods to an
hair, and under the same changes of figures. Sixthly, --


SAGR. Stay a little, Salviatus; That the illumination of the Earth, as to the
several figures, would represent it self to a person placed in the Moon, like
in all things to that which we discover in the Moon, I understand very well,
but yet I cannot conceive how it shall appear to be done in the same period;
seeing that that which the Suns illumination does in the Lunar superficies in a
month, it does in the Terrestrial in twenty four hours.


SALV. Its true, the effect of the Sun about the illuminating these two bodies,
and replenishing with its splendour their whole surfaces, is dispatched in the
Earth in a Natural day, and in the Moon in a Month; but the variation of the
figures in which the illuminated parts of the Terrestrial superficies appear
beheld from the Moon, depends not on this alone, but on the diverse aspects
which the Moon is still changing with the Sun; so that, if for instance, the
Moon punctually followed the motion of the Sun, and stood, for example, always
in a direct line between it and the Earth, in that aspect which we call
Conjunction, it looking always to the same Hemisphere of the Earth which the
Sun looks unto, she would behold the same all light: as on the contrary, if it
should always stay in Opposition to the Sun, it would never behold the Earth,
of which the dark part would be continually turned toward the Moon, and
therefore invisible. But when the Moon is in Quadrature of the Sun, that half
of the Terrestrial Hemisphere exposed to the sight of the Moon which is toward
the Sun, is luminous; and the other toward the contrary is obscure: and
therefore the illuminated part of the Earth would represent it self to the Moon
in a semi-circular figure.


SAGR. I clearly perceive all this, and understand very well, that the Moon
departing from its Opposition to the Sun, where it saw no part of the
illumination of the Terrestrial superficies, and approaching day by day nearer
the Sun, she begins by little and little to discover some part of the face of
the illuminated Earth; and that which appears of it shall resemble a thin
sickle, in regard the figure of the Earth is round: and the Moon thus acquiring
by its motion day by day greater proximity to the Sun, successively discovers
more and more of the Terrestrial Hemisphere enlightened, so that at the
Quadrature there is just half of it visible, insomuch that we may see the other
part of her: continuing next to proceed toward the Conjunction, it
successively discovers more and more of its surface to be illuminated, and in
fine, at the time of Conjunction sees the whole Hemisphere enlightened. And in
short, I very well conceive, that what befalls the Inhabitants of the Earth, in
beholding the changes of the Moon, would happen to him that from the Moon
should observe the Earth; but in a contrary order, namely, that when the Moon
is to us at her full, and in Opposition to the Sun, then the Earth would be in
Conjunction with the Sun, and wholly obscure and invisible; on the contrary,
that position which is to us a Conjunction of the Moon with the Sun, and for
that cause a Moon silent and unseen, would be there an Opposition of the Earth
to the Sun, and, to so speak, Full Earth, to wit, all enlightened. And lastly,
look what part of the Lunar surface appears to us from time to time
illuminated, so much of the Earth in the same time shall you behold from the
Moon to be obscured: and look how much of the Moon is to us deprived of light,
so much of the Earth is to the Moon illuminated. In one thing yet these mutual
operations in my judgment seem to differ, and it is, that it being supposed,
and not granted, that some one being placed in the Moon to observe the Earth,
he would every day see the whole Terrestrial superficies, by means of the Moons
going about the Earth in twenty four or twenty five hours; but we never see but
half of the Moon, since it revolves not in it self, as it must do to be seen in
every part of it.


SALV. So that this, befalls not contrarily, namely, that her revolving in her
self, is the cause that we see not the other half of her, for so it would be
necessary it should be, if she had the Epicycle. But what other difference have
you behind, to exchange for this which you have named?


SAGR. Let me see; Well for the present I cannot think of any other.


SALV. And what if the Earth (as you have well noted) sees no more than half
All the Earth sees half only of the Moon, and the half only of the Moon
sees all the Earth.
the Moon, whereas from the Moon one may see all the Earth; and on the
contrary, all the Earth sees the Moon, and but only half of it sees the
Earth? For the inhabitants, to so speak, of the superior Hemisphere of the
Moon, which is to us invisible, are deprived of the sight of the Earth: and
these happily are the Anti^thones. But here I remember a particular accident,
newly observed by our Academian, From the Earth we see more than half the Lunar
Globe.
in the Moon, from whch are gathered two necessary consequences; one is, that
we see somewhat more than half of the Moon; and the other is, that the motion
of the Moon has exact concentricity with the Earth: and thus he finds the
Phoenomenon and observation. When the Moon has a correspondence and natural
sympathy with the Earth, toward which it has its aspect in such a determinate
part, it is necessary that the right line which conjoyns their centers, do
pass ever by the same point of the Moons superficies; so that, who so shall
from the center of the Earth behold the same, shall always see the same Discus
or Face of the Moon punctually determined by one and the same circumference;
But if a man be placed upon the Terrestrial surface, the ray which from his eye
passes to the center of the Lunar Globe, will not pass by the same point of
its superficies, by which the line passes that is drawn from the center of the
Earth to that of the Moon, save only when it is vertical to him: but the Moon
being placed in the East, or in the West, the point of incidence of the visual
ray, is higher than that of the line which conjoyns the centres; and therefore
the observer may discern some part of the Lunar Hemisphere toward the upper
circumference, and alike part of the other is invisible: they are discernable
and undiscernable, in respect of the Hemisphere beheld from the true center of
the Earth: and because the part of the Moons circumference, which is superior
in its rising, is nethermost in its setting; therefore the difference of the
said superior and inferior our parts must needs be very observable; certain
spots and other notable things in those parts, being one while discernable, and
another while not. A like variation may also be observed toward the North and
South extremities of the same Discus (or Surface) according as the Moons
position is in its greatest North or South Latitude; For, if it be North, some
of its parts toward the North are hid, and some of those parts toward the
South are discovered, and so on the contrary. Now that these consequences are
really true, Two spots in the Moon, by which it is perceived that she has
respect to the center of the Earth in her motion.
is verified by the Telescope, for there be in the Moon two remarkable spots,
one of which, when the Moon is in the meridian, is situate to the Northwest,
and the other is almost diametrically opposite unto it; and the first of these
is visible even without the Telescope; but the other is not. That toward the
Northwest is a reasonable great spot of oval figure, separated from the other
great ones; the opposite one is less, and also severed from the biggest, and
situate in a very clear field; in both these we may manifestly discern the
foresaid variations, and see them one after another; now near the edge or limb
of the Lunar Discus, and anon remote, with so great difference that the
distance betwixt the Northwest and the circumference of the Discus is more than
twice as great at one time, as at the other; and as to the second spot (because
it is nearer to the circumference) such mutation imports more, than twice so
much in the former. Hence its manifest, that the Moon, as if it were drawn by a
magnetic virtue, constantly beholds the Terrestrial Globe with one and the
same aspect, never deviating from the same.


SAGR. Oh! when will there be an end put to the new observations and
discoveries of this admirable Instrument?


SALV. If this succeed according to the progress of other great inventions, it
is to be hoped, that in process of time, one may arrive to the sight of
things, to us at present not to be imagined. But returning to our first
discourse, Sixthly, The Earth and Moon interchangeably do illuminate.
I say for the sixth resemblance betwixt the Moon and Earth, that as the Moon
for a great part of time, supplies the want of the Suns light, and makes the
nights, by the reflection of its own, reasonable clear; so the Earth, in
recompense, affords it when it stands in most need, by reflecting the Solar
rays, a very clear illumination, and so much, in my opinion, greater than that
which comes from her to us, by how much the superficies of the Earth is
greater than that of the Moon.


SAGR. Hold there, Salviatus hold there, and permit me the pleasure of relating
to you, how at this first hint I have penetrated the cause of an accident,
which I have a thousand times thought upon, Light reflected from the Earth into
the Moon.
but could never find out. You would say, that the imperfect light which is
seen in the Moon, especially when it is horned, comes from the reflection of
the light of the Sun on the Supersicies of the Earth and Sea; and that light is
more clear, by how much the horns are less, for then the luminous part of the
Earth, beheld by the Moon, is greater, according to that which was a little
before proved; to wit, that the luminous part of the Earth, exposed to the
Moon, is always as great as the obscure part of the Moon, that is visible to the
Earth; whereupon, at such time as the Moon is sharp-forked, and consequently
its tenebrous part great, great also is the illuminated part of the Earth
beheld from the Moon, and its reflection of light so much the more potent.


SALV. This is exactly the same with what I was about to say. In a word, it is
a great pleasure to speak with persons judicious and apprehensive, and the
rather to me, for that whilst others converse and discourse touching
Axiomatical truths, I have many times creeping into my brain such arduous
Paradoxes, that though I have a thousand times rehearsed this which you at the
very first, have of your self apprehended, yet could I never beat it into men's
brains.


SIMPL. If you mean by your not being able to persuade them to it, that you
could not make them understand the same, I much wonder thereat, and am very
confident that if they did not understand it by your demonstration (your way of
expression, being, in my judgment, very plain) they would very hardly have
apprehended it upon the explication of any other man; but if you mean you have
not persuaded them, so as to make them believe it, I wonder not, in the least,
at this; for I confess my self to be one of those who understand your
discourses, but am not satisfied therewith; for there are in this, and some of
the other six congruities, or resemblances, many difficulties, which I shall
instance in, when you have gone through them all.


SALV. The desire I have to find out any truth, in the acquist whereof the
objections of intelligent persons (such as your self) may much assist me, will
cause me to be very brief in dispatching that which remains. Seventhly, The
Earth and Moon do mutually eclipse.
For a seventh conformity, take their reciprocal responsion as well to
injuries, as favors; whereby the Moon, which very often in the height of its
illumination, by the interposure of the Earth betwixt it and the Sun, is
deprived of light, and eclipsed, does by way of revenge, in like manner,
interpose it self between the Earth and the Sun, and with its shadow obscureth
the Earth; and although the revenge be not answerable to the injury, for that
the Moon often continues, and that for a reasonable long time, wholly immersed
in the Earths shadow, but never was the Earth wholly, nor for any long time,
eclipsed by the Moon; yet, nevertheless, having respect to the smalnesse of
the body of this, in comparision to the magnitude of the other, it cannot be
denied but that the will and as it were valor of this, is very great. Thus
much for their congruities or resemblances. It should next follow that we
discourse touching their disparity; but because Simplicius will favor us with
his objections against the former, its necessary that we hear and examine them,
before we proceed any farther.


SAGR. And the rather, because it is to be supposed that Simplicius will not
any ways oppose the disparities, and incongruities betwixt the Earth and Moon,
since that he accounts their substances extremely different.


SIMPL. Amongst the resemblances by you recited, in the parallel you make
betwixt the Earth and Moon, I find that I can admit none confidently save only
the first, and two others; I grant the first, namely, the spherical figure;
howbeit, even in this there is some kind of difference, for that I hold that of
the Moon to be very smooth and even, as a looking-glass, whereas, we find and
feel this of the Earth to be extraordinary montuous and rugged; but this
belonging to the inequality of superficies, it shall be anon considered, in
another of those Resemblances by you alleged; I shall therefore reserve what I
have to say thereof, till I come to the consideration of that. Of what you
affirm next, that the Moon seems, as you say in your second Resemblance,
opacous and obscure in its self, like the Earth; I admit not any more than the
first attribute of opacity, of which the Eclipses of the Sun assure me. For
were the Moon transparent, the air in the total obscuration of the Sun, would
not become so duskish, as at such a time it is, but by means of the
transparency of the body of the Moon, a refracted light would pass through it,
as we see it does through the thickest clouds. But as to the obscurity, I
believe not that the Moon is wholly deprived of light, as the Earth; nay, that
clarity which is seen in the remainder ot its Discus, over and the above the
small crescent enlightened by the Sun, I repute to be its proper and natural
light, and not a reflection of the Earth, The second clarity of the Moon
esteemed to be its native light.
which I esteem unable, by reason of its asperity (cragginesse) and obscurity,
to reflect the rays of the Sun. In the third Parallel I assent unto you in one
part, The Earth unable to reflect the Suns rays.
and dissent in another: I agree in judging the body of the Moon to be most
solid and hard, like the Earth, yea much more; for if from Aristotle we receive
that the Heavens are impenetrable, The substance of the Heavens impenetrable,
according to Aristotle.
and the Stars the most dense parts of Heaven, it must necessarily follow, that
they are most solid and most impenetrable.


SAGR. What excellent matter would the Heavens afford us for to make Palaces
of, if we could procure a substance so hard and so transparent?


SALV. Rather how improper, for being by its transparence, wholly invisible, a
man would not be able without stumbling at the thresholds, and breaking his
head against the Walls, to pass from room to room.


SAGR. This danger would not befall him, The substance of Heaven intangible.
if it be true, as some Peripateticks say, that it is intangible: and if one
cannot touch it, much less can it hurt him.


SALV. This would not serve the turn, for though the matter of the Heavens
cannot be touch, as wanting tangible qualities: yet may it easily touch the
elementary bodies; and to offend us it is as sufficient that it strike us, nay
worse, than if we should strike it. But let us leave these Palaces, or, to say
better, these Castles in the air, and not interrupt Simplicius.


SIMPL. The question which you have so casually started, is one of the most
difficulty that is disputed in Philosophy; and I have on that subject most
excellent conceits of a very learned Doctor of Padoua, but it is not now time
to enter upon them. Therefore returning to our purpose, I say that the Moon, in
my opinion, is much more solid than the Earth, but do not infer the same, as
you do, The superficies of the Moon more sleek than any Looking-glass.
from the cragginess and montuousity of its superficies; but rather from the
contrary, namely, from its aptitude to receive (as we see it experimented in
the hardest stones) a polish and luster exceeding that of the smoothest glass,
for such necessarily must its superficies be, to render it apt to make so
lively reflection of the Suns rays. And for those appearances which you
mention, of Mountains, Cliffs, Hills, Valleys, etc. they are all illusions: and
I have been present at certain public disputes, where I have heard it strongly
maintained against these introducers of novelties, The eminencies and cavities
in the Moon are illusions of its opacous and perspicuous parts.
that such appearances proceed from nothing else, but from the unequal
distribution of the opacous and perspicuous parts, of which the Moon is
inwardly and outwardly composed: as we see it often fall out in crystal,
amber, and many other precious stones of perfect luster; in which by reason of
the opacity of some parts, and the transparency of others, there does appear
several concavities and prominencies. In the fourth resemblance, I grant, that
the superficies of Terrestrial Globe beheld from afar, would make two different
appearances, namely, one more clear, the other more dark; but I believe that
such diversity would succeed quite contrary to what you say; that is, I hold
that the surface of the water would appear lucid, because that it is smooth and
transparent; and that of the Earth would appear obscure, by reason of its
opacity and scabrosity, ill accommodated for reflecting the light of the Sun.
Concerning the fifth comparison, I grant it wholly, and am able, in case the
Earth did shine as the Moon, to show the same to any one that should from
thence above behold it, represented by figures answerable to those which we see
in the Moon: I comprehend also, how the period of its illumination and
variation of figure, would be monthly, albeit the Sun revolves round about it
in twenty four hours: and lastly, I do not scruple to admit, that the half
only of the Moon sees all the Earth, and that all the Earth sees but only
half of the Moon. For what remains, I repute it most false, that the Moon can
receive light from the Earth, which is most obscure, opacous, and utterly unapt
to reflect the Suns light, as the Moon does reflect it to us: and as I have
said, I hold that that light which we see in the remainder of the Moons face
(the splendid crescents subducted) by the illumination, is the proper and
natural light of the Moon, and no easy matter would induce me to believe
otherwise. The seventh, touching the mutual Eclipses, may be also admitted;
howbeit that is wont to be called the eclipse of the Sun, which you are pleased
to phrase the eclipse of the Earth. And this is what I have at this time to say
in opposition to your seven congruities or resemblances, to which objections,
if you are minded to make any reply, I shall willingly hear you.


SALV. If I have well apprehended what you have answered, it seems to me, that
there still remains in controversy between us, certain conditions, which I
made common betwixt the Moon and Earth, and they are these; You esteem the Moon
to be smooth and polisht, as a Looking-glass, and as such, able to reflect the
Suns light; and contrarily, the Earth, by reason of its montuosity, unable to
make such reflection: You yield the Moon to be solid and hard, and that you
argue from its being smooth and polite, and not from its being montuous; and
for its appearing montuous, you assign as the cause, that it consists of parts
more and less opacous and perspicuous. And lastly, you esteem that secondary
light, to be proper to the Moon, and not reflected from the Earth; howbeit you
seem not to deny the sea, as being of a smooth surface, some kind of
reflection. As to the convincing you of that error, that the reflection of the
Moon is made, as it were, like that of a Looking-glass, I have small hope,
whilst I see, that what has been read in the Il Saggiatore, and Lettere
Solari, two Treatises of Galilaeus.
Saggiator and in the Solar Letters of our Common Friend, has profited nothing
in your judgment, if happily you have attentively read what he has there written
on this subject.


SIMPL. I have perused the same so superficially, according to the small time
of leisure allowed me from more solid studies; therefore, if you think you can,
either by repeating some of those reasons, or by alleging others, resolve me
these doubts, I will hearken to them attentively.


SALV. I will tell you what comes into my mind upon the instant, and its
possible it may be a commixtion of my own conceits, and those which I have
sometime read in the foresaid Books, by which I well remember, that I was then
perfectly satisfied, although the conclusions, at first sight seemed unto me
strange Paradoxes. We enquire Simplicius, whether to the making a reflection of
light, like that which we receive from the Moon, it be necessary that the
superficies from whence the reflection comes, be so smooth and polite, as the
face of a Looking-glass, or whether a superficies not smooth or polisht, but
rough and uneven, be more apt for such a purpose. Now supposing two reflections
should come unto us, one more bright, the other less, from two superficies
opposite unto us, I demand of you, which of the two superficies you think would
represent it self to our sight, to be the clearest, and which the obscurest.


SIMPL. I am very confident, that that same, which most forcibly reflected the
light upon me, would show its self in its aspect the clearer, and the other
darker.


SALV. Be pleased to take that Glass which hangs on yonder Wall, It is proved
at large that the Moons surface is sharp.
and let us go out into the Courtyard. Come Sagredus. Now hang the glass
yonder, against that same Wall, on which the Sun shines, and now let us
withdraw our selves into the shade. See yonder two superficies beaten by the
Sun, namely, the Wall and the Glass. Tell me now which appears clearest unto
you, that of the Wall or that of the Glass? Why do you not answer me?


SAGR. I leave the reply to Simplicius, who made the question; but I, for my
own part, am persuaded upon this small beginning of the experiment, that the
Moon must be of a very unpolisht surface.


SALV. What say you Simplicius, if you were to depaint that Wall, and that
Glass fastened unto it, where would you use your darkest colors, in designing
the Wall, or else in painting the Looking-glass.


SIMPL. Much the darker in depainting the Glass.


SALV. Now if from the superficies, which represents it self more clear, there
proceeds a more powerful reflection of light, the Wall will more forcibly
reflect the rays of the Sun, than the Glass.


SIMPL. Very well, Sir, have you ever a better experiment than this? you have
placed us where the Glasses does not reverberate upon us; but come along with
me a little this way; how, will you not stir?


SAGR. You perhaps seek the place of the reflection, which the Glass makes.


SIMPL. I do so.


SAGR. Why look you, there it is upon the opposite Wall, just as big as the
Glass, and little less bright than if the Sun had directly shined upon it.


SIMPL. Come hither therefore, and see from hence the surface of the Glass,
and tell me whether you think it more obscure than that of the Wall.


SAGR. Look on it your self, for I have no mind at this time, to dazzle my eyes;
and I know very well, without seeing it, that it there appears as splendid and
bright as the Sun it self, or little less.


SIMPL. What say you therefore, is the reflection of a Glass less powerful
than that of a Wall? I see, that in this opposite Wall, where the reflection of
the other illuminated Wall comes, together with that of the Glass, this of the
Glass is much clearer; and I see likewise, that, from this place where I
stand, the glass it self appears with much more luster than the Wall.


SALV. You have prevented me with your subtlety; for I stood in need of this
very observation to demonstrate what remains. You see then the difference which
happens betwixt the two reflections made by the two superficies of the Wall and
Glass, percu^t in the self-same manner, by the rays of the Sun; and you see,
how the reflection which comes from the Wall, diffuseth it self toward all the
parts opposite to it, but that of the Glass goes toward one part only, not
at all bigger than the Glass it self: you see likewise, how the superficies of
the Wall, beheld from what part soever, always shows it self of one and the
same cleernesse, and every way, much clearer than that of the Glass, excepting
only in that little place, on which the Glasses reflection reverberates, for
from thence indeed the Glass appears much more lucid than the Wall. By these
so sensible, and palpable experiments, my thinks one may soon come to know,
whether the reflection which the Moon sends upon us, proceed as from a Glass,
or else, as from a Wall, that is, from a smooth superficies, or a rugged.


SAGR. If I were in the Moon it self, I think I could not with my hands more
plainly feel the unevenness of its superficies, than I do now perceive it, by
apprehending your discourse. The Moon beheld in any posture, in respect of the
Sun and us, shows us its superficies, touched by the Suns rays, always
equally clear; an effect, which answers to an hair that of the Wall, which
beheld from what place soever, appears equally bright, and differs from the
Glass, which from one place only appears lucid, and from all others
obscure. Moreover, the light which comes to me from the reflection of the
Wall, is tolerable, and weak, in comparison of that of the Glass, which is
little less forcible and offensive to the sight, than that primary and direct
light of the Sun. And thus without trouble do we behold the face of the Moon;
which were it as a Glass, it appearing to us by reason of its vicinity, as big
as the Sun it self, its splendour would be absolutely intolerable, and would
seem as if we beheld another Sun.


SALV. Ascribe not, I beseech you Sagredus, more to my demonstration, than it
produces. I will oppose you with an instance, which I see not well how you can
easily resolve. You insist upon it as a grand difference between the Moon and
Glass, that it emits its reflection toward all parts equally, as does the
Wall; whereas the Glass casts it upon one only determinate place; and from
hence you conclude the Moon to be like to the Wall, and not to the Glass: Flat
Looking-glasses cast forth the reflection toward but one place, but the
spherical every way.
But I must tell you, that that same Glass casts its reflection on one place
only, because its surface is flat, and the reflex rays being to depart at
angles equal to those of the rays of incidence, it must follow that from a
plane or flat superficies, they do depart unitedly toward the same place; but
in regard that the superficies of the Moon is not plain, but spherical, and the
incident rays upon such a superficies, being to reflect themselves at angles
equal to those of the incidence toward all parts, by means of the infinity of
the inclinations which compose the spherical superficies, therefore the Moon
may send forth its reflection every way; and there is no necessity for its
repercussion upon one place only, as that Glass which is flat.


SIMPL. This is one of the very same objections, which I intended to have made
against him.


SAGR. If this be one, you had need have more of them; yet I tell you, that as
to this first, it seems to me to make more against you, than for you.


SIMPL. You have pronounced as a thing manifest, that the reflection made by
that Wall, is as clear and lucid as that which the Moon sends forth, and I
esteem it nothing in comparison thereto. For, in this business of the
illumination, its requisite to respect, and to distinguish the Sphere of
Activity; The sphere of Activity greater in the Celestial bodies than in
Elementary.
and who questions but the Celestial bodies have greater Spheres of activity,
than these our elementary, frail, and mortal ones? and that Wall, finally, what
else is it but a little obscure Earth, unapt to shine?


SAGR. And here also I believe, that you very much deceive your felf. But I
come to the first objection moved by Salviatus; and I consider, that to make a
body appear unto us luminous, it suffices not that the rays of the
illuminating body fall upon it, but it is moreover requisite that the reflex
rays arrive to our eye; as is manifestly seen in the example of that Glass,
upon which, without question, the illuminating rays of the Sun do come; yet
nevertheless, it appears not to us bright and shining, unless we set our eye
in that particular place, where the reflection arriveth. Now let us consider
what would succeed, were the glass of a spherical figure; for without doubt,
we should find, that of the reflection made by the whole surface illuminated,
that to be but a very small part, which arriveth to the eye of a particular
beholder; by reason that that is but an incosiderable particle of the whole
spherical superficies, the inclination of which casts the ray to the particular
place of the eye; whence the part of the spherical superficies, which shows it
self shining to the eye, must needs be very small; all the rest being
represented obscure. So that were the Moon smooth, as a Looking-glass, The
Moon if it were smooth, like a spherical glass, would be invisible.
a very small part would be seen by any particular eye to be illustrated by the
Sun, although its whole Hemisphere were exposed to the Suns rays; and the rest
would appear to the eye of the beholder as not illuminated, and therefore
invisible; and finally, the whole Moon would be likewise invisible, for so much
as that particle, whence the reflection should come, by reason of its smalnesse
and remoteness, would be lost. And as it would be invisible to the eye, so
would it not afford any light; for it is altogether impossible, that a bright
body should take away our darkness by its splendour, and we not to see it.


SALV. Stay good Sagredus, for I see some emotions in the face and eyes of
Simplicius, which are to me as indices that he is not either very apprehensive
of, or satisfied with this which you, with admirable proof, and absolute truth
have spoken. And yet I now call to mind, that I can by another experiment
remove all scruple. I have seen above in a Chamber, a great spherical
Looking-glass; let us send for it hither, and whilst it is in bringing, let
Simplicius return to consider, how great the clarity is which comes to the
Wall here, under the penthouse, from the reflection of the flat glass.


SIMPL. I see it is little less shining, than if the Sun had directly beat
upon it.


SALV. So indeed it is. Now tell me, if taking away that small flat glass, we
should put that great spherical one in the same place, what effect (think you)
would its reflection have upon the same Wall?


SIMPL. I believe that it would eject upon it a far greater and more diffused
light.


SALV. But if the illumination should be nothing, or so small, that you would
scarce discern it, what would you say then?


SIMPL. When I have seen the effect, I will bethink my self of an answer.


SALV. See here is the glass, which I would have to be placed close to the
other. But first let us go yonder toward the reflection of that flat one, and
attentively observe its clarity; see how bright it is here where it shines, and
how distinctly one may discern these small unevennesses in the Wall.


SIMPL. I have seen and very well observed the same, now place the other glass
by the side of the first.


SALV. See where it is. It was placed there as soon as you began to look upon
the Walls small unevennesses, and you perceived it not, so great was the
increase of the light all over the rest of the Wall. Now take away the flat
glass. Behold now all reflection removed, though the great unequal glass still
remains. Remove this also, and place it there again if you please, and you
shall see no alteration of light in all the Wall. See here then demonstrated to
sense, that the reflection of the Sun, made upon a spherical unequal glass,
does not sensibly illuminate the places near unto it. Now what say you to this
experiment?


SIMPL. I am afraid that there may be some Leigerdemain, used in this affair;
yet in beholding that glass I see it dart forth a great splendour, which
dazleth my eyes; and that which imports most of all, I see it from what place
soever I look upon it; and I see it go changing situation upon the superficies
of the glass, which way soever I place my self to look upon it; a necessary
argument, that the light is livelily reflected toward every side, and
consequently, as strongly upon all that Wall, as upon my eye.


SALV. Now you see how cautiously and reservedly you ought to proceed in
lending your assent to that, which discourse alone represents to you. There
is no doubt but that this which you say, carries with it probability enough,
yet you may see, how sensible experience proves the contrary.


SIMPL. How then does this come to pass?


SALV. I will deliver you my thoughts thereof, but I cannot tell how you may be
pleased therewith. And first, that lively splendour which you see upon the
glass, and which you think occupies a good part thereof, is nothing near so
great, nay is very exceeding small; but its liveliness occasioneth in your eye,
(by means of the reflection made on the humidity of the extreme parts of the
eyebrows, which distendeth upon the pupil) an adventitious irradiation, like
to that blaze which we think we see about the flame of a candle placed at some
distance; or if you will, you may resemble it to the adventitious splendour of a
star; The small body of the stars fringed round about with rays, appears very
much bigger than plain and naked, and in its native clarity
for if you should compare the small body v. g. of the Canicula, seen in the
day time with the Telescope, when it is seen without such irradiation, with the
same seen by night by the eye it self, you will doubtless comprehend that being
irradiated, it appears above a thousand times bigger than the naked and real
body: and a like or greater augmentation does the image of the Sun make, which
you see in that glass. I say greater, for that it is more lively than the star,
as is manifest from our being able to behold the star with much less offense,
than this reflection of the glass. The reverberation therefore which is to
dispere it self all over this wall, comes from a small part of that glass, and
that which even now came from the whole flat glass dispersed and restrained it
self to a very small part of the said wall. What wonder is it then, that the
first reflection very lively illuminates, and that this other is almost
imperceptible?


SIMPL. I find my self more perplexed than ever, and there presents it self
unto me the other difficulty, how it can be that that wall, being of a matter
so obscure, and of a superficies so unpolished, should be able to dart from it
greater light, than a glass very smooth and polite.


SALV. Greater light it is not, but more universal; for as to the degree of
brightness, you see that the reflection of that small flat glass, where it
beamed forth yonder under the shadow of the penthouse, illuminateth very much;
and the rest of the wall which receives the reflection of the wall on which
the glass is placed, is not in any great measure illuminated, as was the small
part on which the reflection of the glass fell. And if you would understand the
whole of this business, you must consider that the superficies of that wall's
being rough, The reflex light of uneven bodies, is more universal than that of
the smooth, and why.
is the same as if it were composed of innumerable small superficies, disposed
according to innumerable diversities of inclinations: amongst which it
necessarily happens, that there are many disposed to send forth their reflex
rays from them into such a place, many others into another: and in sum, there
is not any place to which there comes not very many rays, reflected from very
many small superficies, dispersed throughout the whole superficies of the
rugged body, upon which the rays of the Sun fall. From which it necessarily
follows, That upon any, whatsoever, part of any superficies, opposed to that
which receives the primary incident rays, there is produced reflex rays, and
consequently illumination. There does also follow thereupon, That the same body
upon which the illuminating rays fall, beheld from whatsoever place, appears
all illuminated and shining: and therefore the Moon, as being of a superficies
rugged and not smooth, The Moon, if it were smooth and sle^k, would be
invisible.
beameth forth the light of the Sun on every side, and to all beholders
appears equally lucid. But if the surface of it, being spherical, were also
smooth as a glass, it would become wholly invisible; forasmuch as that small
part, from which the image of the Sun should be reflected unto the eye of a
particular person, by reason of its great distance would be invisible, as I
have said before.


SIMPL. I am very apprehensive of your discourse; yet methinks I am able to
resolve the same with very little trouble; and easily to maintain, that the
Moon is rotund and polite, and that it reflects the Suns light unto us in
manner of a glass; nor therefore ought the image of the Sun to be seen in the
middle of it, forasmuch as the species of the Sun it self admits not its small
figure to be seen at so great a distance, but the light produced by the Sun may
help us to conceive that it illuminateth the whole Lunar Body: a like effect we
may see in a plate gilded and well pollish'd, which touched by a luminous body,
appears to him that beholds it at some distance to be all shining; and only
near at hand one may discover in the middle of it the small image of the
luminous body.


SALV. Ingenuously confessing my dullness of apprehension, I must tell you,
that I understand not any thing of this your discourse, save only what
concerns the gilt plate: and if you permit me to speak freely, I have a great
conceit that you also understand not the same, but have learnt by heart those
words written by some one out of a desire of contradiction, and to show himself
more intelligent than his adversary; but it must be to those, which to appear
also more wise, applaud that which they do not understand, and entertain a
greater conceit of persons, the less they are by them understood: and the
writer himself may be one of those (of which there are many) who write what
they do not understand, Some write what they understand not, and therefore
understand not what they write.
and consequently understand not what they write. Therefore, omitting the rest,
I reply, as to the gilt plate, that if it be flat and not very big, it may
appear at a distance very bright, whilst a great light beameth upon it, but yet
it must be when the eye is in a determinate line, namely in that of the reflex
rays: and it will appear the more shining, if it were v. g. of silver, by means
of its being burnished, and apt through the great density of the metal, to
receive a perfect polish. And though its superficies, being very well
brightned, were not exactly plain, but should have various inclinations, yet
then also would its splendour be seen many ways; namely, from as many places as
the various reflections, made by the several superficies, Diamonds ground to
diverse sides, and why.
do reach: for therefore are Diamonds ground to many sides, that so their
pleasing luster might be beheld from many places. But if the Plate were very
big, though it should be all plain, yet would it not at a distance appear all
over shining: and the better to express my self, Let us suppose a very large
gilt plate exposed to the Sun, it will show to an eye far distant, the image of
the Sun, to occupy no more but a certain part of the said plate; to wit, that
from whence the reflection of the incident solar rays come: but it is true that
by the vivacity of the light, the said image will appear fringed about with
many rays, and so will seem to occupy a far greater part of the plate, than
really it does. And to show that this is true, when you have noted the
particular place of the plate from whence the reflection comes, and conceived
likewise how great the shining place appeared to you, cover the greater part of
that same space, leaving it only visible about the midst; and all this shall
not any whit diminish the apparent splendour to one that beholds it from afar;
but you shall see it largely dispersed upon the cloth or other matter,
wherewith you covered it. If therefore any one, by seeing from a good distance
a small gilt plate to be all over shining, should imagine that the same would
also even in a plate as broad as the Moon, he is no less deceived, than if he
should believe the Moon to be no bigger than the bottom of a tub. If again the
plate were turned into a spherical superficies, the reflection would be seen
strong in but one sole particle of it; but yet by reason of its liveliness, it
will appear fringed about with many glittering rays: the rest of the Ball would
appear according as it was burnished; Silver (...) wished appears ma^e obscu^e,
(...) the not burnished, and why.
and this also only then when it was not very much polished, for should it be
perfectly brightned, it would appear obscure. An example of this we have daily
before our eyes in silver vessels, which whilst they are only boiled in the
Argol and Salt, they are all as white as snow, and do not reflect any image;
but if they be in any part burnished, they become in that place presently
obscure: and in them one may see the representation of any thing as in
Looking-glasses. And that chanto obscurity, proceeds from nothing else but the
smoothing and plaining of a fine grain, which made the superficies of the
silver rough, and yet such, as that it reflected the light into all parts,
whereby it seemed from all parts equally illuminated: which small unevennesses,
when they come to be exquisitely plained by the burnish, so that the reflection
of the rays of incidence are all directed unto one determinate place; then,
from that same place, the burnished part shall show much more bright and
shining than the rest which is only whitened by boiling; but from all other
places it looks very obscure. And note, that the diversity of sights of looking
upon burnished superficies, Burnished Steel (...) from one (...) very (...)
from (...), very obscure.
occasioneth such difference in appearances, that to imitate and represent in
picture, v. g. a polished Cuirace, one must couple black plains with white, one
sideways to the other, in those parts of the arms where the light falls
equally.


SAGR. If therefore these great Philosophers would acquiese in granting, that
the Moon, Venus and the other Planets, were not of so bright and smooth a
surface as a Looking-glass, but wanted some small matter of it, namely, were as
a silver plate, only boiled white, but not burnished; would this yet suffice
to the making of it visible, and apt for darting forth the light of the Sun?


SALV. It would suffice in part; but would not give a light so strong, as it
does being mountainous, and in sum, full of eminencies and great cavities. But
these Philosophers will never yield it to be less polite than a glass; but
far more, if more it can be imagined; for they esteeming that to perfect bodies
perfect figures are most suitable; it is necessary, that the sphericity of those
Celestial Globes be most exact; besides, that if they should grant me some
inequality, though never so small, I would not scruple to take any other
greater; for that such perfection consisting in indivisibles, an hair does as
much detract from its perfection as a mountain.


SAGR. Here I meet with two difficulties, one is to know the reason why the
greater inequality of superficies makes the stronger reflection of light; the
other is, why these Peripatetick Gentlemen are for this exact figure.


SALV. I will answer to the first; The more rough superficies make greater
reflection of light, than the less rough.
and leave to Simplicius the care of making reply to the second. You must know
therefore, that the same superficies happen to be by the same light more or
less illuminated, according as the rays of illumination fall upon them more or
less obliquely; Perpendicular rays illuminate more than the oblique, and why.
so that the greatest illumination is where the rays are perpendicular. And
see, how I will prove it to your sense. I bend this paper, so, that one part of
it makes an angle upon the other: and exposing both these parts to the
reflection of the light of that opposite Wall, you see how this side which
receives the rays obliquely, is less shining than this other, where the
reflection falls at right angles; and observe, that as I by degrees receive the
illumination more obliquely, it grows weaker.


SAGR. I see the effect, but comprehend not the cause.


SALV. If you thought upon it but a minute of an hour, you would find it; but
that I may not waste the time, see a kind of demonstration thereof in Fig. 7.


SAGR. The bare sight of this Figure has fully satisfied me, therefore proceed.


SIMPL. Pray you let me hear you out, for I am not of so quick an apprehension.


SALV. Fancy to your self, that all the parallel lines, which you see to depart
from the terms A. B. are the rays which fall upon the line C. D. at right
angles: The more oblique Rays illuminate less, and why.
then incline the said C. D. till it hang as D. O. now do not you see that a
great part of those rays which pierce C. D. pass by without touching D. O? If
therefore D. O. be illuminated by fewer rays, it is very reasonable, that the
light received by it be more weak. Let us return now to the Moon, which being
of a spherical figure, if its superficies were smooth, as this paper, the parts
of its hemisphere illuminated by the Sun, which are toward its extremity,
would receive much less light, than the middle parts; the rays falling upon
them most obliquely, and upon these at right angles; whereupon at the time of
full Moon, when we see almost its whole Hemisphere illuminated, the parts
toward the midst, would show themselves to us with more splendour, than those
others toward the circumference: which is not so in effect. Now the face of
the Moon being represented to me full of indifferent high mountains, do not you
see how their tops and continuate ridges, being elevated above the convexity of
the perfect spherical superficies, come to be exposed to the view of the Sun,
and accommodated to receive its rays much less obliquely, and consequently to
appear as luminous as the rest?


SAGR. All this I well perceive: and if there are such mountains, its true, the
Sun will dart upon them much more directly than it would do upon the
inclination of a polite superficies: but it is also true, that betwixt those
mountains all the valleys would become obscure, by reason of the vast shadows,
which in that time would be cast from the mountains, whereas the parts toward
the middle, though full of valleys and hills, by reason they have the Sun
elevated, would appear without shadow, and therefore more lucid by far than the
extreme parts, which are no less diffused with shadow than light, and yet we
can perceive no such difference.


SIMPL. I was ruminating upon the like difficulty.


SALV. How much readier is Simplicius to apprehend the objections which favor
the opinions of Aristotle, than their solutions? I have a kind of suspicion,
that he strives also sometimes to dissemble them; and in the present case, he
being of himself able to hit upon the doubt, which yet is very ingenious, I
cannot believe but that he also was advised of the answer; wherefore I will
attempt to wrest the same (as they say) out of his mouth. Therefore tell me,
Simplicius, do you think there can be any shadow, where the rays of the Sun do
shine?


SIMPL. I believe, nay I am certain that there cannot; for that it being the
grand luminary, which with its rays drives away darkness, it is impossible any
tenebrosity should remain where it comes; moreover, we have the definition,
that Tenebrae sunt privatio luminis.


SALV. Therefore the Sun, beholding the Earth, Moon or other opacous body,
never sees any of its shady parts, it not having any other eyes to see with,
save its rays, the conveyers of light: and consequently, one standing in the
Sun would never see any thing of umbrage, forasmuch as his visive rays would
ever go accompanied with those illuminating beams of the Sun.


SIMPL. This is true, without any contradiction.


SALV. But when the Moon is opposite to the Sun, what difference is there
between the tract of the rays of your sight, and that motion which the Suns
rays make?


SIMPL. Now I understand you; for you would say, that the rays of the sight
and those of the Sun, moving by the same lines, we cannot perceive any of the
obscure valleys of the Moon. Be pleased to change this your opinion, that I
have either simulation or dissimulation in me; for I protest unto you, as I am
a Gentleman, that I did not guess at this solution, nor should I have thought
upon it, without your help, or without long study.


SAGR. The resolutions, which between you two have been alleged touching this
last doubt, has, to speak the truth, satisfied me also. But at the same time
this consideration of the visible rays accompanying the rays of the Sun, has
begotten in me another scruple, about the other part, but I know not whether I
can express it right, or no: for it but just now coming into my mind, I have
not yet methodized it to my mind: but let us see if we can, all together, make
it intelligible. There is no question, but that the parts toward the
circumference of that polish't, but not burnish't Hemisphere, which is
illuminated by the Sun, receiving the rays obliquely, receive much fewer
thereof, than the middlemost parts, which receive them directly. And its
possible, that a tract or space of v. g. twenty degrees in breadth, and which
is toward the extremity of the Hemisphere, may not receive more rays than
another toward the middle parts, of but four degree broad: so that that
doubtless will be much more obscure than this; and such it will appear to
whoever shall behold them both in the face, or (as I may say) in their full
magnitude. But if the eye of the beholder were constituted in such a place,
that the breadth of the twenty degrees of the obscure space, appeared not to it
longer than one of four degrees, placed in the midst of the Hemisphere, I hold
it not impossible for it to appear to the said beholder equally clear and lucid
with the other; because, finally, between two equal angles, to wit, of four
degrees apiece, there come to the eye the reflections of two equal numbers of
rays: namely, those which are reflected from the middlemost space, four
degrees in breadth, and those reflected from the other of twenty degrees, but
seen by compression, under the quantity of four degrees: and such a situation
shall the eye obtain, when it is placed between the said Hemisphere, and the
body which illuminates it; for then the sight and rays move in the same lines.
It seems not impossible therefore, but that the Moon may be of a very equal
superficies; and that nevertheless, it may appear when it is at the full, no
less light in the extremities, than in the middle parts.


SALV. The doubt is ingenious and worthy of consideration; and as it but just
now came into your mind unawares, so I will like wise answer with what first
comes into my thoughts, and it may happily fall out, that by thinking more upon
it, I may stumble upon a better reply. But before, that I labyrinth my self any
farther, it would be necessary, that we assure our selves by some experiment,
whether your objection prove in effect, what it seems to conclude in
appearance; and therefore taking once more the same paper, and making it to
incline, by bending a little part thereof upon the remainder, let us try
whether exposing it to the Sun, so that the rays of light fall upon the lesser
part directly, and upon the other obliquely; this which receives the rays
directly appears more lucid; and see here by manifest experience, that it is
notably more clear. Now if your objection be conclusive, it will follow, that
stooping with our eye so, that in beholding the other greater part, less
illuminated, in compression or fore-shortning, it appear unto us no bigger than
the other, more shining; and that consequently, it be not beheld at a greater
angle than that; it will necessarily ensue, I say, that its light be increased,
so that it do seem to us as bright as the other. See how I behold, and look
upon it so obliquely, that it appears to me narrower than the other; but yet,
notwithstanding its obscurity, does not to my perceiving, at all grow clearer.
Try now if the same succeed to you.


SAGR. I have looked upon it, and though I have stooped with my eye, yet cannot
I see the said superficies increase in light or clarity; nay me thinks it
rather grows more dusky.


SALV. We are hitherto confident of the invalidity of the objection; In the
next place, as to the solution, I believe, that, by reason the Superficies of
this paper is little less than smooth, the rays are very few, which be
reflected toward the point of incidence, in comparison of the multitude, which
are reflected toward the opposite parts; and that of those few more and more
are lost, the nearer the visive rays approach to those lucid rays of
incidence; and because it is not the incident rays, but those which are
reflected to the eye, that make the object appear luminous; therefore, in
stooping the eye, there is more lost than got, as you your self confess to
have seen in looking upon the obscurer part of the paper.


SAGR. I rest satisfied with this experiment and reason: It remains now, that
Simplicius answer to my other question, and tell me what moves the
Peripateticks to require this so exact rotundity in the Celestial bodies.


SIMPL. The Celestial bodies being ingenerable, inalterable, impassible,
immortal, Perfect (...) why ascribed is Celestial bodies, by the Peripateticks.
etc. they must needs be absolutely perfect; and their being absolute perfect,
necessarily implies that there is in them all kinds of perfection; and
consequently, that their figure be also perfect, that is to say, spherical; and
absolutely and perfectly spherical, and not rough and irregular.


SALV. And this incorruptibility, from whence do you prove it?


SIMPL. Immediately by its freedom from contraries, and mediately, by its
simple circular motion.


SALV. So that; The Figure is not the cause of incorruptibili^r, but of longer
duration.
by what I gather from your discourse, in making the essence of the Celestial
bodies to be incorruptible, inalterable, etc, there is no need of rotundity as
a cause, or requisite; for if this should cause inalterability, we might at our
pleasure make wood, wax, and other Elementary matters, incorruptible, by
reducing them to a spherical figure.


SIMPL. And is it not manifest that a ball of Wood will better and longer be
preserved, than an oblong, or other angular figure, made of a like quantity of
the same wood.


SALV. This is most certain, but yet it does not of corruptible become
incorruptible, but still remains corruptible, though of a much longer duration.
Corruptibility admits of more or less; so does not incorruptibili^y.
Therefore you must note, that a thing corruptible, is capable of being more or
less such, and we may properly say this is less corruptible than that; as for
example, the Jasper, than the Pietra Sirena; but incorruptibility admits not of
more, or less, so as that it may be said this is more incorruptible than that,
The perfection of figure, operateth in corruptible bodies, but not in the
eternal.
if both be incorruptible and eternal. The diversity of figure therefore cannot
operate: save only in matters capable of more or less duration; but in the
eternal, which cannot be other than equally eternal, the operation of figure
cease. And therefore, since the Celestial matter is not incorruptible by
figure, but otherwise no man needs to be so solicitous for this perfect
sphericity; for if the matter be incorruptible, let it have what figure it
will, it shall be always such.


SAGR. But I am considering another thing, If the spherical figure conferreth
eternity, all bodies would be eternal.
and say, that if we should grant the spherical figure a faculty of conferring
incorruptibility, all bodies of whatsoever figure, would be incorruptible;
forasmuch as if the rotund body be incorruptible, corruptibility would then
subsist in those parts which alter the perfect rotundity; as for instance,
there is in a Die a body perfectly round, and, as such, incorruptible;
therefore it remains that those angles be corruptible which cover and hide
the rotundity; so that the most that could happen, would be, that those angles,
and (to so speak) excrescencies, would corrupt. But if we proceed to a more
inward consideration, that in those parts also toward the angles, there are
comprised other lesser bals of the same matter; and therefore they also, as
being round, must be also incorruptible; and likewise in the remainders, which
environ these eight lesser Spheres, a man may understand that there are others:
so that in the end, resolving the whole Die into innumerable balls, it must
necessarily be granted incorruptible. And the same discourse and resolution may
be made in all other figures.


SALV. Your method in making the conclusion, for if v. g. a round Crystal
were, by reason of its figure, incorruptible; namely, received from thence a
faculy of resisting all internal and external alterations, we should not find,
that the joining to it other Crystal, and reducing it v. g. into a Cube, would
any whit alter it within, or without; so as that it would thereupon become
less apt to resist the new ambient, made of the same matter, than it was to
resist the other, of a matter different; and especially, if it be true, that
corruption is generated by contraries, as Aristotle says; and with what can
you enclose that ball of Crystal, that is less contrary to it, than Crystal it
self? But we are not aware how time flies away; and it will be too late before
we come to an end of our dispute, if we should make so long discourses, upon
every particular; besides our memories are so confounded in the multiplicity of
notions, that I can very hardly recall to mind the Propotsiions, which I
proposed in order to Simplicius, for our consideration.


SIMPL. I very well remember them: And as to this particular question of the
montuosity of the Moon, there yet remains unanswered that which I have
alleged, as the cause, (and which may very well serve for a solution) of that
Phenomenon, saying, that it is an illusion proceeding from the parts of the
Moon, being unequally opacous, and perspicuous.


SAGR. Even now, when Simplicius ascribed the apparent Protnberancies or
unevennesses of the Moon (according to the opinion of a certain Peripatetick
his friend) to the diversely opacous, and perspicuous parts of the said Moon,
Mother of Pearl accommodated to imitate the apparent unevennesses of the Moons
surface.
conformable to which the like illusions are seen in Crystal, and Jems of
diverse kinds, I bethought my self of a matter much more commodious for the
representing such effects; which is such, that I verily believe, that that
Philosopher would give any price for it; and it is the mother of Pearl, which
is wrought into diverse figures, and though it be brought to an extreme
evennesse, yet it seems to the eye in several parts, so variously hollow and
knotty, that we can scarce credit our feeling of their evennesse.


SALV. This invention is truly ingenious; and that which has not been done
already, may be done in time to come; and if there have been produced other
Jems, and Crystals, which have nothing to do with the illusions of the mother
of Pearl, these may be produced also; in the mean time, that I may not prevent
any one, I will suppress the answer which might be given, and only for this
time betake my self to satisfy the objections brought by Simplicius. I say
therefore, that this reason of yours is too general, and as you apply it not to
all the appearances one by one; which are seen in the Moon, and for which my
self and others are induced to hold it mountainous, I believe you will not find
any one that will be satisfied with such a doctrine; nor can I think, that
either you, or the Author himself, find in it any greater quietude, The
apparent unevennesses of the Moon cannot be imitated by way of more and less
opacity and perspicuity.
than in any other thing wide from the purpose. Of the very many several
appearances which are seen night by night in the course of Moon, you cannot
imitate so much as one, by making a Ball at your choice, more or less opacous
and perspicuous, and that is of a polite superficies; The various aspects of
the Moon, imitable with any opacous matter.
whereas on the contrary, one may make Balls of any solid matter whatsoever,
that is not transparent, which only with eminencies and cavities, and by
receiving the illumination several ways, shall represent the same appearances
and mutations to an hair, Various appearances from which the Moons montuosity
is argued.
which from hour to hour are discovered in the Moon. In them you shall see the
ledges of Hills exposed to the Suns light, to be very shining, and after them
the projections of their shadows very obscure; you shall see them greater and
less, according as the said eminencies shall be more or less distant from the
confines which distinguish the parts of the Moon illuminated, from the obscure:
you shall see the same term and confine, not equally distended, as it would be
if the Ball were polished, but craggie and rugged. You shall see beyond the
same term, in the dark parts of the Moon many bright prominencies, and distinct
from the rest of the illuminations: you shall see the shadows aforesaid,
according as the illumination gradually rises, to deminish by degrees, till
they wholly disappear; nor are there any of them to be seen when the whole
Hemisphere is enlightened. Again on the contrary, in the lights passage toward
the other Hemisphere of the Moon, you shall again observe the same eminencies
that were marked, and you shall see the projections of their shadows to be made
a contrary way, and to decrease by degrees: of which things, once more I say,
you cannot show me so much as one in yours that are opacous and perspicuous.


SAGR. One of them certainly he may imitate, namely, that of the Full-Moon,
when by reason of its being all illuminated, there is not to be seen either
shadow, or other thing, which receives any alteration from its eminencies and
cavities. But I beseech you, Salviatus, let us spend no more time on this
Argument, for a person that has had but the patience to make observation of
but one or two Lunations, and is not satisfied with this most sensible truth,
may well be adjudged void of all judgment; and upon such why should we throw
away our time and breath in vain?


SIMPL. I must confess I have not made the observations, for that I never had
so much curiosity, or the Instruments proper for the business; but I will not
fail to do it. In the mean time, we may leave this question in suspense, and
pass to that point which follows, producing the motives inducing you to think
that the Earth may reflect the light of the Sun no less forceably than the
Moon, for it seems to me so obscure and opacous, that I judge such an effect
altogether impossible.


SALV. The cause for which you repute the Earth unapt for illumination, may
rather evince the contrary: And would it not be strange, Simplicius, if I
should apprehend your discourses better than you your self?


SIMPL. Whether I argue well or ill, it may be, that you may better understand
the same than I; but be it ill or well that I discourse, I shall never believe
that you can penetrate what I mean better than I my self.


SALV. Well, I will make you believe the same presently. Tell me a little, when
the Moon is near the Full, so that it may be seen by day, and also at midnight,
at what do you think it more splendid, by day or by night?


SIMPL. By night, The Moon appears brighter by night than by day.
without all comparison. And methinks the Moon resembles that pillar of Clouds
and pillar of Fire, which guided the Israelites; which at the presence of the
Sun, appeared like a Cloud, but in the night was very glorious. Thus I have by
day observed the Moon amidst certain small Clouds, The Moon beheld in the day
time, is like to a little cloud.
just as if one of them had been colored white, but by night it shines with
much splendour.


SALV. So that if you had never happened to see the Moon, save only in the day
time, you would not have thought it more shining than one of those Clouds.


SIMPL. I verily believe I should not.


SALV. Tell me now; do you believe that the Moon is really more shining in the
night than day, or that by some accident it seems so?


SIMPL. I am of opinion, that it resplends in it self as much in the day as
night, but that its light appears greater by night, because we behold it in the
dark mantle of Heaven; and in the day time, the whole Atmosphere being very
clear, so that she little exceeds it in luster, she seems to us much less
bright.


SALV. Now tell me; have you ever at midnight seen the Terrestrial Globe
illuminated by the Sun?


SIMPL. This seems to me a question not to be asked, unless in jest, or of
some person known to be altogether void of sense.


SALV. No, no; I esteem you to be a very rational man, and do ask the question
seriously; and therefore answer me: and if afterward you shall think that I
speak impertinently, I will be content to be the senseless man: for he is much
more a fool who interrogates simply, than he to whom the question is put.


SIMPL. If then you do not think me altogether simple, take it for granted that
I have answered you already, and said, that it is impossible, that one that is
upon the Earth, as we are, should see by night that part of the Earth where it
is day, namely, that is illuminated by the Sun.


SALV. Therefore you have never seen the Earth enlightened, save only by day;
but you see the Moon to shine also in the dead of night. And this is the cause,
Simplicius, which makes you believe that the Earth does not shine like the
Moon; but if you could see the Earth illuminated, whilst you were in some dark
place, like our night, you would see it shine brighter than the Moon. Now if
you desire that the comparison may proceed well, you must compare the light of
the Earth, with that of the Moon seen in the day time, and not with the same by
night: for it is not in our power to see the Earth illuminated, save only in
the day. Is it not so?


SIMPL. So it ought to be.


SALV. And forasmuch as you your self have already confessed to have seen the
Moon by day among some little white Clouds, and very nearly, as to its aspect,
resembling one of them; you did thereby grant, Clouds are no less apt than the
Moon to be illuminated by the Sun.
that those Clouds, which yet are Elementary matters, are as apt to receive
illumination, as the Moon, yea more, if you will but call to mind that you have
sometimes seen some Clouds of vast greatness, and as perfect white as the Snow;
and there is no question, but that if such a Cloud could be continued so
luminous in the deep of night, it would illuminate the places near about it,
more than an hundred Moons. If therefore we were assured that the Earth is
illuminated by the Sun, like one of those Clouds, it would be undubitable, but
that it would be no less shining than the Moon. But of this there is no
question to be made, in regard we see those very Clouds in the absence of the
Sun, to remain by night, as obscure as the Earth: and that which is more, there
is not any one of us, but has seen many times some such Clouds low, and far
off, and questioned whether they were Clouds or Mountains: an evident sign that
the Mountains are no less luminous than those Clouds. A wall illuminated by the
Sun, compared to the Moon shines no less than it.



SAGR. But what needs more discourse? See yonder the Moon is risen, and more
than half of it illuminated; see there that wall, on which the Sun shines;
retire a little this way, so that you see the Moon sideways with the wall: look
now; which of them shows more lucid? Do not you see, that if there is any
advantage, the wall has it? The Sun shines on that wall; from thence it is
reverberated upon the wall of the Hall, The third reflection of a Wall
illuminates more than the first of the Moon.
from thence it is reflected upon that chamber, so that it falls on it at the
third reflection: and I am very certain, that there is in that place more
light, than if the Moons light had directly fallen upon it.


SIMPL. But this I cannot believe; for the illumination of the Moon, especially
when it is at the full, is very great.


SAGR. It seems great by reason of the circumjacent dark places; The light of
the Moon weaker than that of the twilight.
but absolutely it is not much, and is less than that of the twilight half an
hour after the Sun is set; which is manifest, because you see not the shadows
of the bodies illuminated by the Moon till then, to begin to be distinguished
on the Earth. Whether, again, that third reflection upon that chamber,
illuminates more than the first of the Moon, may be known by going thither, and
reading a Book, and afterward standing there in the night by the Moons light,
which will show by which of them lights one may read more or less plainly, but
I believe without further trial, that one should see less distinctly by this
later.


SALV. Now, Simplicius, (if happily you be satisfied) you may conceive, as you
your self know very well, that the Earth does shine no less than the Moon; and
the only remembering you of some things, which you knew of your self, and
learned not of me, has assured you thereof: for I taught you not that the Moon
shows lighter by night than by day, but you understood it of your self; as also
you could tell me that a little Cloud appears as lucid as the Moon: you knew
also, that the illumination of the Earth cannot be seen by night; and in a
word, you knew all this, without knowing that you knew it. So that you have no
reason to be scrupulous of granting, that the dark part of the Earth may
illuminate the dark part of the Moon, with no less a light than that wherewith
the Moon illuminates the obscurities of the night, yea rather so much the
greater, inasmuch as the Earth is forty times bigger than the Moon.


SIMPL. I must confess that I did believe, that that secondary light had been
the natural light of the Moon.


SALV. And this also you know of your self, and perceive not that you know it.
Tell me, do not you know without teaching, that the Moon shows it self more
bright by night than by day, Lum nous bodies appear the brighter in an obscurer
ambient.
in respect of the obscurity of the space of the ambient? and confequently, do
you not know in genere, that every bright body shows the clearer, by how much
the ambient is obscurer?


SIMPL. This I know very well.


SALV. When the Moon is horned, and that secondary light seems to you very
bright, is it not ever nigh the Sun, and consequently, in the light of the
crepusculum, (twilight?)


SIMPL. It is so; and I have oftentimes wished that the Air would grow thicker,
that I might be able to see that same light more plainly; but it ever
disappeared before dark night.


SALV. You know then very certainly, that in the depth of night, that light
would be more conspicuous.


SIMPL. I do so; and also more than that, if one could but take away the great
light of the crescent illuminated by the Sun, the presence of which much
obscureth the other lesser.


SALV. Why, does it not sometimes come to pass, that one may in a very dark
night see the whole face of the Moon, without being at all illuminated by the
Sun?


SIMPL. I know not whether this ever happens, save only in the total
Ecclipses of the Moon.


SALV. Why, at that time this its light would appear very clear, being in a
most obscure medium, and not darkened by the clarity of the luminous crescents:
but in that position, how light did it appear to you?


SIMPL. I have sometimes seen it of the color of brass, and a little whitish;
but at other times it has been so obscure, that I have wholly lost the sight
of it.


SALV. How then can that light be so natural, which you see so clear in the
close of the twilight, notwithstanding the impediment of the great and
contiguous splendour of the crescents; and which again, in the more obscure time
of night, all other light removed, appears not at all?


SIMPL. I have heard of some that believed that same light to be participated
to these crescents from the other Stars, and in particular from Venus, the
Moons neighbor.


SALV. And this likewise is a vanity; because in the time of its total
obscuration, it ought to appear more shining than ever; for you cannot say,
that the shadow of the Earth intercepts the sight of Venus, or the other Stars.
But to say true, it is not at that instant wholly deprived thereof, for that
the Terrestrial Hemisphere, which in that time looks toward the Moon, is
that where it is night, that is, an entire privation of the light of the Sun.
And if you but diligently observe, you will very sensibly perceive, that like
as the Moon, when it is sharp-horned, does give very little light to the Earth;
and according as in her the parts illuminated by the Suns light do increase: so
likewise the splendour to our seeming increases, which from her is reflected
toward us; thus the Moon, whilst it is sharp-forked, and that by being between
the Sun and the Earth, it discovers a very great part of the Terrestrial
Hemisphere illuminated, appears very clear: and departing from the Sun, and
passing toward the By the Moons two Quadratures you are to understand its
first and last quarters, as Astrologers call them*
Quadrature, you may see the said light by degrees to grow dim; and after the
Quadrature, the same appears very weak, because it continually loses more and
more of the view of the luminous part of the Earth: and yet it should succeed
quite contrary, if that light were its own, or communicated to it from the
Stars; for then we should see it in the depth of night, and in so very dark an
ambient.


SIMPL. Stay a little; for I just now remember, that I have read in a little
modern tract, full of many novelties; That this secondary light is not derived
from the Stars, nor innate in the Moon, and least of all communicated by the
Earth, but that it is received from the same illumination of the Sun, The
secondary light of the Moon caused by the Sun, according to some.
which, the substance of the Lunar Globe being somewhat transparent,
penetrateth through all its body; but more livelily illuminateth the superficies
of the Hemisphere exposed to the rays of the Sun* and its profundity imbuing,
and (as I may say) swallowing that light, after the manner of a cloud or
crystal, transmits it, and renders it visibly lucid. And this (if I remember
aright) he proves by Authority, Experience and Reason; citing Cleomedes,
Vitellion, Macrobius, and a certain other modern Author: and adding, That it is
seen by experience to shine most in the days nearest the Conjunction, that is,
when it is horned, and is chiefly bright about its limb. And he farther writes,
That in the Solar Ecclipses, when it is under the Discus of the Sun, it may be
seen translucid, and more especially toward its utmost Circle. And in the next
place, for Arguments, as I think, he says, That it not being able to derive
that light either from the Earth, or from the Stars, or from it self, it
necessarily follows, that it comes from the Sun. Besides that, if you do but
grant this supposition, one may easily give convenient reasons for all the
particulars that occur. For the reason why that secundary light shows more
lively toward the outmost limb, is, the shortness of the space that the Suns
rays has to penetrate, in regard that of the lines which pass through a
circle, the greatest is that which passes through the center, and of the rest,
those which are farthest from it, are always less than those that are nearer.
From the same principle, he says, may be shown why the said light does not
much diminish. And lastly, by this way the cause is assigned whence it comes,
that that same more shining circle about the utmost edge of the Moon, is seen
at the time of the Solar Eclipse, in that part which lies just under the
Discus of the Sun, but not in that which is beside the Discus: which happens
because the rays of the Sun pass directly to our eye, through the parts of the
Moon underneath: but as for the parts which are besides it, they fall besides
the eye.


SALV. If this Philosopher had been the first Author of this opinion, I would
not wonder that he should be so affectionate to it, as to have received it for
truth; but borrowing it from others, I cannot find any reason sufficient to
excuse him for not perceiving it^ fallacies; and especially after he had heard
the true cause of that effect, and had it in his power to satisfy himself by a
thousand experiments, and manifest circumstances, that the same proceeded from
the reflection of the Earth, and from nothing else: and the more this
speculation makes something to be desired, in the judgment of this Author, and
of all those who give no credit to it: so much the more does their not having
understood and remembered it, excuse those more recess Ancients, who, I am very
certain, did they now understand it, would without the least repugnance admit
thereof. And if I may freely tell you what I think, I cannot believe but that
this Modern does in his heart believe it; but I rather think, that the conceit
he should not be the first Author thereof, did a little move him to endeavor
to suppress it, or to disparage it at least amongst the simple, whose number
we know to be very great; and many there are, who much more affect the numerous
applauds of the people, than the approbation of a few not vulgar judgments.


SAGR. Hold good Salviatus, for me thinks, I see that you go not the way to hit
the true mark in this your discourse, for these that Tendono le parete al
commune.
confound all propriety, know also how to make themselves Authors of others
Inventions, provided they be not so stale, and public in the Schools and
Marketplaces, as that they are more then notorious to every one.


SALV. Ha! well aimed, you blame me for roving from the point in hand; but what
have you to do with Schools and Markets? Its all one whether opinions be new to
men, or men new to opinions.
Is it not all one whether opinions and inventions be new to men, or the men
new to them? If you Contestare falsely rendered in the Latin Translation
contentare.
contend about the esteem of the Founders of Sciences, which in all times do
start up, you may make your self their inventor, even to the Alphabet it self,
and so gain admiration amongst that illiterate rabble; and though in process
of time your craft should be perceived, that would but little prejudice your
design; for that others would succeed them in maintaining the number of your
fautors; but let us return to prove to Simplicius the invalidity of the reasons
of his modern Author, in which there are several falsities, inconsequencies,
The secondary light of the Mo^n appears in form of a Ring, that is to say,
bright in the extreme circumference, and not ^n the midst, and why*
and incredible Paradoxes. And first, it is false that this secondary light is
clearer about the utmost limb than in the middle parts, so as to form, as it
were, a ring or circle more bright than the rest of its space or contence. True
it is, indeed, that looking on the Moon at the time of twilight, at first sight
there is the resemblance of such a circle, but by an illusion arising from the
diversity of confines that bound the Moons Discus, which are confused by means
of this secondary light; forasmuch as on the part toward the Sun it is bounded
by the lucid horns of the Moon, and on the other part, its confining term is
the obscure tract of the twilight; whose relation makes us think the candor of
the Moons Discus to be so much the clearer; the which happens to be obfuscated
in the opposite part, by the greater clarity of the crescents; but if this
modern Author had essaied to make an interposition between the eye and the
primary splendour, The way to observe the secondary light of the Moon.
by the ridg of some house, or some other screen, so as to have left visible
only the gross of the Moon, the horns excluded, he might have seen it all alike
luminous.


SIMPL, I think, now I remember, that he writes of his making use of such
another Artifice, to hide from us the false lucidum.


SALV. Oh! how is this (as I believed) inadvertency of his, changed into a lie,
bordering on rashness; for that every one may frequently make proof of the
contrary. That in the next place, The Moons Discus in a solar Eclipse can be
seen only by privation.
at the Suns Eclipse, the Moons Discus is seen otherwise than by privation, I
much doubt, and specially when the Eclipse is not total, as those must
necessarily have been, which were observed by the Author; but if also he should
have discovered somewhat of light, this contradicts not, rather favors our
opinion; for that at such a time, the whole Terrestrial Hemisphere illuminated
by the Sun, is opposite to the Moon, so that although the Moons shadow does
obscure a part thereof, yet this is very small in comparison of that which
remains illuminated. That which he farther adds, that in this case, the part of
the limb, lying under the Sun, does appear very lucid, but that which lies
besides it, not so; and that to proceed from the coming of the solar rays
directly through that part to the eye, but not through this, is really one of
those fopperies, which discover the other fictions, of him which relates them:
For if it be requisite to the making a secondary light visible in the lunar
Discus, that the rays of the Sun came directly through it to our eyes, does
not this pitiful Philosopher perceive, that we should never see this same
secondary light, save only at the Eclipse of the Sun? And if a part only of
the Moon, far less than half a degree, by being remote from the Suns Discus,
can deflect or deviate the rays of the Sun, so that they arrive not at our
eye; what shall it do when it is distant twenty or thirty degrees, as it is at
its first apparition? and what course shall the rays of the Sun keep, which
are to pass through the body of the Moon, that they may find out our eye? The
Author of the Book of conclusions, accommodates the things to his purposes, and
not his purposes to the things.
This man does go successively considering what things ought to be, that they
may serve his purpose, but does not gradually proceed, accommodating his
conceits to the things, as really they are. As for instance, to make the light
of the Sun capable to penetrate the substance of the Moon, he makes her in part
diaphanous, as is v. g. the transparence of a cloud, or crystal: but I know not
what he would think of such a transparency, in case the solar rays were to
pass a depth of clouds of above two thousand miles; but let it be supposed
that he should boldly answer, that might well be in the Celestial, which are
quite other things from these our Elementary, impure, and feculent bodies; and
let us convict his error by such ways, as admit him no reply, or (to say
better) subter-fuge. If he will maintain, that the substance of the Moon is
diaphanous, he must say that it is so, whilst that the rays of the Sun are to
penetrate its whole profundity, that is, more than two thousand miles; but that
if you oppose unto them only one mile, or less, they should no more penetrate
that, than they penetrate one of our mountains.


SAGR. You put me in mind of a man, A jest put upon one that would sell a
certain secret for holding correspondency with a person a thousand miles off.
who would have sold me a secret how to correspond, by means of a certain
sympathy of magnetic needles, with one, that should be two or three thousand
miles distant; and I telling him, that I would willingly buy the same, but that
I desired first to see the experiment thereof, and that it did suffice me to
make it, I being in one Chamber, and he in the next, he answered me, that in so
small a distance one could not so well perceive the operation; whereupon I
turned him going, telling him, that I had no mind, at that time, to take a
journey unto Grand Cairo, or to Muscovy, to make the experiment; but that, if
he would go himself, I would perform the other part, staying in Venice. But let
us hear whither the deduction of our Author tends, and what necessity there
is, that he must grant the matter of the Moon to be most perforable by the
rays of the Sun, in a depth of two thousand miles, but more opacous than one
of our mountains, in a thickness of one mile only.


SALV. The very mountains of the Moon themselves are a proof thereof, which
percussed on one side of the Sun, do cast on the contrary side very dark
shadows, terminate, and more distinct by much, than the shadows of ours; but
had these mountains been diaphanous, we could never have come to the knowledge
of any unevenness in the superficies of the Moon, not have seen those luminous
montuosities distinguished by the terms which separate the lucid parts from the
dark: much less, should we see this same term so distinct, if it were true,
that the Suns light did penetrate the whole thickness of the Moon; yea rather,
according to the Authors own words, we should of necessity discern the passage,
and confine, between the part of the Sun seen, and the part not seen, to be
very confused, and mixed with light and darkness; for that that matter which
admits the passage of the Suns rays through a space of two thousand miles, must
needs be so transparent, that it would very weakly resist them in a hundredth,
or lesser part of that thickness; nevertheless, the term which separateth the
part illuminated from the obscure, is incident, and as distinct, as white is
distinct from black; and especially where the Section passes through the part
of the Moon, that is naturally more clear and montanous; but where the old
spots do part, which are certain plains, that by means of their spherical
inclination, receive the rays of the Sun obliquely, there the term is not so
distinct, by reason of the more dim illumination. That, lastly, which he
says, how that the secondary light does not diminish and languish, according
as the Moon increases, but conserveth it self continually in the same
efficacy; is most false; nay it is hardly seen in the quadrature, when, on the
contrary, it should appear more splendid, and be visible after the crepusculum
in the dark of night. Let us conclude therefore, that the Earths reflection is
very strong upon the Moon; and that, which you ought more to esteem, we may
deduce from thence another admirable congruity between the Moon and Earth;
namely, The Earth may reciprocally operate upon Celestial bodies, with its
light.
that if it be true, the Planets operate upon the Earth by their motion and
light, the Earth may probably be no less potent in operating reciprocally upon
them with the same light, and peradventure, motion also. And though it should
not move, yet may it retain the same operation; because, as it has been proved
already, the action of the light is the self same, I mean of the light of the
Sun reflected; and motion does nothing, save only vary the aspects, which fall
out in the same manner, whether we make the Earth move, and the Sun stand
still, or the contrary.


SIMPL. None of the Philosophers are found to have said, that these inferior
bodies operate on the Celestial, nay, Aristotle affirms the direct contrary.


SALV. Aristotle and the rest, who knew not that the Earth and Moon mutually
illuminated each other, are to be excused; but they would justly deserve our
censure, if whilst they desire that we should grant and believe with them,
that the Moon operateth upon the Earth with light, they should deny to us, who
have taught them that the Earth illuminates the Moon, the operation the Earth
has on the Moon.


SIMPL. In short, I find in my self a great unwillingnesse to admit this
commerce, which you would persuade me to be betwixt the Earth and Moon, placing
it, as we say, amongst the number of the Stars; for if there were nothing else,
the great separation and distance between it and the Celestial bodies, does in
my opinion necessarily conclude a vast disparity between them.


SALV. See Simplicius what an inveterate affection and radicated opinion can
do, since it is so powerful, that it makes you think that those very things
favor you, which you produce against your self. For if separation and distance
are accidents sufficient to persuade with you a great diversity of natures, it
must follow that proximity and contiguity import similitude. Affinity between
the Earth and Moon in respect of their vicinity.
Now how much more nearer is the Moon to the Earth, than to any other of the
Celestial Orbs? You must acknowledge therefore, according to your own
concession (and you shall have other Philosophers bear you company) that there
is a very great affinity betwixt the Earth and Moon. Now let us proceed, and
see whether any thing remains to be considered, touching those objections which
you made against the resemblances that are between these two bodies.


SIMPL. It rests, that we say something touching the solidity of the Moon,
which I argued from its being exquisite smooth and polite, and you from its
montuosity. There is another scruple also comes into my mind, from an opinion
which I have, that the Seas reflection ought by the equality of its surface, to
be rendered stronger than that of the Earth, whose superficies is so rough and
opacous.


SALV. As to the first objection; I say, that like as among the parts of the
Earth, Solidity of the Lunar Globe argued from its being montainous.
which all by their gravity strive to approach the nearest they can possible to
the center, some of them always are more remote from it than the rest, as the
mountains more than the valleys, and that by reason of their solidity and
firmness (for if they were of fluid, they would be even) so the seeing some
parts of the Moon to be elevated above the sphericity of the lower parts,
argues their hardness; for it is probable that the matter of the Moon is
reduced into a spherical form by the harmonious conspiration of all its parts
to the same sentense. Touching the second doubt, my thinks that the particulars
already observed to happen in the Looking-glasses, may very well assure us,
that the reflection of light coming from the Sea, The Seas reflection of light
much weaker than that of the Earth.
is far weaker than that which comes from Land; understanding it always of
the universal reflection; for as to that particular, on which the water being
calm, casts upon a determinate place, there is no doubt, but that he who
shall stand in that place, shall see a very great reflection in the water, but
every way else he shall see the surface of the Water more obscure than that of
the Land; An experimen^ to prove the reflection of the Water less clear than
that of the Land.
and to prove it to your senses, let us go into yonder Hall, and power forth a
little water upon the Pavement. Tell me now, does not this wet brick show more
dull than the other dry ones? Doubtless it does, and will so appear, from what
place soever you behold it, except one only, and this is that way which the
light comes, that enters in at yonder window; go backwards therefore by a
little and a little.


SIMPL. Here I see the west part shine more than all the rest of the pavement,
and I see that it so happens, because the reflection of the light which
enters in at the window, comes toward me.


SALV. That moisture has done no more but filled those little cavities which
are in the brick with water, and reduced its superficies to an exact evenesse;
whereupon the reflex rays issue unitedly toward one and the same place; but
the rest of the pavement which is dry, has its protuberances, that is, an
innumerable variety of inclinations in its smallest particles; whereupon the
reflections of the light scatter toward all parts, but more weakly than if
they had gone all united together; and therefore, the same shows almost all
alike, beheld several ways, but far less clear than the moistened brick. I
conclude therefore, that the surface of the Sea, beheld from the Moon, in like
manner, as it would appear most equal, (the Islands and Rocks deducted) so it
would show less clear than that of the Earth, which is montanous and uneven.
And but that I would not seem, as the saying is, to harp too much on one
string, I could tell you that I have observed in the Moon that secondary light
which I told you came to her from the reflection of the Terrestrial Globe, to
be notably more clear two or three days before the conjunction, The secondary
light of the Moon clearer before the conjunction, than after.
than after, that is, when we see it before break of day in the East, than when
it is seen at night after Sunset in the West; of which difference the cause
is, that the Terrestrial Hemisphere, which looks toward the Eastern Moon, has
little Sea, and much Land, to wit, all Asia, whereas, when it is in the West,
it beholds very great Seas, that is, the whole Atlantic Ocean as far as
America: An Argument sufficiently probable that the surface of the water
appears less splendid than that of the Earth.


SIMPL. So that perhaps you believe, those great spots discovered in the face
of the Moon, to be Seas, and the other clearer parts to be Land, or some such
thing?


SALV. This which you ask me, is the beginning of those incongruities which I
esteem to be between the Moon and the Earth, out of which it is time to
dis-ingage our selves, for we have stayed too long in the Moon. I say
therefore, that if there were in nature but one way only, to make two
superficies illustrated by the Sun, to appear one more clear than the other,
and that this were by the being of the one Earth, and the other Water; it would
be necessary to say that the surface of the Moon were part earthy and part
aquatick; but because we know many ways to produce the same effect (and others
there may be which we know not of;) therefore I dare not affirm the Moon to
consist of one thing more than another: It has been seen already that a silver
plate boiled, being touched with the Burnisher, becomes of white obscure; that
the moist part of the Earth shows more obscure than the dry; that in the tops
of Hills, the woody parts appear more gloomy than the naked and barren; which
happens because there falls very much shadow among the Trees, but the open
places are illuminated all over by the Sun. And this mixtion of shadow has
such operation, that in tufted velvet, the silk which is cut, is of a far
darker color than that which is not cut, by means of the shadows diffused
betwixt thread and thread, and a plain velvet shows much blacker than a Taffata,
made of the same silk. So that if there were in the Moon things which should
look like great Woods, their aspect might represent unto us the spots which we
discover; alike difference would be occasioned, if there were Seas in her: and
lastly, nothing hinders, but that those spots may really be of an obscurer
color than the rest; for thus the snow makes the mountains show brighter. The
obscurer parts of the Moon are plains, and the more bright mountainous.
That which is plainly observed in the Moon is, that its most obscure parts are
all plains, with few rises and bancks in them; though some there be; the rest
which is of a brighter color, is all full of rocks, mountains, hillocks of
spherical and other figures; and in particular, round about the spots are very
great ledges of mountains. Long ledges of mountains about the spots of the Moon.
That the spots be plain superficies, we have assured proof, in that we see,
how that the term which distinguishes the part illuminated from the obscure,
in crossing the spots makes the intersection even, but in the clear parts it
shows all craggy and shagged. But I know not as yet whether this evennesse of
superficies may be sufficient of it self alone, to make the obscurity appear,
and I rather think not. Besides, I account the Moon exceeding different from
the Earth; for although I imagine to my self that those are not idle and dead
Regions, There are not generated in the Moon things like to ours, but if there
be any productions, they are very different.
yet I affirm not, that there are in them motion and life, much less that there
are bred plants, animals or other things like to ours; but, if such there be,
they should nevertheless be very different, and remote from our imagination.
And I am induced so to think, because in the first place, I esteem that the
matter of the Lunar Globe consists not of Earth and Water; and this alone
suffices to take away the generations and alterations resembling ours: The
Moon not composed of Water and Earth.
but now supposing that there were in the Moon, Water and Earth, yet would they
not produce plants and animals like to ours; Those aspects of the Sun necessary
for our generations, are not so in the Moon.
and this for two principal reasons: The first is, that unto our productions
there are required so many variable aspects of the Sun, that without them they
would all miscarry: now the habitudes of the Sun toward the Earth are far
different from those toward the Moon. We as to the diurnal illumination, have,
in the greater part of the Earth, every twenty four hours part day, and part
night, which effect in the Moon is monthly: and that annual declination and
elevation of the Sun in the Zodiac, Natural days in the Moon are of a Month
long.
by which it produces diversity of Seasons, and inequality of days and
nights, are finished in the Moon in a month; and whereas the Sun to us rises
and declineth so much, To the Moon the Sun ascends and declineth with a
difference of ten degrees, and to the Earth of forty seven degrees.
that from the greatest to the least altitude, there is a difference of almost
47 degrees, for so much is the distance from one to the other Tropic; this is
in the Moon but ten degrees only, or little more; namely, as much as the
greatest Latitudes of the Dragon on each side the Ecliptic. Now consider what
effect the Sun would have in the torrid Zone, should it continually for fifteen
days together beam forth its Rays upon it; which without all question would
destroy plants, herbs, and living creatures: and if it should chance that there
were any production, it would be of herbs, plants, and creatures very different
from those which are now there. There are no rains in the Moon.
Secondly, I verily believe that in the Moon there are no rains, for if Clouds
should gather in any part thereof, as they do about the Earth, they would
thereupon hide from our sight some of those things, which we with the Telescope
behold in the Moon, and in a word, would some way or other change its
Phenomenon, an effect which I could never by long and diligent observations
discover; but always beheld it in a even and pure serenity.


SAGR. To this may be answered, either that there might be great mists, or that
it might rain in the time of their night, that is, when the Sun does not
illuminate it.


SALV. If other passages did but assure us, that there were generations in it
like to ours, and that there was only wanting the concourse of rains, we might
find out this, or some other temperament to serve instead thereof, as it
happens in Egypt by the inundation of Nile: but not meeting with any accident,
which corresponds with ours, of many that have been sought out for the
production of the like effects, we need not trouble our selves to introduce one
alone; and that also, not because we have certain observation of it, but for a
bare non-repugnance that we find therein. Moreover, if I was demanded what my
first apprehension, and pure natural reason dictated to me concerning the
production of things like or unlike there above, I would always reply, that
they are most different, and to us altogether unimaginable, for so me thinks
the riches of Nature, and the omnipotence of our Creator and Governor, do
require.


SAGR. I ever accounted extraordinary madness that of those, who would make
humane comprehension the measure of what nature has a power or knowledge to
effect; whereas on the contrary there is not any the least effect in Nature,
The having a perfect knowledge of nothing, makes some believe they understand
all things.
which can be fully understood by the most speculative wits in the world. This
their so vain presumption of knowing all, can take beginning from nothing,
unless from their never having known any thing; for if one has but once only
experienced the perfect knowledge of one only thing, and but truly tasted what
it is to know, he shall perceive that of infinite other conclusions, he
understands not so much as one.


SALV. Your discourse is very concluding; in confirmation of which we have the
example of those who understand, or have known some thing, which the more
knowing they are, the more they know, and freely confess that they know
little; nay, the wisest man in all Greece, and for such pronounced by the
Oracle, openly professed to know that he knew nothing.


SIMPL. It must be granted therefore, either that Socrates or that the Oracle
it self was a liar, that declaring him to be most wise, and he confessing that
he knew himself to be most ignorant.


SALV. Neither one nor the other does follow, The answer of the Oracle true in
judging Socrates the wisest of his time.
for that both the assertions may be true. The Oracle adjudged Socrates the
wisest of all men, whose knowledge is limited; Socrates acknowledges that he
knew nothing in relation to absolute wisdom, which is infinite; and because of
infinite, much is the same part, as is little, and as is nothing (for to arrive
v. g. to the infinite number, it is all one to accumulate thousands, tens, or
ciphers,) therefore Socrates well perceived his wisdom to be nothing, in
comparison of the infinite knowledge which he wanted. But yet, because there is
some knowledge found amongst men, and this not equally shared to all, Socrates
might have a greater share thereof than others, and therefore verified the
answer of the Oracle.


SAGR. I think I very well understand this particular amongst men, Simplicius
there is a power of operating, but not equally dispensed to all; and it is
without question, that the power of an Emperor is far greater than that of a
private person; but, both this and that are nothing in comparison of the Divine
Omnipotence. Amongst men, there are some that better understand Agriculture
than many others; but the knowledge of planting a Vine in a trench, what has it
to do with the knowledge of making it to sprout forth, to attract nourishment,
to select this good part from that other, for to make thereof leaves, another
to make sprouts, another to make grapes, another to make raisins, another to
make the husks of them, which are the works of most wise Nature? This is one
only particular act of the innumerable, which Nature does, Divine Wisdom
infinitely infinite.
and in it alone is discovered an infinite wisdom, so that Divine Wisdom may be
concluded to be infinitely infinite.


SALV. Take hereof another example. Do we not say that the judicious
discovering of a most lovely Statua in a piece of Marble, has sublimated the
wit of Buonarruotti far above the vulgar wits of other men? Buonarruotti, a
statuary of admirable ingenitity.
And yet this work is only the imitation of a mere aptitude and disposition of
exterior and superficial members of an immovable man; but what is it in
comparison of a man made by nature, composed of as many exterior and interior
members, of so many muscles, tendons, nerves, bones, which serve to so many and
sundry motions? but what shall we say of the senses, and of the powers of the
soul, and lastly, of the understanding? May we not say, and that with reason,
that the structure of a Statue falls far short of the formation of a living man,
yea more of a contemptible worm?


SAGR. And what difference think you, was there betwixt the Dove of Architas,
and one made by Nature?


SIMPL. Either I am none of these knowing men, or else there is a manifest
contradiction in this your discourse. You account understanding amongst the
greatest (if you make it not the chief of the) Encomiums ascribed to man made
by Nature, and a little before you said with Socrates, that he had no knowledge
at all; therefore you must say, that neither did Nature understand how to make
an understanding that understands.


SALV. You argue very cunningly, but to reply to your objection I must have
recourse to a Philosophical distinction, and say that the understanding is to
be taken too ways, Man understands very well intensive, but little extensive.
that is intensive, or extensive; and that extensive, that is, as to the
multitude of intelligibles, which are infinite, the understanding of man is as
nothing, though he should understand a thousand propositions; for that a
thousand, in respect of infinity is but as a cipher: but taking the
understanding intensive, (in as much as that term imports) intensively, that
is, perfectly some propositions, I say, that humane wisdom understands some
propositions so perfectly, and is as absolutely certain thereof, as Nature her
self; and such are the pure Mathematical sciences, to wit, Geometry and
Arithmetic: in which Divine Wisdom knows infinite more propositions, because
it knows them all; but I believe that the knowledge of those few comprehended
by humane understanding, equalleth the divine, as to the certainty objective,
for that it arriveth to comprehend the necessity thereof, than which there can
be no greater certainty.


SIMPL. This seems to me a very bold and rash expression.


SALV. These are common notions, and far from all umbrage of temerity, or
boldness, and detract not in the least from the Majesty of divine wisdom; as it
nothing diminishes the omnipotence thereof to say, that God cannot make what
is once done, to be undone: but I doubt, Simplicius, that your scruple arises
from an opinion you have, that my words are somewhat equivocal; therefore the
better to express my self I say, that as to the truth, of which Mathematical
demonstrations give us the knowledge, it is the same, which the divine wisdom
knows; but this I must grant you, G^ds manner of knowing different from that
of men.
that the manner whereby God knows the infinite propositions, of which we
understand some few, is highly more excellent than ours, Humane understanding
done by raciocination.
which proceeds by ratiocination, and passes from conclusion to conclusion,
whereas his is done at one single thought or intuition; and whereas we, for
example, to attain the knowledge of some passion of the Circle, which has
infinite, beginning from one of the most simple, and taking that for its
definition, do proceed with argumentation to another, and from that to a third,
and then to a fourth, etc. the Divine Wisdom, by the apprehension of its
essence comprehends, without temporary raciocination, all these infinite
passions; which notwithstanding, are in effect virtually comprised in the
definitions of all things; Definitions contein virtually all the passions of
the things defined.
and, to conclude, as being infinite, perhaps are but one alone in their
nature, and in the Divine Mind; the which neither is wholly unknown to humane
understanding, Infinite Passions are perhaps but one only.
but only be-clouded with thick and gross mists; which come in part to be
dissipated and clarified, when we are made Masters of any conclusions, firmly
demonstrated, and so perfectly made ours, as that we can speedily run through
them; for in sum, what other, is that proposition, that the square of the side
subtending the right angle in any triangle, is equal to the squares of the
other two, which include it, but only the Paralellograms being upon common
bases, and between parallels equal amongst themselves? and this, lastly, is it
not the same, as to say that those two superficies are equal, of which equal
parts applied to equal parts, The discourses which humane reason makes in a
certain time, the Divine Wisdom resolves in a moment; that is, has them
always present.
possess equal place? Now these inferences, which our intellect apprehends
with time and a gradual motion, the Divine Wisdom, like light, penetrateth in
an instant, which is the same as to say, has them always present: I conclude
therefore, that our understanding, both as to the manner and the multitude of
the things comprehended by us, is infinitely surpast by the Divine Wisdom; but
yet I do not so vilify it, as to repute it absolutely nothing; yea rather,
when I consider how many and how great mysteries men have understood,
discovered, and contrived, I very plainly know and understand the mind of man
to be one of the works, yea one of the most excellent works of God.


SAGR. I have often times considered with my self, The wit of man admirably acute.
in pursuance of that which you speak of, how great the wit of man is; and
whilst I run through such and so many admirable inventions found out by him, as
well in the Arts, as Sciences; and again reflecting upon my own wit, so far
from promising me the discovery of any thing new, that I despair of
comprehending what is already discovered, confounded with wonder, and surprised
with desperation, I account my self little less than miserable. If I behold a
Statue of some excellent Master, I say with my self; When will thou know how to
chizzle away the refuse of a piece of Marble, and discover so lovely a figure,
as lies hid therein? When will thou mix and spread so many different colors
upon a Cloth, or Wall, and represent therewith all visible objects, like a
Michael Angelo, a Raphaello, or a Tizvano? If I behold what inventions men have
in comparting Musical intervals, in establishing Precepts and Rules for the
management thereof with admirable delight to the ear: When shall I cease my
astonishment? What shall I say of such and so various Instruments of that Art?
The reading of excellent Poets, with what admiration does it swell any one that
attentively considers the invention of conceits, and their explanation? What
shall we say of Architecture? What of Navigation? The invention of writing
stupendous above all others.
But, above all other stupendous inventions, what sublimity of mind was that
in him, that imagined to himself to find out a way to communicate his most
secret thoughts to any other person, though very far distant from him either in
time, or place, speaking with those that are in the India's; speaking to those
that are not yet born, nor shall be this thousand, or ten thousand years? and
with how much facility? but by the various collocation of For of so many only
the Italian Alphabet consists.
twenty little letters upon a paper? Let this be the Seal of all the admirable
inventions of man, and the close of our Discourse for this day: For the warmer
hours being past, I suppose that Salviatus has a desire to go and take the air
in his Gondelo; but too morrow we will both wait upon you, to continue the
Discourses we have begun, etc.






GALILAEUS Galilaeus Lyncaeus, HIS SYSTEME OF THE WORLD.
The Second Dialogue.
INTERLOCVTORS. SALVIATUS, SAGREDUS, and SIMPLICIUS. SALV. THe yester-dayes
diversions which led us out of the path of our principal discourse, were such
and so many, that I know not how I can without your assistance recover the
track in which I am to proceed.


SAGR. I wonder not, that you, who have your fancy charged and laden with both
what has been, and is to be spoken, do find your self in some confusion; but
I, who as being only an Auditor, have nothing to burden my memory withal, but
such things as I have heard, may happily by a succinct rehearsal of them, recover
the first thread of our Discourse. As far therefore as my memory serves me, the
sum of yester-dayes conferences were an examination of the Principles of
Ptolomy and Copernicus, and which of their opinions is the more probable and
rational; that, which affirms the substance of the Celestial bodies to be
ingenerable, incorruptible, unalterable, impassible, and in a word, exempt from
all kind of change, save that of local, and therefore to be a fifth essence,
quite different from this of our Elementary bodies, which are generable,
corruptible, alterable, etc. or else the other, which taking away such
deformity from the parts of the World, holds the Earth to enjoy the same
perfections as the other integral bodies of the universe; and esteems it a
moveable and erratick Globe, no less than the Moon, Jupiter, Venus, or any
other Planet: And lastly, makes many particular parallels betwixt the Earth
and Moon; and more with the Moon, than with any other Planet; happily by reason
we have greater and more certain notice of it, as being less distant from us.
And having, lastly, concluded this second opinion to have more of probability
with it than the first, I should think it best in the subsequent discourses to
begin to examine whether the Earth be esteemed immovable, as it has been till
now believed by most men, or else moveable, as some ancient Philosophers held,
and others of not very recesse times, were of opinion; and if it be moveable,
to enquire of what kind its motion may be?


SALV. I see already what way I am to take; but before we offer to proceed any
farther, I am to say something to you touching those last words which you
spoke, how that the opinion which holds the Earth to be endued with the same
conditions that the Celestial bodies enjoy, seems to be more true than the
contrary; for that I affirmed no such thing, nor would I have any of the
Propositions in controversy, be made to speak to any definitive sense: but I
only intended to produce on either part, those reasons and answers, arguments
and solutions, which have been hitherto thought upon by others, together with
certain others, which I have stumbled upon in my long searching thereinto,
always remitting the decision thereof to the judgment of others.


SAGR. I was unawares transported by my own sense of the thing; and believing
that others ought to judge as I did, I made that conclusion universal, which
should have been particular; and therefore confess I have erred, and the
rather, in that I know not what Simplicius his judgment is in this particular.


SIMPL. I must confess, that I have been ruminating all this night of what
past yesterday, and to say the truth, I meet therein with many acute, new, and
plausible notions; yet nevertheless, I find my self over-perswaded by the
authority of so many great Writers, and in particular -- etc. I see you shake
your head Sagredus, and smile to your self, as if I had uttered some great
absurdity.


SAGR. I not only smile, but to tell you true, am ready to burst with holding
in my self from laughing outright, for you have put me in mind of a very pretty
passage, that I was a witness of, not many years since, together with some
others of my worthy friends, which I could yet name unto you.


SALV. It would be well that you told us what it was, that so Simplicius may
not still think that he gave you the occasion of laughter.


SAGR. I am content. I found one day, at home in his house, at Venice, a famous
Phisician, to whom some flockt for their studies, and others out of curiosity,
sometimes came thither to see certain Anatomies diffected by the hand of a no
less learned, than careful and experienced Anatomist. The original of the
Nerves according to Aristotle, and according to Phisicians.
It chanced upon that day, when I was there, that he was in search of the
original and rise of the Nerves, about which there is a famous controversy
between the Galenists and Peripateticks; and the Anatomist showing, how that
the great number of Nerves departing from the Brain, as their root, and passing
by the nape of the Neck, distend themselves afterward along by the Backbone,
and branch themselves through all the Body; and that a very small filament, as
fine as a thread went to the Heart; he turned to a Gentleman whom he knew to be
a Peripatetick Philosopher, and for whose sake he had with extraordinary
exactness, discovered and proved every thing, and demanded of him, if he was
at length satisfied and persuaded that the original of the Nerves proceeded
from the Brain, and not from the Heart? The ridiculous answer of a Philosopher,
determining the original of the Nerves.
To which the Philosopher, after he had stood musing a while, answered; you
have made me to see this business so plainly and sensibly, that did not the
Text of Aristotle assert the contrary, which positively affirms the Nerves to
proceed from the Heart, I should be constrained to confess your opinion to be
true.


SIMPL. I would have you know my Masters, that this controversy about the
original of the Nerves is not yet so proved and decided, as some may perhaps
persuade themselves.


SAGR. Nor questionless ever shall it be, if it find such like contradictors;
but that which you say, does not at all lessen the extravagance of the answer
of that Peripatetick, who against such sensible experience produced not other
experiments, or reasons of Aristotle, but his bare authority and pure ipse
dixit.


SIMPL. Aristotle had not gained so great authority, but for the force of his
Demonstrations, and the profoundnesse of his arguments; but it is requisite
that we understand him, and not only understand him, but have so great
familiarity with his Books, that we form a perfect Idea thereof in our minds,
so as that every saying of his may be always as it were, present in our memory
for he did not write to the vulgar, nor is he obliged to spin out his
Sillogismes with the trivial method of disputes; nay rather, using a freedom,
he has sometimes placed the proof of one Proposition amongst Texts, which seem
to treat of quite another point; Requisites to fit a man to philosophate well
after the manner of Aristotle.
and therefore it is requisite to be master of all that vast Idea, and to learn
how to connect this passage with that, and to combine this Text with another
far remote from it; for it is not to be questioned but that he who has thus
studied him, knows how to gather from his Books the demonstrations of every
knowable deduction, for that they contein all things.


SAGR. But good Simplicius, like as the things scattered here and there in
Aristotle, give you no trouble in collecting them, but that you persuade your
self to be able by comparing and connecting several small sentences to extract
thence the juice of some desired conclusion, A cunning way to gather Philosophy
out of any book whatsoever.
so this, which you and other egregious Philosophers do with the Text of
Aristotle, I could do by the verses of Virgil, or of Ovid, composing thereof A
word signifying works composed of many fragments of verses collected out of the
Poets.
Centones, and therewith explaining all the affairs of men, and secrets of
Nature. But what talk I of Virgil, or any other Poet? I have a little Book much
shorter than Aristotle and Ovid, in which are contained all the Sciences, and
with very little study, one may gather out of it a most perfect Idea, and this
is the Alphabet; and there is no doubt but that he who knows how to couple and
dispose aright this and that vowel, with those, or those other consonants, may
gather thence the infallible answers to all doubts, and deduce from them the
principles of all Sciences and Arts, just in the same manner as the Painter
from diverse simple colors, laid severally upon his Palate, proceeds by
mixing a little of this and a little of that, with a little of a third, to
represent to the life men, plants, buildings, birds, fishes, and in a word,
counterfeiting what ever object is visible, though there be not on the Palate
all the while, either eyes, or feathers, or fins, or leaves, or stones. Nay,
farther, it is necessary, that none of the things to be imitated, or any part
of them, be actually among colors, if you would be able therewith to represent
all things; for should there be amongst them v. gr. feathers, these would serve
to represent nothing save birds, and plumed creatures.


SALV. And there are certain Gentlemen yet living, and in health, who were
present, when a Doctor, that was Professor in a famous Academy, Invention of
the Telescope taken from Aristotle.
hearing the description of the Telescope, by him not seen as then, said, that
the invention was taken from Aristotle, and causing his works to be fetched, he
turned to a place where the Philosopher gives the reason, whence it comes,
that from the bottom of a very deep Well, one may see the stars in Heaven, at
noon day; and, addressing himself to the company, see here, says he, the Well,
which represents the Tube, see here the gross vapors, from whence is taken
the invention of the Crystals, and see here lastly the sight fortified by the
passage of the rays through a diaphanous, but more dense and obscure medium.


SAGR. This is a way to comprehend all things knowable, much like to that
wherewith a piece of marble contains in it one, yea, a thousand very
beautiful Statua's, but the difficulty lies in being able to discover them; or
we may say, that it is like to the prophesies of Abbot Joachim, or the answers
of the Heathen Oracles, which are not to be understood, till after the things
foretold are come to pass.


SALV. And why do you not add the predictions of the Genethliacks, which are
with like cleernesse seen after the event, in their Horoscopes, or, if you
will, Configurations of the Heavens.


SAGR. In this manner the Chemists find, Chemists interpret the Fables of the
Poets to be secrets for making of Gold.
being led by their melancholy humor, that all the sublimest wits of the
World have writ of nothing else in reality, than of the way to make Gold; but,
that they might transmit the secret to posterity without discovering it to the
vulgar, they contrived some one way, and some another how to conceal the same
under several maskes; and it would make one merry to hear their comments upon
the ancient Poets, finding out the important mysteries, which lie hid under
their Fables; and the signification of the Loves of the Moon, and her
descending to the Earth for Endimion; her displeasure against Acteon, and what
was meant by Jupiters turning himself into a shower of Gold; and into flames of
fire; and what great secrets of Art are contained in that Mercury the
Interpreter; in those thefts of Pluto; and in those Branches of Gold.


SIMPL. I believe, and in part know, that there want not in the World very
extravagant heads, the vanities of whom ought not to redound to the prejudice
of Aristotle, of whom my thinks you speak sometimes with too little respect,
and the only antiquity and bare name that he has acquired in the opinions of
so many famous men, should suffice to render him honorable with all that
profess themselves learned.


SALV. You state not the matter rightly, Simplicius; There are some of his
followers that fear before they are in danger, who give us occasion, or, to say
better, would give us cause to esteem him less, Some of Aristotle's Sectators
impare the reputation of their Master, in going about to enhanse it.
should we consent to applaud their Capricio's. And you, pray you tell me, are
you for your part so simple, as not to know that had Aristotle been present, to
have heard the Doctor that would have made him Author of the Telescope, he
would have been much more displeased with him, than with those, who laughed at
the Doctor and his Comments? Do you question whether Aristotle, had he but seen
the novelties discovered in Heaven, would not have changed his opinion, amended
his Books, and embraced the more sensible Doctrine; rejecting those silly
Gulls, which too scrupulously go about to defend what ever he has said; not
considering, that if Aristotle were such a one as they fancy him to themselves,
he would be a man of an untractable wit, an obstinate mind, a barbarous soul, a
stubborn will, that accounting all men else but as silly sheep, would have his
Oracles preferred before the Senses, Experience, and Nature her self? They are
the Sectators of Aristotle that have given him this Authority, and not he that
has usurped or taken it upon him; and because it is more easy for a man to
sculk under another shield than to show himself openly, they tremble, and are
afraid to stir one step from him; and rather than they will admit some
alterations in the Heaven of Aristotle, they will impertinently deny those they
behold in the Heaven of Nature.


SAGR. These kind of Drolleries put me in mind of that Statuary which having
reduced a great piece of Marble to the Image of an Hercules, A ridiculous
passage of a certain Statuary.
or a thundering Jupiter, I know not whether, and given it with admirable Art
such a vivacity and threatening fury, that it moved terror in as many as beheld
it; he himself began also to be afraid thereof, though all its
sprightfulnesse, and life was his own workmanship; and his affrightment was
such, that he had no longer the courage to affront it with his Chizzels and
Mallet.


SALV. I have many times wondered how these nice maintainers of what ever fell
from Aristotle, are not aware how great a prejudice they are to his reputation
and credit; and how that the more they go about to increase his Authority, the
more they diminish it; for whilst I see them obstinate in their attempts to
maintain those Propositions which I palpably discover to be manifestly false;
and in their desires to persuade me that so to do, is the part of a
Philosopher; and that Aristotle himself would do the same, it much abates in me
of the opinion that he has rightly philosophated about other conclusions, to
me more abstruse: for if I could see them concede and change opinion in a
manifest truth, I would believe, that in those in which they should persist,
they may have some solid demonstrations to me unknown, and unheard of.


SAGR. Or when they should be made to see that they have hazarded too much of
their own and Aristotle's repuatation in confessing, that they had not
understood this or that conclusion found out by some other man; would it not be
a less evil for them to seek for it amongst his Texts, by laying many of them
together, according to the art intimated to us by Simplicius? for if his works
contain all things knowable, it must follow also that they may be therein
discovered.


SALV. Good Sagredus, make no jest of this advice, which me thinks you rehearse
in too Ironical a way; for it is not long since that a very eminent Philosopher
having composed a Book de anima, wherein, citing the opinion of Aristotle,
about its being or not being immortal, he alleged many Texts, (not any of
those heretofore quoted by Alexander ab Alexandro: for in those he said, that
Aristotle had not so much as treated of that matter, much less determined any
thing pertaining to the same, but others) by himself found out in other more
abstruse places, which tended to an erroneous sense: and being advised, that he
would find it an hard matter to get a License from the Inquisitors, A brave
resolution of a certain Peripatetick Philosopher.
he writ back unto his friend, that he would notwithstanding, with all
expedition procure the same, for that if no other obstacle should interpose, he
would not much scruple to change the Doctrine of Aristotle, and with other
expositions, and other Texts to maintain the contrary opinion, which yet should
be also agreeable to the sense of Aristotle.


SAGR. Oh most profound Doctor, this! that can command me that I stir not a
step from Aristotle, but will himself lead him by the nose, and make him speak
as he pleases. See how much it imports to learn to take Time by the
Fore-top. Nor is it seasonable to have to do with Hercules, whilst he is
enraged, and amongst the Furies, but when he is telling merry tales amongst the
Meonion Damsels. The servile spirit of some of Aristotle's followers.
Ah, unheard of sordidnesse of servile souls! to make themselves willing slaves
to other men's opinions; to receive them for inviolable Decrees, to engage
themselves to seem satisfied and convinced by arguments, of such efficacy, and
so manifestly concludent, that they themselves cannot certainly resolve whether
they were really writ to that purpose, or serve to prove that assumption in
hand, or the contrary. But, which is a greater madness, they are at variance
amongst themselves, whether the Author himself has held the affirmative part,
or the negative. What is this, but to make an Oracle of a Log, and to run to
that for answers, to fear that, to reverence and adore that?


SIMPL. But in case we should recede from Aristotle, who have we to be our Guide
in Philosophy? Name you some Author.


SALV. We need a Guide in unknown and uncouth ways, but in champion places, and
open plains, the blind only stand in need of a Leader; and for such, it is
better that they stay at home. But he that has eyes in his head, and in his
mind, him should a man choose for his Guide. Too close adhering to Aristotle is
blameable.
Yet mistake me not, thinking that I speak this, for that I am against hearing
of Aristotle; for on the contrary, I commend the reading, and diligently
studying of him; and only blame the servile giving ones self up a slave unto
him, so, as blindly to subscribe to what ever he delivers, and without search
of any farther reason thereof, to receive the same for an inviolable decree.
Which is an abuse, that carries with it another great inconvenience, to wit,
that others will no longer take pains to understand the validity of his
Demonstrations. And what is more shameful, than in the midst of public
disputes, whilst one person is treating of demonstrable conclusions, to hear
another interpose with a passage of Aristotle, and not seldom writ to quite
another purpose, and with that to stop the mouth of his opponent? But if you
will continue to study in this manner, I would have you lay aside the name of
Philosophers; and call your selves either Historians or Doctors of Memory, It
is not just, that those who never philosophate, should ^surp the title of
Philosophers.
for it is not fit, that those who never philosophate, should usurp the
honorable title of Philosophers. But it is best for us to return to shore, and
not lanch farther into a boundless Gulf, out of which we shall not be able to
get before night. Therefore Simplicius, come either with arguments and
demonstrations of your own, or of Aristotle, and bring us no more Texts and
naked authorities, The Sensible World.
for our disputes are about the Sensible World, and not one of Paper. And
forasmuch as in our discourses yesterday, we retrieved the Earth from
darkness, and exposed it to the open sky, showing, that the attempt to
enumerate it amongst those which we call Celestial bodies, was not a position
so foiled, and vanquished, as that it had no life left in it; it follows
next, that we proceed to examine what probability there is for holding of it
fixed, and wholly immovable, scilicet as to its entire Globe, what likelihood
there is for making it moveable with some motion, and of what kind that may be.
And forasmuch as in this same question I am ambiguous, and Simplicius is
resolute, as likewise Aristotle for the opinion of its immobility, he shall one
by one produce the arguments in favor of their opinion, and I will allege the
answers and reasons on the contrary part; and next Sagredus shall tell us his
thoughts, and to which side he finds himself inclined.


SAGR. Content; provided always that I may reserve the liberty to my self of
alleging what pure natural reason shall sometimes dictate to me.


SALV. Nay more, it is rhat which I particularly beg of you; for, amongst the
more easy, and, to so speak, material considerations, I believe there are but
few of them that have been omitted by Writers, so that only some of the more
subtle, and remote can be desired, or wanting; and to investigate these, what
other ingenuity can be more fit than that of the most acute and piercing wit of
Sagredus?


SAGR. I am what ever pleases Salviatus, but I pray you, let us not sally out
into another kind of digression complemental; for at this time I am a
Philosopher, and in the Schools, not in the Court.


SALV. Let our contemplation begin therefore with this consideration, that
whatsoever motion may be ascribed to the Earth, it is necessary that it be to
us, (as inhabitants upon it, and consequently partakers of the same) altogether
imperceptible, and as if it were not at all, so long as we have regard only to
terrestrial things; The motions of the Earth are imperceptible to its
inhabitants.
but yet it is on the contrary, as necessary that the same motion do seem
common to all other bodies, and visible objects, that being separated from the
Earth, participate not of the same. So that the true method to find whether any
kind of motion may be ascribed to the Earth, and that found, to know what it
is, is to consider and observe if in bodies separated from the Earth, The Earth
can have no other motions, than those which to us appear commune to all the
rest of the Universe, the Earth excepted.
one may discover any appearance of motion, which equally suiteth to all the
rest; for a motion that is only seen, v. gr. in the Moon, and that has
nothing to do with Venus or Jupiter, or any other Stars, cannot any way belong
to the Earth, or to any other save the Moon alone. Now there is a most general
and grand motion above all others, and it is that by which the Sun, the Moon,
The Diurnal Motion, seems commune to all the Universe, save only the Earth
excepted.
the other Planets, and the Fixed Stars, and in a word, the whole Universe, the
Earth only excepted, appears in our thinking to move from the East toward
the West, in the space of twenty four hours; and this, as to this first
appearance, has no obstacle to hinder it, that it may not belong to the Earth
alone, as well as to all the World besides, the Earth excepted; for the same
aspects will appear in the one position, as in the other. Hence it is that
Aristotle and Ptolomy, Aristotle and Ptolomy argue against the Diurnal Motion
attributed to the Earth.
as having hit upon this consideration, in going about to prove the Earth to be
immovable, argue not against any other than this Diurnal Motion; save only
that Aristotle hinteth something in obscure terms against another Motion
ascribed to it by an Ancient, of which we shall speak in its place.


SAGR. I very well perceive the necessity of your illation: but I meet with a
doubt which I know not how to free my self from, and this it is, That
Copernicus assigning to the Earth another motion beside the Diurnal, which,
according to the rule even now laid down, ought to be to us, as to appearance,
imperceptible in the Earth, but visible in all the rest of the World; me thinks
I may necessarily infer, either that he has manifestly erred in assigning the
Earth a motion, to which there appears not a general correspondence in Heaven;
or else that if there be such a congruity therein, Ptolomy on the other hand
has been deficient in not confuting this, as he has done the other.


SALV. You have good cause for your doubt: and when we come to treat of the
other Motion, you shall see how far Copernicus excelled Ptolomey in clearness
and sublimity of wit, in that he saw what the other did not, I mean the
admirable harmony wherein that Motion agreed with all the other Celestial
Bodies. But for the present we will suspend this particular, and return to our
first consideration; touching which I will proceed to propose (beginning with
things more general) those reasons which seem to favor the mobility of the
Earth, Why the diurnal motion more probably should belong to the Earth, than to
the rest of the Universe.
and then wait the answers which Simplicius shall make thereto. And first, if
we consider only the immense magnitude of the Starry Sphere, compared to the
smalness of the Terrestrial Globe, contained therein so many millions of times;
and moreover weigh the velocity of the motion which must in a day and night
make an entire revolution thereof, I cannot persuade my self, that there is any
man who believes it more reasonable and credible, that the Celestial Sphere
turns round, and the Terrestrial Globe stands still.


SAGR. If from the universality of effects, which may in nature have dependence
upon such like motions, there should indifferently follow all the same
consequences to an hair, as well in one Hypothesis as in the other; yet I for my
part, as to my first and general apprehension, would esteem, that he which
should hold it more rational to make the whole Universe move, and thereby to
salve the Earths mobility, is more unreasonable than he that being got to the
top of your Turret, should desire, to the end only that he might behold the
City, and the Fields about it, that the whole Country might turn round, that so
he might not be put to the trouble to stir his head. And yet doubtless the
advantages would be many and great which the Copernican Hypothesis is attended
with, above those of the Ptolomaique, which in my opinion resembles, nay
surpasses that other folly; so that all this makes me think that far more
probable than this. But happily Aristotle Ptolomey, and Simplicius may find the
advantages of their Systeme, which they would do well to communicate to us
also, if any such there be; or else declare to me, that there neither are or
can be any such things.


SALV. For my part, as I have not been able, as much as I have thought upon it,
to find any diversity therein; so I think I have found, that no such diversity
can be in them: in so much that I esteem it to no purpose to seek farther after
it. Motion, as to the things that equally move thereby, is as if it never were,
and so far operates as it has relation to things deprived of motion.
Therefore observe: Motion is so far Motion, and as Motion operateth, by how
far it has relation to things which want Motion: but in those things which all
equally partake thereof it has nothing to do, and is as if it never were. And
thus the Merchandises with which a ship is laden, so far move, by how far
leaving London, they pass by France, Spain, Italy, and sail to Aleppo, which
London, France, Spain etc. stand still, not moving with the ship: but as to the
Chests, Bales and other Parcels, wherewith the ship is stowed and and laden,
and in respect of the ship it self, the Motion from London to Syria is as much
as nothing; and nothing-altereth the relation which is between them: and this,
because it is common to all, and is participated by all alike: and of the Cargo
which is in the ship, if a Bale were romag'd from a Chest but one inch only,
this alone would be in that Cargo, a greater Motion in respect of the Chest,
than the whole Voyage of above three thousand miles, made by them as they were
stived together.


SIMPL. This Doctrine is good, sound, and altogether Peripatetick.


SALV. I hold it to be much more ancient: A proposition taken by Aristotle from
the Ancients, but somewhat altered by him.
and suspect that Aristotle in receiving it from some good School, did not
fully understand it, and that therefore, having delivered it with some
alteration, it has been an occasion of confusion amongst those, who would
defend whatever he says. And when he writ, that whatsoever moves, does move
upon something immovable, I suppose that he equivocated, and meant, that
whatever moves, moves in respect to something immovable; which proposition
admits no doubt, and the other many.


SAGR. Pray you make no digression, but proceed in the dissertation you began.


SALV. It being therefore manifest, The first discourse to prove that the
diurnal motion belongs to the Earth.
that the motion which is common to many movables, is idle, and as it were,
null as to the relation of those movables between themselves, because that
among themselves they have made no change: and that it is operative only in
the relation that those movables have to other things, which want that motion,
among which the habitude is changed: and we having divided the Universe into
two parts, one of which is necessarily moveable, and the other immovable; for
the obtaining of whatsoever may depend upon, or be required from such a motion,
it may as well be done by making the Earth alone, as by making all the rest of
the World to move: for that the operation of such a motion consists in nothing
else, save in the relation or habitude which is between the Celestial Bodies,
and the Earth, the which relation is all that is changed. Now if for the
obtaining of the same effect ad unguem, it be all one whether the Earth alone
moves, the rest of the Universe standing still; Nature never does that by many
things, which may be done by a few.
or that, the Earth only standing still, the whole Universe moves with one
and the same motion; who would believe, that Nature (which by common consent,
does not that by many things, which may be done by few) has chosen to make an
innumerable number of most vast bodies move, and that with an unconceivable
velocity, to perform that, which might be done by the moderate motion of one
alone about its own Center?


SIMPL. I do not well understand, how this grand motion signifies nothing as
to the Sun, as to the Moon, as to the other Planets, and as to the innumerable
multitude of fixed stars: or why you should say that it is to no purpose for
the Sun to pass from one Meridian to another; to rise above this Horizon, to
set beneath that other; to make it one while day, another while night: the like
variations are made by the Moon, the other Planets, and the fixed stars
themselves.


SALV. All these alterations instanced by you, are nothing, save only in
relation to the Earth: and that this is true, do but imagine the Earth to move,
The diurnal motion causes no mutation amongst the Celestial Bodies, but all
changes have relation to the Earth.
and there will be no such thing in the World as the rising or setting of the
Sun or Moon, nor Horizons, nor Meridians, nor days, nor nights; nor, in a word,
will such a motion cause any mutation between the Moon and Sun, or any other
star whatsoever, whether fixed or erratick; but all these changes have relation
to the Earth: which all do yet in sum import no other than as if the Sun should
show it self now to China, anon to Persia, then to Egypt, Greece, France,
Spain, America, etc. and the like holds in the Moon, and the rest of the
Celestial Bodies: which self same effect falls out exactly in the same manner,
if, without troubling so great a part of the Universe, the Terrestrial Globe be
made to revolve in it self. A second confirmation that the diurnal motion
belongs to the Earth.
But we will augment the difficulty by the addition of this other, which is a
very great one, namely, that if you will ascribe this Great Motion to Heaven,
you must of necessity make it contrary to the particular motion of all the Orbs
of the Planets, each of which without controversy has its peculiar motion
from the West toward the East, and this but very easy and moderate: and then
you make them to be hurried to the contrary part, i. e. from East to West, by
this most furious diurnal motion: whereas, on the contrary, making the Earth to
move in it self, the contrariety of motions is taken away, and the only motion
from West to East is accommodated to all appearances, and exactly satisfies
every Phoenomenon.


SIMPL. As to the contrariety of Motions it would import little, Circular
motions are not contrary, according to Aristotle.
for Aristotle demonstrateth, that circular motions, are not contrary to one
another; and that theirs cannot be truly called contrariety.


SALV. Does Aristotle demonstrate this, or does he not rather barely affirm it,
as serving to some certain design of his? If contraries be those things, that
destroy one another, as he himself affirms, I do not see how two movables
that encounter each other in a circular line, should less prejudice one
another, than if they interfered in a right line.


SAGR. Hold a little, I pray you. Tell me Simplicius, when two Knights
encounter each other, tilting in open field, or when two whole Squadrons, or
two Fleets at Sea, make up to grapple, and are broken and sunk, do you call
these encounters contrary to one another?


SIMPL. Yes, we say they are contrary.


SAGR. How then, is there no contrariety in circular motions. These motions,
being made upon the superficies of the Earth or Water, which are, as you know,
spherical, come to be circular. Can you tell, Simplicius, which those circular
motions be, that are not contrary to each other? They are (if I mistake not)
those of two circles, which touching one another without, one thereof being
turned round, naturally makes the other move the contrary As you see in a
Mill, wherein the implicated cogs set the wheels on moving.
way; but if one of them shall be within the other, it is impossible that their
motion being made toward different points, they should not justle one another.


SALV. But be they contrary, or not contrary, these are but alterations of
words; and I know, that upon the matter, it would be far more proper and
agreeable with Nature, if we could salve all with one motion only, than to
introduce two that are (if you will not call them contrary) opposite; yet do I
not censure this introduction (of contrary motions) as impossible; nor pretend
I from the denial thereof, to infer a necessary Demonstration, but only a
greater probability, A third confirmation of the same Doctrine.
of the other. A third reason which makes the Ptolomaique Hypothesis less
probable is, that it most unreasonably confounds the order, which we
assuredly see to be amongst those Celestial Bodies, the circumgyration of
which is not questionable, The greater Orbs make their conversions in greater
times.
but most certain. And that Order is, that according as an Orb is greater, it
finisheth its revolution in a longer time, and the lesser, in shorter. And thus
Saturn describing a greater Circle than all the other Planets, compleateth the
same in thirty years: Jupiter finisheth his; that is less, in twelve years:
Mars in two: The Moon runs through hers, so much less than the rest, in a
Month only. Nor do we less sensibly see that of the Medicean Stars, The
times of the Medicean Planets conversions.
which is nearest to Jupiter, to make its revolution in a very short time, that
is, in four and forty hours, or thereabouts, the next to that in three days
and an half, the third in seven days, and the most remote in sixteen. And this
rate holds well enough, nor will it at all alter, whilst we assign the
motion of 24 hours to the Terrestrial Globe, for it to move round its own
center in that time; but if you would have the Earth immovable, it is
necessary, that when you have past from the short period of the Moon, to the
others successively bigger, until you come to that of Mars in two years, and
from thence to that of the bigger Sphere of Jupiter in twelve years, and from
this to the other yet bigger of Saturn, whose period is of thirty years, it is
necessary, I say, that you pass to another Sphere incomparably greater still
than that, and make this to accomplish an entire revolution in twenty four
hours. The motion of 24 hours ascribed to the highest Sphere disorders the
period of the inferior.
And this yet is the least disorder that can follow. For if any one should
pass from the Sphere of Saturn to the Starry Orb, and make it so much bigger
than that of Saturn, as proportion would require, in respect of its very slow
motion, of many thousands of years, then it must needs be a Salt much more
absurd, to skip from this to another bigger, and to make it convertible in
twenty four hours. But the motion of the Earth being granted, the order of the
periods will be exactly observed, and from the very slow Sphere of Saturn, we
come to the fixed Stars, which are wholly immovable, The fourth Confirmation.
and so avoid a fourth difficulty, which we must of necessity admit, if the
Starry Sphere be supposed moveable, and that is the immense disparity between
the motions of those stars themselves; Great disparity amongst the motions of
the particular fixed stars, if their Sphere be moveable.
of which some would come to move most swiftly in most vast circles, others
most slowly in circles very small, according as those or these should be found
nearer, or more remote from the Poles; which still is accompanied with an
inconvenience, as well because we see those, of whose motion there is no
question to be made, to move all in very immense circles; as also, because it
seems to be an act done with no good consideration, to constitute bodies, that
are designed to move circularly, at immense distances from the center, and
afterward to make them move in very small circles. And not only the
magnitudes of the circles, and consequently the velocity of the motions of
these Stars, shall be most different from the circles and motions of those
others, The fifth Confirmation.
but (which shall be the fifth inconvenience) the self-same Stars shall
successively vary its circles and velocities: The motions of the fixed stars
would accelerate and grow slow in diverse times, if the starry Sphere were
moveable.
For that those, which two thousand years since were in the Equinoctial, and
consequently did with their motion describe very vast circles, being in our
days many degrees distant from thence, must of necessity become more slow of
motion, and be reduced to move in lesser circles, and it is not altogether
impossible but that a time may come, in which some of them which in aforetime
had continually moved, shall be reduced by uniting with the Pole, to a state of
rest, and then after some time of cessation, shall return to their motion
again; whereas the other Stars, touching whose motion none stand in doubt, do
all describe, as has been said, the great circle of their Orb, and in that
maintain themselves without any variation. The sixth Confirmation.
The absurdity is farther enlarged (which let be the sixth inconvenience) to
him that more seriously examineth the thing, in that no thought can comprehend
what ought to be the solidity of that immense Sphere, whose depth so steadfastly
holds fast such a multitude of Stars, which without ever changing site among
themselves, are with so much concord carried about, with so great disparity of
motions. Or else, supposing the Heavens to be fluid, as we are with more reason
to believe, so as that every Star wandereth to and fro in it, by ways of its
own, what rules shall regulate their motions, and to what purpose, so, as that
being beheld from the Earth, they appear as if they were made by one only
Sphere? It is my opinion, that they might so much more easily do that, and in a
more commodious manner, by being constituted immovable, than by being made
errant, by how much more facile it is to number the quarries in the Pavement of
a Piazza, than the rout of boys which run up and down upon them. The Seventh
Confirmation.
And lastly, which is the seventh instance, if we attribute the Diurnal Motion
to the highest Heaven, it must be constituted of such a force and efficacy, as
to carry along with it the innumerable multitude of fixed Stars, Bodies all of
vast magnitude, and far bigger than the Earth; and moreover all the Spheres of
the Planets; notwithstanding that both these and those of their own nature move
the contrary way. And besides all this, it must be granted, that also the
Element of Fire, and the greater part of the Air, are likewise forcibly hurried
along with the rest, and that the sole little Globe of the Earth pertinaciously
stands still, and unmoved against such an impulse; a thing, which in my
thinking, is very difficult; nor can I see how the Earth, a pendent body, The
Earth a pendent Body, and equilibrated in a fluid Medium seems unable to resist
the rapture of the Diurnal Motion.
and equilibrated upon its center, exposed indifferently to either motion or
rest, and environed with a liquid ambient, should not yield also as the rest,
and be carried about. But we find none of these obstacles in making the Earth
to move; a small body, and insensible, compared to the Universe, and therefore
unable to offer it any violence.


SAGR. I find my fancy disturbed with certain conjectures so confusedly sprung
from your later discourses; that, if I would be enabled to apply my self with
atention to what follows, I must of necessity attempt whether I can better
methodize them, and gather thence their true construction, if happily any can be
made of them; and peradventure, the proceeding by interrogations may help me
the more easily to express my self. Therefore I demand first of Simplicius,
whether he believes, that diverse motions may naturally agree to one and the
same moveable body, or else that it be requisite its natural and proper motion
be only one.


SIMPL. To one single moveable, A single moveable has but only one natural
motion, and all the rest are by participation.
there can naturally agree but one sole motion, and no more; the rest all
happen accidentally and by participation; like as to him that walks upon the
Deck of a Ship, his proper motion is that of his walk, his motion by
participation that which carries him to his Port, whither he would never with
his walking have arrived, if the Ship with its motion had not wafted him
thither.


SAGR. Tell me secondly. That motion, which is communicated to any moveable by
participation, whilst it moves by it self, with another motion different from
the participated, is it necessary, that it do reside in some certain subject by
it self, or else can it subsist in nature alone, without other support.


SIMPL. Aristotle gives you an answer to all these questions, Motion cannot be
made without its moveable subject.
and tells you, that as of one sole moveable the motion is but one; so of one
sole motion the moveable is but one; and consequently, that without the
inherence in its subject, no motion can either subsist, or be imagined.


SAGR. I would have you tell me in the third place, whether you beblieve that
the Moon and the other Planets and Celestial bodies, have their proper
motions, and what they are.


SIMPL. They have so, and they be those according to which they run through the
Zodiac, the Moon in a Month, the Sun in a Year, Mars in two, the Starry
Sphere in those so many thousand. And these are their proper, or natural
motions.


SAGR. But that motion wherewith I see the fixed Stars, and with them all the
Planets go unitedly from East to West, and return round to the East again in
twenty four hours, how does it agree with them?


SIMPL. It suiteth with them by participation.


SAGR. This then resides not in them, and not residing in them, nor being able
to subsist without some subject in which it is resident, it must of force be
the proper and natural motion of some other Sphere.


SIMPL. For this purpose Astronomers, and Philosophers have found another high
Sphere, above all the rest, without Stars, to which Natural agrees the Diurnal
Motion; and this they call the Primum mobile; the which carries along with it
all the inferior Spheres, contributing and imparting its motion to them.


SAGR. But when, without introducing other Spheres unknown and hugely vast,
without other motions or communicated raptures, with leaving to each Sphere its
sole and simple motion, without intermixing contrary motions, but making all
turn one way, as it is necessary that they do, depending all upon one sole
principle, all things proceed orderly, and correspond with most perfect
harmony, why do we reject this Phoenomenon, and give our assent to those
prodigious and laborious conditions?


SIMPL. The difficulty lies in finding out this so natural and expeditous way.


SAGR. In my judgment this is found. Make the Earth the Primum mobile, that is,
make it turn round its own axis in twenty four hours, and toward the same
point with all the other Spheres; and without participating this same motion to
any other Planet or Star, all shall have their risings, settings, and in a
word, all their other appearances.


SIMPL. The business is, to be able to make the Earth move without a thousand
inconveniences.


SALV. All the inconveniences shall be removed as fast as you propound them:
and the things spoken hitherto are only the primary and more general
inducements which give us to believe that the diurnal conversion may not
altogether without probability be applied to the Earth, rather than to all the
rest of the Universe: the which inducements I impose not upon you as inviolable
Axioms, but as hints, which carry with them somewhat of likelihood. One single
experiment, or sound demonstration batereth down all arguments merely probable.
And in regard I know very well, that one sole experiment, or concludent
demonstration, produced on the contrary part, suffices to batter to the ground
these and a thousand other probable Arguments; therefore it is not fit to stay
here, but proceed forwards and hear what Simplicius answers, and what greater
probabilities, or stronger arguments he alleges on the contrary.


SIMPL. I will first say something in general upon all these considerations
together, and then I will descend to some particulars. It seems that you
universally bottom all you say upon the greater simplicity and facility of
producing the same effects, whilst you hold, that as to the causing of them,
the motion of the Earth alone, serves as well as that of all the rest of the
World, the Earth deducted: but as to the operations, you esteem that much
easier than this. To which I reply, that I am also of the same opinion, so long
as I regard my own not only finite, but feeble power; but having a respect to
the strength of the Mover, which is infinite, its no less easy to move the
Universe, than the Earth, yea than a straw. And if his power be infinite, Of an
infinite power one would think a greater part should rather be employed than a
less.
why should he not rather exercise a greater part thereof than a less?
Therefore, I hold that your discourse in general is not convincing.


SALV. If I had at any time said, that the Universe moved not for want of power
in the Mover, I should have erred, and your reproof would have been seasonable;
and I grant you, that to an infinite power, it is as easy to move an hundred
thousand, as one. But that which I did say, concerns not the Mover, but only
has respect to the Movables; and in them, not only to their resistance,
which doubtless is lesser in the Earth, than in the Universe; but to the many
other particulars, but even now considered. As to what you say in the next
place, that of an infinite power it is better to exercise a great part than a
small: I answer, that of infinite one part is not greater than another, since
both are infinite; Of infinity, one part is no bigger than another, although
they are comparatively unequal.
nor can it be said, that of the infinite number, an hundred thousand is a
greater part than two, though that be fifty thousand times greater than this;
and if to the moving of the Universe there be required a finite power, though
very great in comparison of that which suffices to move the Earth only; yet
is there not implied therein a greater part of the infinite power, nor is that
part less infinite which remains unimploy'd. So that to apply unto a
particular effect, a little more, or a little less power, imports nothing;
besides that the operation of such virtue, has not for its bound or end the
Diurnal Motion only; but there are several other motions in the World, which
we know of, and many others there may be, that are to us unknown. Therefore if
we respect the Movables, and granting it as out of question, that it is a
shorter and easier way to move the Earth, than the Universe; and moreover,
having an eye to the so many other abreviations, and facilities that only this
way are to be obtained, an infallible Maxim of Aristotle, which he teaches
us, that, frustra fit per plura, quod potest fieri per pauciora, rendereth it
more probable that the Diurnal Motion belongs to the Earth alone, than to the
Universe, the Earth subducted.


SIMPL. In reciting that Axiom, you have omitted a small clause, which
imports as much as all the rest, especially in our case, that is to say, the
words aeque been. It is requisite therefore to examine whether this Hypothesis
does equally well satisfy in all particulars, as the other.


SALV. The knowledge whether both these positions do aeque been, satisfy, may
be comprehended from the particular examination of the appearances which they
are to satisfy; for hitherto we have discoursed, and will continue to argue ex
hypothesi, namely, supposing, that as to the satisfaction of the appearances,
both the assumptions are equally accomodated. In the Axiom Frustra fit per
plura, etc. the addition of aeque been, is superfluous.
As to the clause which you say was omitted by me, I have more reason to
suspect that it was superfluously inserted by you. For the expression aeque
been, is a relative that necessarily requires two terms at least, for a thing
cannot have relation to its self, nor do we say, v. gr. rest to be equally
good, as rest. And because, when we say, that is done in vain by many means,
which may be done with fewer, we mean, that that which is to be done, ought to
be the same thing, not two different ones; and because the same thing cannot be
said to be done as well as its self; therefore, the addition of the Phrase
aeque been is superfluous, and a relation, that has but one term only.


SAGR. Unless you will have the same befall us, as did yesterday, let us return
to our matter in hand; and let Simplicius begin to produce those difficulties
that seem in his opinion, to thwart this new disposition of the World.


SIMPL. That disposition is not new, but very old; and that you may see it is
so, Aristotle confuteth it; and his confutations are these: Aristotle's
Arguments for the Earths quiessence.
First if the Earth moves either in it self about its own Center, or in an
Excentrick Circle, it is necessary that that same motion be violent; for it is
not its natural motion, for if it were, each of its parts would partake
thereof; but each of them moves in a right line toward its Center. It being
therefore violent and pteternatural, it could never be perpetual: But the order
of the World is perpetual. Therefore, etc. Secondly, all the other movables
that move circularly, seem to Resti^ indietz^, which is meant here of that
motion which a bowl makes when is born by its by as to one side or other, and
so hindered in its direct motion. ^
stay behind, and to move with more than one motion, the Prmum Mobile excepted:
Whence it would be necessary that the Earth also do move with two motions; and
if that should be so, it would inevitably follow, that mutations should be made
in the Fixed Stars, the which none do perceive; nay without any variation, the
same Stars always rise from toward the same places, and in the same places do
set. Thirdly, the motion of the parts is the same with that of the whole, and
naturally tends toward the Center of the Universe; and for the same cause
rest, being arrived thither. He thereupon moves the question whether the motion
of the parts has a tendency to center of the Universe, or to the center of the
Earth; and concludes that it goes by proper instinct to the center of the
Universe, and per accidence to that of the Earth; of which point we largely
discoursed yesterday. He lastly confirms the same with a fourth argument
taken from the experiment of grave bodies, which faling from on high, descend
perpendicularly unto the Earths surface; and in the same manner Projections
shot perpendicularly upwards, do by the same lines return perpendicularly down
again, though they were shot to a very great height. All which arguments
necessarily prove their motion to be toward the Center of the Earth, which
without moving at all waits for, and receives them. He intimates in the last
place that the Astronomers alledg other reasons in confirmation of the same
conclusions, I mean of the Earths being in the Center of the Universe, and
immovable; and instanceth only in one of them, to wit, that all the
Phenomenon or appearances that are seen in the motions of the Stars, perfectly
agree with the position of the Earth in the Center; which would not be so, were
the Earth seated otherwise. The rest produced by Ptolomy and the other
Astronomers, I can give you now if you please, or after you have spoken what
you have to say in answer to these of Aristotle.


SALV. The arguments which are brought upon this occasion are of two kinds: Two
kinds of Arguments touching the Earths motion or rest.
some have respect to the accidents Terrestrial, without any relation to the
Stars, and others are taken from the Phenomenon and observations of things
Celestial. The arguments of Aristotle are for the most part taken from things
near at hand, and he leaves the others to Astronomers; and therefore it is the
best way, if you like of it, to examine these taken from experiments touching
the Earth, and then proceed to those of the other kind. Arguments of Ptolomy
and Tycho, and other persons, over and above those of Aristotle.
And because Ptolomy, Tycho, and the other Astronomers and Philosophers,
besides the arguments of Aristotle by them assumed, confirmed, and made good,
do produce certain others; we will put them all together, that so we may not
answer twice to the same, or the like objections. Therefore Simplicius, choose
whether you will recite them your self, or cause me to ease you of this task,
for I am ready to serve you.


SIMPL. It is better that you quote them, because, as having taken more pains
in the study of them, you can produce them with more readiness, and in greater
number.


SALV. All, The first argument taken from grave bodies falling from on high to
the ground.
for the strongest reason, allege that of grave bodies, which falling
downwards from on high, move by a right line, that is perpendicular to the
surface of the Earth, an argument which is held undeniably to prove that the
Earth is immovable: for in case it should have the diurnal motion, a Tower,
from the top of which a stone is let fall, being carried along by the
conversion of the Earth, in the time that the stone spends in falling, would be
transported many hundred yards Eastward, and so far distant from the Towers
foot would the stone come to ground. The which effect they back with another
experiment; Which is confirmed by the experiment of a body let fall from the
round top of a Ship.
to wit, by letting a bullet of lead fall from the round top of a Ship, that
lies at anchor, and observing the mark it makes where it lights, which they
find to be near the That is, at the foot of the Mast, upon the upper deck.
partners of the Mast; but if the same bullet be let fall from the same place
when the ship is under sail, it shall light as far from the former place, as
the ship has run in the time of the leads descent; and this for no other
reason, than because the natural motion of the ball being at liberty is by a
right line toward the center of the Earth. The second argument taken from a
Projection shot very high.
They fortify this argument with the experiment of a projection shot on high
at a very great distance; as for example, a ball sent out of a Cannon, erected
perpendicular to the horizon, the which spends so much time in ascending and
falling, that in our parallel the Cannon and we both should be carried by the
Earth many miles toward the East, so that the ball in its return could never
come near the Piece, but would fall as far West, The third argument taken from
the shots of a Cannon, toward the East, and toward the West*
as the Earth had run East. They again add a third, and very evident
experiment, scilicet, that shooting a bullet point blank (or as Gunners say,
neither above nor under metal) out of a Culverin toward the East, and
afterward another, with the same charge, and at the same elevation or disport
toward the West, the range toward the West should be very much greater then
the other toward the East: for that whilst the ball goes Westward, and the
Piece is carried along by the Earth Eastward, the ball will fall from the Piece
as far distant as is the aggregate of the two motions, one made by it self
toward the West, and the other by the Piece carried about by the Earth toward
the East; and on the contrary, from the range of the ball shot Eastward you are
to substract the space the Piece moved, being carried after it. Now suppose,
for example, that the range of the ball shot West were five miles, and that the
Earth in the same parallel and in the time of the Bals ranging should remove
three miles, the Ball in this case would fall eight miles distant from the
Culverin, namely, its own five Westward, and the Culverins three miles
Eastward: but the range of the shot toward the East would be but two miles
long, for so much is the remainder, after you have subtracted from the five
miles of the range, the three miles which the Piece had moved toward the same
part. But experience shows the Ranges to be equal, therefore the Culverin,
and consequently the Earth are immovable. This argument is confirmed by two
shots toward the South and toward the North.
And the stability of the Earth is no less confirmed by two other shots made
North and South; for they would never hit the mark, but the Ranges would be
always wide, or toward the West, by means of the remove the mark would make,
being carried along with the Earth toward the East, whilst the ball is
flying. And it is likewise confirmed by two shots toward the East, and toward
the West.
And not only shots made by the Meridians, but also those aimed East or West
would prove uncertain; for those aimed East would be too high, and those
directed West too low, although they were shot point blank, as I said. For the
Range of the Ball in both the shots being made by the Tangent, that is, by a
line parallel to the Horizon, and being that in the diurnal motion, if it be of
the Earth, the Horizon goes continually descending toward the East, and
rising from the West (therefore the Oriental Stars seem to rise, and the
Occidental to decline) so that the Oriental mark would descend below the aim,
and thereupon the shot would fly too high, and the ascending of the Western
mark would make the shot aimed that way range too low; so that the Piece would
never carry true toward any point; and for that experience tells us the
contrary, it is requisite to say, that the Earth is immovable.


SIMPL. These are solid reasons, and such as I believe no man can answer.


SALV. Perhaps they are new to you?


SIMPL. Really they are; and now I see with how many admirable experiments
Nature is pleased to favor us, wherewith to assist us in the knowledge of the
Truth. Oh! how exactly one truth agrees with another, and all conspire to
render each other inexpugnable!


SAGR. What pity it is that Guns were not used in Aristotle's age, he would with
help of them have easily battered down ignorance, and spoke without haesitation
of these mundane points.


SALV. I am very glad that these reasons are new unto you, that so you may not
rest in the opinion of the major part of Peripateticks, who believe, that if
any one forsakes the Doctrine of Aristotle, it is because they did not
understand or rightly apprehend his demonstrations. Copernicus his followers
are not moved through ignorance of the arguments on the other part.
But you may expect to hear of other Novelties, and you shall see the followers
of this new Systeme produce against themselves observations, experiences, and
reasons of far greater force than those alleged by Aristotle, Ptolomy, and
other opposers of the same conclusions, and by this means you shall come to
ascertain your self that they were not induced through want of knowledge or
expetience to follow that opinion.


SAGR. It is requisite that upon this occasion I relate unto you some accidents
that befell me, so soon as I first began to hear speak of this new doctrine.
Being very young, and having scarcely finished my course of Philosophy, which I
left off, as being set upon other employments, there chanced to come into these
parts a certain Foreigner of Rostock, whose name, as I remember, was
Christianus Vurstitius, Christianus Vurstitius read certain Lectures touching
the opinion of Copernicus, and what ensued thereupon.
a follower of Copernicus, who in an Academy made two or three Lectures upon
this point, to whom many flock't as Auditors; but I thinking they went more for
the novelty of the subject than otherwise, did not go to hear him: for I had
concluded with my self that that opinion could be no other than a solemn
madness. And questioning some of those who had been there, I perceived they
all made a jest thereof, execpt one, who told me that the business was not
altogether to be laugh't at, and because this man was reputed by me to be very
intelligent and wary, I repented that I was not there, and began from that time
forward as often as I met with any one of the Copernican persuasion, to demand of
them, if they had been always of the same judgment; and of as many as I
examined, I found not so much as one, who told me not that he had been a long
time of the contrary opinion, but to have changed it for this, as convinced by
the strength of the reasons proving the same: and afterward questioning them,
one by one, to see whether they were well possessed of the reasons of the other
side, I found them all to be very ready and perfect in them; The followers of
Copernicus were all first against that opinion, but the Sectators of Aristotle
and Ptolomy, were never of the other side.
so that I could not truly say, that they had took up this opinion out of
ignorance, vanity, or to show the acuteness of their wits. On the contrary, of
as many of the Peripateticks and Ptolomeans as I have asked (and out of
curiosity I have talked with many) what pains they had taken in the Book of
Copernicus, I found very few that had so much as superficially perused it; but
of those whom, I thought, had understood the same, not one; and moreover, I
have enquired amongst the followers of the Peripatetick Doctrine, if ever any
of them had held the contrary opinion, and likewise found none that had.
Whereupon considering that there was no man who followed the opinion of
Copernicus, that had not been first on the contrary side, and that was not very
well acquainted with the reasons of Aristotle and Ptolomy; and, on the
contrary, that there is not one of the followers of Ptolomy that had ever been
of the judgment of Copernicus, and had left that, to embrace this of Aristotle,
considering, I say, these things, I began to think, that one, who leaves an
opinion imbued with his milk, and followed by very many, to take up another
owned by very few, and denied by all the Schools, and that really seems a very
great Paradox, must needs have been moved, not to say forced, by more powerful
reasons. For this cause, I am become very curious to dive, as they say, into
the bottom of this business, and account it my great good fortune that I have
met you two, from whom I may without any trouble, hear all that has been, and,
happily, can be said on this argument, assuring my self that the strength of your
reasons will resolve all scruples, and bring me to a certainty in this subject.


SIMPL. But its possible your opinion and hopes may be disappointed, and that
you may find your selves more at a loss in the end than you was at first.


SAGR. I am very confident that this can in no wise befall me.


SIMPL. And why not? I have a manifest example in my self, that the farther I
go, the more I am confounded.


SAGR. This is a sign that those reasons that hitherto seemed concluding unto
you, and assured you in the truth of your opinion, begin to change countenance
in your mind, and to let you by degrees, if not embrace, at least look toward
the contrary tenent; but I, that have been hitherto indifferent, do greatly
hope to acquire rest and satisfaction by our future discourses, and you will
not deny but I may, if you please but to hear what persuades me to this
expectation.


SIMPL. I will gladly hearken to the same, and should be no less glad that the
like effect might be wrought in me.


SAGR. Favor me therefore with answering to what I shall ask you. And first,
tell me, Simplicius, is not the conclusion, which we seek the truth of, Whether
we ought to hold with Aristotle and Ptolomy, that the Earth only abiding
without motion in the Center of the Universe, the Celestial bodies all move,
or else, Whether the Starry Sphere and the Sun standing still in the Center,
the Earth is without the same, and owner of all those motions that in our
seeming belong to the Sun and fixed Stars?


SIMPL. These are the conclusions which are in dispute.


SAGR. And these two conclusions, are they not of such a nature, that one of
them must necessarily be true, and the other false?


SIMPL. They are so. We are in a Dilemma, one part of which must of necessity
be true, and the other untrue; for between Motion and Rest, which are
contradictories, there cannot be instanced a third, so as that one cannot say
the Earth moves not, nor stands still; the Sun and Stars do not move, and yet
stand not still.


SAGR. The Earth, the Sun, and Stars, what things are they in nature? are they
petite things not worth our notice, or grand and worthy of consideration?


SIMPL. They are principal, noble, integral bodies of the Universe, most vast
and considerable.


SAGR. And Motion, and Rest, what accidents are they in Nature?


SIMPL. So great and principal, Motion and rest principal accidents in nature.
that Nature her self is defined by them.


SAGR. So that moving eternally, and the being wholly immovable are two
conditions very considerable in Nature, and indicate very great diversity; and
especially when ascribed to the principal bodies of the Universe, from which
can ensue none but very different events.


SIMPL. Yea doubtless.


SAGR. Now answer me to another point. Do you believe that in Logic,
Rhethorick, the Physics, Metaphysics, Mathematics, and finally, in the
universa^ity of Disputations there are arguments sufficient to persuade and
demonstrate to a person the fallacious, no less then the true conclusions?


SIMPL. No Sir; Untruths cannot be demonstrated, as Truths are.
rather I am very confident and certain, that for the proving of a true and
necessary conclusion, there are in nature not only one, For proof of true
conclusions, many solid arguments may be produced, but to prove a falsity, none.
but many very powerful demonstrations: and that one may discuss and handle
the same diverse and sundry ways, without ever falling into any absurdity; and
that the more any Sophist would disturb and muddy it, the more clear would its
certainty appear: And that on the contrary to make a false position pass for
true, and to persuade the belief thereof, there cannot be any thing produced
but fallacies, Sophisms, Paralogismes, Equivocations, and Discourses vain,
inconsistant, and full of repugnances and contradictions.


SAGR. Now if eternal motion, and eternal rest be so principal accidents of
Nature, and so different, that there can depend on them only most different
consequences, and especially when applied to the Sun, and to the Earth, so vast
and famous bodies of the Universe; and it being, moreover, impossible, that one
of two contradictory Propositions, should not be true, and the other false; and
that for proof of the false one, any thing can be produced but fallacies; but
the true one being perswadeable by all kind of concluding and demonstrative
arguments, why should you think that he, of you two, who shall be so fortunate
as to maintain the true Proposition ought not to persuade me? You must suppose
me to be of a stupid wit, perverse judgment, dull mind and intellect, and of a
blind reason, that I should not be able to distinguish light from darkness,
jewels from coals, or truth from falsehood.


SIMPL. I tell you now, and have told you upon other occasions, that the best
Master to teach us how to discern Sophismes, Paralogismes, and other fallacies,
was Aristotle, who in this particular can never be deceived.


SAGR. You insist upon Aristotle, who cannot speak. Yet I tell you, Aristotle
would either refute his adversaries arguments, or would alter his opinion.
that if Aristotle were here, he would either yield himself to be persuaded by
us, or refuting our arguments, convince us by better of his own. And you your
self, when you heard the experiments of the Suns related, did you not
acknowledge and admire them, and confess them more concludent than those of
Aristotle? Yet nevertheless I cannot perceive that Salviatus, who has
produced them, examined them, and with exquisite care scanned them, does
confess himself persuaded by them; no nor by others of greater force, which he
intimated that he was about to give us an account of. And I know not on what
grounds you should censure Nature, as one that for many Ages has been lazy,
and forgetful to produce speculative wits; and that knows not how to make
more such, unless they be such kind of men as slavishly giving up their
judgments to Aristotle, do understand with his brain, and resent with his
senses. But let us hear the residue of those reasons which favor his opinion,
that we may thereupon proceed to speak to them; comparing and weighing them in
the balance of impartiality.


SALV. Before I proceed any farther, I must tell Sagredus, that in these our
Disputations, I personate the Copernican, and imitate him, as if I were his
Zany; but what has been effected in my private thoughts by these arguments
which I seem to alledg in his favor, I would not have you to judge by what I
say, whilst I am in the heat of acting my part in the Fable; but after I have
laid by my disguise, for you may chance to find me different from what you see
me upon the Stage. Now let us go on.

Ptolomy and his followers produce another experiment like to that of the
Projections, An argument taken from the Clouds, and from Birds.
and it is of things that being separated from the Earth, continue a good space
of time in the Air, such as are the Clouds, Birds of flight; and as of them it
cannot be said that they are rapt or transparted by the Earth, having no
adhesion thereto, it seems not possible, that they should be able to keep pace
with the velocity thereof; nay it should rather seem to us, that they all
swiftly move toward the West: And if being carried about by the Earth, pass
our parallel in twenty four hours, which yet is at least sixteen thousand
miles, how can Birds follow such a course or revolution? Whereas on the
contrary, we see them fly as well toward the East, as toward the West, An
argument taken from the air which we feel to beat upon us when we run a Horse
at full speed.
or any other part, without any sensible difference. Moreover, if when we run a
Horse at his speed, we feel the air beat vehemently against our face, what an
impetuous blast ought we perpetually to feel from the East, being carried with
so rapid a course against the wind? and yet no such effect is perceived. Take
another very ingenious argument inferred from the following experiment. An
argument taken from the whirling of circular motion, which has a faculty to
extrude and dissipate.
The circular motion has a faculty to extrude and dissipate from its Center
the parts of the moving body, whenever either the motion is not very slow, or
those parts are not very well fastened together; and therefore, if v. g. we
should turn one of those great wheels very fast about, wherein one or more men
walking, crane up very great weights, as the huge massy stone, used by the
Callander for pressing of Clothes; or the fraighted Barks which being haled on
shore, are hoisted out of one river into another; in case the parts of that
same Wheel so swiftly turned round, be not very well joined and pined together,
they would all be shattered to pieces; and though many stones or other
ponderous substances, should be very fast bound to its outward Rimme, yet could
they not resist the impetuosity, which with great violence would hurl them
every way far from the Wheel, and consequently from its Center. So that if the
Earth did move with such and so much greater velocity, what gravity, what
tenacity of lime or plaster would keep together Stones, Buildings, and whole
Cities, that they should not be tossed into the Air by so precipitous a motion?
And both men and beasts, which are not fastened to the Earth, how could they
resist so great an impetus? Whereas, on the other side, we see both these, and
far less resistances of pebles, sands, leaves rest quietly on the Earth, and
to return to it in falling, though with a very slow motion. See here,
Simplicius, the most potent arguments, taken, to so speak, from things
Terrestrial; there remain those of the other kind, namely, such as have
relation to the appearances of Heaven, which reasons, to confess the truth,
tend more to prove the Earth to be in the center of the Universe, and
consequently, to deprive it of the annual motion about the same, ascribed unto
it by Copernicus. Which arguments, as being of somewhat a different nature, may
be produced, after we have examined the strength of these already propounded.


SAGR. What say you Simplicius? do you think that Salviatus is Master of, and
knows how to unfold the Ptolomean and Aristotelian arguments? Or do you think
that any Peripatetick is equally verst in the Copernican demonstrations?


SIMPL. Were it not for the high esteem, that the past discourses have begot in
me of the learning of Salviatus, and of the acuteness of Sagredus, I would by
their good leave have gone my way without staying for their answers; it seeming
to me a thing impossible, that so palpable experiments should be contradicted;
and would, without hearing them farther, confirm my self in my old persuasion;
for though I should be made to see that it was erroneous, its being upheld by
so many probable reasons, would render it excuseable. And if these are
fallacies, what true demonstrations were ever so fair?


SAGR. Yet its good that we hear the responsions of Salviatus; which if they be
true, must of necessity be more fair, and that by infinite degrees; and those
must be deformed, yea most deformed, if the Metaphysical Axiom hold, True and
fair are one and the same, as also false and deformed.
That true and fair are one and the same thing; as also false and deformed.
Therefore Salviatus let us no longer lose time.


SALV. The first Argument alleged by Simplicius, if I well remember it, was
this. The Earth cannot move circularly, because such motion would be violent to
the same, and therefore not perpetual: that it is violent, the reason was:
Because, that had it been natural, its parts would likewise naturally move
round, which is impossible, for that it is natural for the parts thereof to
move with a right motion downwards. To this my reply is, that I could gladly
wish, The answer t^ Aristotle's first argument.
that Aristotle had more clearly expressed himself, where he said; That its parts
would likewise move circularly; for this moving circularly is to be understood
two ways, one is, that every particle or atome separated from its Whole would
move circularly about its particular center, describing its small Circulets;
the other is, that the whole Globe moving about its center in twenty four
hours, the parts also would turn about the same center in four and twenty
hours. The first would be no less an impertinency, than if one should say,
that every part of the circumference of a Circle ought to be a Circle; or
because that the Earth is Spherical, that therefore every part thereof be a
Globe, for so does the Axiom require: Eadem est ratio totius, and partium. But
if he took it in the other sense, to wit, that the parts in imitation of the
Whole should move naturally round the Center of the whole Globe in twenty four
hours, I say, that they do so; and it concerns you, instead of Aristotle, to
prove that they do not.


SIMPL. This is proved by Aristotle in the same place, when he says, that the
natural motion of the parts is the right motion downwards to the center of the
Universe; so that the circular motion cannot naturally agree therewith.


SALV. But do not you see, that those very words carry in them a confutation of
this solution?


SIMPL. How? and where?


SALV. Does not he say that the circular motion of the Earth would be violent?
and therefore not eternal? and that this is absurd, for that the order of the
World is eternal?


SIMPL. He says so.


SALV. But if that which is violent cannot be eternal, That which is violent,
cannot be eternal, and that which cannot be eternal, cannot be natural.
then by conversion, that which cannot be eternal, cannot be natural: but the
motion of the Earth downwards cannot be otherwise eternal; therefore much less
can it be natural: nor can any other motion be natural to it, save only that
which is eternal. But if we make the Earth move with a circular motion, this
may be eternal to it, and to its parts, and therefore natural.


SIMPL. The right motion is most natural to the parts of the Earth, and is to
them eternal; nor shall it ever happen that they move not with a right motion;
always provided that the impediments be removed.


SALV. You equivocate Simplicius; and I will try to free you from the equivoke.
Tell me, therefore, do you think that a Ship which should sail from the Strait
of Gibralter toward Palestina can eternally move toward that Coast? keeping
always an equal course?


SIMPL. No doubtless.


SALV. And why not?


SIMPL. Because that Voyage is bounded and terminated between the Herculean
Pillars, and the shore of the Holy Land; and the distance being limited, it is
past in a finite time, unless one by returning back should with a contrary
motion begin the same Voyage anew; but this would be an interrupted and no
continued motion.


SALV. Very true. But the Navigation from the Strait of Magalanes by the
Pacifick Ocean, the Moluccha's, the Cape di buona Speranza, and from thence by
the same Strait, and then again by the Pacifick Ocean, etc. do you believe that
it may be perpetuated?


SIMPL. It may; for this being a circumgyration, which returns about its
self, with infinite replications, it may be perpetuated without any
interruption.


SALV. A Ship then may in this Voyage continue sailing eternally.


SIMPL. It may, in case the Ship were incorruptible, but the Ship decaying, the
Navigation must of necessity come to an end.


SALV. But in the Mediterrane, though the Vessel were incorruptible, yet could
she not sail perpetually toward Palestina, that Voyage being determined. Two
things requisite to the end a motion may perpetuate it self; an unlimited
space, and an incorruptible moveable.
Two things then are required, to the end a moveable may without intermission
move perpetually; the one is, that the motion may of its own nature be
indeterminate and infinite; the other, that the moveable be likewise
incorruptible and eternal.


SIMPL. All this is necessary.


SALV. Therefore you may see how of your own accord you have confessed it
impossible that any moveable should move eternally in a right line, Right
motion cannot be eternal, and consequently cannot be natural to the Earth.
in regard that right motion, whether it be upwards, or downwards, is by you
your self bounded by the circumference and center; so that if a Moveable, as
suppose the Earth be eternal, yet forasmuch as the right motion is not of its
own nature eternal, but most Terminatissimo.
terminate, it cannot naturally suit with the Earth. Nay, as was said By this
expression he every where means the preceding Dialogue, or Giornata.
yesterday, Aristotle himself is constrained to make the Terrestrial Globe
eternally immovable. When again you say, that the parts of the Earth evermore
move downwards, all impediments being removed, you egregiously equivocate; for
then, on the other side they must be impeded, contraried, and forced, if you
would have them move; for, when they are once fallen to the ground, they must
be violently thrown upwards, that they may a second time fall; and as to the
impediments, these only hinder its arrival at the center; but if there were a
Well, that did pass through and beyond the center, yet would not a cold of
Earth pass beyond it, unless inasmuch as being transported by its impetus, it
should pass the same to return thither again, and in the end there to rest. As
therefore to the defending, that the motion by a right line does or can agree
naturally neither to the Earth, nor to any other moveable, whilst the Universe
retains its perfect order, I would have you take no further pains about it,
but (unless you will grant them the circular motion) your best way will be to
defend and maintain their immobility.


SIMPL. As to their immoveablenesse, the arguments of Aristotle, and moreover
those alleged by your self seem in my opinion necessarily to conclude the
same, as yet; and I conceive it will be a hard matter to refute them.


SALV. Come we therefore to the second Argument, which was, That those bodies,
The answer to the second argument.
which we are assured do move circularly, have more than one motion, unless it
be the Primum Mobile; and therefore, if the Earth did move circularly, it ought
to have two motions; from which alterations would follow in the rising and
setting of the Fixed Stars: Which effect is not perceived to ensue. Therefore,
etc. The most proper and genuine answer to this Allegation is contained in the
Argument it self; and even Aristotle puts it in our mouths, which it is
impossible, Simplicius, that you should not have seen.


SIMPL. I neither have seen it, nor do I yet apprehend it.


SALV. This cannot be, sure, the thing is so very plain.


SIMPL. I will with your leave, cast an eye upon the Text.


SAGR. We will command the Text to be brought forthwith.


SIMPL. I always carry it about with me: See here it is, and I know the place
perfectly well, which is in lib. 2. De Coelo, cap. 16. Here it is, Text 97.
Preterea omnia, quae feruntur latione circulari subdeficere videntur, ac moveri
pluribus una latione, praeter primam Sphaeram; quare and Terram necessariam
est, sive circa medium, sive in medio posita feratur, duabus moveri lationibus.
Si autem hoc acciderit, necessariam est fieri mutationes, ac conversiones
fixorum astrorum. Hoc autem non videtur fieri, sed semper eadem, apud eadem
loca ipsius, and oriuntur, and occidunt. [In English thus:] Furthermore all
that are carried with circular motion, seem to Subdeficere.
foreslow, and to move with more than one motion, except the first Sphere;
wherefore it is necessary that the Earth move with two motions, whether it be
carried about the Or Center.
middle, or placed in the middle. But if it be so, there would of necessity be
alterations and conversions made amongst the fixed Stars. But no such thing is
seen to be done, but the same Star does always rise and set in the same place.
In all this I find not any falacy, and my thinks the argument is very forcible.


SALV. And this new reading of the place has confirmed me in the fallacy of
the Sillogisme, and moreover, discovered another falsity. Therefore observe.
The Positions, or if you will, Conclusions, which Aristotle endeavors to
oppose, are two; one is that of those, who placing the Earth in the midst of
the World, do make it move in it self about its own center. The other is of
those, who constituting it far from the middle, do make it revolve with a
circular motion about the middle of the Universe. And both these Positions he
conjointly impugneth with one and the same argument. Now I affirm that he is
out in both the one and the other impugnation; and that his error against the
first Position is an Equivoke or Paralogisme; Aristotle's argument against the
Earth^ motion, is defective in two things
and his mistake touching the second is a false consequence. Let us begin with
the first Assertion, which constituteth the Earth in the midst of the World,
and makes it move in it self about its own center; and let us confront it with
the objection of Aristotle; saying, All movables, that move circularly, seem
to The same word which a little a^^ve I tendered stay behind, as a bowl when it
meets with ^ul^s.
foreslow, and more with more than one Byas, except the first Sphere (that is
the primum mobile) therefore the Earth moving about its own center, being
placed in the middle, must of necessity have two byasse, and foreslow. But if
this were so, it would follow, that there should be a variation in the rising
and setting of the fixed Stars, which we do not perceive to be done: Therefore
the Earth does not move, etc. Here is the Paralogisme, and to discover it, I
will argue with Aristotle in this manner. Thou say, oh Aristotle, that the
Earth placed in the middle of the World, cannot move in it self ( i. e. upon
its own axis) for then it would be requisite to allow it two byasses; so that,
if it should not be necessary to allow it more than one Byas only, thou
would not then hold it impossible for it to move only with that one; for
thou would unnecessarily have confined the impossibility to the plurality of
byasses, if in case it had no more but one, yet it could not move with that.
And because that of all the movables in the World, thou make but one alone
to move with one sole byas; and all the rest with more than one; and this same
moveable thou affirmest to be the first Sphere, namely, that by which all the
fixed and erratick Stars seem harmoniously to move from East to West, if in
case the Earth may be that first Sphere, that by moving with one byas only,
may make the Stars appear to move from East to West, thou will not deny them
it: But he that affirms, that the Earth being placed in the midst of the
World, moves about its own Axis, ascribes unto it no other motion, save that
by which all the Stars appear to move from East to West; and so it comes to be
that first Sphere, which thou thy self acknowledgest to move with but one byas
only. It is therefore necessary, oh Aristotle, if thou will conclude any
thing, that thou demonstrate, that the Earth being placed in the midst of the
World, cannot move with so much as one byas only; or else, that much less can
the first Sphere have one sole motion; for otherwise thou do in thy very
Sillogisme both commit the falacy, and detect it, denying, and at that very
time proving the same thing. I come now to the second Position, namely, of
those who placing the Earth far from the midst of the Universe, make it
moveable about the same; that is, make it a Planet and erratick Star; against
which the argument is directed, and as to form is concludent, but fails in
matter. For it being granted, that the Earth does in that manner move, and that
with two byasses, yet does it not necessarily follow that though it were so, it
should make alterations in the risings and settings of the fixed Stars, as I
shall in its proper place declare. And here I could gladly excuse Aristotle;
rather I could highly applaud him for having light upon the most subtle
argument that could be produced against the Copernican Hypothesis; and if the
objection be ingenious, and to outward appearance most powerful, you may see
how much more acute and ingenious the solution must be, and not to be found by
a wit less piercing than that of Copernicus; and again from the difficulty in
understanding it, you may argue the so much greater difficulty in finding it.
But let us for the present suspend our answer, which you shall understand in
due time and place, after we have repeated the objection of Aristotle, and that
in his favor, much strengthened. Now pass we to Aristotle's third Argument,
The answer to the third argument.
touching which we need give no farther reply, it having been sufficiently
answered betwixt the discourses of yesterday and to day: In as much as he
urges, that the motion of grave bodies is naturally by a right line to the
center; and then enquireth, whether to the center of the Earth, or to that of
the Universe, and concludes that they tend naturally to the center of the
Universe, but accidentally to that of the Earth. Therefore we may proceed to
the fourth, The answer to the fourth argument.
upon which its requisite that we stay some time, by reason it is founded upon
that experiment, from whence the greater part of the remaining arguments derive
all their strength. Aristotle says therefore, that it is a most convincing
argument of the Earths immobility, to see that projections thrown or shot
upright, return perpendicularly by the same line unto the same place from
whence they were shot or thrown. And this holds true, although the motion be
of a very great height; which could never come to pass, did the Earth move:
for in the time that the projected body is moving upwards and downwards in a
state of separation from the Earth, the place from whence the motion of the
projection began, would be past, by means of the Earths revolution, a great way
toward the East, and look how great that space was, so far from that place
would the projected body in its descent come to the ground. So that hither may
be referred the argument taken from a bullet shot from a Canon directly
upwards; as also that other used by Aristotle and Ptolomy, of the grave bodies
that falling from on high, are observed to descend by a direct and
perpendicular line to the surface of the Earth. Now that I may begin to unite
these knots, I demand of Simplicius that in case one should deny to Ptolomy and
Aristotle that weights in falling freely from on high, descend by a right and
perpendicular line, that is, directly to the center, what means he would use to
prove it?


SIMPL. The means of the senses; the which assures us, that that Tower or
other altitude, is upright and perpendicular, and shows us that that stone,
or other grave body, does slide along the Wall, without inclining a hairs
breadth to one side or another, and light at the foot thereof just under the
place from whence it was let fall.


SALV. But if it should happen that the Terrestrial Globe did move round, and
consequently carry the Tower also along with it, and that the stone did then
also grate and slide along the side of the Tower, what must its motion be then?


SIMPL. In this case we may rather say its motions: for it would have one
wherewith to descend from the top of the Tower to the bottom, and should
necessarily have another to follow the course of the said Tower.


SALV. So that its motion should be compounded of two, to wit, of that
wherewith it measures the Tower, and of that other wherewith it follows the
same: From which composition would follow, that the stone would no longer
describe that simple right and perpendicular line, but one transverse, and
perhaps not straight.


SIMPL. I can say nothing of its non-rectitude, but this I know very well, that
it would of necessity be transverse, and different from the other directly
perpendicular, which it does describe, the Earth standing still.


SALV. You see then, that upon the mere observing the falling stone to glide
along the Tower, you cannot certainly affirm that it describes a line which is
straight and perpendicular, unless you first suppose that the Earth stands
still.


SIMPL. True; for if the Earth should move, the stones motion would be
transverse, and not perpendicular.


SALV. Behold then the Paralogism of Aristotle and Ptolomey to be evident and
manifest, The Paralogism of Aristotle and Ptolomey in supposing that for known,
which is in question.
and discovered by you your self, wherein that is supposed for known, which is
intended to be demonstrated.


SIMPL. How can that be? To me it appears that the Syllogism is rightly
demonstrated without petitionem principii.


SALV. You shall see how it is; answer me a little. Does he not lay down the
conclusion as unknown?


SIMPL. Unknown; why otherwise the demonstrating it would be superfluous.


SALV. But the middle term, ought not that to be known?


SIMPL. Its necessary that it should; for otherwise it would be a proving
ignotum per aeque ignotum.


SALV. Our conclusion which is to be proved, and which is unknown, is it not
the stability of the Earth?


SIMPL. It is the same.


SALV. The middle term, which ought to be known, is it not the straight and
perpendicular descent of the stone?


SIMPL. It is so.


SALV. But was it not just now concluded, that we can have no certain knowledge
whether that same shall be direct and perpendicular, unless we first know that
the Earth stands still? Therefore in your Syllogism the certainty of the middle
term is assumed from the uncertainty of the conclusion. You may see then, what
and how great the Paralogism is.


SAGR. I would, in favor of Simplicius, defend Aristotle if it were possible,
or at least better satisfy my self concerning the strength of your illation.
You say, that the seeing the stone rake along the Tower, is not sufficient to
assure us, that its motion is perpendicular (which is the middle term of the
Syllogism) unless it be presupposed, that the Earth stands still, which is
the conclusion to be proved: For that if the Tower did move together with the
Earth, and the stone did slide along the same, the motion of the stone would be
transverse, and not perpendicular. But I shall answer, that should the Tower
move, it would be impossible that the stone should fail gliding along the side
of it; and therefore from its falling in that manner the stability of the Earth
is inferred.


SIMPL. It is so; for if you would have the stone in descending to grate upon
the Tower, though it were carried round by the Earth, you must allow the stone
two natural motions, to wit, the straight motion toward the Center, and the
circular about the Center, the which is impossible.


SALV. Aristotle's defense then consists in the impossibility, or at least in
his esteeming it an impossibility, that the stone should move with a motion
mixed of right and circular: for if he did not hold it impossible that the stone
could move to the Center, and about the Center at once, he must have
understood, that it might come to pass that the cadent stone might in its
descent, race the Tower as well when it moved as when it stood still; and
consequently he must have perceived, that from this grating nothing could be
inferred touching the mobility or immobility of the Earth. But this does not
any way excuse Aristotle; as well because he ought to have expressed it, if he had
had such a conceit, it being so material a part of his Argument; as also
because it can neither be said that such an effect is impossible, nor that
Aristotle did esteem it so. The first cannot be affirmed, for that by and by I
shall show that it is not only possible, but necessary: nor much less can the
second be averred, Aristotle admits that the Fire moves directly upwards by
nature, and round abent by participation.
for that Aristotle himself grants fire to move naturally upwards in a right
line, and to move about with the diurnal motion, imparted by Heaven to the
whole Element of Fire, and the greater part of the Air: If therefore he held it
not impossible to mix the right motion upwards, with the circular communicated
to the Fire and Air from the concave of the Moon, much less ought he to account
impossible the mixture of the right motion downwards of the stone, with the
circular which we presuppose natural to the whole Terrestrial Globe, of which
the stone is a part.


SIMPL. I see no such thing: for if the element of Fire revolve round together
with the Air, it is a very easy, yea a necessary thing, that a spark of fire
which from the Earth mounts upwards, in passing through the moving air, should
receive the same motion, being a body so thin, light, and easy to be moved:
but that a very heavy stone, or a Canon bullet, that descends from on high,
and that is at liberty to move whither it will, should suffer it self to be
transported either by the air or any other thing, is altogether incredible.
Besides that, we have the Experiment, which is so proper to our purpose, of the
stone let fall from the round top of the Mast of a ship, which when the ship
lies still, falls at the Partners of the Mast; but when the ship saileth,
falls so far distant from that place, by how far the ship in the time of the
stones falling had run forward; which will not be a few fathoms, when the ships
course is swift.


SALV. There is a great disparity between the case of the Ship and that of the
Earth, The disparity between the fall of a stone from the round top of a ship,
and from the top of a tower.
if the Terrestrial Globe be supposed to have a diurnal motion. For it is a
thing very manifest, that the motion of the Ship, as it is not natural to it,
so the motion of all those things that are in it is accidental, whence it is no
wonder that the stone which was retained in the round top, being left at
liberty, descends downwards without any obligation to follow the motion of
the Ship. But the diurnal conversion is ascribed to the Terrestrial Globe for
its proper and natural motion, and consequently, it is so to all the parts of
the said Globe; and, as being impressed by nature, is indelible in them; and
therefore that stone that is on the top of the Tower has an intrinsic
inclination of revolving about the Center of its Whole in twenty four hours,
and this same natrual instinct it exercises eternally, be it placed in any
state whatsoever. And to be assured of the truth of this, you have no more to
do but to alter an antiquated impression made in your mind; and to say, Like as
in that I hitherto holding it to be the property of the Terrestrial Globe to
rest immovable about its Center, did never doubt or question but that all
whatsoever particles thereof do also naturally remain in the same state of
rest: So it is reason, in case the Terrestrial Globe did move round by natural
instinct in twenty four hours, that the intrinsic and natural inclination of
all its parts should also be, not to stand still, but to follow the same
revolution. And thus without running into any inconvenience, one may conclude,
that in regard the motion conferred by the force of That you may not suspect my
translation, or wonder what Oars have to do with a ship, you are to know that
the Author intends the Galleys used in the Mediterrane.
Oars on the Ship, and by it on all the things that are contained within her,
is not natural but foreign, it is very reasonable that that stone, it being
separated from the ship, do reduce its self to its natural disposure, and
return to exercise its pure simple instinct given it by nature. The part of the
Air inferior to the higher mountains does follow the motion of the Earth.
To this I add, that it is necessary, that at least that part of the Air which
is beneath the greater heights of mountains, should be transported and carried
round by the roughness of the Earths surface; or that, as being mixed with many
Vapors, and terrene Exhalations, it do naturally follow the diurnal motion,
which occurreth not in the Air about the ship rowed by Oars: So that your
arguing from the ship to the Tower has not the force of an illation; because
that stone which falls from the round top of the Mast, enters into a medium,
which is unconcerned in the motion of the ship: but that which departs from
the top of the Tower, finds a medium that has a motion in common with the
whole Terrestrial Globe; so that without being hindered, rather being assisted
by the motion of the air, it may follow the universal course of the Earth.


SIMPL. I cannot conceive that the air can imprint in a very great stone, The
motion of the Air apt to carry with it light things but not heavy.
or in a gross Globe of Wood or Ball of Lead, as suppose of two hundred weight,
the motion wherewith its self is moved, and which it does perhaps communicate
to feathers, snow, and other very light things: nay, I see that a weight of
that nature, being exposed to any the most impetuous wind, is not thereby
removed an inch from its place; now consider with your self whether the air
will carry it along therewith.


SALV. There is great difference between your experiment and our case. You
introduce the wind blowing against that stone, supposed in a state of rest, and
we expose to the air, which already moves, the stone which does also move with
the same velocity; so that the air is not to conferr a new motion upon it, but
only to maintain, or to speak better, not to hinder the motion already
acquired: you would drive the stone with a strange and preternatural motion,
and we desire to conserve it in its natural. If you would produce a more
pertinent experiment, you should say, that it is observed, if not with the eye
of the forehead, yet with that of the mind, what would evene, if an eagle that
is carried by the course of the wind, should let a stone fall from its talons;
which, in regard that at its being let go, it went along with the wind, and
after it was let fall it entered into a medium that moved with equal velocity,
I am very confident that it would not be seen to descend in its fall
perpendicularly, but that following the course of the wind, and adding thereto
that of its particular gravity, it would move with a transverse motion.


SIMPL. But it would first be known how such an experiment may be made; and
then one might judge according to the event. In the mean time the effect of the
ship does hitherto incline to favor our opinion.


SALV. Well said you hitherto, for perhaps it may anon change countenance. And
that I may no longer hold you in suspense, tell me, Simplicius, do you really
believe, that the Experiment of the ship squares so very well with our purpose,
as that it ought to be believed, that that which we see happen in it, ought
also to evene in the Terrestrial Globe?


SIMPL. As yet I am of that opinion; and though you have alleged some small
disparities, I do not think them of so great moment, as that they should make
me change my judgment.


SALV. I rather desire that you would continue therein, and hold for certain,
that the effect of the Earth would exactly answer that of the ship: provided,
that when it shall appear prejudicial to your cause, you would not be humorous
and alter your thoughts. You may happily say, Forasmuch as when the ship stands
still, the stone falls at the foot of the Mast, and when she is under sail, it
lights far from thence, that therefore by conversion, from the stones falling
at the foot is argued the ships standing still, and from its falling far from
thence is argued her moving; and because that which occurreth to the ship,
ought likewise to befall the Earth: that therefore from the falling of the
stone at the foot of the Tower is necessarily inferred the immobility of the
Terrestrial Globe. Is not this your argumentation?


SIMPL. It is, and reduced into that conciseness, as that it is become most
easy to be apprehended.


SALV. Now tell me; if the stone let fall from the Round-top, when the ship is
in a swift course, should fall exactly in the same place of the ship, in which
it falls when the ship is at anchor, what service would these experiments do
you, in order to the ascertaining whether the vessel does stand still or move?


SIMPL. Just none: Like as, for exemple, from the beating of the pulse one
cannot know whether a person be asleep or awake, seeing that the pulse beats
after the same manner in sleeping as in waking.


SALV. Very well. Have you ever tried the experiment of the Ship?


SIMPL. I have not; but yet I believe that those Authors which alledg the same,
have accurately observed it; besides that the cause of the disparity is so
manifestly known, that it admits of no question.


SALV. That it is possible that those Authors instance in it, without having
made trial of it, you your self are a good testimony, that without having
examined it, alledg it as certain, and in a credulous way remit it to their
authority; as it is now not only possible, but very probable that they
likewise did; I mean, did remit the same to their Predecessors, without ever
arriving at one that had made the experiment: for whoever shall examine the
same, shall find the event succeed quite contrary to what has been written of
it: that is, he shall see the stone fall at all times in the same place of the
Ship, whether it stand still, or move with any whatsoever velocity. The stone
falling from the Mast of a ship lights in the same place, whether the ship does
move or ly still.
So that the same holding true in the Earth, as in the Ship, one cannot from
the stones falling perpendicularly at the foot of the Tower, conclude any thing
touching the motion or rest of the Earth.


SIMPL. If you should refer me to any other means than to experience, I verily
believe our Disputations would not come to an end in haste; for this seems to
me a thing so remote from all humane reason, as that it leaves not the least
place for credulity or probability.


SALV. And yet it has left place in me for both.


SIMPL. How is this? You have not made an hundred, no nor one proof thereof,
and do you so confidently affirm it for true? I for my part will return to my
incredulity, and to the confidence I had that the Experiment has been tried by
the principal Authors who made use thereof, and that the event succeeded as
they affirm.


SALV. I am assured that the effect will ensue as I tell you; for so it is
necessary that it should: and I farther add, that you know your self that it
cannot fall out otherwise, however you feign or seem to feign that you know it
not. Yet I am so good at taming of wits, that I will make you confess the same
whether you will or no. But Sagredus stands very mute, and yet, if I mistake
not, I saw him make an offer to speak somewhat.


SAGR. I had an intent to say something, but to tell you true, I know not what
it was; for the curiosity that you have moved in me, by promising that you
would force Simplicius to discover the knowledge which he would conceal from us,
has made me to depose all other thoughts: therefore I pray you to make good
your vaunt.


SALV. Provided that Simplicius do consent to reply to what I shall ask him, I
will not fail to do it.


SIMPL. I will answer what I know, assured that I shall not be much put to it,
for that of those things which I hold to be false, I think nothing can be
known, in regard that Science respects truths and not falsehoods.


SALV. I desire not that you should say or reply, that you know any thing, save
that which you most assuredly know. Therefore tell me; If you had here a flat
superficies as polite as a Looking-glass, and of a substance as hard as steel,
and that it were not parallel to the Horizon, but somewhat inclining, and that
upon it you did put a Ball perfectly spherical, and of a substance grave and
hard, as suppose of brass; what think you it would do being let go? do not you
believe (as for my part I do) that it would lie still?


SIMPL. If that superficies were inclining?


SALV. Yes; for so I have already supposed.


SIMPL. I cannot conceive how it should lie still: nay, I am confident that it
would move toward the declivity with much propensness.


SALV. Take good heed what you say, Simplicius, for I am confident that it
would lie still in what ever place you should lay it.


SIMPL. So long as you make use of such suppositions, Salvictus, I shall cease
to wonder if you infer most absurd conclusions.


SALV. Are you assured, then, that it would freely move toward the declivity?


SIMPL. Who doubts it?


SALV. And this you verily believe, not because I told you so, (for I
endeavored to persuade you to think the contrary) but of your self, and upon
your natural judgment.


SIMPL. Now I see what you would be at; you spoke not this as really believing
the same; but to try me, and to wrest matter out of my own mouth wherewith to
condemn me.


SALV. You are in the right. And how long would that Ball move, and with what
velocity? But take notice that I instanced in a Ball exactly round, and a plain
exquisitely polished, that all external and accidental impediments might be
taken away. And so would I have you remove all obstructions caused by the Airs
resistance to division, and all other casual obstacles, if any other there can
be.


SIMPL. I very well understand your meaning, and as to your demand, I answer,
that the Ball would continue to move in infinitum, if the inclination of the
plain should so long last, and continually with an accelerating motion; for
such is the nature of ponderous movables, that vires acquirant eundo: and the
greater the declivity was, the greater the velocity would be.


SALV. But if one should require that that Ball should move upwards on that
same superficies, do you believe that it would so do?


SIMPL. Not spontaneously; but being drawn, or violently thrown, it may.


SALV. And in case it were thrust forward by the impression of some violent
impetus from without, what and how great would its motion be?


SIMPL. The motion would go continually decreasing and retarding, as being
contrary to nature; and would be longer or shorter, according to the greater or
less impulse, and according to the greater or less acclivity.


SALV. It seems, then, that hitherto you have explained to me the accidents of
a moveable upon two different Planes; and that in the inclining plane, the
grave moveable does spontaneously descend, and goes continually accelerating,
and that to retain it in rest, force must be used therein: but that on the
ascending plane, there is required a force to thrust it forward, and also to
stay it in rest, and that the motion impressed goes continually diminishing,
till that in the end it comes to nothing. You say yet farther, that in both
the one and the other case, there do arise differences from the planes having a
greater or less declivity or acclivity; so that the greater inclination is
attended with the greater velocity; and contrariwise, upon the ascending plane,
the same moveable thrown with the same force, moves a greater distance, by how
much the elevation is less. Now tell me, what would befall the same moveable
upon a superficies that had neither acclivity nor declivity?


SIMPL. Here you must give me a little time to consider of an answer. There
being no declivity, there can be no natural inclination to motion: and there
being no acclivity, there can be no resistance to being moved; so that there
would arise an indifference between propension and resistance of motion;
therefore, methinks it ought naturally to stand still. But I had forgot my
self: it was but even now that Sagredus gave me to understand that it would so
do.


SALV. So I think, provided one did lay it down gently: but if it had an
impetus given it toward any part, what would follow?


SIMP. There would follow, that it should move toward that part.


SALV. But with what kind of motion? with the continually accelerated, as in
declining planes; or with the successively retarded, as in those ascending.


SIMP. I cannot tell how to discover any cause of acceleration, or retardation,
there being no declivity or acclivity.


SALV. Well: but if there be no cause of retardation, much less ought there to
be any cause of rest. How long therefore would you have the moveable to move?


SIMP. As long as that superficies, neither inclined nor declined shall last.


SALV. Therefore if such a space were interminate, the motion upon the same
would likewise have no termination, that is, would be perpetual.


SIMP. I think so, if so be the moveable be of a matter durable.


SALV. That has been already supposed, when it was said, that all external and
accidental impediments were removed, and the brittlenesse of the moveable in
this our case, is one of those impediments accidental. Tell me now, what do you
think is the cause that that same Ball moves spontaneously upon the inclining
plane, and not without violence upon the erected?


SIMP. Because the inclination of grave bodies is to move toward the center of
the Earth, and only by violence upwards toward the circumference; and the
inclining superficies is that which acquireth vicinity to the center, and the
ascending one, remoteness.


SALV. Therefore a superficies, which should be neither declining nor
ascending, ought in all its parts to be equally distant from the center. But is
there any such superficies in the World?


SIMP. There is no want thereof: Such is our Terrestrial Globe, if it were more
even, and not as it is rough and montainous; but you have that of the Water, at
such time as it is calm and still.


SALV. Then a ship which moves in a calm at Sea, is one of those movables,
which run along one of those superficies that are neither declining nor
ascending, and therefore disposed, in case all obstacles external and
accidental were removed, to move with the impulse once imparted incessantly and
uniformly.


SIMPL. It should seem to be so.


SALV. And that stone which is on the round top, does not it move, as being
together with the ship carried about by the circumference of a Circle about the
Center; and therefore consequently by a motion in it indelible, if all extern
obstacles be removed? And is not this motion as swift as that of the ship.


SIMPL. Hitherto all is well. But what follows?


SALV. Then in good time recant, I pray you, that your last conclusion, if you
are satisfied with the truth of all the premises.


SIMPL. By my last conclusion, you mean, That that same stone moving with a
motion indelibly impressed upon it, is not to leave, nay rather is to follow
the ship, and in the end to light in the self same place, where it falls when
the ship lies still; and so I also grant it would do, in case there were no
outward impediments that might disturb the stones motion, after its being let
go, the which impediments are two, the one is the movables inability to break
through the air with its mere impetus only, it being deprived of that of the
strength of Oars, of which it had been partaker, as part of the ship, at the
time that it was upon the Mast; the other is the new motion of descent, which
also must needs be an hinderance of that other progressive motion.


SALV. As to the impediment of the Air, I do not deny it you; and if the thing
falling were a light matter, as a feather, or a lock of wool, the retardation
would be very great, but in an heavy stone is very exceeding small. And you
your self but even now did say, that the force of the most impetuous wind
suffices not to stir a great stone from its place; now do but consider what
the calmer air is able to do, being encountered by a stone no more swift than
the whole ship. Nevertheless, as I said before, I do allow you this small
effect, that may depend upon such an impediment; like as I know, that you will
grant to me, that if the air should move with the same velocity that the ship
and stone has, then the impediment would be nothing at all. As to the other of
the additional motion downwards; in the first place it is manifest, that these
two, I mean the circular, about the center, and the straight, toward the
center, are not contraries, or destructive to one another, or incompatible.
Because that as to the moveable, it has no repugnance at all to such motions,
for you your self have already confessed the repugnance to be against the motion
which removes from the center, and the inclination to be toward the motion
which approaches to the center. Whence it does of necessity follow, that the
moveable has neither repugnance, nor propension to the motion which neither
approaches, nor goes from the center, nor consequently is there any cause for
the diminishing in it the faculty impressed. And forasmuch as the moving cause
is not one alone, which it has attained by the new operation of retardation;
but that they are two, distinct from each other, of which, the gravity attends
only to the drawing of the moveable toward the center, and the virtue
impress't to the conducting it about the center, there remains no occasion of
impediment.


SIMPL. Your argumentation, to give you your due, is very probable; but in
reality it is invelloped with certain intricacies, that are not easy to be
extricated. You have all along built upon a supposition, The project according
to Aristotle, is not moved by virtue impressed, but by the medium.
which the Peripatetick Schools will not easily grant you, as being directly
contrary to Aristotle, and it is to take for known and manifest, That the
project separated from the projicient, continues the motion by virtue
impressed on it by the said projicient, which virtue impressed is a thing as
much detested in Peripatetick Philosophy, as the passage of any accident from
one subject into another. Which doctrine does hold, as I believe it is well
known unto you, that the project is carried by the medium, which in our case
happens to be the Air. And therefore if that stone let fall from the round
top, ought to follow the motion of the ship, that effect should be ascribed to
the Air, and not to the virtue impressed. But you presuppose that the Air does
not follow the motion of the ship, but is tranquil. Moreover, he that lets
it fall, is not to throw it, or to give it impetus with his arm, but ought
barely to open his hand and let it go; and by this means, the stone, neither
through the virtue impressed by the projicient, nor through the help of the
Air, shall be able to follow the ships motion, and therefore shall be left
behind.


SALV. I think then that you would say, that if the stone be not thrown by the
arm of that person, it is no longer a projection.


SIMPL. It cannot be properly called a motion of projection.


SALV. So then that which Aristotle speaks of the motion, the moveable, and the
mover of the projects, has nothing to do with the business in hand; and if it
concern not our purpose, why do you alledg the same?


SIMP. I produce it on the oceasion of that impressed virtue, named and
introduced by you, which having no being in the World, can be of no force; for
non-entium nullae sunt operationes; and therefore not only of projected, but
of all other preternatural motions, the moving cause ought to be ascribed to
the medium, of which there has been no due consideration had; and therefore
all that has been said hitherto is to no purpose.


SALV. Go to now, in good time. But tell me, seeing that your instance is
wholly grounded upon the nullity of the virtue impressed, if I shall
demonstrate to you, that the medium has nothing to do in the continuation of
projects, after they are separated from the projicient, will you admit of the
impressed virtue, or will you make another attempt to overthrow it?


SIMP. The operation of the medium being removed, I see not how one can have
recourse to any thing else save the faculty impressed by the mover.


SALV. It would be well, for the removing, as much as is possible, the
occasions of multiplying contentions, that you would explain with as much
distinctnesse as may be, what is that operation of the medium in continuing the
motion of the project. Operation of the medium in continuing the motion of the
project.



SIMP. The projicient has the stone in his hand, and with force and violence
throws his arm, with which jactation the stone does not move so much as the
circumambient Air; so that when the stone at its being forsaken by the hand,
finds it self in the Air, which at the same time moves with impetousity, it
is thereby born away; for, if the air did not operate, the stone would fall at
the foot of the projicient or thrower.


SALV. And was you so credulous, Many experiments, and reasons against the
cause of the motion of projects, assigned by Aristotle.
as to suffer your self to be persuaded to believe these fopperies, so long as
you had your senses about you to confute them, and to understand the truth
thereof? Therefore tell me, that great stone, and that Canon bullet, which but
only laid upon a table, did continue immovable against the most impetuous
winds, according as you a little before did affirm, if it had been a ball of
cork or other light stuff, think you that the wind would have removed it from
its place?


SIMP. Yes, and I am assured that it would have blown it quite away, and with
so much more velocity, by how much the matter was lighter, for upon this reason
we see the clouds to be transported with a velocity equal to that of the wind
that drives them.


SALV. And what is the Wind?


SIMP. The Wind is defined to be nothing else but air moved.


SALV. Then the moved air does carry light things more swiftly, and to a
greater distance, then it does heavy.


SIMP. Yes certainly.


SALV. But if you were to throw with your arm a stone, and a lock of cotton
wool, which would move swiftest and farthest?


SIMP. The stone by much; nay the wool would fall at my feet.


SALV. But, if that which moves the projected substance, after it is delivered
from the hand, be no other than the air moved by the arm, and the moved air do
more easily bear away light than grave matters, how comes it that the project
of wool flies not farther, and swifter than that of stone? Certainly it
argues that the stone has some other impulse besides the motion of the air.
Furthermore, if two strings of equal length did hang at yonder beam, and at the
end of one there was fastened a bullet of lead, and a ball of cotton wool at
the other, and both were carried to an equal distance from the perpendicular,
and then let go; it is not to be doubted, but that both the one and the other
would move toward the perpendicular, and that being carried by their own
impetus, they would go a certain space beyond it, and afterward return thither
again. But which of these two pendent Globes do you think, would continue
longest in motion, before that it would come to rest in its perpendicularity?


SIMP. The ball of lead would swing to and again many times, and that of wool
but two or three at the most.


SALV. So that the impetus and that mobility whatsoever is the cause thereof,
would conserve its self longer in grave substances, than light; I proceed now
to another particular, and demand of you, why the air does not carry away that
Lemon which is upon that same Table?


SIMP. Because that the air it self is not moved


SALV. It is requisite then, that the projicient do confer motion on the Air,
with which it afterward moves the project. But if such a motion cannot be
impressed [i. e. imparted] it being impossible to make an accident pass out of
one subject into another, how can it pass from the arm into the Air? Will you
say that the Air is not a subject different from the arm?


SIMP. To this it is answered that the Air, in regard it is neither heavy nor
light in its own Region, is disposed with facility to receive every impulse,
and also to retain the same.


SALV. But if those penduli even now named, did prove unto us, that the
moveable, the less it had of gravity, the less apt it was to conserve its
motion, how can it be that the Air which in the Air has no gravity at all,
does of it self alone retain the motion acquired? I believe, and know that you
by this time are of the same opinion, that the arm does not sooner return to
rest, than does the circumambient Air. Let Us go into the Chamber, and with a
towel let us agitate the Air as much as we can, and then holding the cloth
still, let a little candle be brought, that was lighted in the next room, or in
the same place let a leaf of beaten Gold be left at liberty to fly any way,
and you shall by the calm vagation of them be assured that the Air is
immediately reduced to tranquilty. I could alledg many other experiments to the
same purpose, but if one of these should not suffice, I should think your folly
altogether incurable.


SAGR. When an arrow is shot against the Wind, how incredible a thing is it,
that that same small filament of air, impelled by the bow-string, should in
despite of fate go along with the arrow? But I would willingly know another
particular of Aristotle, to which I entreat Simplicius would vouchsafe me an
answer. Supposing that with the same Bow there were shot two arrows, one just
after the usual manner, and the other side-wayes, placing it long-wayes upon
the Bow-string, and then letting it fly, I would know which of them would go
farthest. Favor me, I pray you with an answer, though the question may seem to
you rather ridiculous than otherwise; and excuse me, for that I, who am, as you
see, rather blockish, than not, can reach no higher with my speculative faculty.


SIMPL. I have never seen an arrow shot in that manner, yet nevertheless I
believe, that it would not fly side-long, the twentieth part of the space that
it goes end-wayes.


SAGR. And for that I am of the same opinion, hence it is, that I have a doubt
risen in me, whether Aristotle does not contradict experience. For as to
experience, if I lay two arrows upon this Table, in a time when a strong Wind
blovveth, one toward the course of the wind, and the other sidelong, the wind
will quickly carry away this later, and leave the other where it was; and the
same to my seeming, ought to happen, if the Doctrine of Aristotle were true, of
those two shot out of a Bow: forasmuch as the arrow shot sideways is driven by
a great quantity of Air, moved by the bowstring, to wit by as much as the said
string is long, whereas the other arrow receives no greater a quantity of air,
than the small circle of the strings thickness. And I cannot imagine what may
be the reason of such a difference, but would fain know the same.


SIMP. The cause seems to me sufficiently manifest; and it is, because the
arrow shot endways, has but a little quantity of air to penetrate, and the
other is to make its way through a quantity as great as its whole length.


SALV. Then it seems the arrows shot, are to penetrate the air? but if the air
goes along with them, yea, is that which carries them, what penetration can
they make therein? Do you not see that, in this case, the arrow would of
necessity move with greater velocity than the air? and this greater velocity,
what does confer it on the arrow? Will you say the air gives them a velocity
greater than its own? Know then, Simplicius, that the business proceeds quite
contrary to that which Aristotle says, The medium does impede and not confer
the motion of projects.
and that the medium conferreth the motion on the project, is as false, as it
is true, that it is the only thing which procures its obstruction; and having
known this, you shall understand without finding any thing whereof to make
question, that if the air be really moved, it does much better carry the dart
along with it longways, than endways, for that the air which impelleth it in
that posture, is much, and in this very little. But shooting with the Bow,
forasmuch as the air stands still, the transverse arrow, being to force its
passage through much air, comes to be much impeded, and the other that was
nock't easily overcomes the obstruction of the small quantity of air, which
opposes it self thereto.


SALV. How many Propositions have I observed in Aristotle, (meaning still in
Natural Philosophy) that are not only false, but false in such sort, that its
diametrical contrary is true, as it happens in this case. But pursuing the
point in hand, I think that Simplicius is persuaded, that, from seeing the
stone always to fall in the same place, he cannot conjecture either the motion
or stability of the Ship: and if what has been hitherto spoken, should not
suffice, there is the Experiment of the medium which may thoroughly assure us
thereof; in which experiment, the most that could be seen would be, that the
cadent moveable might be left behind, if it were light, and that the air did
not follow the motion of the ship: but in case the air should move with equal
velocity, no imaginable diversity could be found either in this, or any other
experiment whatsoever, as I am anon to tell you. Now if in this case there
appears no difference at all, what can be pretended to be seen in the stone
falling from the top of the Tower, where the motion in gyration is not
adventitious, and accidental, but natural and eternal; and where the air
exactly follows the motion of the Tower, and the Tower that of the
Terrestrial Globe? have you any thing else to say, Simplicius, upon this
particular?


SIMP. No more but this, that I see not the mobility of the Earth as yet proved.


SALV. Nor have I any intention at this time, but only to show, that nothing
can be concluded from the experiments alleged by our adversaries for
convincing Arguments: as I think I shall prove the others to be.


SAGR. I beseech you, Salviatus, before you proceed any farther, to permit me
to start certain questions, which have been rouling in my fancy all the while
that you with so much patience and equanimity, was minutely explaining to
Simplicius the experiment of the Ship.


SALV. We are here met with a purpose to dispute, and it is fit that every one
should move the difficulties that he mets withal; for this is the way to come
to the knowledge of the truth. Therefore speak freely.


SAGR. If it be true, that the impetus wherewith the ship moves, does remain
indelibly impressed in the stone, after it is let fall from the Mast; and if it
be farther true, that this motion brings no impediment or retardment to the
motion directly downwards, natural to the stone: An admirable accident in the
motion of projects.
it is necessary, that there do an effect ensue of a very wonderful nature. Let
a Ship be supposed to stand still, and let the time of the falling of a stone
from the Masts Round-top to the ground, be two beats of the pulse; let the Ship
afterward be under sail, and let the same stone depart from the same place,
and it, according to what has been premised, shall still take up the time of
two pulses in its fall, in which time the ship will have run, suppose, twenty
yards; so that the true motion of the stone will be a transverse line,
considerably longer than the first straight and perpendicular line, which is
the length of the By the length of the mast he means the distance between the
upperdeck and Roundtop.
Mast, and yet nevertheless the La palla.
stone will have past it in the same time. Let it be farther supposed, that the
Ships motion is much more accelerated, so that the stone in falling shall be to
pass a transverse line much longer than the other; and in sum, increasing the
Ships velocity as much as you will, the falling stone shall describe its
transverse lines still longer and longer, and yet shall pass them all in those
self same two pulses. And in this fashion, if a Canon were levelled on the top
of a Tower, and shots were made therewith point blank, that is, parallel to the
Horizon, let the Piece have a greater or less charge, so as that the ball may
fall sometimes a thousand yards distant, sometimes four thousand, sometimes
six, sometimes ten, etc. and all these shots shall curry or finish their ranges
in times equal to each other, and every one equal to the time which the ball
would take to pass from the mouth of the Piece to the ground, being left,
without other impulse, to fall simply downwards in a perpendicular line. Now it
seems a very admirable thing, that in the same short time of its falling
perpendicularly down to the ground, from the height of, suppose, an hundred
yards, the same ball, being thrust violently out of the Piece by the Fire,
should be able to pass one while four hundred, another while a thousand,
another while four, another while ten thousand yards, so as that the said ball
in all shots made point blank, always continues an equal time in the air.


SALV. The consideration for its novelty is very pretty, and if the effect be
true, very admirable: and of the truth thereof, I make no question: and were it
not for the accidental impediment of the air, I verily believe, that, if at the
time of the balls going out of the Piece, another were let fall from the same
height directly downwards, they would both come to the ground at the same
instant, though that should have curried ten thousand miles in its range, and
this but an hundred only: presupposing the surface of the Earth to be equal,
which to be assured of, the experiment may be made upon some lake. As for the
impediment which might come from the air, it would consist in retarding the
extreme swift motion of the shot. Now, if you think fit, we will proceed to the
solution of the other Objections, seeing that Simplicius (as far as I can see)
is convinced of the nullity of this first, taken from things falling from on
high downwards.


SIMP. I find not all my scruples removed, but it may be the fault is my own,
as not being of so easy and quick an apprehension as Sagredus. And it seems to
me, that if this motion, of which the stone did partake whilst it was on the
Round-top of the Ships Mast, be, as you say, to conserve it self indelibly in
the said stone, even after it is separated from the Ship, it would follow, that
likewise in case any one, riding a horse that was upon his speed, should let a
bowl drop out of his hand, that bowl being fallen to the ground would continue
its motion and follow the horses steps, without tarrying behind him: the which
effect, I believe, is not to be seen, unless when he that is upon the horse
should throw it with violence that way toward which he runs; but otherwise,
I believe it will stay on the ground in the same place where it fell.


SALV. I believe that you very much deceive your self, and am certain, that
experience will show you the contrary, and that the ball being once arrived at
the ground, will run together with the horse, not staying behind him, unless so
far as the asperity and unevenness of the Earth shall hinder it. And the reason
seems to me very manifest: for if you, standing still, throw the said ball
along the ground, do you think it would not continue its motion even after you
had delivered it out of your hand? and that for so much a greater space, by how
much the superficies were more smooth, so that v. g. upon ice it would run a
great way?


SIMP. There is no doubt of it, if I give it impetus with my arm; but in the
other case it is supposed, that he who is upon the horse, only drops it out of
his hand.


SALV. So I desire that it should be: but when you throw it with your arm, what
other remains to the ball being once gone out of your hand, than the motion
received from your arm, which motion being conserved in the boul, it does
continue to carry it forward? Now, what does it import, that that impetus be
conferred on the ball rather from the arm than from the horse? Whilst you were
on horseback, did not your hand, and consequently the ball run as fast as the
horse it self? Doubtless it did: therefore in only opening of the hand, the
ball departs with the motion already coceived, not from your arm, by your
particular motion, but from the motion dependant on the said horse, which
comes to be communicated to you, to your arm, to your hand, and lastly to the
ball. Nay, I will tell you farther, that if the rider upon his speed fling the
ball with his arm to the part contrary to the course, it shall, after it is
fallen to the ground, sometimes (albeit thrown to the contrary part) follow the
course of the horse, and sometimes lie still on the ground; and shall only
move contrary to the said course, when the motion received from the arm, shall
exceed that of the carrier in velocity. And it is a vanity, that of some, who
say that a horseman is able to cast a javelin through the air, that way which
the horse runs, and with the horse to follow and overtake the same; and lastly,
to catch it again. It is, I say, a vanity, for that to make the project return
into the hand, it is requisite to cast it upwards, in the same manner as if you
stood still. For, let the carrier be never so swift, provided it be uniform,
and the project not over-light, it shall always fall back again into the hand
of the projicient, though never so high thrown.


SAGR. By this Doctrine I come to know some Problems very curious upon this
subject of projections; Sundry curious Problems, touching the motions of
projects.
the first of which must seem very strange to Simplicius. And the Problem is
this; I affirm it to be possible, that the ball being barely dropped or let fall,
by one that any way runs very swiftly, being arrived at the Earth, does not
only follow the course of that person, but does much out go him. Which Problem
is connexed with this, that the moveable being thrown by the projicient above
the plane of the Horizon, may acquire new velocity, greater by far than that
conferred upon it by the projicient. The which effect I have with admiration
observed, in looking upon those who use the sport of tops, which, so soon as
they are set out of the hand, are seen to move in the air with a certain
velocity, the which they afterward much increase at their coming to the
ground; and if whipping them, they rub at any uneven place that makes them skip
on high, they are seen to move very slowly through the air, and falling again
to the Earth, they still come to move with a greater velocity: But that which
is yet more strange, I have farther observed, that they not only turn always
more swiftly on the ground, than in the air, but of two spaces both upon the
Earth, sometimes a motion in the second space is more swift than in the first.
Now what would Simplicius say to this?


SIMP. He would say in the first place, that he had never made such an
observation. Secondly, he would say, that he did not believe the same. He would
say again, in the third place, that if you could assure him thereof, and
demonstratively convince him of the same, he would account you a great Demon.


SAGR. I hope then that it is one of the Socratick, not infernal ones. But that
I may make you understand this particular, you must know, that if a person
apprehend not a truth of himself, it is impossible that others should make him
understand it: I may indeed instruct you in those things which are neither true
nor false; but the true, that is, the necessary, namely, such as it is
impossible should be otherwise, every common capacity either comprehends them
of himself, or else it is impossible he should ever know them. And of this
opinion I am confident is Salviatus also: and therefore I tell you, that the
reasons of the present Problems are known by you, but it may be, not
apprehended.


SIMP. Let us, for the present, pass by that controversy, and permit me to
plead ignorance of these things you speak of, and try whether you can make me
capable of understanding these Problems.


SAGR. This first depends upon another, which is, Whence comes it, that
setting a top with the lash, it runs farther, and consequently with greater
force, than when its set with the fingers?


SIMP. Aristotle also makes certain Problems about these kinds of projects.


SALV. He does so; and very ingenious they are: particularly, That, Whence it
comes to pass that round tops run better than the square?


SAGR. And cannot you, Simplicius, give a reason for this, without others
prompting you?


SIMP. Very good, I can so; but leave your jeering.


SAGR. In like manner you do know the reason of this other (...). Tell me
therefore; know you that a thing which moves, being impeded stands still?


SIMP. I know it does, if the impediment be so great as to suffice.


SAGR. Do you know, that moving upon the Earth is a greater impediment to the
moveable, than moving in the air, the Earth being rough and hard, and the air
soft and yielding?


SIMP. And knowing this, I know that the top will turn faster in the air, than
on the ground, so that my knowledge is quite contrary to what you think it.


SAGR. Fair and softly, Simplicius. You know that in the parts of a moveable,
that turns about its center, there are found motions toward all sides; so
that some ascend, others descend; some go forwards, others backwards?


SIMP. I know it, and Aristotle taught me the same.


SAGR. And with what demonstration, I pray you?


SIMP. With that of sense.


SAGR. Aristotle, then, has made you see that which without him you would not
have seen? Did he ever lend you his eyes? You would say, that Aristotle has
told, advertised, remembered you of the same; and not taught you it. When then
a top, without changing place, turns round, (or in the childrens phrase,
sleeps) not parallel, but erect to the Horizon, some of its parts ascend, and
the opposite descend; the superior go one way, the inferior another. Fancy
now to your self, a top, that without changing place, swiftly turns round in
that manner, and stands suspended in the air, and that in that manner turning,
it be let fall to the Earth perpendicularly, do you believe, that when it is
arrived at the ground, it will continue to turn round in the same manner,
without changing place, as before?


SIMP. No, Sir.


SAGR. What will it do then?


SIMP. It will run along the ground very fast.


SAGR. And toward what part?


SIMP. Toward that, whither its Vert^gine.
reeling carries it.


SAGR. In its reeling there are parts, that is the uppermost, which do move
contrary to the inferior; therefore you must instance which it shall obey: for
as to the parts ascending and descending, the one kind will not yield to the
other; nor will they all go downwards, being hindered by the Earth, nor upwards
as being heavy.


SIMP. The top will run reeling along the floor toward that part whither its
upper parts incline it.


SAGR. And why not whither the contrary parts tend, namely, those which touch
the ground?


SIMP. Because those upon the ground happen to be impeded by the roughness of
the touch, that is, by the floors unevenness; but the superior, which are in
the tenuous and flexible air, are hindered very little, if at all; and therefore
the top will obey their inclination.


SAGR. So that that taction, if I may so say, of the neither parts on the
floor, is the cause that they stay, and only the upper parts spring the top
forward.


SALV. And therefore, if the top should fall upon the ice, or other very smooth
superficies, it would not so well run forward, but might peradventure continue
to revolve in it self, (or sleep) without acquiring any progressive motion.


SAGR. It is an easy thing for it so to do; but yet nevertheless, it would not
so speedily come to sleep, as when it falls on a superficies somewhat rugged.
But tell me, Simplicius, when the top-turning round about it self, in that
manner, is let fall, why does it not move forwards in the air, as it does
afterward when it is upon the ground?


SIMP. Because having air above it, and beneath, neither those parts, nor these
have any where to touch, and not having more occasion to go forward than
backward, it falls perpendicularly.


SAGR. So then the only reeling about its self, without other impetus, can
drive the top forward, being arrived at the ground, very nimbly. Now proceed we
to what remains. That lash, which the driver tyeth to his Top-stick, and with
which, winding it about the top, he sets it ( i. e. makes it go) what effect
has it on the said top?


SIMP. It constrains it to turn round upon its toe, that so it may free it self
from the Top-lash.


SAGR. So then, when the top arriveth at the ground, it comes all the way
turning about its self, by means of the lash. Has it not reason then to move
in it self more swiftly upon the ground, than it did whilst it was in the air?


SIMP. Yes doubtless; for in the air it had no other impulse than that of the
arm of the projicient; and if it had also the reeling, this (as has been said)
in the air drives it not forward at all* but arriving at the floor, to the
motion of the arm is added the progression of the reeling, whereby the velocity
is redoubled. And I know already very well, that the top skipping from the
ground, its velocity will deminish, because the help of its circulation is
wanting; and returning to the Earth will get it again, and by that means move
again faster, than in the air. It only rests for me to understand, whether in
this second motion on the Earth it move more swiftly, than in the first; for
then it would move in infinitum, always accelerating.


SAGR. I did not absolutely affirm, that this second motion is more swift than
the first; but that it may happen so to be sometimes.


SIMP. This is that, which I apprehend not, and which I desire to know.


SAGR. And this also you know of your self. Therefore tell me: When you let the
top fall out of your hand, without making it turn round ( i. e. setting it)
what will it do at its coming to the ground?


SIMP. Nothing, but there lie still.


SAGR. May it not chance, that in its fall to the ground it may acquire a
motion? Think better on it.


SIMP. Unless we let it fall upon some inclining stone, as children do playing
at A Game in Italy, which is, to glide bullets down an inclining stone, etc.
Chiosa, and that falling side-wayes upon the same, it do acquire the motion of
turning round upon its toe, wherewith it afterward continues to move
progressively on the floor, I know not in what other manner it can do any thing
but lie still where it falls.


SAGR. You see then that in some case it may acquire a new revolution. When
then the top jerked up from the ground, falls down again, why may it not
casually hit upon the declivity of some stone fixed in the floor, and that has
an inclination that way toward which it moves, and acquiring by that slip a
new whirle over and above that conferred by the lash, why may it not redouble
its motion, and make it swifter than it was at its first lighting upon the
ground?


SIMP. Now I see that the same may easily happen. And I am thinking that if the
top should turn the contrary way, in arriving at the ground, it would work a
contrary effect, that is, the motion of the accidental whirl would retard that
of the projicient.


SAGR. And it would sometimes wholly retard and stop it, in case the revolution
of the top were very swift. And from hence arises the resolution of that
slight, which the more skilful Tennis Players use to their advantage; that is,
to gull their adversary by cutting (for so is their Phrase) the Ball; which is,
to return it with a side Rachet, in such a manner, that it does thereby acquire
a motion by it self contrary to the projected motion, and so by that means, at
its coming to the ground, the rebound, which if the ball did not turn in that
manner, would be toward the adversary, giving him the usual time to toss it
back again, does fail, and the ball runs tripping along the ground, or rebounds
less than usual, and breaks the time of the return. Hence it is that you
see, those who play at A Game in Italy, wherein they strive who shall trundle
or throw a wooden bowl nearest to an assigned mark.
Stool-ball, when they play in a stony way, or a place full of holes and rubs
that make the ball trip an hundred several ways, never suffering it to come
near the mark, to avoid them all, they do not trundle the ball upon the ground,
but throw it, as if they were to pitch a quait. But because in throwing the
ball, it issues out of the hand with some roling conferred by the fingers,
when ever the hand is under the ball, as it is most commonly held; whereupon
the ball in its lighting on the ground near to the mark, between the motion of
the projicient and that of the roling, would run a great way from the same: To
make the ball stay, they hold it artificially, with their hand uppermost, and
it undermost, which in its delivery has a contrary twirl or roling conferred
upon it by the fingers, by means whereof in its coming to the ground near the
mark it stays there, or runs very very little forwards. But to return to our
principal problem which gave occasion for starting these others; I say it is
possible that a person carried very swiftly, may let a ball drop out of his
hand, that being come to the Earth, shall not only follow his motion, but also
out-go it, moving with a greater velocity. And to see such an effect, I desire
that the course may be that of a Chariot, to which on the outside let a
declining board be fastened; so as that the neither part may be toward the
horses, and the upper toward the hind Wheel. Now, if in the Chariots full
career, a man within it, let a ball fall gliding along the declivity of that
board, it shall in roling downward acquire a particular vertigo or turning, the
which added to the motion impressed by the Chariot, will carry the ball along
the ground much faster than the Chariot. And if one accommodate another
declining board over against it, the motion of the Chariot may be qualified so,
that the ball, gliding downwards along the board, in its coming to the ground
shall rest immovable, and also shall sometimes run the contrary way to the
Chariot. But we are strayed too far from the purpose, therefore if Simplicius
be satisfied with the resolution of the first arg^ment against the Earths
mobility, taken from things falling perpendicularly, we may pass to the rest.


SALV. The digressions made hitherto, are not so alienated from the matter in
hand, as that one can say they are wholly strangers to it. Besides these
argumentations depend on those things that start up in the fancy not of one
person, but of three, that we are: And moreover we discourse for our pleasure,
nor are we obliged to that strictness of one who ex professo treats
methodically of an argument, with an intent to publish the same. I will not
consent that our Poem should be so confined to that unity, as not to leave us
fields open for Epsody's, which every smalll connection should suffice to
introduce; but with almost as much liberry as if we were met to tell stories,
it shall be lawful for me to speak, what ever your discourse brings into mymind.


SAGR. I like this motion very well; and since we are at this liberty, let me
take leave, before we pass any farther to ask of you Salviatus, whether you
did ever consider what that line may be that is described by the grave moveable
naturally falling down from the top of a Tower; and if you have reflected on
it, be pleased to tell me what you think thereof.


SALV. I have sometimes considered of it, and make no question, that if one
could be certain of the nature of that motion wherewith the grave body
descends to approach the center of the Terrestrial Globe, mixing it self
afterward with the common circular motion of the diurnal conversion; it might
be exactly found what kind of line that is, that the center of gravity of the
moveable describes in those two motions.


SAGR. Touching the simple motion toward the center dependent on the gravity,
I think that one may confidently, without error, believe that it is by a right
line, as it would be, were the Earth immovable.


SALV. As to this particular, we may not only believe it, but experience
rendereth us certain of the same.


SAGR. But how does experience assure us thereof, if we never see any motions
but such as are composed of the two, circular and descending.


SALV. Nay rather Sagredus we only see the simple motion of descent; since
that other circular one common to the Earth, the Tower and our selves remains
imperceptible, and as if it never were, and there remains perceptible to us
that of the stone, only not participated by us, and for this, sense
demonstrateth that it is by a right line, ever parallel to the said Tower,
which is built upright and perpendicular upon the Terrestrial surface.


SAGR. You are in the right; and this was but too plainly demonstrated to me
even now, seeing that I could not remember so easy a thing; but this being so
manifest, what more is it that you say you desire, for understanding the nature
of this motion downwards?


SALV. It suffices not to know that it is straight, but its requisite to know
whether it be uniform, or irregular; that is, whether it maintain always one
and the same velocity, or else goes retarding or accelerating.


SAGR. It is already clear, that it goes continually accellerating.


SALV. Neither does this suffice, but its requisite to know according to what
proportion such accelleration is made; a Problem, that I believe was never
hitherto understood by any Philosopher or Mathematician; although Philosophers,
and particularly the Peripateticks, have writ great and entire Volumes,
touching motion.


SIMP. Philosophers principally busy themselves about universals; they find
the definitions and more common symptoms, omitting certain subtilties and
niceties, which are rather curiosities to the Mathematicians. And Aristotle did
content himself to define excellently what motion was in general; and of the
local, to show the principal qualities, to wit, that one is natural, another
violent; one is simple, another compound; one is equal, another accellerate;
and concerning the accelerate, contents himself to give the reason of
acceleration, remitting the finding out of the proportion of such acceleration,
and other particular accidents to the Mechanitian, or other inferior Artist.


SAGR. Very well Simplicius. But you Salviatus, when you descend sometimes from
the Throne of Peripatetick Majesty, have you ever thrown away any of your hours
in studying to find this proportion of the acceleration of the motion of
descending grave bodies?


SALV. There was no need that I should study for it, in regard that the
Academick our common friend, heretofore showed me a Treatise of his This is
that excellent tract which we give the first place in our second Volume.
De Motu, where this, and many other accidents were demonstrated. But it would
be too great a digression, if for this particular, we should interrupt our
present discourse, (which yet it self is also no better than a digression) and
make as the Saying is, a Comedy within a Comedy.


SAGR. I am content to excuse you from this narration for the present, provided
that this may be one of the Propositions reserved to be examined amongst the
rest in another particular meeting, for that the knowledge thereof is by me very
much desired; and in the mean time let us return to the line described by the
grave body in its fall from the top of the Tower to its base.


SALV. If the right motion toward the center of the Earth was uniforme, the
circular toward the East being also uniforme, you would see composed of them
both a motion by a spiral line, of that kind with those defined by Archimedes
in his Book De Spiralibus; which are, when a point moves uniformly upon a
right line, whilst that line in the mean time turns uniformly about one of
its extreme points fixed, as the center of his gyration. But because the right
motion of grave bodies falling, is continually accelerated, it is necessary,
that the line resulting of the composition of the two motions do go always
receding with greater and greater proportion from the circumference of that
circle, which the center of the stones gravity would have designed, if it had
always staid upon the Tower; it follows of necessity that this recession at
the first be but little, yea very small, yea, more, as small as can be
imagined, seeing that the descending grave body departing from rest, that is,
from the privation of motion, toward the bottom and entering into the right
motion downwards, it must needs pass through all the degrees of tardity, that
are betwixt rest, and any assigned velocity; the which degrees are infinite; as
already has been at large discoursed and proved.

It being supposed therefore, that the progress of the acceleration being
after this manner, and it being moreover true, that the descending grave body
goes to terminate in the center of the Earth, The line described by a moveable
in its natural descent, the motion of the Earth about its own center being
presupposed, would probably be the circumference of a circle.
it is necessary that the line of its mixed motion be such, that it go
continually receding with greater and greater proportion from the top of the
Tower, or to speak more properly, from the circumference of the circle
described by the top of the Tower, by means of the Earths conversion; but that
such recessions be lesser and lesser in infinitum; by how much the moveable
finds it self to be less and less removed from the first term where it
rested. Moreover it is necessary, that this line of the compounded motion do go
to terminate in the center of the Earth. Now having presupposed these two
things, I come to describe about the center A [in Fig. 1. of this second
Dialogue;] with the semidiameter AB, the circle BY, representing to me the
Terrestrial Globe, and prolonging the semidiameter AB to C, I have described
the height of the Tower BC; the which being carried about by the Earth along
the circumference BY, describes with its top the arch CD: Dividing, in the
next place, the line CA in the middle at E; upon the center E, at the distance
EC, I describe the semicircle CIA: In which, I now affirm, that it is very
probable that a stone falling from the top of the Tower C, does move, with a
motion mixed of the circular, which is in common, and of its peculiar right
motion. If therefore in the circumference CD, certain equal parts CF, FG, GH,
HL, be marked, and from the points F, G, H, L, right lines be drawn toward the
center A, the parts of them intercepted between the two circumferences CD and
BY, shall represent unto us the same Tower CB, transported by the Terrestrial
Globe toward DI; in which lines the points where they come to be intersected
by the arch of the semicircle CI, are the places by which from time to time the
falling stone does pass; which points go continually with greater and greater
proportion receding from the top of the Tower. And this is the cause why the
right motion made along the side of the Tower apeareth to us more and more
accelerate. It appears also, how by reason of the infinite acuteness of the
contact of those two circles DC, CI, the recession of the cadent moveable from
the circumference CFD; namely, from the top of the Tower, is toward the
beginning extreme small, which is as much as if one said its motion downwards
is very slow, and more and more slow in infinitum, according to its vicinity to
the term C, that is to the state of rest. And lastly it is seen how in the end
this same motion goes to terminate in the center of the Earth A.


SAGR. I understand all this very well, nor can I persuade my self that the
falling moveable does describe with the center of its gravity any other line,
but such an one as this.


SALV. But stay a little Sagredus, for I am to acquaint you also with three
Observations of mine, that its possible will not displease you. A moveable
falling from the top of the Tower, moves in the circumference of a circle.
The first of which is, that if we do well consider, the moveable moves not
really with any more than only one motion simply circular, as when being
placed upon the Tower, it moved with one single and circular motion. The second
is yet more pleasant; for, It moves neither more nor less, than if it had
staid always there.
it moves neither more nor less then if it had staid continually upon the
Tower, being that to the arches CF, FG, GH, etc. that it would have passed
continuing always upon the Tower, the arches of the circumference CI are
exactly equal, answering under the same CF, FG, GH, etc. Whence follows the
third wonder, It moves with an uniform, not an accelerate motion.
That the true and real motion of the stone is never accelerated, but always
even and uniforme, since that all the equal arches noted in the circumference
CD, and their respondent ones marked in the circumference CI, are past in equal
times; so that we are left at liberty to seek new causes of acceleration, or of
other motions, seeing that the moveable, as well standing upon the Tower, as
descending thence, always moves in the same fashion, that is, circularly,
with the same velocity, and with the same uniformity. Now tell me what you
think of this my fantastical conjecture.


SAGR. I must tell you, that I cannot with words sufficiently express how
admirable it seems to me; and for what at present offers it self to my
understanding, I cannot think that the business happens otherwise; and would
to God that all the demonstrations of Philosophers were but half so probable as
this. However for my perfect satisfaction I would gladly hear how you prove
those arches to be equal.


SALV. The demonstration is most easy. Suppose to your self a line drawn from
I to E. And the Semidiameter of the circle CD, that is, the line CA, being
double the Semidiameter CE of the circle CI, the circumference shall be double
to the circumference, and every arch of the greater circle double to every like
arch of the lesser; and consequently, the half of the arch of the greater
circle, equal to the whole arch of the less. And because the angle CEI made in
the center E of the lesser circle, and which insisteth upon the arch CI, is
double the angle CAD, made in the center A of the greater circle, to which the
arch CD subtendeth; therefore the arch CD is half of the arch of the greater
circle like to the arch CI, and therefore the two arches CD and CI are equal;
and in the same manner we may demonstrate of all their parts. But that the
business, as to the motion of descending grave bodies, proceeds exactly thus,
I will not at this time affirm; but this I will say, that if the line described
by the cadent moveable be not exactly the same with this, it does extreme
nearly resemble the same.


SAGR. But I, Right motion seems wholly excluded in nature.
Salviatus, am just now considering another particular very admirable; and this
it is; That admitting these considerations, the right motion does go wholly
Vadia del tutto a monte, rendered in the Latin omnino pessum eat.
mounting, and that Nature never makes use thereof, since that, even that that
use, which was from the beginning granted to it, which was of reducing the
parts of integral bodies to their place, when they were separated from their
whole, and therefore constituted in a depraved disposition, is taken from it,
and assigned to the circular motion.


SALV. This would necessarily follow, if it were concluded that the Terrestrial
Globe moves circularly; a thing, which I pretend not to be done, but have
only hitherto attempted, as I shall still, to examine the strength of those
reasons, which have been alleged by Philosophers to prove the immobility of
the Earth, of which this first taken from things falling perpendicularly, has
begat the doubts, that have been mentioned; which I know not of what force they
may have seemed to Simplicius; and therefore before I pass to the examination
of the remaining arguments, it would be convenient that he produce what he has
to reply to the contrary.


SIMP. As to this first, I confess indeed that I have heard sundry pretty
notions, which I never thought upon before, and in regard they are new unto me,
I cannot have answers so ready for them, but this argument taken from things
falling perpendicularly, I esteem it not one of the strongest proofs of the
mobility of the Earth; and I know not what may happen touching the shots of
great Guns, especially those aimed contrary to the diurnal motion.


SAGR. The flying of the birds as much puzzleth me as the objection of the
Gunshot, and all the other experiments above alleged. For these birds which
at their pleasure fly forwards and backwards, and wind to and again in a
thousand fashions, and, which more imports, lie whole hours upon the wing,
these I say do not a little pose me, nor do I see, how amongst so many
circumgyrations, they should not lose the motion of the Earth, and how they
should be able to keep pace with so great a velocity as that which they so far
exceed with their flight.


SALV. To speak the truth, your scruple is not without reason, and its possible
Copernicus himself could not find an answer for it, that was to himself
entirely satisfactory; and therefore happily past it over in silence; albeit he
was, indeed, very brief in examining the other allegations of his adversaries,
I believe through his height of wit, placed on greater and sublimer
contemplations, like as Lions are not much moved at the barking of little Dogs.
We will therefore reserve the instance of birds to the last place, and for the
present, see if we can give Simplicius satisfaction in the others, by showing
him in our wonted manner, that he himself has their answers at hand, though
upon first thoughts he does not discover them. And to begin with the shots made
at random, with the self same piece, powder, and ball, the one toward the
East, the other toward the West (if the diurnal conversion belonged to the
Earth) ought to be much longer than that toward the East.


SIMP. I am moved so to think; because in the shot made toward the East, The
reason why a Gun should seem to carry farther toward the West than toward the
East.
the ball whilst it is out of the piece, is followed by the said piece, the
which being carried round by the Earth, runs also with much velocity toward
the same part, whereupon the fall of the ball to the ground, comes to be but
little distant from the piece. On the contrary in the shot toward the West,
before that the ball falls to the ground, the piece is retired very far
toward the East, by which means the space between the ball and the piece, that
is Range, will appear longer than the other, by how much the piece, that is the
Earth, had run in the time that both the bals were in the air.


SALV. I could wish, that we did know some way to make an experiment
corresponding to the motion of these projects, as that of the ship does to the
motion of things perpendicularly falling from on high; and I am thinking how it
may be done.


SAGR. I believe, that it would be a very opposite proof, to take an open
Chariot, The experiment of a running chariot to find out the difference of
Ranges.
and to accomodate therein a Balestrone da bolzoni.
Stock-bow at half elevation, to the end the flight may prove the greatest that
my be, and whilst the horses shall run, to shoot first toward the part
whither you drive, and then another backwards toward the contrary part,
causing some one to mark diligently where the Chariot was in that moment ^f
time when the shaft came to the ground, as well in the one shot as in the
other: for thus you may see exactly how much one shaft flew farther than the
other.


SIMP. In my thoughts this experiment is very proper: and I do not doubt but
that the flight, that is, the space between the shaft and the place where the
chariot was at the shafts fall, will be less by much when one shoots toward
the chariots course, than when one shoots the contrary way. For an example,
let the flight of it self be three hundred yards, and the course of the chariot
in the time whilst the shaft stays in the air, an hundred yards, therefore
shooting toward the course, of the three hundred yards of the flight, the
chariot will have gone one hundred; so then at the shafts coming to the ground,
the space between it and the chariot, shall be but two hundred yards only; but
on the contrary, in the other shoot, the chariot running contrary to the shaft,
when the shaft shall have passed its three hundred yards, and the chariot its
other hundred the contrary way, the distance interposing shall be found to be
four hundred yards.


SALV. Is there any way to shoot so that these flights may be equal?


SIMP. I know no other way, unless by making the chariot to stand still.


SALV. This we know; but I mean when the chariot runs in full carreer.


SIMP. In that case you are to draw the Bow higher in shooting forwards, and to
slack it in shooting the contrary way.


SALV. Then you see that there is one way more. But how much is the bow to be
drawn, and how much slackened?


SIMP. In our case, where we have supposed that the bow carried three hundred
yards, it would be requisite to draw it so, as that it might carry four
hundred, and in the other to slacken it so, as that it might carry no more than
two hundred. For so each of the flights would be but three hundred in relation
to the chariot, the which, with its course of an hundred yards which it
substracts from the shoot of four hundred, and adds to that of two hundred,
would reduce them both to three hundred.


SALV. But what effect has the greater or less intensness of the bow upon the
shaft?


SIMP. The stiffer bow carries it with greater velocity, and the weaker with
less; and the same shaft flies so much farther at one time than another, with
how much greater velocity it goes out of the tiller at one time, than another.


SALV. So that to make the shaft shot either way, to fly at equal distance
from the running chariot, it is requisite, that if in the first shoot of the
precedent example, it goes out of the tiller with v. g. four degrees of
velocity, that then in the other shoot it depart but with two only: but if the
same bow be used, it always receives thence three degrees.


SIMP. It does so; and for this reason, shooting with the same bow in the
chariots course, the shoots cannot be equal.


SALV. I had forgot to ask, with what velocity it is supposed in this
particular experiment, that the chariot runs.


SIMP. The velocity of the chariot must be supposed to be one degree in
comparison to that of the bow, which is three,


SALV. Very right, for so computation gives it. But tell me, when the chariot
moves, does not all things in the same move with the same velocity?


SIMP. Yes doubtless.


SALV. Then so does the shaft also, and the bow, and the string, upon which the
shaft is nock't.


SIMP. They do so.


SALV. Why then, in discharging the shaft toward the course of the chariot,
the bow impresseth its three degrees of velocity on a shaft that had one degree
of velocity before, by means of the chariot which transported it so fast
toward that part; so that in its going off it has four degrees of velocity.
On the contrary, in the other shoot, the same bow conferreth its same three
degrees of velocity on a shaft that moves the contrary way, with one degree;
so that in its departing from the bow-string, it has no more left but only
two degrees of velocity. But you your self have already said, that the way to
make the shoots equal, is to cause that the shaft be let fly the first time
with four degrees of velocity, and the second time with two. Therefore without
changing the bow, the very course of the chariot is that which adjusteth the
flights, The solution of the argument taken from great-Guns shot toward the
East and West.
and the experiment does so represent them to any one who is not either
wilfully or naturally incapable of reason. Now apply this discourse to Gunnery,
and you shall find, that whether the Earth move or stand still, the shots made
with the same force, will always curry equal ranges, to what part soever aimed.
The error of Aristotle, Ptolomey, Tycho, your self, and all the rest, is
grounded upon that fixed and strong persuasion, that the Earth stands still,
which you have not judgment nor power to depose, no not when you have a desire
to argue of that which would ensue, presupposing the Earth to move. And thus,
in the other argument, not considering that whilst the stone is upon the
Tower, it does, as to moving or not moving, the same that the Terrestrial Globe
does, because you have concluded with your self, that the Earth stands still,
you always discourse touching the fall of the stone, as if it were to depart
from rest: whereas it behooveth to say, that if the Earth stands still, the
stone departs from rest, and descends perpendicularly; but if the Earth do
move, the stone likewise moves with like velocity, nor does it depart from
rest, but from a motion equal to that of the Earth, wherewith it intermixeth
the supervenient motion of descent, and of those two composeth a third which is
transversal or side-ways.


SIMP. But for Gods sake, if it move transversly, how is it that I behold it to
move directly and perpendicularly? This is no better than the denial of
manifest sense; and if we may not believe sense, at what other door shall we
enter into disquisitions of Philosophy?


SALV. In respect to the Earth, to the Tower, and to our selves, which all as
one piece move with the diurnal motion together with the stone, the diurnal
motion is as if it never had been, and becomes insensible, imperceptible, and
without any action at all; and the only motion which we can perceive, is that
of which we partake not, that is the descent gliding along the side of the
Tower: You are not the first that has felt great repugnance in apprehending
this non-operating of motion upon things to which it is common.


SAGR. Now I do remember a certain conceit, A notable case of Sagredus, to
show the non-operating of common motion.
that came one day into my fancy, whilst I sailed in my voyage to Aleppo,
whither I went Consul for our Country, and possibly it may be of some use, for
explaining this nullity of operation of common motion, and being as if it never
were to all the partakers thereof. And if it stand with the good liking of
Simplicius, I will reason with him upon that which then I thought of by my self
alone.


SIMP. The novelty of the things which I hear, makes me not so much a patient,
as a greedy and curious auditor: therefore go on.


SAGR. If the neb of a writing pen, that I carried along with me in the ship,
through all my navigation from Venice to Alessandretta.
Scanderon, had had a faculty of leaving visible marks of its whole voyage,
what signs, what marks, what lines would it have left?


SIMP. It would have left a line distended from Venice thither, not perfectly
straight, or to say better, distended in a perfect arch of a circle, but in
some places more, in some less curved, according as the vessel had gone more or
less fluctuating; but this its inflecting in some places a fathom or two to the
right hand or to the left, upwards or downwards, in a length of many hundred
miles, would have brought but little alteration to the entire tract of the
line, so that it would have been hardly sensible; and without any considerable
error, might have been called the part of a perfect arch.


SAGR. So that the true and most exact motion of the neb of my pen would have
also been an arch of a perfect circle, if the vessels motion, the fluctuation
of the billows ceasing, had been calm and tranquil. And if I had continually
held that per in my hand, and had only moved it sometimes an inch or two this
way or that way, what alteration should I have made in that its principal, and
very long tract or stroke?


SIMP. Less than that which the declining in several places from absolute
rectitude, but the quantity of a flea's eye makes in a right line of a thousand
yards long.


SAGR. If a Painter, then, at our launching from the Port, had began to design
upon a paper with that pen, and continued his work till he came to Scanderon,
he would have been able to have taken by its motion a perfect draught of all
those figures perfectly interwoven and shadowed on several sides with
countries, buildings, living creatures, and other things; albeit all the true,
real, and essential motion traced out by the neb of that pen, would have been
no other than a very long, but simple line: and as to the proper operation of
the Painter, he would have delineated the same to an hair, if the ship had
stood still. That therefore of the huge long motion of the pen there does
remain no other marks, than those tracks drawn upon the paper, the reason
thereof is because the grand motion from Venice to Scanderon, was common to the
paper, the pen, and all that which was in the ship: but the petty motions
forwards and backwards, to the right, to the left, communicated by the fingers
of the Painter unto the pen, and not to the paper, as being peculiar thereunto,
might leave marks of it self upon the paper, which did not move with that
motion. Thus it is likewise true, that the Earth moving, the motion of the
stone in descending downwards, was really a long tract of many hundreds and
thousands of yards, and if it could have been able to have delineated in a calm
air, or other superficies, the track of its course, it would have left behind
an huge long transverse line. But that part of all this motion which is common
to the stone, the Tower, and our selves, is imperceptible to us, and as if it
had never been, and that part only remains observable, of which neither the
Tower nor we are partakers, which is in fine, that wherewith the stone falling
measures the Tower.


SALV. A most witty conceit to clear up this point, which was not a little
difficult to many capacities. Now if Simplicius will make no farther reply, we
may pass to the other experiments, the unfolding of which will receive no small
facility from the things already declared.


SIMP. I have nothing more to say: and I was well-nigh transported with that
delineation, and with thinking how those strokes drawn so many ways, hither,
thither, upwards, downwards, forwards, backwards, and interwoven with thousands
of turnings, are not essentially or really other, than small pieces of one sole
line drawn all one way, and the same without any other alteration save the
declining the direct rectitude, sometimes a very insensible matter toward one
side or another, and the pens moving its neb one while softer, another while
slower, but with very small inequality. And I think that it would in the same
manner write a letter, and that those frollike penmen, who to show their
command of hand, without taking their pen from the paper in one sole stroke,
with infinite turnings draw a pleasant knot, if they were in a boat that did
tide it along swiftly they would convert the whole motion of the pen, which in
reality is but one sole line, drawn all toward one and the same part, and very
little curved, or declining from perfect rectitude, into a knot or flourish.
And I am much pleased that Sagredus has helped me to this conceit: therefore
let us go on, for the hope of meeting with more of them, will make me the
stricter in my attention.


SAGR. If you have a curiosity to hear such like subtilties, Subtilties
sufficiently insipid, ironically, spoken and taken from a certain Encyclopaedia.
which occurr not thus to every one, you will find no want of them, especially
in this particular of Navigation; and do you not think that a witty conceit
which I met with likewise in the same voyage, when I observed that the mast of
the ship, without either breaking or bending, had made a greater voyage with
its round-top, that is with its top-gallant, than with its foot; for the round
top being more distant from the center of the Earth than the foot is, it had
described the arch of a circle bigger than the circle by which the foot had
passed.


SIMP. And thus when a man walks he goes farther with his head than with his
feet.


SAGR. You have found out the matter your self by help of your own mother-vvit:
But let us not interrupt Salviatus.


SALV. It pleases me to see Simplicius how he sootheth up himself in this
conceit, if happly it be his own, and that he has not borrowed it from a
certain little pamphlet of conclusions, where there are a great many more such
fancies no less pleasant and vvitty. It follovveth that we speak of the piece
of Ordinance mounted perpendicular to the Horizon, An instance against the
deurnal motion of the earth, taken from the shot of a Piece of Ordinance
perpendicularly.
that is, of a shot toward our vertical point, and to conclude, of the return
of the ball by the same line unto the same piece, though that in the long time
which it is separated from the piece, the earth has transported it many miles
toward the East; now it seems, that the ball ought to fall a like distance
from the piece toward the West; the which does not happen: therefore the
piece without having been moved did stay expecting the same. The answer is
the same with that of the stone falling from the Tovver; The answer to the
objection, showing the equivoke.
and all the fallacy, and equivocation consists in supposing still for true,
that which is in question; for the Opponent has it still fixed in his conceit
that the ball departs from its rest, being discharged by the fire from the
piece; and the departing from the state of rest, cannot be, unless the
immobility of the Terrestrial Globe be presupposed, which is the conclusion of
that was in dispute; Therefore, I reply, that those who make the Earth
moveable, answer, that the piece, and the ball that is in it, partake of the
same motion with the Earth; nay that they have this together with her from
nature; and that therefore the ball departs in no other manner from its
quiescence, but conjoined with its motion about the center, the which by its
projection upwards, is neither taken away, nor hindered; and in this manner
following, the universal motion of the Earth toward the East, it always
keeps perpendicular over the said piece, as well in its rise as in its
return. And the same you see to ensue, in making the experiment in a ship with
a bullet shot upwards perpendicularly with a Crosse-bow, which returns to the
same place whether the ship does move, or stand still.


SAGR. This satisfies very well to all; Another answer to the same objection.
but because that I have seen that Simplicius takes pleasure with certain
subtilties to puzzle his companions, I will demand of him whether, supposing
for this time that the Earth stands still, and the piece erected upon it
perpendicularly, directed to our Zenith, he do at all question that to be the
true perpendicular shot, and that the ball in departing, and in its return is
to go by the same right line, still supposing all external and accidental
impediments to be removed?


SIMP. I understand that the matter ought to succeed exactly in that manner.


SAGR. But if the piece were placed, not prependicularly, but inclining toward
some place, what would the motion of the ball be? Would it go happily, as in the
other shot, by the perpendicular line, and return again by the same?


SIMP. It would not so do; but issuing out of the piece, it would pursue its
motion by a right line which prolongeth the erect perpendicularity of the
concave cylinder of the piece, unless so far as its own weight would make it
decline from that erection toward the Earth.


SAGR. So that the mounture of the cylinder is the regulator of the motion of
the ball, nor does it, or would it move out of that line, if its own gravity
did not make it decline downwards. And therefore placing the cylinder
perpendicularly, Projects continue their motion by the right line that
follows the direction of the motion, made together with the proficient,
whilst they were conjoined therewith.
and shooting the ball upwards, it returns by the same right line downvvards;
because the motion of the ball dependent on its gravity is downward, by the
same perpendicular. The journey therefore of the ball out of the piece,
continues or prolongeth the rectitude or perpendicularity of that small part
of the said journey, which it made within the said piece; is it not so?


SIMP. So it is, in my opinion.


SAGR. Now imagine the cylinder to be erected, and that the Earth does revolve
about with a diurnal motion, carrying the piece along with it, tell me what
shall be the motion of the ball within the cylinder, having given fire?


SIMP. It shall be a straight and perpendicular motion, the cylinder being
erected perpendicularly.


SAGR. Consider well what you say: for I believe that it will not be
perpendicular. It would indeed be perpendicular, if the Earth stood still, for
so the ball would have no other motion but that proceeding from the fire. The
revolution of the Earth supposed, the ball in the piece erected
perpendicularly, does not move by a perpendicular, but an inclined line.
But in case the Earth turns round, the ball that is in the piece, has
likewise a diurnal motion, so that there being added to the same the impulse of
the fire, it moves from the breech of the piece to the muzzle with two
motions, from the composition whereof it comes to pass that the motion made
by the center of the balls gravity is an inclining line. And for your clearer
understanding the same, let the piece AC [in Fig. 2.] be erected, and in it the
ball B; it is manifest, that the piece standing immovable, and fire being
given to it, the ball will make its way out by the mouth A, and with its
center, passing through the the piece, shall have described the perpendicular
line BA, and it shall pursue that rectitude when it is out of the piece, moving
toward the Zenith. But in case the Earth should move round, and consequently
carry the piece along with it, in the time that the ball driven out of the
piece shall move along the cylinder, the piece being carried by the Earth,
shall pass into the situation DE, and the ball B, in going off, would be at
the cornish D, and the motion of the bals center, would have been according to
the line BD, no longer perpendicular, but inclining toward the East; and the
ball (as has been concluded) being to continue its motion through the air,
according to the direction of the motion made in the piece, the said motion
shall continue on according to the inclination of the line BD, and so shall no
longer be perpendicular, but inclined toward the East, to which part the piece
does also move; whereupon the ball may follow the motion of the Earth, and of
the piece. Now Simplicius, you see it demonstrated, that the Range which you
took to be perpendicular, is not so.


SIMP. I do not very well understand this business; do you, Salviatus?


SALV. I apprehend it in part; but I have a certain kind of scruple, which I
wish I knew how to express. It seems to me, that according to what has been
said, if the Piece be erected perpendicular, and the Earth do move, the ball
would not be to fall, as Aristotle and Tycho will have it, far from the Piece
toward the West, nor as you would have it, upon the Piece, but rather far
distant toward the East. For according to your explanation, it would have two
motions, the which would with one consent carry it thitherward, to wit, the
common motion of the Earth, which carries the Piece and the ball from CA
toward ED; and the fire which carries it by the inclined line BD, both
motions toward the East, and therefore they are superior to the motion of the
Earth.


SAGR. Not so, Sir. The motion which carries the ball toward the East, comes
all from the Earth, and the fire has no part at all therein: the motion which
mounteth the ball upwards, is wholly of fire, wherewith the Earth has nothing
to do. And that it is so, if you give not fire, the ball will never go out of
the Piece, nor yet rise upwards a hairs breadth; as also if you make the Earth
immovable, and give fire, the ball without any inclination shall go
perpendicularly upwards. The ball therefore having two motions, one upwards,
and the other in gyration, of both which the transverse line BD is compounded,
the impulse upward is wholly of fire, the circular comes wholly from the
Earth, and is equal to the Earths motion: and being equal to it, the ball
maintains it self all the way directly over the mouth of the Piece, and at
last falls back into the same: and because it always observes the erection
of the Piece, it appears also continually over the head of him that is near
the Piece, and therefore it appears to mount exactly perpendicular toward
our Zenith, or vertical point.


SIMP. I have yet one doubt more remaining, and it is, that in regard the
motion of the ball is very swift in the Piece, it seems not possible, that in
that moment of time the transposition of the Piece from CA to AD should confer
such an inclination upon the transverse line CD, that by means thereof, the
ball when it comes afterward into the air should be able to follow the course
of the Earth.


SAGR. You err upon many accounts; and first, the inclination of the transverse
line CD, I believe it is much greater than you take it to be, for I verily
think that the velocity of the Earths motion, not only under the Equinoctial,
but in our parallel also, is greater than that of the ball whilst it moves in
the Piece; so that the interval CE would be absolutely much bigger than the
whole length of the Piece, and the inclination of the transverse line
consequently bigger than half a right angle: but be the velocity of the Earth
more, or be it less, in comparison of the velocity of the fire, this imports
nothing; for if the velocity of the Earth be small, and consequently the
inclination of the transverse line be little also; there is then also need but
of little inclination to make the ball suspend it self in its range directly
over the Piece. And in a word, if you do but attentively consider, you will
comprehend, that the motion of the Earth in transferring the Piece along with
it from CA to ED, conferreth upon the transverse line CD, so much of little or
great inclination, as is required to adjust the range to its perpendicularity.
But you err, secondly, in that you referr the faculty of carrying the ball
along with the Earth to the impulse of the fire, and you run into the same
error, into which Salviatus, but even now seemed to have fallen; for the
faculty of following the motion of the Earth, is the primary and perpetual
motion, indelibly and inseparably imparted to the said ball, as to a thing
terrestrial, and that of its own nature does and ever shall possess the same.


SALV. Let us yield, The manner how Fowlers shoot birds flying.
Simplicius, for the business is just as he says. And now from this discourse
let us come to understand the reason of a Venatorian Problem, of those Fowlers
who with their guns shoot a bird flying; and because I did imagine, that in
regard the bird flies a great pace, therefore they should aim their shot far
from the bird, anticipating its flight for a certain space, and more or less
according to its velocity and the distance of the bird, that so the bullet
hasting directly to the mark aimed at, it might come to arrive at the self same
time in the same point with its motion, and the bird with its flight, and by
that means one to encounter the other: and asking one of them, if their
practice was not so to do; He told me, no; but that the slight was very easy
and certain, and that they took aim just in the same manner as if they had shot
at a bird that did sit still; that is, they made the flying bird their mark,
and by moving their fowling-piece they followed her, keeping their aim still
full upon her, till such time as they let fly, and in this manner shot her as
they did others sitting still. It is necessary therefore that that motion,
though slow, which the fowling-piece makes in turning and following after the
flight of the bird do communicate it self to the bullet also, and that it be
joined with that of the fire; so that the ball has from the fire the motion
directly upwards, and from the concave Cylinder of the barrel the declination
according to the flight of the Bird, just as was said before of the shot of a
Canon; where the ball receives from the fire a virtue of mounting upwards
toward the Zenith, and from the motion of the Earth its winding toward the
East, and of both makes a compound motion that follows the course of the
Earth, and that to the beholder seems only to go directly upwards, and
return again downwards by the same line. The holding therefore of the gun
continually directed toward the mark, makes the shoot hit right, and that you
may keep your gun directed to the mark, in case the mark stands still, you must
also hold your gun still; and if the mark shall move, the gun must be kept upon
the mark by moving. The answer to the objection taken from the shots of great
Guns ma^e toward the North and South.
And upon this depends the proper answer to the other argument taken from the
shot of a Canon, at the mark placed toward the South or North: wherein is
alleged, that if the Earth should move, the shots would all range Westward of
the mark, because that in the time whilst the ball, being forced out of the
Piece, goes through the air to the mark, the said mark being carried toward
the East, would leave the ball to the Westward. I answer therefore, demanding
whether if the Canon be aimed true at the mark, and permitted so to continue,
it will constantly hit the said mark, whether the Earth move or stand still? It
must be replied, that the aim alters not at all, for if the mark does stand
still, the Piece also does stand still, and if it, being transported by the
Earths motion, does move, the Piece does also move at the same rate, and, the
aim maintained, the shot proves always true, as by what has been said above,
is manifest.


SAGR. Stay a little, I entreat you, Salviatus, till I have propounded a
certain conceit touching these shooters of birds flying, whose proceeding I
believe to be the same which you relate, and believe the effect of hitting the
bird does likewise follow: but yet I cannot think that act altogether
conformable to this of shooting in great Guns, which ought to hit as well when
the piece and mark moves, as when they both stand still; and these, in my
opinion, are the particulars in which they disagree. In shooting with a great
Gun both it and the mark move with equal velocity, being both transported by
the motion of the Terrestrial Globe: and albeit sometimes the piece being
planted more toward the Pole, than the mark, and consequently its motion being
somewhat flower than the motion of the mark, as being made in a lesser circle,
such a difference is insensible, at that little distance of the piece from the
mark: but in the shot of the Fowler the motion of the Fowling-piece wherewith
it goes following the bird, is very slow in comparison of the flight of the
said bird; whence me thinks it should follow, that that small motion which the
turning of the Birding-piece conferreth on the bullet that is within it,
cannot, when it is once gone forth of it, multiply it self in the air, until
it come to equal the velocity of the birds flight, so as that the said bullet
should always keep direct upon it: nay, me thinks the bird would anticipate
it and leave it behind. Let me add, that in this act, the air through which the
bullet is to pass, partaketh not of the motion of the bird: whereas in the case
of the Canon, both it, the mark, and the intermediate air, do equally partake
of the common diurnal motion. So that the true cause of the Marks-man his
hitting the mark, as it should seem, moreover and besides the following the
birds flight with the piece, is his somewhat anticipating it, taking his aim
before it; as also his shooting (as I believe) not with one bullet, but with
many small balls (called shot) the which scattering in the air possess a great
space; and also the extreme velocity wherewith these shot, being discharged
from the Gun, go toward the bird.


SALV. See how far the winged wit of Sagredus anticipateth, and out-goeth the
dullness of mine; which perhaps would have light upon these disparities, The
answer to the Argument taken from the shots at point blanck toward the East
and West.
but not without long study. Now turning to the matter in hand, there do
remain to be considered by us the shots at point blank, toward the East and
toward the West; the first of which, if the Earth did move, would always
happen to be too high above the mark, and the second too low; forasmuch as the
parts of the Earth Eastward, by reason of the diurnal motion, do continually
descend beneath the tangent parallel to the Horizon, whereupon the Eastern stars
to us appear to ascend; and on the contrary, the parts Westward do more and
more ascend, whereupon the Western stars do in our seeming descend: and
therefore the ranges which are leveled according to the said tangent at the
Oriental mark, (which whilst the ball passes along by the tangent descends)
should prove too high, and the Occidental too low by means of the elevation of
the mark, whilst the ball passes along the tangent. The answer is like to the
rest: for as the Eastern mark goes continually descending, by reason of the
Earths motion, under a tangent that continues immovable; so likewise the
piece for the same reason goes continually inclining, and with its mounture
pursuing the said mark: by which means the shot proves true.

But here I think it a convenient opportunity to give notice of certain
concessions, The followers of Copernicus too freely admit certain propositions
for true, which are very doubtful.
which are granted perhaps over liberally by the followers of Copernicus unto
their Adversaries: I mean of yielding to them certain experiments for sure and
certain, which yet the Adversaries themselves had never made trial of: as for
example, that of things falling from the round-top of a ship whilst it is in
motion, and many others; amongst which I verily believe, that this of
experimenting whether the shot made by a Canon toward the East proves too
high, and the Western shot too low, is one: and because I believe that they
have never made trial thereof, I desire that they would tell me what difference
they think ought to happen between the said shots, supposing the Earth
moveable, or supposing it moveable; and let Simplicius for this time answer for
them.


SIMP. I will not undertake to answer so confidently as another more
intelligent perhaps might do; but shall speak what thus upon the sudden I think
they would reply; which is in effect the same with that which has been said
already, namely, that in case the Earth should move, the shots made Eastward
would prove too high, etc. the ball, as it is probable, being to move along the
tangent.


SALV. But if I should say, that so it falls out upon trial, how would you
censure me?


SIMP. It is necessary to proceed to experiments for the proving of it.


SALV. But do you think, that there is to be found a Gunner so skilful, as to
hit the mark at every shoot, in a distance of v.g. five hundred paces?


SIMP. No Sir; nay I believe that there is no one, how good a marks-man soever
that would promise to come within a pace of the mark,


SALV. How can we then, with shots so uncertain, assure our selves of that
which is in dispute?


SIMP. We may be assured thereof two ways; one, by making many shots; the
other, because in respect of the great velocity of the Earths motion, the
deviation from the mark would in my opinion be very great.


SALV. Very great, that is more than one pace; in regard that the varying so
much, yea and more, is granted to happen ordinarily even in the Earths mobility.


SIMP. I verily believe the variation from the mark would be more than so.


SALV. Now I desire that for our satisfaction we do make thus in gross a
slight calculation, A Computation how much the ranges of great shot ought to
vary from the mark, the Earths motion being granted.
if you consent thereto, which will stand us in stead likewise (if the
computation succeed as I expect) for a warning how we do in other occurrences
suffer our selves, as the saying is, to be taken with the enemies shouts, and
surrender up our belief to what ever first presents it self to our fancy. And
now to give all advantages to the Peripateticks and Tychonicks, let us suppose
our selves to be under the Equinoctial, there to shoot a piece of Ordinance
point blank Eastwards at a mark five hundred paces off. First, let us see thus
(as I said) in a level, what time the shot after it is gone out of the Piece
takes to arrive at the mark; which we know to be very little, and is certainly
no more than that wherein a travailer walks two steps, which also is less
than the second of a minute of an hour; for supposing that the travailer
walks three miles in an hour, which are nine thousand paces, being that an
hour contains three thousand, six hundred second minutes, the travailer
walks two steps and an half in a second, a second therefore is more than the
time of the balls motion. And for that the diurnal revolution is twenty four
hours, the Western horizon rises fifteen degrees in an hour, that is, fifteen
first minutes of a degree, in one first minute of an hour; that is, fifteen
seconds of a degree, in one second of an hour; and because one second is the
time of the shot, therefore in this time the Western horizon rises fifteen
seconds of a degree, and so much likewise the mark; and therefore fifteen
seconds of that circle, whose semidiameter is five hundred paces (for so much
the distance of the mark from the Piece was supposed.) Now let us look in the
table of Arches and Chords (see here is Copernicus his book) what part is the
chord of fifteen seconds of the semidiameter, that is, five hundred paces. Here
you see the chord (or subtense) of a first minute to be less than thirty of
those parts, of which the semidiameter is an hundred thousand. Therefore the
chord of a second minute shall be less then half of one of those parts, that is
less than one of those parts, of which the semidiameter is two hundred
thousand; and therefore the chord of fifteen conds shall be less than fifteen
of those same two hundred thousand parts; but that which is less than That is,
in plainer terms the fraction 15/200000, is more than the fraction 4/50000,
for dividing the denominators by their ^ominators, and the first produces
13333 1/3, the other but 12500.
fifteen parts of two hundred thousand, is also more than that which is four
centesmes of five hundred; therefore the ascent of the mark in the time of the
balls motion is less than four centesmes, that is, than one twenty fifth part
of a pace; it shall be therefore It shall be near 2 2/5 inches, accounting the
pace to be Geometrical, containing 5 foot.
about two inches: And so much consequently shall be the variation of each
Western shot, the Earth being supposed to have a diurnal motion. Now if I shall
tell you, that this variation (I mean of falling two inches short of what they
would do in case the Earth did not move) upon trial does happen in all shots,
how will you convince me Simplicius, showing me by an experiment that it is not
so? Do you not see that it is impossible to confute me, unless you first find
out a way to shoot at a mark with so much exactness, as never to miss an
hairs breadth? For whilst the ranges of great shot consist of different numbers
of paces, as de facto they do, I will affirm that in each of those variations
there is contained that of two inches caused by the motion of the Earth.


SAGR. Pardon me, It is demonstrated with great subtilty, that the Earths
motion supposed, Canon shot ought not to vary more than in rest.
Salviatus, you are too liberal. For I would tell the Peripateticks, that
though every shot should hit the very center of the mark, that should not in
the least disprove the motion of the Earth. For the Gunners are so constantly
employed in levelling the sight and gun to the mark, as that they can hit the
same, notwithstanding the motion of the Earth. And I say, that if the Earth
should stand still, the shots would not prove true; but the Occidental would be
too low, and the Oriental too high: now let Simplicius disprove me if he can.


SALV. This is a subtilty worthy of Sagredus: But whether this variation be to
be observed in the motion, or in the rest of the Earth, it must needs be very
small, it must needs be swallowed up in those very great ones which sundry
accidents continually produce. It is requisite to be very cautious in admitting
experim^nts for true, to those who never tried them.
And all this has been spoken and granted on good grounds to Simplicius, and
only with^n intent to advertise him how much it imports to be cautious in
granting many experiments for true to those who never had tried them, but only
eagerly alleged them just as they ought to be for the serving their purpose:
This is spoken, I say, by way of surplussage and Corollary to Simplicius, for
the real truth is, Experiments and arguments against the Earths motion seem so
far concluding, as they lie hid under equivokes.
that as concerning these shots, the same ought exactly to befall as well in the
motion as in the rest of the Terrestrial Globe; as likewise it will happen in
all the other experiments that either have been or can be produced, which have
at first blush so much semblance of truth, as the antiquated opinion of the
Earths motion has of equivocation.


SAGR. As for my part I am fully satisfied, and very well understand that who
so shall imprint in his fancy this general community of the diurnal conversion
amongst all things Terrestrial, to all which it naturally agrees, as well as in
the old conceit of its rest about the center, shall doubtless discern the
fallacy and equivoke which made the arguments produced seem eoncluding. There
yet remains in me some haesitancy (as I have hinted before) touching the flight
of birds; the which having as it were an animate faculty of moving at their
pleasure with a thousand motions, and to stay long in the Air separated from
the Earth, and therein with most irregular windings to go fluttering to and
again, I cannot conceive how amongst so great a confusion of motions, they
should be able to retain the first commune motion; and in what manner, having
once made any stay behind, they can get it up again, and overtake the same with
flying, and keep pace with the Towers and trees which hurry with so precipitant
a course toward the East; I say so precipitant, for in the great circle of the
Globe it is little less than a thousand miles an hour, whereof the flight of
the swallow I believe makes not fifty.


SALV. If the birds were to keep pace with the course of the trees by help of
their wings, they would of necessity fly very fast; and if they were deprived
of the universal conversion, they would lag as far behind; and their flight
would seem as furious toward the West, and to him that could discern the same,
it would much exceed the flight of an arrow; but I think we could not be able
to perceive it, no more than we see a Canon bullet, whilst driven by the fury
of the fire, it flies through the Air: But the truth is that the proper motion
of birds, I mean of their flight, has nothing to do with the universal motion,
to which it is neither an help, nor an hinderance; and that which maintains
the said motion unaltered in the birds, is the Air it self, thorough which they
fly, which naturally follovving the Vertigo of the Earth, like as it carries
the clouds along with it, so it transporteth birds and every thing else which
is pendent in the same; in so much that as to the business of keeping pace
with the Earth, the birds need take no care thereof, but for that work might
sleep perpetually.


SAGR. That the Air can carry the clouds along with it, as being matters easy
for their lightness to be moved and deprived of all other contrary
inclination, yea more, as being matters that partake also of the conditions and
properties of the Earth; I comprehend without any difficulty; but that birds,
which as having life, may move with a motion quite contrary to the diurnal,
once having surceased the said motion, the Air should restore them to it, seems
to me a little strange, and the rather for that they are solid and weighty
bodies; and withal, we see; as has been said, stones and other grave bodies to
lie unmoved against the impetus of the air; and when they suffer themselves to
be overcome thereby, they never acquire so much velocity as the wind which
carries them.


SALV. We ascribe not so little force, Sagredus, to the moved Air, which is
able to move and bear before it ships full fraught, to tear up trees by the
roots, and overthrow Towers when it moves swiftly; and yet we cannot say that
the motion of the Air in these violent operations is near so violent, as that
of the diurnal revolution.


SIMP. You see then that the moved Air may also continue the motion of projects,
according to the Doctrine of Aristotle; and it seemed to me very strange that
he should have erred in this particular.


SALV. It may without doubt, in case it could continue it self, but lik as when
the wind ceasing neither ships go on, nor trees are blown down, so the motion
in the Air not continuing after the stone is gone out of the hand, and the Air
ceasing to move, it follows that it must be something else besides the Air
that makes the projects to move.


SIMP. But how upon the winds being laid, does the ship cease to move? Nay you
may see that when the wind is down, and the sails furled, the vessel continues
to run whole miles.


SALV. But this makes against your self Simplicius, for that the wind being
laid that filling the sails drove on the ship, yet nevertheless does it
without help of the medium continue its course.


SIMP. It might be said that the water was the medium which carried forward the
ship, and maintained it in motion.


SALV. It might indeed be so affirmed, if you would speak quite contrary to
truth; for the truth is, that the water, by reason of its great resistance to
the division made by the hull of the ship, does with great noise resist the
same; nor does it permit it of a great while to acquire that velocity which the
wind would confer upon it, were the obstacle of the water removed. Perhaps
Simplicius you have never considered with what fury the water besets a bark,
whilst it forces its way through a standing water by help of Oars or Sails:
for if you had ever minded that effect, you would not now have produced such an
absurdity. And I am thinking that you have hitherto been one of those who to
find out how such things succeed, and to come to the knowledge of natural
effects, do not betake themselves to a Ship, a Crosse-bow, or a piece of
Ordinance, but retire into their studies, and turn over Indexes and Tables to
see whether Aristotle has spoken any thing thereof, and being assured of the
true sense of the Text, neither desire nor care for knowing any more.


SAGR. This is a great felicity, The great felicity for which they are much to
be envied who persuade themselves that they know every thing.
and they are to be much envied for it. For if knowledge be desired by all, and
if to be wise, be to think ones self so, they enjoy a very great happiness,
for that they may persuade themselves that they know and understand all things,
in soorn of those who knowing, that they understand not what these think they
understand, and consequently seeking that they know not the very least particle
of what is knowable, kill themselves with waking and studying, and consume
their days in experiments and observations. But pray you let us return to our
birds; touching which you have said, that the Air being moved with great
velocity, might restore unto them that part of the diurnal motion which amongst
the windings of their flight they might have lost; to which I reply, that the
agitated Air seems unable to confer on a solid and grave body, so great a
velocity as its own: And because that of the Air is as great as that of the
Earth, I cannot think that the Air is able to make good the loss of the birds
retardation in flight.


SALV. Your discourse has in it much of probability, and to stick at trivial
doubts is not for an acute wit; yet nevertheless the probability being
removed, I believed that it has not a jot more force than the others already
considered and resolved.


SAGR. It is most certain that if it be not necessarily concludent, its
efficacy must needs be just nothing at all, for it is only when the conclusion
is necessary that the opponent has nothing to alledg on the contrary.


SALV. Your making a greater scruple of this than of the other instances
depends, if I mistake not, upon the birds being animated, and thereby enabled
to use their strength at pleasure against the primary motion inbred in terrene
bodies: like as for example, we see them whilst they are alive to fly upwards,
a thing altogether impossible for them to do as they are grave bodies; whereas
being dead they can only fall downwards; and therefore you hold that the
reasons that are of force in all the kinds of projects above named, cannot take
place in birds: Now this is very true; and because it is so, Sagredus, that
does not appear to be done in those projects, The answer to the argument taken
from the flight of birds contrary to the motion of the Earth.
which we see the birds to do. For if from the top of a Tower you let fall a
dead bird and a live one, the dead bird shall do the same that a stone does,
that is, it shall first follow the general motion diurnal, and then the motion
of descent, as grave; but if the bird let fall, be a live, what shall hinder
it, (there ever remaining in it the diurnal motion) from soaring by help of its
wings to what place of the Horizon it shall please? and this new motion, as
being peculiar to the bird, and not participated by us, must of necessity be
visible to us; and if it be moved by help of its wings toward the West, what
shall hinder it from returning with a like help of its wings unto the Tower.
And, because, in the last place, the bird swending its flight toward the West
was no other than a withdrawing from the diurnal motion, (which has, suppose
ten degrees of velocity) one degree only, there did thereupon remain to the
bird whilst it was in its flight nine degrees of velocity, and so soon as it
did alight upon the the Earth, the ten common degrees returned to it, to which,
by flying toward the East it might add one, and with those eleven overtake
the Tower. And in short, if we well consider, and more narrowly examine the
effects of the flight of birds, they differ from the projects shot or thrown to
any part of the World in nothing, save only that the projects are moved by an
external projicient, An experiment with which alone is shown the nullity of all
the objections produced against the motion of the Earth.
and the birds by an internal principle. And here for a final proof of the
nullity of all the experiments before illedged, I conceive it now a time and
place convenient to demonstrate a way how to make an exact trial of them all.
Shut your self up with some friend in the grand Cabin between the decks of
some large Ship, and there procure gnats, flies, and such other small winged
creatures: get also a great tub (or other vessel) full of water, and within it
put certain fishes; let also a certain bottle be hung up, which drop by drop
lets forth its water into another bottle placed underneath, having a narrow
neck: and, the Ship lying still, observe diligently how those small winged
animals fly with like velocity toward all parts of the Cabin; how the fishes
swim indifferently toward all sides; and how the distilling drops all fall
into the bottle placed underneath. And casting any thing toward your friend,
you need not throw it with more force one way then another, provided the
distances be equal: and leaping, as the saying is, with your feet closed, you
will reach as far one way as another. Having observed all these particulars,
though no man doubts that so long as the vessel stands still, they ought to
succeed in this manner; make the Ship to move with what velocity you please;
for (so long as the motion is uniforme, and not fluctuating this way and that
way) you shall not discern any the least alteration in all the forenamed
effects; nor can you gather by any of them whether the Ship does move or stand
still. In leaping you shall reach as far upon the floor, as before; nor for
that the Ship moves shall you make a greater leap toward the poop than
toward the prow; howbeit in the time that you staid in the Air, the floor
under your feet shall have run the contrary way to that of your jump; and
throwing any thing to your companion you shall not need to cast it with more
strength that it may reach him, if he shall be toward the prow, and you
toward the poop, then if you stood in a contrary situation; the drops shall
all distill as before into the inferior bottle, and not so much as one shall
fall toward the poop, albeit whilst the drop is in the Air, the Ship shall
have run many feet; the Fishes in their water shall not swim with more trouble
toward the forepart, than toward the hinder part of the tub; but shall with
equal velocity make to the bait placed on any side of the tub; and lastly, the
flies and gnats shall continue their flight indifferently toward all parts;
nor shall they ever happen to be driven together toward the side of the Cabin
next the prow, as if they were wearied with following the swift course of the
Ship, from which through their suspension in the Air, they had been long
separated; and if burning a few grains of incense you make a little smoke, you
shall see it ascend on high, and there in manner of a cloud suspend it self,
and move indifferently, not inclining more to one side than another: and of
this correspondence of effects the cause is for that the Ships motion is common
to all the things contained in it, and to the Air also; I mean if those things
be shut up in the Cabin: but in case those things were above deck in the open
Air, and not obliged to follow the course of the Ship, differences more or
less notable would be observed in some of the forenamed effects, and there is
no doubt but that the smoke would stay behind as much as the Air it self; the
flies also, and the gnats being hindered by the Air would not be able to follow
the motion of the Ship, if they were separated at any distance from it. But
keeping near thereto, because the Ship it self as being an unfractuous Fabric,
carries along with it part of its nearest Air, they would follow the said Ship
without any pains or difficulty. And for the like reason we see sometimes in
riding post, that the troublesome flies and Tafaris, horse-flyes.
hornets do follow the horses flying sometimes to one, sometimes to another
part of the body, but in the falling drops the difference would be very small;
and in the salts, and projections of grave bodies altogether imperceptible.


SAGR. Though it came not into my thoughts to make trial of these
observations, when I was at Sea, yet am I confident that they will succeed in
the same manner, as you have related; in confirmation of which I remember that
being in my Cabin I have asked an hundred times whether the Ship moved or
stood still; and sometimes I have imagined that it moved one way, when it
steered quite another way. I am therefore as hitherto satisfied and convinced
of the nullity of all those experiments that have been produced in proof of the
negative part. There now remains the objection founded upon that which
experience shows us, namely, that a swift Vertigo or whirling about has a
faculty to extrude and disperse the matters adherent to the machine that turns
round; whereupon many were of opinion, and Ptolomy amongst the rest, that if
the Earth should turn round with so great velocity, the stones and creatures
upon it should be tossed into the Sky, and that there could not be a mortar
strong enough to fasten buildings so to their foundations, but that they would
likewise suffer a like extrusion.


SALV. Before I come to answer this objection, I cannot but take notice of that
which I have an hundred times observed, and not without laughter, to come into
the minds of most men so soon as ever they hear mention made of this motion of
the Earth, which is believed by them so fixed and immovable, that they not only
never doubted of that rest, but have ever strongly believed that all other men
as well as they, have held it to be created immovable, and so to have continued
through all succeeding ages: The stupidity of some that think the Earth to have
begun to move, when Pythagoras began to affirm that it did so.
and being settled in this persuasion, they stand amazed to hear that any one
should grant it motion, as if, after that he had held it to be immovable, he
had fondly thought it to commence its motion then (and not till then) when
Pythagoras (or whoever else was the first hinter of its mobility) said that it
did move. Now that such a foolish conceit (I mean of thinking that those who
admit the motion of the Earth, have first thought it to stand still from its
creation, until the time of Pythagoras, and have only made it moveable after
that Pythagoras esteemed it so) finds a place in the minds of the vulgar,
and men of shallow capacities, I do not much wonder; but that such persons as
Aristotle and Ptolomy should also run into this childish mistake, is to my
thinking a more admirable and unpardonable folly.


SAGR. You believe then, Salviatus, that Ptolomy thought, that in his
Disputation he was to maintain the stability of the Earth against such persons,
as granting it to have been immovable, until the time of Pythagoras, did
affirm it to have been but then made moveable, when the said Pythagoras
ascribed unto it motion.


SALV. We can think no other, if we do but consider the way he takes to
confute their assertion; Aristotle and Ptolomy seem to confute the mobility of
the Earth against those who thought that it having a long time stood still, did
begin to move in the time of Pythagoras
the confutation of which consists in the demolition of buildings, and the
tossing of stones, living creatures and men themselves up into the Air. And
because such overthrows and extrusions cannot be made upon buildings and men,
which were not before on the Earth, nor can men be placed, nor buildings
erected upon the Earth, unless when it stands still; hence therefore it is
clear, that Ptolomy argues against those, who having granted the stability of
the Earth for some time, that is, so long as living creatures, stones, and
Masons were able to abide there, and to build Palaces and Cities, make it
afterward precipitately moveable to the overthrow and destructiof Edifices,
and living creatures, etc. For if he had undertook to dispute against such as
had ascribed that revolution to the Earth from its first creation, he would
have confuted them by saying, that if the Earth had always moved, there could
never have been placed upon it either men or stones; much less could buildings
have been erected, or Cities founded, etc.


SIMP. I do not well conceive these Aristotelick and Ptolomaick inconveniences.


SALV. Ptolomey either argues against those who have esteemed the Earth always
moveable; or against such as have held that it stood for some time still, and
has since been set on moving. If against the first, he ought to say, that the
Earth did not always move, for that then there would never have been men,
animals, or edifices on the Earth, its vertigo not permitting them to stay
thereon. But in that he arguing, says that the Earth does not move, because
that beasts, men, and houses before placed on the Earth would precipitate, he
supposes the Earth to have been once in such a state, as that it did admit men
and beasts to stay, and build thereon; the which draws on the consequence,
that it did for some time stand still, to wit, was apt for the abode of animals
and erection of buildings. Do you now conceive what I would say?


SIMP. I do, and I do not: but this little imports to the merit of the cause;
nor can a small mistake of Ptolomey, committed through inadvertencie be
sufficient to move the Earth, when it is immovable. But omitting cavils, let
us come to the substance of the argument, which to me seems unanswerable.


SALV. And I, Simplicius, will drive it home, and reinforce it, by showing yet
more sensibly, that it is true that grave bodies turned with velocity about a
settled center, do acquire an impetus of moving, and receding to a distance
from that center, even then when they are in a state of having a propension of
moving naturally to the same. Tie a bottle that has water in it, to the end of
a cord, and holding the other end fast in your hand, and making the cord and
your arm the semi-diameter, and the knitting of the shoulder the center, swing
the bottle very fast about, so as that it may describe the circumference of a
circle, which, whether it be parallel to the Horizon, or perpendicular to it,
or any way inclined, it shall in all cases follow, that the water will not fall
out of the bottle: nay, he that shall swing it, shall find the cord always
draw, and strive to go farther from the shoulder. And if you bore a hole in the
bottom of the bottle, you shall see the water spout forth no less upwards into
the sky, than laterally, and downwards to the Earth; and if instead of water,
you shall put little pebble stones into the bottle, and swing it in the same
manner, you shall find that they will strive in the like manner against the
cord. And lastly, we see boys throw stones a great way, by swinging round a
piece of a stick, at the end of which the stone is let into a slit ( which
stick is called by them a sling;) all which are arguments of the truth of the
conclusion, to wit, that the vertigo or swing conferreth upon the moveable, a
motion toward the circumference, in case the motion be swift: and therefore if
the Earth revolve about its own center, the motion of the superficies, and
especially toward the great circle, as being incomparably more swift than
those before named, ought to extrude all things up into the air.


SIMP. The Argument seems to me very well proved and enforced; and I believe
it would be an hard matter to answer and overthrow it.


SALV. Its solution depends upon certain notions no less known and believed
by you, than by my self: but because they come not into your mind, therefore it
is that you perceive not the answer; wherefore, without telling you it (for
that you know the same already) I shall with only assisting your memory, make
you to refute this argument.


SIMP. I have often thought of your way of arguing, which has made me almost
think that you lean to that opinion of Plato, Our knowledge is a kind of
reminiscence according to Plato.
Quod nostrum scire sit quoddam reminisci; therefore I entreat you to free me
from this doubt, by letting me know your judgment.


SALV. What I think of the opinion of Plato, you may gather from my words and
actions. I have already in the precedent conferences expressly declared my self
more than once; I will pursue the same style in the present case, which may
hereafter serve you for an example, thereby the more easily to gather what my
opinion is touching the attainment of knowledge, when a time shall offer upon
some other day: but I would not have Sagred^s offended at this digression.


SAGR. I am rather very much pleased with it, for that I remember that when I
studied Logic, I could never comprehend that so much cried up and most potent
demonstration of Aristotle.


SALV. Let us go on therefore; and let Simplicius, tell me what that motion is
which the stone makes that is held fast in the slit of the sling, when the boy
swings it about to throw it a great way?


SIMP. The motion of the stone, so long as it is in the slit, is circular, that
is, moves by the arch of a circle, whose steadfast center is the knitting of
the shoulder, and its semi-diameter the arm and stick.


SALV. And when the stone leaves the sling, what is its motion? Does it
continue to follow its former circle, or does it go by another line?


SIMP. It will continue no longer to swing round, for then it would not go
farther from the arm of the projicient, whereas we see it go a great way off.


SALV. With what motion does it move then?


SIMP. Give me a little time to think thereof; For I have never considered it
before.


SALV. Hark hither, Sagredus; this is the Quoddam reminisci in a subject well
understood. You have paused a great while, Simplicius.


SIMP. As far as I can see, the motion received in going out of the sling, can
be no other than by a right line; nay, it must necessarily be so, if we speak
of the pure adventitious impetus. I was a little puzzled to see it make an arch,
but because that arch bended all the way upwards, and no other way, I conceive
that that incurvation comes from the gravity of the stone, The motion
impressed by the projicient is only by a right line.
which naturally draws it dovvnvvards. The impressed impetus, I say,
without respecting the natural, is by a right line.


SALV. But by what right line? Because infinite, and toward every side may be
produced from the slit of the sling, and from the point of the stones
separation from the sling.


SIMP. It moves by that line which goes directly from the motion which the
stone made in the sling.


SALV. The motion of the stone whilst it was in the slit, you have affirmed
already to be circular; now circularity opposes directness, there not being in
the circular line any part that is direct or straight.


SIMP. I mean not that the projected motion is direct in respect of the whole
circle, but in reference to that ultimate point, where the circular motion
determines. I know what I would say, but do not well know how to express my
self.


SALV. And I also perceive that you understand the business, but that you have
not the proper terms, wherewith to express the same. Now these I can easily
teach you; teach you, that is, as to the words, but not as to the truths, which
are things. And that you may plainly see that you know the thing I ask you, and
only want language to express it, tell me, when you shoot a bullet out of a
gun, toward what part is it, that its acquired impetus carries it?


SIMP. Its acquired impetus carries it in a right line, which continues the
rectitude of the barrel, that is, which inclines neither to the right hand nor
to the left, nor upwards nor downwards.


SALV. Which in short is as much as to say, it makes no angle with the line of
straight motion made by the sling.


SIMP. So I would have said.


SALV. If then the line of the projects motion be to continue without making an
angle upon the circular line described by it, whilst it was with the
projicient; and if from this circular motion it ought to pass to the right
motion, what ought this right line to be?


SIMP. It must needs be that which touches the circle in the point of
separation, for that all others, in my opinion, being prolonged would intersect
the circumference, and by that means make some angle therewith.


SALV. You have argued very well, and shown your self half a Geometrician. Keep
in mind therefore, that your true opinion is expressed in these words, namely,
That the project acquireth an impetus of moving by the Tangent, the arch
described by the motion of the projicient, in the point of the said projects
separation from the projicient.


SIMP. I understand you very well, and this is that which I would say.


SALV. Of a right line which touches a circle, which of its points is the
nearest to the center of that circle?


SIMP. That of the contact without doubt: for that is in the circumference of a
circle, and the rest without: and the points of the circumference are all
equidistant from the center.


SALV. Therefore a moveable departing from the contact, and moving by the
straight Tangent, goes continually farther and farther from the contact, and
also from the center of the circle.


SIMP. It does so doubtless.


SALV. Now if you have kept in mind the propositions, which you have told me,
lay them together, and tell me what you gather from them.


SIMP. I think I am not so forgetful, but that I do remember them. The project
moves by the Tangent of the circle of the motion precedent in the point of
separation.
From the things premised I gather that the project swiftly swinged round by
the projicient, in its separating from it, does retain an impetus of continuing
its motion by the right line, which touches the circle described by the motion
of the projicient in the point of separation, by which motion the project goes
continually receding from the center of the circle described by the motion of
the projicient.


SALV. You know then by this time the reason why grave bodies sticking to the
rim of a wheel, swiftly moved, are extruded and thrown beyond the
circumference to yet a farther distance from the center.


SIMP. I think I understand this very well; but this new knowledge rather
increases than lesseneth my incredulity that the Earth can turn round with so
great velocity, without extruding up into the sky, stones, animals, etc.


SALV. In the same manner that you have understood all this, you shall, nay you
do understand the rest: and with recollecting your self, you may remember the
same without the help of others: but that we may lose no time, I will help your
memory therein. You do already know of your self, that the circular motion of
the projicient impresseth on the project an impetus of moving (when they come
to separate) by the right Tangent, the circle of the motion in the point of
separation, and continuing along by the same the motion ever goes receding
farther and farther from the projicient: and you have said, that the project
would continue to move along by that right line, if there were not by its
proper weight an inclination of descent added unto it; from which the
incurvation of the line of motion is derived. It seems moreover that you knew
of your self, that this incurvation always bended toward the center of the
Earth, for thither do all grave bodies tend. Now I proceed a little farther,
and ask you, whether the moveable after its separation, in continuing the right
motion goes always equally receding from the center, or if you will, from the
circumference of that circle, of which the precedent motion was a part; which
is as much as to say, Whether a moveable, that forsaking the point of a
Tangent, and moving along by the said Tangent, does equally recede from the
point of contact, and from the circumference of the circle?


SIMP. No, Sir: for the Tangent near to the point of contact, recedeth very
little from the circumference, wherewith it keeps a very narrow angle, but in
its going farther and farther off, the distance always increases with a
greater proportion; so that in a circle that should have v. g. ten yards of
diameter, a point of the Tangent that was distant from the contact but two
palms, would be three or four times as far distant from the circumference of
the circle, as a point that was distant from the contaction one palm, and the
point that was distant half a palm, I likewise believe would fearse recede the
fourth part of the distance of the second: so that within an inch or two of the
contact, the separation of the Tangent from the circumference is scarce
discernable.


SALV. So that the recession of the project from the circumference of the
precedent circular motion is very small in the beginning?


SIMP. Almost insensible.


SALV. Now tell me a little; the project, which from the motion of the
projicient receives an impetus of moving along the Tangent in a right line,
and that would keep unto the same, did not its own weight depress it downwards,
how long is it after the separation, ere it begin to decline downwards.


SIMP. I believe that it begins presently; for it not having any thing to
uphold it, its proper gravity cannot but operate. A grave project, as s^on as
it is separated from the projicient begineth to decline.



SALV. So that, if that same stone, which being extruded from that wheel turned
about very fast, had as great a natural propension of moving toward the center
of the said wheel, as it has to move toward the center of the Earth, it would
be an easy matter for it to return unto the wheel, or rather not to depart
from it; in regard that upon the beginning of the separation, the recession
being so small, by reason of the infinite acuteness of the angle of contact,
every very little of inclination that draws it back toward the center of the
wheel, would be sufficient to retain it upon the rim or circumference.


SIMP. I question not, but that if one suppose that which neither is, nor can
be, to wit, that the inclination of those grave bodies was to go toward the
center of the wheel, they would never come to be extruded or shaken off.


SALV. But I neither do, nor need to suppose that which is not; for I will not
deny but that the stones are extruded. Yet I speak this by way of supposition,
to the end that you might grant me the rest. Now fancy to your self, that the
Earth is that great wheel, which moved with so great velocity is to extrude the
stones. You could tell me very well even now, that the motion of projection
ought to be by that right line which touches the Earth in the point of
separation: and this Tangent, how does it notably recede from the superficies
of the Terrestrial Globe?


SIMP. I believe, that in a thousand yards, it will not recede from the Earth
an inch.


SALV. And did you not say, that the project being drawn by its own weight,
declineth from the Tangent toward the center of the Earth?


SIMP. I said so, and also confess the rest: and do now plainly understand
that the stone will not separate from the Earth, for that its recession in the
beginning would be such, and so small, that it is a thousand times exceeded by
the inclination which the stone has to move toward the center of the Earth,
which center in this case is also the center of the wheel. And indeed it must
be confessed that the stones, the living creatures, and the other grave bodies
cannot be extruded; but here again the lighter things beget in me a new doubt,
they having but a very weak propension of descent toward the center; so that
there being wanting in them that faculty of withdrawing from the superficies, I
see not, but that they may be extruded; and you know the rule, that ad
destruendum sufficit unum.


SAVL. We will also give you satisfaction in this. Tell me therefore in the
first place, what you understand by light matters, that is, whether you thereby
mean things really so light, as that they go upvvards, or else not absolutely
light, but of so small gravity, that though they descend downwards, it is but
very slowly; for if you mean the absolutely light, I will be readier than your
self to admit their extrusion.


SIMP. I speak of the other sort, such as are feathers, wool, cotton, and the
like; to lift up which every small force suffices: yet nevertheless we see
they rest on the Earth very quietly.


SALV. This pen, as it has a natural propension to descend toward the
superficies of the Earth, though it be very small, yet I must tell you that it
suffices to keep it from mounting upwards: and this again is not unknown to
you your self; therefore tell me if the pen were extruded by the Vertigo of the
Earth, by what line would it move?


SIMP. By the tangent in the point of separation.


SALV. And when it should be to return, and reunite it self to the Earth, by
what line would it then move?


SIMP. By that which goes from it to the center of the Earth.


SALV. So then here falls under our consideration two motions; one the motion
of projection, which begins from the point of contact, and proceeds along
the tangent; and the other the motion of inclination downwards, which begins
from the project it self, and goes by the secant toward the center; and if
you desire that the projection follow, it is necessary that the impetus by the
tangent overcome the inclination by the secant: is it not so?


SIMP. So it seems to me.


SALV. But what is it that you think necessary in the motion of the projicient,
to make that it may prevail over that inclination, from which ensues the
separation and elongation of the pen from the Earth?


SIMP. I cannot tell.


SALV. How, do you not know that? The moveable is here the same, that is, the
same pen; now how can the same moveable superate and exceed it self in motion?


SIMP. I do not see how it can overcome or yield to it self in motion, unless
by moving one while faster, and another while slower.


SALV. You see then, that you do know it. If therefore the projection of the
pen ought to follow, and its motion by the tangent be to overcome its motion by
the secant, what is it requisite that their velocities should be?


SIMP. It is requisite that the motion by the tangent be greater than that
other by the secant. But wretch that I am! Is it not only many thousand times
greater than the descending motion of the pen, but than that of the stone? And
yet like a simple fellow I had suffered my self to be persuaded, that stones
could not be extruded by the revolution of the Earth. I do therefore revoke my
former sentence, and say, that if the Earth should move, stones, Elephants,
Towers, and whole Cities would of necessity be tossed up into the Air; and
because that that does not evene, I conclude that the Earth does not move.


SALV. Softly Simplicius, you go on so fast, that I begin to be more afraid for
you, than for the pen. Rest a little, and observe what I am going to speap. If
for the reteining of the stone or pen annexed to the Earths surface it were
necessary that its motion of descent were greater, or as much as the motion
made by the tangent; you would have had reason to say, that it ought of
necessity to move as fast, or faster by the secant downwards, than by the
tangent Eastwards: But did not you tell me even now, that a thousand yards of
distance by the tangent from the contact, do remove hardly an inch from the
circumference? It is not sufficient therefore that the motion by the tangent,
which is the same with that of the diurnall Vertigo, (or hasty revolution) be
simply more swift than the motion by the secant, which is the same with that of
the pen in descending; but it is requisite that the same be so much more swift
as that the time which suffices for the pen to move v. g. a thousand yards by
the tangent, be insufficient for it to move one sole inch by the secant. The
which I tell you shall never be, though you should make that motion never so
swift, and this never so slow.


SIMP. And why might not that by the tangent be so swift, as not to give the
pen time to return to the surface of the Earth?


SALV. Try whether you can state the case in proper terms, and I will give you
an answer. Tell me therefore, how much do you think suffices to make that
motion swifter than this?


SIMP. I will say for example, that if that motion by the tangent were a
million of times swifter than this by the secant, the pen, yea, and the stone
also would come to be extruded.


SALV. You say so, and say that which is false, only for want, not of Logic,
Physics, or Metaphysics, but of Geometry; for if you did but understand its
first elements, you would know, that from the center of a circle a right line
may be drawn to meet the tangent, which intersecteth it in such a manner, that
the part of the tangent between the contact and the secant, may be one, two, or
three millions of times greater than that part of the secant which lies
between the tangent and the circumference, and that the nearer and nearer the
secant shall be to the contact, this proportion shall grow greater and greater
in infinitum; so that it need not be feared, though the vertigo be swift, and
the motion downwards slow, that the pen or other lighter matter can begin to
rise upwards, for that the inclination downwards always exceeds the velocity
of the projection.


SAGR. I do not perfectly apprehend this business.


SALV. I will give you a most universal yet very easy demonstration thereof. A
geometrical demonstration to prove the impossibility of extrusion by means of
the terrestrial vertigo.
Let a proportion be given between BA [in Fig. 3.] and C: And let BA be greater
than C at pleasure. And let there be described a circle, whose center is D.
From which it is required to draw a secant, in such manner, that the tangent
may be in proportion to the said secant, as BA to C. Let AI be supposed a third
proportional to BA and C. And as BY is to IA, so let the diameter FE be to EG;
and from the point G, let there be drawn the tangent GH. I say that all this is
done as was required; and as BA is to C, so is HG to GE. And in regard that as
BY is to IA, so is FE to EG; therefore by composition, as BA is to AI; so shall
FG be to GE. And because C is the middle proportion between BA and AI; and GH
is a middle term between FG and GE; therefore, as BA is to C, so shall FG be to
GH; that is HG to GE, which was to be demonstrated.


SAGR. I apprehend this demonstration; yet nevertheless, I am not left wholly
without haesitation; for I find certain confused scruples role to and again in
my mind, which like thick and dark clouds, permit me not to discern the
cleernesse and necessity of the conclusion with that perspicuity, which is
usual in Mathematical Demonstrations. And that which I stick at is this. It is
true that the spaces between the tangent and the circumference do gradually
diminish in infinitum toward the contact; but it is also true on the contrary,
that the propension of the moveable to descending grows less and less in it,
the nearer it is to the first term of its descent; that is, to the state of
rest; as is manifest from that which you declare unto us, demonstrating that
the descending grave body departing from rest, ought to pass through all the
degrees of tardity comprehended between the said rest, and any assigned degree
of velocity, the which grow less and in infinitum. To which may be added, that
the said velocity and propension to motion, does for another reason diminish to
infinity; and it is because the gravity of the said moveable may infinitely
diminish. So that the causes which diminish the propension of ascending, and
consequently favor the projection, are two; that is, the levity of the
moveable, and its vicinity to the state of rest; both which are augmentable in
infinite. and these two on the contrary being to contract but with one sole
cause of making the projection, I cannot conceive how it alone, although it
also do admit of infinite augmentation, should be able to remain invincible
against the union and confederacy of the others, which are two, and are in like
manner capable of infinite augmentation.


SALV. This is a doubt worthy of Sagredus; and to explain it so as that we may
more clearly apprehend it, for that you say that you your self have but a
confused Idea of it, we will distinguish of the same by reducing it into
figure; which may also perhaps afford us some ease in resolving the same. Let
us therefore [in Fig. 4.] draw a perpendicular line toward the center, and let
it be AC, and to it at right angles let there be drawn the Horizontal line AB,
upon which the motion of the projection ought to be made; now the project would
continue to move along the same with an even motion, if so be its gravity did
not incline it downwards. Let us suppose from the point A a right line to be
drawn, that may make any angle at pleasure with the line AB; which let be AE,
and upon AB let us mark some equal spaces AF, FH, HK, and from them let us let
fall the perpendiculars FG, HI, KL, as far as AE. And because, as already has
been said, the descending grave body departing from rest, goes from time to
time acquiring a greater degrees of velocity, according as the said time does
successively increase; we may conceive the spaces AF, FH, HK, to represent unto
us equal times; and the perpendiculars FG, HI, KL, degrees of velocity acquired
in the said times; so that the degree of velocity acquired in the whole time
AK, is as the line KL, in respect to the degree HI, acquired in the time AH,
and the degree FG in the time AF; the which degrees KL, HI, FG, are (as is
manifest) the same in proportion, as the times KA, HA, FA, and if other
perpendiculars were drawn from the points marked at pleasure in the line FA,
one might successively find degrees less and less in infinitum, proceeding
toward the point A, representing the first instant of time, and the first
state of rest. And this retreat toward A, represents the first propension to
the motion of descent, diminished in infinitum by the approach of the moveable
to the first state of rest, which approximation is augmentable in infinitum.
Now let us find the other diminution of velocity, which likewise may proceed to
infinity, by the diminution of the gravity of the moveable, and this shall be
represented by drawing other lines from the point A, which contein angles less
than the angle BAE, which would be this line AD, the which intersecting the
parallels KL, HI, FG, in the points M, N, and O, represent unto us the degrees
FO, HN, KM, acquired in the times AF, AH, AK, less than the other degrees FG,
HI, KL, acquired in the same times; but these latter by a moveable more
ponderous, and those other by a moveable more light. And it is manifest, that
by the retreat of the line EA toward AB, contracting the angle EAB (the which
may be done in infinitum, like as the gravity may in infinitum be diminished)
the velocity of the cadent moveable may in like manner be diminished in
infinitum, and so consequently the cause that impeded the projection; and
therefore my thinks that the union of these two reasons against the projection,
diminished to infinity, cannot be any impediment to the said projection. And
couching the whole argument in its shortest terms, we will say, that by
contracting the angle EAB, the degrees of velocity LK, IH, GF, are diminished;
and moreover by the retreat of the parallels KL, HI, FG, toward the angle A,
the same degrees are again diminished; and both these diminutions extend to
infinity: Therefore the velocity of the motion of descent may very well
diminish so much, (it admitting of a twofold diminution in infinitum) as that
it may not suffice to restore the moveable to the circumference of the wheel,
and thereupon may occasion the projection to be hindered and wholly obviated.

Again on the contrary, to impede the projection, it is necessary that the
spaces by which the project is to descend for the reuniting it self to the
Wheel, be made so short and close together, that though the descent of the
moveable be retarded, yea more, diminished in infinitum, yet it suffices to
reconduct it thither: and therefore it would be requisite, that you find out a
diminution of the said spaces, not only produced to infinity, but to such an
infinity, as that it may superate the double infinity that is made in the
diminution of the velocity of the descending moveable. But how can a magnitude
be diminished more than another, which has a twofold diminution in infinitum?
Now let Simplicius observe how hard it is to philosophate well in nature,
without Geometry. The degrees of velocity diminished in infinitum, as well by
the diminution of the gravity of the moveable, as by the approxination to the
first term of the motion, that is, to the state of rest, are always
determinate, and answer in proportion to the parallels comprehended between two
right lines that concur in an angle, like to the angle BAE, or BAD, or any
other infinitely more acute, always provided it be rectilineall. But the
diminution of the spaces through which the moveable is to be conducted along the
circumference of the wheel, is proportionate to another kind of diminution,
comprehended between lines that contain an angle infinitely more narrow and
acute, than any rectilineal angle, how acute soever, which is that in our
present case. Let any point be taken in the perpendicular AC, and making it the
center, describe at the distance CA, an arch AMP, the which shall intersect the
parallels that determine the degrees of velocity, though they be very minute,
and comprehended within a most acute rectilineal angle; of which parallels the
parts that lie between the arch and the tangent AB, are the quantities of the
spaces, and of the returns upon the wheel, always lesser (and with greater
proportion lesser, by how much nearer they approach to the contact) than the
said parallels of which they are parts. The parallels comprehended between the
right lines in retiring toward the angle diminish always at the same rate, as
v. g. AH being divided in two equal parts in F, the parallel HI shall be double
to FG, and sub-dividing FA, in two equal parts, the parallel produced from the
point of the division shall be the half of FG; and continuing the sub-division
in infinitum, the subsequent parallels shall be always half of the next
preceding; but it does not so fall out in the lines intercepted between the
tangent and the circumference of the circle: For if the same sub-division be
made in FA; and supposing for example, that the parallel which comes from the
point H, were double unto that which comes from F, this shall be more then
double to the next following, and c^^^inually the nearer we come toward the
contact A, we shall fi^^ the precedent lines contein the next following three,
four, ten, an hundred, a thousand, an hundred thousand, an hundred millions of
times, and more in infinitum. The brevity therefore of such lines is so
reduced, that it far exceeds what is requisite to make the project, though
never so light, return, nay more, continue unremoveable upon the circumference.


SAGR. I very well comprehend the whole discourse, and upon what it lays all
its stresse, yet nevertheless methinks that he that would take pains to pursue
it, might yet start some further questions, by saying, that of those two causes
which render the descent of the moveable slower and slower in infinitum, it is
manifest, that that which depends on the vicinity to the first term of the
descent, increases always in the same proportion, like as the parallels
always retain the same proportion to each other, etc. but that the diminution
of the same velocity, dependent on the diminution of the gravity of the
moveable (which was the second cause) does also observe the same proportion,
does not so plainly appear, And who shall assure us that it does not proceed
according to the proportion of the lines intercepted between the secant, and
the circumference; or whether with a greater proportion?


SALV. I have assumed for a truth, that the velocities of movables descending
naturally, will follovv the proportion of their gravities, with the favor of
Simplicius, and of Aristotle, who does in many places affirm the same, as a
proposition manifest: You, in favor of my adversary, bring the same into
question, and say that its possible that the velocity increases with greater
proportion, yea and greater in infinitum than that of the gravity; so that all
that has been said falls to the ground: For maintaining whereof, I say, that
the proportion of the velocities is much less than that of the gravities; and
thereby I do not only support but confirm the premises. And for proof of this
I appeal unto experience, which will show us, that a grave body, howbeit thirty
or forty times bigger then another; as for example, a ball of lead, and
another of sugar, will not move much more than twice as fast. Now if the
projection would not be made, albeit the velocity of the cadent body should
diminish according to the proportion of the gravity, much less would it be
made so long as the velocity is but little diminished, by abating much from the
gravity. But yet supposing that the velocity diminishes with a proportion much
greater than that wherewith the gravity decreaseth, nay though it were the
self-same wherewith those parallels contained between the tangent and
circumference do decrease, yet cannot I see any necessity why I should grant
the projection of matters of never so great levity; yea I farther aver, that
there could no such projection follow, meaning always of matters not properly
and absolutely light, that is, void of all gravity, and that of their own
natures move upwards, but that descend very slowly, and have very small
gravity. And that which moves me so to think is, that the diminution of
gravity, made according to the proportion of the parallels between the tangent
and the circumference, has for its ultimate and highest term the nullity of
weight, as those parallels have for their last term of their diminution the
contact it self, which is an indivisible point: Now gravity never diminishes
so far as to its last term, for then the moveable would cease to be grave; but
yet the space of the reversion of the project to the circumference is reduced
to the ultimate minuity, which is when the moveable rests upon the
circumference in the very point of contact; so as that to return thither it
has no need of space: and therefore let the propension to the motion of
descent be never so small, yet is it always more than sufficient to reconduct
the moveable to the circumference, from which it is distant but its least
space, that is, nothing at all.


SAGR. Your discourse, I must confess, is very accurate; and yet no less
concluding than it is ingenuous; and it must be granted that to go about to
handle natural questions, without Geometry, is to attempt an impossibility.


SALV. But Simplicius will not say so; and yet I do not think that he is one of
those Peripateticks that dissuade their Disciples from studying the
Mathematics, as Sciences that vitiate the reason, and render it less apt for
contemplation.


SIMP. I would not do so much wrong to Plato, but yet I may truly say with
Aristotle, that he too much lost himself in, and too much doted upon that his
Geometry: for that in conclusion these Mathematical subtilties Salviatus are
true in abstract, but applied to sensible and Physical matter, they hold not
good. For the Mathematicians will very well demonstrate for example, that
Sphaera tangit planum in puncto; a position like to that in dispute, but when
one comes to the matter, things succeed quite another way. And so I may say of
these angles of contact, and these proportions; which all evaporate into Air,
when they are applied to things material and sensible.


SALV. You do not think then, that the tangent touches the superficies of the
terrestrial Globe in one point only?


SIMP. No, not in one sole point; but I believe that a right line goes many
tens and hundreds of yards touching the surface not only of the Earth, but of
the water, before it separate from the same.


SALV. But if I grant you this, do not you perceive that it makes so much the
more against your cause? For if it be supposed that the tangent was separated
from the terrestrial superficies, yet it has been however demonstrated that by
reason of the great acuity of the angle of contingence (if happily it may be
called an angle) the project would not separate from the same; how much less
cause of separation would it have, if that angle should be wholly closed, The
truth sometimes gains strength by contradiction.
and the superficies and the tangent become all one? Perceive you not that the
Projection would do the same thing upon the surface of the Earth, which is
as much as to say, it would do just nothing at all? You see then the power of
truth, which while you strive to oppose it, your own assaults themselves uphold
and defend it. But in regard that you have retracted this error, I would be
loath to leave you in that other which you hold, namely, that a material Sphere
does not touch a plain in one sole point: and I could wish some few hours
conversation with some persons conversant in Geometry, might make you a little
more intelligent amongst those who know nothing thereof. Now to show you how
great their error is who say, that a Sphere v. g. of brass, does not touch a
plain v. g. of steel in one sole point, Tell me what conceit you would
entertain of one that should constantly aver, that the Sphere is not truly a
Sphere.


SIMP. I would esteem him wholly devoid of reason.


SALV. He is in the same case who says that the material Sphere does not touch
a plain, The sphere although material, touches the material plane but in one
point only.
also material, in one only point; for to say this is the same, as to affirm
that the Sphere is not a Sphere. And that this is true, tell me in what it is
that you constitute the Sphere to consist, that is, what it is that makes the
Sphere differ from all other solid bodies.


SIMP. I believe that the essence of a Sphere consists in having all the
right lines produced from its center to the circumference, The definition of
the sphere.
equal.


SALV. So that, if those lines should not be equal, that same solidity would be
no longer a sphere?


SIMP. True.


SALV. Go to; tell me whether you believe that amongst the many lines that may
be drawn between two points, there may be more than one right line only.


SIMP. There can be but one.


SALV. But yet you understand that this only right line shall again of
necessity be the shortest of them all?


SIMP. I know it, and also have a demonstration thereof, produced by a great
Peripatetick Philosopher, and as I take it, if my memory do not deceive me, he
alleges it by way of reprehending Archimedes, that supposes it as known,
when it may be demonstrated.


SALV. This must needs be a great Mathematician, that knew how to demonstrate
that which Archimedes neither did, nor could demonstrate. And if you remember
his demonstration, I would gladly hear it: for I remember very well, that
Archimedes in his Books, de Sphaer^ and Cylindro, places this Proposition
amongst the Postulata; and I verily believe that he thought it demonstrated.


SIMP. I think I shall remember it, for it is very easy and short.


SALV. The disgrace of Archimedes, and the honor of this Philosopher shall be
so much the greater.


SIMP. I will describe the Figure of it. Between the points A and B, The
demonstration of a Peripatetick* to prove the right line to be the shortest of
all lines.
[in Fig. 5.] draw the right line AB, and the curve line ACB, of which we will
prove the right to be the shorter: and the proof is this; take a point in the
curve-line, which let be C, and draw two other lines, AC and CB, which two
lines together, are longer than the sole line AB, for so demonstrateth Euclid.
But the curve-line ACB, is greater than the two right-lines AC, and CB;
therefore, a fortiori, the curve-line ACB, is much greater than the right line
AB, which was to be demonstrated.


SALV. I do not think that if one should ransack all the Paralogisms of the
world, The Paralogism of the same Peripatetick* which proves ignotum per
ignotius.
there could be found one more commodious than this, to give an example of the
most solemn fallacy of all fallacies, namely, than that which proves ignotum
per ignotius.


SIMP. How so?


SALV. Do you ask me how so? The unknown conclusion which you desire to prove,
is it not, that the curved line ACB, is longer than the right line AB; the
middle term which is taken for known, is that the curve-line ACB, is greater
than the two lines AC and CB, the which are known to be greater than AB; And if
it be unknown whether the curve-line be greater than the single right-line AB,
shall it not be much more unknown whether it be greater than the two right
lines AC and CB, which are known to be greater than the sole line AB, and yet
you assume it as known?


SIMP. I do not yet very well perceive wherein lies the fallacy.


SALV. As the two right lines are greater than AB, (as may be known by Euclid)
and in as much as the curve line is longer than the two right lines AC and BC,
shall it not not be much greater than the sole right line AB?


SIMP. It shall so.


SALV. That the curve-line ACB, is greater than the right line AB, is the
conclusion more known than the middle term, which is, that the same curve-line
is greater than the two right-lines AC and CB. Now when the middle term is less
known than the conclusion, it is called a proving ignotum per ignotius. But to
return to our purpose, it is sufficient that you know the right line to be the
shortest of all the lines that can be drawn between two points. And as to the
principal conclusion, you say, that the material sphere does not touch the
sphere in one sole point. What then is its contact?


SIMP. It shall be a part of its superficies.


SALV. And the contact likewise of another sphere equal to the first, shall be
also a like particle of its superficies?


SIMP. There is no reason why it should be otherwise.


SALV. Then the two spheres which touch each other, shall touch with the
two same particles of a superficies, for each of them agreeing to one and the
same plane, they must of necessity agree in like manner to each other. A
demonstration that the sphere touches the plane but in one point.
Imagine now that the two spheres [in Fig. 6.] whose centres are A and B, do
touch one another: and let their centres be conjoined by the right line AB,
which passes through the contact. It passes through the point C, and another
point in the contact being taken as D, conjoyn the two right lines AD and BD,
so as that they make the triangle ADB; of which the two sides AD and DB shall
be equal to the other one ACB, both those and this containing two
semidiameters, which by the definition of the sphere are all equal: and thus
the right line AB, drawn between the two centres A and B, shall not be the
shortest of all, the two lines AD and DB being equal to it: which by your own
concession is absurd.


SIMP. This demonstration holds in the abstracted, but not in the material
spheres.


SALV. Instance then wherein the fallacy of my argument consists, if as you
say it is not concluding in the material spheres, but holds good in the
immaterial and abstracted.


SIMP. The material spheres are subject to many accidents, Why the sphere in
abstract, touches the plane only in one point, and not the material in
concrete.
which the immaterial are free from. And because it cannot be, that a sphere of
metal passing along a plane, its own weight should not so depress it, as that
the plain should yield somewhat, or that the sphere it self should not in the
contact admit of some impression. Moreover, it is very hard for that plane to
be perfect, if for nothing else, yet at least for that its matter is porous:
and perhaps it will be no less difficult to find a sphere so perfect, as that
it has all the lines from the center to the superficies, exactly equal.


SALV. I very readily grant you all this that you have said; but it is very
much beside our purpose: for whilst you go about to show me that a material
sphere touches not a material plane in one point alone, you make use of a
sphere that is not a sphere, and of a plane that is not a plane; for that,
according to what you say, either these things cannot be found in the world, or
if they may be found, they are spoiled in applying them to work the effect. It
had been therefore a less evil, for you to have granted the conclusion, but
conditionally, to wit, that if there could be made of matter a sphere and a
plane that were and could continue perfect, they would touch in one sole point,
and then to have denied that any such could be made.


SIMP. I believe that the proposition of Philosophers is to be understood in
this sense; for it is not to be doubted, but that the imperfection of the
matter, makes the matters taken in concrete, to disagree with those taken in
abstract.


SALV. What, do they not agree? Why, that which you your self say at this
instant, proves that they punctually agree.


SIMP. How can that be?


SALV. Do you not say, that through the imperfection of the matter, that body
which ought to be perfectly spherical, and that plane which ought to be
perfectly level, do not prove to be the same in concrete, as they are imagined
to be in abstract?


SIMP. This I do affirm.


SALV. Then when ever in concrete you do apply a material Sphere to a material
plane, Things are exactly the same in abstract as in concrete.
you apply an imperfect Sphere to an imperfect plane, and these you say do not
touch only in one point. But I must tell you, that even in abstract an
immaterial Sphere, that is, not a perfect Sphere, may touch an immaterial
plane, that is, not a perfect plane, not in one point, but with part of its
superficies, so that hitherto that which falls out in concrete, does in like
manner hold true in abstract. And it would be a new thing that the computations
and rates made in abstract numbers, should not afterward answer to the Coins
of Gold and Silver, and to the merchandises in concrete. But do you know
Simplicius, how this comes to pass? Like as to make that the computations
agree with the Sugars, the Silks, the Wools, it is necessary that the
accomptant reckon his tares of chests, bags, and such other things* So when the
Geometrical Philosopher would observe in concrete the effects demonstrated in
abstract, he must defalke the impediments of the matter, and if he know how to
do that, I do assure you, the things shall jump no less exactly, than
Arithmetical computations. The errors therefore lies neither in abstract, nor
in concrete, nor in Geometry, nor in Physics, but in the Calculator, that
knows not how to adjust his accounts. Therefore if you had a perfect Sphere
and plane, though they were material, you need not doubt but that they would
touch only in one point. And if such a Sphere was and is impossible to be
procured, it was much besides the purpose to say, Quod Sphaera aenea non tangit
in puncto. Furthermore, if I grant you Simplicius, that in matter a figure
cannot be procured that is perfectly spherical, or perfectly level: Do you
think there may be had two material bodies, whose superficies in some part,
and in some sort are incurvated as irregularly as can be desired?


SIMP. Of these I believe that there is no want.


SALV. If such there be, Contact in a single point is not peculiar to the
perfect Spheres only, but belongs to all curved figures.
then they also will touch in one sole point; for this contact in but one point
alone is not the sole and peculiar privilege of the perfect Sphere and perfect
plane. Nay, he that should prosecute this point with more subtle contemplations
would find that it is much harder to procure two bodies that touch with part
of their s^perficies, It is more difficult to find Figures that touch with a
part of their surface, than in one sole point.
than with one point only. For if two superficies be required to combine well
together, it is necessary either, that they be both exactly plane, or that if
one be unequal, the other be concave; but in such a manner concave, that the
concavity do exactly answer to the convexity of the other: the which conditions
are much harder to be found, in regard of their too narrow determination, than
those others, which in their casual latitude are infinite.


SIMP. You believe then, that two stones, or two pieces of Iron taken at
chance, and put together, do for the most part touch in one sole point?


SALV. In casual encounters, I do not think they do; as well because for the
most part there will be some small yielding filth upon them, as because that no
diligence is used in applying them without striking one another; and every
small matter suffices to make the one superficies yield somewhat to the other;
so that they interchangeably, at least in some small particle, receive figure
from the impression of each other. But in case their superficies were very
terse and polite, and that they were both laid upon a table, that so one might
not press upon the other, and gently put toward one another, I question not,
but that they might be brought to the simple contact in one only point.


SAGR. It is requisite, with your permission, that I propound a certain scruple
of mine, which came into my mind, whilst I heard proposed by Simplicius, the
impossibility of finding a material and solid body, that is, perfectly of a
Spherical figure, and whilst I saw Salviatus in a certain manner, not
gainsaying, to give his consent thereto; therefore I would know, whether there
would be the same difficulty in forming a solid of some other figure, that is,
to express my self better, whether there is more difficulty in reducing a
piece of Marble into the figure of a perfect Sphere, than into a perfect
Pyramid, or into a perfect Horse, or into a perfect Grasse-hopper?


SALV. To this I will make you the first answer: and in the first place, I will
acquit my self of the assent which you think I gave to Simplicius, which was
only for a time; for I had it also in my thoughts, before I intended to enter
upon any other matter, to speak that, which, it may be, is the same, or very
like to that which you are about to say; The Sphericall Figure is easier to be
made than any other.
And answering to your first question, I say, that if any figure can be given
to a Solid, the Spherical is the easiest of all others, as it is likewise the
most simple, and holds the same place amongst solid figures, The circular
Figure only is placed amongst the postulat^ of Mathematicians.
as the Circle holds amongst the superficial. The description of which
Circle, as being more easy than all the rest, has alone been judged by
Mathematicians worthy to be put amongst the Demands or Petitions.
postulata belonging to the description of all other figures. And the formation
of the Sphere is so very easy, that if in a plain plate of hard metal you take
an empty or hollow circle, within which any Solid goes casually revolving that
was before but grossly rounded, it shall, without any other artifice be reduced
to a Spherical figure, as perfect as is possible for it to be; provided, that
that same Solid be not less than the Sphere that would pass through that
Circle. And that which is yet more worthy of our consideration is, that within
the self-same incavity one may form Spheres of several magnitudes. Sphericall
Figures of sundry magnitudes may be made with one only instrument.
But what is required to the making of an Horse, or (as you say) of a
Grass-hopper, I leave to you to judge, who know that there are but few
statuaries in the world able to undertake such a piece of work. And I think
that herein Simplicius will not dissent from me.


SIMP. I know not whether I do at all dissent from you; my opinion is this,
that none of the aforementioned figures can be perfectly obtained; but for the
approaching as near as is possible to the most perfect degree, I believe that
it is incomparably more easy to reduce the Solid into a Spherical figure, than
into the shape of an Horse, or Grasse-hopper?


SAGR. And this greater difficulty, wherein think you does it depend?


SIMP. Like as the great facility in forming the Sphere arises from its
absolute simplicity and uniformity so the great irregularity rendereth the
construction of all other figures difficult. Irregular forms difficult to be
introduced.



SAGR. Therefore the irregularity being the cause of the difficulty, than the
figure of a stone broken with an hammer by chance, shall be one of the figures
that are difficult to be introduced, it being perhaps more irregular than that
of the horse?


SIMP. So it should be.


SAGR. But tell me; that figure what ever it is which the stone has, has it
the same in perfection, or no?


SIMP. What it has, it has so perfectly, that nothing can be more exact.


SAGR. Then, if of figures that are irregular, and consequently hard to be
procured, there are yet infinite which are most perfectly obtained, with what
reason can it be said, that the most simple, and consequently the most easy of
all, is impossible to be procured?


SALV. Gentlemen, with your favor, I may say that we have sallied out into a
dispute not much more worth than the wool of a goat; and whereas our
argumentations should continually be conversant about serious and weighty
points, we consume our time in frivolous and impertinent wranglings. The
constitution of the Universe is one of the most noble Problems.
Let us call to mind, I pray you, that the search of the worlds constitution,
is one of the greatest and noblest Problems that are in nature; and so much the
greater, inasmuch as it is directed to the resolving of that other; to wit, of
the cause of the Seas ebbing and flowing, enquired into by all the famous men,
that have hitherto been in the world, and possibly found out by none of them.
Therefore if we have nothing more remaining for the full confutation of the
argument taken from the Earths vertigo, which was the last, alleged to prove
its immobility upon its own center, let us pass to the examination of those
things that are alleged for, and against the Annual Motion.


SAGR. I would not have you, Salviatus, measure our wits by the scale of yours:
you, who use to be continually busied about the sublimest contemplations,
esteem those notions frivolous and below you, which we think matters worthy of
our profoundest thoughts: yet sometimes for our satisfaction do not disdain to
stoop so low as to give way a little to our curiosity. As to the refutation of
the last argument, taken from the extrusions of the diurnal vertigo, far less
than what has been said, would have given me satisfaction: and yet the things
superfluously spoken, seemed to me so ingenious, that they have been so far
from wearying my fancy, as that they have, by reason of their novelty,
entertained me all along with so great delight, that I know not how to desire
greater: Therefore, if you have any other speculation to add, produce it, for
I, as to my own particular, shall gladly hearken to it.


SALV. I have always taken great delight in those things which I have had the
fortune to discover, and next to that, which is my chief content, I find great
pleasure in imparting them to some friends, that apprehends and seems to
like them: Now, in regard you are one of these, slacking a little the reins of
my ambition, which is much pleased when I show my self more perspicacious, than
some other that has the reputation of a sharp sight, I will for a full and
true measure of the past dispute, produce another fallacy of the Sectators of
Ptolomey and Aristotle, which I take from the argument alleged.


SAGR. See how greedily I wait to hear it.


SALV. We have hitherto over-passed, and granted to Ptolomey, as an effect
indubitable, that the extrusion of the stone proceeding from the velocity of
the wheel turned round upon its center, the cause of the said extrusion
increases in proportion, as the velocity of the vertigo (or whirling) is
augmented: from whence it was inferred, that the velocity of the Earth's
vertigo being very much greater than that of any machin whatsoever, that we can
make to turn round artificially; the extrusion of stones, of animals, etc.
would consequently be far more violent. Now, I observe that there is a great
fallacy in this discourse, in that we do compare these velocities indifferently
and absolutely to one another. It Is true, that if I compare the velocities of
the same wheel, or of two wheels equal to each other, that which shall be more
swiftly turned round, shall extrude the stone with greater violence; and the
velocity increasing, the cause of the projection shall likewise increase: but
when the velocity is augmented, not by increasing the velocity in the same
wheel, which would be by causing it to make a greater number of revolutions in
equal times; but by increasing the diameter, and making the wheel greater, so
as that the conversion taking up the same time in the lesser wheel, as in the
greater, The cause of the projection increases not according to the proportion
of the velocity, increased by making the wheel bigger.
the velocity is greater only in the bigger wheel, for that its circumference
is bigger; there is no man that thinks that the cause of the extrusion in the
great wheel will increase according to the proportion of the velocity of its
circumference, to the velocity of the circumference of the other lesser wheel;
for that this is most false, as by a most expeditious experiment I shall thus
grossly declare: We may sling a stone with a stick of a yard long, farther than
we can do with a stick six yards long, though the motion of the end of the long
stick, that is of the stone placed in the slit thereof, were more than double
as swift as the motion of the end of the other shorter stick, as it would be if
the velocities were such that the lesser stick should turn thrice round in the
time whilst the greater is making one only conversion.


SAGR. This which you tell me, Salviatus, must, I see, needs succeed in this
very manner; but I do not so readily apprehend the cause why equal velocities
should not operate equally in extruding projects, but that of the lesser wheel
much more than the other of the greater wheel; therefore I entreat you to tell
me how this comes to pass?


SIMP. Herein, Sagredus, you seem to differ much from your self, for that you
were wont to penetrate all things in an instant, and now you have overlooked a
fallacy couched in the experiment of the stick, which I my self have been able
to discover: and this is the different manner of operating, in making the
projection one while with the short sling and another while with the long one,
for if you will have the stone fly out of the slit, you need not continue its
motion uniformly, but at such time as it is at the swiftest, you are to stay
your arm, and stop the velocity of the stick; whereupon the stone which was in
its swiftest motion, flies out, and moves with impetuosity: but now that stop
cannot be made in the great stick, which by reason of its length and
flexibility, does not entirely obey the check of the arm, but continues to
accompany the stone for some space, and holds it in with so much less force,
and not as if you had with a stiff sling sent it going with a jerk: for if both
the sticks or slings should be checked by one and the same obstacle, I do
believe they would fly as well out of the one, as out of the other, howbeit
their motions were equally swift.


SAGR. With the permission of Salviatus, I will answer something to Simplicius,
in regard he has addressed himself to me; and I say, that in his discourse
there is somewhat good and somewhat bad: good, because it is almost all true;
bad, because it does not agree with our case: Truth is, that when that which
carries the stones with velocity, shall meet with a check that is immovable,
they shall fly out with great impetuosity: the same effect following in that
case, which we see daily to fall out in a boat that running a swift course,
runs a-ground, or meets with some sudden stop, for all those in the boat, being
surprised, Gran^i^g the diurnal vertigo of the Earth, and that by some sudden
stop or obstacle it were arrested, houses, mountains themselves, and perhaps
the whole Globe would be shake ^n pieces.
stumble forwards, and fall toward the part whither the boat steered. And in
case the Earth should meet with such a check, as should be able to resist and
arrest its vertigo, then indeed I do believe that not only beasts, buildings
and cities, but mountains, lakes and seas would overturn, and the globe it self
would go near to shake in pieces; but nothing of all this concerns our present
purpose, for we speak of what may follow to the motion of the Earth, it being
turned round uniformly, and quietly about its own center, howbeit with a great
velocity. That likewise which you say of the slings, is true in part; but was
not alleged by Salviatus, as a thing that punctually agreed with the matter
whereof we treat, but only, as an example, for so in gross it may prompt us in
the more accurate consideration of that point, whether, the velocity increasing
at any rate, the cause of the projection does increase at the same rate: so
that v. g. if a wheel of ten yards diameter, moving in such a manner that a
point of its circumference will pass an hundred yards in a minute of an hour,
and so has an impetus able to extrude a stone, that same impetus shall be
increased an hundred thousand times in a wheel of a million of yards diameter;
the which Salviatus denies, and I incline to his opinion; but not knowing the
reason thereof, I have requested it of him, and stand impatiently expecting it.


SALV. I am ready to give you the best satisfaction, that my abilities will
give leave: And though in my first discourse you thought that I had enquired
into things estranged from our purpose, yet nevertheless I believe that in the
sequel of the dispute, you will find that they do not prove so. Therefore let
Sagredus tell me wherein he has observed that the resistance of any moveable
to motion does consist.


SAGR. I see not for the present that the moveable has any internal resistance
to motion, unless it be its natural inclination and propension to the contrary
motion, as in grave bodies, that have a propension to the motion downwards, the
resistance is to the motion upwards; and I said an internal resistance, because
of this, I think, it is you intend to speak, and not of the external
resistances, which are many and accidental.


SALV. It is that indeed I mean, and your nimblenesse of wit has been too hard
for my craftiness, but if I have been too short in asking the question, I
doubt whether Sagredus has been full enough in his answer to satisfy the
demand; and whether there be not in the moveable, besides the natural
inclination to the contrary term, another intrinsic and natural quality, The
inclination of grave bodies to the motion downwards, is equal to their
resistance to the motion upwards.
which makes it averse to motion. Therefore tell me again; do you not think
that the inclination v. g. of grave bodies to move downwards, is equal to the
resistance of the same to the motion of projection upwards?


SAGR. I believe that it is exactly the same. And for this reason I see that
two equal weights being put into a balance, they do stand still in
equilibrium, the gravity of the one resisting its being raised by the gravity
wherewith the other pressing downwards would raise it.


SALV. Very well; so that if you would have one raise up the other, you must
increase the weight of that which depresseth, or lessen the weight of the
other. But if the resistance to ascending motion cunsist only in gravity, how
comes it to pass, that in balances of unequal arms, to wit in the A portable
balance wherewith market-people weigh their commodities, giving it gravity by
removing the weight farther from the cock: called by the Latins, Campana
trutina.
Stiliard, a weight sometimes of an hundred pounds, with its pression
downwards, does not suffice to raise up on of four pounds; that shall
counterpoise with it, nay this of four, descending shall raise up that of an
hundred; for such is the effect of the pendant weight upon the weight which we
would weigh? If the resistance to motion resideth only in the gravity, how
can the arm with its weight of four pounds only, resist the weight of a sack
of wool, or bale of silk, which shall be eight hundred, or a thousand weight;
yea more, how can it overcome the sack with its moment, and raise it up? It
must therefore be confessed Sagredus, that here it makes use of some other
resistance, and other force, besides that of simple gravity.


SAGR. It must needs be so; therefore tell me what this second virtue should
be.


SALV. It is that which was not in the balance of equal arms; you see then
what variety there is in the Stiliard; and upon this doubtless depends the
cause of the new effect.


SAGR. I think that your putting me to it a second time, has made me remember
something that may be to the purpose. In both these beams the business is done
by the weight, and by the motion; in the balance, the motions are equal, and
therefore the one weight must exceed it in gravity before it can move it; in
the stiliard, the lesser weight will not move the greater, unless when this
latter moves little, as being hung at a lesser distance, and the other much,
as hanging at a greater distance from the lacquet or cock. It is necessary
therefore to conclude, that the lesser weight overcomes the resistance of the
greater, by moving much, whilst the other is moved but little.


SALV. Which is as much as to say, that the velocity of the moveable less
grave, compensateth the gravity of the moveable more grave and less swift.


SAGR. But do you think that the velocity does fully make good the gravity? The
greater velocity exactly compensates the greater gravity.
that is, that the moment and force of a moveable of v. g. four pounds weight,
is as great as that of one of an hundred weight, whenever that the first has
an hundred degrees of velocity, and the later but four only?


SALV. Yes doubtless, as I am able by many experiments to demonstrate: but for
the present, let this only of the stiliard suffice: in which you see that the
light end of the beam is then able to sustain and equilibrate the great
Wool-sack, when its distance from the center, upon which the stiliard rests
and turns, shall so much exceed the lesser distance, by how much the absolute
gravity of the Wool-sack exceeds that of the pendent weight. And we see
nothing that can cause this insufficiency in the great sack of Wool, to raise
with its weight the pendent weight so much less grave, save the disparity of
the motions which the one and the other should make, whilst that the Wool-sack
by descending but one inch only, will raise the pendent weight an hundred
inches: (supposing that the sack did weigh an hundred times as much, and that
the distance of the small weight from the center of the beam were an hundred
times greater, than the distance between the said center and the point of the
sacks suspension.) And again, the pendent weight its moving the space of an
hundred inches, in the time that the sack moves but one inch only, is the
same as to say, that the velocity of the motion of the little pendent weight,
is an hundred times greater than the velocity of the motion of the sack. Now
fix it in your belief, as a true and manifest axiom, that the resistance which
proceeds from the velocity of motion, compensateth that which depends on
the gravity of another moveable: So that consequently, a moveable of one pound,
that moves with an hundred degrees of velocity, does as much resist all
obstruction, as another moveable of an hundred weight, whose velocity is but
one degree only. And two equal movables will equally resist their being
moved, if that they shall be moved with equal velocity: but if one be to be
moved more swiftly than the other, it shall make greater resistance, according
to the greater velocity that shall be conferred on it. These things being
premised, let us proceed to the explanation of our Problem; and for the better
understanding of things, let us make a short Scheme thereof. Let two unequal
wheels be described about this center A, [in Fig. 7.] and let the circumference
of the lesser be BG, and of the greater CEH, and let the semidiameter ABC, be
perpendicular to the Horizon; and by the points B and C, let us draw the right
lined Tangents BF and CD; and in the arches BG and CE, take two equal parts BG
and CE: and let the two wheels be supposed to be turned round upon their
centres with equal velocities, so as that two movables, which suppose for
example to be two stones placed in the points B and C, come to be carried along
the circumferences BG and CE, with equal velocities; so that in the same time
that the stone B shall have run the arch BG, the stone C will have past the
arch CE. I say now, that the whirl or vertigo of the lesser wheel is much more
potent to make the projection of the stone B, than the vertigo of the bigger
wheel to make that of the stone C. Therefore the projection, as we have already
declared, being to be made along the tangent, when the stones B and C are to
separate from their wheel, and to begin the motion of projection from the
points B and C, then shall they be extruded by the impetus conceived from the
vertigo by (or along) the tangents BF and CD. The two stones therefore have
equal impetuosities of running along the tangents BF and CD, and would run
along the same, if they were not turned aside by some other force: is it not so
Sagredus?


SAGR. In my opinion the business is as you say.


SALV. But what force, think you, should that be which averts the stones from
moving by the tangents, along which they are certainly driven by the impetus of
the vertigo.


SAGR. It is either their own gravity, or else some glutinous matter that
holds them fast and close to the wheels.


SALV. But for the diverting of a moveable from the motion to which nature
inciteth it, is there not required greater or lesser force, according as the
deviation is intended to be greater or lesser? that is, according as the said
moveable in its deviation has a greater or lesser space to move in the same
time?


SAGR. Yes certainly: for it was concluded even now, that to make a moveable to
move; the movent virtue must be increased in proportion to the velocity
wherewith it is to move.


SALV. Now consider, that for the deviating the stone upon the less wheel from
the motion of projection, which it would make by the tangent BF, and for the
holding of it fast to the wheel, it is required, that its own gravity draw it
back the whole length of the secant FG, or of the perpendicular raised from the
point G, to the line BF, whereas in the greater wheel the retraction needs to
be no more than the secant DE, or the perpendicular let fall from the tangent
DC to the point E, less by much than FG, and always lesser and lesser
according as the wheel is made bigger. And forasmuch as these retractions (as I
may call them) are required to be made in equal times, that is, whilst the
wheels pass the two equal arches BG and CE, that of the stone B, that is, the
retraction FG ought to be more swift than the other DE; and therefore much
greater force will be required for holding fast the stone B to its little
wheel, than for the holding the stone C to its great one, which is as much as
to say, that such a small thing will impede the extrusion in the great wheel,
as will not at all hinder it in the little one. It is manifest therefore that
the more the wheel augmenteth, the more the cause of the projection diminishes.


SAGR. From this which I now understand, by help of your minute dissertation, I
am induced to think, that I am able to satisfy my judgment in a very few
words. For equal impetus being impressed on both the stones that move along the
tangents, by the equal velocity of the two wheels, we see the great
circumference, by means of its small deviation from the tangent, to go
seconding, as it were, and in a fair way refraining in the stone the appetite,
if I may so say, of separating from the circumference; so that any small
retention, either of its own inclination, or of some glutination suffices to
hold it fast to the wheel. Which, again, is not able to work the like effect in
the little wheel, which but little prosecuting the direction of the tangent,
seeks with too much eagerness to hold fast the stone; and the restriction
and glutination not being stronger than that which holds the other stone fast
to the greater wheel, it Strappar la cavezza, is to break the bridle.
breaks loose, and runs along the tangent. Therefore I do not only find
that all those have erred, who have believed the cause of the projection to
increase according to the augmentation of the vertigo's velocity; but I am
further thinking, that the projection diminishing in the enlarging of the
wheel, so long as the same velocity is retained in those wheels; it may
possibly be true, that he that would make the great wheel extrude things like
the little one, would be forced to increase them as much in velocity; as they
increase in diameter, which he might do, by making them to finish their
conversions in equal times; and thus we may conclude, that the Earths
revolution or vertigo would be no more able to extrude stones, than any little
wheel that goes so slowly, as that it makes but one turn in twenty four hours.


SALV. We will enquire no further into this point for the present: let it
suffice that we have abundantly (if I deceive not my self) demonstrated the
invalidity of the argument, which at first sight seemed very concluding, and
was so held by very famous men: and I shall think my time and words well
bestowed, if I have but gained some belief in the opinion of Simplicius, I will
not say of the Earths mobility, but only that the opinion of those that believe
it, is not so ridiculous and fond, as the rout of vulgar Philosophers esteem it.


SIMP. The answers hitherto produced against the arguments brought against this
Diurnal Revolution of the Earth taken from grave bodies falling from the top of
a Tower, and from projections made perpendicularly upwards, or according to any
inclination sidewayes toward the East, West, North, South, etc. have somewhat
abated in me the antiquated incredulity I had conceived against that opinion:
but other greater doubts run in my mind at this very instant, which I know not
in the least how to free my self of, and happily you your self will not be able
to resolve them; nay, its possible you may not have heard them, for they are
very modern. And these are the objections of two Authors, that ex professo
write against Copernicus. Other objections of two modern Authors against
Copernicus.
Some of which are read in a little Tract of natural conclusions; The rest are
by a great both Philosopher and Mathematician, inserted in a Treatise which he
has written in favor of Aristotle, and his opinion touching the
inalterability of the Heavens, where he proves, that not only the Comets, but
also the new stars, namely, that anno 1572. in Cassiopeia, and that anno 1604.
in Sagittarius were not above the Spheres of the Planets, but absolutely
beneath the concave of the Moon in the Elementary Sphere, and this he
demonstrateth against Tycho, Kepler, and many other Astronomical Observators,
and beats them at their own weapon; to wit, the Doctrine of Parallaxes. If
you like thereof, I will give you the reasons of both these Authors, for I
have read them more than once, with attention; and you may examine their
strength, and give your opinion thereon.


SALV. In regard that our principal end is to bring upon the stage, and to
consider what ever has been said for, or against the two Systemes, Ptolomaick,
and Copernican, it is not good to omit any thing that has been written on this
subject.


SIMP. I will begin therefore with the objections which I find in the Treatise
of Conclusions, and afterward proceed to the rest. The first objection of the
modern Author of the little tract of Conclusions.
In the first place then, he bestows much pains in calculating exactly how
many miles an hour a point of the terrestrial Globe situate under the
Equinoctial, goes, and how many miles are past by other points situate in
other parallels: and not being content with finding out such motions in horary
times, he finds them also in a minute of an hour; and not contenting himself
with a minute, he finds them also in a second minute; yea more, he goes on to
show plainly, how many miles a Cannon bullet would go in the same time, A
Cannon bullet would spend more than six days in falling from the Concave of the
Moon to the center of the Earth, according to the opinion of that modern Author
of the Conclusions.
being placed in the concave of the Lunar Orb, supposing it also as big as
Copernicus himself represents it, to take away all subterfuges from his
adversary. And having made this most ingenious and exquisite supputation, he
shows, that a grave body falling from thence above would consume more than
six days in attaining to the center of the Earth, to which all grave bodies
naturally move. Now if by the absolute Divine Power, or by some Angel, a very
great Cannon bullet were carried up thither, and placed in our Zenith or
vertical point, and from thence let go at liberty, it is in his, and also in my
opinion, a most incredible thing that it, in descending downwards, should all
the way maintain it self in our vertical line, continuing to turn round with
the Earth, about its center, for so many days, describing under the
Equinoctial a Spiral line in the plain of the great circle it self; and under
other Parallels, Spiral lines about Cones, and under the Poles falling by a
simple right line. He, in the next place, stablisheth and confirms this great
improbability by proving, in the way of interrogations, many difficulties
impossible to be removed by the followers of Copernicus; and they are, if I do
well remember --.


SALV. Take up a little, good Simplicius, and do not load me with so many
novelties at once: I have but a bad memory, and therefore I must not go too
fast. And in regard it comes into my mind, that I once undertook to calculate
how long time such a grave body falling from the concave of the Moon, would be
in passing to the center of the Earth, and that I think I remember that the
time would not be so long; it would be fit that you show us by what rule this
Author made his calculation.


SIMP. He has done it by proving his intent a fortiori, a sufficient advantage
for his adversaries, supposing that the velocity of the body falling along the
vertical line, toward the center of the Earth, were equal to the velocity of
its circular motion, which it made in the grand circle of the concave of the
Lunar Orb. Which by equation would come to pass in an hour, twelve thousand
six hundred German miles, a thing which indeed savours of impossibility: Yet
nevertheless, to show his abundant caution, and to give all advantages to his
adversaries, he supposes it for true, and concludes, that the time of the
fall ought however to be more than six days.


SALV. And is this the sum of his method? And does he by this demonstration
prove the time of the fall to be above six days?


SAGR. Me thinks that he has behaved himself too modestly, for that having it
in the power of his will to give what velocity he pleased to such a descending
body, and might as well have made it six months, nay, six years in falling to
the Earth, he is content with six days. But, good Salviatus, sharpen my
appetite a little, by telling me in what manner you made your computation, in
regard you say, that you have heretofore cast it up: for I am confident that if
the question had not required some ingenuity in working it, you would never
have applied your mind unto it.


SALV. It is not enough, Sagredus, that the subjects be noble and great, but
the business consists in handling it nobly. And who knows not, that in the
dissection of the members of a beast, there may be discovered infinite wonders
of provident and prudent Nature; and yet for one, that the Anatomist dissects,
the butcher cuts up a thousand. Thus I, who am now seeking how to satisfy your
demand, cannot tell with which of the two shapes I had best to appear on the
Stage; but yet, taking heart from the example of Simplicius, his Author, I
will, without more delays, give you an account (if I have not forgot) how I
proceeded. But before I go any further, I must not omit to tell you, that I
much fear that Simplicius has not faithfully related the manner how this his
Author found, that the Cannon bullet in coming from the concave of the Moon to
the center of the Earth, would spend more than six days: for if he had
supposed that its velocity in descending was equal to that of the concave (as
Simplicius says he does suppose) he would have shown himself ignorant of the
first, and more simple principles of Geometry; yea, I admire that Simplicius,
in admitting the supposition which he speaks of, does not see the monstrous
absurdity that is couched in it.


SIMP. Its possible that I may have erred in relating it; but that I see any
fallacy in it, I am sure is not true.


SALV. Perhaps I did not rightly apprehend that which you said, Do you not say,
that this Author makes the velocity of the bullet in descending equal to
that which it had in turning round, being in the concave of the Moon, and that
coming down with the same velocity, it would reach to the center in six days?


SIMP. So, as I think, he writes.


SALV. And do not you pe^ceive a shameful error therein? But questionless
you dissemble it: For it cannot be, but that you should know that the
semidiameter of the Circle is less than the sixth part of the circumference; A
shameful error in the Argument taken from the bullets falling out of the
Moons concave.
and that consequently, the time in which the moveable shall pass the
semidiameter, shall be less than the sixth part of the time; in which, being
moved with the same velocity, it would pass the circumference; and that
therefore the bullet descending with the velocity, wherewith it moved in the
concave, will arrive in less than four hours at the center, supposing that in
the concave one revolution should be consummate in twenty four hours, as he
must of necessity have supposed it, for to keep it all the way in the same
vertical line.


SIMP. Now I thoroughly perceive the mistake: but yet I would not lay it upon him
undeservedly, for it is possible that I may have erred in rehearsing his
Argument, and to avoid running into the same mistakes for the future, I could
wish I had his Book; and if you had any body to send for it, I would take it
for a great favor.


SAGR. You shall not want a Lacquey that will run for it with all speed: and
he shall do it presently, without losing any time; in the mean time Salviatus
may please to oblige us with his computation.


SIMP. If he go, he shall find it lie open upon my Desk, together with that of
the other Author, who also argues against Copernicus.


SAGR. We will make him bring that also for the more certainty: and in the
interim Salviatus shall make his calculation: I have dispatched away a
messenger.


SALV. Above all things it must be considered, that the motion of descending
grave bodies is not uniform, but departing from rest they go continually
accelerating: An exact compute of the time of the fall of the Canon bullet from
the Moons concave to the Earths center.
An effect known and observed by all men, unless it be by the forementioned
modern Author, who not speaking of acceleration, makes it even and uniforme.
But this general notion is of no avail, if it be not known according to what
proportion this increase of velocity is made; a conclusion that has been until
our times unknown to all Philosophers; and was first found out and demonstrated
by the The Author.
Academick, our common friend, who in some of his By these Writings, he every
where means his Dialogues, De motu, which I promise to give you in my second
Volume.
writings not yet published, but in familiarity shown to me, and some others of
his acquaintance he proves, how that the acceleration of the right motion of
grave bodies, is made according to the numbers uneven beginning ab unitate,
that is, any number of equal times being assigned, if in the first time the
moveable departing from rest shall have passed such a certain space,
Acceleration of the natural motion of grave bodies is made according to the
odd numbers beginning at unity.
as for example, an ell, in the second time it shall have passed three else, in
the third five, in the fourth seven, and so progressively, according to the
following odd numbers; which in short is the same, as if I should say, that the
spaces passed by the moveable departing from its rest, The spaces past by the
falling grave body are as the squares of their times.
are unto each other in proportion double to the proportion of the times, in
which those spaces are measured; or we will say, that the spaces passed are to
each other, as the squares of their times.


SAGR. This is truly admirable: and do you say that there is a Mathematical
demonstration for it?


SALV. Yes, purely Mathematical; and not only for this, but for many other
very admirable passions, pertaining to natural motions, An entire and new
Science of the Academick concerning local motion.
and to projects also, all invented, and demonstrated by Our Friend, and I have
seen and considered them all to my very great content and admiration, seeing a
new complete Doctrine to spring up touching a subject, upon which have been
written hundreds of Volumes; and yet not so much as one of the infinite
admirable conclusions that those his writings contain, has ever been observed,
or understood by any one, before Our Friend made them out.


SAGR. You make me lose the desire I had to understand more in our disputes in
hand, only that I may hear some of those demonstrations which you speak of;
therefore either give them me presently, or at least promise me upon your word,
to appoint a particular conference concerning them, at which Simplicius also
may be present, if he shall have a mind to hear the passions and accidents of
the primary effect in Nature.


SIMP. I shall undoubtedly be much pleased therewith, though indeed, as to what
concerns Natural Philosophy, I do not think that it is necessary to descend
unto minute particularities, a general knowledge of the definition of motion,
and of the distinction of natural and violent, even and accelerate, and the
like, sufficing: For if this were not sufficient, I do not think that Aristotle
would have omitted to have taught us what ever more was necessary.


SALV. It may be so. But let us not lose more time about this, which I promise
to spend half a day apart in, for your satisfaction; nay, now I remember, I did
promise you once before to satisfy you herein. Returning therefore to our
begun calculation of the time, wherein the grave cadent body would pass from
the concave of the Moon to the center of the earth, that we may not proceed
arbitrarily and at randon, but with a Logical method, we will first attempt to
ascertain our selves by experiments often repeated, in how long time a ball v.
g. of Iron descends to the Earth from an altitude of an hundred yards.


SAGR. Let us therefore take a ball of such a determinate weight, and let it be
the same wherewith we intend to make the computation of the time of descent
from the Moon.


SALV. This is not material, for that a ball of one, of ten, of an hundred, of
a thousand pounds, will all measure the same hundred yards in the same time.


SIMP. But this I cannot believe, nor much less does Aristotle think so, who
writes, that the velocities of descending grave bodies, are in the same
proportion to one another, as their gravities.


SALV. If you will admit this for true, The error of Aristotle in affirming,
falling grave bodies to move according to the proportion of their gravities.
you must believe also, that two balls of the same matter, being let fall in
the same moment, one of an hundred pounds, and another of one, from an altitude
of an hundred yards, the great one arriveth at the ground, before the other is
descended but one yard only: Now bring your fancy, if you can, to imagine,
that you see the great ball got to the ground, when the little one is still
within less than a yard of the top of the Tower.


SAGR. That this proposition is most false, I make no doubt in the world; but
yet that yours is absolutely true, I cannot well assure my self: nevertheless,
I believe it, seeing that you so resolutely affirm it; which I am sure you
would not do, if you had not certain experience, or some clear demonstration
thereof.


SALV. I have both: and when we shall handle the business of motions apart, I
will communicate them: in the interim, that we may have no more occasions of
interrupting our discourse, we will suppose, that we are to make our
computation upon a ball of Iron of an hundred Note that these Calculations are
made in Italian weights and measu^es. And 100 pounds Haverdupoise make 1^1 l.
Florentine. And 100 Engl^^ (...) makes 150^ (...) Florent. so that the brace or
yard of our Author is 1/4 of our yard.
pounds, the which by reiterated experiments descends from the altitude of an
hundred Note that these Calculations are made in Italian weights and measures.
And 100 pounds Haverdupoise make 1^1 l. Florentine. And 100 Engl^^ (...) makes
150^ (...) Florent. so that the brace or yard of our Author is 1/4 of our yard.
yards, in five second-minutes of an hour. And because, as we have said, the
spaces that are measured by the cadent moveable, increase in double proportion;
that is, according to the squares of the times, being that the time of one
first-minute is duodecuple to the time of five seconds, if we multiply the
hundred yards by the square of 12, that is by 144, we shall have 14400, which
shall be the number of yards that the same moveable shall pass in one
first-minute of an hour: and following the same rule because one hour is 60
minutes, multiplying 14400, the number of yards past in one minute, by the
square of 60, that is, by 3600, there shall come forth 51840000, the number of
yards to be passed in an hour, which make 17280 miles. And desiring to know the
space that the said ball would pass in 4 hours, let us multiply 17280 by 16,
(which is the square of 4) and the product will be 276480 miles: which number
is much greater than the distance from the Lunar concave to the center of the
Earth, which is but 196000 miles, making the distance of the concave 56
semidiameters of the Earth, as that modern Author does; and the semidiameter of
the Earth 3500 miles, of 3000 The Italian measure which I commonly transl^te
yards.
Braces to a The Italian m^le is (...) of our mile.
mile, which are our Italian miles.

Therefore, Simplicius, that space from the concave of the Moon to the center
of the Earth, which your Accomptant said could not be passed under more than
six days, you see that (computing by experience, and not upon the fingers ends)
that it shall be passed in much less than four hours; and making the
computation exact, it shall be passed by the moveable in 3 hours, 22 min. prim.
and 4 seconds.


SAGR. I beseech you, dear Sir, do not defraud me of this exact calculation,
for it must needs be very excellent.


SALV. So indeed it is: therefore having (as I have said) by diligent trial
observed, that such a moveable passes in its descent, the height of 100 yards
in 5 seconds of an hour, we will say, if 100 yards are passed in 5 seconds; in
how many seconds shall 588000000 yards (for so many are in 56 diameters of the
Earth) be passed? The rule for this work is, that the third number must be
multiplied by the square of the second, of which does come 14700000000, which
ought to be divided by the first, that is, by 100, and the root square of the
quotient, that is, 12124 is the number sought, namely 12124 min. secun. of an
hour, which are 3 hours, 22 min. prim. and 4 seconds.


SAGR. I have seen the working, but I know nothing of the reason for so
working, nor do I now think it a time to ask it.


SALV. Yet I will give it, though you do not ask it, because it is very easy.
Let us mark these three numbers with the Letters A first, B second, C third. A
and C are the numbers of the spaces, B is the number of the time; the fourth
number is sought, of the time also. And because we know, that look what
proportion the space A, has to the spuace C, the same proportion shall the
square of the time B have to the sqare of the time, which is sought. 100. 5.
588000000. A B C 25 1 14700000000 35956 10
22 241 60 12124 202 3
2422 24240 Therefore by the Golden Rule, let the number C be multiplied by the
square of the number B, and let the product be divided by the number A, and the
quotient shall be the square of the number sought, and its square root shall be
the number it self that is sought. Now you see how easy it is to be understood.


SAGR. So are all truths, when once they are found out, but the difficulty
lies in finding them I very well apprehend it, and kindly thank you. And if
there remain any other curiosity touching this point, I pray you let us hear
it; for if I may speak my mind, I will with the favor of Simplicius, that from
your discourses I always learn some new motion, but from those of his
Philosophers, I do not remember that I have learned any thing of moment.


SALV. There might be much more said touching these local motions; but
according to agreement, we will reserve it to a particular conference; and for
the present I will speak something touching the Author named by Simplicius, who
thinks he has given a great advantage to the adverse party in granting that,
that Canon bullet in falling from the concave of the Moon may descend with a
velocity equal to the velocity wherewith it would turn round, staying there
above, and moving along with the diurnal conversion. Now I tell him, that that
same ball falling from the concave unto the center, will acquire a degree of
velocity much more than double the velocity of the diurnal motion of the Lunar
concave; The falling moveable if it move with a degree of velocity acquired in
a like time with an uniform motion, it shall pass a space double to that passed
with the accelerated motion.
and this I will make out by solid and not impertinent suppositions. You must
know therefore that the grave body falling and acquiring all the way new
velocity according to the proportion already mentioned, has in any whatsoever
place of the line of its motion such a degree of velocity, that if it should
continue to move therewith, uniformly without farther increasing it; in another
time like to that of its descent, it would pass a space double to that passed
in the line of the precedent motion of descent. And thus for example, if that
ball in coming from the concave of the Moon to its center has spent three
hours, 22 min. prim. and 4 seconds, I say, that being arrived at the center, it
shall find it self constituted in such a degree of velocity, that if with that,
without farther increasing it, it should continue to move uniformly, it would
in other 3 hours, 22 min. prim. and 4 seconds, pass double that space, namely
as much as the whole diameter of the Lunar Orb; and because from the Moons
concave to the center are 196000 miles, which the ball passes in 3 hours 22
prim. min. and 4 seconds, therefore (according to what has been said) the ball
continuing to move with the velocity which it is found to have in its arrival
at the center, it would pass in other 3 hours 22 min. prim. and 4 seconds, a
space double to that, namely 392000 miles; but the same continuing in the
concave of the Moon, which is in circuit 1232000 miles, and moving therewith in
a diurnal motion, it would make in the same time, that is in 3 hours 22 min.
prim. and 4 seconds, 172880 miles, which are fewer by many than the half of the
392000 miles. You see then that the motion in the concave is not as the modern
Author says, that is, of a velocity impossible for the falling ball to partake
of, etc.


SAGR. The discourse would pass for current, and would give me full
satisfaction, if that particular was but salved, of the moving of the moveable
by a double space to that passed in falling in another time equal to that of
the descent, in case it does continue to move uniformly with the greatest
degree of velocity acquired in descending. A proposition which you also once
before supposed as true, but never demonstrated.


SALV. This is one of the demonstrations of Our Friend, and you shall see it in
due time; but for the present, I will with some conjectures (not teach you any
thing that is new, but) remember you of a certain contrary opinion, and show
you, that it may happily so be. A bullet of lead hanging in a long and fine
thread fastened to the roof, if we remove it far from perpendicularity, and
then let it go, have you not observed that, it declining, will pass freely, and
well near as far to the other side of the perpendicular?


SAGR. I have observed it very well, and find (especially if the plummet be of
any considerable weight) that it rises so little less than it descended, so
that I have sometimes thought, that the ascending arch is equal to that
descending, and thereupon made it a question whether the vibrations might not
perpetuate themselves; and I believe that they might, The motion of grave
penduli might be perpetuated, impediments being removed.
if that it were possible to remove the impediment of the Air, which resisting
penetration, does some small matter retard and impede the motion of the
pendulum, though indeed that impediment is but small: in favor of which
opinion the great number of vibrations that are made before the moveable wholly
cease to move, seems to plead.


SALV. The motion would not be perpetual, Sagredus, although the impediment of
the Air were totally removed, because there is another much more abstruse.


SAGR. And what is that? as for my part I can think of no other?


SALV. You will be pleased when you hear it, but I shall not tell it you till
anon: in the mean time, let us proceed. I have proposed the observation of this
Pendulum, to the intent, that you should understand, that the impetus acquired
in the descending arch, where the motion is natural, is of it self able to
drive the said ball with a violent motion, as far on the other side in the like
ascending arch; if so, I say, of it self, all external impediments being
removed: I believe also that every one takes it for granted, that as in the
descending arch the velocity all the way increases, till it come to the lowest
point, or its perpendicularity; so from this point, by the other ascending
arch, it all the way diminishes, until it come to its extreme and highest
point: and diminishing with the same proportions, wherewith it did before
increase, so that the dgrees of the velocities in the points equidistant from
the point of perpendicularity, are equal to each other. Hence it seems to me
(arguing with all due modesty) that I might easily be induced to believe, If
the Terrestrial Globe were perforated, a grave body descending by that bore,
would pass and ascend as far beyond the center, as it did descend.
that if the Terrestrial Globe were bored through the center, a Canon bullet
descending through that Well, would acquire by that time it came to the center,
such an impulse of velocity, that, it having passed beyond the center, would
spring it upwards the other way, as great a space, as that was wherewith it had
descended, all the way beyond the center diminishing the velocity with
decreasements like to the increasements acquired in the descent: and the time
spent in this second motion of ascent, I believe, would be equal to the time of
descent. Now if the moveable by diminishing that its greatest degree of
velocity which it had in the center, successively until it come to total
extinction, do carry the moveable in such a time such a certain space, as it
had gone in such a like quantity of time, by the acquist of velocity from the
total privation of it until it came to that its greatest degree; it seems
very reasonable, that if it should move always with the said greatest degree of
velocity it would pass, in such another quantity of time, both those spaces:
For if we do but in our mind successively divide those velocities into rising
and falling v. g. these numbers in the margin; so that the


SAGR. I think I understand you very well; and also that I v. g. 5, all these
degrees of velocity wherewith the moveable is moved, make the sum of 15; but if
the


SALV. According to your quick and piercing way of apprehending things, you
have explained the whole business with more plainness than I my self; and put
me also in mind of adding something more: for in the accelerate motion, the
augmentation being continual, you cannot divide the degrees of velocity, which
continually increase, into any determinate number, because changing every
moment, they are evermore infinite. Therefore we shall be the better able to
exemplify our intentions by describing a Triangle, which let be this ABC, [in
Fig. 8.] taking in the side AC, as many equal parts as we please, AD, DE, OF,
FG, and drawing by the points D, E, F, G, right lines parallel to the (...) BC.
Now let us imagine the parts marked in the line AC, to be equal times, and let
the parallels drawn by the points D, E, F, G, represent unto us the degrees of
velocity accelerated, and increasing equally in equal times; and let the Point
A be the state of rest, from which the moveable departing, has v. g. in the
time AD, acquired the degree of velocity DH, in the second time we will
suppose, that it has increased the velocity from DH, as far as to EI, and so
supposing it to have grown greater in the succeeding times, The acceleration of
grave bodies naturally descendent, increases from moment to moment.
according to the increase of the lines FK, GL, etc. but because the
acceleration is made continually from moment to moment, and not disjunctly from
one certain part of time to another; the point A being put for the lowest
moment of velocity, that is, for the state of rest, and AD for the first
instant of time following; it is manifest, that before the acquist of the
degree of velocity DH, made in the time AD, the moveable must have past by
infinite other lesser and lesser degrees gained in the infinite instants that
are in the time DA, answering the infinite points that are in the line DA;
therefore to represent unto us the infinite degrees of velocity that precede
the degree DH, it is necessary to imagine infinite lines successively lesser
and lesser, which are supposed to be drawn by the infinite points of the line
DA, and parallels to DH, the which infinite lines represent unto us the
superficies of the Triangle AHD, and thus we may imagine any space passed by
the moveable, with a motion which beginning at rest, goes uniformly
accelerating, to have spent and made use of infinite degrees of velocity,
increasing according to the infinite lines that beginning from the point A, are
supposed to be drawn parallel to the line HD, and to the rest IE, KF, LG, the
motion continuing as far as one will.

Now let us complete the whole Parallelogram AMBC, and let us prolong as far as
to the side thereof BM, not only the Parallels marked in the Triangle, but
those infinite others imagined to be drawn from all the points of the side AC;
and like as BC, was the greatest of those infinite parallels of the Triangle,
representing unto us the greatest degree of velocity acquired by the moveable
in the accelerate motion, and the whole superficies of the said Triangle, was
the mass and sum of the whole velocity, wherewith in the time AC it passed such
a certain space, so the parallelogram is now a mass and aggregate of a like
number of degrees of velocity, but each equal to the greatest BC, the which
mass of velocities will be double to the mass of the increasing velocities in
the Triangle, like as the said Parallelogram is double to the Triangle: and
therefore if the moveable, that falling did make use of the accelerated degrees
of velocity, answering to the triangle ABC, has passed in such a time such a
space, it is very reasonable and probable, that making use of the uniform
velocities answering to the parallelogram, it shall pass with an even motion
in the same time a space double to that passed by the accelerate motion.


SAGR. I am entirely satisfied. And if you call this a probable Discourse, what
shall the necessary demonstrations be? I wish that in the whole body of common
Philosophy, I could find one that was but thus concludent.


SIMP. It is not necessary in natural Philosophy to seek exquisite Mathematical
evidence. In natural Sciences it is not necessary to seek Mathematical
evidence.



SAGR. But this point of motion, is it not a natural question? and yet I cannot
find that Aristotle has demonstrated any the least accident of it. But let us
no longer divert our intended Theme, nor do you fail, I pray you Salviatus, to
tell me that which you hinted to me to be the cause of the Pendulum's
quiescence, besides the resistance of the Medium to penetration.


SALV. Tell me; of two penduli hanging at unequal distances, does not that
which is fastened to the longer thread make its vibrations more seldom?


SAGR. Yes, The pendulum hanging at a longer th^eed, makes its vibrations more
seldom than the pendulum hanging at a shorter thread.
if they be moved to equal distances from their perpendicularity.


SALV. This greater or less elongation imports nothing at all, for the same
pendulum always makes its reciprocations in equal times, be they longer or
shorter, that is, though the pendulum be little or much removed from its
perpendicularity, The vibrations of the same pendulum are made with the same
frequency, whether they be small or great.
and if they are not absolutely equal, they are insensibly different, as
experience may show you: and though they were very unequal, yet would they not
discountenance, but favor our cause. Therefore let us draw the perpendicular
AB [in Fig. 9.] and hang from the point A, upon the thread AC, a plummet C, and
another upon the same thread also, which let be E, and the thread AC, being
removed from its perpendicularity, and then letting go the plummets C and E,
they shall move by the arches CBD, EGF, and the plummet E, as hanging at a
lesser distance, and withal, as (by what you said) less removed, will return
back again faster, and make its vibrations more frequent than the plummet C,
and therefore shall hinder the said plummet C, from running so much farther
toward the term D, as it would do, if it were free: and thus the plummet E
bringing unto it in every vibration continual impediment, The cause which
impedeth the pendulum and reduces it to rest.
it shall finally reduce it to quiescence. Now the same thread, (raking away
the middle plummet) is a composition of many grave penduli, that is, each of
its parts is such a pendulum fastened nearer and nearer to the point A, and
therefore disposed to make it, vibrations successively more and more frequent;
and consequently is able to bring a continual impediment to the plummet C; and
for a proof that this is so, if we do but observe the thread AC, we shall see
it distended not directly, but in an arch; and if instead of the thread we take
a chain, we shall discern the effect more perfectly; The thread or chain to
which a pendulum is fastened, makes an arch, and does not stretch it self
straight out in its vibrations.
and especially removing the gravity C, to a considerable distance from the
perpendicular AB, for that the chain being composed of many loose particles,
and each of them of some weight, the arches AEC, and AFD, will appear notably
incurvated. By reason therefore, that the parts of the chain, according as they
are nearer to the point A, desire to make their vibrations more frequent, they
permit not the lower parts of the said chain to swing so far as naturally they
would: and by continual detracting from the vibrations of the plummet C, they
finally make it cease to move, although the impediment of the air might be
removed.


SAGR. The books are now come; here take them Simplicius, and find the place
you are in doubt of.


SIMP. See, here it is where he begins to argue against the diurnal motion
of the Earth, he having first confuted the annual. Motus terrae annuus asserere
Copernicanos cogit conversionem ejusdem quotidianam; alias idem terrae
Hemisphaerium continenter ad Solemn esset conversum obumbrato semper averso. [In
English thus:] The annual motion of the Earth does compel the Copernicans to
assert the daily conversion thereof; otherwise the same Hemisphere of the Earth
would be continually turned toward the Sun, the shady side being always
averse. And so one half of the Earth would never come to see the Sun.


SALV. I find at the very first sight, that this man has not rightly
apprehended the Copernican Hypothesis, for if he had but taken notice how he
always makes the Axis of the terrestrial Globe perpetually parallel to it
self, he would not have said, that one half of the Earth would never see the
Sun, but that the year would be one entire natural day, that is, that through
all parts of the Earth there would be six months day, and six months night,
as it now befalls to the inhabitants under the Pole, but let this mistake be
forgiven him, and let us come to what remains.


SIMP. It follows, Hanc autem gyrationem Terrae impossibilem esse sic
demonstramus. Which speaks in English thus: That this gyration of the Earth is
impossible we thus demonstrate. That which ensues is the declaration of the
following figure, wherein is delineated many descending grave bodies, and
ascending light bodies, and birds that fly to and again in the air, etc.


SAGR. Let us see them, I pray you. Oh! what fine figures, what birds, what
balls, and what other pretty things are here?


SIMP. These are balls which come from the concave of the Moon.


SAGR. and what is this?


SIMP. This is a kind of Shellfish, which here at Venice they call buovoli;
and this also came from the Moons concave.


SAGR. Indeed, it seems then, that the Moon has a great power over these
Oyster-fishes, which we call Pesci armai, or armati.
armed sishes.


SIMP. And this is that calculation, which I mentioned* of this Journey in a
natural day, in an hour, in a first minute, and in a second, which a point of
the Earth would make placed under the Equinoctial, and also in the parallel of
48 gr. And then follows this, which I doubted I had committed some mistake in
reciting, therefore let us read it. His positis, necesse est, terra
circulariter mota, omnia ex aere eidem, etc. Quod si hasce pilas aequales
ponemus pondere, magnitudine, gravitate, and in concavo Sphaerae Lunaris
positas libero descensui permittamus, si motum deorsum aequemus celeritate
motui circum, (quod tamen secus est, cum pila A, etc.) elabentur minimum (ut
multum cedamus adversariis) dies sex: quo tempore sexies circa terram, etc. [In
English thus.] These things being supposed, it is necessary, the Earth being
circularly moved, that all things from the air to the same, etc. So that if we
suppose these balls to be equal in magnitude and gravity, and being placed in
the concave of the Lunar Sphere, we permit them a free descent, and if we make
the motion downwards equal in velocity to the motion about, (which nevertheless
is otherwise, if the ball A, etc.) they shall be falling at least (that we may
grant much to our adversaries) six days; in which time they shall be turned
six times about the Earth, etc.


SALV. You have but too faithfully cited the argument of this person. From
hence you may collect Simplicius, with what caution they ought to proceed, who
would give themselves up to believe others in those things, which perhaps they
do not believe themselves. For me thinks it a thing impossible, but that this
Author was advised, that he did design to himself a circle, whose diameter
(which amongst Mathematicians, is less than one third part of the
circumference) is above 72 times bigger than it self: an error that affirms
that to be considerably more than 200 which is less than one.


SAGR. It may be, that these Mathematical proportions, which are true in
abstract, being once applied in concrete to Physical and Elementary circles, do
not so exactly agree: And yet, I think, that the Cooper, to find the
semidiameter of the bottom, which he is to fit to the Cask, does make use of
the rule of Mathematicians in abstract, although such bottomes be things merely
material, and concrete* therefore let Simplicius plead in excuse of this
Author; and whether he thinks that the Physics can differ so very much from
the Mathematics.


SIMP. The substractions are in my opinion insufficient to salve this
difference, which is so extremely too great to be reconciled: and in this case
I have no more to say but that, Quandoque bonus dormilet Homerus. But supposing
the calculation of Not Sagredus, as the Latin has it.
Salviatus to be more exact, and that the time of the descent of the ball were
no more than three hours; yet me thinks, that coming from the concave of the
Moon, which is so great a distance off, it would be an admirable thing, that it
should have an instinct of maintaining it self all the way over the self-same
point of the Earth, over which it did hang in its departure thence, and not
rather be left a very great way behind.


SALV. The effect may be admirable, and not admirable, but natural and
ordinary, according as the things precedent may fall out. For if the ball
(according to the Authors suppositions) whilst it staid in the concave of the
Moon, had the circular motion of twenty four hours together with the Earth, and
with the rest of the things contained within the said Concave; that very virtue
which made it turn round before its descent, will continue it in the same
motion in its descending. And so far it is from not keeping pace with the
motion of the Earth, and from staying behind, that it is more likely to out-go
it; being that in its approaches to the Earth, the motion of gyration is to be
made with circles continually lesser and lesser; so that the ball retaining in
it self that self-same velocity which it had in the concave, it ought to
anticipate, as I have said, the vertigo or conversion of the Earth. But if the
ball in the concave did want that circulation, it is not obliged in descending
to maintain it self perpendicularly over that point of the Earth, which was
just under it when the descent began. Nor will. Copernicus, or any of his
followers affirm the same.


SIMP. But the Author makes an objection, as you see, demanding on what
principle this circular motion of grave and light bodies, does depend: that is,
whether upon an internal or an external principle.


SALV. Keeping to the Problem of which we speak, I say, that that very
principle which made the ball turn round, whilst it was in the Lunar concave,
is the same that maintains also the circulation in the descent: yet I leave
the Author at liberty to make it internal or external at his pleasure.


SIMP. The Author proves, that it can neither be inward nor outward.


SALV. And I will say then, that the ball in the concave did not move, and so
he shall not be bound to show how that in descending it continues all the way
vertically over one point, for that it will not do any such thing.


SIMP. Very well; But if grave bodies, and light can have no principle, either
internal or external of moving circularly, than neither can the terrestrial
Globe move with a circular motion: and thus you have the intent of the Author.


SALV. I did not say, that the Earth had no principle, either interne, or
externe to the motion of gyration, but I say, that I do not know which of the
two it has; and yet my not knowing it has not a power to deprive it of the
same; but if this Author can tell by what principle other mundane bodies are
moved round, of whose motion there is no doubt; I say, that that which makes
the Earth to move, is a virtue, like to that, by which Mars and Jupiter are
moved, and wherewith he believes that the starry Sphere it self also does move;
and if he will but assure me, who is the mover of one of these movables, I
will undertake to be able to tell him who makes the Earth to move. Nay more; I
will undertake to do the same, if he can but tell me, who moves the parts of
the Earth downwards.


SIMP. The cause of this is most manifest, and every one knows that it is
gravity.


SALV. You are out, Simplicius, you should say, that every one knows, that it
is called Gravity: but I do not question you about the name, but the essence of
the thing, of which essence you know not a tittle more than you know the
essence of the mover of the stars in gyration; unless it be the name that has
been put to this, and made familiar, and domestical, by the many experiences
which we see thereof every hour in the day,: We know (...) more who moves
grave b^dus downwards; than who moves the Stars round, nor kn^w we any thing
of these cause^, more than the names imposed on them by us.
but not as if we really understand any more, what principle or virtue that is
which moves a stone downwards, than we know who moves it upwards, when it is
separated from the projicient, or who moves the Moon round, except (as I have
said) only the name, which more particularly and properly we have assigned to
the motion of descent, namely, Gravity; whereas for the cause of circular
motion, in more general terms, we assign the Virtue impressed, and call the
same an Intelligence, either assisting, or informing; and to infinite other
motions we ascribe Nature for their cause.


SIMP. It is my opinion, that this Author asks far less than that, to which
you deny to make answer; for he does not ask what is nominally and particularly
the principle that moves grave and light bodies circularly, but whatsoever it
be, he desires to know, whether you think it intrinsecal, or extrinsecal: For
howbeit, v. gr. I do not know, what kind of thing that gravity is, by which the
Earth descends; yet I know that it is an intern principle, seeing that if it
be not hindered, it moves spontaneously: and on the contrary, I know that the
principle which moves it upwards, is external; although that I do not know,
what thing that virtue is, impressed on it by the projicient.


SALV. Into how many questions must we excurre, if we would decide all the
difficulties, which successively have dependence one upon another! You call
that an external (and you also call it a preternatural and violent) principle,
which moves the grave project upwards; but its possible that it may be no
less interne and natural, than that which moves it downwards; it may
peradventure be called external and violent, The virtue which carries grave
projects upwards, is no less natural to them, than the gravity which moves
them downwards.
so long as the moveable is joined to the projicient; but being separated, what
external thing remains for a mover of the arrow, or ball? In sum, it must
necessarliy be granted, that that virtue which carries such a moveable
upwards, is no less interne, than that which moves it downwards; and I think
the motion of grave bodies ascending by the impetus conceived, to be altogether
as natural, as the motion of descent depending on gravity.


SIMP. I will never grant this; for the motion of descent has its principle
internal, natural, and perpetual, and the motion of ascent has its principle
externe, violent, and finite.


SALV. If you refuse to grant me, that the principles of the motions of grave
bodies downwards and upwards, Contrary principles cannot naturally reside in
the same subject.
are equally internal and natural; what would you do, if I should say, that
they may also be the same in number?


SIMP. I leave it to you to judge.


SALV. But I desire you your self to be the Judge: Therefore tell me, Do you
believe that in the same natural body, there may reside interne principles,
that are contrary to one another?


SIMP. I do verily believe there cannot.


SALV. What do you think to be the natural inclination of Earth, of Lead, of
Gold, and in sum, of the most ponderous matters; that is, to what motion do you
believe that their interne principle draws them?


SIMP. To that toward the center of things grave, that is, to the center of
the Universe, and of the Earth, whither, if they be not hindered, it will carry
them.


SALV. So that, if the Terrestrial Globe were bored through, and a Well made
that should pass through the center of it, a Cannon bullet being let fall into
the same, as being moved by a natural and intrinsic principle, would pass to
the center; and it would make all this motion spontaneously, and by intrinsic
principle, is it not so?


SIMP. So I verily believe.


SALV. But when it is arrived at the center, do you think that it will pass
any further, or else that there it would immediately stand still, and move no
further?


SIMP. I believe that it would continue to move a great way further.


SALV. But this motion beyond the center, would it not be upwards, and
according to your assertion preternatural, and violent? And yet on what other
principle do you make it to depend, but only upon the self same, which did
carry the ball to the center, and which you called intrinsecal, and natural?
Find, if you can, another external projicient, that overtaketh it again to
drive it upwards. And this that has been said of the motion through the center,
The natural motion changes it self into that which is called preternatural
and violent.
is also seen by us here above; for the interne impetus of a grave body falling
along a declining superficies, if the said superficies be reflected the other
way, it shall carry it, without a jot interrupting the motion, also upwards. A
ball of lead that hangs by a thread, being removed from its perpendicularity,
descends spontaneously, as being drawn by its internal inclination, and
without any interposure of rest, passes beyond the lowest point of
perpendicularity: and without any additional mover, moves upwards. I know that
you will not deny, but that the principle of grave bodies that moves them
downwards, is no less natural, and intrinsecal, than that principle of light
bodies, which moves them upwards: so that I propose to your consideration a
ball of lead, which descending through the Air from a great altitude, and so
moving by an intern principle, and coming to a depth of water, continues its
descent, and without any other externe mover, submergeth a great way; and yet
the motion of descent in the water is preternatural unto it; but yet
nevertheless depends on a principle that is internal, and not external to the
ball. You see it demonstrated then, that a moveable may be moved by one and the
same internal principle, with contrary motions.


SIMP. I believe there are solutions to all these objections, though for the
present I do not remember them; but however it be, the Author continues to
demand, on what principle this circular motion of grave and light bodies
depends; that is, whether on a principle internal, or external; and
proceeding forwards, shows, that it can be neither on the one, nor on the
other, saying; Si ab externo; Deusne illum excitat per continuum miraculum? an
vero Angelus, an aer? Et hunc quidem multi assignant. Sed contra -- [In English
thus] If from an externe principle; Whether God does not excite it by a
continued Miracle? or an Angel, or the Air? And indeed many do assign this. But
on the contrary --.


SALV. Trouble not your self to read his argument; for I am none of those who
ascribe that principle to the ambient air. As to the Miracle, or an Angel, I
should rather incline to this side; for that which takes beginning from a
Divine Miracle, or from an Angelical operation; as for instance, the
transportation of a Cannon ball or bullet into the concave of the Moon, does in
all probability depend on the virtue of the same principle for performing the
rest. But, as to the Air, it serves my turn, that it does not hinder the
circular motion of the movables, which we did suppose to move through it. And
to prove that, it suffices (nor is more required) that it moves with the same
motion, and finisheth its circulations with the same velocity, that the
Terrestrial Globe does.


SIMP. And he likewise makes his opposition to this also; demanding who
carries the air about, Nature, or Violence? And proves, that it cannot be
Nature, alleging that that is contrary to truth, experience, and to Copernicus
himself.


SALV. It is not contrary to Copernicus in the least, who writes no such
thing; and this Author ascribes these things to him with two excessive
courtesy. It Is true, he says, and for my part I think he says well, that the
part of the air near to the Earth, being rather a terrestrial evaporation, may
have the same nature, and naturally follow its motion; or, as being contiguous
to it, may follow it in the same manner, as the Peripateticks say, that the
superior part of it, and the Element of fire, follow the motion of the Lunar
Concave, so that it lies upon them to declare, whether that motion be natural,
or violent.


SIMP. The Author will reply, that if Copernicus makes only the inferior part
of the Air to move, and supposes the upper part thereof to want the said
motion, he cannot give a reason, how that quiet air can be able to carry those
grave bodies along with it, and make them keep pace with the motion of the
Earth.


SALV. Copernicus will say, The propension of elementary bodies to follow the
Earth, has a limited Sphere of activity.
that this natural propension of the elementary bodies to follow the motion of
the Earth, has a limited Sphere, out of which such a natural inclination would
cease; besides that, as I have said, the Air is not that which carries the
movables along with it; which being separated from the Earth, do follow its
motion; so that all the objections come to nothing, which this Author produces
to prove, that the Air cannot cause such effects.


SIMP. To show therefore, that that cannot be, it will be necessary to say,
that such like effects depend on an interne principle, against which position,
oboriuntur difficillimae, immo inextricabiles quaestiones secundae, of which
sort are these that follow. Principium illud internum vel est accidens, vel
substantia. Si primum; quale nam illud? nam qualitas locomotiva circum,
hactenus nulla videtur agni^a. (In English thus:) Contrary to which position
there do arise most difficult, yea inextricable second questions, such as
these; That intern principle is either an accident, or a substance. If the
first; what manner of accident is it? For a locomotive quality about the
center, seems to be hitherto acknowledged by none.


SALV. How, is there no such thing acknowledged? Is it not known to us, that
all these elementary matters move round, together with the Earth? You see how
this Author supposes for true, that which is in question.


SIMP. He says, that we do not see the same; and me thinks, he has therein
reason on his side.


SALV. We see it not, because we turn round together with them.


SIMP. Hear his other Argument. Quae etiam si esset, quomodo tamen inveniretur
in rebus tam contrariis? in igne, ut in aqua; in aere, ut in terra; in
viventibus, ut in anima carentibus? [in English thus:] Which although it were,
yet how could it be found in things so contrary? in the fire, as in the water?
in the air, as in the earth? in living creatures, as in things wanting life?


SALV. Supposing for this time, that water and fire are contraries; as also the
air and earth; (of which yet much may be said) the most that could follow from
thence would be, that those motions cannot be common to them, that are contrary
to one another: so that v. g. the motion upwards, which naturally agrees to
fire, cannot agree to water; but that, like as it is by nature contrary to
fire: so to it that motion suiteth, which is contrary to the motion of fire,
which shall be the motion deorsum; but the circular motion, which is not
contrary either to the motion sursum, or to the motion deorsum, but may mix
with both, as Aristotle himself affirms, why may it not equally suit with
grave bodies and with light? The motions in the next place, which cannot be
common to things alive, and dead, are those which depend on the soul: but those
which belong to the body, in as much as it is elementary, and consequently
participateth of the qualities of the elements, why may not they be common as
well to the dead corpse, as to the living body? And therefore, if the circular
motion be proper to the elements, it ought to be common to the mixed bodies also.


SAGR. It must needs be, that this Author holds, that a dead cat, falling
from a window, it is not possible that a live cat also could fall; it not being
a thing convenient, that a carcass should partake of the qualities which suit
with things alive.


SALV. Therefore the discourse of this Author concludes nothing against one
that should affirm, that the principle of the circular motions of grave and
light bodies is an intern accident: I know not how he may prove, that it cannot
be a substance.


SIMP. He brings many Arguments against this. The first of which is in these
words: Si secundum (nempe, si dicas tale principium esse substantiam) illud est
aut materia, aut forma, aut compositum. Sed repugnant iterum tot diversae rerum
naturae, quales sunt aves, limaces, saxa, sagittae, nives, fumi, grandines,
pisces, etc. quae tamen omnia specie and genere differentia, moverentur a
natura sua circulariter, ipsa naturis diversissima, etc. [In English thus] If
the second, (that is, if you shall say that this principle is a substance) it
is either matter, or form, or a compound of both. But such diverse natures of
things are again repugnant, such as are birds, snails, stones, darts, snows,
smoaks, hails, fishes, etc. all which notwithstanding their differences in
species and kind, are moved of their own nature circularly, they being of their
natures most different, etc.


SALV. If these things before named are of diverse natures, and things of
diverse natures cannot have a motion in common, it must follow, if you would
give satisfaction to all, that you are to think of, more than two motions only
of upwards and downwards: and if there must be one for the arrows, another for
the snails, another for the stones, and another for fishes; then are you to
bethink your self of worms, topazes and mushrums, which are not less different
in nature from one another, than snow and hail.


SIMP. It seems that you make a jest of these Arguments.


SALV. No indeed, Simplicius, but it has been already answered above, to wit,
that if one motion, whether downwards or upwards, can agree with all those
things before named, a circular motion may no less agree with them: and as you
are a Peripatetick, do not you put a greater difference between an elementary
comet and a celestial star, than between a fish and a bird? and yet both those
move circularly. Now propose your second Argument.


SIMP. Si terra staret per voluntatem Dei, rotarentne caetera, an non? si hoc,
falsum est a natura gyrare; si illud, redeunt priores quaestiones. Et sane
mirum esset, quod Gavia pisciculo, Alauda nidulo suo, and corvus limaci,
petraque, etiam volans, imminere non posset. [Which I thus render:] If the
Earth be supposed to stand still by the will of God, should the rest of bodies
turn round or no? If not, then it is false that they are revolved by nature; if
the other, the former questions will return upon us. And truly it would be
strange that the Sea-pie should not be able to hover over the small fish, the
Lark over her nest, and the Crow over the snail and rock, though flying.


SALV. I would answer for my self in general terms, that if it were appointed
by the will of God, that the Earth should cease from its diurnal revolution,
those birds would do what ever should please the same Divine will. But if this
Author desire a more particular answer, I should tell him, that they would do
quite contrary to what they do now, if whilst they, being separated from the
Earth, do bear themselves up in the air, the Terrestrial Globe by the will of
God, should all on a sudden be put upon a precipitate motion; it concerns
this Author now to ascertain us what would in this case succeed.


SAGR. I pray you, Salviatus, at my request to grant to this Author, that the
Earth standing still by the will of God, the other things, separated from it,
would continue to turn round of their own natural motion, and let us hear what
impossibilities or inconveniences would follow: for I, as to my own particular,
do not see how there can be greater disorders, than these produced by the
Author himself, that is, that Larks, though they should fly, could not be able
to hover over their nests, nor Crows over snails, or rocks: from whence would
follow, that Crows must suffer for want of snails, and young Larks must die of
hunger, and cold, not being able to be fed or sheltered by the wings of the old
ones. This is all the ruin that I can conceive would follow, supposing the
Authors speech to be true. Do you see, Simplicius, if greater inconveniences
would happen?


SIMP. I know not how to discover greater; but it is very credible, that the
Author besides these, discovered other disorders in Nature, which perhaps in
reverend respect of her, he was not willing to instance in. Therefore let us
proceed to the third Objection. Insuper qui fit, ut istae res tam variae tantum
moveantur ab Occasu in Ortum, parallelae ad Aequatorem? ut semper moveantur,
nunquam quiescant? [which speaks to this sense:] Moreover, how comes it to pass
that these things, so diverse, are only moved from the West toward the East,
parallel to the Aequinoctial? that they always move, and never rest?


SALV. They move from West to East parallel to the Aequinoctial without
ceasing, in the same manner as you believe the fixed stars to move from East to
West, parallel to the Aequinoctial, without ever resting.


SIMP. Quare, quo sunt altiores, celerius; quo humiliores, tardius? (i. e.) Why
are the higher the swifter, and the lower the ^lower?


SALV. Because that in a Sphere or circle, that turns about upon its own
center, the remoter parts describe greater circuits, and the parts nearer at
hand describe lesser in the same time.


SIMP. Quare, quae Aequinoctiali propriores, in majori; quae remotiores, in
minori circulo feruntur? [scilicet:] Why are those near the Aequinoctial
carried about in a greater circle, and those which are remote in a lesser?


SALV. To imitate the starry Sphere, in which those nearest to the
Aequinoctial, move in greater circles, than the more remote.


SIMP. Quare Pila eadem sub Aequinoctiali tota circa centrum terrae, ambitu
maximo, celeritate incredibili; sub Polo vero circa centrum proprium, gyro
nullo, tarditate suprema volveretur? [That is:] Why is the same ball under the
Aequinoctial wholly turned round the center of the Earth in the greatest
circumference, with an incredible celerity; but under the Pole about its own
center, in no circuit, but with the ultimate degree of tardity?


SALV. To imitate the stars of the Firmament, that would do the like if they
had the diurnal motion.


SIMP. Quare eadem res, pila v. g. plumbea, si semel terram circuivit,
descripto circulo maximo, eandem ubique non circummigret secundum circulum
maximum, sed translata extra Aequinoctialem in circulis minoribus agetur?
[Which speaks thus:] Why does not the same thing, as for example, a ball of
lead turn round every where according to the same great circle, if once
describing a great circle, it has encompassed the Earth, but being removed
from the Aequinoctial, does move in lesser circles?


SALV. Because so would, nay, according to the doctrine of Ptolomey, so have
some fixed stars done, which once were very near the Aequinoctial, and
described very vast circles, and now that they are farther off, describe lesser.


SAGR. If I could now but keep in mind all these fine notions, I should think
that I had made a great purchase; I must needs entreat you, Simplicius, to lend
me this Book, for there cannot choose but be a sea of rare and ingenious matters
contained in it.


SIMP. I will present you with it.


SAGR. Not so, Sir; I would not deprive you of it: but are the Queries yet at
an end?


SIMP. No Sir; hearken therefore. Si latio circularis gravibus and levibus est
naturalis, qualis est ea quae fit secundum lineam rectam? Nam si naturalis,
quomodo and is motus qui circum est, naturalis est, cum specie differat a
recto? Si violentus, qui fit, ut missile ignitum sursum evolans scintillosum
caput sursum a terra, non autem circum volvatur, etc. [Which take in our
idiom:] If a circular lation is natural to heavy and light things, what is that
which is made according to a right line? For if it be natural, how then is that
motion which is about the center natural, seeing it differs in species from a
right motion? If it be violent, how is it that a fiery dart flying upwards,
sparkling over our heads at a distance from the Earth, but not turning about,
etc.


SALV. It has been said already very often, Of the mixed motion we see not the
part that is circular, because we partake thereof.
that the circular motion is natural to the whole, and to its parts, whilst
they are in perfect disposure, and the right is to reduce to order the parts
disordered; though indeed it is better to say, that neither the parts ordered
or disordered ever move with a right motion, but with one mixed, which might as
well be averred merely circular: but to us but one part only of this motion is
visible and observable, that is, the part of the right, the other part of the
circular being imperceptible to us, because we partake thereof. And this
answers to the rays which move upwards, and round about, but we cannot
distinguish their circular motion, for that, with that we our selves move also.
But I believe that this Author never thought of this mixture; for you may see
that he resolutely says, that the rays go directly upwards, and not at all in
gyration.


SIMP. Quare centrum sphaere delapsae sub Aequatore spiram describit in ejus
plano: sub aliis parallelis spiram describit in cono? sub Polo descendit in axe
lineam gyralem, decurrens in superficie cylindrica consignatam? (In English to
this purpose:) Why does the center of a falling Globe under the Aequinoctial
describe a spiral line in the plane of the Equator; and in other parallels a
spiral about a Cone; and under the Pole descend in the axis describing a gyral
line, running in a Cylindrical Superficie?


SALV. Because of the lines drawn from the Center to the circumference of the
sphere, which are those by which graves descend, that which terminates in the
Aequinoctial designeth a circle, and those that terminate in other parallels
describe conical superficies; now the axis describes nothing at all, but
continues in its own being. And if I may give you my judgment freely, I will
say, that I cannot draw from all these Queries, any sense that interfereth with
the motion of the Earth; for if I demand of this Author, (granting him that the
Earth does not move) what would follow in all these particulars, supposing that
it do move, as Copernicus will have it; I am very confident, that he would say
that all these effects would happen, that he has objected, as inconveniences
to disprove its mobility: so that in this man's opinion necessary consequences
are accounted absurdities: but I beseech you, if there be any more, dispatch
them, and free us speedily from this wearisom task.


SIMP. In this which follows he opposes Copernicus and his Sectators, who
affirm, that the motion of the parts separated from their whole, is only to
unite themselves to their whole; but that the moving circularly along with the
vertigenous diurnal revolution is absolutely natural: against which he
objecteth, saying, that according to these men's opinion; Si tota terra, una cum
aqua in nihilum redigeretur, nulla grando aut pluvia e nube decideret, sed
naturalater tantum circumferetur, neque ignis ullus, aut igneum ascenderet, cum
illorum non improbabili sententia ignis nullus sit supra. [Which I translate to
this sense:] If the whole Earth, together with the Water were reduced into
nothing, no hail or rain would fall from the clouds, but would be only
naturally carried round; neither any fire or fiery thing would ascend, seeing
to these that men it is no improbable opinion that there is no fire above.


SALV. The providence of this Philosopher is admirable, and worthy of great
applause; for he is not content to provide for things that might happen, the
course of Nature continuing, but will show hic care in what may follow from
those things that he very well knows shall never come to pass. I will grant him
therefore, (that I may get some pretty passages out of him) that if the Earth
and Water should be reduced to nothing, there would be no more hails or rains,
nor would igneal matters ascend any longer upwards, but would continually turn
round: what will follow? what will the Philosopher say then?


SIMP. The objection is in the words which immediately follow; here they are:
Quibus tamen experientia and ratio adversatur. Which nevertheless (says he) is
contrary to experience and reason.


SALV. Now I must yield, seeing he has so great an advantage of me as
experience, of which I am unprovided. For as yet I never had the fortune to see
the Terrestrial Globe and the element of Water turned to nothing, so as to have
been able to observe what the hail and water did in that little Chaos. But he
perhaps tells us for our instruction what they did.


SIMP. No, he does not.


SALV. I would give any thing to change a word or two with this person, to ask
him, whether when this Globe vanished, it carried away with it the common
center of gravity, as I believe it did; in which case, I think that the hail
and water would remain insensate and stupid amongst the clouds, without knowing
what to do with themselves. It might be also, that attracted by that great void
Vacuum, left by the Earths absenting, all the ambients would be rarefied, and
particularly, the air, which is extreme easily drawn, and would run thither
with very great haste to fill it up. And perhaps the more solid and material
bodies, as birds, (for there would in all probability be many of them scattered
up and down in the air) would retire more toward the center of the great
vacant sphere; (for it seems very reasonable, that substances that under
small bulk contain much matter, should have narrower places assigned them,
leaving the more spacious to the more ra^ified) and there being dead of hunger,
and resolved into Earth, would form a new little Globe, with that little water,
which at that time was among the clouds. It might be also, that those matters
as not beholding the light, would not perceive the Earths departure, but like
blind things, would descend according to their usual custom to the center,
whither they would now go, if that globe did not hinder them. And lastly, that
I may give this Philosopher a less irresolute answer, I do tell him, that I
know as much of what would follow upon the annihilation of the Terrestrial
Globe, as he would have done that was to have followed in and about the same,
before it was created. And because I am certain he will say, that he would
never have been able to have known any of all those things which experience
alone has made him knowing in, he ought not to deny me pardon, and to excuse
me if I know not that which he knows, touching what would ensue upon the
annihilation of the said Globe: for that I want that experience which he has.
Let us hear if he have any thing else to say.


SIMP. There remains this figure, which represents the Terrestrial Globe with a
great cavity about its center, full of air; and to show that Graves move not
downwards to unite with the Terrestrial Globe, as Copernicus says, he
constituteth this stone in the center; and demands, it being left at liberty,
what it would do; and he places another in the space of this great vacuum, and
asks the same question. Saying, as to the first: Lapis in centro constitutus,
aut ascendet ad terram in punctum aliquod, aut non. Si secundum; falsum est,
parts ob solam sejunctionem a toto, ad illud moveri. Si primum; omnis ratio
and experientia renititur, neque gravia in suae gravitatis centro conquiescent.
Item si suspensus lapis, liberatus decidat in centrum, separabit se a toto,
contra Copernicum: si pendeat, refragatur omnis experientia, cum videamus
integros fornices corruere. (Wherein he says:) The stone placed in the center,
either ascends to the Earth in some point, or no. If the second, it is false
that the parts separated from the whole, move unto it. If the first; it
contradicts all reason and experience, nor does the grave body rest in the
center of its gravity. And if the stone being suspended in the air, be let go,
do descend to the center, it will separate from its whole, contrary to
Copernicus: if it do hang in the air, it contradicts all experience: since we
see whole Vaults to fall down.


SALV. I will answer, though with great disadvantage to my self, seeing I
have to do with one who has seen by experience, what these stones do in
this great Cave: a thing, which for my part I have not seen; and will say,
that things grave have an existence before the common center of gravity: Things
grave are before the center of gravity.
so that it is not one center alone, which is no other than indivisible point,
and therefore of no efficacy, that can attract unto it grave matters; but that
those matters conspiring naturally to unite, form to themselves a common
center, which is that about which parts of equal moment consist: The great man
of grave bodies being transfe^red cut of their place, the separated parts would
follow that (...).
so that I hold, that if the great aggregate of grave bodies were gathered all
into any one place, the small parts that were separated from their whole,
would follovv the same, and if they were not hindered, would penetrate
vvherever they should find parts less grave than themselves: but coming where
they should meet with matters more grave, they would descend no farther. And
therefore I hold, that in the Cave full of air, the whole Vault would press,
and violently rest it self only upon that air, in case its hardness could not
be overcome and broken by its gravity; but loose stones, I believe, would
descend to the center, and not swim above in the air: nor may it be said, that
they move not to their whole, though they move whither all the parts of the
whole would transfer themselves, if all impediments were removed.


SIMP. That which remains, is a certain Error which he observes in a
Disciple of Copernicus, who making the Earth to move with an annual motion, and
a diurnal, in the same manner as the Cart-wheel moves upon the circle of the
Earth, and in it self, did constitute the Terrestrial Globe too great, or the
great Orb too little; for that 365 revolutions of the Aequinoctial, are less by
far than the circumference of the great Orb.


SALV. Take notice that you mistake, and tell us the direct contrary to what
must needs be written in that Book; for you should say, that that same
Copernican Author did constitute the Terrestrial Globe too little, and the
great Orb too big; and not the Terrestrial Globe too big, and the annual too
little.


SIMP. The mistake is not mine; see here the words of the Book. Non videt, quod
vel circulum annuum aequo minorem, vel orbem terreum justo multo fabricet
majorem. (In English thus:) He sees not, that he either makes the annual
circle equal to the less, or the Terrestrial Orb much too big.


SALV. I cannot tell whether the first Author erred or no, since the Author of
this Tractate does not name him; but the error of this Book is certain and
unpardonable, whether that follower of Copernicus erred or not erred; for that
your Author passes by so material an error, without either detecting or
correcting it. But let him be forgiven this fault, as an error rather of
inadvertencie, than of any thing else: Farthermore, were it not, that I am
already wearied and tired with talking and spending so much time with very
little profit, in these frivolous janglings and altercations, I could show,
that it is not impossible for a circle, though no bigger than a Cart-wheel, It
is not impo^sible with the circumference of a small (...) for times ^^volved to
measure and describ^^ (...) great circle whatsoever.
with making not 365, but less than 20 revolutions, to describe and measure
the circumference, not only of the grand Orb, but of one a thousand times
greater; and this I s^y to show, that there do not want far greater subtilties,
than this wherewith your Author goes about to detect the error of Copernicus:
but I pray you, let us breath a little, that so we may proceed to the other
Philosopher, that opposes of the same Copernicus.


SAGR. To confess the truth, I stand as much in need of respite as either of
you; though I have only wearied my ears: and were it not that I hope to hear
more ingenious things from this other Author, I question whether I should not
go my ways, to take the air in my Go^d^ la.
Pleasure-boat.


SIMP. I believe that you will hear things of greater moment; for this is a
most accomplished Philosopher, and a great Mathematician, and has confuted
Tycho in the business of the Comets, and new Stars. The ^ame of the Author is
Scipio Claramontius.



SALV. Perhaps he is the same with the Author of the Book, called Anti-Tycho?


SIMP. He is the very same: but the confutation of the new Stars is not in his
Anti-Tycho, only so far as he proves, that they were not prejudicial to the
inalterability and ingenerability of the Heavens, as I told you before; but
after he had published his Anti-Tycho, having found out, by help of the
Parallaxes, a way to demonstrate, that they also are things elementary, and
contained within the concave of the Moon, he has writ this other Book, de
tribus novis Stellis, etc. and therein also inserted the Arguments against
Copernicus: I have already shown you what he has written touching these new
Stars in his Anti-Tycho, where he denied not, but that they were in the
Heavens; but he proved, that their production altered not the inalterability of
the Heavens, and that he did, with a Discourse purely philosophical, in the
same manner as you have already heard. And I then forgot to tell you, how that
he afterward did find out a way to remove them out of the Heavens; for he
proceeding in this confutation, by way of computations and parallaxes, matters
little or nothing at all understood by me, I did not mention them to you, but
have bent all my studies upon these arguments against the motion of the Earth,
which are purely natural.


SALV. I understand you very well: and it will be convenient after we have
heard what he has to say against Copernicus, that we hear, or see at least the
manner wherewith he, by way of Parallaxes, proves those new stars to be
elementary, which so many famous Astronomers constitute to be all very high,
and amongst the stars of the Firmament; and as this Author accomplisheth such
an enterprise of pulling the new stars out of heaven, and placing them in the
elementary Sphere, he shall be worthy to be highly exalted, and transferred
himself amongst the stars, or at least, that his name be by fame etern^^ed
amongst them. Yet before we enter upon this, let us hear what he alleges
against the opinion of Copernicus, and do you begin to recite his Arguments.


SIMP. It will not be necessary that we read them ad verbum, because they are
very prolix; but I, as you may see, in reading them several times attentively,
have marked in the margin those words, wherein the strength of his arguments
lie, and it will suffice to read them. The opinion of Copernicus overthrows the
Criterium of Philosophy
The first Argument begins here. Et primo, si opinio Copernici recipiatur,
Criterium naturalis Philosophiae, ni prorsus tollatur, vehementer sal^em
labefactari videtur. [In our Idiom thus] And first, if Copernicus his opinion
be embraced, the Criterium of natural Philosophy will be, if not wholly
subverted, yet at least extremely shaken.

Which, according to the opinion of all the sects of Philosophers requires,
that Sense and Experience be our guides in philosophating: But in the
Copernican position the Senses are greatly deluded, whilst that they visibly
discover near at hand in a pure Medium, the gravest bodies to descend
perpendicularly downwards, never deviating a single hairs breadth from
rectitude; and yet according to the opinion of Copernicus, the sight in so
manifest a thing is deceived, and that motion is not real straight, but mixed
of right and circular.


SALV. This is the first argument, that Aristotle, Ptolomy, and all their
followers do produce; to which we have abundantly answered, and shown the
Paralogisme, and with sufficient plainness proved, that the motion in common
to us and other movables, is, as if there were no such thing; but because true
conclusions meet with a thousand accidents, Common motion is, as if it never
were.
that confirm them, I will, with the favor of this Philosopher, add
something more; and you Simplicius personating him, answer me to what I shall
ask you: The argument taken from things falling perpendicularly, another way
confuted.
And first tell me, what effect has that stone upon you, which falling from
the top of the Tower, is the cause that you perceive that motion; for if its
fall does operate upon you neither more nor less, than its standing still on
the Towers top, you doubtless could not discern its descent, or distinguish
its moving from its lying still.


SIMP. I comprehend its moving, in relation to the Tower, for that I see it one
while just against such a mark in the said Tower, and another while against
another lower, and so successively, till that at last I perceive it arrived at
the ground.


SALV. Then if that stone were let fall from the tallons of an Eagle flying,
and should descend through the simple invisible Air, and you had no other object
visible and stable, wherewith to make comparisons to that, you could not
perceive its motion?


SIMP. No, nor the stone it self; for if I would see it, when it is at the
highest, Where ^e motion of (...) body is collected.
I must raise up my head, and as it descends, I must hold it lower and lower,
and in a word, must continually move either that, or my eyes, following the
motion of the said stone.


SALV. You have now rightly answered: you know then that the stone lies
still, The motion of the eye argues the motion of the ob^ect looked on.
when without moving your eye, you always see it before you; and you know
that it moves, when for the keeping it in sight, you must move the organ of
sight, the eye. So then when ever without moving your eye, you continually
behold an object in the self same aspect, you do always judge it immovable.


SIMP. I think it must needs be so.


SALV. Now fancy your self to be in a ship, and to have fixed your eye on the
point of the Sail-yard: Do you think, that because the ship moves very fast,
you must move your eye, to keep your sight alvvayes upon the point of the
Sail-yard, and to follow its motion?


SIMP. I am certain, that I should need to make no change at all; and that not
only in the sight; but if I had aimed a Musket at it, I should never have need,
let the ship move how it will, to stir it an hairs breadth to keep it full
upon the same.


SALV. And this happens because the motion, which the Ship conferreth on the
Sail-yard, it conferreth also upon you, and upon your eye; so that you need not
stir it a jot to behold the top of the Sail-yard: and consequently, it will
seem to you immoveaable. Now this Discourse being applied to the revolution of
the Earth, and to the stone placed in the top of the Tower, in which you cannot
discern any motion, because that you have that motion which is necessary for
the following of it, in common with it from the Earth; so that you need not
move your eye. When again there is conferred upon it the motion of descent,
which is its particular motion, and not yours, and that it is intermixed with
the circular, that part of the circular which is common to the stone, and to
the eye, continues to be imperceptible, and the right only is perceived, for
that to the perception of it, you must follow it with your eye, looking lower
and lower. I wish for the undeceiving of this Philosopher, that I could advise
him, that some time or other going by water, An experiment that (...) how the
common motion is imperc^ptible.
he would carry along with him a Vessel of reasonable depth full of water, and
prepare a ball of wax, or other matter that would descend very slowly to the
bottom, so that in a minute of an hour, it would scarce sink a yard; and that
rowing the boat as fast as could be, so that in a minute of an hour it should
run above an hundred yards, he would let the ball submerge into the water, and
freely descend, and diligently observe its motion. If he would but do thus, he
should see, first, that it would go in a direct line toward that point of the
bottom of the vessel, whither it would tend, if the boat should stand still;
and to his eye, and in relation to the vessel, that motion would appear most
straight and perpendicular, and yet he could not say, but that it would be
composed of the right motion downwards, and of the circular about the element
of water. And if these things befall in matters not natural, and in things that
we may experiment in their state of rest; and then again in the contrary state
of motion, and yet as to appearance no diversity at all is discovered, and that
they seem to deceive our sense what can we distinguish touching the Earth,
which has been perpetually in the same constitution, as to motion and rest?
And in what time can we experiment whether any difference is discernable
amongst these accidents of local motion, in its diverse states of motion and
rest, if it eternally indureth in but one only of them?


SAGR. These Discourses have somewhat whetted my stomach, which those fishes,
and snails had in part nauseated; and the former made me call to mind the
correction of an error, that has so much appearance of truth, that I know not
whether one of a thousand would refuse to admit it as unquestionable. And it
was this, that sailing into Syria, and carrying with me a very good Telescope,
that had been bestowed on me by our Common Friend, who not many days before
had invented, I proposed to the Mariners, that it would be of great benefit in
Navigation to make use of it upon the round top of a ship, to discover and
kenne Vessels afar off. The benefit was approved, but there was objected the
difficulty of using it, An ingenuous consideration about the possibility of
using the Telescope with as much facility on the round top of the Mast of a
ship, as on the Deck.
by reason of the Ships continual fluctuation; and especially on the round top,
where the agitation is so much greater, and that it would be better for any one
that would make use thereof to stand at the Partners upon the upper Deck, where
the tossing is less than in any other place of the Ship. I (for I will not
conceal my error) concurred in the same opinion, and for that time said no
more: nor can I tell you by what hints I was moved to return to ruminate with
my self upon this business, and in the end came to discover my simplicity
(although excusable) in admitting that for true, which is most false; false I
say, that the great agitation of the basket or round top, in comparison of the
small one below, at the partners of the Mast, should render the use of the
Telescope more difficult in finding out the object.


SALV. I should have accompanied the Mariners, and your self at the beginning.


SIMP. And so should I have done, and still do: nor can I believe, if I should
think of it an hundred years, that I could understand it otherwise.


SAGR. I may then, it seems, for once prove a Master to you both. And because
the proceeding by interrogatories does in my opinion much dilucidate things,
besides the pleasure which it affords of confounding our companion, forcing
from him that which he thought he knew not, I will make use of that artifice.
And first, I suppose that the Ship, Gally, or other Vessel, which we would
discover, is a great way off, that is, four, six, ten, or twenty I deviate here
from the strict Sea Diallect, which denominates all distances by Leagues.
miles, for that to kenne those near at hand there is no need of these Glasses:
and consequently, the Telescope may at such a distance of four or six miles
conveniently discover the whole Vessel, and a muchgreater bulk. Now I demand
what for species, and how many for number are the motions that are made upon
the round top, depending on the fluctuation of the Ship.


SALV. We will suppose that the Ship goes toward the East. First, Different
motions depending on the fluctuation of the Ship.
in a calm Sea, it would have no other motion than this of progression, but
adding the undulation of the Waves, there shall result thence one, which
alternately hoysting and lowering the poop and prow, makes the round top, to
lean forwards and backwards; other waves driving the vessel sidewayes, bow the
Mast to the Starboard and Larboard; others, may bring the ship somewhat about,
and bear her away by the Misne from East, one while toward the Greco, which
the Latin Translator according to his usual carelessenesse (to call it no
worse) translates Little Ventum, the Northwest Wind; for Ventum Libanotum.
Northeast, another while toward the Southeast; others bearing her up by the
Carine may make her only to rise, and fall; and in sum, these motions are for
species two, one that changes the direction of the Telescope angularly, the
other lineally, without changing angle, that is, always keeping the tube of
the Instrument parallel to its self.


SAGR. Tell me, Two mutations made in the Telescope, depending on the agitation
of the Ship.
in the next place, if we, having first directed the Telescope yonder away
toward the Tower of This is a Castle six Italian miles from Venice Northwards.
Burano, six miles from hence, do turn it angularly to the right hand, or to
the left, or else upwards or downwards, but a Un nero d' ugna, the black or
paring of a nail.
straws breadth, what effect shall it have upon us touching the finding out of
the said tower?


SALV. It would make us immediately lose sight of it, for such a declination,
though small here, may import there hundreds and thousands of yards.


SAGR. But if without changing the angle, keeping the tube always parallel to
it self, we should transfer it ten or twelve yards farther off to the right or
left hand, upwards or downwards, what alteration would it make as to the Tower?


SALV. The change would be absolutely undiscernable; for that the spaces here
and there being contained between parallel rays, the mutations made here and
there, ought to be equal, and because the space which the Instrument discovers
yonder, is capable of many of those Towers; therefore we shall not lose sight
of it.


SAGR. Returning now to the Ship, we may undoubtedly affirm, that the Telescope
moving to the right or left, upwards, or downwards, and also forwards or
backwards ten or fifteen fathom; keeping it all the while parallel to its self,
the visive ray cannot stray from the point observed in the object, more than
those fifteen fathom; and because in a distance of eight or ten miles, the
Instrument takes in a much greater space than the Gally or other Vessel kenn'd;
therefore that small mutation shall not make me lose sight of her. The
impediment therefore, and the cause of losing the object cannot befall us,
unless upon the mutation made angularly; since that Telescopes transportation
higher or lower, to the right, or to the left, by the agitation of the ship,
cannot import any great number of fathomes. Now suppose that you had two
Telescopes fixed, one at the Partners close by the Deck, and the other at the
round top, nay at the main top, or main top-gallant top, where you hang forth
the Pennon or streamer, and that they be both directed to the Vessel that is
ten miles off, tell me, whether you believe that any agitation of the ship, and
inclination of the Mast, can make greater changes, as to the angle, in the
higher tube, than in the lower? One wave arising, the prow will make the main
top give back fifteen or twenty fathom more than the foot of the Mast, and it
shall carry the upper tube along with it so greata space, and the lower it may
be not a palm; but the angle shall change in one Instrument as well as in the
other; and likewise a side-billow shall bear the higher tube an hundred times
as far to the Larboard or Starboard, as it will the other below; but the angles
change not at all, or else alter both alike. But the mutation to the right hand
or left, forwards or backwards, upwards or downwards, brings no sensible
impediment in the kenning of objects remote, though the alteration of the angle
makes great change therein; Therefore it must of necessity be confessed, that
the use of the Telescope on the round top is no more difficult than upon the
Deck at the Partners; seeing that the angular mutations are alike in both
places.


SALV. How much circumspection is there to be used in affirming or denying a
proposition? I say again, thar hearing it resolutely affirmed, that there is a
greater motion made on the Masts top, than at its partners, every one will
persuade himself, that the use of the Telescope is much more difficult above
than below. And thus also I will excuse those Philosophers, who grow impatient
and fly out into passion against such as will not grant them, that that Cannon
bullet which they clearly see to fall in a right line perpendicularly, does
absolutely move in that manner; but will have its motion to be by an arch, and
also very much inclined and transversal: but let us leave them in these
labyrinths, and let us hear the other objections, that our Author in hand
brings against Copernicus.


SIMP. The Author goes on to demonstrate that in the Doctrine of Copernicus,
it is requisite to deny the Senses, and the greatest Sensations, The annual
motion of the (...) a perpetual and strong wind.
as for instance it would be, if we that feel the respirations of a gentle
gale, should not feel the impulse of a perpetual wind that beats upon us
with a velocity that runs more than 2529 miles an hour, for so much is the
space that the center of the Earth in its annual motion passes in an hour upon
the circumference of the grand Orb, as he diligently calculates; and because,
as he says, by the judgment of Copernicus, Cum terra movetur circumpositus
aer, motus tamen ejus, velocior licet ac rapidior celerrimo quocunque vento, a
nobis non sentiretur, sed summa tum tranquilitas reputaretur, nisi alius motus
accederet. Quid est vero decipi sensum, nisi haec esset deceptio? [Which I make
to speak to this sense.] The circumposed air is moved with the Earth, yet its
motion, although more speedy and rapid than the swiftest wind whatsoever, would
not be perceived by us, but then would be thought a great tranquillity, unless
some other motion should happen; what then is the deception of the sense, if
this be not?


SALV. It must needs be that this Philosopher thinks, that that Earth which
Copernicus makes to turn round, together with the ambient air along the
circumference of the great Orb, is not that whereon we inhabit, but some other
separated from this; for that this of ours carries us also along with it with
the same velocity, The air always touching us with the same part of it cannot
make us feel it.
as also the circumjacent air: And what beating of the air can we feel, when we
fly with equal speed from that which should accost us? This Gentleman forgot,
that we no less than the Earth and air are carried about, and that
consequently we are always touched by one and the same part of the air,
which yet does not make us feel it.


SIMP. But I rather think that he did not so think; hear the words which
immediatey follovv. Praeterea nos quoque rotamur ex circumductione terrae etc.


SALV. Now I can no longer help nor excuse him; do you plead for him and bring
him off, Simplicius.


SIMP. I cannot thus upon the sudden think of an excuse that pleases me.


SALV. Go to; take this whole night to think on it, and defend him to morrow;
in the mean time let us hear some other of his objections.


SIMP. He prosecuteth the same Objection, showing, that in the way of
Copernicus, He that will follow Copernicus, must deny his senses.
a man must deny his own senses. For that this principle whereby we turn round
with the Earth, either is intrinsic to us, or external; that is, a rapture of
that Earth; and if it be this second, we not feeling any such rapture, it must
be confessed that the sense of feeling, does not feel its own object touching
it, nor its impression on the sensible part: but if the principle be
intrinsecal, we shall not perceive a local motion that is derived from our
selves, and we shall never discover a propension perpetually annexed to our
selves.


SALV. So that the instance of this Philosopher lays its stress upon this, that
whether the principle by which we move round with the Earth be either extern,
or intern, yet however we must perceive it, and not perceiving it, it is
neither the one nor the other, and therefore we move not, nor consequently the
Earth. Now I say, Our motion may be either (...) or extern^, and yet we never
perceive or feel it.
that it may be both ways, and yet we not perceive the same. And that it may be
external, the experiment of the boat superabundantly satisfies me; I say,
superabundantly, because it being in our power at all times to make it move,
and also to make it stand still, and with great exactness to make observation,
whether by some diversity that may be comprehended by the sense of feeling, we
can come to know whether it moves or no, seeing that as yet no such science is
obtained: Will it then be any matter of wonder, if the same accident is unknown
to us on the Earth, the which may have carried us about perpetually, and we,
without our being ever able to experiment its rest? The motion of a Boat
insensible to those that are with in it, as to the sense of feeling.
You, Simplicius, as I believe, have gone by boat many times to Padoua, and if
you will confess the truth, you never felt in your self the participation of
that motion, unless when the boat running a-ground, or encountering some
obstacle, did stop, and that you with the other Passengers being taken on a
sudden, were with danger over-set. It would be necessary that the Terrestrial
Globe should meet with some rub that might arrest it, for I assure you, that
then you would discern the impulse residing in you, when it should toss you up
toward the Stars. It Is true, that by the other senses, but yet assisted by
Reason, The boats motion is perceptible to the sight joined with reason.
you may perceive the motion of the boat, that is, with the sight, in that you
see the trees and buildings placed on the shore, which being separated from the
boat, seem to move the contrary way. The terrestrial motion collected from the
stars.
But if you would by such an experiment receive entire satisfaction in this
business of the Terrestrial motion, look on the stars, which upon this reason
seem to move the contrary way. As to the wondering that we should not feel such
a principle, supposing it to be internal, is a less reasonable conceit; for if
we do not feel such a one, that comes to us from without, and that frequently
goes away, with what reason can we expect to feel it, if it immutably and
continually resides in us? Now let us see what you have farther to allege on
this argument.


SIMP. Take this short exclamation. Ex hac itaque opinione necesse est
diffidere nostris sensibus, ut penitus fallacibus vel stupidis in sensilibus,
etiam conjunctissimis, dijudicandis. Quam ergo veritatem sperare possumus a
facultate adeo fallaci ortum trahentem? [Which I render thus:] From this
opinion likewise, we must of necessity suspect our own senses, as wholly
fallible, or stupid in judging of sensible things even very near at hand. What
truth therefore can we hope for, to be derived from so deceiveable a faculty?


SALV. But I desire not to deduce precepts more profitable, or more certain,
learning to be more circumspect and less confident about that which at first
blush is represented to us by the senses, which may easily deceive us. And I
would not have this Author trouble himself in attempting to make us comprehend
by sense, that this motion of descending Graves is simply right, and of no
other kind; nor let him exclaim that a thing so clear, manifest, and obvious
should be brought in question; for in so doing, he makes others believe, that
he thinks those that deny that motion to be absolutely straight, but rather
circular, the stone did sensibly see it to move in an arch, seeing that he
inviteth their senses more than their Reason, to judge of that effect: which is
not true, Simplicius, for like as I, that am indifferent in all these opinions,
and only in the manner of a Comedian, personate Copernicus in these our
representations, have never seen, nor thought that I have seen that stone fall
otherwise than perpendicularly, so I believe, that to the eyes of all others it
seemed to do the same. Better it is therefore, that deposing that appearance in
which all agree, we make use of our Reason, either to confirm the reality of
that, or to discover its fallacy.


SAGR. If I could any time meet with this Philosopher, who yet me thinks is
more sublime than the rest of the followers of the same doctrines, I would in
token of my affection put him in mind of an accident which he has doubtless
very often beheld; from which, with great conformity to that which we now
discourse of, it may be collected how easily one may be deceived by the bare
appearance, or, if you will, representation of the sense. And the accident is,
the Moons seeming to follow those that walk the streets in the night, with a
pace equal to theirs, whilst they see it go gliding along the Roofs of houses,
upon which it shows just like a cat, that really running along the ridges of
houses, leaves them behind. An appearance that, did not reason interpose,
would but too manifestly delude the sight.


SIMP. Indeed there want not experiments that render us certain of the fallacy
of the mere senses; Arguments against the Earths motion taken, ex rerum natura.
therefore suspending such sensations for the present, let us hear the
Arguments that follow which are taken, as he says, ex rerum natura. The first
of which is, that the Earth cannot of its own nature move with three motions
very different; or otherwise we must deny many manifest Axioms. Three Axioms
that are supposed manifest.
The first whereof is, that Omnis effectus dependeat ab aliqua causa; [i. e.]
that every effect depends on some cause. The second, that Nulla res seipsam
producat; [i. e.] that nothing produces it self: from whence it follows, that
it is not possible that the move and moved should be totally the same thing:
And this is manifest, not only in things that are moved by an extrinsick
mover; but it is gathered also from the principles propounded, that the same
holds true in the natural motion dependent on an intrinsic principle;
otherwise, being that the mover, as a mover, is the cause, and the thing moved,
as moved, is the effect, the same thing would totally be both the cause and
effect. Therefore a body does not move its whole self, that is, so as that all
moves, and all is moved; but its necessary in the thing moved to distinguish
in some manner the efficient principle of the motion, and that which with that
motion is moved. The third Axiom is, that in rebus quae sensui subjiciuntur,
unum, quatenus unum, unam solam rem producat; i. e. That in things subject to
the senses, one, as it is one, produces but only one thing: That is, the soul
in animals produces its true diverse operations, as the sight, the hearing, the
smell, generation, etc. but all these with several instruments. And in short,
in things sensible, the diversity of operations, is observed to derive it self
from the diversity that is in the cause. A simple body at the Earth, cannot
move with three several motions.
Now if we put all these Axioms together, it will be a thing very manifest,
that one simple body, as is the Earth, cannot of its own nature move at the
same time with three motions, very diverse: For by the foregoing suppositions,
all moves not its self all; it is necessary therefore to distinguish in it
three principles of its three motions; otherwise one and the same principle
would produce many motions; but if it contein in it three principles of natural
motions, besides the part moved, it shall not be a simple body, but compounded
of three principle movers, The Earth cannot move with any of the motions
assigned it by Copernicus.
and of the part moved. If therefore the Earth be a simple body, it shall not
move with three motions; nay more, it will not move with any of those which
Copernicus ascribes to it, it being to move but with one alone, for that it is
manifest, by the reasons of Aristotle, that it moves to its center, as its
parts do show, which descend at right angles to the Earths Spherical Surface.


SALV. Many things might be said, and considered touching the connection of
this argument; Answers to the arguments contrary to the Earths motion, taken ex
rerum natura.
but in regard that we can resolve it in few words, I will not at this time
without need enlarge upon it; and so much the rather, because the same Author
has furnished me with an answer, when he says that from one sole prinple in
animals, there are produced diverse operations; so that for the present my
answer shall be, that in the same manner the Earth from one only principle
deriveth several operations.


SIMP. But this answer will not at all satisfy the Author who makes the
objection, yea, it is totally overthrown by that which immediately after he
adds for a greater confirmation of his argument, as you shall hear. He
re-inforceth his argument, I say, with another Axiom, A fourth Axiom against
the motion of the Earth
which is this; That natura in rebus necessariis nec deficiat, nec abundat: i.
e. That nature in things necessary is neither defective, nor superfluous.
Flexures necessary in animals for the diversity of their motions.
This is obvious to the observers of natural things, and chiefly of animals, in
which, because they are to move with many motions, Nature has made many
flexures, and has thereunto commodiously knitted the parts for motion, as to
the knees, to the hips, for the inabling of living creatures to go, and run at
their pleasure. Moreover in man he has framed many flexions, and joints, in
the elbow, and hand, to enable them to perform many motions. Another argument
against the threefold motion of the Earth.
From these things the argument is taken against the threefold motion of the
Earth. [Either the Body, that is one, and continuate, without any manner of
knittings or flexions, can exercise diverse motions, or cannot: If it can
without them, then in vain has nature framed the flexures in animals; which is
contrary to the Axiom: but if it cannot without them, then the Earth, one
body, and continuate, and deprived of flexures, and joints, cannot of its own
nature move with plurality of motions.] You see now how craftily he falls upon
your answer, as if he had foreseen it.


SALV. Are you serious, or do you jest?


SIMP. I speak it with the best judgment I have.


SALV. You must therefore see that you have as fortunate an hand in defending
the reply of this Philosopher, against some other rejoynders made to him;
therefore answer for him, I pray you, seeing we cannot have him here. You first
admit it for true, that Nature has made the joints, flexures, and knuckles of
living creatures, to the intent that they might move with sundry and diverse
motions; and I deny this proposition; and say, that these flexions are made,
that the animal may move one, or more of its parts, The Flexures in animals are
not made for the diversity of motions.
the rest remaining immoved: and I say, that as to the species and differences
of motions those are of one kind alone, to wit, all circular, and for this
cause you see all the ends of the moveable bones to be unequal or concave, The
motions of animals are of one sort.
and of these some are spherical, as are those that are to move every way, as
in the shoulderjoynt, The ends of the bones are all rotund.
the arm of the Ensign does, in displaying the Colors, and that of the
Falconer in bringing his Hawk to the lure; and such is the flexure of the
elbow, upon which the hand turns round, in boring with an augure: others are
circular only one way, and as it were cylindrical, which serve for the members
that bend only in one fashion, It is demonstrated, that the ends of the bones
are of necessity to be rotund.
as the joints of the fingers one above another, etc. But without more
particular inductions, one only general discourse may make this truth
understood; and this is, that of a solid body that moves, one of its extremes
standing still without chanching place, The motions of animals are all circular.
the motion must needs be circular, and no other: and because in the living
creatures moving, one of its members does not separate from the other its
conterminal, therefore that motion is of necessity circular.


SIMP. How can this be? For I see the animal move with an hundred motions that
are not circular, and very different from one another, as to run, to skip, to
climb, to descend, to swim, and many others.


SALV. It Is well: Secondary motions of animals dependent on the first.
but these are secondary motions, depending on the preceding motions of the
joints and flexures. Upon the plying of the legs to the knees, and the thighs
to the hips, which are circular motions of the parts, is produced, as
consequents, the skip, or running, which are motions of the whole body, and
these may possibly not be circular. Now because one part of the terrestrial
Globe is not required to move upon another part immovable, The Terrestrial
Globe has noe need of flexures.
but that the motion is to be of the whole body, there is no need in it of
flexures.


SIMP. This (will the adversary rejoyn) might be, if the motion were but one
alone, but they being three, and those very different from each other, it is
not possible that they should concur in an Without joints
articulate body.


SALV. I verily believe that this would be the answer of the Philosopher.
Against which I make opposition another way; and ask you, whether you think
that by way of joints and flexures one may adapt the terrestrial Globe to the
participation of three different circular motions? Do you not answer me? Seeing
you are speechless, I will undertake to answer for the Philosopher, who would
absolutely reply that they might; for that otherwise it would have been
superfluous, and besides the purpose to have proposed to consideration, that
nature makes the flexions, to the end, the moveable may move with different
motions; and that therefore the terrestrial Globe having no flexures, it cannot
have those three motions which are ascribed to it. For if he had thought, that
neither by help of flexures, it could be rendered apt for such motions, he
would have freely affirmed, that the Globe could not move with three motions.
Now granting this, I entreat you, It is desired to know, by means of what
flexures and joints the Terrestrial Globe might move with three diverse motions.
and by you, if it were possible, that Philosopher, Author of the Argument, to
be so courteous as to teach me in what manner those flexures should be
accommodated, so that those three motions might commodiously be excercised; and
I grant you four or six months time to think of an answer. As to me, it
seems that one principle only may cause a plurality of motions in the
Terrestrial Globe, One only principle may cause a plurality of motions in the
Earth.
just in the same manner that, as I told you before, one only principle with
the help of various instruments produces sundry and diverse motions in living
creatures. And as to the flexures there is no need of them, the motions being
of the whole, and not of some particular parts; and because they are to be
circular, the mere spherical figure is the most perfect articulation or
flection that can be desired.


SIMP. The most that ought to be granted upon this, would be, that it may hold
true in one single motion, but in three different motions, in my opinion, and
that of the Author, it is impossible; as he going on, prosecuting the
objection, writes in the following words. Let us suppose, with Copernicus, that
the Earth moves of its own faculty, and upon an intrinsic principle from West
to East in the plane of the Ecliptic; and again, that it also by an intrinsic
principle revolveth about its center, from East to West; and for a third
motion, that it of its own inclination deflecteth from North to South, and so
back again. It being a continuate body, and not knit together with joints and
flections, our fancy and our judgment will never be able to comprehend, that
one and the same natural and indistinct principle, that is, that one and the
same propension, should actuate it at the same instant with different, and as
it were of contrary motions. I cannot believe that any one would say such a
thing, unless he had undertook to maintain this position right or wrong.


SALV. Stay a little; and find me out this place in the Book. Fingamus modo cum
Copernico, terram aliqua sua vi, and ab indito principio impelli ab Occasu ad
Ortum in Eclipticae plano; tum rursus revolvi ab indito etiam principio, circa
suimet centrum, ab Ortu in Occasum; A gross error of the opposer of Copernicus.
tertio deflecti rursus suopte nutu a septentrione in Austrum, and vicissim. I
had thought, Simplicius, that you might have erred in reciting the words of the
Author, but now I see that he, and that very grossly, deceives himself; and
to my grief, I find that he has set himself to oppose a position, which he
has not well understood; for these are not the motions which Copernicus
assigns to the Earth. Where does he find that Copernicus makes the annual
motion by the Ecliptic contrary to the motion about its own center? It must
needs be that he never read his Book, which in an hundred places, and in the
very first Chapters affirms those motions to be both toward the same parts,
that is from West to East. But without others telling him, ought he not of
himself to comprehend, that attributing to the Earth the motions that are
taken, one of them from the Sun, and the other from the primum mobile, they
must of necessity both move one and the same way.


SIMP. Take heed that you do not err your self, A subtle and withal simple
argument against Copernicus.
and Copernicus also. The Diurnal motion of the primum mobile, is it not from
East to West? And the annual motion of the Sun through the Ecliptic, is it not
on the contrary from West to East? How then can you make these motions being
conferred on the Earth, of contraries to become consistents?


SAGR. Certainly, Simplicius has discovered to us the original cause of error
of this Philosopher; and in all probability he would have said the very same.


SALV. Now if it be in our power, let us at least recover Simplicius from this
error, who seeing the Stars in their rising to appear above the Oriental
Horizon, will make it no difficult thing to understand, (...)
that in case that motion should not belong to the Stars, it would be necessary
to confess, that the Horizon, with a contrary motion would go down; and that
consequently the Earth would reoolve in it self a contrary way to that
wherewith the Stars seem to move, that is from West to East, which is according
to the order of the Signs of the Zodiac. As, in the next place, to the other
motion, the Sun being fixed in the center of the Zodiac, and the Earth
moveable about its circumference, to make the Sun seem unto us to move about
the said Zodiac, according to the order of the Signs, it is necessary, that
the Earth move according to the same order, to the end that the Sun may seem to
us to possess always that degree in the Zodiac, that is opposite to the
degree in which we find the Earth; and thus the Earth running, verbi gratia,
through Aries, the Sun will appear to run through Libra; and the Earth passing
through the sign Taurus, the Sun will pass through Scorpio, and so the Earth
going through Gemini, the Sun seems to go through Sagittarius; but this is
moving both the same way, that is according to the order of the signs; as also
was the revolution of the Earth about its own center.


SIMP. I understand you very well, and know not what to allege in excuse of so
gross an error.


SALV. And yet, Simplicius, there is one yet worse then this; and it is, that
he makes the Earth move by the diurnal motion about its own center from East to
West; and perceives not that if this were so, the motion of twenty four hours
appropriated by him to the Universe, would, in our seeming, proceed from West
to East; the quite contrary to that which we behold.


SIMP. Oh strange! Why I, that have scarce seen the first elements of the
Sphere, would not, I am confident, have erred so horribly.


SALV. Judge now what pains this Antagonist may be thought to have taken in the
Books of Copernicus, By another (...) error it is seen that the Autagonist had
but little studied Copernicus.
if he absolutely invert the sense of this grand and principal Hypothesis, upon
which is founded the whole sum of those things wherein Copernicus


SAGR. I have twice or thrice observed in the discourses of this Author, that
to prove that a thing is so, or so, he still alleges, that in that manner it
is conformable with our understanding; or that otherwise we should never be
able to conceive of it; or that the Criterium of Philosophy would be
overthrown. Never first (...) of them.
As if that nature had first made men's brains, and then disposed all things in
conformity to the capacity of their intellects. But I incline rather to think
that Nature first made the things themselves, as she best liked, and afterward
framed the reason of men capable of conceiving (though not without great pains)
some part of her secrets.


SALV. I am of the same opinion. But tell me, Simplicius, which are these
different natures, to which, contrary to experience and reason, Copernicus
assigns the same motions and operations.


SIMP. They are these. The Water, the Air, (which doubtless are Natures
different from the Earth) and all things that are in those elements comprised,
shall each of them have those three motions, which Copernicus pretends to be in
the Terrestrial Globe; Copernicus erroneously assigns the same operations to
different natures
and my Author proceeds to demonstrate Geometrically, that, according to the
Copernican Doctrine, a cloud that is suspended in the Air, and that hangs a
long time over our heads without changing place, must of necessity have all
those three motions that belong to the Terrestrial Globe. The demonstration is
this, which you may read your self, for I cannot repeat it without book.


SALV. I shall not stand reading of it, nay I think it an impertinency in him
to have inserted it, for I am certain, that no Copernican will deny the same.
Therefore admitting him what he would demonstrate, let us speak to the
objection, which in my judgment has no great strength to conclude any thing
contrary to the Copernican Hypothesis, seeing that it derogates nothing from
those motions, and those operations, whereby we come to the knowledge of the
natures, etc. Answer me, I pray you, Simplicius: Those accidents wherein some
things exactly concur, can they serve to inform us of the different natures of
those things?


SIMP. No Sir: From commune accidents one cannot know different natures.
nay rather the contrary, for from the idendity of operations and of accidents
nothing can be inferred, but an idendity of natures.


SALV. So that the different natures of the Water, Earth, Air, and other things
contained in these Elements, is not by you argued from those operations,
wherein all these Elements and their affixes agree, but from other operations;
is it so?


SIMP. The very same.


SALV. So that he who should leave in the Elements all those motions,
operations, and other accidents, by which their natures are distinguished,
would not deprive us of the power of coming to the knowledge of them; although
he should remove those operations, in which they unitedly concur, and which for
that reason are of no use for the distinguishing of those natures.


SIMP. I think your dissertation to be very good.


SALV. But that the Earth, Water, Air, are of a nature equally constituted
immovable about the center, is it not the opinion of your self, Aristotle,
Prolomy, and all their sectators?


SIMP. Its on all hands granted as an undeniable truth.


SALV. Then from this common natural condition of quiescence about the center,
there is no argument drawn of the different natures of these Elements, and
things elementary, but that knowledge must be collected from other qualities
not common; and therefore whosoever should deprive the Elements of this common rest
only, and should leave unto them all their other operations, would not in the
least block up the way that leads to the knowledge of their essences. But
Copernicus depriveth them only of this common rest, and changes the same into
a common motion, leaving them gravity, levity, the motions upwards, downwards,
slower, The concurrence of the Elements in a common motion imports no more or
less, than their concurrence in a common rest.
faster, rarity, density, the qualities of hot, cold, dry, moist, and in a
word, all things besides. Therefore such an absurdity, as this Author
imagines to himself, is no Copernican position; nor does the concurrence in an
identity of motion import any more or less, than the concurrence in an identity
of rest about the diversifying, or not diversifying of natures. Now tell us, if
there be any argument to the contrary.


SIMP. There follows a fourth objection, taken from a natural observation,
which is, A fourth argument against Copernicus.
That bodies of the same kind, have motions that agree in kind, or else they
agree in rest. But by the Copernican Hypothesis, Bodies of the same kind have
motions that agree in kind.
bodies that agree in kind, and are most semblable to one another, would be
very discrepant, yea diametrically repugnant as to motion; for that Stars so
like to one another, would be nevertheless so unlike in motion, as that six
Planets would perpetually turn round; but the Sun and all the fixeed Stars
would stand perpetually immovable.


SALV. The form of the argument appears good; but yet I believe that the
application or matter is defective: and if the Author will but persist in his
assumption, the consequence shall make directly against him. The Argument runs
thus; Amongst mundane bodies, From the Earths obscurity, and the splendor of
the Sun, and fixed Stars, is argued, that it is moveable, and they immovable.
six there are that do perpetually move, and they are the six Planets; of the
rest, that is, of the Earth, Sun, and fixed Stars, it is disputable which of
them moves, and which stands still, it being necessary, that if the Earth
stand still, the Sun and fixed Stars do move; and it being also possible, that
the Sun and fixed Stars may stand immovable, in case the Earth should move:
the matter of fact in dispute is, to which of them we may with most convenience
ascribe motion, and to which rest. Natural reason dictates, that motion ought
to be assigned to the bodies, which in kind and essence most agree with those
bodies which do undoubtedly move, and rest to those which most dissent from
them; and in regard that an eternal rest and perpetual motion are most
different, it is manifest, that the nature of the body always moveable ought to
be most different from the body always stable. Therefore, in regard that we
are dubious of motion and rest, let us enquire, whether by the help of some
other eminent affection, we may discover, which most agrees with the bodies
certainly moveable, either the Earth, or the Sun and fixed Stars. But see how
Nature, in favor of our necessity and desire, presents us with two eminent
qualities, and no less different than motion and rest, and they are light and
darkness, to wit, the being by nature most bright, and the being obscure, and
wholly deprived of light: the bodies therefore adorned with an internal and
eternal splendor, are most different in essence from those deprived of light:
The Earth is deprived of light, the Sun is most splendid in it self, and so are
the fixed Stars. The six Planets do absolutely want light, as the Earth;
therefore their essence agrees with the Earth, and differs from the Sun and
fixed Stars. Therefore is the Earth moveable, immovable the Sun and Starry
Sphere.


SIMP. But the Author will not grant, that the six Planets are tenebrose, and
by that negative will he abide. Or he will argue the great conformity of nature
between the six Planets, and the Sun, and Fixed Stars; and the disparity
between them and the Earth from other conditions than from tenebrosity and
light; yea, now I remember in the fifth objection, which follows, he lays
down the vast difference between the Earth and the Celestial Bodies, A fifth
argument against Copernicus.
in which he writes, That the Copernican Hypothesis would make great confusion
and perturbation in the Systeme of the Universe, and amongst its parts: As for
instance, amongst Coebodies that are immutable and incorruptible, Another
difference between the Earth and the Celestial bodies, taken from purity and
impurity.
according to Aristotle, Tycho, and others; amongst bodies, I say, of such
nobility, by the confession of every one, and Copernicus himself, who affirms
them to be ordinate, and disposed in a perfect constitution, and removes from
them all inconstancy of virtue amongst, these bodies, I say once more, so pure,
that is to say, amongst Venus, Mars, etc. to place the very sink of all
corruptible matters, to wit, the Earth, Water, Air, and all mixed bodies.

But how much properer a distribution, and more with nature, yea with God
himself, the Architect, is it, to sequester the pure from the impute, the
mortal from the immortal, as other Schools teach; which tell us that these
impure and frail matters are contained within the angust concave of the Lunar
Orb, above which with uninterrupted Series the things Celestial distend
themselves.


SALV. It Is true that the Copernican Systeme introduces distraction in the
universe of Aristotle; Copernicus introduces confusion in the Universe of
Aristotle.
but we speak of our own Universe, that is true and real. Again if this Author
will infer the disparity of essence between the Earth and Celestial bodies from
the incorruptibility of them, and the corruptibility of it in the method of
Aristotle, from which disparity he concludes motion to belong to the Sun and
fixed Stars, and the immobility of the Earth, The Paralogisme of the Author of
Anti-Tycho.
he will flatter himself with a Paralogisme, supposing that which is in
question; for Aristotle infers the incorruptibility of Celestial bodies from
motion, which is in dispute, whether it belongs to them or to the Earth. Of
the vanity of these Rhetorical Illations enough has been spoken. It seems a
folly to affirm the Earth to be without the Heavens.
And what can be more fond, than to say, that the Earth and Elements are
banished and sequestered from the Celestial Spheres, and confined within the
Lunar Orb? Is, not then the Moons Orb one of the Celestial Spheres, and
according to consent comprised in the middle of all the rest? Its a new way to
separate the pure from the impure, and the sick from the sound, to assign the
infected quarters in the heart of the City: I had thought that the Lazeretto.
Pesthouse ought to have been removed as far off as was possible. Copernicus
admireth the disposition of the parts of the Universe, for that God has
constituted the grand Lamp, which is to give light all over his Temple in the
center of it, and not on one side. And as to the Earths being betwixt Venus and
Mars, we will but hint the same; and do you, in favor of this Author, try to
remove it thence. But let us not Intrecciare, to twine flowers in a garland.
mix these Rhetorical Flowers with solid Demonstrations, rather let us leave
them to the Orators, or if you will to the Poets, who know how in their
drolling way to exalt by their praises things most sordid, yea and sometimes
most pernicious. And if any thing else remain, let us dispatch it, as we have
done the rest.


SIMP. There is the sixth and last argument; A sixth argument against
Copernicus, taken from animals, who have need of rest* though their motion be
natural.
wherein he makes it a very improbale thing. [That a corruptible and
dissipable body should move with a perpetual and regular motion; and this be
confirms with the example of living creatures, which moving with a motion
natural to them, yet grow weary, and have need of repose to restore their
strength.] But what has this motion to do with that of the Earth, that in
comparision to theirs is immense? Besides, to make it move with three motions
that run and draw several ways: Who would ever assert such Paradoxes, unless
he had sworn to be their defender? Nor does that avail in this case, which
Copernicus alleges, that by reason this motion is natural to the Earth and
not violent, it works contrary effects to violent motions; and that those
things dissolve and cannot long subsist, to which impulse is conferred, but
those so made by nature do continue in their perfect disposure; this answer
suffices not, I say, for it is overthrown by that of ours. For the animal is a
natural body, and not made by art, and its motion is natural, deriving it self
from the soul, that is, from an intrinsic principle; and that motion is
violent, whose beginning is without, and on which the thing moved conferreth
nothing; however, if the animal continues its motion any long time, it grows
weary, and also dies, if it obstinately strive to persist therein. You see
then that in nature we meet on all sides with notions contrary to the
Copernican Hypothesis, and none in favor of it. And for that I have nothing
more wherein to take the part of this Opponent, hear what he produces against
Keplerus (with whom he disputes) upon that argument, which the said Kepler
brings against those who think it an inconvenient, nay impossible thing, to
augment the Starry Sphere immensely, as the Copernican Hypothesis requires.
Kepler therefore instanceth, saying: Difficilius est, An argument from Kepler
in favor of Copernicus.
accidens praeter modulum subjecti intendere, quam subjectum sine accidente
augere. Copernicus ergo verisimilius facit, qui auget Orbem Stellarum fixarum
absque motu, quam Ptolomaeus, qui anget motum fixarum immensa velocitate.
[Which makes this English.] Its harder to stretch the accident beyond the model
of the subject than to augment the subject without the accident. Copernicus
has more probability on his side, who increases the Orb of the fixed Stars
without motion, than Ptolomy who augmenteth the motion of the fixed Stars to an
immense degree of velocity. Which objection the Author answers, The Author of
the Anti-Tycho opposes Kepler.
wondering how much Kepler deceived himself, in saying, that in the Ptolomaick
Hypothesis the motion increases beyond the model of the subject, for in his
judgment it does not increase, save only in conformity to the model, and that
according to its encreasement, the velocity of the motion is augmented. The
velocity of the circular motion increases, according to the increase of the
diameter of the circle.
Which he proves by supposing a machine to be framed, that makes one
revolution in twenty four hours, which motion shall be called most slow;
afterward supposing its semidiameter to be prolonged, as far as to the
distance of the Sun, its extreme will equal the velocity of the Sun; and it
being continued out unto the Starry Sphere, it will equal the velocity of the
fixed Stars, though in the circumference of the machine it be very slow. Now
applying this consideration of the machine to the Starry Sphere, let us imagine
any point in its semidiameter, as near to the center as is the semidiameter of
the machine; the same motion that in the Starry Sphere is exceeding swift,
shall in that point be exceeding slow; But the great magnitude of the body is
that which makes it of exceeding slow, to become exceeding swift, although it
continues still the same, and thus the velocity increases, not beyond the
model of the subject, but rather according to it, and to its magnitude; very
differently from the imagination of Kepler.


SALV. I do not believe that this Author has entertained so mean and poor a
conceit of Kepler, as to persuade himself that he did not understand, that the
highest term of a line drawn from the center unto the Starry Sphere, moves
more swiftly than a point of the same line taken within a yard or two of the
center. And therefore of necessity he must have conceived and comprehended that
the mind and intention of Kepler was to have said, An explanation of the true
sense of Kepler and his ^^fence.
that it is less inconvenient to increase an immovable body to an
extraordinary magnitude, than to ascribe an extraordinary velocity to a body,
though very big, having regard to the model, that is to the gauge, and to the
example of other natural bodies; in which we see, that the distance from the
center increasing, the velocity diminishes; that is, that the periods of their
circulations take up longer times. The greatness and smalnesse of the body
make a differeuce in motion and not in rest.
But in rest which is not capable of augmentation or diminution, the grandeur
or smalnesse of the body makes no difference. So that if the answer of the
Author would be directed against the argument of Kepler, it is necessary, that
that Author does hold, that to the movent principle its one and the same to
move in the same time a body very small, or very immense, in regard that the
augmentation of velocity inseparably attends the augmentation of the mass. The
order of nature is to make the lesser Orbs to circulate in shorter times, and
the bigger in longer times.
But this again is contrary to the Architectonical rule of nature, which does
in the lesser Spheres, as we see in the Planets, and most sensibly in the
Medicean Stars, observe to make the lesser Orbs to circulate in shorter times:
Whence the time of Saturns revolution is longer than all the times of the other
lesser Spheres, it being thirty years; now the passing from this to a Sphere
very much bigger, and to make it move in 24. hours, may very well be said to
exceed the rules of the model. So that if we would but attentively consider it,
the Authors answer opposes not the intent and sense of the argument, but the
expressing and manner of delivering of it; where again the Author is injurious,
and cannot deny but that he artificially dissembled his understanding of the
words, that he might charge Kepler with gross ignorance; but the imposture was
so very dull and obvions, that he could not with all his craft alter the
opinion which Kepler has begot of his Doctrine in the minds of all the
Learned. As in the next place, to the instance against the perpetual motion of
the Earth, taken from the impossibility of its moving long without weariness,
in regard that living creatures themselves, which yet move naturally, and from
an intern principle, do grow weary, and have need of rest to relax and refresh
their members --


SAGR. Methinks I hear Kepler answer him to that, that there are some kind of
animals which refresh themselves after weariness, by rolling on the Earth; and
that therefore there is no need to fear that the Terrestrial Globe should tire,
The feigned answer of Kepler covered with an artificial Irony.
nay it may be reasonably affirmed, that it enjoys a perpetual and most
tranquil repose, keeping it self in an eternal rolling.


SALV. You are too tart and Satirical, Sagredus: but let us lay aside jests,
whilst we are treating of serious things.


SAGR. Excuse me, Salviatus, this that I say is not so absolutely besides the
business, as you perhaps make it; for a motion that serves instead of rest,
and removes weariness from a body tired with travail, may much more easily
serve to prevent the coming of that weariness, Animals would not grow weary of
their motion, proceeding as that which is assigned to the terrestrial Globe.
like as preventive remedies are more easy than curative. And I hold for
certain, that if the motion of animals should proceed in the same manner as
this that is ascribed to the Earth, they would never grow weary; Seeing that
the weariness of the living creature, deriveth it self, in my opinion, from the
employment of but one part alone in the moving of its self, The cause of the
weariness of animals.
and all the rest of the body; as v. g. in walking, the thighs and the legs
only are employed for carrying themselves and all the rest: on the contrary,
you see the motion of the heart to be as it were indefatigable, because it
moves it self alone. Besides, I know not how true it may be, The motion of an
animal is rather to be called violent than natural.
that the motion of the animal is natural, and not rather violent: nay, I
believe that one may truly say, that the soul naturally moves the members of
an animal with a motion preternatural, for if the motion upwards is
preternatural to grave bodies, the lifting up of the legs, and the thighs,
which are grave bodies, in walking, cannot be done without violence, and
therefore not without labor to the mover. The climbing upwards by a ladder
carries the grave body contrary to its natural inclination upwards, from
whence follows weariness, by reason of the bodies natural aversness to that
motion: but in moving a moveable with a motion, to which it has no aversion,
what lassitude, The strength diminishes not, where it is not employed.
what diminution of virtue and strength need we fear in the mover? and how
should the forces waste, where they are not at all employed?


SIMP. They are the contrary motions wherewith the Earth is pretended to move,
against which the Author produces his argument.


SAGR. It has been said already, that they are no wise contraries, and that
herein the Author is extteamly deceived, so that the whole strength of the
argument recoileth upon the Opponent himself, The argument of Chramontius,
(...) upon himself.
whilst he will make the First Mover to hurry along with it all the inferior
Spheres, contrary to the motion which they themselves at the same time
exercise. It belongs therefore to the Primum Mobile to grow weary, which
besides the moving of its self is made to carry so many other Spheres, and
which also strive against it with a contrary motion. So that the ultimate
conclusion that the Author inferred, saying, that discoursing of the effects
of Nature, a man always meets with things that favor the opinion of Aristotle
and Ptolomy, and never any one that does not interfer with Copernicus, stands
in need of great consideration; and it is better to say, that one of these two
Hypotheses being true, and the other necessarily false, it is impossible that a
man should ever be able to find any argument, experience, or right reason, in
favor of that which is false, True Propositions meet with many conclusive
arguments, so do not the false.
like as to the truth none of these things can be repugnant. Vast difference,
therefore, must needs be found between the reasons and arguments produced by
the one and other party, for and against these two opinions, the force of which
I leave you your self to judge of, Simplicius.


SALV. But you, Sagredus, being transported by the velocity of your wit, have
taken my words out of my mouth, whilst I was about to say something, touching
this last argument of the Author; and although you have more then sufficiently
refuted him, yet nevertheless I will add somewhat, which then ran in my
mind. He proposes it as a thing very unlikely, that a body dissipable and
corruptible, as the Earth, should perpetually move with a regular motion,
especially for that we see living creatures in the end to grow weary, and to
stand in need of rest: and the improbability is increased, in that the said
motion is required to be of velocity incomparable and immense, in respect to
that of animals. Now, I cannot see why the velocity of the Earth should, at
present, trouble it; so long as that of the starry Sphere so very much bigger
does not occasion in it any disturbance more considerable, than that which the
velocity of a machine, that in 24 hours makes but one sole revolution,
produces in the same. If the being of the velocity of the Earths conversion,
according to the model of that machine, infers things of no greater moment
than that, let the Author cease to fear the Earths growing weary; for that not
one of the most feeble and slow-pac't animals, no not a Chamaeleon would tire
in moving no more than Cinque (...) se^ braccia Fiorentini.
four or five yards in 24 hours; but if he please to consider the velocity to
be no longer, Weariness more to be feared in the starry Sphere than in the
terrestrial Globe.
in relation to the model of the machine, but absolutely, and inasmuch as the
moveable in 24 hours is to pass a very great space, he ought to show himself so
much more reserved in granting it to the starry Sphere, which with a velocity
incomparably greater than that of the Earth is to carry along with it a
thousand bodies, each much bigger than the Terrestrial Globe.

Here it remains for us to see the proofs, whereby the Author concludes the
new stars Anno 1572. and Anno 1604. to be sublunary, and not celestial, as the
Astronomers of those times were generally persuaded; an enterprise very great
certainly; but I have considered, that it will be better, in regard the Book is
new and long, by reason of its many calculations, that between this evening and
to morrow morning I make them as plain as I can, and so meeting you again to
morrow to continue our wonted conferences, give you a brief of what I shall
observe therein; and if we have time left, we will say something of the Annual
motion ascribed to the Earth. In the mean time, if either of you, and
Simplicius in particular, has any thing to say more, touching what relates to
the Diurnal motion, at large examined by me, we have a little time still left
to treat thereof.


SIMP. I have no more to say, unless it be this, that the discourses that this
day have fallen under our debate, have appeared to me fraught with very acute
and ingenious notions, alleged on Copernicus his side, in confirmation of the
motion of the Earth, but yet I find not my self persuaded to believe it; for in
short, the things that have been said conclude no more but this, that the
reasons for the stability of the Earth are not necessary; but all the while no
demonstration has been produced on the other side, that does necessarily
convince and prove its mobility.


SALV. I never undertook, Simplicius, to remove you from that your opinion;
much less dare I presume to determine definitively in this controversy: it
only was, and still shall be in the ensuing disputations my intent, to make it
appear to you, that those who have thought that most swift motion of 24 hours
does belong to the Earth alone, and not to the Universe, the Earth only
excluded, were not induced to believe, that so it might and ought to do out of
any blind persuasion; but that they did very well see, try, and examine the
reasons on the contrary side, and also not slightly answer them. With the same
intention, if it stand with your liking, and that of Sagredus, we may pass to
the consideration of that other motion; first, by Aristarchus Samius, and
afterward by Nicholaus Copernicus ascribed to the said Terrestrial Globe,
which is, as, I believe, you have heretofore heard, made under the Zodiac
within the space of a year about the Sun, immoveably placed in the center of
the said Zodiac.


SIMP. The disquisition is so great, and so noble, that I shall gladly hearken
to the discussion thereof, persuading my self that I shall hear what ever can
be said of that matter. And I will afterward by my self, according to my usual
custom, make more deliberate reflections upon what has been, and is to be
spoken; and if I should gain no more but this, it will be no small benefit that
I shall be able to discourse more Logically.


SAGR. Therefore, that we may no further weary Salviatus, we will put a period
to the disputations of this day, and reassume our conference to morrow in the
usual manner, with hope to hear very pleasing novelties.


SIMP. I will leave with you the Book De stellis novis, and carry back this of
the Conclusions, to see what is written therein against the Annual motion,
which are to be the arguments of our discourse to morrow.


Place this Plate at the end of the Second Dialogue.



GALILAEUS Galilaeus Lyncaeus, HIS SYSTEME OF THE WORLD.
The Third Dialogue.
INTERLOCVTORS. SALVIATUS, SAGREDUS, and SIMPLICIUS. SAGR. THe great desire
wherewith I have expected your coming, that I might hear the novel conceits
touching the annual conversion of this our Globe, has made me think the hours
of the last night, and those of this morning very tedious, although I spent
them not idly, but lying awake I employed a good part thereof in ruminating
upon our yesterdayes discourses, weighing the reasons alleged by both parties,
in favor of the two contrary Hypotheses, that of Aristotle and Ptolomy, and
this of Aristarchus, and Copernicus. And really methinks, that which ever of
these parties have been deceived, they are worthy of excuse, so specious and
valid in appearance are the reasons that may have persuaded them either way;
though nevertheless we do for the most part close with those produced by the
grave Authors first above mentioned. But albeit that the Peripatetick
Hypothesis, by reason of its antiquity, has had many followers and fautors,
and the other very few; first, for its obscurity, and next, for its novelty,
yet methinks I discover amongst those many, and particularly amongst the
modernes some, who for the support of the opinion by them esteemed true, have
introduced other reasons sufficiently childish, I could say ridiculous.


SALV. I have met with the like, and so much worse than yours, Some in arguing
first fix in their minds the conclusion believed by them, and then adapt their
reasons to that.
that I blush to rehearse them, not so much to spare the fame of their
Authors, the names of whom might be perpetually concealed, as because I am
ashamed so much to stain the honor of mankind. In observing of these men, I
have found that some there are who preposterously reasoning, first stablish the
conclusion in their fancy, and (either because it is their own, or else belongs
to a person whom they much confide in) so firmly imprint it in their opinions,
that it is altogether impossible ever wholly to efface it: and those reasons
which they themselves stumble upon, or which they hear others to allege in
confirmation of the conceit entertained, though never so simple and insipid,
instantly find credit and applause with them: but on the contrary, those which
are brought against their opinion, though ingenuous and concluding, they
receive not only with nauseating, but with disdain and bitter indignation, yea,
you shall have one of these so enraged, as that he will not be backward to try
all ways to suppress and silence their adversaries: and of this I my self have
had some experience.


SAGR. Indeed these men deduce not the conclusion from the premises, nor
confirm them with reasons, but accomodate, or to say better, discommodate and
distort the premises and arguments to make them speak in favor of their
pre-assumed and pertinacious conclusions. It is not good therefore to contract
familiarity with these men; and the rather, for that their conversation is not
only unpleasant, but also dangerous. Yet let us continue our conference with
Simplicius however, whom I have known this long while for a man of great
ingenuity; and altogether void of malice: besides he is well verst in the
Peripatetick Doctrine; so that I may assure my self, that what shall not fall
within the reach of his reason for the support of the Aristotelian Hypothesis,
will not easily be found out by others. But see yonder he comes, quite out of
wind, whose company we have so long desired: we were just now speaking against
the small have you made to come to us.


SIMP. You must not blame me, but Neptune, for this my long stay; which in the
ebb of this mornings tide has in a manner drained away the waters, for the
Gondola that brought me, being entered not far from hence into a certain
Channel, wanting depth, where I was stranded, and forced to stay there more
than a full hour, in expecting the return of the tide: and there waiting in
this manner, without being able to get out of the boat, which on a sudden ran a
ground, The motion of the water in ebbing and flowing not interrupted by rest.
I observed a certain accident, which to me seemed very strange; and it was
this, that in the waters ebbing I saw it retreat very fast by several small
rivolets, the ouze being in many places discovered, and whilst I stood looking
upon this effect, I saw this motion in an instant to cease, and without a
minutes interval the same water to begin to return back again, and the tide
from ebbing to become young flood, without standing still a moment: an effect
that as long as I have dwelt in Venice, I never took notice of before.


SAGR. It is very much, that you should be left thus on ground, amongst small
Channels; in which rivolets, as having very little declivity, the rising or
falling of the main sea, the thickness only of a paper is sufficient to make
the water to ebb and flow for good long spaces of time: like as in some creeks
of the Sea, its flowing four or six Pertiche venetiani.
yards only, makes the water to overflow the adjacent Marshes for some
hundreds and thousands of Pertiche venetiani.
acres.


SIMP. This I know very well, but I should have thought, that between the
ultimate term of ebbing, and the first beginnng to flow, there should have
interposed some considerable interval of rest.


SAGR. This will appear unto you, if you cast your eye upon the bank or piles,
where these mutations are made perpendicularly, but not that there is any real
time of cessation.


SIMP. I did think, that because these two motions were contrary, there ought
to be in the midst between them some kind of rest; conformable to the Doctrine
of Aristotle, which demonstrates that in puncto regressus mediat quies.


SAGR. I very well remember this place: but I bear in mind also, that when I
read Philosophy, I was not thoroughly satisfied with Aristotle's demonstration;
but that I had many experiments on the contrary, which I could still rehearse
unto you, but I am unwilling to sally out into any other digressions, we being
met here to discourse of the proposed mattes, if it be possible, without these
excursions wherewith we have interrupted our disputes in those days that are
past.


SIMP. And yet we may with convenience, if not-interrupt them, at least prolong
them very much, for returning yesterday home, I set my self to read the
Tractate of Conclusions, where I find Demonstrations against this annual motion
ascribed to the Earth, very solid; and because I would not trust my memory with
the punctual relation of them, I have brought back the Book along with me.


SAGR. You have done very well; but if we would reassume our Disputations
according to yesterdayes appointment, it is requisite that we first hear what
account Salviatus has to give us of the Book, De stellis novis, and then
without interruption we may proceed to the Annual motion. Now what say you,
Salviatus touching those stars? Are they really pulled down from Heaven to
these lower regions, by virtue of that Authors calculations, whom Simplicius
mentions?


SALV. I set my self last night to peruse his proceedings, and I have this
morning had another view of him, to see whether that which he seemed over night
to affirm, were really his sense, or my dreams and fantastical nocturnal
imaginations; and in the close found to my great grief that those things were
really written and printed, which for the reputation-sake of this Philosopher I
was unwilling to believe. It is in my judgment impossible, but that he should
perceive the vanity of his undertaking, as well because it is too apert, as
because I remember, that I have heard him mentioned with applause by the
Academick our Friend: it seems to me also to be a thing very unlikely, that
in complacency to others, he should be induced to set so low a value upon his
reputation, as to give consent to the publication of a work, for which he could
expect no other than the censure of the Learned.


SAGR. Yea, but you know, that those will be much fewer than one for an
hundred, compared to those that shall celebrate and extol him above the
greatest wits that are, or ever have been in the world: He is one that has
mentioned the Peripatetick inalterability of Heaven against a troop of
Astronomers, and that to their greater disgrace has foiled them at their own
weapons: and what do you think four or five in a Country that discern his
triflings, can do against the innumerable multitude, that, not being able to
discover or comprehend them, suffer themselves to be taken with words, and so
much more applaud him, by how much the less they understand him? You may add
also, that those few who understand, scorn to give an answer to papers so
trivial and unconcludent; and that upon very good reasons, because to the
intelligent there is no need thereof, and to those that do not understand, it
is but labor lost.


SALV. The most deserved punishment of their demerits would certainly be
silence, if there were not other reasons, for which it is happily no less than
necessary to resent their timerity: one of which is, that we Italians thereby
incur the censure of Illiterates, and attract the laughter of Foreigners; and
especially to such who are separated from our Religion; and I could show you
many of those of no small eminency, who scoff at our Academick, and the many
Mathematicians that are in Italic, for suffering the follies of such a (...).
Fabler against Astronomers to come into the light, and to be openly maintained
without contradiction; but this also might be dispensed with, in respect of the
other greater occasions of laughter, wherewith we may confront them depending
on the dissimulation of the intelligent, touching the follies of these
opponents of the Doctrines that they well enough understand.


SAGR. I desire not a greater proof of those men's petulancy, and the infelicity
of a Copernican, subject to be opposed by such as understand not so much as the
very first positions, upon which he undertakes the quarrel.


SALV. You will be no less astonished at their method in confuting the
Astronomers, who affirm the new Stars to be superior to the Orbs of the
Planets; and peradventure in the He takes (...) Firmament (...) the S^arry
Sphere, and not as we vulg^^ly receive the word.
Firmament it self.


SAGR. But how could you in so short a time examine all this Book, which is so
great a Volume, and must needs contain very many demonstrations?


SALV. I have confined my self to these his first confutations, in which with
twelve demonstrations founded upon the observations of twelve Astronomers, (who
all held, that the Star, Anno 1572. which appeared in Cassiopeia, was in the
Firmament) he proves it on the contrary, to be beneath the Moon, conferring,
two by two, the meridian altitudes, proceeding in the method that you shall
understand by and by. And because, I think, that in the examination of this his
first progression, I have discovered in this Author a great unlikelihood of
his ability to conclude any thing against the Astronomers, in favor of the
Peripatetick Philosophers, and that their opinion is more and more concludently
confirmed, I could not apply my self with the like patience in examining his
other methods, but have given a very slight glance upon them, and am certain,
that the defect that is in these first impugnations, is likewise in the rest.
And as you shall see, by experience, very few words will suffice to confute
this whole Book, though compiled with so great a number of laborious
calculations, The method observed by Clar. in confuting the Astronomers, and by
Salviatus in confuting him.
as here you see. Therefore observe my proceedings. This Author undertaketh,
as I say, to wound his adversaries with their own weapons, i. e. a great number
of observations made by themselves, to wit, by twelve or thirteen Authors in
number, and upon part of them he makes his supputations, and concludes those
stars to have been below the Moon. Now because the proceeding by
interrogatories very much pleases me, in regard the Author himself is not
here, let Simplicius answer me to the questions that I shall ask him, as he
thinks he himself would, if he were present. And presupposing that we speak of
the foresaid Star, of Anno 1572. appearing in Cassiopeia, tell me, Simplicius,
whether you believe that it might be in the same time placed in diverse places,
that is, amongst the Elements, and also amongst the planetary Orbs, and also
above these amongst the fixed Stars, and yet again infinitely more high.


SIMP. There is no doubt, but that it ought to be confessed that it is but in
one only place, and at one sole and determinate distance from the Earth.


SALV. Therefore if the observations made by the Astronomers were exact, and
the calculations made by this Author were not erroneous, it were easy from all
those and all these to recollect the same distances always to an hair, is not
this true?


SIMP. My reason hitherto tells me that so it must needs be; nor do I believe
that the Author would contradict it.


SALV. But when of many and many computations that have been made, there should
not be so much as two only that prove true, what would you think of them?


SIMP. I would think that they were all false, either through the fault of the
computist, or through the defect of the observators, and at the most that could
be said, I would say, that but only one of them and no more was true; but as
yet I know not which to choose.


SALV. Would you then from false fundamentals deduce and establish a doubtful
conclusion for true? Certainly no. Now the calculations of this Author are
such, that no one of them agrees with another, you may see then what credit is
to be given to them.


SIMP. Indeed, if it be so, this is a notable failing.


SAGR. But by the way I have a mind to help Simplicius, and the Author by
telling Salviatus, that his arguments would hold good if the Author had
undertook to go about to find out exactly the distance of the Star from the
Earth, which I do not think to be his intention; but only to demonstrate that
from those observations he collected that the Star was sublunary. So that if
from those observations, and from all the computations made thereon, the height
of the Star be always collected to be less than that of the Moon, it serves
the Authors turn to convince all those Astronomers of most impardonable
ignorance, that through the defect either of Geometry or Arithmetic, have not
known how to draw true conclusions from their own observations themselves.


SALV. It will be convenient therefore that I turn my self to you, Sagredus,
who so cunningly aphold the Doctrine of this Author. And to see whether I can
make Simplicius, though not very expert in calculations, and demonstrations to
apprehend the inconclusivenesse at least of the demonstrations of this Author,
first proposed to consideration, and how both he, and all the Astronomers with
whom he contendeth, do agree that the new Star had not any motion of its own,
and only went round with the diurnal motion of the primum mobile; but dissent
about the placing of it, the one party putting it in the Celestial Region, that
is above the Moon, and happily above the fixed Stars, and the other judging it to
be near to the Earth, that is, under the concave of the Lunar Orb. And because
the situation of the new star, of which we speak, was toward the North, and at
no very great distance from the Pole, so that to us Septentrionals, it did
never set, it was an easy matter with Astronomical instruments to have taken
its several meridian altitudes, as well its smallest under the Pole, as its
greatest above the same; from the comparing of which altitudes, made in several
places of the Earth, situate at different distances from the North, that is,
different from one another in relation to polar altitudes, the stars distance
might be inferred: The greatest and least elevations of the new star differ not
from each other more than the polar altitudes, the said star being in the
Firmnment.
For if it was in the Firmament amongst the other fixed stars, its meridian
altitudes taken in diverse elevations of the pole, ought necessarily to differ
from each other with the same variations that are found amongst those
elevations themselves; that is, for example, if the elevation of the star above
the horizon was 30 degrees, taken in the place where the polar altitude was v.
gr. 45 degrees, the elevation of the same star ought to have been increased 4
or 5 degrees in those more Northernly places where the pole was higher by the
said 4 or 5 degrees. But if the stars distance from the Earth was but very
little, in comparison of that of the Firmament; its meridian altitudes ought
approaching to the North to increase considerably more than the polar
altitudes; and by that greater increase, that is, by the excess of the
increase of the stars elevation, above the increase of the polar elevation
(which is called the difference of Parallaxes) is readily calculated with a
clear and sure method, the stars distance from the center of the Earth. Now
this Author takes the observations made by thirteen Astronomers in sundry
elevations of the pole, and conferring a part of them at his pleasure, he
computeth by twelve collations the new stars height to have been always
beneath the Moon; but this he adventures to do in hopes to find so gross
ignorance in all those, into whose hands his book might come, that to speak the
truth, it has turned my stomach; and I wait to see how those other
Astronomers, and particularly Kepler, against whom this Author principally
inveigheth, can contein themselves in silence, for he does not use to hold his
tongue on such occasions; unless he did possibly think the enterprise too much
below him. Now to give you to understand the same, I have upon this paper
transcribed the conclusions that he infers from his twelve indagations; the
first of which is upon the two observations: Of Maurolicus and Hainzelius, from
which the Star is collected to have been distant from the center less than 3
semidiameters of the Earth, the difference of Parallaxes being 4 gr. 42 m. 30
sec. 3 semid. 2. And is calculated on the observations of Hainzelius, with
Parall. of 8. m. 30 sec. and its distance from the center is computed to be
more than 25 semid. 3. And upon the observations of Tycho and Hainzelius, with
Parall. of 10 m. and the distance of the center is collected to be little less
than 19 semid. 4. And upon the observations of Tycho and the Landgrave, with
Parall. of 14 m. the distance from the center is made to be about 10 semid. 5.
And upon the observations of Hainzelius and Gemma, with Parall. of 42 m. 30
sec. whereby the distance is gathered to be about 4 semid. 6. And upon the
observations of the Landgrave and Camerarius, with Parall. of 8 m. the distance
is concluded to be about 4 semid. 7. And upon the observations of Tycho and
Hagecius, with Parall. of 6 m. and the distance is made 31 semid. 8. And upon
the observations of Hagecius and Vrsinus with Parall. of 43 m. and the stars
distance from the superficies of the Earth is rendered 1/2 semid. 9. And upon
the observations of Landgravius and Buschius, with Parall. of 15 m. and the
distance from the superficies of the Earth is by supputation 1/48 semid. 10.
And upon the observations of Maurolice and Munocius, with Parall. of 4 m. 30
sec. and the compnted distance from the Earths surface is 1/5 semid. 11. And
upon the observations of Munocius and Gemma, with Parall. of 55 m. and the
distance from the center is rendered 13 semid. 12. And upon the observations of
Munosius and Vrsinus with Parall. of 1 gr. 36 m. and the distance from the
center comes forth less than 7 semid.


These are twelve indagations made by the Author at his election, amongst many
which, as he says, might be made by combining the observations of these
thirteen observators. The which twelve we may believe to be the most favorable
to prove his intention.


SAGR. I would know whether amongst the so many other indagations pretermitted
by the Author, there were not some that made against him, that is, from which
calculating one might find the new star to have been above the Moon, as at the
very first sight I think we may reasonably question; in regard I see these
already produced to be so different from one another, that some of them give me
the distance of the said star from the Earth, 4, 6, 10, 100, a thousand, and an
hundred thousand times bigger one than another; so that I may well suspect that
amongst those that he did not calculate, there was some one in favor of the
adverse party. And I guess this to be the more probable, for that I cannot
conceive that those Astronomers the observators could want the knowledge and
practice of rhese computations, which I think do not depend upon the abstrucest
things in the World. And indeed it will seem to me a thing more than
miraculous, if whilst in these twelve investigations only, there are some that
make the star to be distant from the Earth but a few miles, and others that
make it to be but a very fmall matter below the Moon, there are none to be
found that in favor of the contrary part do make it so much as twenty yards
above the Lunar Orb. And that which shall be yet again more extravagant, that
all those Astronomers should have been so blind as not to have discovered that
their so apparent mistake.


SALV. Begin now to prepare your ears to hear with infinite admiration to what
excesses of confidence of ones own authority and others folly, the desire of
contradicting and showing ones self wiser than others, transports a man.
Amongst the indagations omitted by the Author, there are such to be found as
make the new star not only above the Moon, but above the fixed stars also. And
these are not a few, but the greater part, as you shall see in this other
paper, where I have set them down.


SAGR. But what says the Author to these? It may be he did not think of them?


SALV. He has thought of them but too much: but says, that the observations
upon which the calculations make the star to be infinitely remote, are
erroneous, and that they cannot be combined to one another.


SIMP. But this seems to me a very lame evasion; for the adverse party may
with as much reason reply, that those are erroneous wherewith he collecteth the
star to have been in the Elementary Region.


SALV. Oh Simplicius, if I could but make you comprehend the craft, though no
great craftiness of this Author, I should make you to wonder, and also to be
angry to see how that he palliating his sagacity with the vail of the
simplicity of your self; and the rest of mere Philosophers, would insinuate
himself into your good opinion, by tickling your ears, and swelling your
ambition, pretending to have convinced and silenced these petty Astronomers,
who went about to assault the impregnable inalterability of the Peripatetick
Heaven, and which is more, to have foild and conquered them with their own
arms. I will try with all my ability to do the same; and in the mean time let
Sagredus take it in good part, if Simplicius and I try his patience, perhaps a
little too much, whilst that with a superfluous circumlocution (superfluous I
say to his most nimble apprehension) I go about to make out a thing, which it
is not convenient should be hid and unknown unto him.


SAGR. I shall not only without weariness, but also with much delight hearken
to your discourses; and so ought all Peripatetick Philosophers, to the end they
may know how much they are obliged to this their Protector.


SALV. Tell me, Simplicius, whether you do well comprehend, how, the new star
being placed in the meridian circle yonder toward the North, the same to one
that from the South should go toward the North, would seem to rise higher and
higher above the Horizon, as much as the Pole, although it should have been
situate amongst the fixed stars; but, that in case it were considerably lower,
that is nearer to the Earth, it would appear to ascend more than the said pole,
and still more by how much its vicinity was greater?


SIMP. I think that I do very well conceive the same; in token whereof I will
try if I can make a mathematical Scheme of it, and in this great circle [in
Fig. 1. of this Dialogue.] I will mark the pole P; and in these two lower
circles I will note two stars beheld from one place on the Earth, which let be
A; and let the two stars be these B and C, beheld in the same line ABC, which
line I prolong till it meet with a fixed star in D. And then walking along the
Earth, till I come to the term E, the two stars will appear to me separated
from the fixed star D, and advanced nearer to the pole P, and the lower star B
more, which will appear to me in G, and the star C less, which will appear to
me in F, but the fixed star D will have kept the same distance from the Pole.


SALV. I see that you understand the business very well. I believe that you do
likewise comprehend, that, in regard the star B is lower than C, the angle
which is made by the rays of the sight, which departing from the two places A
and E, meet in C, to wit, this angle ACE, is more narrow, or if we will say
more acute than the angle constituted in B, by the rays AB and EB.


SIMP. This I likewise understand very well.


SALV. And also, the Earth beine very little and almost insensible, in respect
of the Firmament ( or Starry Sphere;) and consequently the space AE, paced on
the Earth, being very small in comparison of the immense length of the lines EG
and OF, passing from the Earth unto the Firmament, you thereby collect that the
star C might rise and ascend so much and so much above the Earth, that the
angle therein made by the rays which depart from the said stationary points A
and E, might become most acute, and as it were absolutely null and insensible.


SIMP. And this also is most manifest to sense.


SALV. Now you know Simplicius that Astronomers and Mathematicians have found
infallible rules by way of Geometry and Arithmetic, to be able by help of the
quantity of these angles B and C, and of their differences, with the additional
knowledge of the distance of the two places A and E, to find to a foot the
remoteness of sublime bodies; provided always that the aforesaid distance,
and angles be exactly taken.


SIMP. So that if the Rules dependent on Geometry and Astronomy be true, all
the fallacies and errors that might be met with in attempting to investigate
those altitudes of new Stars or Comets, or other things must of necessity
depend on the distance AE, and on the angles B and C, not well measured. And
thus all those differences which are found in these twelve workings depend, not
on the defects of the rules of the Calculations, but on the errors committed
in finding out those angles, and those distances, by means of the Instrumental
Observations.


SALV. True; and of this there is no doubt to be made. Now it is necessary that
you observe intensely, how in removing the Star from B to C, whereupon the
angle always grows more acute, the ray EBG goes farther and farther off from
the ray ABD in the part beneath the angle, as you may see in the line ECF,
whose inferior part EC is more remote from the part AC, than is the part EB,
but it can never happen, that by any whatsoever immense recession, the lines AD
and OF should totally sever from each other, they being finally to go and
conjoyn in the Star: and only this may be said, that they would separate, and
reduce themselves to parallels, if so be the recession should be infinite,
which case is not to be supposed. But because (observe well) the distance of
the Firmament, in relation to the smallness of the Earth, as has been said,
is to be accounted, as if it were infinite; therefore the angle contained
betwixt the two rays, that being drawn from the points A and E, go to
determine in a fixed Star, is esteemed nothing, and those rays held to be two
parallel lines; and therefore it is concluded, that then only may the New Star
be affirmed to have been in the Firmament, when from the collating of the
Observations made in diverse places, the said angle is, by calculation, gathered
to be insensible, and the lines, as it were, parallels. But if the angle be of
a considerable quantity, the New Star must of necessity be lower than those
fixed; and also than the Moon, in case the angle ABE should be greater than
that which would be made in the Moons center.


SIMP. Then the remoteness of the Moon is not so great, that a like angle
should be (...).
insensible in her?


SALV. No Sir; nay it is sensible, not only in the Moon, but in the Sun also.


SIMP. But if this be so, it is possible that the said angle may be observed in
the New Star, without necessitating it to be inferior to the Sun, as well as to
the Moon.


SALV. This may very well be, yea, and is in the present case, as you shall see
in due place; that is, when I shall have made plain the way, in such manner
that you also, though not very perfect in Astronomical calculations, may
clearly see, and, as it were, with your hands feel how that this Author had it
more in his eye to write in complacency of the Peripateticks, by palliating and
dissembling sundry things, than to establish the truth, by producing them with
naked sincerity: therefore let us proceed forwards. By the things hitherto
spoken, I suppose that you comprehend very well how that the distance of the
new Star can never be made so immense, that the angle so often named shall
wholly disappear, and that the two rays of the Observators at the places A and
E, shall become altogether parallels: and you may consequently comprehend to
the full, that if the calculations should collect from the observations, that
that angle was totally null, or that the lines were truly parallels, we should
be certain that the observations were at least in some small particular
erroneous: But, if the calculations should give us the said lines to be
separated not only to equidistance, that is, so as to be parallel, but to have
past beyond that term, and to be dilated more above than below, then must it
be resolutely concluded, that the observations were made with less
accuratenesse, and in a word, to be erroneous; as leading us to a manifest
impossibility. In the next place, you must believe me, and suppose it for true,
that two right lines which depart from two points marked upon another right
line, are then wider above than below, when the angles included between them
upon that right line are greater than two right angles; and if these angles
should be equal to two right angles, the lines would be parallels; but if they
were less than two right angles, the lines would be concurrent, and being
continued out would undoubtedly intersect the triangle.


SIMP. Without taking it upon trust from you, I know the same; and am not so
very naked of Geometry, as not to know a Proposition, which I have had occasion
of reading very often in Aristotle, that is, that the three angles of all
triangles are equal to two right angles: so that if I take in my Figure the
triangle ABE, it being supposed that the line EA is right; I very well
conceive, that its three angles A, E, B, are equal to two right angles; and
that consequently the two angles E and A are less than two right angles, so
much as is the angle B. Whereupon widening the lines AB and EB (still keeping
them from moving out of the points A and E) until that the angle contained by
them toward the parts B, disappear, the two angles beneath shall be equal to
two right angles, and those lines shall be reduced to parallels: and if one
should proceed to enlarge them yet more, the angles at the points E and A would
become greater than two right angles.


SALV. You are an Archimedes, and have freed me from the expense of more words
in declaring to you, that whenever the calculations make the two angles A and
E to be greater than two right angles, the observations without more ado will
prove erroneous. This is that which I had a desire that you should perfectly
understand, and which I doubted that I was not able so to make out, as that a
mere Peripatetick Philosopher might attain to the certain knowledge thereof. Now
let us go on to what remains. And re-assuming that which even now you granted
me, namely, that the new star could not possibly be in many places, but in one
alone, when ever the supputations made upon the observations of these
Astronomers do not assign it the same place, its necessary that it be an error
in the observations, that is, either in taking the altitudes of the pole, or in
taking the elevations of the star, or in the one or other working. Now for that
in the many workings made with the combinations two by two, there are very few
of the observations that do agree to place the star in the same situation;
therefore these few only may happily be the non-erroneous, but the others are
all absolutely false.


SAGR. It will be necessary then to give more credit to these few alone, than
to all the rest together, and because you say, that these which accord are very
few, and I amongst these 12, do find two that so accord, which both make the
distance of the star from the center of the Earth 4 semidiameters, which are
these, the fifth and sixth, therefore it is more probable that the new star was
elementary, than celestial.


SALV. You mistake the point; for if you note well it was not written, that the
distance was exactly 4 semidiameters, but about 4 semidiameters; and yet you
shall see that those two distances differed from each other many hundreds of
miles. Here they are; you see that this fifth, which is 13389 Italian miles,
exceeds the sixth, which is 13100 miles, by almost 300 miles.


SAGR. Which then are those few that agree in placing the star in the same
situation?


SALV. They are, to the disgrace of this Author five workings, which all place
it in the firmament, as you shall see in this note, where I have set down many
other combinations. But I will grant the Author more than peradventure he would
demand of me, which is in sum, that in each combination of the observations
there is some error; which I believe to be absolutely necessary; for the
observations being four in number that serve for one working, that is, two
different altitudes of the Pole, and two different elevations of the star, made
by different obfervers, in different places, Astronomical Instruments are very
subject to error.
with different instruments, who ever has any small knowledge of this art, will
say, that amongst all the four, it is impossible but there will be some error;
and especially since we see that in taking but one only altitude of the Pole,
with the same instrument, in the same place, by the same observer, that has
repeated the observation a thousand times, there will still be a titubation of
one, or sometimes of many minutes, as in this same book you may see in several
places. These things presupposed, I ask you Simplicius whether you believe that
this Author held these thirteen observators for wise, understanding and expert
men in using those instruments, or else for inexpert, and bunglers?


SIMP. It must needs be that he esteemed them very acute and intelligent; for
if he had thought them unskilful in the business, he might have omitted his
sixth book as inconclusive, as being founded upon suppositions very erroneous;
and might take us for excessively simple, if he should think he could with
their inexpertnesse persuade us to believe a false position of his for truth.


SALV. Therefore these observators being such, and that yet notwithstanding
they did err, and so consequently needed correction, that so one might from
their observations infer the best hints that may be; it is convenient that we
apply unto them the least and nearest emendations and corrections that may be;
so that they do but suffice to reduce the observations from impossibility to
possibility; so as v. gr. if one may but correct a manifest error, and an
apparent impossibility of one of their observations by the addition or
substraction of two or three minutes, and with that amendment to reduce it to
possibility, a man ought not to essay to adjust it by the addition or
substraction of fifteen, twenty, or fifty.


SIMP. I think the Author would not deny this: for granting that they are
expert and judicious men, it ought to be thought that they did rather err
little than much.


SALV. Observe again; The places where the new Star is placed, are some of them
manifestly impossible, and others possible. Absolutely impossible it is, that
it should be an infinite space superior to the fixed Stars, for there is no
such place in the world; and if there were, the Star there situate would have
been imperceptible to us: it is also impossible that it should go creeping
along the superficies of the Earth; and much less that it should be within the
said Terrestrial Globe. Places possible are these that be in controversy, it
not interferring with our understanding, that a visible object in the
likeness of a Star might be as well above the Moon, as below it. Now whilst one
goes about to compute by the way of Observations and Calculations made with
the utmost certainty that humane diligence can attain unto what its place was,
it is found that the greatest part of those Calculations make it more than
infinitely superior to the Firmament, others make it very near to the surface
of the Earth, and some also under the same; and of the rest, which place it in
situations not impossible, none of them agree with each other; insomuch that it
must be confessed, hat all those observations are necessarily false; so that if
we would nevertheless collect some fruit from so many laborious calculations,
we must have recourse to the corrections, amending all the observations.


SIMP. But the Author will say, that of the observations that assign to the
Star impossible places, there ought no account to be made, as being extremely
erroneous and false; and those only ought to be accepted, that constitute it
in places not impossible: and amongst these a man ought to seek, by help of the
most probable, and most numerous concurrences, not if the particular and exact
situation, that is, its true distance from the center of the Earth, at least,
whether it was amongst the Elements, or else amongst the Celestial bodies.


SALV. The discourse which you now make, is the self same that the Author made,
in favor of his cause, but with too unreasonable a disadvantage to his
adversaries; and this is that principal point that has made me excessively to
wonder at the too great confidence that he expressed to have, no less of his
own authority, than of the blindness and inadvertency of the Astronomers; in
favor of whom I will speak, and you shall answer for the Author. And first, I
ask you, whether the Astronomers, in observing with their Instruments, and
seeking v. gr. how great the elevation of a Star is above the Horizon, may
deviate from the truth, as well in making it too great, as too little; that is,
may erroneously compute, that it is sometime higher than the truth, and
sometimes lower; or else whether the error must needs be always of one kind,
to wit, that erring they always make it too much, and never too little, or
always too little, and never too much?


SIMP. I doubt not, but that it is as easy to commit an error the one way, as
the other.


SALV. I believe the Author would answer the same. Now of these two kinds of
errors, which are contraries, and into which the observators of the new star
may equally have fallen, applied to calculations, one sort will make the star
higher, and the other lower than really it is. And because we have already
agreed, that all the observations are false; upon what ground would this Author
have us to accept those for most congruous with the truth, that show the star
to have been near at hand, than the others that show it excessively remote?


SIMP. By what I have, as yet, collected of the Authors mind, I see not that he
does refuse those observations, and indagations that might make the star more
remote than the Moon, and also than the Sun, but only those that make it remote
(as you your self have said) more than an infinite distance; the which
distance, because you also do refuse it as impossible, he also passes over, as
being convicted of infinite falsehood; as also those observations are of
impossibility. Methinks, therefore, that if you would convince the Author, you
ought to produce supputations, more exact, or more in number, or of more
diligent observers, which constitute the star in such and such a distance above
the Moon, or above the Sun, and to be brief, in a place possible for it to be
in, like as he produces these twelve, which all place the star beneath the
Moon in places that have a being in the world, and where it is possible for it
to be.


SALV. But Simplicius yours and the Authors Equivocation lies in this, yours
in one respect, and the Authors in another; I discover by your speech that you
have formed a conceit to your self, that the exorbitancies that are committed in
the establishing the distance of the Star do increase successively, according
to the proportion of the errors that are made by the Instrument, in taking the
observations, and that by conversion, from the greatness of the exorbitancies,
may be argued the greatness of the error; and that thereforefore hearing it to
be infered from such an observation, that the distance of the star is infinite,
it is necessary, that the error in observing was infinite, and therefore not
to be amended, and as such to be refused; but the business does not succeed in
that manner, my Simplicius, and I excuse you for not having comprehended the
matter as it is, in regard of your small experience in such affairs; but yet
cannot I under that cloak palliate the error of the Author, who dissembling the
knowledge of this which he did persuade himself that we in good earnest did not
understand, has hoped to make use of our ignorance, to gain the better credit
to his Doctrine, among the multitude of illiterate men. Therefore for an
advertisement to those who are more credulous then intelligent, and to recover
you from error, know that its possible (and that for the most part it will come
to pass) that an observation, that gives you the star v. gr. at the distance
of Saturn, by the adition or substraction of but one sole minute from the
elevation taken with the instrument, shall make it to become infinitely
distant; and therefore of possible, impossible, and by conversion, those
calculations which being grounded upon those observations, make the star
infinitely remote, may possibly oftentimes with the addition or subduction of
one sole minute, reduce it to a possible situation: and this which I say of a
minute, may also happen in the correction of half a minute, a sixth part, and
less. Now fix it well in your mind, that in the highest distances, that is v.
g. the height of Saturn, or that of the fixed Stars, very small errors made by
the Observator, with the instrument, render the situation determinate and
possible, infinite and impossible. This does not so evene in the sublunary
distances, and near the earth, where it may happen that the observation by
which the Star is collected to be remote v. g. 4. Semidiameters terrestrial,
may increase or diminish, not only one minute but ten, and an hundred, and
many more, without being rendered by the calculation either infinitely remote,
or so much as superior to the Moon. You may hence comprehend that the
greatness of the error (to so speak) instrumental, are not to be valued by the
event of the calculation, but by the quantity it self of degrees and minutes
numbered upon the instrument, and these observations are to be called more just
or less erroneous, which with the addition or substraction of fewer minutes,
restore the star to a possible situation; and amongst the possible places, the
true one may be believed to have been that, about which a greater number of
distances concur upon calculating the more exact observations.


SIMP. I do not very well apprehend this which you say: nor can I of my self
conceive how it can be, that in greater distances, greater exorbitancies can
arise from the error of one minute only, than in the smaller from ten or an
hundred; and therefore would gladly understand the same.


SALV. You shall see it, if not Theorically, yet at least Practically, by this
short assumption, that I have made of all the combinations, and of part of the
workings pretermitted by the Author, which I have calculated upon this same
paper.


SAGR. You must then from yesterday, till now, which yet is not above eighteen
hours, have done nothing but compute, without taking either food or sleep.


SALV. I have refreshed my self both those ways; but truth is, make these
supputations with great brevity; and, if I may speak the truth, I have much
admired, that this Author goes so far about, and introduces so many
computations no wise necessary to the question in dispute. And for a full
knowledge of this, and also to the end it may soon be seen, how that from the
observations of the Astronomers, whereof this Author makes use, it is more
probably gathered, that the new star might have been above the Moon, and also
above all the Planets, yea amongst the fixed stars, and yet higher still than
they, I have transcribed upon this paper all the observations set down by the
said Author, which were made by thirteen Astronomers, wherein are noted the
Polar altitude, and the altitudes of the star in the meridian, as well the
lesser under the Pole, as the greater and higher, and they are these.

Tycho.
gr. m. Altitude of the Pole 55 58 Altitude of the Star 84 00 the greatest. 27
57 the least. And these are, according to the first paper: but according to the
second, the greatest is -- 27 45 Hainzelius.
gr. m. sec. Altitude of the Pole 48 22 Altitude of the Star 76 34 76 33 45 76
35 20 09 40 20 09 30 20 09 20 Peucerus and Sculerus.
gr. m. Altitude of the pole 51 54 Altitude of the Star 79 56 23 33 Landgravius.
gr. m. Altitude of the pole 51 18 Altitude of the Star 79 30 Camerarius.
gr. m. Altitude of the pole 52 24 Altitude of the Star 80 30 80 27 80 26 24 28
24 20 24 17 Hagecius
gr. m. Altitude of the pole 48 22 Altitude of the Star 20 15 Maurolycus.
gr. m. Altitude of the pole 38 30 Altitude of the Star 62 00 Munocius.
gr. m. Altitude of the pole 39 30 Altitude of the star 67 30 11 30 Vrsinus.
gr. m. Altitude of the pole 49 24 Altitude of the star 79 00 22 00 Reinholdus.
gr. m. Altitude of the pole 51 18 Altitude of the star 79 30 23 02 Buchius.
gr. m. Altitude of the pole 51 10 Altitude of the star 79 20 22 40 Gemma.
gr. m. Altitude of the pole 50 50 Altitude of the star 79 45

Now to see my whole proceeding, we may begin from these calculations, which
are four, omitted by the Author, perhaps because they make against him, in
regard they place the star above the moon by many semidiameters of the Earth.
The first of which is this, computed upon the observations of the Landgrave of
Hassia, and Tycho; which are, even by the Authors concession, two of the most
exact observers: and in this first, I will declare the order that I hold in the
working; which shall serve for all the rest, in that they are all made by the
same rule, not varying in any thing, save in the quantity of the given sums,
that is, in the number of the degrees of the Poles altitude, and of the new
Stars elevation above the Horizon, the distance of which from the center of the
Earth, in proportion to the semidiameter of the terrestrial Globe is sought,
touching which it nothing imports in this case, to know how many miles that
semidiameter contains; whereupon the resolving that, and the distance of
places where the observations were made, as this Author does, is but time and
labor lost; nor do I know why he has made the same, and especially why at the
last he goes about to reduce the miles found, into semidiameters of the
Terrestrial Globe.


SIMP. Perhaps he does this to find with such small measures, and with their
fractions the distance of the Star terminated to three or four inches; for we
that do not understand your rules of Arithmetic, are stupefied in hearing your
conclusions; as for instance, whilst we read; Therefore the new Star or Comet
was distant from the Earths center three hundred seventy and three thousand
eight hundred and seven miles; and moreover, two hundred and eleven, four
thousand ninety sevenths 373807 21^/4097, and upon these precise punctualities,
wherein you take notice of such small matters, we do conceive it to be
impossible, that you, who in our calculations keep an account of an inch, can
at the close deceive us so much as an hundred miles.


SALV. This your reason and excuse would pass for current, if in a distance of
thousands of miles, a yard over or under were of any great moment, and if the
suppositions that we take for true, were so certain, as that they could assure
us of producing an indubitable truth in the conclusion; but here you see in the
twelve workings of the Author, the distances of the Star, which from them one
may conclude to have been different from each other, (and therefore wide of the
truth) for many hundreds and thousands of miles: now whilst that I am more than
certain, that that which I seek must needs differ from the truth by hundreds of
miles, to what purppse is it to be so curious in our calculations, for fear of
missing the quantity of an inch? But let us proceed, at last, to the working,
which I resolve in this manner. Tycho, as may be seen in that same note
observed the star in the polar altitude of 55 degrees and 58 mi. pri. And the
polar altitude of the Landgrave was 51 degrees and 18 mi. pri. The altitude of
the star in the Meridian taken by Tycho was 27 degrees 45 mi. pri. The
Landgrave found its altitude 23 degrees 3 mi. pri. The which altitudes are
these noted here, as you see.

gr. m. gr. m. Tycho. Pole 55 58 * 27 45 Landgr. Pole 51 18 * 23 3

This done, substract the less from the greater, and there remains these
differences here underneath.

gr. m. 4 40 4 42 Parall. 2

Where the difference of the poles altitudes 4 gr. 4 mi. pr. is less than the
difference of the altitudes of the Star 4 gr. 42 mi. pr. and therefore we have
the difference of parallaxes, 0 gr. 2 mi. pri. These things being found, take
the Authors own figure [Fig. 2.] in which the point B is the station of the
Landgrave, D the station of Tycho, C the place of the star, A the center of the
Earth, ABE the vertical line of the Landgrave, ADF ^ of Tycho, and the angle
BCD the difference of Parallaxes. And because the angle BAD, contained between
the vertical lines, is equal to the difference of the Polar altitudes, it shall
be 4gr. 40m. which I note here apart; and I find the chord of it by the Table
of Arches and Chords, and set it down near unto it, which is 8142 parts, of
which the semidiameter AB is 100000. Next, I find the angle BDC with ease, for
the half of the angle BAD, which is 2gr. 20 m. added to a right angle, gives
the angle BDF 92gr. 20 m. to which adding the angle CDF, which is the distance
from the vertical point of the greatest altitude of the Star, which here is 62
gr. 15 m. it gives us the quantity of the angle BDC, 154 grad. 45 min. the
which I set down together with its Sine, taken out of the Table, which is
42657, and under this I note the angle of the Parallax BCD 0 gr. 2 m. with its
Sine 58. And because in the Triangle BCD, the side DB is to the side BC; as the
sine of the opposite angle BCD, to the sine of the opposite angle BDC:
therefore, if the line BD were 58. BC would be 42657. And because the Chord DB
is 8142. of those parts whereof the semidiameter BA is 100000. and we seek to
know how many of those parts is BC; therefore we will say, by the Golden Rule,
if when BD is 58. BG is 42657. in case the said DB were 8142. how much would BC
be? I multiply the second term by the third, and the product is 347313294.
which ought to be divided by the first, namely, by 58. and the quotient shall
be the number of the parts of the line BC, whereof the semidiameter AB is
100000. And to know how many semidiameters BA, the said line BC does contein,
it will be necessary anew to divide the said quotient so found by 100000. and
we shall have the number of semidiameters contained in BC. Now the number
347313294. divided by 58. gives 5988160. as here you may see.

^ And this divided by 100000. the product is 59 88160/100000 ^

But we may much abbreviate the operation, dividing the first quotient found,
that is, 347313294. by the product of the multiplication of the two numbers 58.
and 100000. that is, ^

And this way also there will come forth 59 5113294/5^00^^^

And so many semidiameters are contained in the line BC, to which one being
added for the line AB, we shall have little less than 61. semidiameters for
the two lines ABC; and therefore the right distance from the center A, to the
Star C, shall be more than 60. semidiameters, and therefore it is superior to
the Moon, according to Ptolomy, more than 27. semidiameters, and according to
Copernicus, more than 8. supposing that the distance of the Moon from the
center of the Earth by Copernicus his account is what the Author makes it, 52
semidiameters. With this same working, I find by the observations of
Camerarius, and of Munosius, that the Star was situate in that same distance,
to wit, somewhat more than 60. semidiameters. These are the observations, and
these following next after them the calculations.

^

The next working is made upon two observations of Tycho, and of Munosius, from
which the Star is calculated to be distant from the Center of the Earth 478
Semidiameters and more.

^

These workings following make the Star remote from the Center, more than 358
Semidiameters.

^

From this other working the star is found to be distant from the center more
than 716. semidiameters.

^

These as you see are five workings which place the star very much above the
Moon. And here I desire you to consider upon that particular, which even now I
told you, namely, that in great distances, the mutations, or if you please
corrections, of a very few minutes, removes the star a very great way farther
off. As for example, in the first of these workings, where the calculation made
the star 60. semidiameters remote from the center, with the Parallax of 2.
minutes; he that would maintain that it was in the Firmament, is to correct in
the observations but only two minutes, nay less, for then the Parallax
cease, or becomes so small, that it removes the star to an immense
distance, which by all is received to be the Firmament. In the second
indagation, or working, the correction of less than 4 m. prim. d th the same.
In the third, and fourth, like as in the first, two minutes only mount the
star even above the Firmament. In the last preceding, a quarter of a minute,
that is 15. seconds, gives us the same. But it does not so occur in the
sublunary altitudes; for if you fancy to your self what distance you most like,
and go about to correct the workings made by the Author, and adjust them so as
that they all answer in the same determinate distance, you will find how much
greater corrections they do require.


SAGR. It cannot but help us in our fuller understanding of things, to see some
examples of this which you speak of.


SALV. Do you assign any whatsoever determinate sublunary distance at pleasure
in which to constitute the star, for with small ado we may assertain our selves
whether corrections like to these, which we see do suffice to reduce it amongst
the fixed stars, will reduce it to the place by you assigned.


SAGR. To take a distance that may favor the Author, we will suppose it to be
that which is the greatest of all those found by him in his 12 workings; for
whilst it is in controversy between him and Astronomers, and that they affirm
the star to have been superior to the Moon, and he that it was inferior, very
small space that he proves it to have been lower, gives him the victory.


SALV. Let us therefore take the seventh working wrought upon the observations
of Tycho and Thaddaeus Hagecius, by which the Author found the star to have
been distant from the center 32. semidiameters, which situation is most
favorable to his purpose; and to give him all advantages, let us moreover
place it in the distance most disfavouring the Astronomers, which is to situate
it above the Firmament. That therefore being supposed, let us seek in the next
place what corrections it would be necessary to apply to his other 11 workings.
And let us begin at the first calculated upon the observations of Hainzelius
and Mauroice; in which the Author finds the distance from the center about
3. semidiameters with the Parallax of 4 gr. 42 m. 30. sec. Let us see whether
by withdrawing it 20. minutes only, it will rise to the height of 32.
semidiameters: See the short and true operation. Multiply the sine of the angle
BDC, by the sine of the ^ chord BD, and divide the product, the five last
figures being cut off by the sine of the Parallax, and the quotient will be 28.
semidiameters, and an half, so that though you make a correction of 4 gr. 22
min. 30 sec. taken from 4 gr. 42 min. 30 sec. it shall not elevate the star to
the altitude of 32. semidiameters, which correction for Simplicius his
understanding it, is of 262. minutes, and an half.

In the second operation made upon the observations of Hainzelius, and
Sculerus, with the Parallax of 0 gr. 8 min. 30 sec. the star is found in the
height of 25. semidiameters or thereabouts, as may be seen in the subsequent
working.

^

And bringing back the Parallax 0 gr. 8 m. 30 sec. to 7 gr. 7 m. whose sine is
204, the star elevateth to 30 semidiameters or thereabouts; therefore the
correction of 0 gr. 1 mi. 30 sec. does not suffice.

^

Now let us see what correction is requisite for the third working made upon
the observations of Hainzelius and Tycho, which rendereth the star about 19
semidiameters high, with the Parallax of 10 m. pri. The usual angles and their
sines, and chord found by the Author, are these next following; and they
remove the star (as also in the Authors working) 19 semidiameters from the
center of the Earth. It is necessary therefore for the raising of it, to
diminish the Parallax according to the Rule which he likewise observes in the
ninth working. Let us therefore suppose the Parallax to be 6 m. prim. whose
sine is 175, and the division being made, there is found likewise less than 31
semidiameters for the stars distance. And therefore the correction of 4 min.
prim. is too little to serve the Authors purpose.

^

Let us come to the fourth working, and the rest with the same rule, and with
the chords and sines found out by the Author himself; in this the Parallax is
14 m. prim. and the height found less than 10 semidiameters, and diminishing
the Parallax from 14 min. to 4 min. yet nevertheless you see that the star
does not elevate full 31 semidiameters. Therefore 10 min. in 14 min. does not
suffice.

^

In the fifth operation of the Author we have the sines and the chord as you
see, and the Parallax is 0 gr. 42 m. 30 sec. which rendereth the height of the
star about 4 semidiameters, and correcting the Parallax, with reducing it from
0 gr. 42 m. 30 sec. to 0 gr. 5 m. only, does not suffice to raise it to so
much as 28 semidiameters, the correction therefore of 0 gr. 37 m. 30 sec. is
too little.

^

^

In the sixth operation the chord, the sines and Parallax are as follows, and
the star is found to be about 4. semidiameters; let us see whether it will be
reduced, abating the Parallax from 8 m. to 1 m. only; Here is the operation,
and the star raised but to 27. semidiameters or thereabout; therefore the
correction of 7 m. in 8 m. does not suffice.

^

In the eighth operation the chord, the sines, and the Parallax, as you see,
are these ensuing, and hence the Author calculates the height of the star to
be 1. semidiameter and an half, with the Parallax of 43. min. which reduced to
1 min. yet notwithstanding gives the star less remote than 24. semidiameters,
the correction therefore of 42. min. is not enough.

^

Let us now see the ninth. Here is the chord, the sines and the Parallax which
is 15 m. From whence the Author calculates the distance of the star from the
superficies of the Earth to be less than a Here the Latin version is
erroneous, making it a fortieth part of, etc.
seven and forteith part of a semidiameter, but this is an error in the
calculation, for it comes forth truly, as we shall see here below, more than a
fifth: See here the quotient is ^90/4^^, which is more than one fifth.

^

That which the Author presently after subjoyns in way of amending the
observations, that is, that it suffices not to reduce the difference of
Parallax, neither to a minute, nor yet to the eighth part of a minute is true.
But I say, that neither will the tenth part of a minute reduce the height of
the star to 32. semidiameters; for the sine of the tenth part of a minute, that
is of six seconds, is 3; by which if we according to our Rule should divide 90.
or we may say, if we should divide 9058672. by 300000. the quotient will be 30
58671/100000, that is little more than 30. semidiameters and an half.

The tenth gives the altitude of the star one fifth of a semidiameter, with
these angles, sines, and Parallax, that is, 4 gr. 30 m. which I see that being
reduced from 4 gr. 30 min. to 2 min. yet nevertheless it elevates not the star
to 29. semidiameters.

^

The eleventh rendereth the star to the Author remote about 13. semidiameters,
with the Parallax of 55. min. let us see, reducing it to 20 min. whether it
will exalt the star: See here the calculation elevates it to little less than
33. semidiameters, the correction therefore is little less than 35. min. in
55. min.

^

The twelfth with the Parallax of 1. gr. 36. min. makes the star less high
than 6. semidiameters, reducing the Parallax to 20 min. it carries the star to
less than 30. semidiameters distance, therefore the correction of 1 gr. 16.
min. suffices not.

^ These are the Corrections of the Parallaxes of the ten workings of the
Author, to reduce the Star to the altitude of 32 Semidiameters.
gr. m. sec. gr. m. sec. 04 22 30 in 04 42 30 00 04 00 in 00 10 00 00 10 00 in
00 14 00 00 37 00 in 00 42 30 00 07 00 in 00 18 00 00 42 00 in 00 43 00 00 14
50 in 00 15 00 04 28 00 in 04 30 00 00 35 00 in 00 55 00 01 16 00 in 01 36 00^

From hence we see, that to reduce the Star to 32. Semidiameters in altitude,
it is requisite from the sum of the Parallaxes 836. to subtract 756. and to
reduce them to 80. nor yet does that correction suffice.

Here we see also, (as I have noted even now) that should the Author consent
to assign the distance of 32. Semidiameters for the true height of the Star,
the correction of those his 10. workings, (I say 10. because the second being
very high, is reduced to the height of 32. Semidiameters, with 2. minutes
correction) to make them all to restore the said Star to that distance, would
require such a reduction of Parallaxes, that amongst the whole number of
substractions they should make more than 756 m. pr. whereas in the 5.
calculated by me, which do place the Star above the Moon, to correct them in
such sort, as to constitute it in the Firmament, the correction only of 10.
minutes, and one fourth suffices.

Now add to these, other 5. workings, that place the Star precisely in the
Firmament, without need of any correction at all, and we shall have ten
workings or indagations that agree to place it in the Firmament, with the
correction only of 5. of them (as has been seen) but 10. m. and 15 sec.
Whereas for the correction of those 10. of the Author, to reduce them to the
altitude of 32. semidiameters, there will need the emendations of 756 minutes
in 836. that is, there must from the sum 836 be subtracted 756. if you would
have the Star elevated to the altitude of 32. semidiameters, and yet that
correction does not fully serve.

The workings that immediately without any correction free the Star from
Parallaxes, and therefore place it in the Firmament, and that also in the
remotest parts of it, and in a word, as high as the Pole it self, are these 5.
noted here.

gr. m. gr. m. Camerar. Polar altit. 52 24 Altit. of the Star 80 26 Peucerus 51
54 79 56 0 30 0 30 gr. m. gr. m. Landgrav. Polar altit. 51 18 Altit. of the
Star 79 30 Hainzel. 48 22 76 34 2 56 2 56 gr. m. gr. m. Tycho Polar altit. 55
58 Altit. of the Star 84 00 Peucerus 51 54 79 56 4 4 4 4 gr. m. gr. m.
Reinhold. Polar altit. 51 18 Altit. of the Star 79 30 Hainzel. 48 22 36 34 2 56
2 56 gr. m. gr. m. Camerar. Polar altit. 52 24 Altit. of the Star 24 17
Hagecius 48 22 20 15 4 2 4 2

Of the remaining combinations that might be made of the Observations of all
these Astronomers, those that make the Stars sublime to an infinite distance,
are many in number, namely, about 30. more than those who give the Star, by
calculation, to be below the Moon; and because (as it was agreed upon between
us) it is to be believed that the Observators have erred rather little than
much, it is a manifest thing that the corrections to be applied to the
Observaations, which make the star of an infinite altitude, to reduce it lower,
do sooner, and with lesser amendment place it in the Firmament, than beneath
the Moon; so that all these applaud the opinion of those who put it amongst the
fixed Stars. You may add, that the corrections required for those emendations,
are much lesser than those, by which the Star from an unlikely proximity may be
removed to the height more favorable for this Author, as by the foregoing
examples has been seen; amongst which impossible proximities, there are three
that seem to remove the Star from the Earths center, a less distance than one
Semidiameter, making it, as it were, to turn round under ground, and these are
those combinations, wherein the Polar altitude of one of the Observators being
greater than the Polar altitude of the other, the elevation of the Star taken
by the first, is lesser than the elation of the Star taken by the latter.

The first of these is this of the Landgrave with Gemma, where the Polar
altitude of the Landgrave 51 gr. 18 min. is greater than the Polar altitude of
Gemma, which is 50 gr. 50 m. But the altitude of the Star of the Landgrave 79
gr. 30 min. is lesser than that of the Star, of Gemma 79 gr. 45 min.

gr. m. gr. m. Landgrave Polar altit. 51 18 Altit. of the Star 79 30 Gemma 50
50 79 45

The other two are these below. gr. m. gr. m. Buschius. Polar Altitude 51 10
Altit. of the Star 79 20 Gemma. 50 50 79 45 Reinholdus. Polar Altitude 51 18
Altit. of the Star 79 30 Gemma. 50 50 79 45

From what I have hitherto demonstrated, you may guess how much this first way
of finding out the distance of the Star, and proving it sublunary introduced by
the Author, makes against himself, and how much more probably and clearly the
distance thereof is collected to have been amongst the more remote fixed Stars.


SIMP. As to this particular, I think that the inefficacy of the Authors
demonstrations is very plainly discovered; But I see that all this was
comprised in but a few leaves of his Book, and it may be, that some other of
his Arguments are more conclusive then these first.


SALV. Rather they must needs be less valid, if we will take those that lead
the way for a proof of the rest: For (as it is clear) the uncertainty and
inconclusivenesse of those, is manifestly observed to derive it self from the
errors committed in the instrumental observations, upon which the Polar
Altitude, and height of the Star was thought to have been justly taken, all in
effect having easily erred; And yet to find the Altitude of the Pole,
Astronomers have had Ages of time to apply themselves to it, at their leisure:
and the Meridian Altitudes of the Star are easier to be observed, as being most
terminate, and yielding the Observator some time to continue the same, in
regard they change not sensibly, in a short time, as those do that are remote
from the Meridian. And if this be so, as it is most certain, what credit shall
we give to Calculations founded upon Observations more numerous, more difficult
to be wrought, more momentary in variation, and we may add, with Instruments
more incommodious and erroneous? Upon a slight perusal of the ensuing
demonstrations, I see that the Computations are made upon Altitudes of the Star
taken in different Vertical Circles, which are called by the Arabic name,
Azimuths; in which observations moveable instruments are made use of, not only
in the Vertical Circles, but in the Horizon also, at the same time; insomuch
that it is requisite in the same moment that the altitude is taken, to have
observed, in the Horizon, the distance of the Virtical point in which the Star
is, from the Meridian; Moreover, after a considerable interval of time, the
operation must be repeated, and exact account kept of the time that passed,
trusting either to Dials, or to other observations of the Stars. Such an Olio
of Observations does he set before you, comparing them with such another made
by another observer in another place with another different instrument, and at
another time; and from this the Author seeks to collect what would have been,
the Elevations of the Star, and Horizontal Latitudes happened in the time and
hour of the other first observations, and upon such a coaequation he in the end
grounds his account. Now I refer it to you, what credit is to be given to that
which is deduced from such like workings. Moreover, I doubt not in the least,
but that if any one would torture himself with such tedious computations, he
would find, as in those aforegoing, that there were more that would favor the
adverse party, than the Author: But I think it not worth the while to take so
much pains in a thing, which is not, amongst those primary ones, by us
understood.


SAGR. I am of your Opinion in this particular: But this business being
environed with so many intricacies, uncertainties, and errors, upon what
confidence have so many Astronomers positively pronounced the new Star to have
been so high?


SALV. Upon two sorts of observations most plain, most easy, and most certain;
one only of which is more than sufficient to assure us, that it was situate in
the Firmament, or at least by a great distance superior to the Moon. One of
which is taken from the equality, or little differing inequality of its
distances from the Pole, as well whilst it was in the lowest part of the
Meridian, as when it was in the uppermost: The other is its having perpetually
kept the same distances from certain of the fixed Stars, adjacent to it, and
particularly from the eleventh of Cassiopea, no more remote from it than one
degree and an half; from which two particulars is undoubtedly inferred, either
the absolute want of Parallax, or such a smalnesse thereof, that it does assure
us with very expeditious Calculations of its great distance from the Earth.


SAGR. But these things, were they not known to this Author? and if he saw
them, what does he say unto them?


SALV. We are wont to say, of one that having no reply that is able to cover
his fault, produces frivolous excuses, cerca di attaccarsi all funi del
cielo, [He strives to take hold of the Cords of Heaven;] but this Author runs,
not to the Cords, but to the Spiders Web of Heaven; as you shall plainly see in
our examination of these two particulars even now hinted. And first, that which
shows us the Polar distances of the Observators one by one, I have noted down
in these brief Calculations; For a full understanding of which, I ought first
to advertise you, that when ever the new Star, or other Phenomenon is near to
the earth, turning with a Diurnal motion about the Pole, it will seem to be
farther off from the said Pole, whilst it is in the lower part of the Meridian,
then whilst it is above, as in this Figure [being fig. third of this Dial.] may
be seen. In which the point T. denotes the center of the Earth; O. the place of
the Observator; the Arch VPC the Firmament; P. the Pole. The Phenomenon, [or
appearance] moving along the Circle FS. is seen one while under the Pole by the
Ray OFC. and another while above, according to the Ray OSD. so that the places
seen in the Firmament are D. and C. but the true places in respect of the
Center T, are B, and A, equidistant from the Pole. Where it is manifest that
the apparent place of the Phenomenon S, that is the point D, is nearer to the
Pole than the other apparent place C, seen along the Line or Ray OFC, which is
the first thing to be noted. In the second place you must note that the exces
of the apparent inferior distance from the Pole, over and above the apparent
superior distance from the said Pole, is greater than the Inferior Parallax
of the Phenomenon, that is, I say, that the excess of the Arch CP, (the
apparent inferior distance) over and above the Arch PD, (the apparent superior
distance) is greater then the Arch CA, (that is the inferior Paralax.) Which
is easily proved; for the Arch CP. more exceeds PD, then PB; PB, being bigger
than PD, but PB. is equal to PA, and the excess of CP, above PA, is the arch,
CA, therefore the excess of the arch CP above the arch PD, is greater than the
arch CA, which is the parallax of the Phenomenon placed in F, which was to be
demonstrated. And to give all advantages to the Author, let us suppose that the
parallax of the star in F, is the whole excess of the arch CP (that is of the
inferior distance from the pole) above the arch PD (the inferior distance.) I
proceed in the next place to examine that which the observations of all
Astronomers cited by the Author gives us, amongst which, there is not one
that makes not against himself and his purpose. And let us begin with these of
Buschius, who finds the stars distance from the pole, when it was superior,
to be 28 gr. 10 m. and the inferior to be 28 gr. 30 m. so that the excess is
0 gr. 20 m. which let us take (in favor of the Author) as if it all were the
parallax of the star in F, that is the angle TFO. Then the distance from the
Vertex [or Zenith] that is the arch CV, is 67 gr. 20 m. These two things being
found, prolong the line CO, and from it let fall the perpendicular TI, and let
us consider the triangle TOI, of which the angle I is right angle, and the
angle JOT known, as being vertical to the angle VOC, the distance of the star
from the Vertex, Moreover in the triangle TIF, which is also rectangular, there
is known the angle F, taken by the parallax. Then note in some place apart the
two angles JOT and IFT, and of them take the sines, which are here set down to
them, as you seen. And because in the triangle JOT, the sine TI is 92276. of
those parts, whereof the whole sine TO is 100000; and moreover in the triangle
IFT, the sine TI is 582. of those parts, whereof the whole sine TF is 100000,
to find how many TF is of those parts, whereof TO is 100000; we will say by the
Rule of three: If TI be 582. TF is an 100000. but if T I were 92276. how much
would T F be. Let us multiply 92276. by 100000. and the product will be
9227600000. and this must be divided by 582. and the quotient will be 15854982.
and so many shall there be in TF of those parts, of which there are in TO an
100000. So that if it were required to know how many lines TO, are in TF, we
would divide 15854982 by 100000. and there will come forth 158. and very near
an half; and so many diameters shall be the distance of the star F, from the
center T, and to abreviate the operation, we seeing, that the product of the
multiplication of 92276. by 100000, ought to be divided first by 582, and then
the quotient of that division by 100000. we may without multiplying 92276. by
100000. and with one only division of the sine 92276. by the sine 582. soon
obtain the same solution, as may be seen there below; where 92276. divided by
582. gives us the said 158 1/2, or thereabouts. Let us bear in mind therefore,
that the only division of the sine TI, as the sine of the angle TOI by the
sine TI, as the sine of the angle IFT, gives us the distance sought TF, in so
many diameters TO.

^

See next that which the observations of Peucerus gives us, in which the
inferior distance from the Pole is 28 gr. 21 m. and the superior 28 gr. 2 m.
the difference 0 gr. 19 m. and the distance from the vertical point 66 gr. 27
m. from which particulars is gathered the stars distance from the center almost
166 semediameters.

^

Here take what Tycho his observation holds forth to us, interpreted with
greatest favor to the adversary; to wit, the inferior distance from the pole
is 28 gr. 13 m. and the superior 28 gr. 2 m. omit^ing the difference which is
0 gr. 11 m. as if all were one Parallax; the distance from the vertical point
62 gr. 15 m. Behold here below the operation, and the distance of the star from
the center found to be 976 9/16 semidiameters.

^

The observation of Reinholdus, which is the next ensuing, gives us the
distance of the Star from the Center 793. Semidiameters.

^

From the following observation of the Landgrave, the distance of the Star from
the Center is made to be 1057, Semidiameters.

^

Two of the most favorable observations for the Author being taken from
Camerarius, the distance of the Star from the Center is found to be 3143
Semidiameters.

^

The Observation of Munosius gives no Parallax, and therefore renders the new
Star amongst the highest of the fixed. That of Hainzelius makes it infinitely
remote, but with the correction of an half min. prim. places it amongst the
fixed Stars. And the same is collected from Vrsinus, with the correction of 12.
min. prim. The other Astronomers have not give us the distance above and below
the Pole, so that nothing can be concluded from them. By this time you see,
that all the observations of all these men conspire against the Author, in
placing the Star in the Heavenly and highest Regions.


SAGR. But what defense has he for himself against so manifest contradictions?


SALV. He betakes himself to one of those weak threads which I speak of; saying
that the Parallaxes come to be lessened by means of the refractions, which
opperating contrarily sublimate the Phenomenon, whereas the Parallaxes abase
it. Now of what little stead this lamentable refuge is, judge by this, that in
case that effect of the refractions were of such an efficacy, as that which not
long time since some Astronomers have introduced, the most that they could work
touching the elevating a Phaeuomenon above the Horizon more than truth, when it
is before hand 23. or 24. Degrees high, would be the lessening its Parallax
about 3. minutes, the which abatement is too small to pull down the Star below
the Moon, and in some cases is less than the advantage given him by us in
admitting that the excess of the inferior distance from the Pole above the
Superior, is all Parallax, the which advantage is far more clear and palpable
than the effect of Refracton, of the greatness of which I stand in doubt, and
not without reason. But besides, I demand of the Author, whether he thinks that
those Astronomers, of whose observations he makes use, had knowledge of these
effects of Refractions, and considered the same, or no; if they did know and
consider them, it is reasonable to think that the, kept account of them in
assigning the true Elevation of the Star, making in those degrees of Attitude
discovered with the Instruments, such abatements as were convenient on the
account of the alterations made by the Refractions; insomuch that the distances
by them delivered, were in the end those corrected and exact, and not the
apparent and false ones. But if he think that those Authors made no reflection
upon the said Refractions, it must be confessed, that they had in like manner
erred in determining all those things which cannot be perfectly adjusted
without allowance for the Refractions; amongst which things one is the precise
investigation of the Polar Altitudes, which are commonly taken from the two
Meridian Altitudes of some of the fixed Stars that are constantly visible,
which Altitudes will come to be altered by Refraction in the same manner, just
as those of the new Star; so that the Polar Altitude that is deduced from them,
will prove to be defective, and to partake of the self same want which this
Author assigns to the Altitudes ascribed to the new Star, to wit, both that and
these will be with equal falsehood placed higher than really they are. But any
such error, as far as concerns our present business, does no prejudce at all:
For we not needing to know any more, but only the difference between the two
distances of the new Star from the Pole at such time as it was inferior and
superior, it is evident that such distances would be the same, taking the
alteration of Refraction commonly for the Star and for the Pole, or for them
when commonly amended. The Authors Argument would indeed have had some
strength, though very small, if he had assured us that the Altitude of the Pole
had been once precisely assigned, and corrected from the error depending on
refraction, from which again the Astronomers had not kept themselves in
assigning the altitudes of the new Star; but he has not ascertained us of
that, nor perhaps could he have done, nor happily, (and this is more probable)
was that caution wanting in the Observators.


SAGR. This argument is in my judgment sufficiently answered; therefore tell me
how he dis-ingageth himself in the next place from that particular of the Stars
having constantly kept the same distance from the fixed Stars circumjacent to
it.


SALV. He betakes himself, in like manner, to two threads, yet more unable to
uphold him than the former: one of which is likewise fastened to refraction,
but so much less firmly, in that he says, that refraction operating upon the
new Star, and sublimating it higher than its true situation, makes the seeming
distances untain to be distinguished from the true, when compared to the
circumposed fixed Stars that environ it. Nor can I sufficiently admire how he
can dissemble his knowing how that the same refraction will work alike upon the
new Star, as upon the ancient one its neighbor, elevating both equally, so as
that such a like accident alters not the space betwixt them. His other
subterfuge is yet more unhappy, and carries with it much of ridiculous, it
being founded upon the error that may arise in the instrumental operation it
self; whilst that the Observator not being able to constitute the center of the
eyes pupil in the center of the Sextant (an Instrument employed in observing
the distance between two Stars) but holding it elevated above that center, as
much as the said pupil is distant from I know not what bone of the cheek,
against which the end of the Instrument rests, there is formed in the eye an
angle more acute than that which is made by the sides of the Instrument; which
angle of rays differs also from it self, at such time as a man looks upon
Stars, not much elevated above the Horizon, and the same being afterward
placed at a great height; that angle, says he, is made different, while the
Instrument goes ascending, the head standing still: but if in mounting the
Instrument, the neck should bend backwards, and the head go rising, together
with the Instrument, the angle would then continue the same. So that the
Authors answer supposes that the Observators in using the Instrument have not
raised the head, as they ought to have done; a thing which has nothing of
likelihood in it. But granting that so it had been, I leave you to judge what
difference can be between two acute angles of two equicrural triangles, the
sides of one of which triangles are each four [Italian] Braces [i. e. about
three English yards] and those of the other, four braces within the quantity of
the diameter of a Pea; for the differences cannot be absolutely greater between
the length of the two visive rays, whilst the line is drawn perpendicularly
from the center of the pupil, upon the plain of the Rule of the Sextant (which
line is no bigger than the breath of the thumb) and the length of the same
rays, whilst elevating the Sextant, without raising the head together with it,
that same line no longer falls perpendicularly upon the said plane, but
inclines, making the angle toward the circumference something acute. But
wholly to free this Author from these unhappy lies, let him know, (in regard
it appears that he is not very skilful in the use of Astronomicall Instruments)
that in the sides of the Sextant or Quadrant there are placed two Traguardi.
Sights, one in the center, and the other at the other at the opposite end,
which are raised an inch or more above the plane of the Rule; and through the
tops of those sights the ray of the eye is made to pass, which eye likewise is
held an hands breadth or two, or it may be more, from the Instrument; so that
neither the pupil, nor any bone of the cheek, nor of the whole body touches or
stays it self upon the Instrument, nor much less is the Instrument upheld or
mounted in the arms, especially if it be one of those great ones, as is usual,
which weighing tens, hundreds, and also thousands of pounds, are placed upon
very strong feet or frames: so that the whole objection vanishes. These are
the subterfuges of this Author, which, though they were all of steel, would
not secure him the hundredth part of a minute; and with these he conceits to
make us believe, that he has compensated that difference, which imports more
than an hundred minutes; I mean, that of the not observing a notable difference
in the distances between one of the fixed stars, and the new star in in any of
their circulations; which, had it been near to the Moon, it ought to have been
very conspicuous to the mere sight, without any Instrument, especially
comparing it with the eleventh of Cassiopeia, its neighbor, within 1 gr. 30 m.
which ought to have varied from it more than two diameters of the moon, as the
more intelligent Astronomers of those times do well note.


SAGR. Methinks I see that unfortunate Husbandman, who after all his expected
crops, have been beaten down and destroyed by a storm, goes up and down with a
languishing and down-cast look, gleaning up every small ear that would not
suffice to keep a chicken alive one sole day.


SALV. Truly, this Author came out too slenderly provided with arms against
the assailants of the Heavens inalterability, and with too brittle a chain
attempted to pull down the new star of Cassiopeia from the highest Regions, to
these so low and elementary. And for that I think that we have sufficiently
demonstrated the vast difference that is between the arguments of those
Astronomers, and of this their Antagonist, it will be convenient that we leave
this particular, and return to our principal matter; in which there presents it
self to our consideration the annual motion commonly ascribed to the Sun, but
by Aristarchus Samius first of all, and after by Copernicus taken from the Sun,
and transferred upon the Earth; against which Hypothesis, methinks I see
Simplicius to come strongly provided, and particularly with the sword and
buckler of the little Treatise of Conclusions, or Disquisitions Mathematical,
the oppugnations of which it would be good to begin to produce.


SIMP. I will, if you so please, reserve them to the last, as those that are of
latest invention.


SALV. It will therefore be necessary, that in conformity to the method
hitherto observed, you do orderly, one by one, propound the arguments, on the
contrary, as well of Aristotle, as of the other ancients, which shall be my task
also, that so nothing may escape our strict consideration and examination; and
likewise Sagredus, with the vivacity of his wit, shall interpose his thoughts,
as he shall find himself inclined.


SAGR. I will do it with my wonted freedom; and your commands shall oblige you
to excuse me in so doing.


SALV. The favor will challenge thanks, and not an excuse. But now let
Simplicius begin to propose those doubts which dissuade him from believing that
the Earth, in like manner, as the other planets, may move round about a fixed
center.


SIMP. The first and greatest difficulty is the repugnance and incompatibility
that is between being in the center, and being far from it; for if the
Terrestrial Globe were to move in a year by the circumference of a circle, that
is, under the Zodiac, it is impossible that it should, at the same time, be in
the center of the Zodiac; but that the Earth is in the said center Aristotle,
Ptolomy, and others have many ways proved.


SALV. You very well argue, and there is no question but that one that would
make the Earth to move in the circumference of a circle, must first of
necessity prove, that it is not in the center of that same circle; it now
follows, that we enquire, whether the Earth be, or be not in that center,
about which, I say, that it turns, and you say that it is fixed; and before
we speak of this, it is likewise necessary that we declare our selves, whether
you and I have both the same conceit of this center, or no. Therefore tell me,
what and where is this your intended center?


SIMP. When I speak of the center, I mean that of the Universe, that of the
World, that of the Starry Sphere.


SALV. Although I might very rationally put it in dispute, whether there be any
such center in nature, In has not been hitherto proved by any, whether the
World be finite or infinite.
or no; being that neither you nor any one else has ever proved, whether the
World be finite and figurate, or else infinite and interminate; yet
nevertheless granting you, for the present, that it is finite, and of a
terminate Spherical Figure, and that thereupon it has its center; it will be
requisite to see how credible it is that the Earth, and not rather some other
body, does possess the said center.


SIMP. That the world is finite, terminate, and spherical, Aristotle proves
with an hundred demonstrations.


SALV. All which in the end are reduced to one alone, The Demonstrations of
Aristotle to p^ove that the Universe is finite, are all nullified by denying it
to be moveable.
and that one to none at all; for if I deny his assumption, to wit, that the
Universe is moveable, all his demonstrations come to nothing, for he only
proves the Universe to be finite and terminate, for that it is moveable. But
that we may not multiply disputes, let it be granted for once, that the World
is finite, spherical, and has its center. And seeing that that center and
figure is argued from its mobility, it will, without doubt, be very reasonable,
if from the circular motions of mundane bodies we proceed to the particular
investigation of that centres proper place: Aristotle makes that point to be
the center of the Universe about which all the Celestial Spheres do revolve.
Nay Aristotle himself has argued and determined in the same manner, making
that same to be the center of the Universe about which all the Coelelestial
Spheres revolve, and in which he believed the Terrestrial Globe to have been
placed. A question is put, in case that if Aristotle were forced to receive one
of two propositions that make against his doctrine, which he would admit.
Now tell me Simplicius, if Aristotle should be constrained by evident
experience to alter in part this his disposure and order of the Universe, and
confess himself to have been deceived in one of these two propositions,
namely, either in placing the Earth in the center, or in saying, that the
Celestial Spheres do move about that center, which of the two confessions
think you would he choose?


SIMP. I believe, that if it should so fall out, the Peripateticks.


SALV. I do not ask the Peripateticks, I demand of Aristotle, for as to those,
I know very well what they would reply; they, as observant and humble vassals
of Aristotle, would deny all the experiments and all the observations in the
World, nay, would also refuse to see them, that they might not be forced to
acknowledge them, and would say that the World stands as Aristotle writes, and
not as nature will have it, for depriving them of the shield of his Authority,
with what do you think they would appear in the field? Tell me therefore what
you are persuaded Aristotle himself would do in the case.


SIMP. To tell you the truth, I know not how to resolve which of the two
inconveniences is to be esteemed the lesser.


SALV. Apply not I pray you this term of inconvenience to a thing which
possibly may of necessity be so. It was an inconvenience to place the Earth in
the center of the Celestial revolutions; but seeing you know not to which part
he would incline, I esteeming him to be a man of great judgment, let us examine
which of the two choices is the more rational, and that we will hold that
Aristotle would have received. Reassuming therefore our discourse from the
beginning, we suppose with the good liking of Aristotle, that the World (of the
magnitude of which we have no sensible notice beyond the fixed stars) as being
of a spherical figure; and moves circularly, has necessarily, and in respect
of its figure a center; and we being moreover certain, that within the starry
Sphere there are many Orbs, the one within another, with their stars, which
likewise do move circulary, it is in dispute whether it is most reasonable to
believe and to say that these contained Orbs do move round the said center of
the World, or else about some other center far remote from that? Tell me now
Simplicius what you think concerning this particular.


SIMP. If we could stay upon this only supposition, Its more rational that the
Orb containing, and the parts contained, do move all about one center, than
upon diverse.
and that we were sure that we might encounter nothing else that might disturb
us, I would say that it were much more reasonable to affirm that the Orb
containing, and the parts contained, do all move about one common center, than
about diverse.


SALV. Now if it were true that the center of the World is the same about which
the Orbs of mundane bodies, If the center of the World be the (...) that about
which the planets move, the Sun and not the Earth is placed in it.
that is to say, of the Planets, move, it is most certain that it is not the
Earth, but the Sun rather that is fixed in the center of the World. So that as
to this first simple and general apprehension, the middle place belongs to
the Sun, and the Earth is as far remote from the center, as it is from that
same Sun.


SIMP. But from whence do you argue that not the Earth, but the Sun is in the
center of the Planetary revolutions?


SALV. I infer the same from most evident, and therefore necessarily concludent
observations, of which the most palpable to exclude the Earth from the said
center, Observations from whence it is collected that the Sun and not the Earth
is in the center of the Celestial revolutions.
and to place the Sun therein, are, the seeing all the Planets one while nearer
and another while farther off from the Earth with so great differences, that
for example, Venus when it is at the farthest, is six times more remote from
us, than when it is nearest, and Mars rises almost eight times as high at one
time as at another. See therefore whether Aristotle was not somewhat mistaken
in thinking that it was at all times equidistant from us.


SIMP. What in the next place are the tokens that their motions are about the
Sun?


SALV. It is argued in the three superior planets Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn,
in that we find them always nearest to the Earth when they are in opposition
to the Sun, and farthest off when they are toward the conjunction, and this
approximatian and recession imports thus much that Mars near at hand,
appears very near 60 times greater than when it is remote. The mutation of
figure in Venus argues its motion to be about the Sun.
As to Venus in the next place, and to Mercury, we are certain that they
revolve about the Sun, in that they never move far from him, and in that we see
them one while above and another while below it, The Moon cannot separate from
the Earth.
as the mutations of figure in Venus necessarily argues. To^ching the Moon it
is certain, that she cannot in any way separate from the Earth, for the reasons
that shall be more distinctly alleged hereafter.


SAGR. I expect that I shall hear more admirable things that depend upon this
annual motion of the Earth, than were those dependant upon the diurnal
revolution.


SALV. You do not therein err: The annual motion of the Earth mixing with the
motions of the other Planets produce extravagant appearances.
For as to the operation of the diurnal motion upon the Celestial bodies, it
neither was, nor can be other, than to make the Universe seem to run
precipitately the contrary way; but this annual motion intermixing with the
particular motions of all the planets, produces very many extravagancies,
which have disarmed and non-plust all the greatest Scholars in the World. But
returning to our first general apprehensions, I reply that the center of the
Celestial conversions of the ^ive planets Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus and
Mercury, is the Sun; and shall be likewise the center of the motion of the
Earth, if we do but succeed in our attempt of placing it in Heaven. And as for
the Moon, this has a circular motion about the Earth, from which (as I said
before) it can by no means alienate it self, but yet does it not cease to go
about the Sun together with the Ear^h in an annual motion.


SIMP. I do not as yet very well apprehend this structure, but it may be, that
with making a few draughts thereof, one may better and more easily discourse
concerning the same.


SALV. It Is very true: yea for your greater satisfaction and admiration
together, I desire you, that you would take the pains to draw the same; and to
see that although you think you do not apprehend it, yet you very perfectly
understand it; And only by answering to my interrogations you shall design it
punctually. Take therefore a sheet of paper and Compasses; The Systeme of the
Universe designed from the appearances.
And let this white paper be the immense expansion of the Universe; in which
you are to distribute and dispose its parts in order, according as reason shall
direct you. And first, in regard that without my instruction you verily believe
that the Earth is placed in this Universe, therefore note a point at pleasure,
about which you intend it to to be placed, and mark it with some characters.


SIMP. Let this mark A be the place of the Terrestrial Globe.


SALV. Very well. I know secondly, that you understand perfectly that the said
Earth is not within the body of the Sun, nor so much as contiguous to it, but
distant for some space from the same, and therefore assign to the Sun what
other place you best like, as remote from the Earth as you please, and mark
this in like manner.


SIMP. Here it is done: Let the place of the Solar body be O.


SALV. These two being constituted, I desire that we may think of accomodating
the body of Venus in such a manner that its state and motion may agree with
what sensible experiments do show us; and therefore recall to mind that which
either by the past discourses, or your own observations you have learnt to
befall that star, and afterward assign unto it that state which you think
agrees with the same.


SIMP. Supposing those Phenomenon expressed by you, and which I have likewise
read in the little treatise of Conclusions, to be true, namely, that that star
never recedes from the Sun beyond such a determinate space of 40 degrees or
thereabouts, so as that it never comes either to apposition with the Sun, or
so much as to quadrature, or yet to the sextile aspect; and more than that,
Venus very great toward the respective conjunction and very small toward the
maintine.
supposing that it shows at one time almost 40 times greater than at another;
namely, very great, when being retrograde, it goes to the vespertine
conjnnction of the Sun, and very small when with a motion straight forwards, it
goes to the matutine conjunction; and moreover it being true, that when it
appears big it shows with a corniculate figure, and when it appears
little, it seems perfectly round, these appearances, I say, being true, I do
not see how one can choose but affirm the said star to revolve in a circle
about the Sun, Venus necessarily proved to move about the Sun.
for that the said circle cannot in any wise be said to encompasse or to
contain the Earth within it, nor to be inferior to the Sun, that is between it
and the Earth, nor yet superior to the Sun. That circle cannot incompasse the
Earth, because Venus would then sometimes come to opposition with the Sun; it
cannot be inferior, for then Venus in both its conjunctions with the Sun would
seem horned; nor can it be superior, for then it would always appear round,
and never cornicular; and therefore for receipt of it I will draw the circle CH,
about the Sun, without encompassing the Earth.


SALV. Having placed Venus, it is requisite that you think of Mercury, which,
as you know, always keeping about the Sun, does recede less distance from it
than Venus; therefore consider with your self, what place is most convenient to
assign it.


SIMP. It is not to be questioned, The revolution of Mercury concluded to be
about the Sun, within the Orb of Venus.
but that this Planet imitating Venus, the most commodious place for it will
be, a lesser circle within this of Venus, in like manner about the Sun, being
that of its greatest vicinity to the Sun, an argument, an evidence sufficiently
proving the vigor of its illumination, above that of Venus, and of the other
Planets, we may therefore upon these considerations draw its Circle, marking it
with the Characters BG.


SALV. But Mars, Mars necessarily includes within its Orb the Earth, and also
the Sun.
Where shall we place it?


SIMP. Mars, Because it comes to an opposition with the Sun, its Circle must of
necessity encompass the Earth; But I see that it must necessarily encompass the
Sun also, for coming to conjunction with the Sun, if it did not move over it,
but were below it, it would appear horned, as Venus and the Moon; but it shows
always round, and therefore it is necessary, that it no less includes the Sun
within its circle than the Earth. Mars at its opposition to the Sun shows to be
sixty times bigger than toward the conjunction.
And because I remember that you did say, that when it is in opposition with
the Sun, it seems 60 times bigger than when it is in the conjunction, me thinks
that a Circle about the Center of the Sun, and that takes in the earth, will
very well agree with these Phenomenon, which I do note and mark DI, where Mars
in the point D, is near to the earth, and opposite to the Sun; but when it is
in the point I, it is at Conjuction with the Sun, but very far from the Earth.
And because the same appearances are observed in Jupiter and Saturn, Jupiter
and Saturn do likewise encompasse the Earth, and the Sun.
although with much lesser difference in Jupiter than in Mars, and with yet
less in Saturn than in Jupiter; me thinks I understand that we should very
commodiously salve all the Phenomenon of these two Planets, with two Circles,
in like manner, drawn about the Sun, and this first for Jupiter, marking it EL,
and another above that for Saturn marked FM.


SALV. You have behaved your self bravely hitherto. The approximation and
recession of the three superior Planets, imports double the Suns distance.
And because (as you see) the approach and recession of the three Superior
Planets is measured with double the distance between the Earth and Sun, this
makes greater difference in Mars than in Jupiter, the Circle DI, The
difference of the apparent magnitude less in Saturn, than in Jupiter, and^
Jupiter than in Mars, and why.
of Mars, being lesser than the Circle EL, of Jupiter, and likewise because
this EL, is less than this Circle FM, of Saturn, the said difference is also
yet lesser in Saturn than in Jupiter, and that punctually answers the
Phenomenon. It remains now that you assign a place to the Moon.


SIMP. Following the same Method (which seems to me very conclusive) in regard
we see that the Moon comes to conjunction and opposition with the Sun, The
Moons Orb invironeth the Earth, but not the Sun.
it is necessary to say, that its circle encompasseth the Earth, but yet does
it not follow, that it must environ the Sun, for then at that time toward its
conjunction, it would not seem horned, but always round and full of Light.
Moreover it could never make, as it often does, the Eclipse of the Sun, by
interposing betwixt it and us; It is necessary therefore to assign it a circle
about the Earth, which should be this NP, so that being constituted in P, it
will appear from the Earth A, to be in conjunction with the Sun, and placed in
N, it appears opposite to the Sun, and in that position it may fall under the
Earths shadow, and be obscured.


SALV. Now, Simplicius, what shall we do with the fixed stars? Shall we suppose
them scattered through the immense abisses of the Universe, at different
distances, from any one determinate point; or else placed in a superficies
spherically distended about a center of its own, so that each of them may be
equidistant from the said center?


SIMP. I would rather take a middle way; The probable situation of the fixed
stars.
and would assign them an Orb described about a determinate center and
comprised within two spherical superficies, to wit, one very high, and concave,
and the other lower, Which ought to be accounted the sphere of the Universe.
and unequal, betwixt which I would constitute the innumerable multitude of
stars, but yet at diverse altitudes, and this might be called the Sphere of the
Universe, containing within it the Orbs of the planets already by us described.


SALV. But now we have all this while, Simplicius, disposed the mundane bodies
exactly, according to the order of Copernicus, and we have done it with your
hand; and moreover to each of them you have assigned peculiar motions of their
own, except to the Sun, the Earth, and starry Sphere; and to Mercury with
Venus, you have ascribed the circular motion about the Sun, without
encompassing the Earth; about the same Sun you make the three superior Planets
Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn, to move, comprehending the Earth within their
circles. The Moon in the next place can move in no other manner than about the
Earth, without taking in the Sun, and in all these motions you agree also with
the same Copernicus. There remains now three things to be decided between the
Sun, the Earth, and fixed stars, namely, Rest, Rest, the annual motion and the
diurnal ought to be distributed betwixt the Sun, Earth, and Firmament.
which seems to belong to the Earth; the annual motion under the Zodiac,
which appears to pertain to the Sun; and the diurnal motion, which seems to
belong to the Starry Sphere, and to be by that imparted to all the rest of the
Universe, the Earth excepted, And it being true that all the Orbs of the
Planets, I mean of Mercury, In a moveable sphere, it seems more reasonable
that its center be stable, than any other of its parts.
Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn, do move about the Sun as their center; rest
seems with so much more reason to belong to the said Sun, than to the Earth,
in as much as in a moveable Sphere, it is more reasonable that the center stand
still, than any other place remote from the said center; to the Earth
therefore, which is constituted in the midst of moveable parts of the Universe,
I mean between Venus and Mars, one of which makes its revolution in nine
months, and the other in two years, may the motion of a year very commodiously
be assigned, leaving rest to the Sun. Granting to the Earth the annual, it must
of necessity also have the diurnal motion assigned to it.
And if that be so, it follows of necessary consequence, that likewise the
diurnal motion belongs to the Earth; for, if the Sun standing still, the
Earth should not revolve about its self, but have only the annual motion about
the Sun, our year would be no other than one day and one night, that is six
months of day, and six months of night, as has already been said. You may
consider withal how commodiously the precipitate motion of 24 hours is taken
away from the Universe, and the fixed stars that are so many Suns, are made in
conformity to our Sun to enjoy a perpetual rest. You see moreover what facility
one meets with in this rough draught to render the reason of so great
appearances in the Celestial bodies.


SAGR. I very well perceive that facility, but as you from this simplicity
collect great probabilities for the truth of that System, others happily could
make thence contrary deductions; doubting, not without reason, why that same
being the ancient Systeme of Pythagoreans, and so well accommodated to the
Phenomenon, has in the succession of so many thousand years had so few
followers, and has been even by Aristotle himself refuted, and since that
Copernicus himself has had no better fortune.


SALV. If you had at any time been assaulted, as I have been, many and many a
time, with the relation of such kind of frivolous reasons, as serve to make the
vulgar contumacious, and difficult to be persuaded to hearken, (I will not say
to consent) to this novelty, I believe that you wonder at the paucity of those
who are followers of that opinion would be much diminished. Discourses more
than childish, serve to keep fools in the opinion of the Earths stability.
But small regard in my judgment, ought to be had of such thick sculs, as
think it a most convincing proof to confirm, and steadfastly settle them in the
belief of the earths immobility, to see that if this day they cannot Dine at
Constantinople, nor Sup in Jappan, that then the Earth as being a most grave
body cannot clamber above the Sun, and then slide headlong down again; Of such
as these I say, whose number is infinite, we need not make any reckoning, nor
need we to record their foolieries, or to strive to gain to our side as our
partakers in subul and sublime opinions, men in whose definition the kind only
is concerned, and the difference is wanting. Moreover, what ground do you think
you could be able to gain, with all the demonstrations of the World upon brains
so stupid, as are not able of themselves to know their down right follies? But
my admiration, Sagredus, is very different from yours, you wonder that so few
are followers of the Pythagorean Opinion; and I am amazed how there could be
any yet left till now that do embrace and follow it: A declaration of the
improbability of Copernicus his opinion.
Nor can I sufficiently admire the eminency of those men's wits that have
received and held it to be true, and with the sprightlinesse of their
judgments offered such violence to their own senses, as that they have been
able to prefer that which their reason dictated to them, to that which sensible
experiments represented most manifestly on the contrary. That the reasons
against the Diurnal virtiginous revolution of the Earth by you already
examined, do carry great probability with them, we have already seen; as also
that the Ptolomaicks, and Aristotelicks, with all their Sectators did receive
them for true, is indeed a very great argument of their efficacy; but those
experiments which apertly contradict the annual motion, Reasons and discourse
in Aristarcus and Copernicus prevailed over manifest sense.
are of yet so much more manifestly repugnant, that (I say it again) I cannot
find any bounds for my admiration, how that reason was able in Aristarchus and
Copernicus, to commit such a rape upon their Senses, as in despite thereof, to
make her self mistress of their credulity.


SAGR. Are we then to have still more of these strong oppositions against this
annual motion?


SALV. We are, and they be so evident and sensible, that if a sense more
sublime and excellent than those common and vulgar, did not take part with
reason, I much fear, that I also should have been much more averse to the
Copernican Systeem than I have been since the time that a clearer lamp than
ordinary has enlightened me.


SAGR. Now therefore Salviatus, let us come to join battle for every word that
is spent on any thing else, I take to be cast away.


SALV. I am ready to serve you. You have already seen me draw the form of the
Copernican Systeme; Mars makes an hot assaults upon the Coper^^can Systeme.
against the truth of which Mars himself, in the first place, makes an hot
charge; who, in case it were true, that its distances from the earth should so
much vary, as that from the least distance to the greatest, there were twice as
much differences, as from the earth to the Sun; it would be necessary, that
when it is nearest unto us, its discus would show more than 60. times bigger
than it seems, when it is farthest from us; nevertheless that diversity of
apparent magnitude is not to be seen, nay in its opposition with the Sun, when
its nearest to the Earth, it does not show so much as quadruple and quintuple
in bigness, to what it is, when toward the conjunction it comes to be
occulted under the Suns rays. Another and greater difficulty does Venus
exhibit; For if revolving about the Sun, as Copernicus affirms, The
Phenomenon of Venus appear contrary to the Systeme of Copernicus.
it were one while above, and another while below the same, receding and
approaching to us so much as the Diameter of the circle described would be, at
such time as it should be below the Sun, and nearest to us, its discus would
show little less than 40 times bigger than when it is above the Sun, near to
its other conjunction; yet nevertheless, Another difficulty raised by Venus
against Copernicus.
the difference is almost imperceptible Let us add another difficulty, that in
case the body of Venus be of it self dark, and only shines as the Moon, by
the illumination of the Sun, which seems most reasonable; it would show
forked or horned at such time as it is under the Sun, as the Moon does when she
is in like manner near the Sun; an accident that is not to be discovered in
her. Venus, according to Copernicus, either lucid in it self, or else of a
transparent substance.
Whereupon Copernicus affirms, that either she is light of her self, or else
that her substance is of such a nature, that it can imbue the Solar light, and
transmit the same through all its whole depth, so as to be able to appear to us
always shining; and in this manner Copernicus excuses the not changing figure
in Venus: but of her small variation of Magnitude, Copernicus speaks nothing
of the small variation of bigness in Venus and in Mars.
he makes no mention at all; and much less of Mars than was needful; I believe
as being unable so well as he desired to salve a Phenomenon so contrary to his
Hypothesis, and yet being convinced by so many other occurrences and reasons he
maintained, and held the same Hypothesis to be true. Besides these things, to
make the Planets, together with the Earth, to move above the Sun as the Center
of their conversions, and the Moon only to break that order, The moon much
disturbeth the order of the other Planets.
and to have a motion by it self about the earth; and to make both her, the
Earth, and the whole Elementary Sphere, to move all together about the Sun in a
year, this seems to pervert the order of this Systeme, which renders it
unlikely and false. These are those difficulties that make me wonder how
Aristarchus and Copernicus, who must needs have observed them, not having been
able for all that to salve them, have yet notwithstanding by other admirable
occurrences been induced to conside so much in that which reason dictated to
them, as that they have considently affirmed that the structure of the Universe
could have no other figure than that which they designed to themselves. There
are also several other very serious and curious doubts, not so easy to be
resolved by the middle sort of wits, but yet penetrated and declared by
Coperninus, which we shall defer till by and by, after we have answered to
other objections that seem to make against this opinion. Now coming to the
declarations and answers to those three before named grand Objections, I say,
that the two first not only contradict not the Copernican Systeme, Answers to
the three first objections against the Copernican, Systeme.
but greatly and absolutely favor it; For both Mars and Venus seems unequal to
themselves, according to the proportions assigned; and Venus under the Sun
seems horned, and goes changing figures in it self exactly like the Moon.


SAGR. But how came this to be concealed from Copernicus, and revealed to you?


SALV. These things cannot be comprehended, save only by the sense of seeing,
the which by nature was not granted to man so perfect, as that it was able to
attain to the discovery of such differences; nay even the very instrument of
sight is an impediment to it self: But since that it has pleased God in our
age to vouchsafe to humane ingenuity, so admirable an invention of perfecting
our sight, by multiplying it four, six, ten, twenty, thirty, and forty times,
infinite objects, that either by reason of their distance, or for their extreme
smallness were invisible unto us, have by help of the Telescope been rendered
visible.


SAGR. But Venus and Mars are none of the objects invisible for their distance
or smallness, yea, we do discern them with our bare natural sight; why then do
we not distinguish the differences of their magnitudes and figures?


SALV. In this, The reason whence it happens that Venus and Mars do not appear
to vary magnitude so much as is requisite.
the impediment of our very eye it self has a great share, as but even now I
hinted, by which the resplendent and remote objects are not represented to us
simple and pure; but gives them us fringed with strange and adventitious rays,
so long and dense, that their naked body shows to us agrandized, ten twenty,
an hundred, yea a thousand times more than it would appear, if the capillitious
rays were taken away.


SAGR. Now I remember that I have read something on this subject, I know not
whether in the Solar Letters, or in the Saggiatore of our common Friend, but it
would be very good, as well for recalling it into my memory, as for the
information of Simplicius, who it may be never saw those writings, that you
would declare unto us more distinctly how this business stands, the knowledge
whereof I think to be very necessary for the assisting of us to understand that
of which we now speak.


SIMP. I must confess that all that which Salviatus has spoken is new unto
me, for truth is, I never have had the curiosity to read those Books, nor have
I hitherto given any great credit to the Telescope newly introduced; The
operations of the Telescope accounted fallacies by the Peripateticks.
rather treading in the steps of other Peripatetick Philosophers my companions,
I have thought those things to be fallacies and delusions of the Chrystals,
which others have so much admired for stupendous operations: and therefore if
I have hitherto been in an error, I shall be glad to be freed from it, and
allured by these novelties already heard from you, I shall the more attentively
hearken to the rest.


SALV. The confidence that these men have in their own apprehensivenesse, is no
less unreasonable than the small esteem they have of the judgment of others:
yet its much that should esteem themselves able to judge better of such an
instrument, without ever having made trial of it, than those who have made, and
daily do make a thousand experiments of the same: But I pray you, let us leave
this kind of pertinacious men, whom we cannot so much as tax without doing them
too great honor. And returning to our purpose, Shining objects seem environed
with adventitious rays.
I say, that resplendent objects, whether it is that their light does refract
on the humidity that is upon the pupils, or that it does reflect on the edges
of the eyebrows, diffusing its reflex rays upon the said pupils, or whether
it is for some other reason, they do appear to our eye, as if they were
environed with new rays, and therefore much bigger than their bodies would
represent themselves to us, were they divested of those irradiations. The
reason why luminous bodies appear enlarged much the more, by how much they are
lesser.
And this aggrandizement is made with a greater and greater proportion, by how
much those lucid objects are lesser and lesser; in the same manner for all the
world, as if we should suppose that the augmentation of shining locks were v.
g. four inches, which addition being made about a circle that has four inches
diameter would increase its appearance to nine times its former bigness: but
--


SIMP. I believe you would have said three times; for adding four inches to
this side, and four inches to that side of the diameter of a circle, which is
likewise four inches, its quantity is thereby tripled, and not made nine times
bigger.


SALV. A little more Geometry would do well, Superficial figures increasing
proportion double to their lines.
Simplicius. True it is, that the diameter is tripled, but the superficies,
which is that of which we speak, increases nine times: for you must know,
Simplicius, that the superficies of circles are to one another, as the squares
of their diameters; and a circle that has four inches diameter is to another
that has twelve, as the square of four to the square of twelve; that is, as
16. is to 144. and therefore it shall be increased nine times, and not three;
this, by way of advertisement to Simplicius. And proceeding forwards, if we
should add the said irradiation of four inches to a circle that has but two
inches of diameter only, the diameter of the irradiation or Garland would be
ten inches, and the superficial content of the circle would be the area of the
naked body, as 100. to 4. for those are the squares of 10. and of 2. the
agrandizement would therefore be 25. times so much; and lastly, the four inches
of hair or fringe, added to a small circle of an inch in diameter, the same
would be increased 81. times; and so continually the augmentations are made
with a proportion greater and greater, according as the real objects that
increase, are lesser and lesser.


SAGR. The doubt which puzzled Simplicius never troubled me, but certain other
things indeed there are, of which I desire a more distinct understanding; and
in particular, I would know upon what ground you affirm that the said
agrandizement is always equal in all visible objects. Objects the more
vigorous they are in light, the more they do seem to increase.



SALV. I have already declared the same in part, when I said, that only lucid
objects so increased, and not the obscure; now I add what remains, that of
the resplendent objects those that are of a more bright light, make the
reflection greater and more resplendent upon our pupil; whereupon they seem to
augment much more than the less lucid: and that I may no more enlarge my self
upon this particular, come we to that which the true Mistress of Astronomy,
Experience, teaches us. Let us this evening, when the air is very obscure,
observe the star of Jupiter; we shall see it very glittering, An easy
experiment that shows the increase in the stars, by means of the adventitious
rays.
and very great; let us afterward look through a tube, or else through a small
trunk, which clutching the hand close, and accosting it to the eye, we lean
between the palm of the hands and the fingers, or else by an hole made with a
small needle in a paper; and we shall see the said star divested of its beams,
but so small, that we shall judge it less, even than a sixtieth part of its
great glittering light seen with the eye at liberty: we may afterward behold
the Dog-stars beautiful and bigger than any of the other fixed stars, Jupiter
augments less than the Dog Star.
which seems to the bare eye no great matter less than Jupiter; but taking
from it, as before, the irradiation, its Discus will show so little, that it
will not be thought the twentieth part of that of Jupiter, nay, he that has
not very good eyes, will very hardly discern it; from whence it may be
rationally inferred, that the said star, as having a much more lively light
than Jupiter, makes its irradiation greater than Jupiter does his. In the next
place, as to the irradiation of the Sun and Moon, The Sun and Moon increase
little.
it is as nothing, by means of their magnitude, which possesses of it self
alone so great a space in our eye, that it leaves no place for the
adventitious rays; so that their faces seem close clipped, and terminate. We may
assure our selves of the same truth by another experiment which I have often
made trial of; we may assure ourselves, It is seen by manifest experience,
that the more splendid bodies do much more irradiate than the less lucid.
I say, that bodies shining with most lively light do irradiate, or beam forth
rays more by far than those that are of a more languishing light. I have many
times seen Jupiter and Venus together twenty or thirty degrees distant from the
Sun, and the air being very dark, Venus appeared eight or ten times bigger than
Jupiter, being both beheld by the eye at liberty; but being beheld afterward
with the Telescope, the Discus of Jupiter discovered it self to be four or more
times greater than that of Venus, but the vivacity of the splendor of Venus
was incomparably bigger than the languishing light of Jupiter; which was only
because of Jupiters being far from the Sun, and from us; and Venus near to us,
and to the Sun. These things premised, it will not be difficult to comprehend,
how Mars, when it is in opposition to the Sun, and therefore nearer to the
Earth by seven times, and more, than it is toward the conjunction, comes to
appear scarce four or five times bigger in that state than in this, when as it
should appear more than fifty times so much; of which the only irradiation is
the cause; for if we divest it of the adventitious rays, we shall find it
exactly augmented with the due proportion: but to take away the capillitious
border, The Telescope is the best means to take away the irradiations of the
Stars.
the Telescope is the best and only means, which enlarging its Discus nine
hundred or a thousand times, makes it to be seen naked and terminate, as that
of the Moon, Another second reason of the small apparent increase of Venus.
and different from it self in the two positions, according to its due
proportions to an hair. Again, as to Venus, that in its vespertine conjunction,
when it is below the Sun, ought to show almost forty times bigger than in the
other matutine conjunction, and yet does not appear so much as doubled; it
happens, besides the effect of the irradiation, that it is horned; and its
crescents, besides that they are sharp, they do receive the Suns light
obliquely, and therefore emit but a faint splendor; so that as being little
and weak, its irradiation becomes the less ample and vivacious, than when it
appears to us with its Hemisphere all shining: but now the Telescope
manifestly shows its horns to have been as terminate and distinct as those of
the Moon, and appear, as it were, with a great circle, and in a proportion
those well near forty times greater than its same Discus, at such time as it
is superior to the Sun in its ultimate matutine apparition.


SAGR. Oh, Nicholas Copernicus, how great would have been thy joy to have seen
this part of thy Systeme, confirmed with so manifest experiments!


SALV. It Is true. Copernicus persuaded by reasons contrary to sensible
experiments.
But how much less the fame of his sublime wit amongst the intelligent? when
as it is seen, as I also said before, that he did constantly continue to affirm
(being persuaded thereto by reason) that which sensible experiments seemed to
contradict; for I cannot cease to wonder that he should constantly persist in
saying, that Venus revolveth about the Sun, and is more than six times farther
from us at one time, than at another; and also seems to be always of an
equal bigness, although it ought to show forty times bigger when nearest to us,
than when farthest off.


SAGR. But in Jupiter, Saturn and Mercury, I believe that the differences of
their apparent magnitudes, should seem punctually to answer to their different
distances.


SALV. In the two Superior ones, I have made precise observation yearly for
this twenty two years last past: Mercury admits not of clear observations.
In Mercury there can be no observation of moment made, by reason it suffers
not it self to be seen, save only in its greatest dig^ssieons from the Sun, in
which its distances from the earth are insensibly unequal, and those
differences consequently not to be observed; as also its mutations of figures
which must absolutely happen in it, as in Venus. And if we do see it, it must
of necessity appear in form of a Semicircle, as Venus likewise does in her
greatest digressions; but its discns is so very small, and its splendour so very
great, by reason of its vicinity to the Sun, that the virtue of the Telescope
does not suffice to clip its tresses or adventitious rays, The difficulties
removed that arise from the Earths moving about the Sun, not solitarily, but in
consort with the Moon.
so as to make them appear shaved round about. It remains, that we remove that
which seemed a great inconvenience in the motion of the Earth, namely that all
the Planets moving about the Sun, it alone, not solitary as the rest, but in
company with the Moon, and the whole Elementary Sphere, should move round about
the Sun in a year; and that the said Moon withal should move every month about
the earth. Here it is necessary once again to exclaim and extol the admirable
perspicacity of Copernicus, and withal to condole his misfortune, in that he is
not now alive in our days, when for removing of the seeming absurdity of the
Earth and Moons motion in consort we see Jupiter, as if it were another Earth,
not in consort with the Moon, but accompanied by four Moons to rovolve about
the Sun in 12. years together, with what ever things the Orbs of the four
Medicaean Stars can contain within them.


SALV. Why do you call the four jovial Planets, Moons?


SAGR. Such they would seem to be to one that standing in Jupiter should behold
them; The Medicean Stars areas it were four Moons about Jupiter.
for they are of themselves dark, and receive their light from the Sun, which
is manifest from their being eclipsed, when they enter into the cone of
Jupiters shadow: and because only those their Hemispheres, that look toward
the Sun are illuminated, to us that are without their Orbs, and nearer to the
Sun, they seem always lucid, but to one that should be in Jupiter, they would
show all illuminated, at such time as they were in the upper parts of their
circles; but in the parts inferior, that is between Jupiter and the Sun, they
would from Jupiter be observed to be horned; and in a word they would, to the
observators standing in Jupiter, make the self same changes of Figure, that to
us upon the Earth, the Moon does make. You see now how these three things,
which at first seemed dissonant, do admirably accord with the Copernican
Systeme. Here also by the way may Simplicius see, with what probability one may
conclude, that the Sun and not the Earth, is in the Center of the Planetary
conversions. And since the Earth is now placed amongst mundane Bodies, that
undoubtedly move about the Sun, to wit, above Mercury and Venus, and below
Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars; shall it not be in like manner probable, and perhaps
necessary to grant, that it also moves round?


SIMP. These accidents are so notable and conspicuous, that it is not possible,
but that Ptolomy and others his Sectators, should have had knowledge of them,
and having so, it is likewise necessary, that they have found a way to render
reasons of such, and so sensible appearances that were sufficient, and also
congruous and probable, seeing that they have for so long a time been received
by such numbers of learned men.


SALV. You argue very well; The Principal scope of Astronomers, is to give a
reason of appearances.
but you know that the principal scope of Astronomers, is to render only reason
for the appearances in the Caelestial Bodies, and to them, and to the motions
of the Stars, to accomodate such structures and compositions of Circles, that
the motions following those calculations, answer to the said appearances,
little scrupling to admit of some exorbitances, that indeed upon other accounts
they would much stick at. And Copernicus himself writes, Copernicus restored
Astronomy upon the suppositions of Ptolomy.
that he had in his first studies restored the Science of Astronomy upon the
very suppositions of Ptolomy, and in such manner corrected the motions of the
Planets, that the computations did very exactly agree with the Phenomenon, and
the Phenomenon with the supputations, in case that he took the Planets
severally one by one. But he adds, that in going about to put together all
the structures of the particular Fabrics, there resulted thence a Monster and
Chimaera, composed of members most disproportionate to one another, and
altogether incompatible; So that although it satisfied an Astronomer merely
Arithmetical, yet did it not afford satisfaction or content to the Astronomer
Phylosophical. What moved Copernicus to establish his Systeme.
And because he very well understood, that if one might salve the Caelestial
appearances with false assumptions in nature, it might with much more ease be
done by true suppositions, he set himself diligently to search whether any
amongst the ancient men of fame, had ascribed to the World any other structure,
than that commonly received by Ptolomy; and finding that some Pythagoreans had
in particular assigned the Diurnal conversion to the Earth, and others the
annual motion also, he began to compare the appearances, and particularities of
the Planets motions, with these two new suppositions, all which things jumpt
exactly with his purpose; and seeing the whole correspond, with admirable
facility to its parts, he embraced this new Systeme, and it took up his rest.


SIMP. But what great exorbitancies are there in the Ptolomaick Systeme, for
which there are not greater to be found in this of Copernicus?


SALV. In the Ptolomaick Hypothesis there are diseases, Inconveniences that
are in the Systeme of Ptolomy.
and in the Copernican their cures. And first will not all the Sects of
Philosophers, account it a great inconvenience, that a body naturally moveable
in circumgyration, should move irregularly upon its own Center, and regularly
upon another point? And yet there are such deformed motions as these in the
Ptolomaean Hypothesis, but in the Copernican all move evenly about their own
Centres. In the Ptolomaick, it is necessary to assign to the Caelestial bodies,
contrary motions, and to make them all to move, from East to West, and at the
same time, from West to East; But in the Copernican, all the Caelestial
revolutions are toward one only way, from West to East. But what shall we say
of the apparent motion of the Planets, so irregular, that they not only go one
while swift, and another while slow, but sometimes wholly seace to move; and
then after a long time return back again? To salve which appearances Ptolomie
introduces very great Epicicles, accommodating them one by one to each Planet,
with some rules of incongruous motions, which are all with one single motion of
the Earth taken away. And would not you, Simplicius, call it a great
absurdity, if in the Ptolomaick Hypothesis, in which the particular Planets,
have their peculiar Orbs assigned them one above another, one must be
frequently forced to say, that Mars, constituted above the Sphaere of the Sun,
does so descend, that breaking the Solar Orb, it goes under it, and
approaches nearer to the Earth, than to the Body of the Sun, and by and by
immeasurably ascends above the same? And yet this, and other exorbitancies
are remedied by the sole and single annual motion of the Earth.


SAGR. I would gladly be bettter informed how these stations, and retrograde
and direct motions, which did ever seem to me great improbalities, do accord in
this Copernican Systeme.


SALV. You shall see them so to accord, Its a great Argument in favor of
Copernicus, that he obviates the stations and retrogradations of the motions of
the Planets.
Sagredus, that this only conjecture ought to be sufficient to make one that
is not more than pertinacious or stupid, yield, assent to all the rest of this
Doctrine. I tell you therefore, that nothing being altered in the motion of
Saturn, which is 30 years, in that of Jupiter, which is 12, in that of Mars,
which is 2, in that of Venus, which is 9. months, in that of Mercury, which is
80. days, or thereabouts, the sole annual motion of the Earth between Mars and
Venus, The sole annual motion of the Earth causes great inequality of motions
in the five Planets.
causes the apparent inequalities in all the five stars before named. And for
a facile and full understanding of the whole, I will describe this figure of
it. Therefore suppose the Sun to be placed in the center O, about which we will
draw the Orb described by the Earth, with the annual motion BGM, and let the
circle described, v. gr. by Jupiter about the Sun in 12. years, be this BGM,
and in the starry sphere let us imagine the Zodiac YVS. A demonstration of the
inequalities of the three superior Planets dependent on the annual motion of
the Earth.
Again, in the annual Orb of the Earth let us take certain equal arches, BC,
CD, OF, FG, GH, HI, IK, KL, LM, and in the Sphere of Jupiter let us make
certain other arches, passed in the same times in which the Earth passes hers,
which let be BC, CD, DE, OF, FG, GH, HI, IK, KL, LM, which shall each be
proportionally less than these marked in the Earths Orb, like as the motion of
Jupiter under the Zodiac is slower than the annual. Supposing now, that when
the Earth is in B, Jupiter is in B, it shall appear to us in the Zodiac to be
in P, describing the right line BBP. Next suppose the Earth to be moved from B
to C, and Jupiter from B to C, in the same time; Jupiter shall appear to have
passed in the Zodiac to Q, and to have moved straight forwards, according to
the order of the signs PQ. In the next place, the Earth passing to D, and
Jupiter to D, it shall be seen in the Zodiac in R, and from E, Jupiter being
come to E; will appear in the Zodiac in S, having all this while moved right
forwards. But the Earth afterward beginning to interpose more directly between
Jupiter and the Sun, she being come to F, and Jupiter to F, he will appear in
T, to have already begun to return apparently back again under the Zodiac, and
in that time that the Earth shall have pased the arch OF, Jupiter shall have
entertained himself between the points ST, and shall have appeared to us almost
motionlesse and stationary. The Earth being afterward come to G, and Jupiter
to G, in opposition to the Sun, it shall be visible in the Zodiac at V, and
much returned backwards by all the arch of the Zodiac TV; howbeit that all the
way pursuing its even course it has really gone forwards not only in its own
circle, but in the Zodiac also in respect to the center of the said Zodiac,
and to the Sun placed in the same. The Earth and Jupiter again continuing their
motions, when the Earth is come to H, and Jupiter to H, it shall seem very much
gone backward in the Zodiac by all the arch VX. The Earth being come to I, and
Jupiter to I, it shall be apparently moved in the Zodiac by the little space
XY, and there it will seem stationary. When afterward the Earth shall be come
to K, and Jupiter to K; in the Zodiac he shall have passed the arch IN in a
direct motion; and the Earth pursuing its course to L, shall see Jupiter in L,
in the point Z. And lastly Jupiter in M shall be seen from the Earth M, to have
passed to A, with a motion still right forwards; and its whole apparent
retrogadation in the Zodiac shall answer to the arch SY, made by Jupiter,
whilst that he in his own circle passes the arch EI, and the Earth in hers the
arch EI. And this which has been said, Retrogradations more frequent in
Saturn, less in Jupiter, and yet less in Mars, and why.
is intended of Saturn and of Mars also; and in Saturn those retrogradations
are somewhat more frequent than in Jupiter, by reason that its motion is a
little slower than that of Jupiter, so that the Earth overtaketh it it in a
shorter space of time; in Mars again they are more rare, for that its motion is
more swift than that of Jupiter. Whereupon the Earth consumes more time in
recovering it. Next as to Venus and Mercury, The Retrogradation of Venus and
Mercury demonstrated by Apollonius and Copernicus.
whose Circles are comprehended by that of the Earth, their stations and
regressions appear to be occasioned, not by their motions that really are such,
but by the anual motion of the said Earth, as Copernicus exellently
demonstrateth, together with Appollonius Pergaeus in lib. 5. of his
Revolutions, Chap. 35.

You see, Gentlemen, with what facility and simplicity the annual motion, The
annual motion of the Earth most apt to render a reason of the exorbitances of
the five Planets.
were it appertaining to the Earth, is accommodated to render a reason of the
apparent exorbitances, that are observed in the motions of the five Planets,
Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus and Mercury, taking them all away, and reducing
them to equal and regular motions. The Sun it self testifies the annual motion
to belong to the Earth.
And of this admirable effect, Nicholas Copernicus, has been the first that
has made the reason plain unto us. But of another effect, no less admirable
than this, and that with a knot, perhaps more difficult to unknit, binds the
wit of man, to admit this annual conversion, and to leave it to our Terrestrial
Globe; a new and unthought of conjecture arises from the Sun it self, which
shows that it is unwilling to be singular in shifting, of this attestation of
so eminent a conclusion, rather as a testimony beyond all exception, it has
desired to be heard apart. Hearken then to this great and new wonder.

The first discoverer and observer of the Solar spots, The Lyncaean Academick
the first discoverer of the Solar spots, and all the other celestial novelties.
as also of all the other Celestial novelties, was our Academick Lincaeus; and
he discovered them anno 1610. being at that time Reader of the Mathematics, in
the College of Padua, and there, and in Venice, The history of the proceedings
of the Academian for a long time about the observation of the Solar spots.
he discoursed thereof with several persons, of which some are yet living: And
the year following, he showed them in Rome to many great personages, as he
relates in the first of his Letters to Marcus Velserus, Duumviro.
Sheriff of Augusta. He was the first that against the opinions of the too
timorous and too jealous assertors of the Heavens inalterability, affirmed
those spots to be matters, that in short times were produced and dissolved: for
as to place, they were contiguous to the body of the Sun, and revolved about
the same; or else being carried about by the said Solar body, which revolveth
in it self about its own Center, in the space almost of a month, do finish
their course in that time; which motion he judged at first to have been made by
the Sun about an Axis erected upon the plane of the Ecliptic; in regard that
the arches described by the said spots upon the Discus of the Sun appear unto
our eye right lines, and parallels to the plane of the Ecliptic: which
therefore come to be altered, in part, with some accidental, wandering, and
irregular motions, to which they are subject, and whereby tumultuarily, and
without any order they successively change situations amongst themselves, one
while crouding close together, another while dissevering, and some dividing
themselves into many and very much changing figures, which, for the most part,
are very unusual. And albeit those so inconstant mutations did somewhat alter
the primary periodick course of the said spots, yet did they not alter the
opinion of our friend, so as to make him believe, that they were any essential
and fixed cause of those deviations, but he continued to hold, that all the
apparent alterations derived themselves from those accidental mutations: in
like manner, just as it would happen to one that should from far distant
Regions observe the motion of our Clouds; which would be discovered to move
with a most swift, great, and constant motion, carried round by the diurnal
Vertigo of the Earth (if happily that motion belong to the same) in twenty four
hours, by circles parallel to the Equinoctial, but yet altered, in part, by the
accidental motions caused by the winds, which drive them, at all adventures,
toward different quarters of the World. While this was in agitation, it came
to pass that Velserus sent him two Letters, written by a certain person, under
the feigned name of This Authors true name is Christopher Scheinerus a Jesuit,
and his Book here meant is entitled, Apelles post tabulam.
Apelles, upon the subject of these Spots, requesting him, with importunity, to
declare his thoughts freely upon those Letters, and withal to let him know
what his opinion was touching the essence of those spots; which his request he
satisfied in 3 Letters, showing first of all howvain the conjectures of Apelles
were; and discovering, secondly, his own opinions; withal foretelling to him,
that Apelles would undoubtedly be better advised in time, and turn to his
opinion, as it afterward came to pass. And because that our Academian (as it
was also the judgment of many others that were intelligent in Natures secrets)
thought he had in those three Letters investigated and demonstrated, if not all
that could be desired, or required by humane curiosity, at least all that could
be attained by humane reason in such a matter, he, for some time (being bufied
in other studies) intermitted his continual observations, and only in
complacency to some friend, joined with him, in making now and then an abrupt
observation: till that he, and after some years, we, being then at my La mia
villa delle S^lue.
Country-seat, met with one of the solitary Solar spots very big, and thick,
invited withal by a clear and constant serenity of the Heavens, he, at my
request, made observations of the whole progress of the said spot, carefully
marking upon a sheet of paper the places that it was in every day at the time
of the Suns coming into the Meridian; and we having found that its course was
not in a right line, but somewhat incurvated, we came to resolve, at last, to
make other observations from time to time; to which undertaking we were
strongly induced by a conceit, that accidentally came into the mind of my
Guest, which he imparted to me in these or the like words.

In my opinion, Philip, there is a way opened to a business of very great
consequence. For if the Axis about which the Sun turns be not erect
perpendicularly to the plane of the Ecliptic, A conceit that came suddenly
into the mind of the Academian Lyncaeus concerning the great consequence that
followed upon the motion of the Solar spots.
but is inclined upon the same, as its crooked course, but even now observed,
makes me believe, we shall be able to make such conjectures of the states of
the Sun and Earth, as neither so solid or so rational have been hitherto
deduced from any other accident whatsoever. I being awakened at so great a
promise, importuned him to make a free discovery of his conceit unto me. And he
continued his discourse to this purpose. Extravagant mutations to be observed
in the motions of the spots, foreseen by the Academick, in case the Earth had
the annual motion.
If the Earths motion were along the Ecliptique about the Sun; and the Sun were
constituted in the center of the said Ecliptic, and therein revolved in its
self, not about the Axis of the said Ecliptique (which would be the Axis of the
Earths annual motion) but upon one inclined, it must needs follow, that strange
changes will represent themselves to us in the apparent motions of the Solar
spots, although the said Axis of the Sun should be supposed to persist
perpetually and immutably in the same inclination, and in one and the same
direction toward the self-same point of the Universe. Therefore the
Terrestrial Globe in the annual motion moving round it, it will first follow,
that to us, carried about by the same, the courses of the spots shall sometimes
seem to be made in right lines, but this only twice a year, and at all other
times shall appear to be made by arches insensibly incurvated. Secondly, the
curvity of those arches for one half of the year, will show inclined the
contrary way to what they will appear in the other half; that is, for six
months the convexity of the arches shall be toward the upper part of the
Solar Discus, and for the other six months toward the inferior. Thirdly, the
spots beginning to appear, and (if I may so speak) to rise to our eye from the
left side of the Solar Discus, and going to hide themselves and to set in the
right side, the Oriental terms, that is, of their first appearings for six
months, shall be lower than the opposite terms of their occultations; and for
other six months it shall happen contrarily, to wit, that the said spots
rising from more elevated points, and from them descending, they shall, in
their courses, go and hide themselves in lower points; and only for two days
in all the year shall those terms of risings and settings be equilibrated:
after which freely beginning by small degrees the inclination of the courses of
the spots, and day by day growing bigger, in three months, it shall arrive at
its greatest obliquity, and from thence beginning to diminish, in such another
time it shall reduce it self to the other Aequilibrium. It shall happen, for a
fourth wonder, that the course of the greatest obliquity shall be the same with
the course made by the right line, and in the day of the Libration the arch of
the course shall seem more than ever incurvated. Again, in the other times,
according as the pendency shall successively diminish, and make it approach
toward the Aequilibrium, the incurvation of the arches of the courses on the
contrary shall, by degrees, increase.


SAGR. I confess, Salviatus, that to interrupt you in your Discourse is ill
manners, but I esteem it no less rudeness to permit you to run on any farther
in words, whilst they are, as the saying is, cast into the air: for, to speak
freely, I know not how to form any distinct conceit of so much as one of these
conclusions, that you have pronounced; but because, as I thus generally and
confusedly apprehend them, they hold forth things of admirable consequence, I
would gladly, some way or other, be made to understand the same.


SALV. The same that befalls you, befell me also, whilst my Guest transported
me with bare words; who afterward assisted my capacity, The first Accident to
be observed in the motion of the Solar spots; and consequently all the rest
explained.
by describing the business upon a material Instrument, which was no other
than a simple Sphere, making use of some of its circles, but to a different
purpose from that, to which they are commonly applied. Now I will supply the
defect of the Sphere, by drawing the same upon a piece of paper, as need shall
require. And to represent the first accident by me propounded, which was, that
the courses or journeys of the spots, twice a year, and no more, might be seen
to be made in right lines, let us suppose this point O [in Fig. 4.] to be the
center of the grand Orb, or, if you will, of the Ecliptic, and likewise also
of the Globe of the Sun it self; of which, by reason of the great distance that
is between it and the Earth, we that live upon the Earth, may suppose that we
see the one half: we will therefore describe this circle ABCD about the said
center O, which represents unto us the extreme term that divides and
separates the Hemisphere of the Sun that is apparent to us, from the other that
is occult. And because that our eye, no less than the center of the Earth, is
understood to be in the plane of the Ecliptic, in which is likewise the center
of the Sun, therefore, if we should fancy to our selves the body of the Sun to
be cut through by the said plane, the section will appear to our eye a right
line, which let be BOD, and upon that a perpendicular being let fall AOC, it
shall be the Axis of the said Ecliptic, and of the annual motion of the
Terrestrial Globe. Let us next suppose the Solar body (without changing center)
to revolve in it self, not about the Axis AOC (which is the erect Axis upon the
plane of the Ecliptic) but about one somewhat inclined, which let be this EOI,
the which fixed and unchangeable Axis maintains it self perpetually in the
same inclination and direction toward the same points of the Firmament, and of
the Universe. And because, in the revolutions of the Solar Globe, each point of
its superficies (the Poles excepted) describes the circumference of a circle,
either bigger or lesser, according as it is more or less remote from the said
Poles, let us take the point F, equally distant from them, and draw the
diameter FOG, which shall be perpendicular to the Axis EI, and shall be the
diameter of the grand circle described about the Poles EI. Supposing not that
the Earth, and we with her be in such a place of the Ecliptic, that the
Hemisphere of the Sun to us apparent is determined or bounded by the circle
ABCD, which passing (as it always does) by the Poles AC, passes also by EI.
It is manifest, that the grand circle, whose diameter is FG, shall be erect to
the circle ABCD, to which the ray that from our eye falls upon the center O,
is perpendicular; so that the said ray falls upon the plane of the circle,
whose diameter is FG, and therefore its circumference will appear to us a right
line, and the self same with FG, whereupon if there should be in the point F, a
spot, it coming afterward to be carried about by the Solar conversion, would,
upon the surface of the Sun, trace out the circumference of that circle, which
seems to us a right line. Its course or passage will therefore seem straight.
And straight also will the motion of the other spots appear, which in the said
revolution shall describe lesser circles, as being all parallel to the greater,
and to our eye placed at an immense distance from them. Now, if you do but
consider, how that after the Earth shall in six months have run through half
the grand Orb, and shall be situate opposite to that Hemisphere of the Sun,
which is now occult unto us, so as that the boundary of the part that then
shall be seen, may be the self same ABCD, which also shall pass by the Poles
EI; you shall understand that the same will evene in the courses of the spots,
as before, to wit, that all will appear to be made by right lines. But because
that that accident takes not place, save only when the teminator or boundary
passes by the Poles EI, and the said terminator from moment to moment, by
means of the Earths annual motion, continually alters, therefore its passage
by the fixed Poles EI, shall be momentary, and consequently momentary shall be
the time, in which the motions of those spots shall appear straight. From what
has been hitherto spoken one may comprehend also how that the apparition and
beginning of the motion of the spots from the part F, proceeding toward G,
their passages or courses are from the left hand, ascending toward the right;
but the Earth being placed in the part diametrically opposite the appearance of
the spots about G, shall still be to the left hand of the beholder, but the
passage shall be descending toward the right hand F. Let us now describe the
Earth to be situate one fourth part farther distant from its present state, and
let us draw, as in the other figure, the terminator ABCD, [as in Fig. 5.] and
the Axis, as before AC, by which the plane of our Meridian would pass, in
which plane should also be the Axis of the Suns revolution, with its Poles, one
toward us, that is, in the apparent Hemisphere, which Pole we will represent
by the point E, and the other shall fall in the occult Hemisphere, and I mark
it I. Inclining therefore the Axis EI, with the superior part E, toward us,
the great circle described by the Suns conversion, shall be this BFDG, whose
half by us seen, namely BFD, shall no longer seem unto us a right line, by
reason the Poles EI are not in the circumference ABCD, but shall appear
incurvated, and with its convexity toward the inferior part C. And it is
manifest, that the same will appear in all the lesser circles parallel to the
same BFD. It is to be understood also, that when the Earth shall be
diametrically opposite to this state, so that it sees the other Hemisphere of
the Sun, which now is hid, it shall of the said great circle behold the part
DGB incurved, with its convexity toward the superior part A; and the courses
of the spots in these constitutions shall be first, by the arch BFD, and
afterward by the other DGB, and the first apparitions and ultimate
occultations made about the points B and D, shall be equilibrated, and not
those that are more or less elevated than these. But if we constitute the
Earth in such a place of the Ecliptic, that neither the boundary ABCD, nor the
Meridian AC, passes by the Poles of the Axis EI, as I will show you anon,
drawing this other Figure [viz. Fig. 6.] wherein the apparent or visible Pole E
falls between the arch of the terminator AB, and the section of the Meridian
AC; the diameter of the great circle shall be FOG, and the apparent semicircle
FNG, and the occult semicircle GSF, the one incurvated with its convexity N
toward the inferior part, and the other also bending with its convexity S
toward the upper part of the Sun. The ingressions and exitions of the spots,
that is, the terms F and G shall not be librated, as the two others B and D;
but F shall be lower, and G higher: but yet with lesser difference than in the
first Figure. The arch also FNG shall be incurvated, but not so much as the
precedent BFD; so that in this position the passages or motions of the spots
shall be ascendent from the left side F, toward the right G, and shall be made
by curved lines. And imagining the Earth to be constituted in the position
diametrically opposite; so that the Hemisphere of the Sun, which was before the
occult, may be the apparent, and terminated by the same boundary ABCD, it will
be manifestly discerned, that the course of the spots shall be by the arch GSF,
beginning from the upper point G, which shall then be likewise from the left
hand of the beholder, and going to determine, descending toward the right, in
the point F. What I have hitherto said, being understood, I believe that there
remains no difficulty in conceiving how from the passing of the terminator of
the Solar Hemispheres by the Poles of the Suns conversion, or near or far from
the same, do arise all the differences in the apparent courses of the spots; so
that by how much the more those Poles shall be remote from the said terminator,
by so much the more shall those courses be incurvated, and less oblique;
whereupon at the same distance, that is, when those Poles are in the section of
the Meridian, the incurvation is reduced to the greatest, but the obliquity to
the least, that is to Aequilibrium, as the second of these three last figures
[viz. Fig. 5.] demonstrateth. On the contrary, when the Poles are in the
terminator, as the first of these three figures [viz. Fig. 4.] shows the
inclination is at the greatest, but the incurvation at the least, and reduced
to rectitude. The terminator departing from the Poles, the curvity begins to
grow sensible, the obliquity all the way increasing, and the inclination
growing lesser.

These are those admirable and extravagant mutations, that my Guest told me
would from time to time appear in the progresses of the Solar spots, if so be
it should be true that the annual motion belonged to the Earth, and that the
Sun being constituted in the center of the Ecliptic, were revolved in it self
upon an Axis, not erect, but inclined to the Plane of the said Ecliptic.


SAGR. I do now very well apprehend these consequences, and believe that they
will be better imprinted in my fancy, when I shall come to reflect upon them,
accommodating a Globe to those inclinations, and then beholding them from
several places. It now remains that you tell us what followed afterward
touching the event of these imaginary consequences.


SALV. It came to pass thereupon, The events being observed, were answerable
to the predictions.
that continuing many several months to make most accurate observations,
noting down with great exactness the courses or transitions of sundry spots at
diverse times of the year, we found the events punctually to correspond to the
predictions.


SAGR. Simplicius, if this which Salviatus says be true; (nor can we distrust
him upon his word) the Ptolomeans and Aristoteleans had need of solid
arguments, strong conjectures, and well grounded experiments to counterpoise an
objection of so much weight, and to support their opinion from its final
overthrow.


SIMP. Fair and softly good Sir, for happily you may not yet be got* so far as
you persuade your self you are gone. And though I am not an absolute master of
the subject of that narration given us by Salviatus; Though the annual motion
assigned to the Earth answerth to the Phenomenon of the solar spots, yet does
it not follow by conversion that from the Phenomenon of the spots one may inf^r
the annual motion to belong to the Earth.
yet do I not find that my Logic, whilst I have a regard to form, teaches me,
that that kind of argumentation affords me any necessary reason to conclude in
favor of the Copernican Hypothesis, that is, of the stability of the Sun in
the center of the Zodiac, and of the mobility of the Earth under its
circumference. For although it be true, that the said conversion of the Sun,
and cirnition of the Earth being granted, there be a necessity of discerning
such and such strange extravagancies as these in the spots of the Sun, yet does
it not follow that arguing per conversum, from finding such like unusual
accidents in the Sun, one must of necssity conclude the Earth to move by the
circumference, and the Sun to be placed in the center of the Zodiac. For who
shall assertain me that the like irregularities may not as well be visible in
the Sun, it being moveable by the Ecliptic, to the inhabitants of the Earth,
it being also immovable in the center of the same? Unless you demonstrate to
me, that there can be no reason given for that appearance, when the Sun is made
moveable, and the Earth stable, I will not alter my opinion and belief that the
Sun moves, and the Earth stands still.


SAGR. Simplicius behaveth himself very bravely, and argues very subtly in
defense of the cause of Aristotle and Ptolomy; and if I may speak the truth,
mythinks that the conversation of Salviatus, though it have been but of small
continuance, has much farthered him in discoursing silogistically. An effect
which I know to be wrought in others as well as him. But as to finding and
judging whether competent reason may be rendered of the apparent exorbitancies
and irregularities in the motions of the spots, supposing the Earth to be
immovable, and the Sun moveable, I shall expect that Salviatus manifest his
opinion to us, for it is very probable that he he has considered of the same,
and collected together whatever may be said upon the point.


SALV. I have often thought thereon, and also discoursed thereof with my Friend
and Guest aforementioned; and touching what is to be produced by Philosophers and
Astronomers, in defense of the ancient Systeme, we are on one hand certain,
certain I say, The Pure Peripatetick Philosophers will laugh at the spots and
their Phenomenon, as illusions of the Chrystals in the Telescope.
that the true and pure Peripateticks laughing at such as employ themselves in
such, to their thinking, insipid fooleries, will censure all these Phenomenon
to be vain illusions of the Christals; and in this manner will with little
trouble free themselves from the obligation of studying any more upon the same.
Again, as to the Astronomical Philosophers, after we have with some diligence
weighed that which may be alleged as a mean between those two others, we have
not been able to find out an answer that suffices to satisfy at once the
course of the spots, and the discourse of the Mind. I will explain unto you so
much as I remember thereof, that so you may judge thereon as seems best unto
you.

Supposing that the apparent motions of the Solar spots are the same with those
that have been above declared, and supposing the Earth to be immovable in the
center of the Ecliptic, in whose circumference let the center of the Sun be
placed; it is necessary that of all the differences that are seen in those
motions, the causes do reside in the motions that are in the body of the Sun:
Which in the first place must necessarily revolve in it self ( i. e. about its
own axis) carrying the spots along therewith; If the Earth be immovable in the
center of the Zodiac, there must be ascribed to the Sun four several motions,
as is declared at length.
which spots have been supposed, yea and proved to adhere to the Solar
superficies. It must secondly be confessed, that the Axis of the Solar conversion
is not parallel to the Axis of the Ecliptic, that is as much as to say, that
it is not perpendicularly erected upon the Plane of the Ecliptic, because if
it were so, the courses and exitions of those spots would seem to be made by
right lines parallel to the Ecliptic. The said Axis therefore is inclining, in
regard the said courses are for the most part made by curve lines. It will be
necessary in the third place to grant that the inclination of this Axis is not
fixed, and continually extended toward one and the same point of the Universe,
but rather that it does always from moment to moment go changing its
direction; for if the pendency should always look toward the self same point,
the courses of the spots would never change appearance; but appearing at one
time either right or curved, bending upwards or downwards, ascending or
descending, they would appear the same at all times. It is therefore necessary
to say, that the said Axis is convertible; and is sometimes found to be in the
Plane of the circle that is extreme, terminate, or of the visible Hemisphere, I
mean at such time as the courses of the spots seem to be made in right lines,
and more than ever pendent, which happens twice a year; and at other times
found to be in the Plane of the Meridian of the Observator, in such sort that
one of its Poles falls in the visible Hemisphere of the Sun, and the other in
the occult; and both of them remote from the extreme points, or we may say,
from the poles of another Axis of the Sun, which is parallel to the Axis of the
Ecliptic; (which second Axis must necessarily be assigned to the Solar Globe)
remote, I say, as far as the inclination of the Axis of the revolution of the
spots does import; and moreover that the Pole falling in the apparent
Hemisphere, is one while in the superior, another while in the inferior part
thereof; for that it must be so, the courses themselves do manifestly evince at
such time as they are equilibrated, and in their greatest curvity, one while
with their convexity toward the upper part, and another while toward the
lower part of the Solar Discus. And because those positions are in continual
alteration, making the inclinations and incurvations now greater, now lesser,
and sometimes reduce themselves, the first sort to perfect libration, and the
second to perfect perpendicularity, it is necessary to assert that the self
same Axis of the monthly revolution of the spots has a particular revolution
of its own, whereby its Poles describe two circles about the Poles of another
Axis, which for that reason ought (as I have said) to be assigned to the Sun,
the semidiameter of which circles answers to the quantity of the inclination
of the said Axis. And it is necessary, that the time of its Period be a year;
for that such is the time in which all the appearances and differences in the
courses of the spots do return. And that the revolution of this Axis, is made
about the Poles of the other Axis parallel to that of the Ecliptic, and not
about other points, the greatest inclinations and greatest incurvations, which
are always of the same bigness, do clearly prove. So that finally, to maintain
the Earth fixed in the center, it will be necessary to assign to the Sun, two
motions about its own center, upon two several Axes, one of which finisheth its
conversion in a year, and the other in less than a month; which assumption
seems, to my understanding, very hard, and almost impossible; and this
depends on the necessity of ascribing to the said Solar body two other
motions about the Earth upon different Axes, describing with one the Ecliptic
in a year, and with the other forming spirals, or circles parallel to the
Equinoctial one every day: whereupon that third motion which ought to be
assigned to the Solar Clobe about its own center (I mean not that almost
monthly, which carries the spots about, but I speak of that other which ought
to pass through the Axis and Poles of this monthly one) ought not, for any
reason that I see, to finish its Period rather in a year, as depending on the
annual motion by the Ecliptic, than in twenty four hours, as depending on the
diurnal motion upon the Poles of the Equinoctial. I know, that what I now speak
is very obscure, but I shall make it plain unto you, when we come to speak of
the third motion annual, assigned by Copernicus, to the Earth. Now if these
four motions, so incongruous with each other, (all which it would be necessary
to assign to the self same body of the Sun) may be reduced to one sole and
simple motion, assigned the Sun upon an Axis that never changes position, and
that without innovating any thing in the motions for so many other causes
assigned to the Terrestrial Globe, may so easily salve so many extravagant
appearances in the motions of the Solar spots, it seems really that such an
Hypothesis ought not to be rejected.

This, Simplicius, is all that came into the minds of our friend, and my self,
that could be alleged in explanation of this Phenomenon by the Copernicans,
and by the Ptolomaeans, in defense of their opinions. Do you infer from
thence what your judgment persuades you.


SIMP. I acknowledge my self unable to interpose in so important a decision:
And, as to my particular thoughts, I will stand neutral; and yet nevertheless
I hope that a time will come, when our minds being illumined by more lofty
contemplations than these our humane reasonings, we shall be awakened and freed
from that mist which now is so great an hinderance to our sight.


SAGR. Excellent and pious is the counsel taken by Simplicius, and worthy to be
entertained and followed by all, as that which being derived from the highest
wisdom and supreamest authority, may only, with security be received. But yet
so far as humane reason is permitted to penetrate, confining my self within the
bounds of conjectures, and probable reasons, I will say a little more
resolutely than Simplicius does, that amongst all the ingenuous subtilties I
ever heard, I have never met with any thing of greater admiration to my
intellect, nor that has more absolutely captivated my judgment, (always
excepting pure Geometrical and Arithmetical Demonstrations) than these two
conjectures taken, the one from the stations and retrogradations of the five
Planets, and the other from these irregularities of the motions of the Solar
spots: and because they seem to me so easily and clearly to assign the true
reason of so extravagant appearances, showing as if they were but one sole
simple motion, mixed with so many others, simple likewise, but different from
each other, without introducing any difficulty, rather with obviating those
that accompany the other Hypothesis; I am thinking that I may rationally
conclude, that those who contumaciously withstand this Doctrine, either never
heard, or never understood, these so convincing arguments.


SALV. I will not ascribe unto them the title either of convincing, or
non-convincing; in regard my intention is not, as I have several times told
you, to resolve any thing upon so high a question, but only to propose those
natural and Astronomicall reasons, which, for the one and other Systeme, may be
produced by me, leaving the determination to others; which determination cannot
at last, but be very manifest: for one of the two positions being of necessity
to be true, and the other of necessity to be false, it is a thing impossible
that (always confining our selves within the limits of humane doctrine) the
reasons alleged for the true Hypothesis should not manifest themselves as
concludent as those for the contrary vain and ineffectual.


SAGR. It will be time therefore, that we hear the objections of the little
Book of I should have told you, that the true name of this concealed Author is
Christopher Scheinerus, and its title Disquisitiones Mathematica.
Conclusions, or Disquisitions which Simplicius did bring with him.


SIMP. Here is the Book, and this is the place where the Author first briefly
describes the Systeme of the world, according to the Hypothesis of Copernicus,
saying, Terram igitur una cum Luna, totoque hoc elementari mundo Copernicus,
etc.


SALV. Forbear a little, Simplicius, for methinks that this Author, in this
first entrance, shows himself to be but very ill verst in the Hypothesis which
he goes about to confute, in regard, he says that Copernicus makes the
Earth, together with the Moon, to describe the i. e. the Ecliptic
grand Orb in a year moving from East to West; a thing that as it is false and
impossible, so was it never affirmed by Copernicus, who rather makes it to
move the contrary way, I mean from West to East, that is, according to the
order of the Signs; whereupon we come to think the same to be the annual
motion of the Sun, constituted immovable in the center of the Zodiac. See the
too adventurous confidence of this man; to undertake the confutation of
another Doctrine, and yet to be ignorant of the primary fundamentals; upon
which his adversary lays the greatest and most important part of all the
Fabric. This is a bad beginning to gain himself credit with his Reader; but
let us go on.


SIMP. Having explained the Universal Systeme, he begins to propound his
objections against this annual motion: and the first are these, which he cites
Ironically, and in derision of Copernicus, Instances of a certain Book
Ironically propounded against Copernicus.
and of his followers, writing that in this fantastical Hypothesis of the
World one must necessarily maintain very gross absurdities; namely, that the
Sun, Venus, and Mercury are below the Earth; and that grave matters go
naturally upwards, and the light downwards; and that Christ, our Lord and
Redeemer, ascended into Hell, and descended into Heaven, when he approached
toward the Sun, and that when Joshuah commanded the Sun to stand still, the
Earth stood still, or the Sun moved a contrary way to that of the Earth; and
that when the Sun is in Cancer, the Earth runs through Capricorn; and that
the Hyemal (or Winter) Signs make the Summer, and the Aestival Winter; and
that the Stars do not rise and set to the Earth, but the Earth to the Stars;
and that the East begins in the West, and the West in the East; and, in a
word, that almost the whole course of the World is inverted.


SALV. Every thing pleases me, except it be his having intermixed places out
of the sacred Scriptures (always venerable, and to be revered) amongst these,
but two scurrilous fooleries, and attempting to wound with holy Weapons, those
who Philosophating in jest, and for divertisement, neither affirm nor deny,
but, some presupposals and positions being assumed, do familiarly argue.


SIMP. Truth is, he has displeased me also, and that not a little; and
especially, by adding presently after that, howbeit, the Copernichists answer,
though but very impertinently to these and such like other reasons, yet can
they not reconcile nor answer those things that follow.


SALV. This is worse than all the rest; for he pretends to have things more
efficacious and concludent than the Authorities of the sacred Leaves; But I
pray you, let us reverence them, and pass on to natural and humane reasons:
and yet if he give us amongst his natural arguments, things of no more
solidity, than those hitherto alleged, we may wholly decline this
undertaking, for I as to my own parricular, do not think it fit to spend words
in answering such trifling impertinencies. And as to what he says, that the
Copernicans answer to these objections, it is most false, nor may it be
thought, that any man should set him self to wast his time so unprofitably.


SIMP. I concur with you in the same judgment; Supposing the annual motion to
belong to the Earth, it follows, that one fixed Star, is bigger than the
whole grand Orb.
therefore let us hear the other instances that he brings, as much stronger.
And observe here, how he with very exact computations concludes, that if the
grand Orb of the Earth, or the ecliptic, in which Copernicus makes it to run
in a year round the Sun, should be as it were, insensible, in respect of the
immensitie of the Starry Sphaere, according as the said Copernicus, says it is
to be supposed, it would be necessary to grant and confirm, that the fixed
Stars were remote from us, an unconceivable distance, and that the lesser of
them, were bigger than the whole grand Orb aforesaid, and some other much
bigger than the whole Sphaere of Saturn; Masses certainly too excessively vast,
unimaginable, and incredible.


SALV. I have heretofore seen such another objection brought by Tycho against
Copernicus, Tycho his Argument grounded upon a false Hypothesis.
and this is not the first time that I have discovered the fallacy, or, to say
better, the fallacies of this Argumemtation, founded upon a most false
Hypothesis, and upon a Proposition of the said Copernicus, Litigious Lawyers
that are extertained in an ill cause, keep close to some ex^ression fallen from
the adverse party at unawares.
understood by his adversaries, with too punctual a nicity, according to the
practice of those pleaders, who finding the flaw to be in the very merit of
their cause, keep to some one word, fallen unawares from the contrary party,
and fly out into loud and tedious descants upon that. But for your better
information; Copernicus having declared those admirable consequences which are
derived from the Earths annual motion, to the other Planets, that is to say, of
the Or progressions.
directions and retrogradations of the three uppermost in particular; The
apparent diversity of motion in the Planets, is insensible in the fixed Stars.
he subjoyneth, that this apparent mutation (which is discerned more in Mars
than in Jupiter, by reason Jupiter is more remote, and yet less in Saturn, by
reason it is more remote than Jupiter) in the fixed Stars, did remain
imperceptible, by reason of their immense remoteness from us, in comparison of
the distances of Jupiter or Saturn. Here the Adversaries of this opinion rise
up, and supposing that forenamed imperceptibility of Copernicus, as if it had
been taken by him, for a real and absolute thing of nothing, and adding, that a
fixed Star of one of the lesser magnitudes, is notwithstanding perceptible,
seeing that it comes under the sense of seeing, they go on to calculate with
the intervention of other false assumptions, and concluding that it is
necessary by the Copernican Doctrine, to admit, that a fixed Star is much
bigger than the whole grand Orb. Supposing that a fixed Star of the sixth
magnitude is no bigger than the Sun, the diversity which is so great in the
Planets, in the fixed Stars is almost insensible.
Now to discover the vanity of this their whole proceeding, I shall show that a
fixed Star of the sixth magnitude, being supposed to be no bigger than the Sun,
one may thence conclude with true demonstrations, that the distance of the said
fixed Stars from us, comes to be so great, that the annual motion of the
Earth, which causes so great and notable variations in the Planets, appears
scarce observable in them; and at the same time, I will distinctly show the
gross fallacies, in the assumptions of Copernicus his Adversaries.

And first of all, The distance of the Sun, contains 1208 Semid. of the Earth.
I suppose with the said Copernicus, and also with his opposers, that the
Semidiameter of the grand Orb, which is the distance of the Earth from the Sun,
contains 1208 Semidiameters of the said Earth. Secondly, I premise with the
allowance aforesaid, and of truth, that the The Diameter of the Sun, half a
degree.
apparent diameter of the Sun in its mean distance, to be about half a degree,
that is, 30. min. prim. which are 1800. seconds, that is, 108000. thirds. And
because the apparent Diameter of a fixed Star of the first magnitude, The
Diameter of a fixed Star, of the first magnitude, and of one of the sixth.
is no more than 5. seconds, that is, 300. thirds, and the Diameter of a fixed
Star of the sixth magnitude, 50. thirds, (and herein is the greatest error of
the Anti-Copernicans) Therefore the Diameter of the Sun, The apparent Diameter
of the Sun, how much it is bigger than that of a fixed star.
contains the Diameter of a fixed Star of the sixth magnitude 2160. times.
And therefore if a fixed Star of the sixth magnitude, were supposed to be
really equal to the Sun, and not bigger, which is the same as to say, if the
Sun were so far removed, that its Diameter should seem to be one of the 2160.
parts of what it now appears, its distance ought of necessity to be 2160.
times greater than now in effect it is, which is as much as to say, that the
distance of the fixed Stars of the sixth magnitude, is 2160. Semidiameters of
the grand Orb. The distance of a fixed star of the sixth magnitude, how much it
is, the star being supposed to be equal to the Sun.
And because the distance of the Sun from the Earth, contains by common consent
1208. Semidiameters of the said Earth, and the distance of the fixed Stars (as
has been said) 2160. Semediameters of the grand Orb, therefore the
Semidiameter of the Earth is much greater (that is almost double) in comparison
of the grand Orb, than the Semidiameter of the grand Orb, in relation to the
distance of the Starry Sphaere; In the fixed stars the diversity of aspect,
caused by the grand Orb, is little more then that caused by the Earth in the
Sun.
and therefore the variation of aspect in the fixed Stars, caused by the
Diameter of the grand Orb, can be but little more observable, than that which
is observed in the Sun, occasioned by the Semidiameter of the Earth.


SAGR. This is a great fall for the first step.


SALV. It is doubtless an error; for a fixed Star of the sixth magnitude, A
star of the sixth magnitude, supposed by Tycho and the Author of the Book of
Conclusions, an hundred and six milions of times bigger than needs.
which by the computation of this Author, ought, for the upholding the
proposition of Copernicus, to be as big as the whole grand Orb, only by
supposing it equal to the Sun, which Sun is less by far, than the hundred and
six millionth part of the said grand Orb, makes the starry Sphaere so great
and high as suffices to overthrow the instance brought against the said
Copernicus.


SAGR. Favor me with this computation.


SALV. The supputation is easy and short. The Diameter of the Sun, The
computation of the magnitude of the fixed Stars, in respect to the grand Orb.
is eleven semidiameters of the Earth, and the Diameter of the grand Orb,
contains 2416. of those same semidiameters, by the ascent of both parties; so
that the Diameter of the said Orb, contains the Suns Diameter 220. times very
near. And because the Spheres are to one another, as the Cubes of their
Diameters, let us make the Cube of 220. which is 106480000. and we shall have
the grand Orb, an hundred and six millions, four hundred and eighty thousand
times bigger than the Sun, to which grand Orb, a star of the sixth magnitude,
ought to be equal, according to the assertion of this Author.


SAGR. The error then of these men, consists in being extremely mistaken, in
taking the apparent Diameter of the fixed Stars.


SALV. This is one, but not the only error of them; and indeed, A common
error of all the Astronomers, touching the magnitude of the stars.
I do very much admire how so many Astronomers, and those very famous, as are
Alfagranus, Albategnus, Tebizius, and much more modernly the Tycho's and
Clavins's, and in sum, all the predecessors of our Academian, should have been
so grossly mistaken, in determining the magnitudes of all the Stars, as well
fixed as moveable, the two Luminaries excepted out of that number; and that
they have not taken any heed to the adventitious irradiations that deceitfully
represent them an hundred and more times bigger, than when they are beheld,
without those capillious rays, nor can this their inadvertency be excused, in
regard that it was in their power to have beheld them at their pleasure without
those tresses, which is done, by looking upon them at their first appearance in
the evening, Venus renders the error of Astronomers in determining the
magnitudes of stars inexcusable.
or their last occultation in the coming on of day; and if none of the rest,
yet Venus, which often times is seen at noon day, so small, that one must sharpen
the sight in discerning it; and again, in the following night, seems a great
flake of light, might advertise them of their fallacy; for I will not believe
that they thought the true Discus to be that which is seen in the obscurest
darknesses, and not that which is discerned in the luminous Medium: for our
lights, which seen by night afar off appear great, and near at hand show their
true luster to be terminate and small, might have easily have made them
cautious; nay, if I may freely speak my thoughts, I absolutely believe that
none of them, no not Tycho himself, so accurate in handling Astronomical
Instruments, and that so great and accurate, without sparing very great cost in
their construction, did ever go about to take and measure the apparent diameter
of any Star, the Sun and Moon excepted; but I think, that arbitrarily, and as
we say, with the eye, some one of the more ancient of them pronounced the thing
to be so and so, and that all that followed him afterward, without more ado,
kept close to what the first had said; for if any one of them had applied
himself to have made some new proof of the same, he would doubtless have
discovered the fraud.


SAGR. But if they wanted the Telescope, and you have already said, that our
Friend with that same Instrument came to the knowledge of the truth, they ought
to be excused, and not accused of ignorance.


SALV. This would hold good, if without the Telescope the business could not
be effected. Its true, that this Instrument by showing the Discus of the Star
naked, and magnified an hundred or a thousand times, rendereth the operation
much more easy, but the same thing may be done, although not altogether so
exactly, without the Instrument, and I have many times done the same, and my
method therein was this. I have caused a rope to be hanged toward some Star, A
way to measure the apparent diameter of a star.
and I have made use of the Constellation, called the Harp, which rises
between the North and Rendered in Latin Little, that is to say, North-west.
North-east, and then by going toward, and from the said rope, interposed
between me and the Star, I have found the place from whence the thickness of
the rope has just hid the Star from me: this done, I have taken the distance
from the eye to the rope, which was one of the sides including the angle that
was composed in the eye, and i. e. Is subtended by.
which insisteth upon the thickness of the rope, and which is like, yea the
same with the angle in the Starry Sphere, that insisteth upon the diameter of
the Star, and by the proportion of the ropes thickness to the distance from
the eye to the rope, by the table of Arches and Chords, I have immediately
found the quantity of the angle; using all the while the wonted caution that is
observed in taking angles so acute, not to form the concourse of the visive
rays in the center of the eye, where they are only refracted, but beyond the
eye, where really the pupils greatness makes them to concur.


SAGR. I apprehend this your cautelous procedure, albeit I have a kind of
haesitancy touching the same, but that which most puzzleth me is, that in this
operation, if it be made in the dark of night, methinks that you measure the
diameter of the irradiated Discus, and not the true and naked face of the Star.


SALV. Not so, Sir, for the rope in covering the naked body of the Star, takes
away the rays, which belong not to it, but to our eye, of which it is deprived
so soon as the true Discus thereof is hid; and in making the observation, you
shall see, how unexpectedly a little cord will cover that reasonable big body
of light, which seemed impossible to be hid, unless it were with a much
broader Screene: to measure, in the next place, and exactly to find out, how
many of those thicknesses of the rope interpose in the distance between the
said rope and the eye, I take not only one diameter of the rope, but laying
many pieces of the same together upon a Table, so that they touch, I take with
a pair of Compasses the whole space occupied by fifteen, or twenty of them, and
with that measure I commensurate the distance before with another smaller cord
taken from the rope to the concourse of the visive rays. And with this
sufficiently-exact operation I find the apparent diameter of a fixed Star of
the first magnitude, commonly esteemed to be 2 min. pri. and also 3 min. prim.
by Tycho in his Astronomical Letters, The diameter of a fixed star of the first
magnitude not more than five sec. min.
cap. 167. to be no more than 5 seconds, which is one of the 24. or 36. parts
of what they have held it: see now upon what gross errors their Doctrines are
founded.


SAGR. I see and comprehend this very well, but before we pass any further, I
would propound the doubt that arises in me in the finding the concourse [or
intersection] of the visual rays beyond the eye, when observation is made of
objects comprehended between very acute angles; and my scruple proceeds from
thinking, that the said concourse may be sometimes more remote, and sometimes
less; and this not so much, by means of the greater or lesser magnitude of
the object that is beheld, as because that in observing objects of the same
bigness, it seems to me that the concourse of the rays, for certain other
respects ought to be made more and less remote from the eye.


SALV. I see already, whither the apprehension of Sagredus, a most diligent
observer of Natures secrets, tends; and I would lay any wager, The circle of
the pupil of the eye enlarges and contracteth.
that amongst the thousands that have observed Cats to contract and enlarge the
pupils of their eyes very much, there are not two, nor happily one that has
observed the like effect to be wrought by the pupils of men in seeing, whilst
the medium is much or little illumined, and that in the open light the circlet
of the pupil diminishes considerably: so that in looking upon the face or
Discus of the Sun, it is reduced to a smallness lesser than a grain of
Panicum, a small grain like to Mill, I take it to be the same with that called
Bird Seed.
Panick, and in beholding objects that do not shine, and are in a less
luminous medium, it is enlarged to the bigness of a Lintel or more; and in
sum this expansion and contraction differs in more than decuple proportion:
From whence it is manifest, that when the pupil is much dilated, it is
necessary that the angle of the rays concourse be more remote from the eye;
which happens in beholding objects little luminated. This is a Doctrine which
Sagredus has, just now, given me the hint of, whereby, if we were to make a
very exact observation, and of great consequence, we are advertized to make the
observation of that concourse in the act of the same, or just such another
operation; but in this our case, wherein we are to show the error of
Astronomers, this accuratenesse is not necessary: for though we should, in
favor of the contrary party, suppose the said concourse to be made upon the
pupil it self, it would import little, their mistake being so great. I am not
certain, Sagredus, that this would have been your objection.


SAGR. It is the very same, and I am glad that it was not altogether without
reason, as your concurrence in the same assures me; but yet upon this occasion
I would willingly hear what way may be taken to find out the distance of the
concourse of the visual rays.


SALV. The method is very easy, and this it is, I take two long Strisce. How
to find the distance of the rays concourse from the pupil.
labels of paper, one black, and the other white, and make the black half as
broad as the white; then I stick up the white against a wall, and far from that
I place the other upon a stick, or other support, at a distance of fifteen or
twenty yards, and receding from this, second another such a space in the same
right line, it is very manifest, that at the said distance the right lines will
concur, that departing from the terms of the breadth of the white piece, shall
pass close by the edges of the other label placed in the midway; whence it
follows, that in case the eye were placed in the point of the said concourse
or intersection, the black slip of paper in the midst would precisely hide the
opposite blank, if the sight were made in one only point; but if we should
find, that the edges of the white cartel appear discovered, it shall be a
necessary argument that the visual rays do not issue from one sole point. And
to make the white label to be hid by the black, it will be requisite to draw
nearer with the eye: Therefore, having approached so near, that the
intermediate label covers the other, and noted how much the required
approximation was, the quantity of that approach shall be the certain measure,
how much the true concourse of the visive rays, is remote from the eye in the
said operation, and we shall moreover have the diameter of the pupil, or of
that circlet from whence the visive rays proceed: for it shall be to the
breadth of the black paper, as is the distance from the concourse of the lines,
that are produced by the edges of the papers to the place where the eye
stands, when it first sees the remote paper to be hid by the intermediate
one, as that distance is, I say, to the distance that is between those two
papers. And therefore when we would, with exactness, measure the apparent
diameter of a Star, having made the observation in manner, as aforesaid, it
would be necessary to compare the diameter of the rope to the diameter of the
pupil; and having found v. g. the diameter of the rope to be quadruple to that
of the pupil, and the distance of the eye from the rope to be, for example,
thirty yards, we would say, that the true concourse of the lines produced from
the ends or extremities of the diameter of the star, by the extremities of the
diameter of the rope, does fall out to be forty yards remote from the said
rope, for so we shall have observed, as we ought, the proportion between the
distance of the rope from the concourse of the said lines, and the distance
from the said concourse to the place of the eye, which ought to be the same
that is between the diameter of the rope, and diameter of the pupil.


SAGR. I have perfectly understood the whole business, and therefore let us
hear what Simplicius has to allege in defense of the Anti-Copernicans.


SIMP. Albeit that grand and altogether incredible inconvenience insisted upon
by these adversaries of Copernicus be much moderated and abated by the
discourse of Salviatus, yet do I not think it weakened so, as that it has not
strength enough left to foil this same opinion. For, if I have rightly
apprehended the chief and ultimate conclusion, in case, the stars of the sixth
magnitude were supposed to be as big as the Sun, (which yet I can hardly think)
yet it would still be true, that the grand Orb [or Ecliptick] would occasion a
mutation and variation in the starry Sphere, like to that which the
semidiameter of the Earth produces in the Sun, which yet is observable; so
that neither that, no nor a less mutation being discerned in the fixed Stars,
methinks that by this means the annual motion of the Earth is destroyed and
overthrown.


SALV. You might very well so conclude, Simplicius, if we had nothing else to
say in behalf of Copernicus: but we have many things to allege that yet have
not been mentioned; and as to that your reply, nothing hinders, but that we
may suppose the distance of the fixed Stars to be yet much greater than that
which has been allowed them, and you your self, and whoever else will not
derogate from the propositions admitted by Piolomy's sectators, must needs
grant it as a thing most requisite to suppose the Starry Sphere to be very much
bigger yet than that which even now we said that it ought to be esteemed. All
Astronomers agree that the greater magnitudes of the Orbs is the cause of the
tardity of the conversions.
For all Astronomers agreeing in this, that the cause of the greater tardity of
the Revolutions of the Planets is, the majority of their Spheres, and that
therefore Saturn is more slow than Jupiter, and Jupiter than the Sun, for that
the first is to describe a greater circle than the second, and that than this
later, etc. confidering that Saturn v. g. the altitude of whose Orb is nine
times higher than that of the Sun, and that for that cause the time of one
Revolution of Saturn, is thirty times longer than that of a conversion of the
Sun, in regard that according to the Doctrine of Ptolomy, one conversion of the
starry Sphere is finished in 36000. years, whereas that of Saturn is consummate
in thirty, and that of the Sun in one, By another supposition taken from
Astronomers, the distance of the fixed Stars is calculated to be 10800
semidiameters of the grand Orb.
arguing with a like proportion, and saying, if the Orb of Saturn, by reason it
is nine times bigger than that of the Sun, revolves in a time thirty times
longer, by conversion, how great ought that Orb to be, which revolves 36000.
times more slowly? it shall be found that the distance of the starry Sphere
ought to be 10800 semidiameters of the grand Orb, which should be full five
times bigger than that, which even now we computed it to be, in case that a
fixed Star of the sixth magnitude were equal to the Sun. Now see how much
lesser yet; upon this account, the variation occasioned in the said Stars, by
the annual motion of the Earth, ought to appear. And if at the same rate we
would argue the distance of the starry Sphere from Jupiter, By the proportion
of Jupiter and of Mars, the starry Sphere is found to be yet more remo^e.
and from Mars, that would give it us to be 15000. and this 27000 semidiameters
of the grand Orb, to wit, the first seven, and the second twelve times bigger
than what the magnitude of the fixed Star, supposed equal to the Sun, did make
it.


SIMP. Methinks that to this might be answered, that the motion of the starry
Sphere has, since Ptolomy, been observed not to be so slow as he accounted it;
yea, if I mistake not, I have heard that Copernicus himself made the
Observation.


SALV. You say very well; but you allege nothing in that which may favor the
cause of the Ptolomaeans in the least, who did never yet reject the motion of
36000. years in the starry Sphere, for that the said tardity would make it too
vast and immense. For if that the said immensity was not to be supposed in
Nature, they ought before now to to have denied a conversion so slow as that it
could not with good proportion adapt it self, save only to a Sphere of
monstrous magnitude.


SAGR. Pray you, Salviatus, let us lose no more time in proceeding, by the way
of these proportions with people that are apt to admit things most
dis-proportionate; so that its impossible to win any thing upon them this way:
and what more disproportionate proportion can be imagined than that which these
men swallow down, and admit, in that writing, that there cannot be a more
convenient way to dispose the Celestial Spheres, in order, than to regulate
them by the differences of the times of their periods, placing from one degree
to another the more slow above the more swift, when they have constituted the
Starry Sphere higher than the rest, as being the slowest, they frame another
higher still than that, and consequently greater, and make it revolve in twenty
four hours, whilst the next below, it moves not round under 36000. years?


SALV. I could wish, Simplicius, that suspending for a time the affection rhat
you bear to the followers of your opinion, you would sincerely tell me, whether
you think that they do in their minds comprehend that magnitude, which they
reject afterward as incapable for its immensity to be ascribed to the
Universe. For I, Imme^se magnitudes and numbers are incomprehensible by our
understanding.
as to my own part, think that they do not; But believe, that like as in the
apprehension of numbers, when once a man begins to pass those millions of
millions, the imagination is confounded, and can no longer form a conceit of
the same, so it happens also in comprehending immense magnitudes and distances;
so that there intervenes to the comprehension an effect like to that which
befalls the sense; For whilst that in a serene night I look toward the
Stars, I judge, according to sense, that their distance is but a few miles, and
that the fixed Stars are not a jot more remote than Jupiter or Saturn, nay than
the Moon. But without more ado, consider the controversies that have past
between the Astronomers and Peripatetick Philosophers, upon occasion of the new
Stars of Cassiopeia and of Sagittary, the Astronomers placing them amongst the
fixed Stars, and the Philosophers believing them to be below the Moon. So
unable is our sense to distinguish great distances from the greatest, though
these be in reality many thousand times greater than those. In a word, I ask of
thee, O foolish man! Does thy imagination comprehend that vast magnitude of the
Universe, which thou afterward judge to be too immense? If thou
comprehendest it; will thou hold that thy apprehension extends it self
farther than the Divine Power? will thou say, that thou can imagine greater
things than those which God can bring to pass? But if thou apprehendest it
not, why will thou pass thy verdict upon things beyond thy comprehension?


SIMP. All this is very well, nor can it be denied, but that Heaven may in
greatness surpass our imagination, as also that God might have created it
thousands of times vaster than now it is; but we ought not to grant any thing
to have been made in vain, and to be idle in the Universe. Now, in that we see
this admirable order of the Planets, disposed about the Earth in distances
proportionate for producing their effects for our advantage, to what purpose is
it to interpose afterward between the sublime Orb of Saturn and the starry
Sphere, a vast vacancy, without any star that is superfluous, and to no
purpose? To what end? For whose profit and advantage?


SALV. Methinks we arrogate too much to our selves, Simplicius, whilst we will
have it, that the only care of us, is the adaequate work, and bound, beyond
which the Divine Wisdom and Power does, or disposes of nothing. But I will
not consent, that we should so much shorten its hand, but desire that we may
content our selves with an assurance that God and Nature are so employed in the
governing of humane affairs, God and Nature do employ themselves in caring for
men, as if they minded nothing else.
that they could not more apply themselves thereto, although they had no other
care than only that of mankind; and this, I think, I am able to make out by a
most pertinent and most noble example, taken from the operation of the Suns
light, which whilst it attracteth these vapors, An example of Gods care of
mankind taken from the Sun.
or scorcheth that plant, it attracteth, it scorcheth them, as if it had no
more to do; yea, in ripening that bunch of grapes, nay that one single grape,
it does apply it self so, that it could not be more intense, if the sum of all
its business had been the only maturation of that grape. Now if this grape
receives all that it is possible for it to receive from the Sun, not suffering
the least injury by the Suns production of a thousand other effects at the same
time; it would be either envy or folly to blame that grape, if it should think
or wish that the Sun would only appropriate its rays to its advantage. I am
confident that nothing is omitted by the Divine Providence, of what concerns
the government of humane affairs; but that there may not be other things in the
Universe, that depend upon the same infinite Wisdom, I cannot, of my self, by
what my reason holds forth to me, bring my self to believe. However, if it were
not so, yet should I not forbear to believe the reasons laid before me by some
more sublime intelligence. In the mean time, if one should tell me, that an
immense space interposed between the Orbs of the Planets and the Starry Sphere,
deprived of stars and idle, would be vain and useless, as likewise that so
great an immensity for receipt of the fixed stars, as exceeds our utmost
comprehension would be superfluous, I would reply, that it is rashness to go
about to make our shallow reason judge of the Works of God, and to call vain and
superfluous, whatsoever thing in the Universe is not subservient to us.


SAGR. Say rather, It is great rashness to censure that to be superfluous in
h^ll verse, which we do not perceive to be made for us.
and I believe you would say better, that we know not what is subservient to
us; and I hold it one of the greatest vanities, yea follies, that can be in the
World, to say, because I know not of what use Jupiter or Saturn are to me, that
therefore these Planets are superfluous, yea more, that there are no such
things in rerum natura; when as, oh foolish man! I know not so much as to what
purpose the arteries, the gristles, the spleen, the gall do serve; nay I should
not know that I have a gall, spleen, or kidneys, if in many desected Corpse,
they were not shown unto me; and then only shall I be able to know what the
spleen works in me, when it comes to be taken from me. To be able to know
what this or that Celestial body works in me (seeing you will have it that
all their influences direct themselves to us) it would be requisite to remove
that body for some time; By depriving Heaven of some star, one might come to
know what influence it has upon us.
and then whatsoever effect I should find wanting in me, I would say that it
depended on that star. Moreover, who will presume to say that the space which
they call too vast and useless between Saturn and the fixed stars, is void of
other mundane bodies? Must it be so, Many things may be in Heaven, that are
invisible to us.
because we do not see them? Then the four Medicean Planets, and the companions
of Saturn came first into Heaven, when we began to see them, and not before?
And by this rule the innumerable other fixed stars had no existence before that
men did look on them? and the cloudy constellations called Nebulosae were at
first only white flakes, but afterward with the Telescope we made them to
become constellations of many lucid and bright stars. Oh presumptious, rather
oh rash ignorance of man!


SALV. It Is to no purpose Sagredus, to sally out any more into these
unprofitable exaggerations: Let us pursue our intended design of examining the
validity of the reasons alleged on either side, without determining any thing,
remitting the judgment thereof when we have done, to such as are more knowing.
Returning therefore to our natural and humane disquisitions, I say, Great,
small, immense, etc. are relative terms.
that great, little, immense, small, etc. are not absolute, but relative terms,
so that the self same thing compared with diverse others, may one while be
called immense, and another while imperceptible, not to say small. This being
so, I demand in relation to what the Starry Sphere of Copernicus may be called
over vast. In my judgment it cannot be compared, or said to be such, unless it
be in relation to some other thing of the same kind; Vanity of those men's
discourse who judge the starry sphere too vast in the Copernican Hypothesis.
now let us take the very least of the same kind, which shall be the Lunar Orb;
and if the Starry Orb may be so censured to be too big in respect to that of
the Moon, every other magnitude that with like or greater proportion exceeds
another of the same kind, ought to be adjudged too vast, and for the same
reason to be denied that they are to be found in the World; and thus an
Elephant, and a Whale, shall without more ado be condemned for Chymaera's, and
Poetical fictions, because that the one as being too vast in relation to an
Ant, which is a Terrestrial animal, and the other in respect to the
Spelloncola, which is here put for the l^ast of Fishes.
Gudgeon, which is a Fish, and are certainly seen to be in rerum natura, would
be too immeasurable; for without all dispute, the Elephant and Whale exceed the
Ant and Gudgeon in a much greater proportion than the Starry Sphere does that
of the Moon, although we should fancy the said Sphere to be as big as the
Copernican Systeme makes it. The space assigned to a fixed star, is much less
than that of a Planet.
Moreover, how hugely big is the Sphere of Jupiter, or that of Saturn, designed
for a receptacle but for one single star; and that very small in comparison of
one of the fixed? Certainly if we should assign to every one of the fixed stars
for its receptacle so great a part of the Worlds space, it would be necessary
to make the Orb wherein such innumerable multitudes of them reside, very many
thousands of times bigger than that which serves the purpose of Copernicus. A
star is called in respect of the space that environs it.
Besides, do not you call a fixed star very small, I mean even one of the most
apparent, and not one of those which shun our sight; and do we not call them so
in respect of the vast space circumfused? Now if the whole Starry Sphere were
one entire lucid body; The whole starry sphere behold from a great distance
might appear as small as one single star.
who is there, that does not know that in an infinite space there might be
assigned a distance so great, as that the said lucid Sphere might from thence
show as little, yea less than a fixed star, now appears beheld from the
Earth? From thence therefore we should then judge that self same thing to be
little, which now from hence we esteem to be immeasurably great.


SAGR. Great in my judgment, is the folly of those who would have had God to
have made the World more proportinal to the narrow capacities of their reason,
than to his immense, rather infinite power.


SIMP. All this that you say is very true; but that upon which the adversary
makes a scruple, is, to grant that a fixed star should be not only equal to,
but so much bigger than the Sun; when as they both are particular bodies
situate within the Starry Orb: And indeed in my opinion this Author very
pertinently questioneth and asks: To what end, and for whose sake are such
huge machines made? Instances of the Author of the Conclusions by way of
interogation.
Were they produced for the Earth, for an inconsiderable point? And why so
remote? To the end they might seem so very small, and might have no influence
at all upon the Earth? To what purpose is such a needless monstrous Or Gulf.
immensity between them and Saturn? All those assertions fall to the ground
that are not upheld by probable reasons.


SALV. I conceive by the questions which this person asks, that one may
collect, Answers to the interrogatories of the said Author.
that in case the Heavens, the Stars, and the quantity of their distances and
magnitudes which he has hitherto held, be let alone, (although he never
certainly fancied to himself any conceivable magnitude thereof) he perfectly
discerns and comprehends the benefits that flow from thence to the Earth, which
is no longer an inconsiderable thing; nor are they any longer so remote as to
appear so very small, but big enough to be able to operate on the Earth; and
that the distance between them and Saturn is very well proportioned, and that
he, for all these things, has very probable reasons; of which I would gladly
have heard some one: The Author of the Conclusions confound and contradicts
himself in his interrogations.
but being that in these few words he confounds and contradicts himself, it
makes me think that he is very poor and ill furnished with those probable
reasons, and that those which he calls reasons, are rather fallacies, or dreams
of an overweening fancy. For I ask of him, whether these Celestial bodies
truly operate on the Earth, Interrogatories put to the Author of the
Conclusions, by which the weakness of his is made appear.
and whether for the working of those effects they were produced of such and
such magnitudes, and disposed at such and such distances, or else whether they
have nothing at all to do with Terrene mattets. If they have nothing to do with
the Earth; it is a great folly for us that are Earth-born, to offer to make our
selves arbitrators of their magnitudes, and regulators of their local
dispositions, seeing that we are altogether ignorant of their whole business
and concerns; but if he shall say that they do operate, and that they are
directed to this end, he does affirm the same thing which a little before he
denied, and praises that which even now he condemned, in that he said, that
the Celestial bodies situate so far remote as that they appear very small,
cannot have any influence at all upon the Earth. But, good Sir, in the Starry
Sphere pre-established at its present distance, and which you did acknowledge to
be in your judgment, well proportioned to have an influence upon these Terrene
bodies, many stars appear very small, and an hundred times as many more are
wholly invisible unto us (which is an appearing yet less than very small)
therefore it is necessary that (contradicting your self) you do now deny their
operation upon the Earth; or else that (still contradicting your self) you
grant that their appearing very small does not in the least lessen their
influence; or else that (and this shall be a more sincere and modest
concession) you acknowledge and freely confess, that our passing judgment upon
their magnitudes and distances is a vanity, not to say presumption or rashness.


SIMP. Truth is, I my self did also, in reading this passage perceive the
manifest contradiction, in saying, that the Stars (if one may so speak) of
Copernicus appearing so very small, could not operate on the Earth, and not
perceiving that he had granted an influence upon the Earth to those of Ptolomy,
and his sectators, which appear not only very small, but are, for the most
part, very invisible.


SALV. But I proceed to another consideration: What is the reason, does he say,
why the stars appear so little? Is it happily, because they seem so to us? That
remote objects appear so small, is the defect of the eye, as is demonstrated.
Does not he know, that this comes from the Instrument that we employ in
beholding them, to wit, from our eye? And that this is true, by changing
Instrument, we shall see them bigger and bigger, as much as we will. And who
knows but that to the Earth, which beholds them without eyes, they may not
show very great, and such as in reality they are? But it is time that, omitting
these trifles, we come to things of more moment; and therefore I having already
demonstrated these two things: First, how far off the Firmament ought to be
placed to make, that the grand Orb causes no greater difference than that
which the Terrestrial Orb occasioneth in the remoteness of the Sun; And next,
how likewise to make that a star of the Firmament appear to us of the same
bigness, as now we see it, it is not necessary to suppose it bigger than the
Sun; I would know whether Tycho, or any of his adherents has ever attempted to
find out, by any means, whether any appearance be to be discovered in the
starry Sphere, upon which one may the more resolutely deny or admit the annual
motion of the Earth.


SAGR. I would answer for them, that there is not, no nor is there any need
there should; Tycho nor his followers ever attempted to see whether there are
any appearances in the Firmament for or against the annual m^tion.
seeing that it is Copernicus himself that says, that no such diversity is
there: and they, arguing ad hominem, admit him the same; and upon this
assumption they demonstrate the improbability that follows thereupon, namely,
that it would be necessary to make the Sphere so immense, that a fixed star, to
appear unto us as great as it now seems, ought of necessity to be of so immense
a magnitude, as that it would exceed the bigness of the whole grand Orb, a
thing, which notwithstanding, as they say, is altogether incredible.


SALV. I am of the same judgment, and verily believe that they argue contra
hominem, studying more to defend another man, than desiring to come to the
knowledge of the truth. And I do not only believe, Astronomers, perhaps, have
not known what appearances ought to follow upon the annual motion of the Earth.
that none of them ever applied themselves to make any such observation, but I
am also uncertain, whether any of them do know what alteration the Earths
annual motion ought to produce in the fixed stars, in case the starry Sphere
were not so far distant, as that in them the said diversity, by reason of its
minuity dis-appeareth; for their surceasing that inquisition, and referring
themselves to the mere assertion of Copernicus, may very well serve to convict
a man, but not to acquit him of the fact: Copernicus understood not some things
for want of Instruments.
For its possible that such a diversity may be, and yet not have been sought
for; or that either by reason of its minuity, or for want of exact Instruments
it was not discovered by Copernicus; for though it were so, this would not be
the first thing, that he either for want of Instruments, or for some other
defect has not known; and yet he proceeding upon other solid and rational
conjectures, affirms that, which the things by him not discovered do seem to
contradict: for, as has been said already, without the Telescope, neither
could Mars be discerned to increase 60. times; nor Venus 40. more in that than
in this position; yea, their differences appear much less than really they are
and yet nevertheless it is certainly discovered at length, that those
mutations are the same, to an hair that the Copernican Systeme required. Tycho
and others argue against the annual motion, from the invariable elevation of
the Pole.
Now it would be very well, if with the greatest accuratenesse possible one
should enquire whether such a mutation as ought to be discoverable in the fixed
stars, supposing the annual motion of the Earth, would be observed really and
in effect, a thing which I verily believe has never as yet been done by any;
done, said I? no, nor happily (as I said before) by many well understood how it
ought to be done. Nor speak I this at random, for I have heretofore seen a
certain Manuscript of one of these Anti-Copernicans, which said, that there
would necessarily follow, in case that opinion were true, a continual rising
and falling of the Pole from six months to six months, according as the Earth
in such a time, by such a space as is the diameter of the grand Orb, retireth
one while toward the North, and another while toward the South; and yet it
seemed to him reasonable, yea necessary, that we, following the Earth, when we
were toward the North should have the Pole more elevated than when we are
toward the South. In this very error did one fall that was otherwise a very
skilful Mathematician, and a follower of Copernic. as Tycho relates in his
Christophorus Rothmannus.
Progymnasma. page 684. which said, that he had observed the Polar altitude to
vary, and to differ in Summer from what it is in Winter: and because Tycho
denies the merit of the cause, but finds no fault with the method of it;
that is, denies that there is any mutation to be seen in the altitude of the
Pole, but does not blame the inquisition, for not being adapted to the finding
of what is sought, he thereby shows, that he also esteeemed the Polar
altitude varied, or not varied every six months, to be a good testimony to
disprove or infer the annual motion of the Earth.


SIMP. In truth, Salviatus, my opinion also tells me, that the same must
necessarily ensue: for I do not think that you will deny me, but that if we
walk only 60. miles toward the North, the Pole will rise unto us a degree
higher, and that if we move 60. miles farther Northwards, the Pole will be
elevated to us a degree more, etc. Now if the approaching or receding 60. miles
only, make so notable a change in the Polar altitudes, what alteration would
follow, if the Earth and we with it, should be transported, I will not say 60.
miles, but 60. thousand miles that way.


SALV. It would follow (if it should proceed in the same proportion) that the
Pole shall be elevated a thousand degrees. See, Simplicius, what a long rooted
opinion can do. Yea, by reason you have fixed it in your mind for so many
years, that it is Heaven, that revolveth in twenty four hours, and not the
Earth, and that consequently the Poles of that Revolution are in Heaven, and
not in the Terrestrial Globe, cannot now, in an hours time shake off this
habituated conceit, and take up the contrary, fancying to your self, that the
Earth is that which moves, only for so long time as may suffice to conceive of
what would follow, thereupon should that lie be a truth. If the Earth
Simplicius, be that which moves in its self in twenty four hours, in it are
the Poles, in it is the Axis, in it is the Equinoctial, that is, the grand
Circle, described by the point, equidistant from the Poles, in it are the
infinite Parallels bigger and lesser described by the points of the superficies
more and less distant from the Poles, in it are all these things, and not in
the starry Sphere, which, as being immovable, wants them all, and can only by
the imagination be conceived to be therein, prolonging the Axis of the Earth so
far, till that determining, it shall mark out two points placed right over our
Poles, and the plane of the Equinoctial being extended, it shall describe in
Heaven a circle like it self. Now if the true Axis, the true Poles, the true
Equinoctial, do not change in the Earth so long as you continue in the same
place of the Earth, and though the Earth be transported, as you do please, yet
you shall not change your habitude either to the Poles, or to the circles, or
to any other Earthly thing; and this because, that that transposition being
common to you and to all Terrestrial things; Motion (...) it is common is as if
it never were.
and that motion where it is common, is as if it never were; and as you change
not habitude to the Terrestrial Poles (habitude I say, whether that they rise,
or descend) so neither shall you change position to the Poles imagined in
Heaven; always provided that by Celestial Poles we understand (as has been
already defined) those two points that come to be marked out by the
prolongation of the Terrestrial Axis unto that length. It Is true those points in
Heaven do change, when the Earths transportment is made after such a manner,
that its Axis comes to pass by other and other points of the immovable
Celestial Sphere, but our habitude thereunto changes not, so as that the
second should be more elevated to us than the first. If any one will have one
of the points of the Firmament, which do answer to the Poles of the Earth to
ascend, and the other to descend, he must walk along the Earth toward the one,
receding from the other, for the transportment of the Earth, and with it us our
selves, (as I told you before) operates nothing at all.


SAGR. Permit me, I beseech you Salviatus, to make this a little more clear by
an example, which although gross, is acommodated to this purpose. An example
fitted to prove that the altitude of the Pole ought not to vary by means of the
Earths annual motion.
Suppose your self, Simplicius, to be aboard a Ship, and that standing in the
Poope, or Hin-deck; you have directed a Quadrant, or some other Astronomical
Instrument, toward the top of the Top-gallant-Mast, as if you would take its
height, which suppose it were v. gr. 40. degrees, there is no doubt, but that
if you walk along the Corsia, the bank or bench on which slaves sit in a Gally.
Hatches toward the Mast 25. or 30. paces; and then again direct the said
Instrument to the same Top-Gallant-Top. You shall find its elevation to be
greater, and to be increased v. gr. 10. degrees; but if instead of walking
those 25. or 30. paces toward the Mast, you stand still at the Stern, and
make the whole Ship to move thitherwards, do you believe that by reason of the
25. or 30. paces that it had past, the elevation of the Top-Gallant-Top would
show 10. degrees increased?


SIMP. I believe and know that it would not gain an hairs breadth in the
passing of 30. paces, nor of a thousand, no nor of an hundred thousand miles;
but yet I believe withal that looking through the sights at the Top and
Top-Gallant, if I should find a fixed Star that was in the same elevation, I
believe I say, that, holding still the Quadrant, after I had sailed toward the
star 60. miles, the eye would meet with the top of the said Mast, as before,
but not with the star, which would be elevated to me one degree.


SAGR. Then you do not think that the sight would fall upon that point of the
Starry Sphere, that answers to the direction of the Top-Gallant Top?


SIMP. No: For the point would be changed, and would be beneath the star first
observed.


SAGR. You are in the right. Now like as that which in this example answers
to the elevation of the Top-Gallant-Top, is not the star, but the point of the
Firmament that lies in a right line with the eye, and the said top of the
Mast, so in the case exemplified, that which in the Firmament answers to the
Pole of the Earth, is not a star, or other fixed thing in the Firmament; but is
that point in which the Axis of the Earth continued straight out, till it
comes thither does determine, which point is not fixed, but obeys the
mutations that the Pole of the Earth does make. Upon the annual motion of the
Earth, alteration may ensue in some fixed star, not in the Pole.
And therefore Tycho, or who ever else that did alledg this objection, ought to
have said that upon that same motion of the Earth, were it true, one might
observe some difference in the elevation and depression (not of the Pole, but)
of some fixed star toward that part which answers to our Pole.


SIMP. I already very well understand the mistake by them committed; but yet
therefore (which to me seems very great) of the argument brought on the
contrary is not lessened, supposing relation to be had to the variation of the
stars, and not of the Pole; for if the moving of the Ship but 60. miles, make a
fixed star rise to me one degree, shall I not find alike, yea and very much
greater mutation, if the Ship should sail toward the said star for so much
space as is the Diameter of the Grand Orb, which you affirm to be double the
distance that is between the Earth and Sun?


SAGR. Herein Simplicius, there is another fallacy, which, truth is, The
equivoke of those who believe that in the annual motion great mutations are to
be made about the elevation of a fixed star, is confuted.
you understand, but do not upon the sudden think of the same, but I will try
to bring it to your remembrance: Tell me therefore; if when after you have
directed the Quadrant to a fixed star, and found v. g. its elevation to be 40.
degrees, you should without stirring from the place, incline the side of the
Quadrant, so as that the star might remain elevated above that direction, would
you thereupon say that the star had acquired greater elevation?


SIMP. Certainly no: For the mutation was made in the Instrument and not in the
Observer, that did change place, moving toward the same.


SAGR. But if you sail or walk along the surface of the Terrestrial Globe, will
you say that there is no alteration made in the said Quadrant, but that the
same elevation is still retained in respect of the Heavens, so long as you your
self do not incline it, but let it stand at its first constitution?


SIMP. Give me leave to think of it. I would say without more ado, that it
would not retain the same, in regard the progress I make is not in plano, but
about the circumference of the Terrestrial Globe, which at every step changes
inclination in respect to Heaven, and consequently makes the same change in
the Instrument which is erected upon the same.


SAGR. You say very well: And you know withal, that by how much the bigger that
circle shall be upon which you move, so many more miles you are to walk, to
make the said star to rise that same degree higher; and that finally if the
motion toward the star should be in a right line, you ought to move yet
farther, than if it were about the circumference of never so great a circle?


SALV. True: The right line, and circumference of an infinite circle, are the
same thing.
For in short the circumference of an infinite circle, and a right line are the
same thing.


SAGR. But this I do not understand, nor as I believe, does Simplicius
apprehend the same; and it must needs be concealed from us under some mystery,
for we know that Salviatus never speaks at random, nor proposes any Paradox,
which does not break forth into some conceit, not trivial in the least.
Therefore in due time and place I will put you in mind to demonstrate this,
that the right line is the same with the circumference of an infinite circle,
but at present I am unwilling that we should interrupt the discourse in hand.
Returning then to the case, I propose to the consideration of Simplicius, how
the accession and recession that the Earth makes from the said fixed star which
is near the Pole can be made as it were by a right line, for such is the
Diameter of the Grand Orb, so that the attempting to regulate the elevation and
depression of the Polar star by the motion along the said Diameter, as if it
were by the motion about the little circle of the Earth, is a great argument of
but little judgment.


SIMP. But we continue still unsatisfied, in regard that the said small
mutation that should be therein, would not be discerned; and if this be null,
then must the annual motion about the Grand Orb ascribed to the Earth, be null
also.


SAGR. Here now I give Salviatus leave to go on, who as I believe will not
overpasse the elevation and depression of the Polar star or any other of those
that are fixed as null, although not discovered by any one, and affirmed by
Copernicus himself to be, I will not say null, but unobservable by reason of
its minuity.


SALV. I have already said above, that I do not think that any one did ever set
himself to observe, Enquiry is made what mutations, and in what stars, are to
be discovered, by means of the annual motion of the Earth.
whether in different times of the year there is any mutation to be seen in the
fixed stars, that may have a dependence on the annual motion of the Earth, and
added withal, that I doubted least happily some might never have understood what
those mutations are, and amongst what stars they should be discerned; therefore
it would be necessary that we in the next place narrowly examine this
particular. Astronomers having omitted to instance what alterations those are
that may be derived from the annual motion of the Earth, do thereby testify
that they never rightly understood the same.
My having only found written in general terms that the annual motion of the
Earth about the Grand Orb, ought not to be admitted, because it is not probable
but that by means of the same there would be discoverd some apparent mutation
in the fixed stars, and not hearing say what those apparent mutations ought to
be in particular, and in what stars, makes me very reasonably to infer that
they who rely upon that general position, have not understood, no nor possibly
endeavored to understand, how the business of these mutations goes, nor what
things those are which they say ought to be seen. The mutations of the fixed
stars ought to be in some greater, in others lesser, and in others nothing at
all.
And to this judgment I am the rather induced; knowing that the annual motion
ascribed by Copernicus to the Earth, if it should appear sensible in the Starry
Sphere, is not to make apparent mutations equal in respect to all the stars,
but those appearances ought to be made in some greater, in others lesser, and
in others yet lesser; and lastly, in others absolutely nothing at all, by
reason of the vast magnitude that the circle of this annual motion is supposed
to be of. As for the mutations that should b^ seen, they are of two kinds, one
is the said stars changing apparent magnitude, and the other their variation of
altitudes in the Meridian. Upon which necessarily follows the mutation of
risings and settings, and of their distances from the Zenith, etc.


SAGR. Methinks I see preparing for me such a skean of these revolutions, that
I wish it may never be my task to dis-intangle them, for to confess my
infirmity to Salviatus, I have sometimes thought thereon, but could never find
the Bandola that end of a skeen wherewith housewives fasten their hankes of
yarn, thread or silk.
Lay-band of it, and I speak not so much of this which pertains to the fixed
stars, as of another more terrible labor which you bring to my remembrance by
maintaining these Meridian Altitudes, Ortive Latitudes and distances from the
Vertex, etc. The grand difficulty in Copernicus his Doctrine, is that which
concerns the Phenomenon of the Sun and fixed stars.
And that which puzzleth my brains, arises from what I am now about to tell
you. Copernicus supposes the Starry Sphere immovable, and the Sun in the
center thereof immovable also. Therefore every mutation which seems unto us
to be made in the Sun or in the fixed stars, must of necessity befall the Earth
and be ous. But the Sun rises and declineth in our Meridian by a very great
arch of almost 47. degrees, and by arches yet greater and greatet, varieth its
Ortive and Occidual Latitudes in the oblique Horizons. Now how can the Earth
ever incline and elevate so notably to the Sun, and nothing at all to the fixed
stars, or so little, that it is not to be perceived? This is that knot which
could never get through my Pettine, it is the stay in a Weavets Loom, that
permits no knot or snarle to pass it, called by them the Comb of the Loom.
Loom-Combe; and if you shall untie it, I shall hold you for more than an
Alexander.


SALV. These are scruples worthy of the ingenuity of Sagredus, and this doubt
is so intricate, that even Copernicus himself almost despaired of being able to
explain the same, so as to render it intelligible, which we see as well by his
own confession of its obscurity, as also by his, at two several times, taking
two different ways to make it out. And, I ingenuously confess that I
understood not his explanation, till such time as another method more plain and
manifest, had rendered it intelligible; and yet neither was that done without a
long and laborious application of my thoughts to the same.


SIMP. Aristotle saw the same scruple, Aristotle's argument against the
Ancients, who held that the Earth was a Planet.
and makes use thereof to oppose certain of the Ancients, who held that the
Earth was a Planet; against whom he argues, that if it were so, it would
follow that it also, as the rest of the Planets, should have a plurality of
motions, from whence would follow these variations in the risings and settings
of the fixed stars, and likewise in the Meridian Altitudes. And in regard that
he propounds the difficulty, and does not answer it, it must needs be, if not
impossible, at least very difficult to be resolved.


SALV. The stresse and strength of the knot rendereth the solution thereof more
commendable and admirable; but I do not promise you the same at this time, and
pray you to dispense with me therein till too morrow, and for the present we
will go considering and explaining those mutations and differences that by
means of the annual motion ought to be discerned in the fixed stars, like as
even now we said, for the explication whereof certain preparatory points offer
themselves, which may facilitate the answer to the grand objection. Now
reassuming the two motions ascribed to the Earth (two I say, for the third is
no motion, as in its place I will declare) that is the annual and diurnal, The
annual motion made by the center of the Earth under the Ecliptic and the
diurnal motion made by the Earth about its own center.
the first is to be understood to be made by the center of the Earth in or
about the circumference of the grand Orb, that is of a very great circle
described in the plain of the fixed and immutable Ecliptic; the other, namely
the diurnal, is made by the Globe of the Earth in it self about its own center,
and own Axis, not erect, but inclined to the Plane of the Ecliptic, with the
inclination of 23. degrees and an half, or thereabouts, the which inclination
is maintained all the year about, and that which ought especially to be
observed, is always situate toward the same point of Heaven: The axis of the
Earth continues always parallel to it self, and describes a Cylindraical
superficies, inclining to the grand Orb.
in so much that the Axis of the diurnal motion does always remain parallel to
it self; so that if we imagine that same Axis to be continued out until it
reach the fixed stars, whilst the center of the Earth is encircling the whole
Ecliptic in a year, the said Axis describes the superficies of an oblique
Cylinder, which has for one of its bases the said annual circle, and for the
other a like circle imaginarily described by its extremity, or, (if you will)
Pole, amongst the fixed stars. And this same cylinder is oblique to the Plane
of the Ecliptic, according to the inclination of the Axis that describes it,
which we have said to be 23 degrees and an half, the which continuing
perpetually the same (save only, that in many thousands of years it makes
some very small mutation, which nothing imports in our present business)
causes that the Terrestrial Globe does never more incline or elevate, The Orb
of the Earth never inclines, but is immutably the same.
but still conserveth the same state without mutation. From whence ensues,
that as to what pertains to the mutations to be observed in the fixed stars
dependant on the sole annual motion, the same shall happen to any point
whatsoever of the Earths surface, as befalls unto the center of the Earth it
self; and therefore in the present explanations we will make use of the center,
as if it were any whatsoever point of the superficies. And for a more facile
understanding of the whole, The fixed stars placed in the Ecliptic never
elevate nor descend, on account of the annual motion, but yet approach and
recede.
let us design the same in lineal figures: And first of all let us describe in
the Plane of the Ecliptic the circle ANBO [in Fig. 7.] and let us understand
the points A and B, to be the extremes toward the North and South; that is,
the beginning of [or entrance into] Cancer or Capricorn, and let us prolong the
Diameter AB, indeterminately by D and C toward the Starry Sphere. I say now in
the first place, that none of the fixed stars placed in the Ecliptic, shall
ever vary elevation, by reason of any whatsoever mutation made by the Earth
along the said Plane of the Ecliptic, but shall always appear in the same
superficies, although the Earth shall approach and recede as great a space as
is that of the diameter of the Grand Orb, as may plainly be seen in the said
figure. For whether the Earth be in the point A or in B, the star C always
appears in the same line ABC; although the distance BC, be less than AC, by
the whole diameter AB. The most therefore that can be discovered in the star C,
and in any other placed in the Ecliptic, is the augmented or diminished
apparent magnitude, by reason of the approximation or recession of the Earth.


SAGR. Stay a while I pray you, for I meet with a certain scruple, which much
troubles me, and it is this: That the star C may be seen by the same line ABC,
as well when the Earth is in A, as when it is in B, I understand very well, as
also furthermore I apprehend that the same would happen in all the points of
the line AB, Objections against the Earths annual motion taken from the fixed
stars placed in the Ecliptic.
so long as the Earth should pass from A to B by the said line; but it passing
thither, as is to be supposed, by the arch ANB, it is manifest that when it
shall be in the point N, and in any other except those two A and B, the said
star shall no longer be observed in the line AB; but in others. So that, if the
appearing under several lines ought to cause apparent mutations, some
difference must needs appear in this case. Nay more, I will speak it with that
Philosophical freedom, which ought to be allowed amongst Philosophic friends,
methinks that you, contradicting your self, deny that now, which but even now
to our admiration, you proved to be really true, and considerable; I mean that
which happens in the Planets, and particularly in the three superior ones,
that being constantly in the Ecliptic, or very near unto it, do not only show
themselves one while near unto us, and another while remote, but so deformed in
their regular motions, that they seem sometimes immovable, and sometimes many
degrees retrograde; and all upon no other occasion than the annual motion of
the Earth.


SALV. Though by a thousand accidents I have been heretofore assured of the
wittiness of Sagredus, yet I had a desire by this one experiment more to
ascertain me of what I may expect from his ingenuity, and all this for my own
interest, for in case my Propositions stand but proof against the hammer and
furnace of his judgment, I shall be confident that they will abide the Or will
prove of good alloy.
test of all Touch-stones. I say therefore that I had purposely dissembled this
objection, but yet not with any intent to deceive you, and to put any falsehood
upon you, as it might have happened if the objection by me disguised, and by
you over-lookt, had been the same in effect as it seemed to be in appearance,
that is, really valid and conclusive; but it is not so; nay I rather suspect
that to try me, you make as if you did not see its nullity. But I will herein
be too hard for you, and force from your tongue, that which you would so
artificially conceal; and therefore tell me, what that thing should be, whereby
you come to know the station and retrogradation of the Planets, which is
derived from the annual motion, and which is so great, that at least some
footsteps of such an effect ought to appear in the stars of the Ecliptic?


SAGR. This demand of yours contains two questions, to which it is necessary
that I make reply; the first relates to the imputation which you lay upon me of
a Dissembler; the other concerns that which may appear in the stars, etc. As
to the first, I will say with your permission, that it is not true, that I have
dissembled my knowing the nullity of that objection; and to assure you of the
same, I now tell you that I very well understand the nullity thereof.


SALV. But yet I do not understand how it can be, that you spoke not friendly,
when you said you did not know that same fallacy which you now confess that
you know very well.


SAGR. The very confession of knowing it may assure you that I did not
dissemble, when I said that I did not understand it; for if I had had a mind,
and would dissemble, who could hinder me from continuing in the same
simulation, and denying still that I understand the fallacy? I say therefore
that I understood not the same, at that time, but that I do now at this present
apprehend it, for that you have prompted my intellect, first by telling me
resolutely that it is null, and then by beginning to question me so at large
what thing that might be, whereby I might come to know the station and
retrogradation of the Planets; The station, direction and retrogradation of the
Planets is known, in relation to the fixed stars.
and because this is known by comparing them with the fixed stars, in relation
to which, they are seen to vary their motions, one while toward the West, and
another toward the East, and sometimes to abide immovable; and because there
is not any thing above the Starry Sphere, immensely more remote from us, and
visible unto us, wherewith we may compare our fixed stars, therefore we cannot
discover in the fixed stars any footsteps of what appears to us in the
Planets. This I believe is the substance of that which you would force from me.


SALV. It is so, An Indice is the fixed stars like to that which is (...) in
the Plane^s, is an argument of the Earths annual motion.
with the addition moreover of your admirable ingenuity; and if with half a
word I did open your eyes, you by the like have remembered me that it is not
altogether impossible, but that sometime or other something observable may be
found amongst the fixed stars, by which it may be gathered wherein the annual
conversion resides, so as that they also no less than the Planets and Sun it
self, may appear in judgment to bear witness of that motion, in favor of the
Earth; for I do not think that the sta^s are spread in a spherical superficies
equally remote from a common center, but hold, that their distances from us are
so various, that some of them may be twice and thrice as remote as others; so
that if with the Telescope one should observe a very small star near to one of
the bigger, and which therefore was very exceeding high, it might happen, that
some sensible mutation might fall out between them, correspondent to that of
the superior Planets. And so much shall serve to have spoken at this time
touching the stars placed in the Ecliptic. The fixed stars without the
Ecliptic elevate and descend more or less, according to their distance from
the said Ecliptic*
Let us now come to the fixed stars, placed out of the Ecliptic, and let us
suppose a great circle erect upon [i. e. at right angles to] the Plane of the
i. e. of the Ecliptic.
same; and let it, for example, be a circle that in the Starry Sphere answers
to the Solstitial Colure, and let us mark it CEH [in Fig. 8.] which shall
happen to be withal a Meridian, and in it we will take a star without the
Ecliptic, which let be E. Now this star will indeed vary its elevation upon
the Earths motion; for from the Earth in A it shall be seen according to the
ray AE, with the elevation of the angle EAC; but from the Earth placed in B, it
shall be seen according to the ray BE, with the elevation of the angle EBC,
bigger than the other EAC, that being extern, and this intern and opposite in
the triangle EAB, the distance therefore of the star E from the Ecliptic,
shall appear changed; and likewise its altitude in the Meridian shall become
greater in the position B, than in the place A, according as the angle EBC
exceeds the angle EAC, which excess is the quantity of the angle AEB: For in
the triangle EAB, the side AB being continued to C, the exterior angle EBC (as
being equal to the two interior and opposite E and A) exceeds the said angle
A, by the quantity of the angle E. And if we should take another star in the
same Meridian, more remote from the Ecliptic, as for instance the star H, the
diversity in it shall be greater by being observed from the two stations A and
B, according as the angle AHB is greater than the other E; which angle shall
increase continually according as the observed star shall be farther and
farther from the Ecliptic, till that at last the greatest mutation will appear
in that star that should be placed in the very Pole of the Ecliptic. As for a
full understanding thereof we thus demonstrate. Suppose the diameter of the
Grand Orb to be AB, whose center [in the same Figure] is G, and let it be
supposed to be continued out as far as the Starry Sphere in the points D and C,
and from the center G let there be erected the Axis of the Ecliptic GF,
prolonged till it arrive at the said Sphere, in which a Meridian DFC is
supposed to be described, that shall be perpendicular to the Plane of the
Ecliptic; and in the arch FC any points H and E, are imagined to be taken, as
places of fixed stars: Let the lines FA, FB, AH, HG, HB, AE, GE, BE, be
conjoined. And let the angle of difference, or, if you will, the Parallax of
the star placed in the Pole F, be AFB, and let that of the star placed in H, be
the angle AHB, and let that of the star in E, be the angle AEB. I say, that the
angle of difference of the Polar star F, is the greatest, and that of the rest,
those that are nearer to the greatest are bigger than the more remote; that is
to say, that the angle F is bigger than the angle H, and this bigger than the
angle E. Now about the triangle FAB, let us suppose a circle to be described.
And because the angle F is acute, (by reason that its base AB is less than the
diameter DC, of the semicircle DFC) it shall be placed in the greater portion
of the circumscribed circle cut by the base AB. And because the said AB is
divided in the midst, and at right angles by FG, the center of the
circumscribed circle shall be in the line FG, which let be the point I; and
because that of such lines as are drawn from the point G, which is not the
center, unto the circumference of the circumscribed circle, the biggest is that
which passes by the center, GF shall be bigger than any other that is drawn
from the point G, to the circumference of the said circle; and therefore that
circumference will cut the line GH (which is equal to the line GF) and cutting
GH, it will also cut AH. Let it cut it in L, and conjoyn the line LB. These two
angles, therefore, AFB and ALB shall be equal, as being in the same portion of
the circle circumscribed. But ALB external, is bigger than the internal H;
therefore the angle F is bigger than the angle H. And by the same method we
might demonstrate the angle H to be bigger than the angle E, because that of
the circle described about the triangle AHB, the center is in the perpendicular
GF, to which the line GH is nearer than the line GE, and therefore the
circumference of it cutteth GE, and also AE, whereupon the proposition is
manifest. We will conclude from hence, that the difference of appearance,
(which with the proper term of art, we might call the Parallax of the fixed
stars) is greater, or less, according as the Stars observed are more or less
adjacent to the Pole of the Ecliptic, so that, in conclusion of those Stars
that are in the Ecliptic it self, the said diversity is reduced to nothing. In
the next place, The Earth approaches or recedeth from the fixed stars of the
Ecliptic, the quantity of the Diameter of the Grand Orb.
as to the Earths accession by that motion to, or recession from the Stars, it
appears to, and recedeth from those that are in the Ecliptic, the quantity
of the whole diameter of the grand Orb, as we did see even now, but that
accession or recession to, or from the stars about the Pole of the Ecliptic,
is almost nothing; and in going to and from others, this difference grows
greater, according as they are nearer to the Ecliptic. We may, The stars
nearer to us make greater differences than the more remote.
in the third place, know, that the said difference of Aspect grows greater
or lesser, according as the Star observed shall be nearer to us, or farther
from us. For if we draw another Meridian, less distant from the Earth; as for
example, this DFI [in Fig. 7.] a Star placed in F, and seen by the same ray
AFE, the Earth being in A, would, in case it should be observed from the Earth
in B, appear according to the ray BF, and would make the angle of difference,
namely, BFA, bigger than the former AEB, being the exterior angle of the
triangle BFE.


SAGR. With great delight, and also benefit have I heard your discourse; The
Epilogue of the Phenomenon of the fixed stars caused by the annual motion of
the Earth.
and that I may be certain, whether I have rightly understood the same, I shall
give you the sum of the Conclusions in a few words. As I take it, you have
explained to us the different appearances, that by means of the Earths annual
motion, may be by us observed in the fixed stars to be of two kinds: The one
is, that of their apparent magnitudes varied, according as we, transported by
the Earth, approach or recede from the same: The other (which likewise
depends on the same accession and recession) their appearing unto us in the
same Meridian, one while more elevated, and another while less. Moreover, you
tell us (and I understand it very well) that the one and other of these
mutations are not made alike in all the stars, but in some greater, and in
others lesser, and in others not at all. The accession and recession whereby
the same star ought to appear, one while bigger, and another while lesser, is
insensible, and almost nothing in the stars near unto the pole of the
Ecliptic, but is greatest in the stars placed in the Ecliptic it self, and
indifferent in the intermediate: the contrary happens in the other difference,
that is, the elevation or depression of the stars placed in the Ecliptic is
nothing at all, greatest in those nearest to the Pole of the said Ecliptic,
and indifferent in the intermediate. Besides, both these differences are more
sensible in the Stars nearest to us, in the more remote less sensible, and in
those that are very far distant wholly disappear. This is, as to what concerns
my self; it remains now, as I conceive, that something be said for the
satisfaction of Simplicius, who, as I believe, will not easily be made to
over-passe those differences, as insensible that are derived from a motion of
the Earth so vast, and from a mutation that transports the Earth into places
twice as far distant from us as the Sun.


SIMP. Truth is, to speak freely, I am very loath to confess, that the distance
of the fixed Stars ought to be such, that in them the forementioned
differences should be wholly imperceptible.


SALV. Do not throw your self into absolute despair, Simplicius, for there may
perhaps yet some qualification be found for your difficulties. And first, that
the apparent magnitude of the stars is not seen to make any sensible
alteration, ought not to be judged by you a thing improbable, in regard you see
the guesses of men in this particular to be so grossly erroneous, especially
in looking upon splendid objects; and you your self beholding v. g. a lighted
Torch at the distance of 200 paces, In objects far remote, and luminous, a
small approach or recession is imperceptible.
if it approach nearer to you 3. or 4. yards, do you think that it will show
any whit increased in magnitude? I for my part should not perceive it
certainly, although it should approach 20. or 30. yards nearer; nay it has
sometimes happened that in seeing such a light at that distance I know not how
to resolve whether it came toward me, or retreated from me, when as it did in
reality approach nearer to me. But what need I speak of this? If the self same
accession and recession (I speak of a distance twice as great as that from the
Sun to us) in the star of Saturn is almost totally imperceptible, and in
Jupiter not very observable, what shall we think of the fixed stars, which I
believe you will not scruple to place twice as far off as Saturn? In Mars,
which for that it is nearer to us --


SIMP. Pray Sir, put your self to no farther trouble in this particular, for I
already conceive that what has been spoken touching the unaltered apparent
magnitude of the fixed stars may very well come to pass, but what shall we say
of the other difficulty that proceeds from not perceiving any variation in the
mutation of aspect?


SALV. We will say that which peradventure may satisfy you also in this
particular. And to make short, would you not be satisfied if there should be
discovered in the stars face mutations that you think ought to be discovered,
in case the annual motion belonged to the Earth?


SIMP. I should so doubtless, as to what concerns this particular.


SALV. I could wish you would say that in case such a difference were
discovered, If in the fixed stars one should discover any annual mutation, the
motion of the Earth would be undeniable.
nothing more would remain behind, that might render the mobility of the Earth
questionable. But although yet that should not sensibly appear* yet is not its
mobility removed, nor its immobility necessarily proved, it being possible, (as
Copernicus affirms) that the immense distance of the Starry Sphere rendereth
such very small Phenomenon unobservable; the which as already has been said,
may possibly not have been hitherto so much as sought for, or if sought for,
yet not sought for in such a way as they ought, It is proved what small credit
is to be given to Astronomical Instruments in minute observations.
to wit, with that exactness which to so minute a punctuality would be
necessary; which exactness is very difficult to obtain, as well by reason of
the deficiency of Astronomical Instruments, subject to many alterations, as
also through the fault of those that manage them with less diligence then is
requisite. A necessary argument how little credit is to be given to those
observations may be deduced from the differences which we find amongst
Astronomers in assigning the places, I will not say, of the new Stars or
Comets, but of the fixed stars themselves, even to the altitudes of the very
Poles, in which, most an end, they are found to differ from one another many
minutes. And to speak the truth, who can in a Quadrant, or Sextant, that at
most shall have its side Braccia Italian.
3. or 4. yards long, ascertain himself in the incidence of the perpendicular,
or in the direction of the sights, not to err two or three minutes, which in
its circumference shall not amount to the breadth of a grain of Or Mi^.
Mylet? Besides that, it is almost impossible, that the Instrument should be
made, and kept with absolute exactness. Ptolomey shows his distrust of a
Spherical Instrument composed by Archimedes hismelf to take the Suns ingression
into the Aequinoctial. Ptolomy did not trust to an Instrument made by
Archimedes.



SIMP. But if the Instruments be so suspicious, Instruments of Tycho made with
great expense.
and the observations so dubious, how can we ever come to any certainty of
things, or free our selves from mistakes? I have heard strange things of the
Instruments of Tycho made with extraordinary cost, and of his singular
diligence in observations.


SALV. All this I grant you; but neither one nor other of these is sufficient
to ascertain us in a business of this importance. I desire that we may make
use of Instruments greater by far, What Instruments are apt for most exact
observation.
and by far certainer than those of Tycho, made with a very small charge; the
sides of which are of 4. 6. 20. 30. and 50. miles, so as that a degree is a
mile broad, a minute prim. 50 Italian braces.
yards, a second but little less than a yard, and in short we may without a
farthing expense procure them of what bigness we please. I being in a Country
Seat of mine near to Florence, An exquisite observation of the approach and
departure of the Sun from the Summer Solstice.
did plainly observe the Suns arrival at, and departure from the Summer
Solstice, whilst one Evening at the time of its going down it appeared upon the
top of a Rock on the Mountains of Pietrapana, about 60. miles from thence,
leaving discovered of it a small streak or filament* toward the North, whose
breadth was not the hundredth part of its Diameter; and the following Evening
at the like setting, it showed such another part of it, but notably more small,
a necessary argument, that it had begun to recede from the Tropic; and the
regression of the Sun from the first to the second observation, does not import
doubtless a second minute in the East. A place accommodated for the
observation of the fixed stars, as to what concers the annual motion of the
Earth.
The observation made afterward with an exquisite Telescope, and that
multiplyeth the Discus of the Sun more than a thousand times, would prove
easy, and with all delightful. Now with such an Instrument as this, I would
have observations to be made in the fixed stars, making use of some of those
wherein the mutation ought to appear more conspicuous, such as are (as has
already been declared) the more remote from the Ecliptic, amongst which the
Harp a very great star, and near to the Pole of the Ecliptic, would be very
proper in Countries far North, proceeding according to the manner that I shall
show by and by, but in the use of another star; and I have already fancied to
my self a place very well adapted for such an observation. The place is an open
Plane, upon which toward the North there rises a very eminent Mountain, in
the apex or top whereof is built a little Chapel, situate East and West, so as
that the ridg of its Roof may intersect at right angles, the meridian of some
building standing in the Plane. I will place a beam parallel to the said ridg,
or top of the Roof, and distant from it a yard or thereabouts. This being
placed, I will seek in the Plain the place from whence one of the stars of
Charls's Waine, in passing by the Meridian, comes to hide it self behind the
beam so placed, or in case the beam should not be so big as to hide the star, I
will find a station where one may see the said beam to cut the said star into
two equal parts; an effect that with an * exquisite Telescope may be perfectly
discerned. And if in the place where the said accident is discovered, there
were some building, it will be the more commodious; but if not, I will cause a
Pole to be stuck very fast in the ground, with some standing mark to direct
where to place the eye anew, when ever I have a mind to repeat the observation.
The first of which observations I will make about the Summer Solstice, to
continue afterward from Month to Month, or when I shall so please, to the
other Solstice; with which observation one may discover the elevation and
depression of the star, though it be very small. And if in that operation it
shall happen, that any mutation shall discover it self, what and how great
benefit will it bring to Astronomy? Seeing that thereby, besides our being
assured of the annual motion, we may come to know the grandeur and distance of
the same star.


SAGR. I very well comprehend your whole proceedings; and the operation seems
to me so easy, and so commodious for the purpose, that it may very rationally
be thought, that either Copernicus himself, or some other Astronomer had made
trial of it.


SALV. But I judge the quite contrary, for it is not probable, that if any one
had experimented it, he would not have mentioned the event, whether it fell out
in favor of this, or that opinion; besides that, no man that I can find,
either for this, or any other end, did ever go about to make such an
Observation; which also without an exact Telescope could but badly be effected.


SIMP. I am fully satisfied with what you say. But seeing that it is a great
while to night, if you desire that I shall pass the same quietly, let it not
be a trouble to you to explain unto us those Problems, the declaration whereof
you did even now request might be deferred until too morrow. Be pleased to
grant us your promised indulgence, and, laying aside all other discourses,
proceed to show us, that the motions which Copernicus assigns to the Earth
being taken for granted, and supposing the Sun and fixed stars immovable,
there may follow the same accidents touching the elevations and depressions of
the Sun, touching the mutations of the Seasons, and the inequality of days and
nights, etc. in the self same manner, just as they are with facility
apprehended in the Ptolomaick Systeme.


SALV. I neither ought, nor can deny any thing that Sagredus shall request: And
the delay by me desired was to no other end, save only that I might have time
once again to methodize those prefatory points, in my fancy, that serve for a
large and plain declaration of the manner how the forenamed accidents follow,
as well in the Copernican position, as in the Ptolomaick: nay, with much
greater facility and simplicity in that than in this. The Copernican Systeme
difficult to be understood, but easy to be effected.
Whence one may manifestly conceive that Hypothesis to be as easy to be
effected by nature, as difficult to be apprehended by the understanding: yet
nevertheless, I hope by making use of another kind of explanation, Necessary
prepositions for the better conceiving of the consequences of the Earths motion.
than that used by Copernicus, to render likewise the apprehending of it
somewhat less obscure. Which that I may do, I will propose certain
suppositions of themselves known and manifest, and they shall be these that
follow.

First, I suppose that the Earth is a spherical body, turning round upon its
own Axis and Poles, and that each point assigned in its superficies, describes
the circumference of a circle, greater or lesser, according as the point
assigned shall be nearer or farther from the Poles: And that of these circles
the greatest is that which is described by a point equidistant from the said
Poles; and all these circles are parallel to each other; and Parallels we will
call them.

Secondly, The Earth being of a Spherical Figure, and of an opacous substance,
it is continually illuminated by the Sun, according to the half of its surface,
the other half remaining obscure, and the boundary that distinguishes the
illuminated part from the dark being a grand circle, we will call that circle
the terminator of the light.

Thirdly, If the Circle that is terminator of the light should pass by the
Poles of the Earth, it would cut (being a grand and principal circle) all the
parallels into equal parts; but not passing by the Poles, it would cut them all
in parts unequal, except only the circle in the middle, which, as being a grand
circle will be cut into equal parts.

Fourthly, The Earth turning round upon its own Poles, the quantities of days
and nights are termined by the arches of the Parallels, intersected by the
circle, that is, the terminator of the light, and the arch that is situate in
the illuminated Hemisphere prescribes the length of the day, and the remainer
is the quantity of the night.

These things being presupposed, A plain Scheme representing the Copernican
Hypothesis, and its consequences.
for the more clear understanding of that which remains to be said, we will
lay it down in a Figure. And first, we will draw the circumference of a circle,
that shall represent unto us that of the grand Orb described in the plain of
the Ecliptic, and this we will divide into four equal parts with the two
diameters Capricorn Cancer, and Libra Aries, which, at the same time, shall
represent unto us the four Cardinal points, that is, the two Solstices, and the
two Equinoctials; and in the center of that circle we will place the Sun O,
fixed and immovable.



Let us next draw about the four points, Capricorn, Cancer, Libra and Aries, as
centres, four equal circles, which represent unto us the Earth placed in them
at four several times of the year. The which, with its center, in the space of
a year, passes through the whole circumference, Capricorn, Aries, Cancer,
Libra, moving from East to West, that is, according to the order of the Signs.
It is already manifest, that whilst the Earth is in Capricorn, The Suns annual
motion, how it comes to pass, according to Copernicus.
the Sun will appear in Cancer, and the Earth moving along the arch Capricorn
Aries, the Sun will seem to move along the arch Cancer Libra, and in short,
will run through the Zodiac according to the order of the Signs, in the space
of a year; and by this first assumption, without all question, full
satisfaction is given for the Suns apparent annual motion under the Ecliptic.
Now, coming to the other, that is, the diurnal motion of the Earth in it self,
it is necessary to establish its Poles and its Axis, the which must be
understood not to be erect perpendicularly upon the plain of the Ecliptic,
that is, not to be parallel to the Axis of the grand Orb, but declining from a
right angle 23 degrees and an half, or thereabouts, with its North Pole toward
the Axis of the grand Orb, the Earths center being in the Solstitial point of
Capricorn. Supposing therefore the Terrestrial Globe to have its center in the
point Capricorn, we will describe its Poles and Axis AB, inclined upon the
diameter Capricorn Cancer 23 degrees and an half; so that the angle A Capricorn
Cancer comes to be the complement of a Quadrant or Radius, that is, 66 degrees
and an half; and this inclination must be understood to be immutable, and we
will suppose the superior Pole A to be Boreal, or North, and the other
Austral, or South. Now imagining the Earth to revolve in it self about the Axis
AB in twenty four hours, from West to East, there shall by all the points
assigned in its superficies, be circles described parallel to each other. We
will draw, in this first position of the Earth, the greatest CD, and those two
distant from it gr. 23. and an half, OF above, and GM beneath, and the other
two extreme ones IK and LM remote, by those intervals from the Poles A and B;
and as we have marked these five, so we may imagine innumerable others,
parallel to these, described by the innumerable points of the Terrestrial
surface. Next let us suppose the Earth, with the annual motion of its center,
to transfer it self into the other places already marked; but to pass
thither in such a manner, that its own Axis AB shall not only not change
inclination upon the plain of the Ecliptic, but shall also never vary
direction; so that always keeping parallel to it self, it may continually tend
toward the same part of the Universe, or, if you will, of the Firmament,
whereas, if we do but suppose it prolonged, it will, with its extreme terms,
design a Circle parallel and equal to the grand Orb, Libra Capricorn Aries
Cancer, as the superior base of a Cylinder described by it self in the annual
motion above the inferior base, Libra Capricorn Aries Cancer. And therefore
this immutability of inclination continuing, we will design these other three
figures about the centres Aries, Cancer, and Libra, alike in every thing to
that first described about the center Capricorn. Now we will consider the first
figure of the Earth, in which, in regard the Axis AB is declined from
perpendicularity upon the diameter Capricorn Cancer 23 degrees and an half
toward the Sun O, and the arch AI being also 23 degrees and an half, the
illumination of the Sun will illustrate the Hemisphere of the Terrestrial Globe
exposed toward the Sun (of which, in this place, half is to be seen) divided
from the obscure part by the Terminator of the light IM, by which the parallel
CD, as being a grand circle, shall come to be divided into equal parts, but all
the rest into parts unequal; being that the terminator of the light IM passes
not by their Poles AB, and the parallel IK, together with all the rest
described within the same, and nearer to the pole A, shall wholly be included
in the illuminated part; as on the contrary, the opposite ones toward the Pole
B, contained within the parallel LM, shall remain in the dark. Moreover, the
arch AI being equal to the arch FD, and the arch AF, common to them both, the
two arches IKF and AFD shall be equal, and each a quadrant or 90 degrees. And
because the whole arch IFM is a semicircle, the arch FM shall be a quadrant,
and equal to the other FKI; and therefore the Sun O shall be in this state of
the Earth vertical to one that stands in the point F. But by the revolution
diurnal about the standing Axis AB, all the points of the parallel OF pass by
the same point F: and therefore in that same day the Sun, at noon, shall be
vertical to all the inhabitants of the Parallel OF, and will seem to them to
describe in its apparent motion the circle which we call the Tropic of Cancer.
But to the inhabitants of all the Parallels that are above the parallel OF,
toward the North pole A, the Sun declineth from their Vertex or Zenith toward
the South; and on the contrary, to all the inhabitants of the Parallels that
are beneath OF, toward the Equinoctial CD, and the South Pole B, the Meridian
Sun is elevated beyond their Vertex toward the North Pole A. Next, it is
visible that of all the Parallels, only the greatest CD is cut in equal parts
by the Terminator of the light IM. But the rest, that are beneath and above the
said grand circle, are all intersected in parts unequal: and of the superior
ones, the semidiurnal arches, namely those of the part of the Terrestrial
surface, illustrated by the Sun, are bigger than the seminocturnal ones that
remain in the dark: and the contrary befalls in the remainder, that are under
the great one CD, toward the pole B, of which the semidiurnal arches are
lesser than the seminocturnal, It is likewise apparently manifest, that the
differences of the said arches go augmenting, according as the Parallels are
nearer to the Poles, till such time as the parallel IK comes to be wholly in
the part illuminated, and the inhabitants thereof have a day of twenty four
hours long, without any night; and on the contrary, the Parallel LM, remaining
all in obscurity, has a night of twenty four hours, without any day. Come we
next to the third Figure of the Earth, placed with its center in the point
Cancer, where the Sun seems to be in the first point of Capricorn. We have
already seen very manifestly, that by reason the Axis AB does not change
inclination, but continues parallel to it self, the aspect and situation of
the Earth is the same to an hair with that in the first Figure; save only that
that Hemisphere which in the first was illuminated by the Sun, in this
remains obtenebrated, and that comes to be luminous, which in the first was
tenebrous: whereupon that which happened before concerning the differences of
days and nights, touching the days being greater or lesser than the nights,
now falls out quite contrary. And first, we see, that whereas in the first
Figure the circle IK was wholly in the light, it is now wholly in the dark; and
the opposite arch LM is now wholly in the light, which was before wholly in the
dark. Of the parallels between the grand circle CD, and the Pole A, the
semidiurnal arches are now lesser than the seminocturnal, which before were the
contrary. Of the others likewise toward the Pole B, the semidiurnal arches are
now bigger than the seminocturnal, the contrary to what happened in the other
position of the Earth. We now see the Sun made vertical to the inhabitants of
the Tropic GN, and to be depressed toward the South, with those of the
Parallel OF, by all the arch ECG, that is, 47 degrees; and in sum, to have
passed from one to the other Tropic, traversing the Equinoctial, elevating and
declining in the Meridians the said space of 47 degrees. And all this mutation
is derived not from the inclination or elevation of the Earth, but on the
contrary, from its not inclining or elevating at all; and in a word, by
continuing always in the same position, in respect of the Universe, only with
turning about the Sun situate iu the midst of the said plane, in which it
moves it self about circularly with its annual motion. And here is to be noted
an admirable accident, An admirable accident depending on the not inclining of
the Earths axis
which is, that like as the Axis of the Earth conserving the same direction
toward the Universe, or we may say, toward the highest Sphere of the fixed
stars, causes the Sun to appear to elevate and incline so great a space,
namely, for 47 degrees, and the fixed Stars to incline or elevate nothing at
all; so, on the contrary, if the same Axis of the Earth should maintain it self
continually in the same inclination toward the Sun, or, if you will, toward
the Axis of the Zodiac, no mutation would appear to be made in the Sun about
its elevating or declining, whereupon the inhabitants of one and the same place
would always have one and the same difference of days and nights, and one and
the same constitution of Seasons, that is, some always Winter, others always
Summer, others Spring, etc. but, on the contrary, the alterations in the fixed
Stars would appear very great, as touching their elevation, and inclination to
us, which would amount to the same 47 degrees. For the understanding of which
let us return to consider the position of the Earth, in its first Figure, where
we see the Axis AB, with the superior Pole A, to incline toward the Sun; but
in its third Figure, the same Axis having kept the same direction toward the
highest Sphere, by keeping parallel to it self, inclines no longer toward the
Sun with its superior Pole A, but on the contrary reclines from its former
position gr. 47. and inclines toward the opposite part, so that to restore
the same inclination of the said Pole A toward the Sun, it would be requisite
by turning round the Terrestrial Globe, according to the circumference ACBD, to
transport it toward E those same gr. 47. and for so many degrees, any
whatsoever fixed star observed in the Meridian, would appear to be elevated, or
inclined. Let us come now to the explanation of that which remains, and let us
consider the Earth placed in the fourth Figure, that is, with its center in the
first point of Libra; upon which the Sun will appear in the beginning of Aries.
And because the Axis of the Earth, which in the first Figure is supposed to be
inclined upon the diameter Capricorn Cancer, and therefore to be in that same
plane, which cutting the plane of the grand Orb, according to the line
Capricorn Cancer, was erected perpendicularly upon the same, transposed into
the fourth Figure, and maintained, as has always been said, parallel to it
self, it shall come to be in a plane in like manner erected to the superficies
of the Grand Orb, and parallel to the plane, which at right angles cuts the
same superficies, according to the diameter Capricorn Cancer. And therefore the
line which goes from the center of the Sun to the center of the Earth, that
is, O Libra, shall be perpendicular to the Axis BA: but the same line which
goes from the center of the Sun to the center of the Earth, is also always
perpendicular to the circle that is the Terminator of the light; therefore this
same circle shall pass by the Poles AB in the fourth figure, and in its plain
the Axis AB shall fall, but the greatest circle passing by the Poles of the
Parallels, divides them all in equal parts; therefore the arches IK, OF, CD,
GN, LM, shall be all semicircles, and the illumined Hemisphere shall be this
which looks toward us, and the Sun, and the Terminator of the light shall be
one and the same circle ACBD, and the Earth being in this place shall make it
Equinoctial to all its Inhabitants. And the same happens in the second
figure, where the Earth having its illuminated Hemisphere toward the Sun,
shows us the other that is obscure, with its nocturnal arches, which in like
manner are all semicircles, and consequently, here also it makes the
Equinoctial. And lastly in regard that the line produced from the center of the
Sun to the center of the Earth, is perpendicular to the Axis AB, to which the
greatest circle of the parallels CD, is likewise erect, the said line O Libra
shall pass of necessity by the same Plain of the parallel CD, cutting its
circumference in the midst of the diurnal arch CD; and therefore the Sun shall
be vertical to any one that shall stand where that intersection is made; but
all the Inhabitants of that Parallel shall pass the same, as being carried
about by the Earths diurnal conversion; therefore all these upon that day shall
have the Meridian Sun in their vertex. And the Sun at the same time to all the
Inhabitants of the Earth shall seem to describe the Grand Parallel called the
Equinoctial. Furthermore, forasmuch as the Earth being in both the Solstitial
points of the Polar circles IK and LM, the one is wholly in the light, and the
other wholly in the dark; but when the Earth is in the Equinoctial points, the
halves of those same polar circles are in the light, the remainder of them
being in the dark; it should not be hard to understand, how that the Earth v.
gr. from Cancer (where the parallel IK is wholly in the dark) to Leo, one part
of the parallel toward the point I, begins to enter into the light, and
that the Terminator of the light IM begins to retreat toward the Pole AB,
intersecting the circle ACBD no longer in IM, but in two other points falling
between the terms IA and MB, of the arches IA and MB; whereupon the Inhabitants
of the circle begin to enjoy the light, and the other Inhabitants of the circle
LM to partake of night. And thus you see that by two simple motions made in
times proportionate to their bignesses, and not contrary to one another, but
performed, as all others that belong to moveable mundane bodies, from West to
East assigned to the Terrestrial Globe, adequate reasons are rendered of all
those Phenomenon or appearances, for the accommodating of which to the
stability of the Earth it is necessary (forsaking that Symetry which is
observed to be between the velocities and magnitudes of movables) to ascribe
to a Sphere, vast above all others, an unconceiveable celerity, whilst the
other lesser Spheres move extreme slowly; and which is more, to make that
motion contrary to all their motions; and, yet again to add to the
improbability, to make that superior Sphere forcibly to transport all the
inferior ones along with it contrary to their proper inclination. And here I
refer it to your judgment to determine which of the two is the most probable.


SAGR. To me, as far as concerns sense, there appears no small difference
betwixt the simplicity and facility of operating effects by the means assigned
in this new constitution, and the multiplicity, confusion, and difficulty, that
is found in the ancient and commonly received Hypothesis. For if the Universe
were disposed according to this multiplicity, it would be necessary to renounce
many Maxims in Philosophy commonly received by Philosophers, Axioms commonly
admitted by all Philosophers.
as for instance, That Nature does not multiply things without necessity; and,
That She makes use of the most facile and simple means in producing her
effects; and, That She does nothing in vain, and the like. I do confess that I
never heard any thing more admirable than this, nor can I believe that Humane
Understanding ever penetrated a more sublime speculation. I know not what
Simplicius may think of it.


SIMP. These (if I may speak my judgment freely) do seem to me some of those
Geometrical subtilties which Aristotle finds fault with in Plato, Aristotle
taxes Plato for being too studious of Geometry.
when he accuses him that by his too much studying of Geometry he forsook
solid Philosophy; and I have known and heard very great Peripatetick
Philosophers to dissuade their Scholars from the Study of the Mathematics, as
those that render the wit cavilous, and unable to philosophate well; an
Institute diametrically contrary to that of Plato, who admitted one to
Philosophy, unless he was first well entered in Geometry.


SALV. I commend the policy of these your Peripateticks, Peripatetick
Philosophers condemn the Study of Geometry, and why.
in dehorting their Disciples from the Study of Geometry, for that there is not
art more commodious for detecting their fallacies; but see how they differ from
the Mathematical Philosophers, who much more willingly converse with those that
are well verst in the commune Peripatetick Philosophy, than with those that are
destitute of that knowledge, who for want thereof cannot distinguish between
doctrine and doctrine. But passing by this, tell me I beseech you, what are
those extravagancies and those too affected subtilties that make you think this
Copernican Systeme the less plausible?


SIMP. To tell you true, I do not very well know; perhaps, because I have not
so much as learnt the reasons that are by Ptolomy produced, of those effects, I
mean of those stations, retrogradations, accessions, recessions of the Planets;
lengthenings and shortnings of days, changes of seasons, etc. But omitting the
consequences that depend on the first suppositions, I find in the suppositions
themselves no small difficulties; which suppositions, if once they be
overthrown, they draw along with them the ruin of the whole fabric. Now
forasmuch as because the whole module of Copernicus seems in my opinion to be
built upon infirm foundations, in that it relyeth upon the mobility of the
earth, if this should happen to be disproved, there would be no need of farther
dispute. And to disprove this, the Axiom of Aristotle is in my judgment most
sufficient, That of one simple body, one sole simple motion can be natural: but
here in this case, to the Earth, Four several motions assigned to the Earth.
a simple body, there are assigned 3. if not 4. motions, and all very different
from each other. For besides the right motion, as a grave body toward its
center, which cannot be denied it, there is assigned to it a circular motion in
a great circle about the Sun in a year, and a vertiginous conversion about its
own center in twenty four hours. And that in the next place which is more
exorbitant, and which happly for that reason you pass over in silence, there is
ascribed to it another revolution about its own center, contrary to the former
of twenty four hours, and which finisheth its period in a year. In this my
understanding apprehends a very great contradiction.


SALV. As to the motion of descent, The motion of descent belongs not to the
terrestrial Globe, but to its parts.
it has already been concluded not to belong to the Terrestrial Globe which
did never move with any such motion, nor never shall do; but is (if there be
such a thing) that propension of its parts to reunite themselves to their
whole. As, in the next place, to the Annual motion, and the Diurnal, The annual
and diurnal motion are compatible in the Earth.
these being both made toward one way, are very compatible, in the same manner
just as if we should let a Ball trundle downwards upon a declining superficies,
it would in its descent along the same spontaneously revolve in it self. As to
the third motion assigned it by Copernicus, namely about it self in a year,
only to keep its Axis inclined and directed toward the same part of the
Firmament, I will tell you a thing worthy of great consideration: namely ut
tantum abest (although it be made contrary to the other annual) it is so far
from having any repugnance or difficulty in it, Every pensil and librated, body
carried round in the circumference of a circle, acquireth of it self a motion
in it self contrary to that.
that naturally and without any moving cause, it agrees to any whatsoever
suspended and librated body, which if it shall be carried round in the
circumference of a circle, immediate of it self, it acquireth a conversion
about its own center, contrary to that which carries it about, and of such
velocity, that they both finish one revolution in the same time precisely. You
may see this admirable, and to our purpose accommodate experience, An
Experiment which sensibly shows that two contrary motions may naturally agree
in the same moveable.
if putting in a Basin of water a Ball that will swim; and holding the Basin in
your hand, you turn round upon your toe, for you shall immediately see the Ball
begin to revolve in it self with a motion, contrary to that of the Basin, and
it shall finish its revolution, when that of the Basin it shall finish. Now
what other is the Earth than a pensil Globe librated in tenuous and yielding
air, which being carried about in a year along the circumference of a great
circle, The third motion ascribed to the Earth is rather a resting immovable.
must needs acquire, without any other mover, a revolution about its own
center, annual, and yet contrary to the other motion in like manner annual? You
shall see this effect I say, but if afterward you more narrowly consider it,
you shall find this to be no real thing, but a mere appearance; and that which
you think to be a revolution in it self, you will find to be a not moving at
all, but a continuing altogether immovable in respect of all that which
without you, and without the vessel is immovable: for if in that Ball you
shall make some mark, and consider to what part of the Room where you are, or
of the Field, or of Heaven it is situate, you shall see that mark in yours, and
the vessels revolution to look always toward that same part; but comparing it
to the vessel and to your self that are moveable, it will appear to go altering
its direction, and with a motion contrary to yours, and that of the vessel, to
go seeking all the points of its circumgyration; so that with more reason you
and the basin may be said to turn round the immovable Ball, than that it
moves round in the basin. In the same manner the Earth suspended and librated
in the circumference of the Grand Orb, and situate in such sort that one of
its notes, as for example, its North Pole, looks toward such a Star or other
part of the Firmament, it always keeps directed toward the same, although
carried round by the annual motion about the circumference of the said Grand
Orb. This alone is sufficient to make the Wonder cease, and to remove all
difficulties. But what will Simplicius say, if to this non-indigence of the
cooperating cause we should add an admirable intrinsic virtue ^f the
Terrestrial Globe, An admirable intern virtue of the terrestrial Globe of
always beholding the same part of Heaven.
of looking with its determinate parts toward determinate parts of the
Firmament, I speak of the Magnetic virtue constantly participated by any
whatsoever piece of Loade-stone. And if every minute particle of that S^one
have in it such a virtue, The terrestrial Globe made of Loade-stone.
who will question but that the same more powerfully resides in this whole
Terrestrial Globe, abounding in that Magnetic matter, and which happily it
self, as to its internal and primary substance, is nothing else but a huge
mass of Loade-stone.


SIMP. Then you are one of those it seems that hold the Magnetic Philosophy
William An eminent Doctor of Physic, our Countreyman, born at Colchester, and
famous for this his learned Treatise, published about 60 years since at London,
The Magnetic Philosophy of William Gilbert.
Gilbert.


SALV. I am for certain, and think that all those that have seriously read his
Book, and tried his experiments, will bear me company therein; nor should I
despair, that what has befallen me in this case, might possibly happen to you
also, if so be a curiosity, like to mine, and a notice that infinite things in
Nature are still concealed from the wits of mankind, by delivering you from
being captivated by this or that particular writer in natural things, should
but slacken the reins of your Reason, and mollify the contumacy and
tenaceousnesse of your sense; so as that they would not refuse to hearken
sometimes to novelties never before spoken of. The Pusillanimity of Popular
Wits.
But (permit me to use this phrase) the pusillanimity of vulgar Wits is come to
that pass, that not only like blind men, they make a gift, nay tribute of
their own assent to whatsoever they find written by those Authors, which in
the infancy of their Studies were laid before them, as authentic by their
Tutors, but refuse to hear (not to say examine) any new Proposition or
Problem, although it not only never has been confuted, but not so much as
examined or considered by their Authors. Amongst which, one is this, of
investigating what is the true, proper, primary, interne, and general matter
and substance of this our Terrestrial Globe; For although it never came into
the mind either of Aristotle, or of any one else, before William Gilbert to
think that it might be a Magnet, so far are Aristotle and the rest from
confuting this opinion, yet nevertheless I have met with many, that at the
very first mention of it, as a Horse at his own shadow, have start back, and
refused to discourse thereof, and censured the conceit for a vain Chymaera,
yea, for a solemn madness: and its possible the Book of Gilbert had never come
to my hands, if a Peripatetick Philosopher, of great fame, as I believe, to
free his Library from its contagion, had not given it me.


SIMP. I, who ingenuously confess my self to be one of those vulgar Wits, and
never till within these few days that I have been admitted to a share in your
conferences, could I pretend to have in the least withdrawn from those trite
and popular paths, yet, for all that, I think I have advantaged my self so
much, as that I could without much trouble or difficulty, master the
roughnesses of these novel and fantastical opinions.


SALV. If that which Gilbert writes be true, then is it no opinion, but the
subject of Science; nor is it new, but as ancient as the Earth it self; nor can
it (being true) be rugged or difficult, but plain and easy; and when you
please I shall make you feel the same in your hand, for that you of your self
fancy it to be a Ghost, and stand in fear of that which has nothing in it of
dreadful, like as a little child does fear the Hobgoblin, without knowing any
more of it, save the name; as that which besides the name is nothing.


SIMP. I should be glad to be informed, and reclaimed from an error.


SALV. Answer me then to the questions that I shall ask you. And first of all,
Tell me whether you believe, that this our Globe, which we inhabit and call
Earth, consists of one sole and simple matter, or else that it is an
aggregate of matters different from each other.


SIMP. I see it to be composed of substances and bodies very different; The
Terrestrial Globe composed of sundry matters.
and first, for the greatest parts of the composition, I see the Water and the
Earth, which extremely differ from one another.


SALV. Let us, for this once, lay aside the Seas and other Waters, and let us
consider the solid parts, and tell me, if you think them one and the same
thing, or else different.


SIMP. As to appearance, I see that they are different things, there being very
great heaps of unfruitful sands, and others of fruitful soiles; There are
infinite sharp and steril mountains, full of hard stones and quarries of
several kinds, as Porphyre, Alablaster, Jasper, and a thousand other kinds of
Marbles: There are vast Minerals of so many kinds of metals; and in a word,
such varieties of matters, that a whole day would not suffice only to enumerate
them.


SALV. Now of all these different matters, do you think, that in the
composition of this grand mass, there do concur portions, or else that amongst
them all there is one part that far exceeds the rest, and is as it were the
matter and substance of the immense lump?


SIMP. I believe that the Stones, Marbles, Metals, Gems, and the so many other
several matters are as it were Jewels, and exterior and superficial Ornaments
of the primary Globe, which in gross, as I believe, does without compare
exceed all these things put together.


SALV. And this principal and vast mass, of which those things above named are
as it were excressences and ornaments, of what matter do you think that it is
composed?


SIMP. I think that it is the simple, or less impure element of Earth.


SALV. But what do you understand by Earth? Is it happily that which is dispersed
all over the fields, which is broke up with Mattocks and Ploughs, wherein we
sow corn, and plant fruits, and in which great boscages grow up, without the
help of culture, and which is, in a word, the habitation of all animals, and
the womb of all vegetables?


SIMP. It Is this that I would affirm to be the substance of this our Globe.


SALV. But in this you do, in my judgment, affirm that which is not right: for
this Earth which is broke up, is sowed, and is fertile, is but one part, and
that very small of the surface of the Globe, which does not go very deep, yea,
its depth is very small, in comparison of the distance to the center: and
experience shows us, that one shall not dig very low, but one shall find
matters very different from this exterior scurf, more solid, and not good for
the production of vegetables. Besides the interne parts, as being compressed by
very huge weights that lie upon them, are, in all probability, slived, and made
as hard as any hard rock. One may add to this, that fecundity would be in vain
conferred upon those matters which never were designed to bear fruit, but to
rest eternally buried in the profound and dark abysses of the Earth.


SIMP. But who shall assure us, that the parts more inward and near to the
center are unfruitful? They also may, perhaps, have their productions of things
unknown to us?


SALV. You may as well be assured thereof, as any man else, as being very
capable to comprehend, that if the integral bodies of the Universe be produced
only for the benefit of Mankind, this above all the rest ought to be destined
to the sole conveniences of us its inhabitants. But what benefit can we draw
from matters so hid and remote from us, as that we shall never be able to make
use of them? The interne parts of the terrestrial Globe must of necessity be
solid.
Therefore the interne substance of this our Globe cannot be a matter
frangible, dissipable, and non-coherent, like this superficial part which we
call Or MOULD.
EARTH: but it must, of necessity, be a most dense and solid body, and in a
word, a most hard stone. And, if it ought to be so, what reason is there that
should make you more scrupulous to believe that it is a Loadstone than a
Porphiry, a Jasper, or other hard Marble? Happily if Gilbert had written, that
this Globe is all compounded within of Of which with the Latin translatour, I
must once more profess my self ignorant.
Pietra Serena, or of Chalcedon, the paradox would have seemed to you less
exorbitant?


SIMP. That the parts of this Globe more intern are more compressed, and so
more slived together and solid, and more and more so, according as they lie
lower, I do grant, and so likewise does Aristotle, but that they degenerate and
become other than Earth, of the same sort with this of the superficial parts, I
see nothing that obliegeth me to believe.


SALV. I undertook not this discourse with an intent to prove demonstratively
that the primary and real substance of this our Globe is Lodestone; but only
to show that no reason could be given why one should be more unwilling to grant
that it is of Lodestone, Our Globe would have been called stone, in stead of
Earth, of that name had been given it in the beginning.
than of some other matter. And if you will but seriously consider, you shall
find that it is not improbable, that one sole, pure, and arbitrary name, has
moved men to think that it consists of Earth; and that is their having made use
commonly from the beginning of this word Earth, as well to signify that matter
which is plowed and sowed, as to name this our Globe. The denomination of which
if it had been taken from stone, as that it might as well have been taken from
that as from the Earth; the saying that its primary substance was stone, would
doubtless have found no scruple or opposition in any man. And is so much the
more probable, in that I verily believe, that if one could but pare off the
scurf of this great Globe, taking away but one full thousand or two thousand
yards; and afterward separate the Stones from the Earth, the accumulation of
the stones would be very much biger than that of the fertile Mould. But as for
the reasons which concludently prove de facto, that is our Globe is a Magnet, I
have mentioned none of them, nor is this a time to alledg them, and the rather,
for that to your benefit you may read them in Gilbert; only to encourage you
to the perusal of them, I will set before you, in a similitude of my own, The
method of Gilbert in his Philosophy.
the method that he observed in his Philosophy. I know you understand very well
how much the knowledge of the accidents is subservient to the investigation of
the substance and essence of things; therefore I desire that you would take
pains to inform your self well of many accidents and properties that are found
in the Magnet, Many properties in the Magnet.
and in no other stone, or body; as for instance of attracting Iron, of
conferring upon it by its sole presence the same virtue, of communicating
likewise to it the property of looking toward the Poles, as it also does it
self; and moreover endeavor to know by trial, that it contains in it a
virtue of conferring upon the magnetic needle not only the direction under a
Meridian toward the Poles, with an Horizontal motion, (a property a long time
ago known) but a new found accident, of declining (being balanced under the
Meridian before marked upon a little spherical Magnet) of declining I say to
determinate marks more or less, according as that needle is held nearer or
farther from the Pole, till that upon the Pole it self it erecteth
perpendicularly, whereas in the middle parts it is parallel to the Axis.
Furthermore procure a proof to be made, whether the virtue of attracting Iron,
residing much more vigorously about the Poles, than about the middle parts,
this force be not notably more vigorous in one Pole than in the other, and that
in all pieces of Magnet; the stronger of which Poles is that which looks
toward the South. Observe, in the next place, that in a little Magnet this
South and more vigorous Pole, becomes weaker, when ever it is to take up an
iron in presence of the North Pole of another much bigger Magnet: and not to
make any tedious discourse of it, assertain your self, by experience, of these
and many other properties described by Gilbert, which are all so peculiar to
the Magnet, as that none of them agree with any other matter. (...)
Tell me now, Simplicius, if there were laid before you a thousand pieces of
several matters, but all covered and concealed in a cloth, under which it is
hid, and you were required, without uncovering them, (...) a guess, by
external signs, at the matter of each of them, and that in making trial, you
should hit upon one that should openly show it self to have all the properties
by you already acknowledged to reside only in the Magnet, and in no other
matter, what judgment would you make of the essence of such a body? Would you
say, that it might be a piece of Ebony, or Alablaster, o^ Tin.


SIMP. I would say, without the least haesitation, that it was a piece of
Lodestone.


SALV. If it be so, say resolutely, that under this cover and scurf of Earth,
stones, metals, water, etc. there is hid a great Magnet, forasmuch as about the
same there may be seen by any one that will heedfully observe the same, all
those very accidents that agree with a true and visible Globe of Magnet; but if
no more were to be seen than that of the Declinatory Needle, which being
carried about the Earth, more and more inclines, as it approaches to the
North Pole, and declineth less toward the Equinoctial, under which it finally
is brought to an Aequilibrium, it might serve to persuade even the most
scrupulous judgment. I forbear to mention that other admirable effect, which is
sensibly observed in every piece of Magnet, of which, to us inhabitants of the
Northern Hemisphere, the Meridional Pole of the said Magnet is more vigorous
than the other; and the difference is found greater, by how much one recedeth
from the Equinoctial; and under the Equinoctial both the parts are of equal
strength, but notably weaker. But, in the Meridional Regions, far distant from
the Equinoctial, it changes nature, and that part which to us was more weak,
acquireth more strength than the other: and all this I confer with that which
we see to be done by a small piece of Magnet, in the presence of a great one,
the virtue of which superating the lesser, makes it to become obedient to it,
and according as it is held, either on this or on that side the Equinoctial of
the great one, makes the self same mutations, which I have said are made by
every Magnet, carried on this side, or that side of the Equinoctial of the
Earth.


SAGR. I was persuaded, at the very first reading of the Book of Gilbertus; and
having met with a most excellent piece of Magnet, The Magnet armed takes up
much more Iron, than when armed.
I, for a long time, made many Observations, and all worthy of extreme wonder;
but above all, that seems to me very stupendous of increasing the faculty of
taking up Iron so much by arming it, like as the said Author teaches; and
with arming that piece of mine, I multiplied its force in octuple proportion;
and whereas unarmed it scarce took up nine ounces of Iron, it being armed did
take up above six pounds: And, it may be, you have seen this Loadstone in the
Or Closet of rarities.
Gallery of your Most Serene Grand Duke (to whom I presented it) upholding two
little Anchors of Iron.


SALV. I saw it many times, and with great admiration, till that a little piece
of the like stone gave me greater cause of wonder, that is in the keeping of
our Academick, which being no more than of six ounces weight, and sustaining,
when unarmed, hardly two ounces, does, when armed, take up 160. ounces, so as
that it is of 80. times more force armed than unarmed, and takes up a weight
26. times greater than its own; a much greater wonder than Gilbert could ever
meet with, who writes, that he could never get any Loadstone that could reach
to take up four times its own weight.


SAGR. In my opinion, this Stone offers to the wit of man a large Field to
Phylosophate in; and I have many times thought with my self, how it can be that
it conferreth on that Iron, which armeth it, a strength so superior to its
own; and finally, I find nothing that gives me satisfaction herein; nor do I
find any thing extraordinary in that which Gilbert writes about this
particular; I know not whether the same may have befallen you.


SALV. I extremely praise, admire, and envy this Author, for that a conceit so
stupendous should come into his mind, touching a thing handled by infinite
sublime wits, and hit upon by none of them: I think him moreover worthy of
extraordinary applause for the many new and true Observations that he made, to
the disgrace of so many fabulous Authors, that write not only what they do not
know, but what ever they hear spoken by the foolish vulgar, never seeking to
assure themselves of the same by experience, perhaps, because they are
unwilling to diminish the bulk of their Books. That which I could have desired
in Gilbert, is, that he had been a little greater Mathematician, and
particularly well grounded in Geometry, the practice whereof would have
rendered him less resolute in accepting those reasons for true Demonstrations,
which he produces for true causes of the true conclusions observed by himself.
Which reasons (freely speaking) do not knit and bind so fast, as those
undoubtedly ought to do, in that of natural, necessary, and lasting conclusions
may be alleged. And I doubt not, but that in process of time this new Science
will be perfected with new observations, and, which is more, with true and
necessary Demonstrations. The first observers and inventers of things ought to
be admired.
Nor ought the glory of the first Inventor to be thereby diminished; nor do I
less esteem, but rather more admire, the Inventor of the Harp (although it may
be supposed that the Instrument at first was but rudely framed, and more rudely
fingered) than an hundred other Artists, that in the ensuing Ages reduced that
profession to great perfection. And methinks, that Antiquity had very good
reason to enumerate the first Inventors of the Noble Arts amongst the Gods;
seeing that the common wits have so little curiosity, and are so little
regardful of rare and elegant things, that though they see and hear them
exercitated by the exquisite professors of them, yet are they not thereby
persuaded to a desire of learning them. Now judge, whether Capacities of this
kind would ever have attempted to have found out the making of the Harp, or the
invention of Music, upon the hint of the whistling noise of the dry sinews of
a Tortois, or from the striking of four Hammers. The application to great
inventions moved by small hints, and the thinking that under a primary and
childish appearance admirable Arts may lie hid, is not the part of a trivial,
but of a super-humane spirit. Now answering to your demands, I say, that I also
have long thought upon what might possibly be the cause of this so tenacious
and potent union, that we see to be made between the one Iron that armeth the
Magnet, and the other that conjoyns it self unto it. And first, The true cause
of the multiplication of virtue in the Magnet, by means of the arming.
we are certain, that the virtue and strength of the stone does not augment by
being armed, for it neither attracts at greater distance, nor does it hold an
Iron the faster, if between it, and the arming or cap, a very fine paper, or a
leaf of beaten gold, be interposed; nay, with that interposition, the naked
stone takes up more Iron than the armed. There is therefore no alteration in
the virtue, and yet there is an innovation in the effect. And because its
necessary, Of a new effect its necessary that the cause be likewise new.
that a new effect have a new cause, if it be inquired what novelty is
introduced in the act of taking up with the cap or arming, there is no mutation
to be discovered, but in the different contact; for whereas before Iron touched
Loadstone, now Iron touches Iron. Therefore it is necessary to conclude, It is
proved, that Iron consists of parts more subtle, pure, and compact than the
magnet.
that the diversity of contacts is the cause of the diversity of effects. And
for the difference of contacts it cannot, as I see, be derived from any thing
else, save from that the substance of the Iron is of parts more subtle, more
pure, and more compacted than those of the Magnet, which are more gross,
impure, and rare. From whence it follows, that the superficies of two Irons
that are to touch, by being exquisitely plained, filed, and burnished, do so
exactly conjoyn, that all the infinite points of the one meet with the infinite
points of the other; so that the filaments, if I may so say, that collegate the
two Irons, are many more than those that collegate the Magnet to the Iron, by
reason that the substance of the Magnet is more porous, and less compact,
which makes that all the points and filaments of the Loadstone do not close
with that which it unites unto. In the next place, that the substance of Iron
(especially the well refined, as namely, the purest steel) is of parts much
more dense, subtle, and pure than the matter of the Loadstone, is seen, in that
one may bring its edge to an extraordinary sharpness, such as is that of the
Rasor, which can never be in any great measure effected in a piece of Magnet. A
sensible proof of the impurity of the Magnet.
Then, as for the impurity of the Magnet, and its being mixed with other
qualities of stone, it is first sensibly discovered by the color of some
little spots, for the most part white; and next by presenting a needle to it,
hanging in a thread, which upon those stonynesses cannot find repose, but being
attracted by the parts circumfused, seems to fly from The Author hereby
means that the stone does not all consist of magnetic matter, but that the
whiter specks being weak, those other parts of the Loadstone of a more dark and
constant color, contain all that virtue wherewith bodies are attracted.
those, and to leap upon the Magnet contiguous to them: and as some of those
Heterogeneal parts are for their magnitude very visible, so we may believe,
that there are others, in great abundance, which, for their smallness, are
imperceptible, that are disseminated throughout the whole mass. That which I
say, (namely, that the multitude of contacts that are made between Iron and
Iron, is the cause of the so solid conjunction) is confirmed by an experiment,
which is this, that if we present the sharpened point of a needle to the cap of
a Magnet, it will stick no faster to it, than to the same stone unarmed: which
can proceed from no other cause, than from the equality of the contacts that
are both of one sole point. But what then? Let a A common sewing needle.
Needle be taken and placed upon a Magnet, so that one of its extremities hang
somewhat over, and to that present a Nail; to which the Needle will instantly
cleave, insomuch that withdrawing the Nail, the Needle will stand in suspense,
and with its two ends touching the Magnet and the Iron; and withdrawing the
Nail yet a little further, the Needle will forsake the Magnet; provided that
the eye of the Needle be toward the Nail, and the point toward the Magnet;
but if the eye be toward the Loadstone, in withdrawing the Nail the Needle
will cleave to the Magnet; and this, in my judgment, for no other reason, save
only that the Needle, by reason it is bigger toward the eye, touches in much
more points than its sharp point does.


SAGR. Your whole discourse has been in my judgment very concluding, and this
experiment of the Needle has made me think it little inferior to a
Mathematical Demonstration; and I ingenuously confess, that in all the
Magnetic Philosophy, I never heard or read any thing, that with such strong
reasons gave account of its so many admirable accidents, of which, if the
causes were with the same perspicuity laid open, I know not what sweeter food
our Intellects could desire.


SALV. In seeking the reasons of conclusions unknown unto us, it is requisite
to have the good fortune to direct the discourse from the very beginning
toward the way of truth; in which if any one walk, it will easily happen, that
one shall meet with several other Propositions known to be true, either by
disputes or experiments, from the certainty of which the truth of ours
acquireth strength and evidence; as it did in every respect happen to me in the
present Problem, for being desirous to assure my self, by some other accident,
whether the reason of the Proposition, by me found, were true; namely, whether
the substance of the Magnet were really much less continuate than that of Iron
or of Steel, I made the Artists that work in the Gallery of my Lord the Grand
Duke, to smooth one side of that piece of Magnet, which formerly was yours, and
then to polish and burnish it; upon which to my satisfaction I found what I
desired. For I discovered many specks of color different from the rest, but as
splendid and bright, as any of the harder sort of stones; the rest of the
Magnet was polite, but to the tact only, not being in the least splendid; but
rather as if it were smeered over with foot; and this was the substance of the
Lodestone, and the shining part was the fragments of other stones intermixed
therewith, as was sensibly made known by presenting the face thereof to filings
of Iron, the which in great number leapt to the Lodestone, but not so much as
one grain did stick to the said spots, which were many, some as big as the
fourth part of the nail of a man's finger, others somewhat lesser, the least of
all very many, and those that were scarce visible almost innumerable. So that I
did assure my self, that my conjecture was true, when I first thought that the
substance of the Magnet was not close and compact, but porous, or to say
better, spongy; but with this difference, that whereas the sponge in its
cavities and little cells contains Air or Water, the Magnet has its pores
full of hard and heavy stone, as appears by the exquisite luster which those
specks receive. Whereupon, as I have said from the beginning, applying the
surface of the Iron to the superficies of the Magnet the minute particles of
the Iron, though perhaps more continuate than these of any other body (as its
shining more than any other matter does show) do not all, nay but very few of
them encounter pure Magnet; and the contacts being few, the union is but weak.
But because the cap of the Lodestone, besides the contact of a great part of
its superficies, invests its self also with the virtue of the parts adjoining,
although they touch not; that side of it being exactly smoothed to which the
other face, in like manner well polisht of the Iron to be attracted, is
applied, the contract is made by innumerable minute particles, if not happily by
the infinite points of both the superficies, whereupon the union becomes very
strong. This observation of smoothing the surfaces of the Irons that are to
touch, came not into the thoughts of Gilbert, for he makes the Irons unequal, so
that their contact is very small; and thereupon it comes to pass that the
tenacity, wherewith those Irons conjoyn, is much lesser.


SAGR. I am, as I told you before, little less satisfied with this reason,
that if it were a pure Geometrical Demonstration; and because we speak of a
Physical Problem, I believe that also Simplicius will find himself satisfied as
far as natural science admits, in which he knows that Geometrical evidence is
not to be required.


SIMP. I think indeed, Sympathy and Antipathy, terms used by Philosophers to
give a reason easily of many natural effests*
that Salviatus with a fine circumlocution has so manifestly displayed the
cause of this effect, that any indifferent wit, though not verst in the
Sciences, may apprehend the same; but we, confining our selves to the terms of
Art, reduce the cause of these and other the like natural effects to Sympathy,
which is a certain agreemet and mutual appetite which arises between things
that are semblable to one another in qualities; as likewise on the contrary
that hatred and enmity for which other things shun and abhor one another we
call Antipathy.


SAGR. And thus with these two words men come to render reasons of a great
number of accidents and effects which we see not without admiration to be
produced in nature. But this kind of philosophating seems to me to have great
sympathy with a certain way of Painting that a Friend of mine used, A pleasant
example declaring the invalidity of some Phylosophical argumentations.
who writ upon the Tele or Canvasse in chalk, here I will have the Fountain
with Diana and her Nimphs, there certain Hariers, in this corner I will have a
Hunts-man with the Head of a Stag, the rest shall be Lanes, Woods, and Hills;
and left the remainder for the Painter to set forth with Colors; and thus he
persuaded himself that he had painted the Story of Acteon, when as he had
contributed thereto nothing of his own more than the names. But whether are we
wandered with so long a digression, contrary to our former resolutions? I have
almost forgot what the point was that we were upon when we fell into this
magnetic discourse* and yet I had something in my mind that I intended to have
spoken upon that subject.


SALV. We were about to demonstrate that third motion ascribed by Copernicus to
the Earth to be no motion but a quiescence and maintaining of it self immutably
directed with its determinate parts toward the same and determinate parts of
the Universe, that is a perpetual conservation of the Axis of its diurnal
revolution parallel to it self, and looking toward such and such fixed stars;
which most constant position we said did naturally agree with every librated
body suspended in a fluid and yielding medium, which although carried about,
yet did it not change directionin respect of things external, but only seemed
to revolve in its self, in respect of that which carried it round, and to the
vessel in which it was transported. And then we added to this simple and
natural accident the magnetic virtue, whereby the self Terrestrial Globe might
so much the more constantly keep it immutable, --


SAGR. Now I remember the whole business; and that which then came into my
mind, and which I would have intimated, was a certain consideration touching
the scruple and objection of Simplicius, which he propounded against the
mobility of the Earth, taken from the multiplicity of motions, The several
natural motions of the Magnet.
impossible to be assigned to a simple body, of which but one sole and simple
motion, according to the doctrine of Aristotle, can be natural; and that which
I would have proposed to consideration, was the Magnet, to which we manifestly
see three motions naturally to agree: one toward the center of the Earth, as a
Grave; the second is the circular Horizontal Motion, whereby it restores and
conserves its Axis toward determinate parts of the Universe; and the third is
this, newly discovered by Gilbert, of inclining its Axis, being in the plane of
a Meridian toward the surface of the Earth, and this more and less, according
as it shall be distant from the Equinoctial, under which it is parallel to the
Axis of the Earth. Besides these three, it is not perhaps improbable, but that
it may have a fourth, of revolving upon its own Axis, in case it were librated
and suspended in the air or other fluid and yielding Medium, so that all
external and accidental impediments were removed, and this opinion Gilbert
himself seems also to applaud. So that, Simplicius, you see how tottering the
Axiom of Aristotle is.


SIMP. This does ^ot only not make against the Maxim, but not so much as look
toward it: for that he speaks of a simple body, and of that which may
naturally consist therewith; but you propose that which befalls a mixed body;
nor do you tell us of any thing that is new to the doctrine of Aristotle, for
that he likewise grants to mixed bodies compound motions by --


SAGR. Stay a little, Simplicius, and answer me to the questions I shall ask
you. Aristole grants a compound motion to mixed bodies.
You say that the Lodestone is no simple body, now I desire you to tell me
what those simple bodies are, that mingle in composing the Lodestone.


SIMP. I know not how to tell you th'ingredients nor simples precisely, but it
suffices that they are things elementary.


SALV. So much suffices me also. And of these simple elementary bodies, what
are the natural motions?


SIMP. They are the two right and simple motions, sursum and deorsum.


SAGR. Tell me in the next place? Do you believe that the motion, that shall
remain natural to that same mixed body, should be one that may result from the
composition of the two simple natural motions of the simple bodies compounding,
or that it may be a motion impossible to be composed of them. The motion of
mixed bodies ought to be such as may result from the composition of the motions
of the simple bodies compounding.



SIMP. I believe that it shall move with the motion resulting from the
composition of the motions of the simple bodies compounding, and that with a
motion impossible to be composed of these, it is impossible that it should move.


SAGR. But, Simplicius, with two right and simple motions, you shall never be
able to compose a circular motion, With two right motions one cannot compose
circular motions.
such as are the two, or three circular motions that the magnet has: you see
then into what absurdities evil grounded Principles, or, to say better,
Philosophers are forced to confess that the Magnet is compounded of celestial
substances, and of elementary.
the ill-inferred consequences of good Principles carry a man; for you are now
forced to say, that the Magnet is a mixture compounded of substances elementary
and celestial, if you will maintain that the straight motion is a peculiar to
the Elements, and the circular to the celestial bodies. Therefore if you will
more safely argue, you must say, that of the integral bodies of the Universe,
those that are by nature moveable, do all move circularly, and that therefore
the Magnet, as a part of the true primary, The error of those who call the
Magnet a mixed body, and the terrestrial Globe a simble body.
and integral substance of our Globe, pertaketh of the same qualities with it.
And take notice of this your fallacy, in calling the Magnet a mixed body, and
the Terrestrial Globe a simple body, which is sensibly perceived to be a
thousand times more compound: for, besides that it contains an hundred an
hundred matters, exceeding different from one another, it contains great
abundance of this which you call mixed, I mean of the Lodestone. This seems to
me just as if one should call bread a mixed body, and Ogliopotrida a Spanish
dish of many ingredients boild together.
Pannada a simple body, in which there is put no small quantity of bread,
besides many other things edible. This seems to me a very admirable thing,
amongst others of the Peripateticks, The Discourses of Peripateticks, full of
errors and contradictions.
who grant (nor can it be denied) that our Terrestrial Globe is, de facto, a
compound of infinite different matters; and grant farther that of compound
bodies the motion ought to be compound: now the motions that admit of
composition are the right and circular: For the two right motions, as being
contrary, are incompatible together, they affirm, that the pure Element of
Earth is no where to be found; they confess, that it never has been moved
with a local motion; and yet they will introduce in Nature that body which is
not to be found, and make it move with that motion which it never exercised,
nor never shall do, and to that body which has, and ever had a being, they
deny that motion, which before they granted, ought naturally to agree therewith.


SALV. I beseech you, Sagredus, let us not weary our selves any more about
these particulars, and the rather, because you know that our purpose was not to
determine resolutely, or to accept for true, this or that opinion, but only to
propose for our divertisement such reasons, and answers as may be alleged on
the one side, or on the other; and Simplicius makes this answer, in defense of
his Peripateticks, therefore let us leave the judgment in suspense, and remit
the determination into the hands of such as are more known than we. And because
I think that we have, with sufficient prolixity, in these three days,
discoursed upon the Systeme of the Universe, it will now be seasonable, that we
proceed to the grand accident, from whence our Disputations took beginning, I
mean, of the ebbing and flowing of the Sea, the cause whereof may, in all
probability, be referred to the motion of the Earth. But that, if you so
please, we will reserve till to morrow. In the mean time, that I may not forget
it, I will speak to one particular, to which I could have wished, that Gilbert
had not lent an ear; An improbable effect admired by Gilbertus in the Loadstone.
I mean that of admitting, that in case a little Sphere of Loadstone might be
exactly librated, it would revolve in it self; because there is no reason why
it should do so; For if the whole Terrestrial Globe has a natural faculty of
revolving about its own center in twenty four hours, and that all its parts
ought to have the same, I mean, that faculty of turning round together with
their whole, about its center in twenty four hours; they already have the same
in effect, whilst that, being upon the Earth, they turn round along with it:
And the assigning them a revolution about their particular centres, would be to
ascribe unto them a second motion much different from the first: for so they
would have two, namely, the revolving in twenty four hours about the center of
their whole; and the turning about their own: now this second is arbitrary, nor
is there any reason for the introducing of it: If by plucking away a piece of
Loadstone from the whole natural mass, it were deprived of the faculty of
following it, as it did, whilst it was united thereto, so that it is thereby
deprived of the revolution about the universal center of the Terrestrial Globe,
it might happily, with somewhat greater probability be thought by some, that the
said Magnet was to appropriate to it self a new conversion about its particular
center; but if it do no less, when separated, than when conjoined, continue
always to pursue its first, eternal, and natural course, to what purpose should
we go about to obtrude upon it another new one?


SAGR. I understand you very well, and this puts me in mind of a Discourse very
like to this for the vanity of it, The vain argumentation of some to prove the
Element of Water to be of a Spherical superficies.
falling from certain Writers upon the Sphere, and I think, if I well remember,
amongst others from Sacrobosco, who, to show how the Element of Water, does,
together with the Earth, make a complete Spherical Figure, and so between them
both compose this our Globe, writes, that the seeing the small * particles of
water shape themselves into rotundity, as in the drops, and in the dew daily
apparent upon the leaves of several herbs, is a strong argument; and because,
according to the trite Axiom, there is the same reason for the whole, as for
the parts, the parts affecting that same figure, it is necessary that the same
is proper to the whole Element: and truth is, methinks it is a great oversight
that these men should not perceive so apparent a vanity, and consider that if
their argument had run right, it would have followed, that not only the small
drops, but that any whatsoever greater quantity of water separated from the
whole Element, should be reduced into a Globe: Which is not seen to happen;
though indeed the Senses may see, and the Understanding perceive that the
Element of Water loving to form it self into a Spherical Figure about the
common center of gravity, to which all grave bodies tend (that is, the center
of the Terrestrial Globe) it therein is followed by all its parts, according to
the Axiom; so that all the surfaces of Seas, Lakes, Pools, and in a word, of
all the parts of Waters contained in vessels, distend themselves into a
Spherical Figure, but that Figure is an arch of that Sphere that has for its
center the center of the Terrestrial Globe, and do not make particular Spheres
of themselves.


SALV. The error indeed is childish; and if it had been only the single
mistake of Sacrobosco, I would easily have allowed him in it; but to pardon it
also to his Commentators, and to other famous men, and even to Ptolomy
himself; this I cannot do, without blushing for their reputation. But it is
high time to take leave, it now being very late, and we being to meet again to
morrow, at the usual hour, to bring all the foregoing Discourses to a final
conclusion.



Place this Plate at the end of the third Dialogue




GALILAEUS Gailaeus Lyncaeus, HIS SYSTEME OF THE WORLD.
The Fourth Dialogue.
INTERLOCVTORS. SALVIATUS, SAGREDUS, and SIMPLICIUS. SAGR. I know not whether
your return to our accustomed conferences has really been later than usual, or
whether the desire of hearing the thoughts of Salviatus, touching a matter so
curious, has made me think it so: But I have tarried a long hour at this
window, expecting every moment when the Gondola would appear that I sent to
fetch you.


SALV. I verily believe that your imagination more than our tarriance has
prolonged the time: Nature in sport makes the ebbing and flowing of the Sea,
to approve the Earth^ mobility.
and to make no longer demurre, it would be well, if without interposing more
words, we came to the matter it self; and did show, that nature has permitted
(whether the business in rei veritate be so, or else to play and sport with our
Fancies) has, The tide, and mobility of the Earth mutually confirm each other.
I say, has permitted that the motions for every other respect, except to
resolve the ebbing and flowing of the Sea, assigned long since to the earth,
should be found now at last to answer exactly to the cause thereof; and, as it
were, All terrene effects, indifferently confirm the motion or rest of the
Earth, except the ebbing and flowing of the Sea.
with mutual a emulation, the said ebbing and flowing to appear in confirmation
of the Terrestrial motion: the judices whereof have hitherto been taken from
the celestial Phenomenon, in regard that of those things that happen on Earth,
not any one was of force to prove one opinion more than another, as we already
have at large proved, by showing that all the terrene occurrences upon which
the stability of the Earth and mobility of the Sun and Firmament is commonly
inferred, are to seem to us performed in the same manner, though we supposed
the mobility of the Earth, and the immobility of them. The Element of Water
only, as being most vast, and which is not annexed and concatenated to the
Terrestrial Globe as all its other solid parts are; yea, rather which by reason
of its fluidity remains apart sui juris, and free, is to be ranked amongst
those sublunary things, from which we may collect some hinte and intimation of
what the Earth does in relation to motion and rest. After I had many and many a
time examined with my self the effects and accidents, partly seen and partly
understood from others, that are to be observed in the motions of waters: and
moreover read and heard the great vanities produced by many, as the causes of
those accidents, The first general conclusion of the impossibility of the
ebbing and flowing the immobility of the terrestrial Globe being granted.
I have been induced upon no slight reasons to omit these two conclusions
(having made withal the necessary presupposals) that in case the terrestrial
Globe be immovable, the flux and reflux of the Sea cannot be natural; and
that, in case those motions be conferred upon the said Globe, which have been
long since assigned to it, it is necessary that the Sea be subject to ebbing
and flowing, according to all that which we observe to happen in the same.


SAGR. The Proposition is very considerable, as well for it self as for what
follows upon the same by way of consequence, so that I shall the more
intensly hearken to the explanation and confirmation of it.


SALV. Because in natural questions, The knowledge of the effests contributes
to the investigation of the causes.
of which number this which we have in hand is one, the knowledge of the
effects is a means to guide us to the investigation and discovery of the
causes, and without which we should walk in the dark, nay with more
uncertainty, for that we know not whither we would go, whereas the blind, at
least, know where they desire to arrive; therefore first of all it is necessary
to know the effects whereof we enquire the causes: of which effects you,
Sagredus, ought more abundantly and more certainly to be informed than I am, as
one, that besides your being born, and having, for a long time, dwelt in
Venice, where the Tides are very notable for their greatness, have also sailed
into Syria, and, as an ingenuous and apprehensive wit, must needs have made
many Observations upon this subject: whereas I, that could only for a time,
and that very short, observe what happened in these extreme parts of the
Adriatic Gulf, and in our Seas below about the Tyrrhene shores, must needs
take many things upon the relation of others, who, for the most part, not very
well agreeing, and consequently being very uncertain, contribute more of
confusion than confirmation to our speculations. Nevertheless, from those that
we are sure of, and which are the principal, I think I am able to attain to the
true and primary causes; not that I pretend to be able to produce all the
proper and adequate reasons of those effects that are new unto me, and which
consequently I could never have thought upon. And that which I have to say, I
propose only, as a key that opens the door to a path never yet trodden by
any, in certain hope, that some wits more speculative than mine, will make a
further progress herin, and penetrate much farther than I shall have done in
this my first Discovery: And although that in other Seas, remote from us, there
may ^appen several accidents, which do not happen in our Mediterranean Sea, yet
does not this invalidate the reason and cause that I shall produce, if so be
that it verify and fully resolve the accidents which evene in our Sea: for
that in conclusion there can be but one true and primary cause of the effects
that are of the same kind. I will relate unto you, therefore, the effects that
I know to be true, and assign the causes thereof that I think to be true, and
you also, Gentlemen, shall produce such others as are known to you, besides
mine, and then we will try whether the cause, by me alleged, may satisfy them
also. Three Periods of ebbings and flowings, diurnal, monthly, and annual.


I therefore affirm the periods that are observed in the fluxes and refluxes of
the Sea-waters to be three: the first and principal is this great and most
obvious one; namely, the diurnal, according to which the intervals of some
hours with the waters flow and ebb; and these intervals are, for the most
part, in the Mediterrane from six hours to six hours, or thereabouts, that is,
they for six hours flow, and for six hours ebb. The second period is monthly,
and it seems to take its origin from the motion of the Moon, not that it
introduces other motions, but only alters the greatness of those before
mentioned, with a notable difference, according as it shall wax or wane, or
come to the Quadrature with the Sun. The third Period is annual, and is seen to
depend on the Sun, and only alters the diurnal motions, by making them
different in the times of the Solstices, as to greatness, from what they are
in the Equinoxes.

We will speak (in the first place, of the diurnal motion, as being the
principal, and upon which the Moon and Sun seem to exercise their power
secondarily, Varieties that ^appen in the diur^^^ period.
in their monthly and annual alterations. Three differences are observable in
these horary mutations; for in some places the waters rise and fall, without
making any progressive motion; in others, without rising or falling they run
one while toward the East, and recur another while toward the West; and in
others they vary the heights and course also, as happens here in Venice,
where the Tides in coming in rise, and in going out fall; and this they do in
the extermities of the lengths of Gulphs that distend from West to East, and
terminate in open shores, up along which shores the Tide at time of flood has
room to extend it self: but if the course of the Tide were intercepted by
Cliffes and Banks of great height and steepness, there it will flow and ebb
without any progressive motion. Again, it runs to and again, without changing
height in the middle parts of the Mediterrane, as notably happens in the A
Strair, so called.
Faro de Messina, between Scylla and Carybdis, where the Currents, by reason of
the narrowness of the Channel, are very swift; but in the more open Seas, and
about the Isles that stand farther into the Mediterranean Sea, as the Baleares,
Corsica, Sardignia, Or Ilva.
Elba, Sicily toward the Affrican Coasts, Malta, Or Crets.
Candia, etc. the changes of watermark are very small; but the currents indeed
are very notable, and especially when the Sea is pent between Islands, or
between them and the Continent.

Now these only true and certain effects, were there no more to be observed,
do, in my judgment, very probably persuade any man, that will contain himself
within the bounds of natural causes, to grant the mobility of the Earth: for to
make the vessel (as it may be called) of the Mediterrane stand still, and to
make the water contained therein to do, as it does, exceeds my imagination, and
perhaps every man's else, who will but pierce beyond the rind in these kind of
inquiries.


SIMP. These accidents, Salviatus, begin not now, they are most ancient, and
have been observed by very many, and several have attempted to assign, some
one, some another cause for the same: and there dwells not many miles from
hence a famous Peripatetick, The cause of the ebbing and flowing alleged by a
certain modern Philosopher.
that alleges a cause for the same newly fished out of a certain Text of
Aristotle, not well understood by his Expositors, from which Text he
collecteth, that the true cause of these motions does only proceed from the
different profundities of Seas (...) waters of greatest depth being greater in
abundance, and therefore more grave, drive back the Waters of less depth,
which being afterward raised, desire to descend, and from this continual
colluctation or contest proceeds the ebbing and flowing. The cause of the
ebbing and flowing ascribed to the Moon by a certain Prelate.
Again those that refer the same to the Moon are many, saying that she has
particular Domination over the Water; and at last a certain Prelate has
published a little Treatise, wher^in he says that the Moon wandering too and
fro in the Heavens attracteth and draws toward it a Mass of Water, which
goes continually following it, so that it is full Sea always in that part
which lies under the Moon; and because, that though she be under the Horizon,
yet nevertheless the Tide returns, he says that no more can be said for the
salving of that particular, save only, that the Moon does not only naturally
retain this faculty in her self; but in this case has power to confer it upon
that degree of the Zodiac that is opposite unto it. Others, Hieronymus Borrius
and other Peripateticks refer it to the temperate heat of the Moon,
as I believe you know, do say that the Moon is able with her temperate heat to
rarefie the Water, which being rarefied, does thereupon flow. Nor has there
been wanting some that --


SAGR. I pray you Simplicius let us hear no more of them, for I do not think it
is worth the while to wast time in relating them, or to spend our breath in
confuting them; and for your part, if you gave your assent to any of these or
the like foole^ies, you did a great injury to your judgment, which
nevertheless I acknowledge to be very piercing.


SALV. But I that am a little more phlegmatic than you, Answers to the vanities
alleged as causes of the ebbing and flowing.
Sagredus, will spend a few words in favor of Simplicius, if happily he thinks
that any probability is to be found in those things that he has related. I say
therefore: The Waters, Simplicius, that have their exterior superficies
higher, repel those that are inferior to them, and lower; but so do not those
Waters that are of greatest profundity; and the higher having once driven back
the lower, they in a short time grow quiet and Or rather smooth.
level. This your Peripatetick must needs be of an opinion, that all the Lakes
in the World that are in a calm, and that all the Seas where the ebbing and
flowing is insensible, are level in their bottoms; but I was so simple, that I
persuaded my self that had we no other plummet to sound with, The Isles are
tokens of the unevenness of the bottomes of Seas.
the Isles that advance so high above Water, had been a sufficient evidence of
the unevenness of their bottomes. To that Prelate I could say that the Moon
runs every day along the whole Mediterrane, and yet its Waters do not rise
thereupon, save only in the very extreme bounds of it Eastward, and here to us
at Venice. And for those that make the Moons temperate heat able to make the
Water swell, bid them put fire under a Kettle full of Water, and hold their
right hand therein till that the Water by reason of the heat do rise but one
sole inch, and then let them take it out, and write off the tumefaction of the
Sea. Or at least desire them to show you how the Moon does to rarefie a certain
part of the Waters, and not the remainder; as for instance, these here of
Venice, and not those of Ancona, Naples, Genova: the truth is Poetic Wits are
of two kinds, Poetic wits of two kinds.
some are ready and apt to invent Fables, and others disposed and inclined to
believe them.


SIMP. I believe that no man believes Fables, so long as he knows them to be
so; and of the opinions concerning the causes of ebbing and flowing, which are
many, because I know that of one single effect there is but one single cause
that is true and primary, I understand very well, and am certain that but one
alone at the most can be true, and for all the rest I am sure that they are
fabulous, and false; and its possible that the true one may not be among those
that have been hitherto produced; nay I verily believe that it is not, for it
would be very strange that the truth should have so little light, Truth has
not so little light as not to be discovered amidst the umbrages of falsehoods.
as that it should not be visible amongst the umbrages of so many falsehoods.
But this I shall say with the liberty that is permitted amongst us, that the
introduction of the Earths motion, and the making it the cause of the ebbing
and flowing of Tides, seems to me as yet a conjecture no less fabulous than
the rest of those that I have heard; and if there should not be proposed to me
reasons more conformable to natural matters, I would without any more ado
proceed to believe this to be a supernatural effect, and therefore miraculous,
and unsearchable to the understandings of men, as infinite others there are,
that immediately depend on the Omnipotent hand of God.


SAGR. You argue very prudently, Aristotle holds those effects to be
miraculous, of which the causes are unknown.
and according to the Doctrine of Aristotle, who you know in the beginning of
his mechanical questions refers those things to a Miracle, the causes
whereof are occult. But that the cause of the ebbing and flowing is one of
those that are not to be found out, I believe you have no greater proof than
only that you see, that amongst all those that have hitherto been produced for
true causes thereof, there is not one wherewith, working by what artifice you
will, we are able to represent such an effect; in regard that neither with the
light of the Moon nor of the Sun, nor with temperate heats, nor with different
profundities, shall one ever artificially make the Water contained in an
immovable Vessel to run one way or another, and to ebb and flow in one place,
and not in another. But if without any other artifice, but with the only
moving of the Vessel, I am able punctually to represent all those mutations
that are observed in the Sea Water, why will you refuse this reason and run to
a Miracle?


SIMP. I will run to a Miracle still, if you do not with some other natural
causes, besides that of the motion of the Vessels of the Seawater dissuade me
from it; for I know that those Vessels move not, in regard that all the entire
Terrestrial Globe is naturally immovable.


SALV. But do not you think, that the Terrestrial Globe might supernaturally,
that is, by the absolute power of God, be made moveable?


SIMP. Who doubts it?


SALV. Then Simplicius, seeing that to make the flux and reflux of the Sea, it
is necessary to introduce a Miracle, let us suppose the Earth to move
miraculously, upon the motion of which the Sea moves naturally: and this
effect shall be also the more simple, and I may say natural, amongst the
miraculous operations, in that the making a Globe to move round, of which kind
we see many others to move, is less difficult than to make an immense mass of
water go forwards and backwards, in one place more swiftly, and in another
less, and to rise and fall in some places more; in some less, and in some not
at all: and to work all these different effects in one and the same Vessel that
contains it: besides, that these are several Miracles, and that is but one
only. And here it may be added, that the Miracle of making the water to move
is accompanied with another, namely, the holding of the Earth steadfast against
impetuosities of the water, able to make it swage sometimes one way, and
sometimes another, if it were not miraculously kept to rights.


SAGR. God Simplicius, let us for the present suspend our judgment about
sentencing the new opinion to be vain that Salviatus is about to explicate unto
us, nor let us so hastily fly out into passion like the scolding overgrown
Haggs: and as for the Miracle, we may as well recurre to it when we have done
hearing the Discourses contained within the bounds of natural causes: though to
speak freely, all the Works of nature, or rather of God, are in my judgment
miraculous.


SALV. And I am of the same opinion; nor does my saying, that the motion of the
Earth is the Natural cause of the ebbing and flowing, hinder, but that the said
motion of the Earth may be miraculous. Now reassuming our Argument, I apply,
and once again affirm, that it has been hitherto unknown how it might be that
the Waters contained in our Mediterranean Straights should make those motions,
as we see it does, if so be the said Straight, or containing Vessel were
immovable. And that which makes the difficulty, and renders this matter
inextricable, are the things which I am about to speak of, and which are daily
observed. Therefore lend me your attention.

We are here in Venice, where at this time the Waters are low, the Sea calm, It
is proved impossible that there should naturally be any ebbing and flowing, the
Earth being immovable.
the Air tranquil; suppose it to be young flood, and that in the term of five
or six hours the water do rise ten Palms.
hand breadths and more; that rise is not made by the first water, which was
said to be rarefied, but it is done by the accession of new Water: Water of the
same sort with the former, of the same brackishness, of the same density, of
the same weight: Ships, Simplicius, float therein as in the former, without
drawing an hairs breadth more water; a Barrel of this second does not weigh one
single grain more or less than such another quantity of the other, and
retains the same coldness without the least alteration: And it is, in a word,
Water newly and visibly entered by the Channels and Mouth of the Lio is a fair
Port in the Venetian Gulf, lying N. E. from the City.
Lio. Consider now, how and from whence it came thither. Are there happly
hereabouts any Gulphs or Whirle-pools in the bottom of the Sea, by which the
Earth drinks in and spueth out the Water, breathing as it were a great and
monstrous Whale? But if this be so, how comes it that the Water does not flow
in the space of six hours in Ancona, in * Ragusa, in Corfu, where the Tide is
very small, and happly unobservable? Who will invent a way to pour new Water
into an immovable Vessel, and to make that it rise only in one determinate
part of it, and in other places not? Will you say, that this new Water is
borrowed from the Ocean, being brought in by the Straight of Gibraltar? This
will not remove the doubt aforesaid, but will beget a greater. And first tell
me what ought to be the current of that Water, that entering at the Straights
mouth, is carried in six hours to the remotest Creeks of the Mediterrane, at a
distance of two or three thousand Miles, and that returns the same space
again in a like time at its going back? What would Ships do that lie out at
Sea? What would become of those that should be in the Straights-mough in a
continual precipice of a vast accumulation of Waters, that entering in at a
Channel but eight Miles broad, is to give admittance to so much Water as in six
hours over-floweth a tract of many hundred Miles broad, and thousands in
length? What Tygre, what Falcon runs or flies with so much swiftness? With
the swiftness, I say, of above 400 Miles an hour. The currents run (nor can it
be denied) the long-wayes of the Gulf, but so slowly, as that a Boat with Oars
will out-go them, though indeed not without defalking for their wanderings.
Moreover, if this Water come in at the Straight, the other doubt yet remains,
namely, how it comes to flow here so high in a place so remote, without first
rising a like or greater height in the parts more adjacent? In a word, I cannot
think that either obstinacy, or sharpness of wit can ever find an answer to
these Objections, nor consequently to maintain the stability of the Earth
against them, keeping within the bounds of Nature.


SAGR. I have all the while perfectly apprehended you in this; and I stand
greedily attending to hear in what manner these wonders may occur without
obstruction from the motion already assigned to the Earth.


SALV. These effects being to ensue in consequence of the motions that
naturally agree with the Earth, it is necessary that they not only meet with
no impediment or obstacle, but that they do follow easily, and not only that
they follow with facility, but with necessity, so as that it is impossible that
it should succeed otherwise, for such is the property and condition of things
natural and true. Having therefore shown the impossibility of rendering a
reason of the motions discerned in the Waters, True and natural effects follow
without difficulty.
and at the same time to maintain the immobility of the vessel that contains
them we may proceed to enquire, whether the mobility of the Container may
produce the required effect, in the manner that it is observed to evene.

Two kinds of motions may be conferred upon a Vessel, whereby the Water therein
contained, Two sorts of motions of the containing Vessel, may make the
contained water to rise and fall.
may acquire a faculty of fluctuating in it, one while toward one side, and
another while toward another; and there one while to ebb, and another while
to flow. The first is, when first one, and then another of those sides is
declined, for then the Water running toward the inclining side, will
alternately be higher and lower, sometimes on one side, and sometimes on
another. But because that this rising and abating is no other than a recession
and accession to the center of the Earth, such a motion cannot be ascribed to
the Cavities of the said Earth, that are the Vessels which contain the Waters;
the parts of which Vessel cannot by any whatsoever motion assigned to the
Earth, The Cavities of the Earth cannot approach or go farther from the center
of the same.
be made to approach or recede from the center of the same: The other sort of
motion is, when the Vessel moves (without inclining in the least) with a
progressive motion, not uniform, but that changes velocity, by sometimes
accellerating, and other times retarding: from which disparity it would follow,
The progpessive and uneven motion may make the water contained in a Vessel to
run to and fro.
that the Water contained in the Vessel its true, but not fixed fast to it, as
its other solid parts, but by reason of its fluidity, as if it were separated
and at liberty, and not obliged to follow all the mutations of its Container,
in the retardation of the Vessel, it keeping part of the impetus before
conceived, would run toward the the preceding part, whereupon it would of
necessity come to rise; and on the contrary, if new velocity should be added to
the Vessel, with retaining parts of its tardity, staying somewhat behind,
before it could habituate it self to the new impetus, it would hang back
toward the following part, where it would come to rise something. The which
effects we may plainly declare and make out to the Sense by the example of one
of those same Barks yonder, which continually come from A Town lying S. E. of
Venice
Lizza-Fusina, laden with fresh water, for the service of the City. Let us
therefore fancy one of those Barks, to come from thence with moderate velocity
along the Lake, carrying the water gently, of which it is full: and then either
by running a ground, or by some other impediment that it shall meet with, let
it be notably retarded. The water therein contained shall not, by that means,
lose, as the Bark does, its pre-conceived impetus, but retaining the same,
shall run forwards toward the prow, where it shall rise notably, falling as
much a stern. But if, on the contrary, the said Bark, in the midst of its
smooth course, shall have a new velocity, with notable augmentation added to
it, the water contained before it can habituate it self thereto, continuing in
its tardity, shall stay behind, namely a stern, where of consequence it shall
mount, and abate for the same at the prow. This effect is undoubted and
manifest, and may hourly be experimented; in which I desire that for the
present three particulars may be noted. The first is, that to make the water to
rise on one side of the vessel, there is no need of new water, nor that it run
thither, forsaking the other side. The second is, that the water in the middle
does not rise or fall notably, unless the course of the Bark were not before
that very swift, and the shock or other arrest that held it exceeding strong
and sudden, in which case its possible, that not only all the water might run
forwards, but that the greater part thereof might issue forth of the Bark: and
the same also would ensue, whilst that being under sail in a smooth course, a
most violent impetus should, upon an instant, overtake it: But when to its
calm motion there is added a moderate retardation or incitation, the middle
parts (as I said) unobservedly rise and fall: and the other parts, according as
they are nearer to the middle, rise the less; and the more remote, more. The
third is, that whereas the parts about the midst do make little alteration in
rising and falling, in respect of the waters of the sides; on the contrary,
they run forwards and backwards very much, in comparison of the extremes. Now,
my Masters, that which the Bark does, in respect of the water by it contained,
and that which the water contained does, in respect of the Bark its container,
is the self-same, to an hair, with that which the Mediterranean Vessel does, in
respect of the waters in it contained, and that which the waters contained do,
in respect of the Mediterranean Vessel their container. The parts of the
terrestrial Globe accelerate and regard in their motion.
It follows now that we demonstrate how, and in what manner it is true, that
the Mediterrane, and all the other Straits; and in a word, all the parts of the
Earth do all move, with a motion notably uneven, though no motion that is not
regular and uniforme, is thereby assigned to all the said Globe taken
collectively.


SIMP. This Proposition, at first sight to me, that am neither Geometrician nor
Astronomer, has the appearance of a very great Paradox; and if it should be
true, that the motion of the whole, being regular, that of the parts, which are
all united to their whole, may be irregular, the Paradox will overthrow the
Axiom that affirms, Eandem esse rationem totius and partium.


SALV. I will demonstrate my Paradox, and leave it to your care, Simplicius, to
defend the Axiom from it, or else to reconcile them; and my demonstration
shall be short and familiar, depending on the things largely handled in our
precedent conferences, without introducing the least syllable, in favor of the
flux and reflux.

We have said, Demonstrations how the parts of the terrestrial Globe
accelerate and retard.
that the motions assigned to the Terrestrial Globe are two, the first Annual,
made by its center about the circumference of the Grand Orb, under the
Ecliptic, according to the order of the Signs, that is, from West to East;
the other made by the said Globe revolving about its own center in twenty four
hours; and this likewise from West to East: though about an Axis somewhat
inclined, and not equidistant from that of the Annual conversion. From the
mixture of these two motions, each of it self uniform, I say, that there does
result an uneven and deformed motion in the parts of the Earth. Which, that it
may the more easily be understood, I will explain, by drawing a Scheme thereof.
And first, about the center A [in Fig. 1. of this Dialogue] I will describe the
circumference of the Grand Orb B C, The parts of a Circle regularly moved about
its own center move in diverse times with contrary motions.
in which any point being taken, as B, about it as a center we will describe
this lesser circle D E F G, representing the Terrestrial Globe; the which we
will suppose to run through the whole circumference of the Grand Orb, with its
center B, from the West toward the East, that is, from the part B toward C;
and moreover we will suppose the Terrestrial Globe to turn about its own center
B likewise from West to East, that is, according to the succession of the
points D E F G, in the space of twenty four hours. But here we ought carefully
to note, that a circle turning round upon its own center, each part of it must,
at different times, move with contrary motions: the which is manifest,
considering that whilst the parts of the circumference, about the point D move
to the left hand, that is, toward E, the opposite parts that are about F,
approach to the right hand, that is, toward G; so that when the parts D shall
be in F, their motion shall be contrary to what it was before. when it was in
D. Furthermore, the same time that the parts E descend, if I may so speak,
toward F, those in G ascend toward D. It being therefore presupposed, that
there are such contrarieties of motions in the parts of the Terrestrial
Surface, The mixture of the two motions annnal and diurnal, causes the
inequality in the motion of the parts of the terrestrial Globe.
whilst it turns round upon its own center, it is necessary, that in
conjoyning this Diurnal Motion, with the other Annual, there do result an
absolute motion for the parts of the said Terrestrial Superficies, one while
very accelerate, and another while as slow again. The which is manifest,
considering first the parts about D, the absolute motion of which shall be
extreme swift, as that which proceeds from two motions made both one way,
namely, toward the left hand; the first of which is part of the Annual Motion,
common to all the parts of the Globe, the other is that of the said point D.,
carried likewise to the left, by the Diurnal Revolution; so that, in this case,
the Diurnal motion increases and accelerateth the Annual. The contrary to
which happens in the opposite part F, which, whilst it is by the common
annual motion carried, together with the whole Globe, toward the left, it
happens to be carried by the Diurnal conversion also toward the right: so
that the Diurnal motion by that means detracteth from the Annual, whereupon the
absolute motion, resulting from the composition of both the other, is much
retarded. Again, about the points E and G, the absolute motion becomes in a
manner equal to the simple Annual one, in regard that little or nothing
increases or diminishes it, as not tending either to the left hand, or to the
right, but downwards and upwards. We will conclude therefore, that like as it
is true, that the motion of the whole Globe, and of each of its parts, would be
equal and uniforme, in case they did move with one single motion, whether it
were the mere Annual, or the single Diurnal Revolution, so it is requisite,
that mixing those two motions together, there do result thence for the parts of
the said Globe irregular motions, one while accelerated, and another while
retarded, by means of the additions or substractions of the Diurnal conversion
from the annual circulation. So that, if it be true (and most true it is, as
experience proves) that the acceleration and retardation of the motion of the
Vessel, makes water contained therein to run to and again the long ways of it,
and to rise and fall in its extremes, who will make scruple of granting, that
the said effect may, nay ought to succeed in the Sea-waters, contained within
their Vessels, subject to such like alterations, and especially in those that
distend themselves long-wayes from West to East, which is the course that the
motion of those same Vessels steereth? The most potent and primary cause of the
ebbing and flowing.
Now this is the most potent and primary cause of the ebbing and flowing,
without the which no such effect would ensue. But because the particular
accidents are many and various, that in several places and times are observed,
which must of necessity have dependence on other different concomitant causes,
although they ought all to have connection with the primary; therefore it is
convenient that we propound and examine the several accidents that may be the
causes of such different effects.

The first of which is, Sundry accidents that happen in the ebbings and
flowings The first accident.
that when ever the water, by means of a notable retardation or acceleration of
the motion of the Vessel, its container, shall have acquired a cause of running
toward this or that extreme, The Water raised in one end of the Vessel
returns of its self to Aequilibrium.
and shall be raised in the one, and abated in the other, it shall not
nevertheless continue, for any time in that state, when once the primary cause
is ceased: but by virtue of its own gravity and natural inclination to level
and grow, even it shall speedily return backwards of its own accord, and, as
being grave and fluid, shall not only move toward Aequilibrium; but being
impelled by its own impetus, shall go beyond it, rising in the part, where
before it was lowest; nor shall it stay here, but returning backwards anew,
with more reiterated reciprocations of its undulations, it shall give us to
know, that it will not from a velocity of motion, once conceived, reduce it
self, in an instant, to the privation thereof, and to the state of rest, but
will successively, by decreasing a little and a little, reduce it self unto the
same, just in the same manner as we see a weight hanging at a cord, after it
has been once removed from its state of rest, that is, from its
perpendicularity, of its own accord, to return thither and settle it self, but
not till such time as it shall have often past to one side, and to the other,
with its reciprocal vibrations.

The second accident to be observed is, In the shorter Vessels the undulations
of waters are more frequent.
that the before-declared reciprocations of motion come to be made and repeated
with greater or lesser frequency, that is, under shorter or longer times,
according to the different lengths of the Vessels containing the waters; so
that in the shorter spaces the reciprocations are more frequent, and in the
longer more rare: just as in the former example of pendent bodies, the
vibrations of those that are hanged to longer cords are seen to be less
frequent, than those of them that hang at shorter strings.

And here, The greater profundity makes the undulations of waters more
frequent.
for a third observation, it is to be noted, that not only the greater or
lesser length of the Vessel is a cause that the water makes its reciprocations
under different times; but the greater or lesser profundity works the same
effect. And it happens, that of waters contained in receptacles of equal
length, but of unequal depth, that which shall be the deepest, makes its
undulations under shorter times, and the reciprocations of the shallower waters
are less frequent.

Fourthly, there are two effects worthy to be noted, and diligently observed,
which the water works in those its vibrations; the one is its rising and
falling alternately toward the one and other extremity; Water rises and
falls in the extreme parts of the Vessel, and runs to and fro in the midst.
the other is its moving and running, to so speak, Horizontally forwards and
backwards. Which two different motions differently reside in diverse parts of
the Water: for its extreme parts are those which most eminently rise and fall;
those in the middle never absolutely moving upwards, and downwards; of the rest
successively those that are nearest to the extremes rise and fall
proportionally more than the remote: but on the contrary, touching the other
progressive motion forwards and backwards, the middle parts move notably, going
and returning, and the waters that are in the extreme parts gain no ground at
all; save only in case that in their rising they overflow their banks, and
break forth of their first channel and receptacle; but where there is the
obstacle of banks to keep them in, they only rise and fall; which yet
hinders not the waters in the middle from fluctuating to and again; which
likewise the other parts do in proportion, undulating more or less, according
as they are nearer or more remote from the middle.

The fifth particular accident ought the more attentively to be considered, An
accident of the Earths motions impossible to be reduced to practice by art.
in that it is impossible to represent the effect thereof by an experiment or
example; and the accident is this. In the vessels by us framed with art, and
moved, as the abovenamed Bark, one while more, and another while less swiftly,
the acceleration and retardation is imparted in the same manner to all the
vessel, and to every part of it; so that whilst v. g. the Bark forbeareth to
move, the parts precedent retard no more than the subsequent, but all equally
partake of the same retardment; and the self-same holds true of the
acceleration, namely, that conferring on the Bark a new cause of greater
velocity, the Prow and Poop both accelerate in one and the same manner. But in
huge great vessels, such as are the very long bottomes of Seas, albeit they
also are no other than certain cavities made in the solidity of the Terrestrial
Globe, it always admirably happens, that their extremes do not unitedly
equal, and at the same moments of time increase and diminish their motion, but
it happens that when one of its extremes has, by virtue of the commixtion
of the two Motions, Diurnal, and Annual, greatly retarded its velocity, the
other extreme is animated with an extreme swift motion. Which for the better
understanding of it we will explain, reassuming a Scheme like to the former; in
which if we do but suppose a tract of Sea to be long, v. g. a fourth part, as
is the arch B C [in Fig. 2.] because the parts B are, as has been already
declared, very swift in motion, by reason of the union of the two motions
diurnal and annual, toward one and the same way, but the part C at the same
time is retarded in its motion, as being deprived of the progression dependant
on the diurnal motion: If we suppose, I say, a tract of Sea as long as the arch
B C, we have already seen, that its extremes shall move in the same time with
great inequality. And extremely different would the velocities of a tract of
Sea be that is in length a semicircle, and placed in the position B C D, in
regard that the extreme B would be in a most accelerate motion, and the other
D, in a most slow one; and the intermediate parts toward C, would be in a
moderate motion. And according as the said tracts of Sea shall be shorter, they
shall less participate of this extravagant accident, of being in some hours of
the day with their parts diversely affected by velocity and tardity of motion.
So that, if, as in the first case, we see by experience that the acceleration
and retardation, though equally imparted to all the parts of the containing
Vessel, is the cause that the water contained fluctuates too and again, what
may we think would happen in a Vessel so admirably disposed, that retardation
and acceleration of motion is very unequally contributed to its parts?
Certainly we must needs grant that greater and more wonderful causes of the
commotions in the Water ought to be looked for. And though it may seem
impossible to some, that in artificial Machines and Vessels we should be able
to experiment the effects of such an accident; yet nevertheless it is not
absolutely impossible to be done; and I have by me the model of an Engine, in
which the effect of these admirable commixtions of motions may be particularly
observed. But as to what concerns our present purpose, that which you may have
hitherto comprehended with your imagination may suffice.


SAGR. I for my own particular very well conceive that this admirable accident
ought necessarily to evene in the Straights of Seas, and especially in those
that distend themselves for a great length from West to East; namely according
to the course of the motions of the Terrestrial Globe; and as it is in a
certain manner unthought of, and without a president among the motions possible
to be made by us, so it is not hard for me to believe, that effects may be
derived from the same, which are not to be imitated by our artificial
experiments.


SALV. These things being declared, it is time that we proceed to examine the
particular accidents, which, together with their diversities, are observed by
experience in the ebbing and flowing of the waters. Reasons renewed of the
particnlar accidents observed in the ebbings and flowings.
And first we need not think it hard to guess whence it happens, that in
Lakes, Pooles, and also in the lesser Seas there is no notable flux and reflux;
the which has two very solid reasons. The one is, that by reason of the
shortness of the Vessel, Second causes why in small Seas and in Lakes there
are no ebbings and flowings.
in its acquiring in several hours of the day several degrees of velocity, they
are with very little difference acquired by all its parts; for as well the
precedent as the subsequent, that is to say, both the Eastern and VVestern
parts, do accelerate and retard almost in the same manner; and withal making
that alteration by little and little, and not by giving the motion of the
containing Vessel a sudden check, and retardment, or a sudden and great impulse
or acceleration; both it and all its parts, come to be gently and equally
impressed with the same degrees of velocity; from which uniformity it
follows, that also the contained water with but small resistance and
opposition, receives the same impressions, and by consequence does give but
very obscure signs of its rising or falling, or of its running toward one
part or another. The which effect is likewise manifestly to be seen in the
little artificial Vessels, wherein the contained water does receive the self
same impressions of velocity; when ever the acceleration and retardation is
made by gentle and uniform proportion. But in the Straights and Bays that for a
great length distend themselves from East to West, the acceleration and
retardation is more notable and more uneven, for that one of its extremes shall
be much retarded in motion, and the other shall at the same time move very
swiftly: The reciprocal libration or levelling of the water proceeding from the
impetus that it had conceived from the motion of its container. The which
libration, as has been noted, has its undulations very frequent in small
Vessels; from whence ensues, that though there do reside in the Terrestrial
motions the cause of conferring on the waters a motion only from twelve hours
to twelve hours, for that the motion of the containing Vessels do extremely
accelerate and extremely retard but once every day, and no more; yet
nevertheless this same second cause depending on the gravity of the water
which striveth to reduce it self to equilibration, and that according to the
shortness of the Vessel has its reciprocations of one, two, three, or more
hours, this intermixing with the first, which also it self in small Vessels is
very little, it becomes upon the whole altogether insensible. For the primary
cause, which has the periods of twelve hours, having not made and end of
imprinting the precedent commotion, it is overtaken and opposed by the other
second, dependant on the waters own weight, which according to the brevity and
profundity of the Vessel, has the time of its undulations of one, two, three,
four, or more hours; and this contending with the other former one, disturbeth
and removes it, not permitting it to come to the height, no nor to the half of
its motion; and by this contestation the evidence of the ebbing and flowing is
wholly annihilated, or at least very much obscured. I pass by the continual
alteration of the air, which disquieting the water, permits us not to come to a
certainty, whether any, though but small, increase or abatement of half an
inch, or loss, do reside in the Straights, or receptacles of water not above a
degree or two in length.

I come in the second place to resolve the question, The reason given, why the
ebbings and flowings, for the most part, are every six hours.
why, there not residing any virtue in the primary principle of commoving the
waters, save only every twelve hours, that is to say, once by the greatest
velocity, and once by the greatest tardity of motion; the ebbings and flowings
should yet nevertheless appear to be every six hours. To which is answered,
that this determination cannot any ways be taken from the primary cause only;
but there is a necessity of introducing the secondary causes, as namely the
greater or less length of the Vessels, and the greater or less depth of the
waters in them contained. Which causes although they have not any operation in
the motions of the waters, those operations belonging to the sole primary
cause, without which no ebbing or flowing would happen, yet nevertheless they
have a principal share in determining the times or periods of the
reciprocations, and herein their influence is so powerful, that the primary
cause must of force give way unto them. The period of six hours therefore is no
more proper or natural than those of other intervals of times, though indeed
its the most observed, as agreeing with our Mediterrane, which was the only
Sea that for many Ages was navigated: though neither is that period observed in
all its parts; for that in some more angust places, such as are the Hellespont,
and the Aegean Sea, the periods are much shorter, and also very diverse amongst
themselves; for which diversities, and their causes incomprehensible to
Aristotle, some say, that after he had a long time observed it upon some
cliffes of Negropont, being brought to desperation, he threw himself into the
adjoining Euripus, and voluntarily drowned himself.

In the third place we have the reason ready at hand, The cause why some Seas,
though very long, suffer no ebbing and flowing.
whence it comes to pass, that some Seas, although very long, as is the Red
Sea, are almost altogether exempt from Tides, which happens because their
length extends not from East to West, but rather transversly from the
Southeast to the Northwest; but the motions of the Earth going from West to
East; the impulses of the water, by that means, always happen to fall in the
Meridians, and do not move from parallel to parallel; insomuch that in the Seas
that extend themselves athwart toward the Poles, and that the contrary way are
narrow, there is no cause of ebbing and flowing, save only by the
participation of another Sea, wherewith it has communication, that is subject
to great commotions.

In the fourth place we shall very easily find out the reason why the fluxes
and refluxes are greatest, Ebbings and flowings why greatest in the extremities
of Gulphs, and least in the middle parts.
as to the waters rising and falling in the utmost extremities of Gulphs, and
least in the intermediate parts; as daily experience shows here in Venice,
lying in the farther end of the Adriatic Sea, where that difference commonly
amounts to five or six feet; but in the places of the Mediterrane, far distant
from the extremes, that mutation is very small, as in the Isles of Corsica and
Sardinnia, and in the Strands of Rome and Ligorne, where it exceeds not half a
foot; we shall understand also, why on the contrary, where the risings and
fallings are small, the courses and recourses are great: I say it is an easy
thing to understand the causes of these accidents, seeing that we meet with
many manifest occurrences of the same nature in every kind of Vessel by us
artificially composed, in which the same effects are observed naturally to
follow upon our moving it unevenly, that is, one while faster, and another
while flower.

Moreover, Why in narrow places the course of the waters is more swift than in
larger.
considering in the fifth place, that the same quantity of Water being moved,
though but gently, in a spacious Channel, coming afterward to go through a
narrow passage, will of necessity run, with great violence, we shall not find
it hard to comprehend the cause of the great Currents that are made in the
narrow Channel that separateth Calabria from Sicilia: for that all the Waters
that, by the spaciousness of the Isle, and by the Ionick Gulf, happens to be
pent in the Eastern part of the Sea, though it do in that, by reason of its
largeness, gently descend toward the West, yet nevertheless, in that it is
pent up in the Bosphorus, it flows with great violence between Scilla and
Caribdis, and makes a great agitation. Like to which, and much greater, is
said to be betwixt Africa and the great Isle of St. Lorenzo, where the Waters
of the two vast Seas, Indian and Ethiopick, that lie round it, must needs be
straightned into a less Channel between the said Isle and the Ethiopian Coast.
And the Currents must needs be very great in the Straights of Megallanes, which
join together the vast Oceans of Ethiopia, and Del Zur, called also the
Pacifick Sea.

It follows now, in the sixth place, A discussion of (...) ^abstruce (...)
obse^ved (...) ebbing and ^^^wing.
that to render a reason of some more abstruse and incredible accidents, which
are observed upon this occasion, we make a considerable reflection upon the two
principal causes of ebbings and flowings, afterward compounding and mixing
them together. The first and simplest of which is (as has often been said) the
determinate acceleration and retardation of the parts of the Earth, from whence
the Waters have a determinate period put to their decursions toward the East,
and return toward the West, in the time of twenty four hours. The other is
that which depends on the proper gravity of the Water, which being once
commoved by the primary cause, seeks, in the next place, to reduce it self to
Aequilibrium, with iterated reciprocations; which are not determined by one
sole and prefixed time; but have as many varieties of times as are the
different lengths and profundities of the receptacles, and Straights of Seas;
and by what depends on this second principle, they would ebb and flow, some
in one hour, others in two, in four, in six, in eight, in ten, etc. Now if we
begin to put together the first cause, which has its set Period from twelve
hours to twelve hours, with some one of the secondary, that has its Period
verb. great. from five hours to five hours, it would come to pass, that at
sometimes the primary cause and secondary would accord to make impulses both
one the same way; and in this concurrency, and (as one may call it) unanimous
conspiration the flowings shall be great. At other times it happening that the
primary impulse does, in a certain manner, oppose that which the secondary
Period would make, and in this contest one of the Principles being taken away,
that which the other would give, will weaken the commotion of the Waters, and
the Sea will return to a very tranquil State, and almost immovable. And at
other times, according as the two aforesaid Principles shall neither altogether
contest, nor altogether concur, there shall be other kinds of alterations made
in the increase and diminution of the ebbing and flowing. It may likewise fall
out that two Seas, considerably great and which communicate by some narrow
Channel, may chance to have, by reason of the mixtion of the two Principles of
motion, one cause to flow at the time that the other has cause to move a
contrary way; in which case in the Channel, whereby they disimbogue themselves
into each other, there do extraordinary conturbations ensue, with opposite and
vortick motions, and most dangerous boilings and breakings, as frequent
relations and experiences do assure us. From such like discordant motions,
dependent not only on the different positions and longitudes, but very much
also upon the different profundities of the Seas, which have the said
intercourse there do happen at sometimes different commotions in the Waters,
irregular, and that can be reduced to no rules of observation, the reasons of
which have much troubled, and always do trouble Mariners, for that they meet
with them without seeing either impulse of winds, or other eminent aereal
alteration that might occasion the same; of which disturbance of the Air we
ought to make great account in other accidents, and to take it for a third and
accidental cause, able to alter very much the observation of the effects
depending on the secondary and more essential causes. And it is not to be
doubted, but that impetuous winds, continuing to blow, for example, from the
East, they shall retein the Waters and prohibit the reflux or ebbing; whereupon
the second and third reply of the flux or tide overtaking the former, at the
hours prefixed, they will swell very high; and being thus born up for some
days, by the strength of the Winds, they shall rise more than usual, making
extraordinary inundations.

We ought also, (and this shall serve for a seventh Problem) to take notice of
another cause of motion dependant on the great abundance of the Waters of great
Rivers that discharge themselves into Seas of no great capacity, The cause why,
in some narrow Channels, we see the Sea-waters run always one way.
whereupon in the Straits or Bosphori that communicate with those Seas, the
Waters are seen to run always one way: as it happens in the Thracian
Bosphorus below Constantinople, where the water always runs from the
Black-Sea, toward the Propontis: For in the said Black-Sea by reason of its
shortness, the principal causes of ebbing and flowing are but of small force.
But, on the contrary, very great Rivers falling into the same, those huge
defluxions of water being to pass and disgorge themselves by the the straight,
the Or current.
course is there very notable and always toward the South. Where moreover we
ought to take notice, that the said Straight or Channel, albeit very narrow, is
not subject to perturbations, as the Straight of Scilla and Carybdis; for that
that has the Black-Sea above toward the North, and the Propontis, the Aegean,
and the Mediterranean Seas joined unto it, though by a long tract toward the
South; but now, as we have observed, the Seas, though of never so great length,
lying North and South, are not much subject to ebbings and flowings; but
because the Sicilian Straight is situate between the parts of the Mediterrane
distended for a long tract or distance from West to East, that is, according to
the course of the fluxes and refluxes; therefore in this the agitations are
very great; and would be much more violent between Hercules Pillars, in case
the Straight of Gibraltar did open less; and those of the Straight of
Magellanes are reported to be extraordinary violent.

This is what, for the present, comes into my mind to say unto you about the
causes of this first period diurnal of the Tide, and its various accidents,
touching which, if you have any thing to offer, you may let us hear it, that so
we may afterward proceed to the other two periods, monthly and annual.


SIMP. In my opinion, it cannot be denied, but that your discourse carries
with it much of probability, arguing, as we say, ex suppositione, namely,
granting that the Earth moves with the two motions assigned it by Copernicus:
The Hypothesis of the Earths mobility taken in favor of the Tide, opposed.
but if that motion be disproved, all that you have said is vain, and
insignificant: and for the disproval of that Hypothesis, it is very manifestly
hinted by your Discourse it self. You, with the supposition of the two
Terrestrial motions, give a reason of the ebbing and flowing; and then again,
arguing circularly, from the ebbing and flowing, draw the reason and
confirmation of those very motions; and so proceeding to a more specious
Discourse, you say that the Water, as being a fluid body, and not tenaciously
annexed to the Earth, is not constrained punctually to obey every of its
motions, from which you afterward infer its ebbing and flowing, Now I,
according to your own method, argue the quite contrary, and say; the Air is
much more tenuous, and fluid than the Water, and less annexed to the Earths
superficies, to which the Water, if it be for nothing else, yet by reason of
its gravity that presses down upon the same more than the light Air, adhereth;
therefore the Air is much obliged to follow the motions of the Earth: and
therefore were it so, that the Earth did move in that manner, we the
inhabitants of it, and carried round with like velocity by it, ought
perpetually to feel a Wind from the East that beats upon us with intolerable
force. And that so it ought to fall out, quotidian experience assures us: for
if with only riding post, at the speed of eight or ten miles an hour in the
tranquil Air, the incountering of it with our face seems to us a Wind that
does not lightly blow upon us, what should we expect from our rapid course of
800. or a thousand miles an hour, against the Air, that is, free from that
motion? And yet, notwithstanding we cannot perceive any thing of that nature.


SALV. To this objection that has much of likelihood in it, The answer to the
objections made against the motion of the Terrestrial Globe.
I reply, that its true, the Air is of greater tenuity and levity; and, by
reason of its levity, less adherent to the Earth than Water so much more grave
and Corpulenta
bulky; but yet the consequence is false that you infer from these qualities;
namely, that upon account of that its levity, tenuity, and less adherence to
the Earth, it should be more exempt than the Water from following the
Terrestrial Motions; so as that to us, who absolutely partake of of them, the
said exemption should be sensible and manifest; nay, it happens quite
contrary; for, if you well remember, the cause of the ebbing and flowing of the
Water assigned by us, consists in the Waters not following the unevenness of
the motion of its Vessel, but retaining the impetus conceived before, without
diminishing or increasing it according to the precise rate of its diminishing
or increasing in its Vessel. Because therefore that in the conservation and
retention of the impetus before conceived, The Water more apt to conserve an
impetus conceived, then the Air.
the disobedience to a new augmentation or diminution of motion consists,
that moveable that shall be most apt for such a retention, shall be also most
commodious to demonstrate the effect that follows in consequence of that
retention. Now how much the Water is disposed to maintain such a conceived
agitation; though the causes cease that impress the same, the experience of the
Seas extremely disturbed by impetuous Winds shows us; the Billows of which,
though the Air be grown calm, and the Wind laid, for a long time after continue
in motion: As the Sacred Poet pleasantly sings, Qual l'alto Egeo, etc. --

And that long continuing rough after a storm, Light bodies easier to be moved
than heavy, but less apt to conserve the motion.
depends on the gravity of the water: For, as I have elsewhere said, light
bodies are much easier to be moved than the more grave, but yet are so much the
less apt to conserve the motion imparted, when once the moving cause cease.
Whence it comes that the Air, as being of it self very light and thin, is
easily moved by any very small force, yet it is withal very unable to hold on
its motion, the Mover once ceasing. Therefore, as to the Air which environs
the Terrestrial Globe, I would fay, that by reason of its adherence, it is no
less carried about therewith then the Water; and especially that part which is
contained in its vessels; which vessels are the valleys enclosed with
Mountains. Its more rational that the Air be commoved by the rugged surface of
the Earth* than by the Celestial motion.
And we may with much more reason affirm that this same part of the Air is
carried round, and born forwards by the rugged parts of the Earth, than that
the higher is whirled about by the motion of the Heavens, as ye Peripateticks
maintain.

What has been hitherto spoken, seems to me a sufficient answer to the
allegation of Simplitius; The revolution of the Earth confirmed by a new
argument taken from the Air.
yet nevertheless with a new instance and solution, founded upon an admirable
experiment, I will superabundantly satisfy him, and confirm to Sagredus the
mobility of the Earth. I have told you that the Air, and in particular that
part of it which ascends not above the tops of the highest Mountains, is
carried round by the uneven parts of the Earths surface: from whence it should
seem, that it must of consequence come to pass, that in case the superficies
of the Earth were not uneven, but smooth and plain, no cause would remain for
drawing the Air along with it, or at least for revolving it with so much
uniformity. Now the surface of this our Globe, is not all craggy and rugged,
but there are exceeding great tracts very even, to wit, the surfaces of very
vast Seas, which being also far remote from the continuate ledges of Mountains
which environ it, seem to have no faculty of carrying the super-ambient Air
along therewith: and not carrying it about, we may perceive what will of
consequence ensue in those places.


SIMP. I was about to propose the very same difficulty, which I think is of
great validity.


SALV. You say very well Simplicius, for from the not finding in the Air that
which of consequence would follow, did this our Globe move round; you argue its
immoveablenesse. But in case that this which you think ought of necessary
consequence to be found, be indeed by experience proved to be so; will you
accept it for a sufficient testimony and an argument for the mobility of the
said Globe?


SIMP. In this case it is not requisite to argue with me alone, for if it
should so fall out, and that I could not comprehend the cause thereof, yet
happily it might be known by others.


SALV. So that by playing with you, a man shall never get, but be always on
the losing hand; and therefore it would be better to give over: Nevertheless,
that we may not cheat our third man we will play on. We said even now, and with
some addition we reitterate it, that the Air as if it were a thin and fluid
body, and not solidly conjoined with the Earth, seemed not to be necessitated
to obey its motion; unless so far as the cragginess of the terrestrial
superficies, transports and carries with it a part thereof contigious
thereunto; which does not by any great space exceed the greatest altitude of
Mountains: the which portion of Air ought to be so much less repugnant to the
terrestrial conversion, by how much it is repleat with vapors, The vaporous
parts of the earth, partake of its motions.
fumes, and exhalations, matters all participating of terrene qualities, and
consequently apt of their own nature to the same motions. But where there are
wanting the causes of motion, that is, where the surface of the Globe has
great levels, and where there is less mixture of the terrene vapors, there the
cause whereby the ambient Air is constrained to give entire obedience to the
terrestrial conversion will cease in part; so that in such places, whilst the
Earth revolveth toward the East, there will be continually a wind perceived
which will beat upon us, blowing from the East toward the West: and such gales
will be the more sensible, where the revolution of the Globe is most swift;
which will be in places more remote from the Poles, and approaching to the
greatest Circle of the diurnal conversion. But now de facto experience much
confirms this Phylosophical argumentation; for in the spacious Seas, and in
their parts most remote from Land, and situate under the Torrid Zone, that is
bounded by the Tropicks, where there are none of those same terrestrial
evaporations, Constant gales within the Tropicks blow toward the West.
we find a perpetual gale move from the East with so constant a blast, that
ships by favor thereof sail prosperously to the West-India's. And from the
same coasting along the Mexican shore, they with the same felicity pass the
Pacifick Ocean toward the India's; which to us are East, but to them are West.
The course to the West- India's easy, the return difficult.
Whereas on the contrary the Course from thence toward the East is difficult
and uncertain, and not to be made by the same Rhumb, but must vere more to
Land-ward, to recover other Winds, which we may call accidentary and
tumultuary, produced from other Principles, as those that inhabit the continent
find by experience. Of which productions of Winds, the Causes are many and
different, which shall not at this time be mentioned. Winds from Land make
rough the Seas.
And these accidentary Winds are those which blow indifferently from all parts
of the Earth, and make rough the Seas remote from the Equinoctial, and
environed by the rugged Surface of the Earth; which is as much as to say
environed with those perturbations of Air, that confound that primary Gale. The
which, in case these accidental impediments were removed, would be continually
felt, and especially upon the Sea. Now see how the effect of the Water and Air
seem wonderfully to accord with the Celestial observations, to confirm the
mobility of our Terrestrial Globe.


SAGR. I also for a final close will relate to you one particular, Another
observation taken from the Air in confirmation of the motion of the Earth.
which as I believe is unknown unto you, and which likewise may serve to
confirm the same conclusion: You Salviatus alleged, That Accident which
Sailers meet with between the Tropicks; I mean that perpetual Gale of Wind
that beats upon them from the East, of which I have an account from those that
have many times made the Voyage: And moreover (which is very observable) I
understand that the Mariners do not call it a Wind, but by another Which Wind
with our English Mariners is called the Trade-wind.
name, which I do not now remember, taken happily from its so fixed and constant
Tenor; which when they have met with, they tie up their shrouds and other
cordage belonging to the Sails, and without any more need of touching them,
though they be in a sleep, they can continue their course. Now this constant
Trade-wind was known to be such by its continual blowing without interruptions;
for if it were interrupted by other Winds, it would not have been acknowledged
for a singular Effect, and different from the rest: from which I will infer,
That it may be that also our Mediterranean Sea does partake of the like
accident; but it is not observed, as being frequently altered by the confluence
of other winds. And this I say, not without good grounds, yea upon very
probable conjectures whch came unto my knowledge, from that which tendered it
self to my notice on occasion of the voyage that I made into Syria, going
Consul for this Nation to Aleppo, The voiages in the Mediterrane from East to
West are made in shorter times than from West to East.
and this it is: That keeping a particular account and memorial of the days of
the departure and arrival of the Ships in the Ports of Alexandria, of
Alexandretta, and this of Venice; in comparing sundry of them, which I did for
my curiosity, I found that in exactness of account the returns hither, that is
the voiages from East to West along the Mediterrane, are made in less time then
the contrary courses by 25. in the Hundred: So that we see that one with
another, the Eastern winds are stronger then the Western.


SALV. I am very glad I know this particular, which does not a little make for
the confirmation of the Earths mobility. And although it may be alleged, That
all the Water of the Mediterrane runs perpetually toward the Straits-mouth, as
being to disimbogue into the Ocean, the waters of as many Rivers, as do
discharge themselves into the same; I do not think that that current can be so
great, as to be able of it self alone to make so notable a difference: which is
also manifest by observing that the water in the Pharo of Sicily runs back
again no less toward the East, than it runs forwards toward the West.


SAGR. I, that have not as Simplicius, an inclination to satisfy any one
besides my self, am satisfied with what has been said as to this first
particular: Therefore Salviatus, when you think it sit to proceed forward, I am
prepared to hear you.


SALV. I shall do as you command me, but yet I would fain hear the opinion also
of Simplicius, from whose judgment I can argue how much I may promise to my
self touching these discourses from the Peripatetick Schools, if ever they
should come to their ears.


SIMP. I desire not that my opinion should serve or stand for a measure,
whereby you should judge of others thoughts; for as I have often said, I am
inconsiderable in these kind of studies, and such things may come into the
minds of those that are entered into the deepest passages of Philosophy, as I
could never think of; as having (according to the Proverb) scarce kissed her
Maid: yet nevertheless, to give you my sudden thoughts, I shall tell you, That
of those effects by you recounted, and particularly the last, there may in my
judgment very sufficient Reasons be given without the Earths mobility, by the
mobility of the Heavens only; never introducing any novelty more, than the
inversion of that which you your self propose unto us. It has been received by
the Peripatetick Schools, It is demonstrated inverting the argument, that the
perpetual motion of the Air from East to West comes from the motion of Heaven*
that the Element of Fire, and also a great part of the Air is carried about
according to the Diurnal conversion from East to West, by the contact of the
Concave of the Lunar Orb, as by the Vessel their container. Now without going
out of your track, I will that we determine the Quantity of the Air which
partaketh of that motion to distend so low as to the Tops of the highest Hills,
It is demonstrated inverting the argument, that the perpetual motion of the Air
from East to West, comes from the motion of Heaven.
and that likewise they would reach to the Earth, if those Mountains did not
impede them, which agrees with what you say: For as you affirm, the Air, which
is environed by ledges of Mountains, to be carried about by the asperity of the
moveable Earth; we on the contrary say, That the whole Element of Air is
carried about by the motion of Heaven, that part only excepted which lies
below those bodies, which is hindered by the asperity of the immovable Earth.
And whereas you said, That in case that asperity should be removed, the Air
would also cease to be whirld about; we may say, That the said asperity being
removed, the whole Air would continue its motion. Whereupon, because the
surfaces of spacious Seas are smooth, and even; the Airs motion shall continue
upon those, always blowing from the East: And this is more sensibly perceived
in Climates lying under the Line, and within the Tropicks, where the motion of
Heaven is swifter; and like as that Celestial motion is able to bear before it
all the Air that is at liberty, so we may very rationally affirm that it
contributeth the same motion to the Water moveable, as being fluid and not
connected to the immobility of the Earth: The motion of the Water depends on
the motion of Heaven.
And with so much the more confidence may we affirm the same, in that by your
confession, that motion ought to be very small in resect of the efficient
Cause; which begirting in a natural day the whole Terrestrial Globe, passes
many hundreds of miles an hour, and especially toward the Equinoctial; whereas
in the currents of the open Sea, it moves but very few miles an hour. And thus
the voiages toward the West shall come to be commodious and expeditious, not
only by reason of the perpetual Eastern Gale, but of the course also of the
Waters; from which course also perhaps the Ebbing and Flowing may come, by
reason of the different situation of the Terrestrial Shores: The flux and
reflux may depend on the diurnal motion of Heaven.
against which the Water coming to beat, may also return backwards with a
contrary motion, like as experience shows us in the course of Rivers; for
according as the Water in the unevenness of the Banks, meets with some parts
that stand out, or make with their Meanders some Reach or Bay, here the Water
turns again, and is seen to retreat back a considerable space. Upon this I
hold, That of those effects from which you argue the Earths mobility, and
allege it as a cause of them, there may be assigned a cause sufficiently
valid, retaining the Earth steadfast, and restoring the mobility of Heaven.


SALV. It cannot be denied, but that your discourse is ingenious, and has much
of probability, I mean probability in appearance, but not in reality and
existence: It consists of two parts: In the first it assigns a reason of the
continual motion of the Eastern Wind, and also of a like motion in the Water.
In the second, It would draw from the same Sourse the cause of the Ebbing and
Flowing. The first part has (as I have said) some appearance of probability,
but yet extremely less then that which we take from the Terrestrial motion. The
second is not only wholly improbable, but altogether impossible and false. A
reason of the continual motion of the Air and Water may be given, making the
Earth moveable, then by making it immovable.
And coming to the first, whereas it is said that the Concave of the Moon
carries about the element of Fire, and the whole Air, even to the tops of the
higher Mountains. I answer first, that it is dubious whether there be any
element of Fire: But suppose there be, it is much doubted of the Orb of the
Moon, as also of all the rest; that is, Whether there be any such solid bodies
and vast, or elss, Whether beyond the Air there be extended a continuate
expansion of a substance of much more tenuity and purity than our Air, up and
down which the Planets go wandering, as now at last a good part of those very
Philosophers begin to think: Its improbable that the element of Fire should be
carried round by the Concave of the Moon.
But be it in this or in that manner, there is no reason for which the Fire, by
a simple contract to a superficies, which you your self grant to be smooth and
terse, should be according to its whole depth carried round in a motion
different from its natural inclination; as has been defusely proved, and with
sensible reasons demonstrated by A Treatise of our Author formerly cited.
Il Saggiatore: Besides the other improbability of the said motions transfusing
it self from the subtilest Fire throughout the Air, much more dense; and from
that also again to the Water. But that a body of rugged and mountainous
surface, by revolving in it self, should carry with it the Air contiguous to
it, and against which its promontaries beat, is not only probable but
necessary, and experience thereof may be daily seen; though without seeing it,
I believe that there is no judgment that doubts thereof. As to the other part,
supposing that the motion of Heaven did carry round the Air, and also the
Water; yet would that motion for all that have nothing to do with the Ebbing
and Flowing. For being that from one only and uniform cause, there can follow
but one sole and uniform effect; The Ebbing and Flowing cannot depend on the
motion of Heaven.
that which should be discovered in the Water, would be a continuate and
uniform course from East to West; and in that a Sea only, which running
compass environeth the whole Globe. But in determinate Seas, such as is the
Mediterrane shut up in the East, there could be no such motion. For if its
Water might be driven by the course of Heaven toward the West, it would have
been dry many ages since: Besides that our Water runs not only toward the
West, But returns backwards toward the East, and that in ordinal Periods:
And whereas you say by the example of Rivers, that though the course of the Sea
were Originally that only from East to West, yet nevertheless the different
Position of the Shores may make part of the Water regurgitate, and return
backwards: I grant it you, but it is necessary that you take notice my
Simplicius, that where the Water upon that account returns backwards, it does
so there perpetually; and where it runs straight forwards, it runs there
always in the same manner; for so the example of the Rivers shows you. But in
the case of the ebbing and flowing, you must find and give us some reason why
it does in the self same place run one while one way, and another while
another; Effects that being contrary and irregular, can never be deduced from
any uniform and constant Cause: And this Argument, that overthrows the
Hypothesis of the motion contributed to the Sea from the Heavens diurnal
motion, does also confute that Position of those who would admit the sole
diurnal motion of the Earth, and believe that they are able with that alone to
give a reason of the Flux and Reflux: Of which effect since it is irregular,
the cause must of necessity be irregular and alterable.


SIMP. I have nothing to reply, neither of my own, by reason of the weakness of
my understanding; nor of that of others, for that the Opinion is so new: But I
could believe that if it were spread amongst the Schools, there would not want
Philosophers able to oppose it.


SAGR. Expect such an occasion; and we in the mean time if it seem good to
Salviatus, will proceed forward.


SALV. All that which has been said hitherto, pertains to the diurnal period
of the ebbing and flowing; of which we have in the first place demonstrated in
general the primary and universal Cause, without which, no such effect would
follow: Afterw^^ds passing to the particular Accidents, various, and in a
certain sort irregular, that are observed therein: We have handled the
secondary and concommitant Causes upon which they depend. Now follow the two
other Periods, Monthly, and Annual, which do not bring with them new and
different Accidents, other than those already considered in the diurnal Period;
but they operate on the same Accidents, by rendering them greater and lesser in
several parts of the Lunar Month, and in several times of the Solar Year; as
if that the Moon and Sun did each conceive it self apart in operating and
producing of those Effects; a thing that totally clasheth with my
understanding, which seeing how that this of Seas is a local and sensible
motion, made in an immense mass of Water, it cannot be brought to subscribe to
Lights, to temperate Heats, to predominacies by occult Qualities, and to such
like vain Imaginations, that are so far from being, or being possible to be
Causes of the Tide; that on the contrary, the Tide is the cause of them, that
is, of bringing them into the brains more apt for loquacity and ostentation,
than for the speculation and discovering of the more abstruse secrets of
Nature; which kind of people, before they can be brought to pronounce that
wise, ingenious, and modest sentence, I know it not, suffer to escape from
their mouths and pens all manner of extravagancies. And the only observing,
that the same Moon, and the same Sun operate not with their light with their
motion, with great heat, or with temperate, on the lesser reeeptacl^s of Water,
but that to effect their flowing by heat, they must be reduced to little less
than boiling, and in short, we not being able artificially to imitate any way
the motions of the Tide, save only by the motion of the Vessel, ought it not to
satisfy every one, that all the other things alleged, as causes of those
effects, are vain fancies, and altogether estranged from the Truth. I say, The
alterations in the effects argue alteration in the cause.
therefore, that if it be true, that of one effect there is but one sole
primary cause, and that between the cause and effect, there is a firm and
constant connection; it is necessary that whenever there is seen a firm and
constant alteration in the effect, there be a firm and constant alteration in
the cause. And because the alterations that happen in the ebbing and flowing in
several parts of the Year and Months, have their periods firm and constant, it
is necessary to say, that a regular alteration in those same times happens in
the primary cause of the ebbings and flowings. The causes as large assigned of
the Periods Monthly and Annual of the ebbings and flowings.
And as for the alteration that in those times happens in the ebbings and
flowings consists only in their greatness; that is, in the Waters rising and
falling more or less, and in running with greater or less impetus; therefore
it is necessary, that that which is the primary cause of the ebbing and
flowing, does in those same determinate times increase and diminish its force.
But we have already concluded upon the inequality and irregularity of the
motion of the Vessels containing the Water to be the primary cause of the
ebbings and flowings. Therefore it is necessary, that that irregularity, from
time to time, correspondently grow more irregular, that is, grow greater and
lesser. Now it is requisite, that we call to mind, that the irregularity, that
is, the different velocity of the motions of the Vessels, to wit, of the parts
of the Terrestrial Superficies, depends on their moving with a compound
motion, resulting from the commixtion of the two motions, Annual and Diurnal,
proper to the whole Terrestrial Globe; of which the Diurnal conversion, by one
while adding to, and another while substracting from, the Annual motion, is
that which produces the irregularity in the compound motion; so that, in the
additions and substractions, that the Diurnal revolution makes from the Annual
motion, consists the original cause of the irregular motion of the Vessels,
The monthly and annual alterations of the tide can depend upon nothing, save
on the alteration of the additions and substractions of the diurnal period from
the annual.
and consequently of the Ebbing and Flowing: insomuch that if these additions
and substractions should always proceed in the same proportion, in respect of
the Annual motion, the cause of the Ebbing and Flowing would indeed continue,
but yet so as that they would perpetually return in the self same manner: But
we are to find out the cause of making the same Ebbings and Flowings in diverse
times greater and lesser: Therefore we must (if we will retain the identity of
the cause) find the alteration in these additions and substractions, that make
them more and less potent, in producing those effects which depend thereupon.
But I see not how that potency and impotence can be introduced, unless by
making the same additions and substractions, one while greater, and another
while lesser; so that the acceleration and the retardment of the compound
motion, may be made, sometimes in greater, and sometimes in lesser proportion.


SAGR. I feel my self very gently led, as it were, by the hand, and though I
find no rubs in the way, yet nevertheless, like a blind man, I see not
whether your Clue leads me, nor can I imagine where such a Journey will end.


SALV. Though there be a great difference between my slow pac't Philosophy, and
your more nimble Reason, yet nevertheless, in this particular which we are now
upon, I do not much wonder, if the apprehensivenesse of your wit be a little
obscured by the dark and thick mist that hides the mark, at which we aim: and
that which lesseneth my admiration is, the remembrance of the many hours, many
days, yea more, many nights that I have consumed in this contemplation, and of
the many times that, despairing to bring it to a period, I have, for an
encouragement of my self, endeavored to believe, by the example of the
unfortunate Orlando, that that might not possibly be true, which yet the
testimony of so many credible men set before my eyes: wonder not, therefore, if
this once, contrary to your custom, you do not foresee what I intend: and if
you will needs admire, I believe that the event, as far as I can judge
unexpected, will make you cease your wonderment.


SAGR. I thank God, that he did not permit that desperation of yours to end in
the Exit that is fabled of the miserable Orlando, nor in that which happily is no
less fabulously related of Aristotle,, that so neither my self nor others
should be deprived of the discovery of a thing, as abstruse as it was
desirable: I beseech you, therefore, to satisfy my eager appetite as soon as
you can.


SALV. I am ready to serve you: We were upon an inquiry in what manner the
additions and substractions of the Terrestrial conversion from the Annual
motion, could be made, one while in a greater, and another while in a lesser
proportion; which diversity, and no other thing, could be assigned for the
cause of the alterations, Monthly and Annual, that are seen in the greatness
of the Ebbings and Flowings. I will now consider how this proportion of the
additions and substractions of the Diurnal Revolution, Three ways of altering
the proportion of the additions of the diurnal Revolution to the annual motion.
and Annual motion may grow greater and lesser three several ways. One is by
increasing and diminishing the velocity of the Annual motion, retaining the
additions and substractions made by the Diurnal conversion in the same
greatness, because the Annual motion being about three times greater, that is,
more velocious than the Diurnal motion (considered likewise in the Grand
Circle) if we increase it anew, the additions and substractions of the Diurnal
motion will occasion less alteration therein: but, on the other side, making
it more slow, it will be altered in greater proportion, by that same diurnal
motion, just as the adding or substracting four degrees of velocity from one
that moves with twenty degrees, alters his course less, than those very
four degrees would do, added or subtracted from one that should move only
with ten degrees. The second way would be, by making the additions and
substractions greater and lesser, retaining the annual motion in the same
velocity; which is as easy to be understood, as it is manifest, that a
velocity v. gr. of 20 degr. is more altered by the addition or substraction of
10. degrees. than by the addition or substraction of 4. The third way would be, in
case these two were joined together, diminishing the annual motion, and
increasing the diurnal additions and substractions. Hitherto, as you see, it
was no hard matter to attain, but yet it proved to me very hard to find by what
means this might be effected in Nature. That which to us is hard to be
understood, is with Nature easy to be effected.
Yet in the end, I find that she does admirably make use thereof, and in ways
almost incredible: I mean, admirable and incredible to us, but not to her, who
works even those very things, which, to our capacity, are of infinite wonder,
with extraordinary facility and simplicity: and that which it is hard for us to
understand, is easy for her to effect. Now to proceed, having shown that the
proportion between the additions and substractions of the Diurnal conversion
and Annual motion may be made greater and lesser, two ways, (and I say two,
because the third is comprised in the two first) I add, that Nature makes use
of them both: and farthermore, I subjoyn, that if she did make use but of one
alone, it would be necessary to take away one of the two Periodical
alterations. If the Diurnal motion should not alter, the annual Period would
cease
That of the Monthly Period would cease, if the annual motion should not
alter. And in case the additions and substractions of the diurnal revolution
should continually be equal, the alterations of the annual Period would fail.


SAGR. It seems then, that the Monthly alteration of ebbings and flowings
depends on the alteration of the annual motion of the Earth? And the annual
alteration of those ebbings and flowings do, it seems, depend on the additions
and substractions of the diurnal conversion? And here now I find my self worse
puzzled than before, and more out of hope of being able to comprehend how this
intricacy may be, which is more inextricable, in my judgment, than the Gordian
knot. And I envy Simplicius, from whose silence I argue that he does apprehend
the whole business, and is acquit of that confusion which greatly puzzleth my
brains.


SIMP. I believe verily, Sagredus, that you are put to a a stand; and I believe
that I know also the cause of your confusion, which, if I mistake not, rises
from your understanding part of those particulars but even now alleged by
Salviatus, and but a part. It is true likewise that I find my self free from
the like confusion; but not for that cause as you think, to wit, because I
apprehend the whole, nay it happens upon the quite contrary account; namely,
from my not comprehending any thing, and confusion is in the plurality of
things, and not in nothing.


SAGR. You see Salviatus, how a few checks given to Simplicius in the days
preceding, have rendered him gentle, and brought him from the capriol to the
amble. But I beseech you without farther delay, put us both out of suspense.


SALV. I will endeavor it to the utmost of my harsh way of expressing my self,
the obtusenesse of which, the acuteness of your wit shall supply. The
accidents of which we are to enquire the causes are two: The first respects
the varieties that happen in the ebbings and flowings in the Monthly Period;
and the othr relates to the Annual. We will first speak of the Monthly, and
then treat of the Annual; and it is convenient that we resolve them all
according to the Fundamentals and Hypothesis already laid down, without
introducing any novelty either in Astronomy, or in the Universe, in favor of
the ebbings and flowings; therefore let us demonstrate that of all the several
accidents in them observed, the causes reside in the things already known, The
true Hypothesis may dispatch its revolutions in a shorter time, in lesser
circles than in greater; the which is proved by two examples.
and received for true and undoubted. I say therefore, that it is a truly
natural, yea necessary thing, that one and the same moveable made to move round
by the same moving virtue in a longer time, do make its course by a greater
circle, rather than by a lesser; and this is a truth received by all, and
confirmed by all experiments, The first example.
of which we will produce a few. In the wheel-clocks, and particularly in the
great ones, to moderate the time, the Artificers that make them accomodate a
certain voluble staff horozontally, and at each end of it they fasten two
Weights of Lead, and when the time goes too slow, by the only removing those
Leads a little nearer to the center of the staff, they render its vibrations
more frequent; and on the contrary to retard it, it is but drawing those
Weights more toward the ends; for so the vibrations are made more seldom, and
consequently the intervals of the hours are prolonged.

Here the movent virtue is the same, The second example.
namely the counterpoise, the movables are those same Weights of lead, and
their vibrations are more frequent when they are nearer to the center, that is,
when they move by lesser circles. Hanging equal Weights at unequal cords, and
being removed from their perpendicularity, letting them go; we shall see those
that are pendent at the shorter cords, to make their vibrations under shorter
times, as those that move by lesser circles. Again, let such a kind of Weight
be fastened to a cord, which cord let play upon a staple fastened in the
Seeling, and do you hold the other end of the cord in your hand, and having
given the motion to the pendent Weight, whilst it is making its vibrations,
pull the end of the cord that you hold in your hand, so that the Weight may
rise higher and higher: In its rising you shall see the frequency of its
vibrations increase, in regard that they are made successively by lesser and
lesser circies. Two particular notable accidents in the penduli and their
vibrations.
And here I desire you to take notice of two particulars worthy to be observed.
One is that the vibrations of one of those plummets are made with such a
necessity under such determinate times, that it is altogether impossible to
cause them to be made under other times, unless it be by prolonging, or
abreviating the cord; of which you may also at this very instant ascertain your
selves by experience, tying a stone to a pack-threed, and holding the other end
in your hand, trying whether you can ever by any artifice be able to swing it
this way and that way in other than one determinate time, unless by
lengthening of shortening the string, which you will find to be absolutely
impossible. The other particular truly admirable is, that the self same
pendulum makes its vibrations with one and the same frequency, or very little,
and as it were insensibly different, whether they be made by very great, or
very small arches of the self-same circumference. I mean that whether we remove
the pendulum from perpendicularity one, two, or three degrees only, or whether
we remove it 70. 80. nay to an entire quadrant, it being let go, will in the
one case and in the other make its vibrations with the same frequency, as well
the former where it is to move by an arch of but four or six degrees, as the
second, where it is to pass arches of 160. or more degrees. Which may the
better be seen, by hanging two weights at two strings of equal length, and then
removing them from perpendicularity, one a little way, and the other very far;
the which being set at liberty, will go and return under the same times, the
one by arches very small, and the other by very great ones, from whence
follows the conclusion of an admirable Problem; Admirable Problems of
movables descending by the Quadrant of a Circle, and of those descending by
all the cords of the whole Circle.
which is, That a Quadrant of a Circle being given (take a little diagram of
the same, [in Fig. 3.]) as for instance: AB erect to the Horizon, so as that it
rest upon the plain touching in the point B. and an Arch being made with a Hoop
well plained and smoothed in the concave part, bending it according to the
curvity of the Circumference ADB. So that a Bullet very round and smooth may
freely run to and again within it (the rim of a Sieve is very proper for the
experiment) I say, that the Bullet being put in any what ever place, near or
far from the lowest term B. As for instance, putting it in the point C, or here
in D, or in E; and then let go, it will in equal times, or insensibly different
arrive at the term B, departing from C, or from D, or from E, or from whatever
other place; an accident truly wonderful. We may add another accident no less
strange than this, which is, That moreover by all the cords drawn from the
point B to the points C, D, E; and to any other whatsoever, taken not only in
the Quadrant BA, but in all the whole circumference of the Circle the said
moveable shall descend in times absolutely equal; insomuch that it shall be no
longer in descending by the whole Diameter erect perpendicularly upon the point
B, then it shall in descending by B. C. although it do sublend but one sole
degree, or a lesser Arch. Let us add the other wonder, which is, That the
motions of the falling bodies made by the Arches of the Quadrant AB; are made
in shorter times than those that are made by the cords of those same Arches; so
that the swiftest motion, and made by a moveable in the shortest time, to
arrive from the point A, to the term B, shall be that which is made, not by the
right line A, B, (although it be the shortest of all those that can de drawn
between the points A. B.) but by the circumference ADB. And any point being
taken in the said Arch; as for example: The point D. and two cords drawn AD,
and D. B. the moveable departing from the qoint A, shall in a less time come to
B, moving by the two cords AD and DB. than by the sole cord A, B. But the
shortest of all the times shall be that of the fall by the Arch ADB. And the
self same accidents are to be understood of all the other lesser Arches taken
from the lowermost term B. upwards.


SAGR. No more, no more; for you so confund and fill me with Wonders, and
distract my thoughts so many several ways, that I fear I shall have but a
small part of it left free and disingaged, to apply to the principal matter
that is treated of, and which of it self is but even too obscure and intricate:
So that I entreat you to vouchsafe me, having once dispatched the business of
the ebbings and flowings, to do this honor to my house (and yours) some other
days, and to discourse upon the so many other Problems that we have left in
suspense; and which perhaps are no less curious and admirable, than this that
has been discussed these days past, and that now ought to draw to a
conclusion.


SALV. I shall be ready to serve you, but we must make more than one or two
Sessions; if besides the other questions reserved to be handled apart, we would
discuss those many that pertain to the local motion, as well of natural
movables, as of the rejected: an Argument largely treated of by our Lyncean
Accademick. But turning to our first purpose, where we were about to declare,
That the bodies moving circularly by a movent virtue, which continually
remains the same, the times of the circulation were prefixed and determined,
and impossible to be made longer or shorter, having given examples, and
produced experiments thereof, sensible, and feasible, we may confirm the same
truth by the experiences of the Celestial motions of the Planets; in which we
see the same rule observed; for those that move by greater Circles, confirm
longer times in passing them. A most pertinent observation of this we have from
the Medicaean Planets, which in short times make their revolutions about
Jupiter: Insomuch that it is not to be questioned, nay we may hold it for sure
and certain, that if for example, the Moon continuing to be moved by the same
movent faculty, should retire by little and little in lesser Circles, it would
acquire a power of abreviating the times of its Periods, according to that
Pendulum, of which in the course of its vibrations, we by degrees shortened the
cord, that is contracted the Semidiameter of the circumferences by it passed.
Know now that this that I have alleged an example of it in the Moon, is seen
and verified essentially in fact. Let us call to mind, that it has been
already concluded by us, together with Copernicus, The Earths annual motion by
the Ecliptic, unequal by means of the Moons motion,
That it is not possible to separate the Moon from the Earth, about which it
without dispute revolveth in a Month: Let us remember also that the
Terrestrial Globe, accompanied always by the Moon, goes along the
circumference of the Grand Orb about the Sun in a year, in which time the Moon
revolveth about the Earth almost thirteen times; from which revolution it
follows, that the said Moon sometimes is found near the Sun; that is, when it
is between the Sun and the Earth, and sometimes much more remote, that is, when
the Earth is situate between the Moon and Sun; near, in a word, at the time of
its conjunction and change; remote, in its Full and Opposition; and the
greatest vicinity differ the quantity of the Diameter of the Lunar Orb. Now if
it be true that the virtue which moves the Earth and Moon, about the Sun, be
always maintained in the same vigor; and if it be true that the same moveable
moved by the same virtue, but in circles unequal, do in shorter times pass
like arches of lesser circles, it must needs be granted, that the Moon when it
is at a less distance from the Sun, that is in the time of conjunction,
passes greater arches of the Grand Orb, than when it is at a greater distance,
that is in its Opppsition and Full. And this Lunar inequality must of necessity
be imparted to the Earth also; for if we shall suppose a right line produced
from the center of the Sun by the center of the Terrestrial Globe, and
prolonged as far as the Orb of the Moon, this shall be the semidiameter of the
Grand Orb, in which the Earth, in case it were alone, would move uniformly, but
if in the same semidiameter we should place another body to be carried about,
placing it one while between the Earth and Sun, and another while beyond the
Earth, at a greater distance from the Sun, it is necessary, that in this second
case the motion common to both, according to the circumference of the great Orb
by means of the distance of the Moon, do prove a little slower than in the
other case, when the Moon is between the Earth and Sun, that is at a lesser
distance. So that in this business the very same happens that befalls in the
time of the clock; that lead which is placed one while farther from the center,
to make the vibrations of the staff or balance less frequent, and another
while nearer, to make them thicker, representing the Moon. Hence it may be
manifest, that the annual motion of the Earth in the Grand Orb, and under the
Ecliptic, is not uniform, and that its irregularity proceeds from the Moon,
and has its Monthly Periods and Returns. And because it has been concluded,
that the Monthly and Annual Periodick alterations of the ebbings and flowings,
cannot be deduced from any other cause than from the altered proportion between
the annual motion and the additions and substractions of the diurnal
conversion; and that those alterations might be made two ways, that is by
altering the annual motion, keeping the quantity of the additions unaltered, or
by changing of the bigness of these, reteining the uniformity of annual
motion. We have already found the first of these, depending on the irregularity
of the annual motion occasioned by the Moon, and which has its Monthly
Periods. It is therefore necessary, that upon that account the ebbings and
flowings have a Monthly Period in which they do grow greater and lesser. Now
you see that the cause of the Monthly Period resideth in the annual motion;
and withal you see how much the Moon is concerned in this business, and how it
is therewith interrupted apart, without having any thing to do with either,
with Seas or Waters.


SAGR. If one that never had seen any kind of Stairs or Lader, were showed a
very high Tower, and asked if ever he hoped to climb to the top of it, I verily
believe that he would answer he did not, not conceiving how one should come
thither any way except by flying; but showing him a stone of but a foot high,
and asking him whether he thought he could get to the top of that, I am certain
that he would answer he could; and farther, that he would not deny, but that it
was not only one, but ten, twenty, and an hundred times easier to climb that:
But now if he should be showed the Stairs, by means whereof, with the facility
by him granted, it is possible to get thither, whither he a little before had
affirmed it was impossible to ascend, I do think that laughing at himself he
would confess his dullness of apprehension. Thus, Salviatus, have you step by
step so gently lead me, that, not without wonder, I find that I am got with
small pains to that height which I despaired of arriving at. It Is true; that
the Staircase having been dark, I did not perceive that I was got nearer to, or
arrived at the top, till that coming into the open Air I discovered a great
Sea, and spacious Country: And as in ascending one step, there is no labor; so
each of your propositions by it self seemed to me so plain, that thinking I
heard but little or nothing that was new unto me, I conceived that my benefit
thereby had been little or none at all: Whereupon I was the more amazed at the
unexpected exit of this discourse, that has guided me to the knowledge of a
thing which I held impossible to be demonstrated. One doubt only remains, from
which I desire to be freed, and this it is; Whether that if the motion of the
Earth together with that of the Moon under the Zodiac are irregular motions,
those irregularities ought to have been observed and taken notice of by
Astronomers, which I do not know that they are: Therefore I pray you, who are
better acquainted with these things than I, to free me from this doubt, and
tell me how the ^ase stands.


SALV. You ask a rational question, and answering to the Objection, Many things
may remain as yet unobserved in Astronomy.
I say; That although Astronomy in the courses of many ages has made a great
progress in discovering the constitution and motions of the Celestial bodies,
yet is it not hitherto arrived at that height, but that very many things remain
undecided, and happily many others also undiscovered. It is to be supposed that
the first observers of Heaven knew no more but one motion common to all the
Stars, as is this diurnal one: yet I believe that in few days they perceived
that the Moon was inconstant in keeping company with the other Stars; but yet
withal, that many years past, before that they distinguished all the Planets:
And in particular, Saturn for its slowness, and Mercury for its rareness of
appearing were amongst those that were last observed.
I conceit that Saturn by its slowness, and Mercury by reason of its seldom
appearing, were the last that were observed to be wandering and errant. It is to
be thought that many more years run out before the statio^s and retrogradations
of the three superior Planets were known, as also their approximations and
recessions from the Earth, necessary occasions of introducing the Eccentrix and
Epicicles, things unknown even to Aristotle, for that he makes no mention
thereof. Mercury, and Venus, with their admirable apparitions; how long did
they keep Astronomers in suspense, before that they could resolve (not to speak
of any other of their qualities) upon their situation? Insomuch that the very
order only of the Mundane bodies, and the integral structure of the parts of
the Universe by us known, has been doubted of until the time of Copernicus,
who has at last given us notice of the true constitution, and real systeme,
according to which those parts are disposed; so that at length we are certain
that Mercury, Venus, and the other Planets do revolve about the Sun; and that
the Moon revolveth about the Earth. But how each Planet governs it self in
its particular revolution, Particular structures of the Orbs of the Planets not
yet well resolved.
and how precisely the structure of its Orb is framed; which is that which is
vulgarly called the Theory of the Planets, we cannot as yet undoubtedly
resolve. Mars, that has so much puzzled our Modern Astronomers, is a proof of
this: And to the Moon her self there have been assigned several Theories, after
that the said Copernicus had much altered it from that of Ptolomy. And to
descend to our particular case, that is to say, to the apparent motion of the
Sun and Moon; touching the former, there has been observed a certain great
irregularity, whereby it passes the two semicircles of the Ecliptic, The Sun
passes one half of the Zodiac nine days sooner than the other.
divided by the points of the Equinoxes in very different times; in passing one
of which, it spends about nine days more than in passing the other; a
difference, as you see, very great and notable. But if in passing small arches,
such for example as are the twelve Signs, he maintain a most regular motion, or
else proceed with paces, one while a little more swift, and another more slow,
as it is necessary that it do, in case the annual motion belong to the Sun
only in appearance, but in reality to the Earth in company with the Moon, it
is what has not hitherto been observed, The Moons motion principally sought in
the account of Eclipses.
nor it may be, sought. Touching the Moon in the next place, whose restitutions
have been principally looked into an account of the Eclipses, for which it is
sufficient to have an exact knowledge of its motion about the Earth, it has
not been likewise with a perfect curiosity inquired, what it^ course is through
the particular arches of the Zodiac. That therefore the Earth and Moon in
running through the Zodiac, that is round the Grand Orb, do somewhat
accellerate at the Moons change, and retard at its full, ought not to be
doubted; for that the said difference is not manifest, which comes to be
unobserved upon two accounts; First, Because it has not been looked for.
Secondly, Because that its possible it may not be very great. Nor is there any
need that it should be great, for the producing the effect that we see in the
alteration of the greatness of ebbings and flowings. Ebbings and flowings are
petty things in comparison of the vastness of Seas and of the velocity of the
motion of the Terrestrial Globe.
For not only those alterations, but the Tides themselves are but small
matters in respect of the grandeur of the subjects on which they work; albeit
that to us, and to our littleness they seem great. For the addition or
subduction of one degree of velocity where there are naturally 700, or 1000,
can be called no great alteration, either in that which conferreth it, or in
that Which receives it: the Water of our Mediterrane carried about by the
diurnal revolution, makes about 700 miles an hour, (which is the motion common
to the Earth and to it, and therefore not perceptible to us) and that which we
sensibly discern to be made in the streams or currents, is not at the rate of
full one mile an hour, (I speak of the main Seas, and not of the Straights) and
this is that which alters the first, natural, and grand motion; and this
motion is very great in respect of us, and of Ships: for a Vessel that in a
standing Water by the help of Oars can make v. g. three miles an hour, in that
same current will row twice as far with the stream as against it: A notable
difference in the motion of the Boat, though but very small in the motion of
the Sea, which is altered but its seven hundredth part. The like I say of its
rising, and falling one, two, or three feet; and scarcely four or five in the
utmost bounds of a straight, two thousand, or more miles long, and where there
are depths of hundreds of feet; this alteration is much less than if in one of
the Boats that bring us fresh Water, the said Water upon the arrest of the Boat
should rise at the Prow the thickness of a leaf. I conclude therefore that very
small alterations in respect of the immense greatness, and extraordinary
velocity of the Seas, is sufficient to make therein great mutations in relation
to our smallness, and to our accidents.


SAGR. I am fully satisfied as to this particular; it remains to declare unto
us how those additions and substractions derived from the diurnal Vertigo are
made one while greater, and another while lesser; from which alterations you
hinted that the annual period of the augmentations and diminutions of the
ebbings and flowings did depend.


SALV. I will use my utmost endeavors to render my self intelligible, The
causes of the inequality of the additions and substractions of the diurnal
conversion from the annual motion.
but the difficulty of the accident it self, and the great attention of mind
requisite for the comprehending of it, constrains me to be obscure. The
unequalities of the additions and substractions, that the diurnal motion makes
to or from the annual depends upon the inclination of the Axis of the diurnal
motion upon the plane of the Grand Orb, or, if you please, of the Ecliptic; by
means of which inclination the Equinoctial intersecteth the said Ecliptic,
remaining inclined and oblique upon the same according to the said inclination
of Axis. And the quantity of the additions imports as much as the whole
diameter of the said Equinoctial, the Earths center being at the same time in
the Solstitial points; but being out of them it imports less and less,
according as the said center successively approaches to the points of the
Equinoxes, where those additions are lesser than in any other places. This is
the whole business, but wrapped up in the obscurity that you see.


SAGR. Rather in that which I do no not see; for hitherto I comprehend nothing
at all.


SALV. I have already foretold it. Nevertheless we will try whether by drawing
a Diagram thereof, we can give some small light to the same; though indeed it
might better be set forth by solid bodies than by bare Schemes; yet we will
help our selves with Perspective and fore-shortning. Let us draw therefore, as
before, the circumference of the Grand Orb, [as in Fig. 4.] in which the point
A is understood to be one of the Solstitials, and the diameter AP the common
Section of the Solstitial Colure, and of the plane of the Grand Orb or
Ecliptic; and in that same point A let us suppose the center of the
Terrestrial Globe to be placed, the Axis of which CAB, inclined upon the Plane
of the Grand Orb, falls on the plane of the said Colure that passes through
both the Axis of the Equinoctial, and of the Ecliptic. And for to prevent
confusion, let us only draw the Equinoctial circle, marking it with these
characters DGEF, the common section of which, with the plane of the grand Orb,
let be the line DE, so that half of the said Equinoctial DFE will remain
inclined below the plane of the Grand Orb, and the other half DGE elevated
above. Let now the Revolution of the said Equinoctial be made, according to the
order of the points DGEF, and the motion of the center from A toward E. And
because the center of the Earth being in A, the Axis CB (which is erect upon
the diameter of the Equinoctial DE) falls, as has been said, in the
Solstitial Colure, the common Section of which and of the Grand Orb, is the
diameter PA, the said line PA shall be perpendicular to the same DE, by reason
that the Colure is erect upon the grand Orb; and therefore the said DE, shall
be the Tangent of the grand Orb in the point A. So that in this Position the
motion of the Center by the arch AE; that is, of one degree every day differs
very little; yea, is as if it were made by the Tangent DAE. And because by
means of the diurnal motion the point D, carried about by G, unto E, increases
the motion of the Center moved almost in the same line DE, as much as the whole
diameter DE amounts unto; and on the other side diminishes as much, moving
about the other semicircle EFD. The additions and subductions in this place
therefore, that is in the time of the solstice, shall be measured by the whole
diameter DE.

Let us in the next place enquire, Whether they be of the same bigness in the
times of the Equinoxes; and transporting the Center of the Earth to the point
I, distant a Quadrant of a Circle from the point A. Let us suppose the said
Equinoctial to be GEFD, its common section with the grand Orb DE, the Axis with
the same inclination CB; but the Tangent of the grand Orb in the point I shall
be no longer DE, but another which shall cut that at right Angles; and let it
be this marked HILL, according to which the motion of the Center I, shall make
its progress, proceeding along the circumference of this grand Orb. Now in this
state the Additions and Substractions are no longer measured by the diameter
DE, as before was done; because that diameter not distending it self according
to the line of the annual motion HL, rather cutting it at right angles, those
terms DE, do neither add nor substract any thing; but the Additions and
Substractons are to be taken from that diameter that falls in the plane that
is errect upon the plane of the grand Orb, and that intersects it according to
the line HL; which diameter in this case shall be this GF and the Adjective, if
I may so say, shall be that made by the point G, about the semicircle GEF, and
the Ablative shall be the rest made by the other semicircle FDG. Now this
diameter, as not being in the same line HL of the annual motion, but rather
cutting it, as we see in the point I, the term G being elevated above, and E
depressed below the plane of the grand Orb, does not determine the Additions
and Substractions according to its whole length, but the quantity of those
first ought to be taken from the part of the line HL, that is intercepted
between the perpendiculars drawn upon it from the terms GF; namely, these two
GS, and FV: So that the measure of the additions is the line SV lesser then GF,
or then DE; which was the measure of the additions in the Solstice A. And so
successively, according as the center of the Earth shall be constituted in
other points of the Quadrant AI, drawing the Tangents in the said points, and
the perpendiculars upon the same falling from the terms of the diameters of the
Equinoctial drawn from the errect planes by the said Tangents to the plane of
the grand Orb; the parts of the said Tangents (which shall continually be
lesser toward the Equinoctials, and greater toward the Solstices) shall give
us the quantities of the additions and substractions. How much in the next
place the least additions differ from the greatest, is easy to be known,
because there is the same difference betwixt them, as between the whole Axis or
Diameter of the Sphere, and the part thereof that lies between the
Polar-Circles; the which is less than the whole diameter by very near a twelfth
part, supposing yet that we speak of the additions and substractions made in
the Equinoctial; but in the other Parallels they are lesser, according as their
diameters do diminish.

This is all that I have to say upon this Argument, and all perhaps that can
fall under the comprehension of our knowledge, which, as you well know, may not
entertain any conclusions, save only those that are firm and constant, such as
are the three kinds of Periods of the ebbings and flowings; for that they
depend on causes that are invariabl^, simple, and eternal. But because that
secondary and particular causes, able to make many alterations, intermix with
these that are the primary and universal; and these secondary causes being part
of them inconstant, and not to be observed; as for example, The alteration of
Winds, and part (though terminate and fixed) unobserved for their multiplicity,
as are the lengths of the Straights, their various inclinations toward this or
that part, the so many and so different depths of the Waters, who shall be
able, unless after very long observations, and very certain relations, to frame
so expeditious Histories thereof, as that they may serve for Hypotheses, and
certain suppositions to such as will by their combinations give adequate
reasons of all the appearances, and as I may say, Anomalie, and particular
irregularities that may be discovered in the motions of the Waters? I will
content my self with advertising you, that the accidental causes are in nature,
and are able to produce many alterations; for the more minute observations, I
remit them to be made by those that frequent several Seas: and only by way of
a conclusion to this our conference, I will propose to be considered, how that
the precise times of the fluxes and refluxes do not only happen to be altered
by the length of Straights, and by the difference of depths; but I believe that
a notable alteration may also proceed from the comparing together of sundry
tarcts of Sea, different in greatness; and in position, or, if you will,
inclination; which difference happens exactly here in the Adriatic Gulf,
less by far than the rest of the Mediterrane, and placed in so different an
inclination, that whereas that has its bounds that incloseth it on the Eastern
part, as are the Coasts of Syria, this is shut up in its more Westerly part:
and because the ebbings and flowings are much greater toward the extremities,
yea, because the Seas risings and fallings are there only greatest, it may
probably happen that the times of Flood at Venice may be the time of low Water
in the other Sea, which, as being much greater, and distended more directly
from West to East, comes in a certain sort to have dominion over the
Adriatic: and therefore it would be no wonder, in case the effects depending
on the primary causes, should not hold true in the times that they ought, and
that correspond to the periods in the Adriatic, as it does in the rest of the
Mediterrane. But these Particularities require long Observations, which I
neither have made as yet, nor shall I ever be able to make the same for the
future.


SAGR. You have, in my opinion, done enough in opening us the way to so lofty a
speculation, of which, if you had given us no more than that first general
Proposition that seems to me to admit of no reply, where you declare very
rationally, that the Vessels containing the Sea-waters continuing steadfast, it
would be impossible, according to the common course of Nature, that those
motions should follow in them which we see do follow; and that, on the other
side, granting the motions ascribed, for other respects, by Copernicus to the
Terrestrial Globe, these same alterations ought to ensue in the Seas, if I say
you had told us no more, this alone in my judgment, so far exceeds the vanities
introduced by so many others, that my mere looking on them makes me nauseate
them, and I very much admire, that among men of sublime wit, of which
nevertheless there are not a few, not one has ever considered the
incompatibility that is between the reciprocal motion of the Water contained,
and the immobility of the Vessel containing, which contradiction seems to me
now so manifest.


SALV. It is more to be admired, One single motion of the terrestrial Globe
suffices not to produce the Ebbing and Flowing
that it having come into the thoughts of some to refer the cause of the Tide
to the motion of the Earth, therein showing a more than common apprehension,
they should, in afterward driving home the motion close with no side; and all,
because they did not see that one simple and uniform motion, as v. gr. the sole
diurnal motion of the Terrestrial Globe, does not suffice, but that there is
required an uneven motion, one while accelerated, and another while retarded:
for when the motion of the Vessels are uniforme, the waters contained will
habituate themselves thereto, without ever making any alteration. To say also
(as it is related of an ancient Mathematician) that the motion of the Earth
meeting with the motion of the Lunar Orb, The opinion of Seleucus the
Mathematician censured.
the concurrence of them occasioneth the Ebbing and Flowing, is an absolute
vanity, not only because it is not expressed, nor seen how it should so happen,
but the falsity is obvious, for that the Revolution of the Earth is not
contrary to the motion of the Moon, but is toward the same way. So that all
that has been hitherto said, and imagined by others, is, in my judgment,
altogether invalid. But amongst all the famous men that have philosophated upon
this admirable effect of Nature, Kepler is with respect blamed.
I more wonder at Kepler than any of the rest, who being of a free and piercing
wit, and having the motion ascribed to the Earth, before him, has for all that
given his ear and assent to the Moons predominancy over the Water, and to
occult properties, and such like trifles.


SAGR. I am of opinion, that to these more spaculative persons the same
happened, that at present befalls me, namely, the not understanding the
intricate commixtion of the three Periods Annual, Monthly, and Diurnal; And
how their causes should seem to depend on the Sun, and on the Moon, without the
Suns or Moons having any thing to do with the Water; a business, for the full
understanding of which I stand in need of a little longer time to consider
thereof, which the novelty and difficulty of it has hitherto hindered me from
doing: but I despair not, but that when I return in my solitude and silence to
ruminate that which remains in my fancy, not very well digested, I shall make
it my own. We have now, from these four days Discourse, great attestations, in
favor of the Copernican Systeme, amongst which these three taken: the first,
from the Stations and Retrogradations of the Planets, and from their
approaches, and recessions from the Earth; the second, from the Suns revolving
in it self, and from what is observed in its spots; the third, from the Ebbing
and Flowing of the Sea do show very rational and concluding.


SALV. To which also happily, in short, one might add a fourth, and peradventure
a fifth; a fourth, I say, taken from the fixed stars, seeing that in them, upon
exact observations, those minute mutations appear, that Copernicus thought to
have been insensible. There starts up, at this instant, a fifth novelty, from
which one may argue mobility in the Terrestrial Globe, by means of that which
the most Illustrious Signore Caesare, Sig. Caesare Marsilius observes the
Meridian to be moveable.
of the noble Family of the Marsilii of Bologna, and a Lyncean Academick,
discovers with much ingenuity, who in a very learned Tract of his, shows
very particularly how that he had observed a continual mutation, though very
slow in the Meridian line, of which Treatise, at length, with amazement,
perused by me, I hope he will communicate Copies to all those that are Students
of Natures Wonders.


SAGR. This is not the first time that I have heard speak of the exquisite
Learning of this Gentleman, and of his showing himself a zealous Patron of all
the Learned, and if this, or any other of his Works shall come to appear in
public, we may be aforehand assured, that they will be received, as things of
great value.


SALV. Now because it is time to put an end to our Discourses, it remains,
that I entreat you, that if, at more leisure going over the things again that
have been alleged you meet with any doubts, or scruples not well resolved, you
will excuse my oversight, as well for the novelty of the Notion, as for the
weakness of my wit, as also for the grandeur of the Subject, as also finally,
because I do not, nor have pretended to that assent from others, which I my
self do not give to this conceit, which I could very easily grant to be a
Chymaera, and a mere paradox; and you Sagredus, although in the Discourses past
you have many times, with great applause, declared, that you were pleased with
some of my conjectures, yet do I believe, that that was in part more occasioned
by the novelty than by the certainty of them, but much more by your courtesy,
which did think and desire, by its assent, to procure me that content which we
naturally use to take in the approbation and applause of our own matters: and
as your civility has obliged me to you; so am I also pleased with the
ingenuity of Simplicius. Nay, his constancy in maintaining the Doctrine of his
Master, with so much strength and undauntedness, has made me much to love him.
And as I am to give you thanks, Sagredus, for your courteous affection; so of
Simplicius, I ask pardon, if I have sometimes moved him with my too bold and
resolute speaking: and let him be assured that I have not done the same out of
any inducement of sinister affection, but only to give him occasion to set
before us more lofty fancies that might make me the more knowing.


SIMP. There is no reason why you should make all these excuses, that are
needless, and especially to me, that being accustomed to be at Conferences and
public Disputes, have an hundred times seen the Disputants not only to grow
hot and angry at one another, but likewise to break forth into injurious words,
and sometimes to come very near to blows. As for the past Discourses, and
particulatly in this last, of the reason of the Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea,
I do not, to speak the truth, very well apprehend the same, but by that slight
Idea, what ever it be, that I have formed thereof to my self, I confess that
your conceit seems to me far more ingenuous than any of all those that I ever
heard besides, but yet nevertheless I esteem it not true and concluding: but
keeping always before the eyes of my mind a solid Doctrine that I have learned
from a most learned and ingenuous person, and with which it is necessary to sit
down; I know that both you being asked, Whether God, by his infinite Power and
Wisdom might confer upon the Element of Water the reciprocal motion which we
observe in the same in any other way, than by making the containing Vessel to
move; I know, I say, that you will answer, that he might, and knew how to have
done the same many ways, and those unimaginable to our shallow understanding:
upon which I forthwith conclude, that this being granted, it would be an
extravagant boldness for any one to go about to limit and confine the Divine
Power and Wisdom to some one particular conjecture of his own.


SALV. This of yours is admirable, and truly Angelical Doctrine, to which very
exactly that other accords, in like manner divine, which whilst it gives us
leave to dispute, touching the constitution of the World, adds withal
(perhaps to the end, that the exercise of the minds of men might neither be
discouraged, nor made bold) that we cannot find out the works made by his
hands. Let therefore the Disquisition permitted and ordained us by God, assist
us in the knowing, and so much more admiring his greatness, by how much less
we find our selves too dull to penetrate the profound Abysses of his infinite
Wisdom.


SAGR. And this may serve for a final close of our four days Disputations,
after which, if it seem good to Salviatus, to take some time to rest himself,
our curiosity must, of necessity, grant him the same, yet upon condition, that
when it is less incommodious for him, he will return and satisfy my desire in
particular concerning the Problemes that remain to be discust, and that I have
set down to be propounded at one or two other Conferences, according to our
agreement: and above all, I shall very impatiently wait to hear the Elements of
the new Science of our Academick about the natural and violent local Motions.
And in the mean time, we may, according to our custom, spend an hour in taking
the Air in the Gondola that waits for us.


FINIS. Place this Plate at the end of the fourth Dialogue


A TABLE Of the most Observable PERSONS and MATTERS Mentioned in the FIRST PART
of The First Tome.
A
ABSTACT.
THings are exactly the same in Abstract, as in Concrete. 185
AIR.
The part of the Air inferior to the Higher Mountains does follow the Motion
of the Earth. 124 The motion of the Air apt to carry with it light things, but
not heavy. 124 The Air always touching us with the same part of it, cannot
make us feel it. 228 It is more reasonable that the Air be commoved by the
rugged surface of the Earth, than by the Celestial Motion. 400 It is
demonstrated, inverting the Argument, that the perpetual Motion of the Air
from East to West, comes from the Motion of Heaven. 403
ANIMALS.
Animals, Vide, The Motion of Animals. The cause of the Weariness that attends
the Motion of Animals. 244
APOLLONIUS.
Apollonius and Copernicus demonstrate the Retrogradations of Venus and
Mercury. 311 Arguing, Arguments, and Argumentations Some in Arguing fix in
their minds the Conclusion believed by them, and then adapt their Reasons to
that. 250 One single Experiment or sound Demonstration, overthrows all
Arguments merely probable. 105 A pleasant Example showing the invalidity of
some Phisical Argumentations. 363
ARISTARCHUS.
Reason and Discourse in Aristarchus and Copernicus prevailed over manifest
Sense. 301
ARISTOTLE.
Aristotle makes the World perfect, because it has the Threefold Dimension. 2
Arist. his Demonstrations to prove the Worlds Dimensions to be three, and no
more. 2 Aristotle his Definition of Nature either imperfect or unseasonable. 7
Aristotle accomodates the Rules of Architecture to the Frame of the World, and
not the Frame to the Rules. 8 Aristotle cannot equivocate, being the Inventer
of Logic. 23 Aristotle his Paralogisme in proving the Earth to be in the
center of the World. 24 Arist. Paralogisme another way discovered. 24 Aristotle
his Discourse to prove the Incorruptibility of Heaven. 26 Aristotle proves
that Circular Motion has no Contrary. 26 Aristotle defective in assigning the
Causes, why the Elements are Generable and Corruptible. 31 Aristotle would
change his opinion, did he see the Novelties of our Age. 37 Arist. preferres
Sense before Ratiocination. 42 Aristotle affirms the Heavens alterable,
rather then otherwise, by his Doctrine. 42 Requisites to fit a man to
Philosophate well in the way of Aristotle. 92 Some of Aristotle's Sectators
impair his Reputation, in going about to enhanse it. 93 The servile Spirit of
some of Arist. followers. 95 Too close an adherence to Aristotle is blameable.
95 Aristotle and Ptolomy argue against the Diurnal Motion ascribed to the
Earth. 97 A Proposition that Aristotle filched from the Ancients, and somewhat
altered. 99 Aristotle his Arguments for the Earths Quiescence and Immobility.
107 Aristotle were he alive, would either refute his Adversaries Arguments, or
else would alter his Opinion. 113 Aristotle's first Argument against the Earths
Motion, is defective in two things. 121 The Paralogisme of Aristotle and
Ptolomy in supposing that for known, which is in question. 121 Aristotle
admits that the Fire moves directly upwards by Nature, and round about, by
Participation. 122 Aristotle and Ptolomy seem to confute the Earths Mobility
against those who think that it, having along time stood still, began to move
in the time of Pythagoras. 168 Aristotle his error in affirming falling Grave
Bodies to move according to the proportion of their gravities. 199 Aristotle
his Demonstrations to prove the Earth is finite, are all nullified, by denying
it to be moveable. 294 Aristotle makes that Point to be the Center of the
Universe, about which all the Celestial Spheres do revolve 294 A question is
put, if Arist. were forced to receive one of two Propositions, that make
against his Doctrine, which he would admit. 294 Aristotle his Argument against
the Ancients, who held that the Earth was a Planet. 344 Aristotle taxes Plato
of being over-studious of Geometry. 361 Aristotle h^ldeth those Effects to be
miraculous, of which the Causes are unknown. 384
ASTRONOMERS.
Astronomers confuted by Anti-Tycho. 38 The principal Scope of Astronomers is
to give a reason of Appearances and Phenomenon. 308 Astronomers all agree that
the greater Magnitudes of the Orbs is the cause of the tardity in their
Conversions. 331 Astronomers perhaps have not known what Appearances ought to
follow, upon the Annual Motion of the Earth. 338 Astronomers having omitted to
instance what alterations those are, that may be derived from the Annual Motion
of the Earth, do thereby testify that they never rightly understood the same.
343
ASTRONOMICAL.
Astronomical Observations wrested by Anti-Tycho to his own purpose. 39
Astronomical Instruments are very subject to error. 262
ASTRONOMY.
Astronomy restored by Copernicus upon the Suppositions of Ptolomy 308 Many
things may remain as yet unobserved in Astronomy 415
AUCUPATORIAN.
An Aucupatorian Problem for shooting of Birds flying. 157
AXIOM, or Axioms.
In the Axiom, Frustra fit per plura, etc. the addition of aequae been is
super fluous. 106 Three Axioms that are supposed manifest. 230 Certain Axioms
commonly admitted by all Philosophers. 361
B
BODY and Bodies.
Contraries that corrupt, reside not in the same Body that corrupts. 30 GRAVE
BODY; If the Celestial Globe were perforated, a Grave Body descending by that
Bore, would pass and ascend as far beyond the Center, as it did descend. 203
The motion of Grave Bodies, Vide Motion. The Accelleration of Grave Bodies that
descend naturally, increases from moment to moment. 205 We know no more who
moves Grave Bodies downwards, than who moves the Stars round; nor know we any
thing of these Courses, more than the Names imposed on them by our selves. 210
The great Mass of Grave Bodies being transferred out of their Place, the
separated parts would follow that Mass. 221 PENSILE BODY; Every Pensile Body
carried round in the Circumference of a Circle, acquireth of it self a Motion
in it self contrary to the same. 362 CELESTIAL BODIES neither heavy nor light
according to Aristotle. 23 Celestial Bodies are Generable and Corruptible
because they are Ingenerable and Incorruptible. 29 Amongst Celest. Bodies there
is no contrariety. 29 Celestial Bodies touch, but are not touched by the
Elements. 30 Rarity and Density in Celestial Bodies, different from Rarity and
Density in the Elements. 30 Celestial Bodies designed to serve the Earth, need
no more but Motion and Light. 45 Celestial Bodies want an interchangeable
Operation on each other. 46 Celestial Bodies alterable in their externe parts.
46 Perfect Sphericity why ascribed to Celestial Bodies by Peripateticks. 69 All
Celestial Bodies have Gravity and Levity. 493 ELEMENTARY BODIES; Their
propension to follow the Earth, has a limited Sphere of Activity. 213 LIGHT
BODIES easier to be moved than heavy, but less apt to conserve the Motion. 400
LUMINOUS BODIES; Bodies naturally Luminous are different from those that are by
nature Obscure. 34 The reason why Luminous Bodies appear so much the more
enlarged, by how much they are lesser. 304 Manifest Experience shows that the
more Luminous Bodies do much more irradiate than the less Lucid. 306 SIMPLE
BODIES have but one Simple Motion that agrees with them. 494 SPHERICAL BODIES;
In Spherical Bodies Deorsum is the Center, and Sursum the Cirference. 479
BONES.
The ends of the Bones are rotund, and why. 232
BUONARRUOTTI.
Buonarruotti a Statuary of admirable ingenuity. 86
C
CANON.
A shameful Error in the Argument taken from the Canon-Bullets falling from
the Moons Concave. 197 An exact Computation of the fall of the Canon-Bullet
from the Moons Concave, to the Center of the Earth. 198
CELESTIAL
Celestial Substances that be Unalterable, and Elementary that be Alterable,
necessary in the opinion of Aristotle. 2
CENTER.
The Sun more probably in the Center of the Universe, than the Earth. 22
Natural inclination of all the Globes of the World to go to their Center. 22
Grave Bodies may more rationally be affirmed to tend toward the Center of the
Earth, than of the Universe. 25
CHEMISTS.
Chemists interpret the Fables of Poets to be Secrets for making of Gold. 93
CIRCLE, and Circular.
It is not impossible with the Circumference of a small Circle few times
revolved, to measure and describe a line bigger than any great Circle
whatsoever. 222 The Circular Line perfect, according to Aristotle, and the
Right imperfect, and why. 9
CLARAMONTIUS.
The Paralogisme of Claramontius. 241 The Argument of Claramontius recoileth
upon himself. 245 The Method observed by Claramontius in consuting Astronomers,
and by Salviatus in refuting him. 253
CLOUDS.
Clouds no less apt than the Moon to be illuminated by the Sun. 73
CONCLUSION and Conclusions.
The certainty of the Conclusion helps by a resolutive Method to find the
Demonstration. 37 The Book of Conclusio^s, frequently mentioned, was writ by
Christopher Scheiner a Jesuit. 195, and 323.
CONTRARIES.
Contraries that corrupt, reside not in the same Body that corrupts. 30
COPERNICAN.
Answers to the three first Objections against the Copernican System. 303 The
Copernican System difficul to be understood, but easy to be effected. 354 A
plain Scheme representing the Copernican Systeme and its consequences. 354 The
proscribing of the Copernican Doctrine, after so long a Tolleration, and now
that it is more than ever followed, studied and confirmed, would be an affront
to Truth. 444 The Copern. System admirably agrees with the Miracle of Joshuah
in the Literal Sense. 456 If Divines would admit of the Copernican System, they
might soon find out Expositions for all Scriptures that seem to make against
it. 459 The Copernican System rejected by many, out of a devout respect to
Scripture Authorities. 461 The Copernican System more plainly asserted in
Scripture than the Ptolomaick. 469
COPERNICANS.
Copernicans are not moved through ignorance of the Arguments on the Adverse
part. 110 Copernicans were all first against that Opinion, but the
Peripateticks were never on the other side. 110 Copernicans too freely admit
certain Propositions for true, which are doubtful. 159 He that will be a
Copernican must deny his Senses. 228 A Great Mathematician made a Copernican,
by looking into that Doctrine, with a purpose to confute it. 443
COPERNICUS.
Copernicus esteems the Earth a Globe, like to a Planet. 1 Objections of two
Modern Authors [Scheiner and Claramontius] against Copernicus. 195 Copernicus
his Opinion overthrows the Criterium of Philosophers. 223 A gross Error in
the Opposer of Copernicus, and wherein it appears. 234, 235, and 236 A subtle
and withal simple Argument against Copernicus. 234 Copernicus his Opponent had
but little studied him, as appears by another gross Error. 235 Its questioned
whither he understood the third Motion assigned to the Earth by Copern. 236
Copernicus erroneously assigns the same Operations to different Natures. 238 A
declaration of the improbability of Copernicus his Opinion. 301 Reason and
Discourse in Copernicus and Aristarchus prevailed over Sense. 301 Copernicus
speaks nothing of the small Variation of Bigness in Venus and Mars. 302
Copernicus persuaded by Reasons contrary to Sensible Experiments. 306
Copernicus restored Astronomy upon the Suppositions of Ptolomy. 308 What moved
Copernicus to establish his Systeme. 308 Its a great argument in favor of
Copernicus, that he obviates the Stations and Retrogradations of the Motions of
the Planets. 309 Instances Ironically propounded by Scheiner against
Copernicus. 323 Copernicus understood not some things for want of Instruments.
338 The grand difficulty in Copernicus his Doctrine, is that which concerns the
Phenomenon of the Sun and fixed Stars. 343 Copernicus the Restorer of the
Pythagorean Hypothesis, and the Occasion of it. 429 Copernicus founded not his
Doctrine on Reasons depending on Scripture, wherein he might have mistaken
their Sense, but upon Natural Conclusions and Astronomical and Geometrical
Demonstrations. 431
CORRUPTIBLE, and Corruptibility.
The perfection of Figure operates in Corruptible Bodies, but not in Eternal.
69 The Disparagers of Corruptibility ought to be turned into Statua's. 37
Corruptibility admits of more and less, so does not Incorruptibility. 69
COUNCILS.
The Councils refuse to impose Natural Conclusions as matters of Faith. 450
D
DIAMONDS.
Diamonds ground to diverse sides, and why. 63
DIDACUS.
Didacus a Stunica reconcileth Texts of Scripture with the Copernican
Hypothesis. 468
DEFINITIONS.
Definitions contain virtually all the Passions of the things defined. 87
E
EARTH.
The Earth Spherical by the Conspiration of its parts to go to its Center. 21
It is easier to prove the Earth to move, than that Corruptibility is made by
Contraries. 27 The Earth very Noble, by reason of the Mutations made therein.
45 The Earth unprofitable and full of Idleness, its Alterations being taken
away. 45 The Earth more Noble than Gold and Jewels. 45 The Celestial Bodies
designed to serve the Earth, need no more but Motion and Light. 45 The
Generations and Mutations that are in the Earth, are all for the Good of Man.
47 From the Earth we see more than half the Lunar Globe. 51 Seven Resemblances
between the Earth and Moon. 48 to 53 The Earth unable to reflect the Suns Rays.
54 The Earth may reciprocally operate on Celestial Bodies with its Light. 80
Affinity between the Earth and Moon, by reason of their Vicinity. 81 The
Motions of the Earth imperceptible to its Inhabitants. 97 The Earth can have no
other Motions than those which to us appear commune to all the rest of the
Universe, the Earth excepted. 97 The Diurnal Motion seems commune to all the
Universe, the Earth only excepted. 97 Aristotle and Ptolomy argue against the
Earths Diurnal Motion. 97 The Diurnal Motion of the Earth. Vide Diurnal Motion.
Seven Arguments to prove the Diurnal Motion On to belong to the Earth. 99 to
103 The Earth a pendent Body, and equilibrated in a fluid Medium, seems unable
to resist the Rapture of the Diurnal Motion. 103 Two kinds of Arguments against
the Earths Motion. 108 Arguments of Aristotle, Ptolomy, Tycho, and other
persons, against the Earths Motion. 107 and 108 The first Argument against the
Earths Motion taken from Grave Bodies falling from on high to the Ground. 108
Which Argument is confirmed by the Experiment of a Body let fall from the
Round-top of a Ships Mast. 108 The second Argument taken from a Project shot
very high. 108 The third Argument taken from the Shot of a Canon toward the
East, and toward the West. 108 This Argument is confirmed by two Shots toward
the North and South, and two others toward the (...) West. 109 The fourth
Argument taken from the Clouds and from Birds. 113 A fifth Argument taken from
the Air which we feel beat upon us when we run an Horse at full speed. 114 A
sixth Argument taken from the whirling of Circular Bodies, which has a faculty
to extrude and dissipate. 114 The Answer to Aristotle's first Argument. 115 The
Answer to the second Argument. 117 The Answer to the third Argument. 120 to 150
An Instance of the Diurnal Motion of the Earth, taken from the Shot of a Piece
of Ordinance perpendicularly, and the Answers to the same, showing the
Equivoke. 153, 154 The Answer to the Argument of the Shots of Canons made
toward the North and South. 158 The Answer to the Argument taken from the
Shots at point blank toward the East and West. 159 The Answer to the Argument
of the flying of Birds contrary to the Motion of the Earth. 165 An Experiment
by which alone is shown the Nullity of all the Arguments produced against the
Motion of the Earth. 165 The Stupidity of some that think the Earth began to
move, when Pythagoras began to affirm that it did so. 167 A Geometrical
Demonstration to prove the Impossibility of Extrusion, by means of the Earths
Vertigo, in Answer to the sixth Argument. 176 Granting the Diurnal Vertigo of
the Earth, and that by some sudden Stop or Obstacle it were Arrested, Houses,
Mountains themselves, and perhaps the whole Globe, would be shaken in pieces.
190 Other Argument of two Modern Authors [Scheiner and. Claramontius] against
the Copernican Hypothesis of the Earths Motion. 195 The first Objection of the
Modern Author [Scheiner] in his Book of Conclusions. 195 The Argument of
[Claramontius] against the Earths Motion, taken from things falling
perpendicularly, another way answered. 223 The Earths Motion collected from the
Stars. 229 Argumeuts against the Earths Motion, taken ex rerum natura. 230 A
Simple Body as the Earth, cannot move with three several Motions. 231 The Earth
cannot move with any of the Motions assigned it by Copernicus. 231 Answers to
the Arguments against the Earths Motion, token ex rerum natura. 231 Four
Axioms against the Motion* of the Earth. 230 to 232 One only Principle might
cause a Plurality of Motions in the Earth. 233 The same Argument against the
Plurality of Motions in the Earth, answered by Examples of the like Motions in
other Celestial Bodies. 236 A fourth Argument [of Claramontius] against the
Copernican Hypothesis of the Earths Mobility. 239 From the Earths obscurity,
and the splendour of the fixed Stars, it is argued that it is moveable, and they
immovable. 239 A fifth Argument [of Claramontius] against the Copernican
Hypothesis of the Earths Mobility. 240 Another difference between the Earth and
Celestial Bodies, taken from Purity and impurity. 240 It seems a Solecisme, to
affirm that the Earth is not in Heaven. 241 Granting to the Earth the Annual,
it must of necessity also have the Diurnal Motion assigned to it. 300
Discourses more than childish, that serve to keep Fools in the Opinion of the
Earths Stability. 301 The Difficulties removed that arise from the Earths
moving about the Sun, not solitarily, but in consort with the Moon. 307 The
Axis of the Earth continues always parallel to it self, and describes a
Cylindraical Superficies, inclining to the Orb. 344 The Orb of the Earth never
inclines, but is immutably the same. 345 The Earth approaches or recedeth
from the fixed Stars of the Ecliptic the quantity of the Grand Orb. 349 If in
the fixed Stars one should discover any Mutation, the Motion of the Earth would
be undeniable. 351 Necessary Propositions for the better conceiving of the
Consequences of the Earths Motion. 354 An admirable Accident depending on the
not-inclining of the Earths Axis. 358 Four several Motions assigned to the
Earth. 362 The third Motion ascribed to the Earth, is rather a resting
immovable. 363 An admirable interne virtue [or faculty] of the Earths Globe,
to behold always the same part of Heaven. 363 Nature, as i^ sport, makes the
Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea to prove the Earths Mobility. 379 All Terrene
Effects indifferently confirm the Motion or Rest of the Earth, except the
Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea. 380 The Cavities of the Earth cannot approach or
recede from the Center of the same. 387 The Hypothesis of the Earths Mobility
taken in favor of the Ebbing and Flowing opposed. 399 The Answers to those
Objections made against the Earths Motion. 399 The Revolution of the Earth
confirmed by a new Argument taken from the Air. 400 The vaporous parts of the
Earth partake of its Motions. 400 Another observation taken from the Air, in
confirmation of the motion of the Earth. 402 A Reason of the continual Motion
of the Air and Water may be given by making the Earth moveable, rather then by
making it immovable. 405 The Earths Mobility held by sundry great Philosophers
amongst the Ancients. 437 and 468 The Fathers agree not in expounding the Texts
of Scripture that are alleged against the Earths Mobility. 450 The Earth
Mobility defended by many amongst the Modern Writers. 478 The Earth shall stand
still after the Day of Judgment. 480 The Earth is another Moon or Star. 486
The Earths several Motions, according to Copernicus. 491 The Earth secundum
totum is Immutable, though not Immovable. 491 The Earths Natural Place. 492
The Earths Center keeps her in her Natural Place. 493 The Earth, in what
Sense it may absolutely be said to be in the lowest part of the World. 496
EBBING and Ebbings.
The first general Conclusion of the impossibility of Ebbing and Flowing the
Immobility of the Terrestrial Globe being granted. 380 The Periods of Ebbings
and Flowings, Diurnal, Monthly, and Annual. 381 Varieties that happen in the
Diurnal Period of the Ebbings and Flowings. 382 The Causes of Ebbings and
Flowings alleged by a Modern Philosopher. 382 The Cause of the Ebbing and
Flowing ascribed to the Moon by a certain Prelate. 383 The Cause of the Ebbing,
etc. referred by Hyeronimus Borrius and other Peripateticks, to the temperate
heat of the Moon. 383 Answers to the Vanities alleged as Causes of the Ebbing
and Flowing. 383 Its proved impossible that there should naturally be any
Ebbing and Flowing, the Earth being immovable. 386 The most potent and primary
Cause of the Ebbing and Flowing. 390 Sundry accidents that happen in the
Ebbings and Flowings. 391 Reasons renewed of the particular Accidents observed
in the Ebbings and Flowings. 393 Second Causes why in several Seas and Lakes
there are no Ebbings and Flowings. 394 The Reason why the Ebbings and Flowings
for the most part, are every Six Hours. 395 The Cause why some Seas though very
long, suffer no Ebbing and Flowing. 395 Ebbings and Flowings, why greatest in
the Extremities of Gulphs, and least in the middle parts. 396 A Discussion of
some more Abstruce Accidents observed in the Ebbing and Flowing. 396 The Ebbing
and Flowing may depend on the Diurnal Motion of Heaven. 404 The Ebbing and
Flowing cannot depend on the Motion of Heaven. 405 The Causes of the Periods of
the Ebbings and Flowings Monthly and Annual, at large assigned 407 The
Monthly and Annual alterations of the Ebbings and Flowings, can depend on
nothing, save on the alteration of the Additions and Subtractions of the
Diurnal Period from the Annual. 408 Three ways of altering the proportion of
the Additions of the Diurnal Revolution, to the Annual Motion of the Ebbing and
Flowing. 409 Ebbings and Flowings are petty things, in comparison of the
vastness of the Seas, and the Velocity of the Motion of the Terrestrial Globe.
417
EFFECT and Effects.
Of a new Effect its necessary that the Cause be likewise new. 370 The
Knowledge of the Effects contribute to the investigation of the Causes. 380
True and Natural Effects follow without difficulty. 387 Alterations in the
Effects argue alteration in the Cause. 407
ELEMENTS, and their Motions, Vide MOTION. ENCYCLOPEDIA.
Subtilties sufficiently insipid, ironically spoken, and taken from a certain
Encyclopedia. 153
EXPERIMENTS.
Sensible Experiments are to be preferred before Humane Argumentations. 21, 33,
42. It is good to be very cautious in admitting Experiments for true, to those
that never tried them. 162 Experiments and Arguments against the Earths Motion,
seem so far concluding, as they lie under Equivokes 162 The Authority of
Sensible Experiments and necessary Demonstrations in deciding of Physical
Controversies. 436
EYE.
The Circle of the Pupil of the Eye contracteth and enlarges. 329 How to find
the distance of the Rays Concourse from the Pupil of the Eye. 329
F
FAITH.
Faith more infallible than either Sense or Reason. 475
FIRE.
Fire moves directly upwards by Nature, and round about by Participation,
according to Aristotle. 122 It is improbable that the Element of Fire should be
carried round by the Concave of the Moon. 405
FIGURE and Figures.
Figure is not the Cause of Incorruptibility, but of Longer Duration. 66 The
perfection of Figure appears in Corruptible Bodies, but not in the Eternal.
69 If the Spherical Figure conferred Eternity, all things would be Eternal. 69
It is more difficult to find Figures that touch in a part of their Surface,
then in one sole point. 185 The Circular Figure placed amongst the Postulata of
Mathematicians. 186 Irregular Figures and Forms difficult to be introduced.
187 Superficial figures increase in proportion double to their Lines. 304
FLEXURES.
The necessity and use of Flexures in Animals, for varying of their Motions.
232
FOSCARINI.
Foscarini his Reconciling of Scripture Texts with the Copernican Hypothesis.
473
G
GENERABILITY.
Generability and Corruptibility are only amongst Contraries, according to
Arist. 26 Generability and Alterability are greater perfections in Mundane
Bodies, then the Contrary Qualities. 44
GEOMETRICAL, and Geometry.
Geometrical Demonstrations of the Triple Dimension. 4 Geometrical Exactness
needless in Physical Proofs. 6 Aristotle taxes Plato for being too studious
of Geometry. 334 Peripatetick Philosophers condemn the Study of Geometry, and
why. 461
GILBERT.
The Magnetic Philosophy of Will-Gilbert. 364 The Method of Gilbert in his
Philosophy. 367
GLOBE.
Our Globe would have been called Stone, instead of Earth, if that name had
been given it in the beginning. 367
GOD.
God and Nature do employ themselves in caring for Men, as if they minded
nothing else. 333 An Example of Gods care of Mankind, taken from the Sun. 333
God has given all things an inviolable Law to observe. 4^
GREAT.
Great and Small, Immense, etc. are Relative Terms. 334
GRAVITY.
Grave; Vide Body. Gravity and Levity, Rarity and Density, are contrary
qualities. 30 Things Grave had being before the Common Center of Gravity. 221
Gravity and Levity of Bodies defined. 493
GUN and Gunnery.
The Reason why a Gun should seem to carry farther toward the West than
toward the East. 148 The Revolution of the Earth supposed, the Ball in the Gun
erected perpendicularly, does not move by a perpendicular, but an inclined
Line. 155 It is ingenuously demonstrated, that, the Earths Motion supposed, the
Shot of Great Guns ought to vary no more than in its Rest. 161 The Experiment
of a Running Chariot to find out the difference of Ranges in Gunnery. 148 A
Computation in Gunnery, how much the Ranges of Great Shot ought to vary from
the Mark, the Earths Motion being Granted. 160
H
HEAVEN.
Heaven an Habitation for the Immortal Gods. 26 Heavens Immutability evident to
Sense. 26 Heaven Immutable, because there never was any Mutation seen in it. 34
One cannot (says Aristotle) speak confidently of Heaven, by reason of its
great distance. 42 The substance of the Heavens impenetrable, according to
Aristotle. 54 The Substance of Heaven Intangible. 55 Many things may be in
Heaven, that are Invisible to us. 334 There are more Documents in the Open Book
of Heaven, than Vulgar Wits are able to Penetrate. 444 Heaven and Earth ever
mutually opposed to each other. 480 Which are really the Greater Lights in
Heaven, and which the lesser. 484 Heaven is not composed of a fifth Essence,
differing from the Matter of inferior Bodies. 494 Heaven is no Solid or Dense
Body, but Rare. 494 Christ at his Incarnation truly descended from Heaven, and
at his Ascension truly ascended into Heaven. 496 Of the First, Second and Third
Heaven. 497 Heaven in the Sense of Copernicus, is the same with the most
tenuous Ether, but different from Paradise, which excells all the Heavens. 499
HELL.
Hell is in the Center of the Earth, not of the World. 480
HELIX.
The Helix about the Cylinder may be said to be a Simple Line. 7
HYPOTHESIS.
The true Hypothesis may dispatch its Revolutions in a shorter time in lesser
Circles, than in greater, the which is proved by two Examples. 410
I
JEST.
A Jest put upon one that offered to sell a certain Secret of holding
Correspondence at a Thousand Miles distance. 79 A Jest of a certain Statuary.
94
IMPOSSIBILITY and Impossibilities.
Nature attempts not Impossibilities. 10 To seek what would follow upon an
Impossibility is Folly. 22
INCORRUPTIBILITY.
Incorruptibility esteemed by the Vulgar, out of their fear of Death. 45
INFINITY.
Of Infinity the Parts are not one greater than another, although they are
comparatively unequal. 106
INSTRUMENT and Instruments.
Instruments Astronomical very subject to Error. 262 Copernicus understood not
some things for want of Instruments. 338 A proof of the small credit that is to
be given to Astronomical Instruments in Minute Observations. 351 Ptolomy did
not confide in an Instrument made by Archimedes. 352 Instruments of Tycho made
with great Expense. 352 What Instruments are most apt for exact Observations.
352
INVENTORS.
The First Inventors and Observers of things ought to be admired. 370
JOSHUAH.
The Miracle of Joshuah in commanding the Sun to stand still, contradicts the
Ptolomaick System. 456 Joshuahs Miracle admirably agrees with the Pythagorick
Systeme. 457
IRON.
Its proved that Iron consists of parts more subtle, pure and compact than the
Magnet. 370
JUPITER.
Jupiter and Saturn do encompasse the Earth, and the Sun. 258 Jupiter augments
less by Irradiation, than the Dog Star. 305
K
KEPLER.
The Argument of Kepler in favor of Copernicus. 242 An Explanation of the true
Sense of Kepler, and his Defense. 243 The feigned Answer of Kepler couched in
an Artificial Irony. 244 Kepler is, with respect, blamed. 422 Keplers
reconciling of Scripture Texts whith the Copernican Hypothesis. 461
KNOW, etc.
The having a perfect Knowledge of nothing, makes some believe they understand
all things. 84 Gods manner of Knowing different from that of Man. 87 The great
Felicity for which they are to be envied, who persuade themselves that they
Know every thing. 164 Our Knowledge is a kind of Reminiscence, according to
Plato. 169
L
LIGHT.
Light reflected from the Earth into the Moon. 52 The Reflex Light of uneven
Bodies is more universal than that of the smooth, and why. 62 The more rough
Superficies make greater Reflection of Light than the less rough. 65
Perpendicular Rays of Light illuminate more than the Oblique, and why. 65 The
more Oblique Rays of Light illuminate less, and why, 65 Light or Luminous
Bodies appear the brighter in an Obscure Ambient. 74
LINE.
The Right Line and Circumference of an infinite Circle are the same thing. 342
LAWYERS.
Contentious Lawyers that are retained in an ill Cause, keep close to some
expression fallen from the adverse party at unawares. 324
LOOKING-GLASSES.
Flat Looking-Glasses cast forth their Reflection toward but one place, but
the Spherical every way. 39
LYNCEAN.
The Lyncean Academick the first Discoverer of the Solar spots, and all the
other Celestial Novelties. 312 The History of his proceedings for a long time,
about the Observation of the Solar Spots. 312
M
MAGNET.
Many properties in the Magnet. 367 The Magnet armed takes up more Iron, than
when unarmed. 369 The true cause of the Multiplication of Virtue in the Magnet,
by means of the Arming. 370 A sensible proof of the Impurity of the Magnet. 371
The several Natural Motions of the Magnet. 374 Philosophers are forced to
confess that the Magnet is compounded of Celestial Substances, and of
Elementary. 375 The Error of those who call the Magnet a mixed Body, and the
Terrestrial Globe, a simple Body. 375 An improbable Effect admired by Gilbertus
in the Magnet. 376
MAGNETIC Philosophy.
The Magnetic Philosophy of William Gilbert. 364
MAGNITUDE.
The Magnitude of the Orbs and the Velocity of the Motions of Planets answer
proportionably, as if descended from the same place. 19 Immense Magnitudes and
Numbers are incomprehensible by our Understandings. 332
MARS.
Mars necessarily includes within its Orb the Earth, and also the Sun. 298
Mars at its Opposition to the Sun, seems sixty times bigger than toward the
Conjunction. 298 Mars makes an hot assault upon the Copernican Systeme. 302
MARSILIUS.
Signor Caesar Marsilius observes the Meridian to be moveable. 422
MEDICEAN.
The time of the Medicean Planets conversions. 101 The Medicean Planets are as
it were four Moons about Jupiter. 307
MEDITERRAN.
Mediterranean Sea made by the Separation of Abila and Calpen. 35 The Voyages
in the Mediterran from East to West are made in shorter times than from West to
East. 403
MERCURY.
The Revolution of Mercury concluded to be about the Sun, within the Orb of
Venus. 298 Mercury admits not of clear Observations. 307
MOON.
The Moon has no Generation of things, like as we have, nor is it inhabited by
Men. 47 In the Moon may be a Generation of things different from ours. 47 There
may be Substances in the Moon, very different from ours. 48 The first
resemblance between the Moon and Earth, which is that of Figure, is proved, by
their manner of being illuminated by the Sun. 48 The second resemblance is the
Moons being Opacous, as the Earth. 48 The third resemblance is the Moons being
Dense and Mountainous as the Earth. 49 The fourth resemblance is the Moons
being distinguished into two different parts for Clarity and Obscurity, as the
Terrestrial Globe into Sea and Land. 49 The fifth resemblance is Mutation of
Figures in the Earth, like those of the Moon, and made with the same Periods.
49 All the Earth sees half only of the Moon, and half only of the Moon
sees all the Earth 51 Two Spots in the Moon, by which it is perceived that She
has respect to the Center of the Earth in her Motion. 52 Light reflected from
the Earth into the Moon. 52 The sixth resemblance is that the Earth and Moon
interchangeably illuminate. 53 The seventh resemblance is that the Earth and
Moon interchangeably Eclipse. 53 The Secondary Clarity of the Moon esteemed to
be its Native Light. 54 The Surface of the Moon more sleek then any
Looking-glass. 55 The eminencies and Cavities in the Moon, are illusions of
its Opacous and Perspicuous parts. 55 The Moons Surface is sharp, as is largely
proved. 57 The Moon, if it it were sleek like a Spherical Looking-glass, would
be invisible. 60 and 62 The apparent Vnevennesses of the Moons Surface aptly
represented by Mother of Pearl. 70 The apparent Vnevennesses of the Moon cannot
be imitated by way of more and less Opacity, and Perspicuity 71 The various
Aspects of the Moon imitable by any Opacous matter. 71 Sundry Phenomenon from
whence the Moons Montuosity is argued. 71 The Moon appears brighter by night,
than by day. 72 The Moon beheld in the day time, is like to a little Cloud. 72
Clouds are no less apt than the Moon to be illuminated by the Sun. 73 A Wall
illuminated by the Sun, compared to the Moon, shines no less than it. 73 The
third reflection of a Wall illuminates more than the first of the Moon. 74 The
Light of the Moon weaker than that of the Twy-light. 74 The secondary Light of
the Moon caused by the Sun, according to some. 76 The secondary Light of the
Moon appears in form of a Ring, i. e. bright in the extreme Circumference, and
not in the midst, and why. 77 The secondary Light of the Moon, how it is to be
observed. 78 The Moons Discus in a Solar Eclipse can be seen only by
Privation. 78 Solidity of the Moons Globe argued from its being Mountainous. 81
The secondary Light of the Moon clearer before the Conjunction than after. 82
The obscurer parts of the Moon are Plains, and the more bright Mountains. 83
Long Ledges of Mountains about the Spots of the Moon. 83 There are not
generated in the Moon things like to ours, but if there be any Productions,
they are very different. 83 The Moon not composed of Water and Earth. 83 Those
Aspects of the Sun necessary for our Productions, are not so in the Moon. 83
Natural Days in the Moon are of a Month long. 84 To the Moon the Sun
declineth with a difference of ten Degrees, and to the Earth of Forty seven
Degrees. 84 There are no Rains in the Moon. 84 The Moon cannot separate from
the Earth. 295 The Moons Orb environeth the Earth, but not the Sun. 299 The
Moon much disturbeth the Order of the other Planets. 362 The Moons Motion
principally sought in the Account of Eclipses. 416 The Moon is an Ethereal
Earth. 492
MOTION and Motions.
Motion of Projects. Vide Projects. The Conditions and Attributes which differ
the Celestial and Elementary Bodies depend on the Motions assigned them by
Aristotle. 25 Peripateticks improperly assign those Motions to the Elements for
Natural with which they never were moved, and those for Preternatural with
which they always move. 33 Motion, as to the things that move thereby, is as
if it never were, and so far operates, as it relates to things depr^ved of
Motion. 98 Motion cannot be made without its moveable Subject. 104 Motion and
Rest principal Accidents in Nature. 112 Two things necessary for the
perpetuating of a Motion; an unlimited Space, and an incorruptible Moveable.
117 Disparity in the Motions of a Stone falling from the Round Top of a Ship,
and from the Top of a Tower. 123 The Motion of grave Pendula might be
perpetuated, impediments being removed. 203 Whence the Motion of a Cadent Body
is collected. 224 The Motion of the Eye argues the Motion of the Body looked
on. 224 Different Motions depending on the Fluctuation of the Ship. 226 Our
Motion may be either interne, or externe, and yet we never perceive or feel it.
229 The Motion of a Boat insensible to those that are within it, as to the
Sense of Feeling. 229 The Motion of a Boat sensible to Sight joined with
Reason. 229 A simple Body, as the Earth, cannot move with three several
Motions. 231 Motion and Rest are more different than Right Motion and Circular.
237 One may more rationally ascribe to the Earth two intern Principles to the
Right and Circular Motion, than two to Motion and Rest. 237 The diversity of
Motions helps us to know the Diversity of Natures. 237 Bodies of the same
kind, have Motions that agree in kind. 239 The greatness and smallness of
the Body make a difference in Motion and not in Rest. 243 Every pensile and
librated Body carried round in the Circumference of a Circle acquireth of it
self a Motion in it self equal to the same. 362 Two sorts of Motion in the
containing Vessel may make the containing Water to rise and fall. 387 An
Accident in the Earths Motion impossible to be imitated. 392 ABSOLUTE MOTION:
Things said to move according to certain of their parts, and not according to
their whole, may not be said to move with an Absolute Motion, but per accidens.
491 ANIMAL MOTION: The Diversity of the Motions of Animals, depend on their
Flexures. 232 The Flexures in Animals are not made for varying of their
Motions. 232 The Motions of Animals are of one sort. 232 The Motions of Animals
are all Circular. 233 Secondary Motion of Animals dependent on the first. 233
Animals would not grow weary of their Motion, proceeding as that which is
assigned to the Terrestrial Globe. 244 The Cause of the weariness that attends
the Motion of Animals. 244 The Motion of an Animal is rather to be called
Violent than Natural. 244 ANNUAL MOTION: The Annual Motion of the Earth must
cause a constant and strong Wind. 228 The Error of the Antagonist of
Copernicus is manifest, in that he declares that the Annual and Diurnal Motion
belonging to the Earth, are both one way, and not contrary. 235 The Annual
Motion of the Earth mixing with the Motions of the other Planets, produce
extravagant Appearances. 296 Rest, Annual Motion, and the Diurnal, ought to be
distributed betwixt the Sun, Earth, and Firmament. 300 Granting to the Earth
the Annual, it must of necessity have the Diurnal Motion assigned to it. 300
The sole Annual Motion of the Earth, causes great inequality in the Motions of
the Planets. 310 A Demonstration of the inequalities of the three superior
Planets dependent on the Annual Motion of the Earth. 310 The Annual Motion of
the Earth most apt to render a reason of the Exorbitance of the five Planets.
312 Argument of Tycho against the Annual Motion, from the invariable Elevation
of the Pole. 338 Upon the Annual Motion of the Earth, alteration may ensue in
some Fixed Stars, not in the Pole. 341 The Parallogisme of those who believe
that in the Annual Motion great alterations are to be made about the Elevation
of the Fixed Stars, is confuted. 341 Enquiry is made what mutations, and in
what Stars, are to be discovered by means of the Earths Annual Motion. 342
Astronomers having omitted to instance what alterations those are that may be
derived from the Annual Motion of the Earth, do thereby testify that they
never rightly understood the same. 343 The Annual Motion made by the Center of
the Earth under the Ecliptic, and the Diurnal Motion made by the Earth about
its own Center. 344 Objections against the Earths Annual Motion taken from the
Fixed Stars placed in the Ecliptic 345 An Indice or Observation in the Fixed
Stars like to that which is seen in the Planets, is an Argument of the Earths
Annual Motion. 347 The Suns Annual Motion how it comes to pass, according to
Copernicus. 355 The Annual and Diurnal Motion are consistent in the Earth. 362
Three ways of altering the proportion of the Additions of the Diurnal
Revolution to the Annual Motion. 409 The Earths Annual Motion through the
Ecliptic unequal, by reason of the Moons Motion. 413 The Causes of the
inequality of the Additions and Substractions of the Diurnal Conversion from
the Annual Motion. 418 CIRCULAR MOTION: Circular and Right Motion are simple,
as proceeding in simple Lines. 6 The Circular Motion is never acquired
Naturally, unless Right Motion precede it. 18 Circular Motion perpetually
uniforme. 18 In the Circular Motion every point in the Circumference is the
beginning and end. 20 Circular Motion only is Uniforme. 20 Circular Motion may
be continued perpetually. 20 Circular Motion only and Rest are apt to conserve
Order. 20 To the Circular Motion no other Motion is contrary. 26 Circular
Motions are not contrary, according to Aristotle. 100 The Motion of the Parts
of the ^arth returning to their Whole, may be Circular. 237 The Velocity in the
Circular Motion increases according to the increase of the Diameter of the
Circle. 242 Circular Motion is truly simple and perpetual. 495 Circular Motion
belongs to the Whole Body, and the Right to its Parts. 496 Circular and Right
Motion are coincident, and may consist together in the same Body. 496 COMMON
MOTION: A notable Instance of Sagredus, to show the non-operating of Common
Motion. 151 An Experiment that shows how the Common Motion is imperceptible.
224 The concurrence of the Elements in a Common Motion imports no more than
their concurrence in a Common Rest. 239 Common Motion is as if it never were.
223, 340 COMPRESSIVE MOTION: Compressive Motion is proper to Gravity, Extensive
to Levity. 49^ CONTRARY MOTIONS: An Experiment which plainly shows that two
Contrary Motions may agree in the same Moveable. 363 The parts of a Circle
regularly moved about its own Center, move in diverse times with Contrary
Motions. 389 DESCENDING MOTION: The Inclination of Grave Bodies to the Motion
of Descent, is equal to their resistance to the Motion of Ascent. 191 The
Spaces past in the Descending Motion of the falling Grave Body, are as the
Squares of their times. 198 The Motion of Descent belongs not to the
Terrestrial Globe, but to its parts. 362 DIVRNAL MOTION: The Diurnal Motion
seems Commune to all the Universe, the Earth only excepted. 97 Diurnal
Motion why it should more probably belong to the Earth than to the Rest of the
Universe. 98 The first Discourse to prove that the Diurnal Motion belongs to
the Earth. 99 The Diurnal Motion causes no Mutation among Celestial Bodies,
but all changes have relation to the Earth. 100 A second Confirmation that the
Diurnal Motion belongs to the Earth. 100 A third Confirmation that the Diurnal
Motion belongs to the Earth. 101 A fourth, fifth, and sixth Confirmation that
the Diurnal Motion belongs to the Earth. 102 A seventh Confirmation that the
Diurnal Motion belongs to the Earth. 103 If the Diurnal Motion should alter,
the Annual Period would cease. 409 LOCAL MOTION: Local Motion of three kinds,
Right, Circular, and Mixed. 6 An entire and new Science of our Academick
[Galileo] concerning Local Motion. 198 MIXED MOTION: Of Mixed Motion we see not
the part that is Circular, because we partake thereof. 218 Aristotle grants a
Mixed Motion to Mixed Bodies. 375 The Motion of Mixed Bodies ought to be such as
may result from the Composition of the Motions of the simple Bodies
compounding. 375 NATURAL MOTION: Accelleration of the Natural Motion of Graves
is made according to the Odd Numbers beginning at Unity. 198 Natural Motion
changes into that which is Preter-Natural and Violent. 212 PROGRESSIVE MOTION:
The Progressive Motion may make the Water in a Vessel to run to and fro. 387
RIGHT MOTION: Sometimes Simple, and sometimes Mixed, according to Aristotle. 8
Right Motion impossible in the World exactly Ordinate. 10 Right Motion
Naturally Infinite. 10 Right Motion Naturally Impossible. 10 Right Motion might
possibly have been in the First Chaos. 11 Right Motion is useful to reduce into
Order things out of Order. 11 Right Motion cannot naturally be Perpetual. 20
Right Motion assigned to Natural Bodies, to reduce them to perfect Order, when
removed from their Places. 20 Right Motion of Grave Bodies manifest to Sense.
22 Right Motion with more reason ascribed to the Parts, than to the whole
Elements. 33 Right Motion cannot be Eternal, and consequently cannot be Natural
to the Earth. 117 Right Motion seems to be wholly excluded in Nature. 147
With two Right Motions one cannot compose Circular Motions. 375 Right Motion
belongs to imperfect Bodies, and that are out of their Natural Places. 495
Right Motion is not Simple. 495 Right Motion is ever mixed with the Circular.
495 SIMPLE MOTION peculiar only to Simple Bodies. 494 TERRESTRIAL MOTION
collected from the Stars. 229 The Parts of the Terrestrial Globe accelerate and
retard in their Motion. 388 One single Terrestrial Motion suffices not to
produce the Ebbing and Flowing. 421 UNEVEN MOTION may make the Water in a
Vessel to Run to and fro. 387 The Mixture of the two Motions Annual and
Diurnal, causes the unevenness in the Motion of the parts of the Terrestrial
Clobe. 390
MOVE.
Its questionable whether descending Bodies Move in a Right Line. 21 Aristotle's
Argument to prove the Grave Bodies Move with an inclination to arrive at the
Center. 22 Grave Bodies Move toward the Center of the Center of the Earth per
Accidens. 22 Things forsaking the place which was natural to them by Creation,
are said to Move violently, and naturally tend to return back to the same. 492
MOVEABLE, etc.
A Moveable being in the state of Rest shall not move unless it have an
inclination to some particular Place. 11 The Moveable accellerates its Motion
in going toward the Place whither it has an inclination. 11 The Moveable
departing from Rest goes through all the Degrees of Tardity. 11 The Moveable
does not accelerate save only as it approaches near to its term of Rest. 12
To introduce in a Moveable a certain Degree of Velocity, Nature made it to move
in a Right Line. 12 The Moveable departing from Rest passes through all the
Degrees of Velocity without staying in any. 13 The Grave Moveable descending,
acquireth Impetus sufficient to re-carry it to the like height. 13 The Impetus
of Movables equally approaching to the Center are equal. 14 Upon an Horizontal
Plain the Moveable lies still. 14 A single Moveable has but one only Natural
Motion, and all the rest are by participation. 103 A Line described by a
Moveable in its Natural Descent, the Motion of the Earth about its own Center
being presupposed, would probably be the Circumference of a Circle. 145 A
Moveable falling from the top of a Tower moves in the Circumference of a
Circle. 146 A Moveable falling from a Tower moves neither more nor less, then
if it had staid always there. 146 A Moveable falling from a Tower moves with
an Uniform not an Accelerate Motion. 146 The Cadent Moveable, if it fall with
a Degree of Velocity acquired in a like time with an Uniform Motion, it shall
pass a space double to that passed with the Accelerate Motion. 202 Admirable
Problems of Movables descending by the Quadrant of a Circle, and those
descending by all the Chords of the whole Circle. 412
MUNDANE.
Mundane Bodies were moved in the beginning in a Right Line, and afterward
circularly, according of Plato. 11
N
NATURAL.
That which is Violent cannot be Eternal, and that which is Eternal cannot be
Natural. 116
NATURE, and Natures.
Nature attempts not things impossible to be effected. 10 Nature never does
that by many things which may be done by a few. 99 Nature first made things as
she pleased, and afterward capacitated Man's understanding for conceiving of
them. 238 From Common Accidents one cannot know different Natures. 238 Natures
Order is to make the less Orbs to Circulate in shorter times, and the bigger
in longer. 243 That which to us is hard to be understood, is with Nature easy
to be effected. 403 Nature keeping within the bounds assigned her, little
cares that her Methods of opperating fall within the reach of Humane Capacity.
433 Natures Actions no less admirably discover God to us than Scripture
Dictions. 434
NERVES.
The Original of the Nerves according to Aristotle, and according to
Physicians. 91 The ridiculous Answer of a Philosopher determining the Original
of the Nerves. 91
O
OBJECTS.
Objects, the more Vigorous they are in Light, the more they do seem to
increase. 305 That Remote Objects appear so small is the Defect of the Eye, as
is demonstrated. 337 In Objects far Remote and Luminous, a small accession or
recession is imperceptible. 350
OPINIONS.
It Is all one, whether Opinions are new to Men, or Men new to Opinions. 77
ORB, and Orbs.
The greater Orbs make their Conversions in greater times. 101 and 331 It Is
more rational, that the Orb containing and the Parts contained do move all
about one Center, than about diverse. 295
P
PASSIONS.
Infinite Passions are perhaps but one only. 87
PENDULUM, and Pendula.
Pendula might have a perpetual Motion, impediments being removed. 203 The
Pendulum hanging at a longer thread makes its Vibrations more seldom than the
Pendulum hanging at a shorter. 206 The Vibrations of the same Pendulum are made
with the same frequency, whether they be small or great. 206 The cause which
impedeth the Pendulum, and reduces it to rest. 206 The thread or Chain to
which the Pendulum is fastened makes an Arch, and does not stretch it self
straight out in its Vibrations. 207 Two particular notable Accidents in the
Pendula and their Vibrations. 411
PERIPATETICK, etc.
Peripatetick Philosophy unchangeable. 42 A brave resolution of a certain
Peripatetick Philosopher to prove the Right Line to be the shortest of all
Lines. 182 The Paralogisme of the said Peripatetick who proves Ignotum per
ignotius. 183 The Discourses of Peripateticks full of Errors and
Contradictions. 376 The Peripateticks persecuted Galileo out of envy to his
happy Discoveries in Philosophy. 427 The Peripateticks in defect of Reasons
repair to Scripture for Arguments against their Adversaries. 429
PHILOSOPHERS.
It is not just, that those who never Phylosophate, should usurp the title of
Philosophers. 96
PHILOSOPHY.
The Disputes and Contradictions of Philosophers may conduce to the benefit of
Philosophy. 25 A cunning way to gather Philosophy out of any Book whatsoever.
92
PLANETS.
The approximation and recession of the three superior Planets imports
double the Suns distance. 299 The difference of the Planets apparent Magnitude
less in Saturn than in Jupiter, and less in Jupiter than in Mars, and why.
299 The Station, Direction, and Retrogradation of the Planets is known in
relation to the fixed Stars. 347 The particular Structures of the Orbs of the
Planets not yet well resolved. 416 The Planets places may more certainly be
assigned by this Doctrine, than by that of Ptolomies great Almagest. 469
PLATO.
Plato held, that Humane understanding pertook of Divinity, because it
understood Numbers. 3 Plato his Aenigma, and the Interpretation of it. 498
POLE.
The invariable Elevation of the Pole urged as an Argument against the Annual
Motion. 338 An Example to prove that the Altitude of the Pole ought not to vary
by means of the Earths Annual Motion. 340
POWER.
Of an infinite Power one would think a greater part should rather be employed
than a lesser. 105
PRINCIPLES.
By denying Principles in Sciences, any Paradox may be maintained. 28 Contrary
Principles cannot naturally reside in the same Subject. 211
PROJECT, etc.
The Project, according to Aristotle, is not moved by virtue impressed, but by
the Medium. 130 Operation of the Medium in continuing the Motion of the
Project. 131 Many Experiments and Reasons against the Motions of Projects
assigned by Aristotle. 132 The Medium does impede and not confer the Motion
of Projects. 134 An admirable accident in the Motion of Projects. 135 Sundry
curious Problems touching the Motion of Projects. 137 Projects continue their
Motion by a Right Line that follows the direction of the Motion made together
with the Projicient, whilst they were conjoined therewith. 154 The Motion
impressed by the Projicient is only in a Right Line. 170 The Project moves by
the Tangent of the Circle of the Motion preceding in the instant of
Separation. 172 A Grave Project as soon as it is separated from the Projicient,
begins to decline. 173 The Cause of the Projection increases not according
to the Proportion of Velocity increased by making the Wheel bigger. 189 The
Virtue which carries Grave Projects upwards, is no less Natural to them than
the Gravity which moves them downwards. 211
PTOLOMY, etc.
Inconveniences that are in the System of Ptolomy. 309 Ptolomies System full of
defects. 476 The Learned both of elder and later times dissatisfied with the
Ptolomaick System. 477
PYTHAGORAS, etc.
Pythagorick Mystery of Numbers fabulous. 3 Pythagoras offered an Hecatombe for
a Geometrical Demonstration which he found. 38 Pythagoras and many other
Ancients enumerated, that held the Earths Mobility. 437 and 468
R
RAYS.
Shining Objects seem fringed and environed with adventitious Rays. 304
REST.
Rest. Vide Motion. Rest the Infinite degree of Tardity. 11
RETROGRADATIONS.
Retrogradations more frequent in Saturn, less frequent in Jupiter, and yet
less in Mars, and why. 311 The Retrogradations of Venus and Mercury
demonstrated by Apollonius and Copernicus. 311
S
SATURN.
Saturn for its slownesse, and Mercury for its late appearing, were amongst
those that were last observed. 416
SCARCITY.
Scarcity and Plenty enhanse and debase the price of all things. 43
SCHEINER.
Christopher Scheiner the Jesuit his Book of Conclusions confuted. 78 and 195,
and seq. and 323 A Canon Bullet would spend more than six days in falling from
the Concave of the Moon to the Center of the Earth, according to Scheiner. 195
Christopher Scheiner his Book entitled Apelles post Tabulam censured, and
disproved. 313 The Objections of Scheiner by way of Interrogation. 336 Answers
to the Interrogations of Scheiner. 336 Questions put to Scheiner, by which the
weakness of his is made appear. 336
SCIENCES.
In Natural Sciences the Art of Oratory is of no use. 40 In Natural Sciences it
is not necessary to seek Mathematical evidence. 206
SCRIPTURE, etc.
The Caution we are to use in determining the Sense of Scripture in difficult
points of Philosophy. 427 Scripture studiously condescendeth to the
apprehension of the Vulgar. 432 In dicussing of Natural Questions, we ought not
to begin at Scripture, but at Sensible Experiments and Necessary
Demonstrations. 433 The intent of Scripture is by its Authority to recommend
those Truths to our belief, which being un-intelligible, could no other ways
be rendered credible. 434 Scripture Authority to be preferred, even in Natural
Controversies to such Sciences as are not confined to a Demonstrative Method.
434 The Penmen of Scripture, though read in Astronomy, intentionally forbear
to teach us any thing of the Nature of the Stars. 435 The Spirit had no intent
at the Writing of the Scripture, to teach us whether the Earth moves or
stands still, as nothing concerning our Salvation. 436 Inconveniences that
arise from licentious usurping of Scripture, to stuff out Books that treat of
Not. Arguments. 438 The Literal Sense of Scripture joined with the universal
consent of the Fathers, is to be received without farther dispute. 444 A Text
of Scripture ought no less diligently to be reconciled with a Demonstrated
Proposition in Philosophy, than with another Text of Scripture sounding to a
contrary Sense. 446 Demonstrated Truth ought to assist the Commentator in
finding the true Sense of Scripture. 446 It was necessary by way of
condescension to Vulgar Capacities, that the Scripture should speak of the Rest
and Motion of the Sun and Earth in the same manner that it does. 447 Not only
the Incapacity of the Vulgar, but the Current Opinion of those times, made the
Sacred Writers of the Scripture to accommodate themselves to Popular Esteem
more than Truth. 447 The Scripture had much more reason to affirm the Sun
Moveable, and the Earth Immovable, than otherwise. 448 Circumspection of the
Fathers about imposing positive Senses on Doubtful Texts of Scripture. 451 It Is
Cowardice makes the Anti-Copernican fly to Scripture Authorities, thinking
thereby to affright their Adversaries. 455 Scripture speaks in Vulgar and
Common Points after the manner of Men. 462 The intent of Scripture is to be
observed in Places that seem to affirm the Earths Stability. 464 Scripture
Authorities that seem to affirm the Motion of the Sun and Stability of the
Earth, divided into six Classes. 478 Six Maxims to be observed in Expounding
Dark Texts of Scripture. 481 Scripture Texts speaking of things inconvenient to
be understood in their Literal Sense, are to be interpreted one of the four
ways named. 81 Why the Sacred Scripture accommodates it self to the Sense of
the Vulgar. 487
SEA.
The Seas Surface would show at a distance more obscure than the Land. 49 The
Seas Reflection of Light much weaker than that of the Earth. 81 The Isles are
tokens of the unevenness of the Bottoms of Seas. 383
SELEUCUS.
Opinion of Seleucus the Mathematician censured. 422
SENSE.
He who denies Sense, deserves to be deprived of it. 21 Sense shows that
things Grave move ad Medium, and the Light to the Concave. 21 It is not
probable that God who gave us our Senses, would have us lay them aside, and
look for other Proofs for such Natural Points as Sense sets before our Eyes.
434 Sense and Reason less certain than Faith. 475
SILVER.
Silver burnished appears much more obscure than the unburnished, and why. 64
SIMPLICIUS.
Simplicius his Declamation. 43
SOCRATES.
The Answer of the Oracle true in judging Socrates the Wisest of his time. 85
SORITES.
The Forked Sylogisme called (...). 29
SPEAKING.
We cannot abstract our manner of Speaking from our Sense of Seeing. 461
SPHERE.
The Motion of 24 hours ascribed to the Highest Sphere, disorders the Period of
the Inferior. 102 The Sphere although Material, touches the Material Plane
but in one point only. 182 The Definition of the Sphere. 182 A Demonstration
that the Sphere touches the Plane but in one point. 183 Why the Sphere in
abstract touches the Plane only in one point, and not the Material in
Concrete. 184 Contact in a Single Point is not peculiar to the perfect Sphere
only, but belongs to all Curved Figures. 185 In a Moveable Sphere it seems
more reasonable that its Center be stable, than any of its parts. 300
SPHERE of Activity.
The Sphere of Activity greater in Celestial Bodies than in Elimentary. 59
STARRY SPHERE.
Weariness more to be feared in the Starry Sphere than in the Terrestrial
Globe. 245 By the proportion of Jupiter and of Mars, the Starry Sphere is found
to be yet more remote. 331 Vanity of those men's discourse, who argue the Starry
Sphere to be too vast in the Copernican Hypothesis. 335 The whole Starry Sphere
beheld from a great distance, might appear as small as one single Star. 335
SPHERICAL.
The Spherical Figure is easier to be made than any other. 186 Spherical
Figures of sundry Magnitudes, may be made with one sole Instrument. 187
SPIRIT.
The Spirit had no intent to teach us whether the Earth moves or stands
still, as nothing concerning our Salvation. 436
SOLAR SPOTS.
Spots generate and dissolve in the face of the Sun. 38 Sundry Opinions
touching the Solar Spots. 39 An Argument that necessarily proves the Solar
Spots to generate and dissolve. 40 A conclusive Demonstration to prove that the
Spots are contiguous to the Body of the Sun. 41 The Motion of the Spots toward
the Circumcumference of the Sun appears slow. 41 The Figure of the Spots
toward the Circumference of the Suns Discus, appear narrow, and why. 41 The
Solar Spots are not Spherical, but flat, like thin plates. 41 The History of
the proceedings of the Academian for a long time about the Observation of the
Solar Spots. 312 A conceit that suddenly came into the mind of our Academian
concerning the great consequence that follows upon the Motion of the Solar
Spots. 314 Extravagant Mutations to be observed in the Motions of the Solar
Spots foreseen by the Academick, in case the Earth had the Annual Motion. 314
The first Accident to be observed in the Motion of the Solar Spots, and
consequently all the rest, explained. 315 The events being observed were
answerable to the Predictions touching these Spots. 318 Though the Annual
Motion assigned to the Earth, answers to the Phenomenon of the Solar Spots,
yet does it not follow by conversion, that from the Phenomenon of the Spots one
may infer the Annual Motion to belong to the Earth. 319 The Pure Peripatetick
Philosophers will laugh at the Spots and their Phenomenon, as the Illusions of
the Christals in the Telescope. 319 The Solar Spots of Galileo. 494
STAR and Stars.
The Stars infinitely surpass the rest of Heaven in Density. 30 It is no less
impossible for a Star to corrupt, than the whole Terrestrial Globe. 37 New
Stars discovered in Heaven. 38 The small Body of a Star fringed about with
Rays, appears very much bigger than plain, naked, and in its native Clarity.
61 An easy Experiment that shows the increase in the Stars, by means of the
Adventitious Rays. 305 A Star of the Sixth Magnitude supposed by Tycho and
Scheiner an hundred and six Millions of times bigger than needs. 326 A common
error of all Astronomers touching the Magnitude of the Stars. 326 Venus
rendereth the Error of Astronomers in determining the Magnitudes of Stars
inexcuseable. 326 A way to measure the the apparent Diameter of a Star. 327 By
depriving Heaven of some Star, one might come to know what influence it has
upon us. 334 Enquiry is made what Mutations, and in what Stars, is to be made
by means of the Annual Motion of the Earth. 342 The Stars nearer to us make
greater diversities than the more remote. 349
FIXED STARS.
Great disparity amongst the Motions of the Particular Fixed Stars if their
Sphere be moveable. 102 The Motions of the Fixed Stars would accelerate and
retard in several times, if the Starry were moveable. 102 The Probable
Situation of the Fixed Stars. 299 Supposing the Annual Motion of the Earth, it
follows that one Fixed Star is bigger than the whole Grand Orb. 324 The
apparent diversity of Motion in the Planets, is insensible in the Fixed Stars.
325 Supposing that a Fixed Star of the First Magnitude is no bigger than the
Sun, the diversity which is so great in the Planets, is almost insensible in
the Fixed Stars. 325 The Diameter of a Fixed Star of the First Magnitude, and
one of the Sixth. 325 The distance of a Fixed Star of the First Magnitude, the
Star being supposed to be equal to the Sun. 326 In the Fixed Stars the
diversity of Aspect caused by the Grand Orb, is little more than that caused by
the Earth in the Sun. 326 The Computation of the Magnitude of the Fixed Stars
in respect of the Grand Orb. 326 The Apparent Diameter of a Fixed Star of the
First Magnitude, not more than five Seconds. 328 By another Supposition taken
from Astronomers, the distance of the Fixed Stars is calculated to be 10800
Semidiameters of the Great Orb. 331 The place assigned to a Fixed Star is much
less than that of Planet. 335 The Mutations of the Fixed Stars ought to be in
some greater, in others lesser, and in others nothing at all. 343 The grand
Difficulty in Copernicus his Doctrine, is that which concerns the Phenomenon of
the Sun and Fixed Stars. 343 The Fixed Stars in the Ecliptic never Elevate nor
Descend, on account of the Annual Motion, but yet approach and recede. 345 The
Fixed Stars without the Ecliptic elevate more or less, according to their
distance from the Ecliptic. 347 The Epilogue to the Phenomenon of the Fixed
Stars caused by the Annual Motion of the Earth. 349 A place accommodated for
the Observation of the Fixed Stars, as to what concerns the Annual Motion of
the Earth. 352
NEW STAR.
The greatest and least Elevation of the New Star differ not from each other,
more than the Polar Altitudes, the said Star being in the Firmament. 255
STEEL.
Steel Burnished, beheld from one place appears very bright, and from another,
very obscure. 64
STONE.
The Stone falling from the Mast of a Ship lights in the same place, whether
the Ship move or stands still. 126
STRENGTH.
The Strength diminishes not, were it not employed. 244
SUN.
The Sun more probably in the Center of the Universe than the Earth. 21
Observations from whence it is collected that the Sun and not the Earth, is in
the Center of the Celestial Revolutions. 295 The Sun and Moon increase little
by Irradiation. 305 The Sun it self testifies the Annual Motion to belong to
the Earth. 312 If the Earth be immovable in the Center of the Zodiac, there
must be ascribed to the Sun four several Motions, as is declared at length. 320
The distance of the Sun contains twelve hundred and eight Semidiameters of
the Earth. 325 The Diameter of the Sun half a Degree. 325 The Apparent Diameter
of the Sun how much it is bigger than that of a Fixed Star. 325 An Example of
Gods care of Mankind, taken from the Sun. 333 An exquisite Observation of the
approach and departure of the Sun from the Summer Solstice. 352 The Sun passes
one half of the Zodiac nine days sooner than the other. 416 The Miracle in
Joshuah of the Suns standing still answers not to the intent of lengthening the
day, but on the contrary excellently agrees with the Copernican Systeme. 456
The Sun without change of place revolveth upon its own Center in the space of a
Month. 457 The Nobility of the Sun as being the Fountain of Light, Heart of
the World, and Principle of Motion. 457 The Suns standing still in Joshuah
explained by Kepler. 462 The Sun found to be nearer to us than in times past,
by five thousand Miles. 469 The Sun, Moon, and Stars, are one and the same
thing. 485 Why the Sun to our thinking moves, and not the Earth. 486 How the
Sun is said to rise and set by extrinsick denomination. 489 The Sun is the
King, Heart, and Lamp of the World. 497
SYMPATHY.
Sympathy and Antipathy, terms introduced by Philosophers, the more easily to
give a reason of many Natural Effects. 373
SYSTEM of Copernicus.
The Copernican System once admitted for true, Expositions might be found out
for all those Scriptures than that seem to make against it. 459 Didacus a
Stunica held that the Scripture may be best expounded by the Copernican System.
468
SYSTEM of Universe.
The System of the Universe designed from the Appearances. 296 The System of
the Universe might probably have been intended to have been represented by the
Golden Candlestick. 500 The System represented likewise by the Apple in
Paradise. 501
T
TELESCOPE.
The Telescope enableth us to discourse better of Celestial Matters than
Aristotle himself. 42 Invention of the Telescope taken from Aristotle. 92 An
ingenious Consideration about using of the Telescope with as much facility on
the Roundtop of the Mast of a Ship, as on the Deck. 225 The Mutations made in
the Telescope, depending on the Agitation of the Ship. 226 The Operations of
the Telescope accounted Fallacies by the Peripateticks. 304 and 319 The
Telescope is the best means to take away the Irradiations of the Stars. 306 The
Telescope has much contributed to the Restoration of Astronomy. 476
THEOLOGY.
Theology the Queen of the Sciences, and wherein her Prerogative consists. 44
THINGS.
Some Things are of that nature, that their parts may separate from one
another, and from their whole, others not. 492 Things are simply denominated in
comparison of all or the greatest number of things of that kind. 496
THREE.
The Number Three celebrated amongst the Pythagoreans. 2
TIDE.
The Tide and the Mobility of the Earth mutually confirm each other. 380 Tide.
Vide Ebbing and Flowing.
TRUE.
True and Fair are one and the same, as also False and Deformed. 115 For proof
of True Conclusions, many solid Arguments may be produced, but to prove a false
one, none. 112. 245
TRUTH, and Truths.
Untruths cannot be Demonstrated as Truths are. 112 The Truth sometimes gains
strength by Contradiction. 181 Truth has not so little light as not to be
discovered amongst the Umbrages of Falsehoods. 384
TYCHO.
The Argument of Tycho grounded upon a false Hypothesis. 324 Tycho and his
Followers never attempted to see whether there were any Phenomenon in the
Firmament for or against the Annual Motion. 337 Tycho and others argue against
the Annual Motion, from the invariable Elevation of the Pole. 338
V
VELOCITY.
Uniform Velocity suitable with Circular Motion. 12 Nature does not immediately
confer a determinate degree of Velocity, although She could. 12 The Velocity
by the inclining plane equal to the Velocity by the Perpendicular, and the
Motion by the Perpendicular swifter than by the inclining plane. 14 Velocities
are said to be equal, when the Spaces passed are proportionate to their times.
15 The greater Velocity exactly compensates the greater Gravity. 192
VENUS.
The Mutation of Figure in Venus argues its Motion to be about the Sun. 295
Venus very great toward the Vespertine Conjunction, and very small toward the
Matutine. 297 Venus necessarily proved to move about the Sun. 298 The
Phenomenon of Venus appear contrary to the System of Copernicus. 302 Another
Difficulty raised by Venus against Copernicus. 302 Venus according to
Copernicus either lucid in it self, or a transparent substance. 302 The Reason
why Venus and Mars do not appear to vary Magnitude so much as is requisite. 303
A second Reason of the small apparent increase of Venus. 306 Venus renders the
Error of Astronomers in determining the Magnitude of Stars inexcuseable. 327
VESSEL.
Of the Motion of Water in a Vessel. Vide Water.
UNDERSTAND, etc.
Man Understands very much intensive, but little extensive. 86 Humane
Uuderstanding operates by Ratiocination. 87
UNIVERSE.
The Constitution of the Uuiverse is one of the Noblest Problems a Man can
study. 187 The Center of the Universe according to Aristotle is that Polnt
about which the Celestial Spheres do revolve. 294 Which ought to be accounted
the Sphere of the Universe. 299 It is a great rashness to censure that to be
superfluous in the Universe which we do not perceive to be made for us. 334
VURSTITIUS.
Christianus Vurstitius read certain Lectures touching the Opinion of
Copernicus, and what happened thereupon. 110
W
WATER.
He that had not heard of the Element of Water, could never fancy to himself
Ships and Fishes. 47 An Experiment to prove the Reflection of Water less bright
than that of the Land. 81 The Motion of the Water in Ebbing and Flowing, not
interrupted by Rest. 251 The vain Argumentation of some, to prove the Element
of Water to be of a Spherical Superficies. 377 The Progressive and uneven
Motion makes the Water in a Vessel to run to and fro. 387 The Several Motions
in the containing Vessel, may make the contained Water to rise and fall. 387
The Water raised in one end of the Vessel returns it self to Aequilibrium.
391 In the shorter Vessels the Undulations of Waters are more frequent. 391 The
greater profundity makes the Undulations of Water the more frequent. 391 Why
in narrow places the Course of the Waters is swifter than in larger. 396 The
cause why in some narrow Channels, we see the Sea- Waters run always one way.
398 The Water more apt to conserve an Impetus conceived than the Air. 400 The
Motion of the Water depends on the Motion of Heaven. 404
WEIGHTS.
Its questionable whether Descending Weights move in a Right Line. 21
WEST.
The Course to the West India's easy, the return difficult. 402
WIND.
Constant Gales of Wind within the Tropicks blow toward the West. 402 Winds
from the Land, make rough the Seas. 402
WISDOM Divine.
Divine Wisdom infinitely infinite. 85 The Discourses which Humane Reason
makes in time, the Divine Wisdom resolves in a Moment, that is has them
always present. 87
WIT.
The Wit of Man admirably acute. 87 The Pusilanimity of Popular Wits. 364
Poetic Wits of two kinds. 384
WORLD.
World. Vide Universe. The Worlds parts are according to Aristotle two,
Celestial and Elementary, contrary to each other. 6 The World supposed by the
Author [Galileo] to be perfectly Ordinate. 10 The Sensible World. 96 It has
not been hitherto proved by any whether the World be finite or infinite. 293 If
the Center of the World be the same with that about which the Planets move, the
Sun and not the Earth is placed in it. 295
WRITING.
Some Write what they understand not, and therefore understand not what they
Write. 63 The Invention of Writing Stupendous above all others. 88
Y
YEAR.
The Years beginning and ending, which Ptolomy and his Followers could never
positively assign, is exactly determined by the Copernican Hypothesis. 469
THE END OF THE TABLE.
THE Ancient and Modern DOCTRINE OF Holy Fathers, AND Judicious Divines,
CONCERNING The rash citation of the Testimony of SACRED SCRIPTURE, in
Conclusions merely Natural, and that may be proved by Sensible Experiments, and
Necessary Demonstrations. Written, some years since, to Gratify The most
SERENE CHRISTINA LOTHARINGA, Arch-Dutchess of TVSCANY; By GALILAEO GALILAEI, A
Gentleman of Florence, and Chief Philosopher and Mathematician to His most
Serene Highness the Grand DVKE.

And now rendered into English from the Italian, BY THOMAS SALUSBURY.

Naturam Rerum invenire, difficile; and ubi inveneris, indicare in vulgus,
nefas.

Plato. LONDON, Printed by WILLIAM LEYBOURN, 1661.

TO Her most Serene HIGHNESS THE Gran Duchess Mother.
SOme years since, as Your most Serene Highness well knows, I did discover
many particulars in Heaven that had been unseen and unheard of until this our
Age; which, as well for their novelty, as for certain consequences which depend
upon them, clashing with some Physical Propositions commonly received by the
Schools, did stir up against me no small number of such as professed the vulgar
Philosophy in the Universities; as if I had with my own hand newly placed these
things in Heaven to obscure and disturb Nature and the Sciences: who forgetting
that the multitude of Truths contribute, and concur to the investigation,
augmentation, and establishment of the Arts, and not to their diminution, and
destruction; and at the same time showing themselves more affectionate to their
own Opinions, than to Truth, went about to deny, and to disprove those
Novelties; of which their very sense, had they but pleased to have intentsly
beheld them, would have rendered them thoroughly assured. And to this purpose
they alleged sundry things, and published certain Papers fraughted with vain
discourses; and which was a more gross error, interwoven with the attestations
of the Sacred Scriptures, taken from places by them not rightly understood, and
which did not any thing concern the point for which they were produced Into
which error perhaps they would not have run, if they had but been advertised
of a most profitable Document which S. Augustine gives us, concerning our
proceeding warily, in making positive determinations in points that are obscure
and hard to be understood by the mere help of ratiocination; where treating (as
we) of a certain natural conclusion concerning Celestial Bodies, he thus
writes: Nunc autem servata semper moderatione praegravitatis, nihil credere de
re observa temere debemus, (...) forie, quod postea veritas p^^efecerit,
quamvis Libris Sanctis, sive Testamen^ Vetris, sive Novi, nullo modo esse
possit adversum, tamen propter amorem nostri erroris, oderimus.
But now having evermore a respect to the moderation of pious Gravity, we ought
to believe nothing unadvisedly in a doubtful point; lest we conceive a
prejudice against that, in favor to our Error, which Truth hereafter may
discover to be no wise contrary to the Sacred Books either of the Old or New
Testament.

It has since come to pass, that Time has by degrees discovered to every one
the truths before by me indicated: and together with the truth of the fact, a
discovery has been made of the difference of humors between those who simply
and without passion did refuse to admit such like Phenomenon for true, and
those who to their incredulity had added some discomposed affection: Lib. 2.
Genesi ad Literam in fine.
For as those who were better grounded in the Science of Astronomy, and Natural
Philosophy, became satisfied upon my first intimation of the news; so all those
who stood not in the Negative, or in doubt for any other reason, but because it
was an unlookt-for-Novelty, and because they had not an occasion of seeing a
sensible experiment thereof, did by degrees come to satisfy themselves: But
those, who besides the love they bore to to their first Error, have I know not
what imaginary interess to render them disaffected; not so much toward the
things, as toward the Author of them, not being able any longer to deny them,
conceal themselves under an obstinate silence; and being exasperated more than
ever by that whereby those others were satisfied and convinced, they divert
their thoughts to other projects, and seek to prejudice me some other ways: of
whom I profess that I would make no more account than I have done of those who
heretofore have contradicted me (at whom I always laugh, as being assured of
the issue that the business is to have) but that I see that those new Calumnies
and Persecutions do not determine in our greater or lesser Learning (in which I
will scarce pretend to any thing) but extend so far as to attempt to asperse me
with Crimes which ought to be, and are more abhorred by me than Death it self:
Nor ought I to content my self that they are known to be unjust by those only
who know me and them, but by all men whatsoever. They persisting therefore in
their first Resolution, Of ruining me and whatsoever is mine, by all imaginable
ways; and knowing how that I in my Studies of Astronomy and Philosophy hold,
as to the Worlds Systeme, That the Sun, without changing place, is situate in
the Center of the Conversion of the Celestial Orbs; and that the Earth,
convertible about its own Axis, moves it self about the Sun: And moreover
understanding, that I proceed to maintain this Position, not only by refuting
the Reasons of Ptolomy and Aristotle, but by producing many on the contrary;
and in particular, some Physical pertaining to Natural Effects, the causes of
which perhaps can be by no other way assigned; and others Astronomical
depending upon many circumstances and encounters of new Discoveries in Heaven,
which manifestly confute the Ptolomaick Systeme, and admirably agree with and
confirm this other Hypothesis: and possibly being ashamed to see the known
truth of other Positions by me asserted, different from those that have been
commonly received; and therefore distrusting their defense so long as they
should continue in the Field of Philosophy: for th^se respects, I say, they
have resolved to try whether they could make a Shield for the fallacies of
their Arguments of the Mantle of a feigned Religion, and of the Authority of
the Sacred Scriptures, applied by them with little judgment to the confutation
of such Reasons of mine as they had neither understood, nor so much as heard.

And first, they have endeavored, as much as in them lay, to divulge an
opiniou through the Universe, that those Propositions are contrary to the Holy
Letters, and consequently Damnable and Heretical: And thereupon perceiving,
that for the most part, the inclination of Man's Nature is more prone to embrace
those enterprises, whereby his Neighbor may, although unjustly, be oppressed,
than those from whence he may receive just encouragement; it was no hard matter
to find those Accomplices, who for such (that is, for Damnable and Heretical) did
from their Pulpits with unwonted confidence preach it, with but an unmerciful
and less considerate injury, not only to this Doctrine, and to its followers,
but to all Mathematics and Mathematicians together. Hereupon assuming greater
confidence, and vainly hoping that that Seed which first took root in their
unsound minds, might spread its branches, and ascend toward Heaven, they went
scattering rumors up and down among the People, That it would, ere long be
condemned by Supreme Authority: and knowing that such a Censure would supplant
not only these two Conclusions of the Worlds Systeme, but would make all
other Astronomical and Physical Observations that have correspondence and
necessary connection therewith to become damnable, to facilitate the business
they seek all they can to make this opinion (at least among the vulgar) to seem
new, and peculiar to my self, not owning to know that Nicholas Copernicus was
its Author, or rather Restorer and Confirmer: a person who was not only a
Catholic, but a Priest, Canonick, and so esteemed, that there being a Dispute
in the Lateran Council, under Leo X. touching the correction of the
Ecclesiastic Calender, he was sent for to Rome from the remotest parts of
Germany, for to assist in this Reformation, which for that time was left
imperfect, only because as then the true measure of the Year and Lunar Month
was not exactly known: whereupon it was given him in charge by the Bishop of
Sempronia, at that time Super-intendent in that Affair, to search with
reiterated studies and pains for greater light and certainty, touching those
Celestial Motions. Upon which, with a labor truly Atlantic and with his
admirable Wit, setting himself again to that Study, he made such a progress in
these Sciences, and reduced the knowledge of the Celestial Motions to such
exactness, that he gained the title of an Excellent Astronomer. And, according
unto his Doctrine, not only the Calendar has been since regulated, but the
Tables of all the Motions of the Planets have also been calculated: and having
reduced the said Doctrine into six Books, he published them to the World at the
instance of the Cardinal of Capua, and of the Bishop of Culma. And in regard
that he had reassumed this so laborious an enterprise by the order of The
Pope; he dedicated his Book De Revolutionibus Coelestibus to His Successor,
namely Paul III. which, being then also Printed, has been received by The Holy
Church, and read and studied by all the World, without any the least umbrage of
scruple that has ever been conceived at his Doctrine; The which, whilst it is
now proved by manifest Experiments and necessary Demonstrations to have been
well grounded, there want not persons that, though they never saw that same
Book intercept the reward of those many Labors to its Author, by causing him
to be censured and pronounced an Heretic; and this, only to satisfy a
particular displeasure conceived, without any cause, against another man, that
has no other interest in Copernicus, but only as he is an approver of his
Doctrine.

Now in regard of these false aspersions, which they so unjustly seek to throw
upon me, I have thought it necessary for my justification before the World (of
whose judgment in matters of Religion and Reputation I ought to make great
esteem) to discourse concerning those Particulars, which these men produce to
scandalize and subvert this Opinion, and in a word, to condemn it, not only as
false, but also as Heretical; continually making an Hipocritical Zeal for
Religion their shield; going about moreover to interest the Sacred Scriptures
in the Dispute, and to make them in a certain sense Ministers of their
deceiptful purposes: and farthermore desiring, if I mistake not, contrary to
the intention of them, and of the Holy Fathers to extend (that I may not say
abuse) their Authority, so as that even in Conclusions merely Natural, and not
de Fide, they would have us altogether leave Sense and Demonstrative Reasons,
for some place of Scripture which sometimes under the apparent words may
contain a different sense. Now I hope to show with how much greater Piety and
Religious Zeal I proceed, than they do, in that I propose not, that the Book of
Copernicus is not to be condemned, but that it is not to be condemned, as they
would have it; without understanding it, hearing it, or so much as seeing it;
and especially he being an Author that never treats of matters of Religion or
Faith; nor by Reasons any way depending on the Authority of Sacred Scriptures
whereupon he may have erroniously interpreted them; but always insists upon
Natural Conclusions belonging to the Celestial Motions, handled with
Astronomical and Geometrical Demonstrations. Not that he had not a respect to
the places of the Sacred Leaves, but because he knew very well that his said
Doctrine being demonstrated, it could not contradict the Scriptures, rightly,
and according to their true meaning understood. And therefore in the end of his
Epistle Dedicatory, speaking to The Pope, he says thus; Si fortasscerunt
Mataeologi qui cum omnum Mathematicum ignari sint, tamen de ^is judicium
assumunt, propter aliquem locum Scripturae, male ad suum propositum, detortum,
ausi fuerint hoc meum institutum repre^endere ac insectari, illos nihil moror,
adeo ut etiam illorum judicium, tanquam temerarium contemnam. Non enim obscurum
est, Lactantium, celelebrem alioqui Scriptorem, sed Mathematicum parvum,
admodum pueriliter de forma Terrae loqui, cum deridet eos, qui Terram, Glob^
formam habere prodiderunt. Itaque non debet mirum videri studiosis, si qui
tales, nos etiam ridebunt. Mathemata Mathematicis scribuntur; quibus and hi
nostri labores, (si me non fallit opinio) videbuntur etiam Reipublicae
Ecclesiasticae conducere aliquid, cujus Principatum Tua Sanctitas nunc ten^^.
If there should chance to be any Mataeologists, who though ignorant in all the
Mathematics, yet pretending a skill in those Learnings, should dare, upon the
authority of some place of Scripture wrested to their purpose, to condemn and
censure this my Hypothesis, I value them not, but shall slight their
inconsiderate Judgment. For it is not unknown, that Lactantius ( otherwise a
Famous Author, though mean Mathematician) writes very childishly touching the
Form of the Earth, when he scoffs at those who affirm the Earth to be in Form
of a Globe. So that it ought not to seem strange to the Ingenious, if any such
should likewise now deride us. The Mathematics are written for Mathematitians,
to whom (if I deceive not my self) these Labors of mine shall seem to add
something, as also to the Commonweal of the Church, whose Government is now
in the hands of Your Holiness.

And of this kind do these appear to be who endeavor to persuade that
Copernicus may be condemned before his Book is read; and to make the World
believe that it is not only lawful but commendable so to do, produce certain
Authorities of the Scripture, of Divines, and of Councils; which as they are by
me had in reverence, and held of Supreme Authority, insomuch that I should
esteem it high temerity for any one to contradict them whilst they are used
according to the In stitutes of Holy Church, so I believe that it is no error
to speak, so long as one has reason to suspect that a person has a desire,
for some concern of his own, to produce and allege them, to purposes different
from those that are in the most Sacred intention of The Holy Church. Therefore
I not only protest (and my sincerity shall manifest it self) that I intend to
submit my self freely to renounce those errors, into which, through ignorance*
I may run in this Discourse of matters pertaining to Religion; but I farther
declare, that I desire not in these matters to engage dispute with any one,
although it should be in points that are disputable: for my end tends only
to this, That if in these considerations, besides my own profession, amongst
the errors that may be in them, there be any thing apt to give others an hint
of some Notion beneficial to the Holy Church, touching the determining about
the Copernican Systeme, it may be taken and improved as shall seem best to my
Superiors: If not, let my Book be torn and burnt; for that I do neither
intend, nor pretend to gain to my self any fruit from my writings, that is not
Pious and Catholic. And moreover, although that many of the things that I
observe have been spoken in my own hearing, yet I shall freely admit and grant
to those that spoke them, that they never said them, if so they please, but
confess that I might have been mistaken: And therefore what I say, let it be
supposed to be spoken not by them, but by those which were of this opinion.

The motive therefore that they produce to condemn the Opinion of the Mobility
of the Earth, and Stability of the Sun, is, that reading in the Sacred Leaves,
in many places, that the Sun moves, that the Earth stands still; and the
Scripture not being capable of lying, or erring, it follows upon necessary
consequence, that the Position of those is Erroneous and Heretical, who
maintain that the Sun of it self is immovable, and the Earth moveable.

Touching this Reason I think it fit in the first place, to consider, That it
is both piously spoken, and prudently affirmed, That the Sacred Scripture can
never lie, when ever its true meaning is understood: Which I believe none will
deny to be many times very abstruce, and very different from that which the
bare sound of the words signifies. Whence it comes to pass, that if ever any
one should constantly confine himself to the naked Grammatical Sense, he might,
erring himself, make not only Contradictions and Propositions remote from Truth
to appear in the Scriptures, but also gross Heresies and Blasphemies: For that
we should be forced to assign to God feet, and hands, and eyes, yea more
corporal and humane affections, as of Anger, of Repentance, of Hatred, nay, and
sometimes the Forgetting of things past, and Ignorance of those to come: Which
Propositions, like as (so the Holy Ghost affirms) they were in that manner
pronounced by the Sacred Scriptures, that they might be accommodated to the
Capacity of the Vulgar, who are very rude and unlearned; so likewise, for the
sakes of those that deserve to be distinguished from the Vulgar, it is
necessary that grave and skilful Expositors produce the true senses of them,
and show the particular Reasons why they are dictated under such and such
words. And this is a Doctrine so true and common amongst Divines, that it would
be superfluous to produce any attestation thereof.

Hence me thinks I may with much more reason conclude, that the same holy Writ,
when ever it has had occasion to pronounce any natural Conclusion, and
especially, any of those which are more abstruce, and difficult to be
understood, has not failed to observe this Rule, that so it might not cause
confusion in the minds of those very people, and render them the more
contumacious against the Doctrines that were more sublimely mysterious: For
(like as we have said, and as it plainly appears) out of the sole respect of
condescending to Popular Capacity, the Scripture has not scrupled to shadow
over most principal and fundamental Truths, attributing, even to God himself,
qualities extremely remote from, and contrary unto his Essence. Who would
positively affirm that the Scripture, laying aside that respect, in speaking
but occasionally of the Earth, of the Water, of the Sun, or of any other
Creature, has chosen to confine it self, with all rigor, within the bare and
narrow literal sense of the words? And especially, in mentioning of those
Creatures, things not at all concerning the primary Institution of the same
Sacred Volume, to wit, the Service of God, and the salvation of Souls, and in
things infinitely beyond the apprehension of the Vulgar?

This therefore being granted, methinks that in the Discussion of Natural
Problemes, we ought not to begin at the authority of places of Scripture; but
at Sensible Experiments and Necessary Demonstrations: For, from the Divine
Word, the Sacred Scripture and Nature did both alike proceed; the first, as the
Holy Ghosts Inspiration; the second, as the most observant Executrix of Gods
Commands: And moreover it being convenient in the Scriptures (by way of
condescension to the understanding of all men) to speak many things different,
in appearance; and so far as concerns the naked signification of the words,
from absolute truth: But on the contrary, Nature being inexorable and
immutable, and never passing the bounds of the Laws assigned her, as one that
nothing cares whether her abstruse reasons and methods of operating be, or be
not exposed to the Capacity of Men; I conceive that that, concerning Natural
Effects, which either Sensible Experience sets before our eyes, or Necessary
Demonstrations do prove unto us, ought not, upon any account, to be called into
question, much less condemned upon the testimony of Texts of Scripture, which
may, under their words, couch Senses seemingly contrary thereto; In regard that
every Expression of Scripture is not tied to so strict conditions, as every
Effect of Nature: Nor does God less admirably discover himself unto us in
Nature's Actions, than in the Scriptures Sacred Dictions. Which peradventure
Tertullian intended to express in those words: Not definimus, Deum, primo
N^tura cognoscendum; Deinde, Doctrina recognescendum: Natura ex operibus;
Doctrina ex p^aedicationibus.
We conclude, God is known; first, by Nature, and then again more particularly
known by Doctrine: by Nature, in his Works; by Doctrine, in his Word preached.

But I will not hence affirm, but that we ought to have an extraordinary esteem
for the Places of Sacred Scripture, nay, being come to a certainty in any
Natural Conclusions, Tertul. adver. Marcion. lib. 1. cap. 18.
we ought to make use of them, as most apposite helps to the true Exposition of
the same Scriptures, and to the investigation of those Senses which are
necessarily contained in them, as most true, and concordant with the Truths
demonstrated.

This makes me to suppose, that the Authority of the Sacred Volumes was
intended principally to persuade men to the belief of those Articles and
Propositions, which, by reason they surpass all humane discourse, could not by
any other Science, or by any other means be made credible, than by the Mouth of
the Holy Spirit it self. Besides that, even in those Propositions, which are
not de Fide, the Authority of the same Sacred Leaves ought to be preferred to
the Authority of all Humane Sciences that are not written in a Demonstrative
Method, but either with bare Narrations, or else with probable Reasons; and
this I hold to be so far convenient and necessary, by how far the said Divine
Wisdom surpasses all humane Judgment and Conjecture. But that that self same
God who has endued us with Senses, Discourse, and Understanding has intended,
laying aside the use of these, to give the knowledge of those things by other
means, which we may attain by these, so as that even in those Natural
Conclusions, which either by Sensible Experiments or Necessary Demonstrations
are set before our eyes, or our Understanding, we ought to deny Sense and
Reason, I do not conceive that I am bound to believe it; and especially in
those Sciences, of which but a small part, and that divided into Conclusions is
to be found in the Scripture: Such as, for instance, is that of Astronomy, of
which there is so small a part in Holy Writ, that it does not so much as name
any of the Planets, except the Sun and the Moon, and once or twice only Venus
under the name of Lucifer. For if the Holy Writers had had any intention to
persuade People to believe the Dispositions and Motions of the Celestial
Bodies; and that consequently we are still to derive that knowledge from the
Sacred Books they would not, in my opinion, have spoken so little thereof, that
it is as much as nothing, in comparison of the infinite admirable Conclusions,
which in that Science are comprised and demonstrated. Nay, that the Authors of
the Holy Volumes did not only not pretend to teach us the Constitutions and
Motions of the Heavens and Stars, their Figures, Magnitudes, and Distances, but
that intentionally (albeit that all these things were very well known unto
them) they forbore to speak of them, is the opinion of the Most Holy and Most
Learned Fathers: and in S. Augustine we read the following words. Quaeri etiam
solet, quae forma and figura Caeli credenda sit secundum Scripturas nostras:
Multi enim multum disputant de iis ribus, quas majori prudentia nostri Autores
omiserunt, ad beatam vitam non profuturas discentibus, and occupaentes (quod
prius est) multum prolixa^, and rebus salubribus impendenda temporum spatiae.
Quid enim ad ^e pertinet, utrum Caelum, sicut Sphaera, undique concludat
Terram, in media Mundi ^ole libratam; an eam ex una part desuper, velut
discus, operiat? Sed quia^ de Fide agitur Scripturarum, propter illam causam,
quam non semel commemoravimus, Ne scilicet quisquam eloquia divina non
intelligens, cum de his rebus tale aliquid vel invenerit in Libris Nostris, vel
ex illis audiverit, quod perceptis assertionibus adversari videatur, nullo modo
eis, cetera utilia monentibus, vel narrantibus, vel prae^^^ntiantibus, credat:
Breviter discendum est, de figura Caeli, hoc scisse Autores nostros, quod
veritas habet: Sed Spiritum Dei, qui per ipsos loquebatur, noluisse ista docere
homines, nulli ad salutem profutura. D. August. Lib. 2. De Genesis ad literam,
Cap. 9. Idem etiam legitur apud Petrum Lombardum Magistrum Sententiarum.
It is likewise commonly asked, of what Form and Figure we may believe Heaven
to be, according to the Scriptures: For many contend much about those matters,
which the greater prudence of our Authors has forborne to speak of, as nothing
furthering their Learners in relation to a blessed life; and, (which is the
chiefest thing) taking up much of that time which should be spent in holy
exercises. For what is it to me whether Heaven, as a Sphere, does on all sides
environ the Earth, a Mass balanced in the middle of the World; or whether like
a Dish it does only cover or overcast the same? But because belief of
Scripture is urged for that cause, which we have often mentioned, that is, That
none through ignorance of Divine Phrases, when they shall find any thing of
this nature in, or hear any thing cited out of our Bibles which may seem to
oppose manifest Conclusions, should be induced to suspect their truth, when
they admonish, relate, and deliver more profitable matters Briefly be it
spoken, touching the Figure of Heaven, that our Authors knew the truth: But the
H. Spirit would not, that men should learn what is profitable to none for
salvation.

And the same intentional silence of these sacred Penmen in determining what is
to be believed of these accidents of the Celestial Bodies, is again hinted to
us by the same Father in the ensuing 10. Chapter upon the Question, Whether we
are to believe that Heaven moves, or stands still, in these words: De Moit^
etiam Caeli, nonnulli fra^tres quaestionem movent, utrum stet, an moveatur;
quia^ si ^^^vetur, inquiunt, quomodo Firmamentum est? Si autem stat, quomodo
Sydera quae in ipso fixa creduntur, ab Orient in Occidentem circu^eunt,,
Septentrionalibus breviores gyros juxta cardinem peragentibus; ut Caelum, si
est alius nobis occulius cardo, ex alio vertice, sicut Sphaera; si autem nullus
alius cardo est, vel uti discus rotari videatur? Quibus respondeo, Multum
subtilibus and laboriosis rationibus ista perquiri, ut vere percipiaetur, utrum
ita, an non ita sit, quibus ineundis atque tractandis nec mihi jam tempus est,
nec illis esse debet, quos ad salutem suam, e Sanctae Ecclesiae necessaria
utilitate cupimus informari:
There are some of the Brethren that start a question concerning the motion of
Heaven, Whether it be fixed, or moved: For if it be moved (say they) how is it
a Firmament? If it stand still, how do these Stars which are held to be fixed
go round from East to West, the more Northern performing shorter Circuits near
the Pole; so that Heaven, if there be another Pole, to us unknown, may seem to
revolve upon some other Axis; but if there be not another Pole, it may be
thought to move as a Discus? To whom I reply, that these points require many
subtle and profound Reasons, for the making out whether they be really so, or
no; the undertakeing and discussing of which is neither consistent with my
leisure, nor their duty, whom I desire to instruct in the necessary matters
more directly conducing to their salvation, and to the benefit of The Holy
Church.

From which (that we may come nearer to our particular case) it necessarily
follows, that the Holy Ghost not having intended to teach us, whether Heaven
moves or stands still; nor whether its Figure be in Form of a Sphere, or of
a Discus, or distended in Planum: Nor whether the Earth be contained in the
Center of it, or on one side; he has much less had an intention to assure us
of other Conclusions of the same kind, and in such a manner, connected to
these already named, that without the dedermination of them, one can neither
affirm one or the other part; which are, The determining of the Motion and Rest
of the said Earth, and of the Sun. And if the same Holy Spirit has purposely
pretermitted to teach us those Propositions, as nothing concerning his
intention, that is, our salvation; how can it be affirmed, that the holding of
one part rather than the other, should be so necessary, as that it is de Fide,
and the other erroneous? Can an Opinion be Heretical, and yet nothing
concerning the salvation of souls? Or can it be said that the Holy Ghost
purposed not to teach us a thing that concerned our salvation? I might here
insert the Opinion of an Ecclesiastical Card. Baronius.
Person, Spiritui sancto mentem fuisse, nos docere, quomodo ad Caelum eatur:
non autem, quomodo Caelum gradiatur.
raised to the degree of Eminentissimo, to wit, That the intention of the Holy
Ghost, is to teach us how we shall go to Heaven, and not how Heaven goes.

But let us return to consider how much necessary Demonstrations, Cardinal. Bar.
and sensible Experiments ought to be esteemed in Natural Conclusions; and of
what Authority Holy and Learned Divines have accounted them, from whom amongst
an hundred other attestations, we have these that follow: Illud etiam
diligenter cavendum, and omnino fugiendum est, ne in tractanda Mosis Doctrina,
quicquam affirmate and asseveranter sentiamus and dicamus, quod repugnet
manifestis experimentis and rationibus Philosophiae, vel aliarum Disciplinarum.
Namque cum Verum omne semper cum Vero congruat, non potest Veritas Sacrarum
Litterarum, Veris Rationibus and Experimentis Humanarum Doctrinarum esse
contraria. Peter. in Genesis circa Principium.
We must also carefully heed and altogether avoid in handling the Doctrine of
Moses, to avouch or speak any thing affirmatively and confidently which
contradicts the manifest Experiments and Reasons of Philosophy, or other
Sciences. For since all Truth is agreeable to Truth, the Truth of Holy Writ
cannot be contrary to the solid Reasons and Experiments of Humane Learning.

And in St. Augustine we read: Si manifestae certaeque Rationi, velut sanctarum
Litterarum objicitur autoriritas, non intelligit, qui hoc facit; and non
Scriptura sensum (ad quem penetrare non potuit) sed suum potius objicit
veritati: nec ^d quod in ea, sed quod in seipso velut pro ea invenit, opponit.
If any one shall object the Authority of Sacred Writ, against clear and
manifest Reason, he that does so, knows not what he undertakes: For he objects
against the Truth, not the sense of the Scripture (which is beyond his
comprehension) but rather his own; not what is in it, but what, finding it in
himself, he fancyed to be in it.

This granted, and it being true, (as has been said) that two Truths cannot be
contrary to each other, it is the office of a Judicious Expositor to study to
find the true Senses of Sacred Texts, which undoubtedly shall accord with
those Natural Conclusions, of which manifest Sense and Necessary Demonstrations
had before made us sure and certain. Epist. 7. ad Marcellinum.
Yea, in regard that the Scriptures (as has been said) for the Reasons
alleged, admit in many places Expositions far from the Sense of the words; and
moreover, we not being able to affirm, that all Interpreters speak by Divine
Inspiration; For (if it were so) then there would be no difference between them
about the Senses of the same places; I should think that it would be an act of
great prudence to make it unlawful for any one to usurp Texts of Scripture, and
as it were to force them to maintain this or that Natural Conclusion for
truth, of which Sense, and Demonstrative, and necessary Reasons may one time or
other assure us the contrary. For who will prescribe bounds to the Wits of men?
Who will assert that all that is sensible and knowable in the World is already
discovered and known? Will not they that in other points disagree with us,
confess this (and it is a great truth) that Eaquae scimus, sint minima pars
little quae ignoramus? That those Truths which we know, are very few, in
comparison of those which we know not? Nay more, Ecclesiast. cap. 3.
if we have it from the Mouth of the Holy Ghost, that Deus tradidit Mundum
disputationi eorum, ut non inveniat homo opus, quod operatus est Deus ab initio
ad finem: One ought not, as I conceive, to stop the way to free Philosophating,
touching the things of the World, and of Nature, as if that they were already
certainly found, and all manifest: nor ought it to be counted rashness, if one
do not sit down satisfied with the opinions now become as it were commune; nor
ought any persons to be displeased, if others do not hold, in natural Disputes
to that opinion which best pleases them; and especially touching Problems that
have, for thousands of years, been controverted amongst the greatest
Philosophers, as is the Stability of the Sun, and Mobility of the Earth, an
opinion held by Pythagoras, and by his whole Sect; by Heraclides Ponticus, who
was of the same opininion; by Phylolaus, the Master of Plato; and by Plato
himself, as Aristotle relates, and of which Plutarch writes in the life of
Numa, that the said Plato, when he was grown old, said, It is a most absurd
thing to think otherwise: The same was believed by Aristarchus Samius, as we
have it in Archimedes; and probably by Archimedes himself; by Nicetas the
Philosopher, upon the testimony of Scicero, and by many others. And this
opinion has, finally, been amplified, and with many Observations and
Demonstrations confirmed by Nicholaus Copernicus. And Seneca, a most eminent
Philosopher, in his Book De Cometis, advertizeth us that we ought, with great
diligence, seek for an assured knowledge, whether it be Heaven, or the Earth,
in which the Diurnal Conversion resides.

And for this cause, it would probably be prudent and profitable counsel, if
besides the Articles which concern our Salvation, and the establishment of our
Faith (against the stability of which there is no fear that any valid and solid
Doctrine can ever rise up) men would not aggregate and heap up more, without
necessity: And if it be so, it would certainly be a preposterous thing to
introduce such Articles at the request of persons who, besides that we know not
that they speak by inspiration of Divine Grace, we plainly see that there might
be wished in them the understanding which would be necessary first to enable
them to comprehend, and then to discuss the Demonstrations wherewith the
subtiler Sciences proceed in confirming such like Conclusions. Nay, more I
should say, (were it lawful to speak my judgment freely on this Argument) that
it would happily more suit with the Decorum and Majesty of those Sacred Volumes,
if care were taken that every shallow and vulgar Writer might not authorize his
Books (which are not seldom grounded upon foolish fancies) by inserting into
them Places of Holy Scripture, interpreted, or rather distorted to Senses as
remote from the right meaning of the said Scripture, as they are near to
derirision, who not without ostentation flourish out their Writings therewith.
Examples of such like abuses there might many be produced, but for this time I
will confine my self to two, not much besides these matters of Astronomy: One
of which, is that of those Pamphlets which were published against the Medicean
Planets, of which I had the fortune to make the discovery; against the
existence of which there were brought many places of Sacred Scripture: Now,
that all the World sees them to be Planets, I would gladly hear with what new
interpretations those very Antagonists do expound the Scripture, and excuse
their own simplicity. The other example is of him who but very lately has
Printed against Astronomers and Philosophers, that the Moon does not receive
its light from the Sun, but is of its own nature resplendent: which imagination
he in the close confirms, or, to say better, persuades himself that he
confirms by sundry Texts of Scripture, which he thinks cannot be reconciled
unless his opinion should be true and necessary. Nevertheless, the Moon of it
self is Tenebrose, and yet it is no less lucid than the Splendour of the Sun.

Hence it is manifest, that these kind of Authors, in regard they did not dive
into the true Sense of the Scriptures, would (in case their authority were of
any great moment) have imposed a necessity upon others to believe such
Conclusions for true as were repugnant to manifest Reason, and to Sense. Which
abuse Deus avertat, that it do not gain Countenance and Authority; for if it
should, it would in a short time be necessary to proscribe and inhibit all the
Contemplative Sciences. For being that by nature the number of such as are very
unapt to understand perfectly both the Sacred Scriptures, and the other
Sciences is much greater than that of the skillful and intelligent; those of
the first sort superficially running over the Scriptures, would arrogate to
themselves an Authority of decreeing upon all the Questions in Nature, by
virtue of some Word by them misunderstood, and produced by the Sacred Penmen
to another purpose: Nor would the small number of the Intelligent be able to
repress the furious Torrent of those men, who would find so many the more
followers, in that the gaining the reputation of Wise men without pains or
Study, is far more grateful to humane Nature, than the consuming our selves
with restless contemplations about the most painful Arts. Therefore we ought
to return infinite thanks to Almighty God, who of his Goodness freeth us from
this fear, in that he depriveth such kind of persons of all Authority and,
reposeth the Consulting, Resolving, and Decreeing upon so important
Determinations in the extraordinary Wisdom and Candor of most Sacred Fathers;
and in the Supreme Authority of those, who being guided by his Holy Spirit,
cannot but determine Holily: So ordering things, that of the levity of those
other men, there is no account made. This kind of men are those, as I believe,
against whom, not without Reason, Grave, and Holy Writers do so much inveigh;
and of whom in particular S. Hierom writes: Hanc (Scilicet Sacram cripturam)
garrula anus, banc delirus sen^x, hanc Sophista verbosus, hanc universi
praesumunt, lacerant, docent, antequant dis^ant. Alij, adducto supercilio,
grandia verba trutinantes, ^nter mulierculas, de Sacris Lit^eris
Philosophantur. Alij discunt, proh pudor! a faeminis, quod viros docens, and ne
parum hoc sit, quadam facilitate verborum, (...) audacia, edisserunt aliis,
quod ipsi non intelligunt. Taceo de mei similibus, qui si forte ad Scripturas
Sanctas, post siculares litteras venerint, and sermon composito, aurem populi
mulserint; quicquid dixerint, hoc legem Des putant: nec scire dignantur, quid
Prophetae, quid Apostoli senserint, sed ad sensum suum, incongrua apta^^
^^stimonia: Quasi grande sit, and non vit ^ocissimum docendi genus, depravare
sententias, and ad voluntatem suam Scripturamtrahere repugnantem. Jeron. Epist.
ad Paul. 103.
This (Scilicet the Sacred Scripture) the talking old woman, the doting old
man, the talkative Sophister, all venture upon, lacerate, teach, and that
before they have learnt it. Others induced by Pride, diving into hard words,
Philosophate amongst Women, touching the Holy Scriptures. Others (Oh shameful!)
Learn of Women what they teach to Men; and, as if this were nothing, in a
certain facility of words, I may say of confidence, expound to others what they
understand not themselves. I forbear to speak of those of my own Profession,
who, if after Humane Learning they chance to attain to the Holy Scriptures, and
tickle the ears of the people with affected and Studied expressions, they
affirm that all they say, is to be entertained as the Law of God; and not
stooping to learn what the Prophets and Apostles held, they force incongruous
testimonies to their own Sense: As if it were the genuine, and not corrupt way
of teaching to deprave Sentences, and Wrest the Scripture according to their
own singular and contradictory humor.

I will not rank among these same secular Writers any Theologists, whom I
repute to be men of profound Learning, and sober Manners, and therefore hold
them in great esteem and veneration: Yet I cannot deny but that I have a
certain scruple in my mind, and consequently am desirous to have it removed,
whilst I hear that they pretend to a power of constraining others by Authority
of the Scriptures to follow that opinion in Natural Disputations, which they
think most agrees with the Texts of that: Holding withal, that they are not
bound to answer the Reasons and Experiments on the contrary: In Explication and
Confirmation of which their judgment they say, That Theology being the Queen
of all the Sciences, she ought not upon any account to stoop to accomodate her
self to the Positions of the rest, less worthy, and inferior to her: But that
they ought to refer themselves to her (as to their Supreme Emperess) and change
and alter their Conclusions, according to Theological Statutes and Decrees. And
they further add, That if in the inferior Science there should be any
Conclusion certain by virtue of Demonstrations or experiments, to which there
is found in Scripture another Conclusion repugnant; the very Professors of that
Science ought of themselves to resolve their Demonstrations, and discover the
falacies of their own Experiments, without repairing to Theologers and
Textuaries, it not suiting (as has been said) with the dignity of Theology to
stoop to the investigation of the falacies of the inferior Sciences: But it
suffices her, to determine the truth of the Conclusion with her absolute
Authority, and by her infallibility. And then the Natural Conclusions in which
they say that we ought to bide by the mere Authority of the Scripture, without
glossing, or expounding it to Senses different from the Words, they affirm to
be Those of which the Scripture speaks always in the same manner; and the
Holy Fathers all receive, and expound to the same Sense.

Now as to these Determinations, I have had occasion to consider some
particulars (which I will purpose) for that I was made cautious thereof, by
those who understand more than I in these businesses, and to whose judgments I
always submit my self. And first I could say, that there might possibly a
certain kind of equivocation interpose, in that they do not distinguish the
preheminences whereby Sacred Theology meriteth the Title of Queen. For it
might be called so, either because that that which is taught by all the other
Sciences, is found to be comprised and demonstrated in it, but with more
excellent means, and with more sublime Learning; in like manner, as for
example; The Rules of measuring of Land, and of Accountantship are much more
excellently contained in the Arithmatick and Geometry of Euclid, than in the
Practices of Surveyours and Accomptants: Or because the Subject about which
Theology is conversant, excels in Dignity all the other Subjects, that are
the Matters of other Sciences: As also because its Documents are divulged by
nobler ways. That the Title and Authority of Queen belongs to Theology in
the first Sense, I think that no Theologers will affirm, that have but any
in-sight into the other Sciences; of which there are none (as I believe) that
will say that Geometry, Astronomy Music, and Medicine are much more
excellently and exactly contained in the Sacred Volumes, than in the Books of
Archimedes, in Ptolomy, in Boethius, and in Galen. Therefore it is probable that
the Regal Pre-eminence is given her upon the second account, namely, By reason
of the Subject, and the admirable communicating of the Divine Revelations in
those Conclusions which by other means could not be conceived by men, and which
chiefly concern the acquist of eternal Beatitude. Now if Theology being
conversant about the loftiest Divine Contemplation, and residing for Dignity in
the Regal Throne of the Sciences, (whereby she becomes of highest Authority)
descends not to the more mean and humble Speculations of the inferior
Sciences: Nay; (as has been declared above) has no regard to them, as not
concerning Beatitude; the Professors thereof ought not to arrogate to
themselves the Authority to determine of Controversies in those Professions
which have been neither practiced nor studied by them. For this would be as if
an Absolute Prince, knowing that he might freely command, and cause himself to
be obeyed, should (being neither Physician nor Architect) undertake to
administer Medicines, and erect Buildings after his own fashion, to the great
endangering af the lives of the poor Patients, and to the manifest destruction
of the Edifices.

Again, to command the very Professors of Astronomy, that they of themselves
see to the confuting of their own Observations and Demonstrations, as those
that can be no other but Falacies and Sophismes, is to enjoin a thing beyond
all possibility of doing: For it is not only to command them that they do not
see that which they see, and that they do not understand that which they
understand; but that in seeking, they find the contrary of that which they
happen to meet with. Therefore before that this is to be done, it would be
necessary that they were showed the way how to make the Powers of the Soul to
command one another, and the inferior the Superior; so that the imagination and
will might, and should believe contrary to what the Intellect understands: I
still mean in Propositions purely Natural, and which are not de Fide, and not
in the Supernatural, which are de Fide.

I would entreat these Wise and Prudent Fathers, that they would withal
diligence consider the difference that is between Opinable and Demonstrative
Doctrines: To the end, that well weighing in their minds with what force
Necessary Illations oblige, they might the better ascertain themselves, that it
is not in the Power of the Professors of Demonstrative Sciences to change their
Opinions at pleasure, and apply themselves one while to one side, and another
while to another; and that there is a great difference between commanding a
Methametitian or a Philosopher, and the disposing of a Lawyer or a Merchant;
and that the demonstrated Conclusions touching the things of Nature and of the
Heavens cannot be changed with the same facility, as the Opinions are touching
what is lawful or not in a Contract, Bargain, or Bill of Exchange. This
difference was well understood by the Learned and Holy Fathers, as their having
been at great pains to confute many Arguments, or to say better, many
Philosophical Fallacies, does prove unto us; and as may expressly be read in
some of them, and particularly we have in S. Augustine the following words: Hoc
indubitanter tenendum est, ut quicquid Sapientes hujus Mundi, de Natura rerum
veraciter demonstrare potuerint, ostendamus, nostris libris non esse
contrarium: quicquid autem illi, in suis voluminibus, contrarium Sacris
Litteris docent, sine ulla dubitatione credamus, id falsissimum esse, and
quoquo modo possumus, etiam ostendamus; atque ita teneamus Fidem Domini nostri,
in quasunt absconditi omnes thesauri Sapientiae, ut neque falsae Philosophiae
loquacitate seducamur, neque simulata Religionis superstitione terreamur.
This is to be held for an undoubted Truth, That we may be confident, that
whatever the Sages of this World have demonstrated touching Natural Points, is
no ways contrary to our Bibles: And in case they teach any thing in their
Books that is contrary to the Holy Scriptures, we may without any scruple
conclude it to be most false; And according to our ability let us make the same
appear: And let us so keep the Faith of our Lord, in whom are hidden all the
Treasures of Wisdom; that we be neither seduced with the Loquacity of false
Philosophy, nor scared by the superstition of a counterfeit Religion.

From which words, I conceive that I may collect this Doctrine, namely, That in
the Books of the Wise of this World, there are contained some Natural truths
that are solidly demonstrated, and others again that are barely taught; and
that as to the first sort, it is the Office of wise Divines to show that they
are not contrary to the Sacred Scriptures; As to the rest, taught, but not
necessarily demonstrated, if they shall contain any thing contrary to the
Sacred Leaves, it ought to be held undoubtedly false, and such it ought by all
possible ways to be demonstrated.

If therefore Natural Conclusions veritably demonstrated, Genesis as Litteram. lib
I. Cap.25.
are not to be postposed to the Places of Scripture, but that it ought to be
shown how those Places do not interfer with the said Conclusions; then its
necessary before a Physical Proposition be condemned, to show that it is not
necessarily demonstrated; and this is to be done not by them who hold it to be
true, but by those who judge it to be false. And this seems very reasonable,
and agreeable to Nature; that is to say, that they may much more easily find
the fallacies in a Discourse, who believe it to be false, than those who
account it true and concludent. Nay, in this particular it will come to pass,
that the followers of this opinion, the more that they shall turn over Books,
examine the Arguments, repeat the Observations, and compare the Experiments,
the more shall they be confirmed in this belief. And your Highness knows what
happened to the late Mathematick Professor in the University of Pisa, Who
betook himself in his old age to look into the Doctrine of Copernicus, with
hope that he might be able solidly to confute it (for that he held it so far to
be false, as that he had never studied it) but it was his fortune, that as soon
as he had understood the grounds, proceedings, and demonstrations of
Copernicus, he found himself to be persuaded, and of an opposer became his most
confident Defender. I might also nominate other P. Clavius the Jesuit.
Mathematicians, who being moved by my last Discoveries, have confessed it
necessary to change the formerly received Constitution of the World, it not
being able by any means to subsist any longer.

If for the banishing this Opinion and Hypothesis out of the World, it were
enough to stop the mouth of one alone, as it may be they persuade themselves
who measuring others judgments by their own, think it impossible that this
Doctrine should be able to subsist and find any followers, this would be very
easy to be done, but the business stands otherwise: For to execute such a
determination, it would be necessary to prohibit not only the Book of
Copernicus, and the Writings of the other Authors that follow the same opinion,
but to interdict the whole Science of Astronomy; and which is more, to forbid
men looking toward Heaven, that so they might not see Mars and Venus at one
time near to the Earth, and at another farther off, with such a difference that
the latter is found to be forty times, and the former sixty times bigger in
surface at one time than at another; and to the end, that the same Venus might
not be discovered to be one while round, and another while forked, with most
subtle horns: and many other sensible Observations which can never by any
means be reconciled to the Ptolomaick Systeme, but are unanswerable Arguments
for the Copernican.

But the prohibiting of Copernicus his Book, now that by many new Observations,
and by the application of many of the Learned to the reading of him, his
Hypothesis and Doctrine does every day appear to be more true, having admitted
and tolerated it for so many years, whilst he was less followed, studied, and
confirmed, would seem, in my judgment, an affront to Truth, and a seeking the
more to obscure and suppress her, the more she shows her self clear and
perspicuous.

The abolishing and censuring, not of the whole Book, but only so much of it
as concerns this particular opinion of the Earths Mobility, would, if I mistake
not, be a greater detriment to souls, it being an occasion of great scandal, to
see a Position proved, and to see it afterward made an Heresy to believe it.

The prohibiting of the whole Science, what other would it be but an open
contempt of an hundred Texts of the Holy Scriptures, which teach us, That the
Glory, and the Greatness of Almighty God is admirably discerned in all his
Works, and divinely read in the Open Book of Heaven? Nor let any one think that
the Lecture of the lofty conceits that are written in those Leaves finish in
only beholding the Splendor of the Sun, and of the Stars, and their rising and
setting, (which is the term to which the eyes of bruits and of the vulgar
reach) but there are couched in them mysteries so profound, and conceits so
sublime, that the vigils, labors, and studies of an hundred and an hundred
acute Wits, have not yet been able thoroughly to dive into them after the
continual disquisition of some thousands of years. But let the Unlearned
believe, that like as that which their eyes discern in beholding the aspect of
a humane body, is very little in comparison of the stupendous Artifices, which
an exquisite and curious Anatomist or Philosopher finds in the same when he is
searching for the use of so many Muscles, Tendons, Nerves, and Bones; and
examining the Offices of the Heart, and of the other principal Members, seeking
the seat of the vital Faculties, noting and observing the admirable structures
of the Instruments of the Senses, and, without ever making an end of satisfying
his curiosity and wonder, contemplating the Receptacles of the Imagination, of
the Memory, and of the Understanding; So that which represents it self to the
mere sight, is as nothing in comparison and proportion to the strange Wonders,
that by help of long and accurate Observations the Wit of Learned Men
discovers in Heaven. And this is the substance of what I had to consider
touching this particular.

In the next place, as to those that add, That those Natural Propositions of
which the Scripture still speaks in one constant tenor, and which the Fathers
all unanimously receive in the same sense, ought to be accepted according to
the naked and literal sense of the Words, without glosses and interpretations;
and received and held for most certain and true; and that consequently the
Mobility of the Sun, and Stability of the Earth, as being such, are de Fide to
be held for true, and the contrary opinion to be deemed Heretical. I shall
propose to consideration, in the first place, That of Natural Propositions,
some there are, of which all humane Science and Discourse can furnish us only
with some plausible opinion, and probable conjecture rather than with any
certain and demonstrative knowledge; as for example, whether the Stars be
animated: Others there are, of which we have, or may confidently believe that
we may have, by Experiments, long Observations, and Necessary Demonstrations an
undubitable assurance; as for instance, whether the Earth and Heavens move, or
not; whether the Heavens are Spherical, or otherwise. As to the first sort, I
doubt not in the least, that if humane Ratiocinations cannot reach them, and
that consequently there is no Science to be had of them, but only an Opinion or
Belief, we ought fully and absolutely to comply with the mere Verbal Sense of
the Scripture: But as to the other Positions, I should think (as has been said
above) That we are first to ascertain our selves of the fact it self, which
will assist us in finding out the true senses of the Scriptures; which shall
most certainly be found to accord with the fact demonstrated, for two truths
can never contradict each other. And this I take to be a Doctrine orthodox and
undoubted, for that I find it written in Saint Augustine, who speaking to our
point of the Figure of Heaven, and what it is to be believed to be, in regard
that which Astronomers affirm concerning it seems to be, contrary to the
Scripture, (they holding it to be rotund, and the Scripture calling it as it
were a Pelle, a Skin in the Original, but in our Bibles a Curtain.
Curtain, determines that we are not at all to regard that the Scripture
contradicts Astronomers; but to believe its Authority, if that which they say
shall be false, and founded only on the conjectures of humane infirmity: but if
that which which they affirm be proved by indubitable Reasons, this Holy Father
does not say, that the Astronomers are to be enjoined, that they themselves
resolving and renouncing their Demonstrations do declare their Conclusion to be
false, but says, that it ought to be demonstrated, That what is said in
Scripture of a Curtain is not contrary to their true Demonstrations. These are
his words: Sed ait aliquis, quomodo non est contrarium iis, qui figuram
Sphaerae Coelo tribunt, quod scriptum est in Libris Nostris, Qui extendit
Coelum, sicut pellem? Sit sane contraritem, si falsum est, quod illi dicunt:
hoc enim verum est, qu^d Divina dicit authoritas, potius quam illud, qu^d
humana infirmitas conjicit. Sea si forte illud talibus illi documentis probare
potuerint, ut dubitari inde non debeat; demonstrandum est, hoc quod apud nos
est de Pelle dictum, veris illis rationibus non esse contrarium.
But some object; How does it appear, that the saying in our Bibles, Who
stretches out the Heaven as a Curtain, makes not against those who maintain
the Heavens to be in figure of a Sphere? Let it be so, if that be false which
they affirm: For that is truth which is spoke by Divine Authority, rather than
that which proceeds from Humane Infirmity. But if peradventure they should be
able to prove their Position by such Experiments as puts it out of question, it
is to be proved, that what is said in Scripture concerning a Curtain, does in
no wise contradict their manifest Reasons.

He proceeds afterward to admonish us that we ought to be no less careful
and observant in reconciling a Text of Scripture with a demonstrated Natural
Proposition, than with another Text of Scripture which should sound to a
contrary Sense. Nay methinks that the circumspection of this Saint is worthy to
be admired and imitated, who even in obscure Conclusions, and of which we may
assure our selves that we can have no knowledge or Science by humane
demonstration, is very reserved in determining what is to be believed, as we
see by that which he writes in the end of his second Book, de Genesi ad
Litteram, speaking, whether the Stars are to be believed animate: Quod licet in
praesenti facile non possit comprehendi; arbitror tamen, in processu
tractandarum Scripturarum, opportuniora loca posse occurrere, ubi nobis de hac
re, secundum Sancta auctoritatis Litteras, etsi non ost endere certum aliquid,
tamen credere licebit. Nunc autem, servata semper modoratione piae gravitatis,
nihil credere dear obscura temere debemus; ne forte, quod postea veritas
patefecerit, quamvis Libris Sanctis, sive Testamenti veteris, sive, novi nullo
modo esse possit aeeversum, tamen propter amorem nostri erroris, oderimus.
Which particular, although (at present) it cannot easily be comprehended, yet
I suppose in our farther Progress of handling the Scriptures, we may meet with
some more pertinent places, upon which it will be permitted us (if not to
determine any thing for certain, yet) to suggest somewhat concerning this
matter, according to the dictates of Sacred Authority. But now, the moderation
of pious gravity being always observed, we ought to receive nothing rashly in
a doubtful point, least perhaps we reject that out of respect to our Error,
which hereafter Truth may discover, to be in no wise repugnant to the Sacred
Volumes of the Old and New Testament.

By this and other places (if I deceive not my self) the intent of the Holy
Fathers appears to be, That in Natural questions, and which are not de Fide,
it is first to be considered, whether they be indubitably demonstrated, or by
sensible Experiments known; or whether such a knowledge and demonstration is to
be had; which having obtained, and it being the gift of God, it ought to be
applied to find out the true Senses of the Sacred Pages in those places, which
in appearance might seem to speak to a contrary meaning: Which will
unquestionably be pierced into by Prudent Divines, together with the occasions
that moved the Holy Ghost, Id. D Aug. in Genesis ad Litteram, lib. 1. in sine.
(for our exercise, or for some other reason to me unknown) to veil it self
sometimes under words of different significations.

As to the other point, Of our regarding the Primary Scope of those Sacred
Volumes, I cannot think that their having spoken always in the same tenor,
does any thing at all disturb this Rule. For if it has been the Scope of the
Scripture by way of condescension to the capacity of the Vulgar at any time, to
express a Proposition in words, that bear a sense different from the Essence of
the said Proposition; why might it not have observed the same, and for the same
respect, as often as it had occasion to speak of the same thing? Nay I
conceive, that to have done otherwise, would but have increased the confusion,
and diminished the credit that these Sacred Records ought to have amongst the
Common People.

Again, that touching the Rest and Motion of the Sun and Earth, it was
necessary, for accommodation* to Popular Capacity, to assert that which the
Litteral sense of the Scripture imports, experience plainly proves: For that
even to our days people far less rude, do continue in the same Opinion upon
Reasons, that if they were well weighed and examined, would be found to be
extreme trivial, and upon Experiments, either wholly false, or altogether
besides the purpose. Nor is it worth while to go about to remove them from it,
they being incapable of the contrary Reasons that depend upon too exquisite
Observations, and too subtle Demonstrations, grounded upon Abstractions, which,
for the comprehending of them, require too strong an Imagination. Whereupon,
although that the Stability of Heaveu, and Motion of the Earth should be more
than certain and demonstrated to the Wise; yet nevertheless it would be
necessary, for the conservation of credit amongst the Vulgar, to affirm the
contrary: For that of a thousand ordinary men, that come to be questioned
concerning these particulars, its probab^e that there will not be found so much
as one that will not answer that he thinks, and so certainly he does, that
the Sun moves, and the Earth stands still. But yet none ought to take this
common Popular Assent to be any Argument of the truth of that which is
affirmed: For if we should examine these very men touching the grounds and
motives by which they are induced to believe in that manner; and on the other
side should hear what Experiments and Demonstrations persuade those few others
to believe the contrary, we should find these latter to be moved by most solid
Reasons, and the former by simple appearances, and vain and ridiculous
occurrences. That therefore it was necessary to assign Motion to the Sun, and
Rest to the earth, lest the shallow capacity of the Vulgar should be
confounded, amused, and rendered obstinate and contumacious, in giving credit to
the principal Articles, and which are absolutely de fide, it is sufficiently
obvious. And if it was necessary so to do, it is not at all to be wondered at,
that it was with extraordinary Wisdom so done, in the Divine Scriptures.

But I will allege further, That not only a respect to the Incapacity of the
Vulgar, but the current Opinion of those times made the Sacred Writers, in the
points that were not necessary to salvation, to accommodate themselves more to
the received use, than to the true Essence of things: Of which S. Hierom
treating, writes: Quasi non mu^tain Scripturis Sanctis dicantur juxta
opinionem illius temporis quo gesta referunt, and non juxta quod rei veritas
contenebat. D. Hiero. in c. 28. Jerem.
As if many things were not spoken in the Holy Scriptures according to the
judgment of those times in which they were acted, and not according to that
which truth contained. And elsewhere, the same Saint: Consuetudinis
Scripturarum est, ut opinionem multarum rerum sic narret Historicus, quomodo eo
tempore ab omnibus credebatur. In cap. 13. Matthew.
It is the custom for the Penmen of Scripture, to deliver their Judgments in
many things, according to the common received opinion that their times had of
them. And D. Thomas, in cap. 26. Job. v. 7.
S. Thomas Aquinas in Job upon those words, Qui extendit Aquilonem super
vacuum, and appendit Terram super nihilum: Notes that the Scripture calls
that space Vacuum and Nihilum, which imbraceth and invironeth the Earth, and
which we know, not to be empty, bat filled with Air, Nevertheless, says he,
The Scripture to comply with the apprehension of the Vulgar, who think that in
that same space there is nothing, calls it Vacuum and Nihilum. Here the words
of S. Thomas, Quod de superiori Haemisphaerio Coeli nihil nobis apparet, nisi
spatium aere plenum, quod vulgares homines reputant Vacuum; loquitur enim
secundum existimationem vulgarium hominum, prout est mos in Sacra Scriptura.
Now from this Place I think one may very Logically argue, That the Sacred
Scripture for the same respect had much more reason to phrase the Sun moveable,
and the Earth immovable. For if we should try the capacity of the Common
People, we should find them much more unapt to be persuaded of the stability of
the Sun, and Motion of the Earth, than that the space that environeth it is
full of Air. Therefore if the sacred Authors, in this point, which had not so
much difficulty to be beat into the capacity of the Vulgar, have
notwithstanding forborne to attempt persuading them unto it, it must needs seem
very reasonable that in other Propositions much more abstruse they have
observed the same style. Nay Copernicus himself, knowing what power an
antiquated custom and way of conceiving things become familiar to us from our
infancy has in our Fancy, that he might not increase confusion and difficulty
in our apprehensions, after he had first demonstrated, That the Motions which
appear to us to belong to the Sun, or to the Firmament, are really in the
Earth; in proceeding afterward to reduce them into Tables, and to apply them
to use, he calls them the Motions of the Sun, and of the Heaven that is above
the Planets; expressly terming them the Rising and Setting of the Sun and Stars;
and mutations in the obliquity of the Zodiac, and variations in the points of
the Equinoxes, the Middle Motion, Anomalia, Prosthaphaeresis of the Sun; and
such other things; which do in reality belong to the Earth: But because being
joined to it, and consequently having a share in every of its motions, we
cannot immediately discern them in her, but are forced to refer them to the
Celestial Bodies in which they appear; therefore we call them as if they were
made there, where they seem to us to be made. Whence it is to be noted how
nenessary it is to accommodate our discourse to our old and accustomed manner
of understanding.

That, in the next place, the common consent of Fathers, in receiving a Natural
Proposition of Scripture, all in the same sense ought to Authorize it so far,
as to make it become a matter of Faith to believe it to be Namely, according to
the Litteral Sense.
so, I should think that it ought at most to be understood of those Conclusions
only, which have been by the said Fathers discussed, and sifted with all
possible diligence, and debated on the one side, and on the other, and all
things in the end concurring to disprove the one, and prove the other. But the
Mobility of the Earth, and Stability of the Sun, are not of this kind; For,
that the said Opinion was in those times totally buried, and never brought
amongst the Questions of the Schools, and not considered, much less followed by
any one: So that it is to be believed that it never so much as entered into the
thought of the Fathers to dispute it, the Places of Scripture, their own
Opinion, and the assent of men having all concurred in the same judgment,
without the contradiction of any one, so far as we can find.

Besides, it is not enough to say that the Fathers all admit the stability of
the Earth, etc. Therefore to believe it is a matter of Faith: But its necessary
to prove that they have condemned the contrary Opinion: For I may affirm and
bide by this, That their not having occasion to make satisfaction upon the
same, and to discuss it, has made them to omit and admit it, only as current,
but not as resolved and proved. And I think I have very good Reason for what I
say; For either the Fathers did make reflection upon this Conclusion as
controverted, or not: If not, then they could determine nothing concerning it,
no not in their private thoughts; and their incogitance does not oblige us to
receive those Precepts which they have not, so much as in their intentions
enjoined. But if they did reflect and consider thereon, they would long since
have condemned it, if they had judged it erroneous; which we do not find that
they have done. Nay, after that some Divines have began to consider it, we find
that they have not deemed it erroneous; as we read in the Commentaries of
Didacus a Stunica upon Job, in Cap. 9, v. 6. on the words, Qui commovet Terram
de loco suo, etc. Where he at large discourses upon the Copernican Hypothesis,
and concludes, That the Mobility of the Earth, is not contrary to Scripture.

Withal, I may justly question the truth of that determination, namely, That
the Church enjoyneth us to hold such like Natural Conclusions as matters of
Faith, only because they bear the stamp of an unanimous Interpretation of all
the Fathers: And I do suppose that it may possibly be, that those who hold in
this manner, might possibly have gone about in favor of their own Opinion, to
have amplified the Decretal of the Councils; which I cannot find in this case
to prohibit any other, save only, Perverting to Senses contrary to that of
Holy Church, or of the concurrent consent of Fathers, those places, and those
only that do pertain either to Faith or Manners, or concern our edification in
the Doctrine of Christianity: And thus speaks the Council of Trent. Council.
Trid. Sess. 4.
Sess. 4. But the Mobility or Stability of the Earth, or of the Sun, are not
matters of Faith, nor contrary to Manners, nor is there any one, that for the
stablishing of this Opinion, will pervert places of Scripture in opposition to
the Holy Church, or to the Fathers: Nay, Those who have writ of this Doctrine,
did never make use of Texts of Scripture; that they might leave it still in the
breasts of Grave and Prudent Divines to interpret the said Places, according to
their true meaning.

And how far the Decrees of Councills do comply with the Holy Fathers in these
particulars, may be sufficiently manifest, in that they are so far from
enjoining to receive such like Natural Conclusions for matters of Faith, or
from censuring the contrary Opinions as erroneous; that rather respecting the
Primitive and primary intention of the Holy Church, they do adjudge it
unprofitable to be busied in examining the truth thereof. Let your Highness be
pleased to hear once again what S. Augustine answers to to those Brethren who
put the Question, Whether it be true that Heaven moves, or stands still? His
resp^ndeo, mul^um subuliter, and laboriosis rationibus, ista perquiri, ut vere
percipiatur, utrum ita, an non ita sit: quibus ineundis atque tractandis, nec
mihi jam, tem^us est, nec illis esse debet, quos ad salutem suam, Sanctae
Ecclesiae necessariam utilitatem cupimus informari.
To these I answer, That Points of this nature require a curious and profound
examination, that it may truly appear whether they be true or false; a work
inconsistent with my leisure to undertake or go through with, nor is it any way
necessary for those, whom we desire to inform of things that more nearly
concern their own salvation and The Churches Benefit.

But yet although in Natural Propositions we were to take the resolution of
condemning or admitting them from Texts of Scripture unanimously expounded in
the same Sense by all the Fathers, yet do I not see how this Rule can hold in
our Case; for that upon the same Places we read several Expositions in the
Fathers; Non solemn, sed Primum Mobile immotum constitisse: Dionis. Areop.
Dionysius Areopagita saying, That the Primum Mobile, and not the Sun stand
still. Saint Augustine is of the same Opinion; Omnia corpora Caelestia, immota
substitisse:
All the Celestial Bodies were immovable. And with them concurreth Abulensis.
But which is more, amongst the Jewish Authors (whom Josephus applauds) some
have held, Solemn revera non substitisse immotum, sed probrevi tempore, intra
quod Israelitae, hosts suos fuderunt, id ita visumesse.
That The Sun did not really stand still, but seemed so to do, during the short
time in which Israel gave the overthrow to their Enemies. So for the Miracle in
the time of Hezekiah, Paulus Burgensis is of opinion that it was not wrought on
the Sun, but on the Dial. But that, in short, it is necessary to Gloss and
Interpret the words of the Text in Joshua, when ever the Worlds Systeme is in
dispute, Isa. Cap. 38.
I shall show anon. Now finally, granting to these Gentlemen more than they
demand, to wit, That we are wholly to acquiesce in the judgment of Judicious
Divines, and that in regard that such a particular Disquisition is not found to
have been made by the Ancient Fathers, it may be undertaken by the Sages of our
Age, who having first heard the Experiments, Observations, Reasons, and
Demonstrations of Philosophers and Astronomers, on the one side, and on the
other (seeing that the Controversy is about Natural Problems, and Necessary
Dilemma's, and which cannot possibly be otherwise than in one of the two
manners in controversy) they may with competent certainty determine what
Divine Inspirations shall dictate to them. But that without minutely examining
and discussing all the Reasons on both sides; and without ever coming to any
certainty of the truth of the Case, such a Resolution should be taken, Is not
to be hoped from those who do not stick to hazard the Majesty and Dignity of
the Sacred Scripture, in defending the reputation of their vain Fancies; Nor to
be feared from those who make it their whole business, to examine with all
intensness, what the Grounds of this Doctrine are; and that only in an Holy
Zeal for Truth, the Sacred Scriptures, and for the Majesty, Dignity, and
Authority, in which every Christian should endeavor to have them maintained.
Which Dignity, who sees not that it is with greater Zeal desired and procured
by those who, absolutely submitting themselves to the Holy Church, desire, not
that this, or that opinion may be prohibited, but only that such things may be
proposed to consideration, as may the more ascertain her in the safest choice,
than by those who being blinded by their particular Interest, or stimulated by
malicious suggestions, preach that she should, without more ado, thunder out
Curses, for that she had power so to do: Not considering that all that may be
done is not always convenient to be done. The Holy Fathers of old were not of
this opinion, but rather knowing of how great prejudice, and how much against
the primary intent of the Catholic Church, it would be to go about from Texts
of Scripture to decide Natural Conclusions, touching which, either Experiments
or necessary Demonstrations, might in time to come evince the contrary, of that
which the naked sense of the Words sounds, they have not only proceeded with
great circumspection, but have left the following Precepts for the instruction
of others. In rebus obscuris, at que a nostris oculis remotissimis, siqua inde
scripta etiam divina legerimus, quae possint salva fide, qua^imbuimur, aliis
atque aliis parere sententiis, in nullam earum nos praecipiti affirmatione ita
projiciamus, ut si forte diligentius discussa veritas ea^ recte labefactaverit,
corr^amus: non pro sententia Divinarum Scripturarum, sed pro nostra ita
dimicantes, ut eam velimus Scriturarum esse, quae nostra est, cum potius came
quae Scripturarum est, nostram esse velle debeamus. Divus Augustine. in Genesis ad
Litteram, lib. 2. c. 18. and seq.
In points obscure and remote from our Sight, if we come to read any thing out
of Sacred Writ, that, with a Salvo to the Faith that we have imbued, may
correspond with several constructions, let us not so far throw our selves
upon any of them with a precipitous obstinacy, as that if, perhaps the Truth
being more diligently searched into, it should justly fall to the ground, we
might fall together with it: and so show that we contend not for the sense of
Divine Scriptures, but our own, in that we would have that which is our own to
be the sense of Scriptures, when as we should rather desire the Scriptures
meaning to be ours.

He goes on, and a little after teaches us, that no Proposition can be
against the Faith, unless first it be demonstrated false; saying, Tam diu non
est extra fidem, donec Veritate certissima refellatur. Quod si factum fuerit,
non hoc habebat Divina Scriptura, sed hoc senserat humana Ignorantia. Ibid.
It Is not all the while contrary to Faith, until it be disproved by most certain
Truth, which if it should so be, the Holy Scripture affirmed it not, but Humane
Ignorance supposed it. Whereby we see that the senses which we impose on Texts
of Scripture, would be false, when ever they should disagree with Truths
demonstrated. And therefore we ought, by help of demonstrated Truth, to seek
the undoubted sense of Scripture: and not according to the sound of the words,
that may seem true to our weakness, to go about, as it were, to force Nature,
and to deny Experiments and Necessary Demonstrations.

Let Your Highness be pleased to observe farther, with how great
circumspection this Holy Man proceeds, before he affirms any Interpretation
of Scripture to be sure, and in such wise certain, as that it need not fear the
encounter of any difficulty that may procure it disturbance, for not contenting
himself that some sense of Scripture agrees with some Demonstration, he
subjoynes. Si autem hoc verum esse vera ratio demonstraverit, adhuc incertum
erit, utrum hoc in illis verbis Sanctorum Librorum, Scriptor sentiri voluerit,
an aliquid aliud non minus verum. Quod s^caetra contextio sermonis non hoc eum
voluisse probaverit, non ideo falsum erit aliud, quod ipse intelligi voluit,
sed and verum, and quod utilius cognoscatur.
But if right Reason shall demonstrate this to be true, yet is it questionable
whether in these words of Sacred Scripture the Penman would have this to be
understood, or somewhat else, no less true. And in case the Context of his
Words shall prove that he intended not this, yet will not that which he would
have to be understood be therefore false, but most true, aad that which is more
profitable to be known.

But that which increases our wonder concerning the circumspection, wherewith
this Pious Author proceeds, is, that not trusting to his observing, that both
Demonstrative Reasons, and the sense that the words of Scripture and the rest
of the Context both precedent and subsequent, do conspire to prove the same
thing, he adds the following words.

Si autem contextio Scripturae, hoc voluiss intelligi Scriptorem, non
repugnaverit, adhuc restabit quaerere, utrum and aliud non potuerit.
But if the Context do not hold forth any thing that may disprove this to be
the Authors Sense, it yet remains to enquire, Whether the other may not be
intended also. And not yet resolving to accept of one Sense, or reject another,
but thinking that he could never use sufficient caution, he proceeds: Quod si
and aliud potuisse invenerimus, incertum erit; quidnam eorum ille voluerit: aut
utrumque voluisse non inconvenienter creditur, si utriusque sententiae certa
circumstantia sufragatur.
But if so be we find that the other may be also meant, it will be doubted
which of them he would have to stand; or which in probability he may be thought
to aim at, if the true circumstances on both sides be weighed. And lastly,
intending to render a Reason of this his Rule, by showing us to what perils
those men expose the Scriptures, and the Church; who, more respecting the
support of their own errors, than the Scriptures Dignity, would stretch its
Authority beyond the Bounds which it prescribes to it self, he subjoyns the
ensuing words, which of themselves alone might suffice to repress and moderate
the excessive liberty, which some think that they may assume to themselves:
Plerumque enim accidit, ut aliquid de Terra, de Celo, de ceteris hujus mundi
elementis, de motu, conversione, vel etiam magnitudine and intervallis Syderum,
de certis defectibus Solis, and Lunae, de eircuitibus annorum and temporum; de
Naturis animalium, fruticum, lapidum, atque hujusmodi ceteris, etiam non
Christianus ita noverit, ut cirtissima ratione vel experientia teneat. Turpe
autem est nimis and perniciosum, ac maxim cavendum, ut Christianum de his
rebus quasi secundum Christianas litteras loquentem, ita delirare quilibet
infidelis audiat, ut, quem admodum dicitur, toto Caelo errare conspiciens,
risu^tenere vix possit: and non tam molestum est, quod errans homo derideretur,
sed quod auctores nostri, ab it is qui foris sunt, talia sensisse creduntur, and
cum magno exitio corim, de quorum salute satagimus, tanquam indocti
reprehenduntur atque respuuntur. Cum enim quemquam de numero Christianorum
eai^re, quam ipsi optime norunt, deprehenderint, and vanam sententiam suam de
nostris libris asserent; quo pacto illis Libris credituri sunt, de
Resurrectione Mortuorum, and de spe vitae eternae, Regnoque Celorum; quando de
his rebus quas jam experiri, vel indubitatis rationibus percipere potuerunt,
fallaciter putaverint esse conscriptos.
For it many times falls out, that a Christian may not so fully understand a
Point concerning the Earth, Heaven, and the rest of this Worlds Elements; the
Motion, Conversion, Magnitude, and Distances of the Stars, the certain defects
of the Sun and Moon, the Revolutions of Years and Times, the Nature of Animals,
Fruits, Stones, and other things of like nature, as to defend the same by right
Reason, or make it out by Experiments. But its too great an absurdity, yea most
pernicious, and chiefly to be avoided, to let an Infidel find a Christian so
stupid, that he should argue these matters; as if they were according to
Christian Doctrine; and make him (as the Proverb says) scarce able to contain
his laughter, seeing him so far from the Mark. Nor is the matter so much that
one in an error should be laughed at, but that our Authors should be thought by
them that are without, to be of the same Opinion, and to the great prejudice of
those, whose salvation we wait for, sensured and rejected as unlearned. For
when they shall confute any one of the Christians in that matter, which they
themselves thorovvly understand, and shall thereupon express their light esteem
of our Books; how shall these Volumes be believed touching the Resurrection of
the Dead, the Hope of eternal Life, and the Kingdom of Heaven; when, as to
these Points which admit of present Demonstration, or undoubted Reasons, they
conceive them to be falsely written.

And how much the truly Wise and Prudent Fathers are displeased with these men,
who in defense of Propositions which they do not understand, do apply, and in a
certain sense pawn Texts of Scripture, and afterward go on to increase their
first Error, by producing other places less understood than the former. The
same Saint declares in the expressions following: Quid enim molestiae,
tristiaeque ingerant prudentibus fratribus, tenerar^j praesumpiores, satis dici
non potest, cum, si quando de falsa and prava opinione sua reprehendi and
convinci caeperint, ab iis qui nostrorum librorum auctoritate, and apertissima
falsitate dixerunt, eosdnm libros Sanctos, unde id probent, proferre conantur;
vel etiam memoriter, quae ad testimonium v^lere arbitrantur, multa inde verba
pronunciant, non intelligentes, neque quae loquuntur, neque de quibus affirmant.
What trouble and sorrow weak undertakers bring upon their knowing Brethren, is
not to be expressed; since when they begin to be told and convinced of their
false and unsound Opinion, by those who have no respect for the Authority of
our Scriptures, in defense of what through a fond Temerity, and most manifest
falsity, they have urged; they fall to citing the said Sacred Books for proof
of it, or else repeat many words by heart out of them, which they conceive to
make for their purpose; not knovving either what they say, or whereof they
affirm.

In the number of these we may, as I conceive, account those, who, being either
unwilling or unable to understand the Demonstrations and Experiments, wherewith
the Author and followers of this Opinion do confirm it, run upon all occasions
to the Scriptures, not considering that the more they cite them, and the more
they persist in affirming that they are very clear, and do admit no other
senses, save those which they force upon them, the greater injury they do to
the Dignity of them (if we allowed that their judgments were of any great
Authority) in case that the Truth coming to be manifestly known to the
contrary, should occasion any confusion, at least to those who are separated
from the Holy Church; of whom yet she is very solicitous, and like a tender
Mother, desirous to recover them again into her Lap Your Highness therefore may
see how praeposterously those Persons proceed, who in Natural Disputations do
range Texts of Scripture in the Front for their Arguments; and such Texts too
many times, as are but superficially understood by them.

But if these men do verily think, and absolutely believe that they have the
true sense of Such a particular place of Scripture, it must needs follow of
consequence, that they do likewise hold for, certain, that they have found the
absolute truth of that Natural Conclusion, which they intend to dispute: And
that withal, they do know that they have a great advantage of their Adversary,
whose Lot it is to defend the part that is false; in regard that he who
maintains the Truth, may have many sensible experiments, and many necessary
Demonstrations on his side; whereas his Antagonist can make use of no other
than deceitful appearances, Paralogisms and Sophisms. Now if they keeping
within natural bounds, and producing no other Weapons but those of Philosophy,
pretend however, to have so much advantage of their Enemy; why do they
afterward in coming to engage, presently betake themselves to a Weapon
inevitable and dreadful to terrify their Opponent with the sole beholding of
it? But if I may speak the truth, I believe that they are the first that are
affrighted, and that perceiving themselves unable to bear up against the
assaults of theit Adversary, go about to find out ways how to keep them far
enough off, forbidding unto them the use of the Reason which the Divine Bounty
had vouchsafed them, and abusing the most equitable Authority of sacred
Scripture, which rightly understood and applied, can never, according to the
common Maxim of Divines, oppose the Manifest Experiments, or Necessary
Demonstrations. But these men's running to the Scriptures for a Cloak to their
inability to comprehend, not to say resolve the Reasons alleged against them,
ought (if I be not mistaken) to stand them in no stead: the Opinion which they
oppose having never as yet been condemned by Holy Church. So that if they would
proceed with Candor, they should either by silence confess themselves unable to
handle such like points, or first consider that it is not in the power of them
or others, If this passage seem harsh, the Reader must remember that I do but
Translate.
but only in that of the Pope, and of Sacred Councils to censure a Position to
be Erroneous: But that it is left to their freedom to dispute concerning its
falsity. And thereupon, knowing that it is impossible that a Proposition should
at the same time be True and Heretical; they ought, I say, to employ themselves
in that work which is most proper to them, namely, in demonstrating the falsity
thereof: whereby they may see how needless the prohibiting of it is, its
falsehood being once discovered, for that none would follow it: or the
Prohibition would be safe, and without all danger of Scandal. Therefore first
let these men apply themselves to examine the Arguments of Copernicus and
others; and leave the condemning of them for Erroneous and Heretical to whom it
belongs: But yet let them not hope ever to find such rash and precipitous
Determinations in the Wary and Holy Fathers, or in the absolute Wisdom of him
that cannot err, as those into which they suffer themselves to be hurried by
some particular Affection or Interest of their own. In these and such other
Positions, which are not directly de Fide, certainly no man doubts but His
Holiness has always an absolute power of Admitting or Condemning them, but it
is not in the power of any Creature to make them to be true or false, otherwise
than of their own nature, and de facto they are.

Therefore it is in my judgment more discretion to assure us first of the
necessary and immutable Truth of the Fact, (over which none has power) than
without that certainty by condemning one part to deprive ones self of that
authority of freedom to elect, making those Determinations to become
necessary, which at present are indifferent and arbitrary, and rest in the will
of Supreme Authority. And in a word, if it be not possible that a Conclusion
should be declared Heretical, whilst we are not certain, but that it may be
true, their pains are in vain who pretend to condemn the Mobility of the Earth
and Stability of the Sun, unless they have first demonstrated it to be
impossible and false.

It remains now, that we consider whether it be true, that the Place in
Joshuah may be taken without altering the pure signification of the words: and
how it can be that the Sun, obeying the command of Joshuah, which was, That it
should stand still, the day might thereupon be much lengthened. Which
business, if the Celestial Motions be taken according to the Ptolomaick
Systeme, can never any ways happen, for that the Sun moving through the
Ecliptic, according to the order of the Signs, which is from East to West
(which is that which makes Day and Night) it is a thing manifest, that the Sun
ceasing its true and proper Motion, the day would become shorter and not
longer; and that on the contrary, the way to lengthen it would be to hasten and
velocitate the Suns motion; insomuch that to cause the Sun to stay above the
Horizon for some time, in one and the same place, without declining toward the
West, it would be necessary to accelerate its motion in such a manner as that
it might seem equal to that of the Primum Mobile, which would be an
accelerating it about three hundred and sixty times more than ordinary. If
therefore Joshuah had had an intention that his words should be taken in their
pure and proper signification, he would have bid the Sun to have accelerated
its Motion so, that the Rapture of the Primum Mobile might not carry it to the
West: but because his words were heard by people which happily knew no other
Celestial Motion, save this grand and common one, from East to West, stooping
to their Capacity, and having no intention to teach them the Constitution of
the Spheres, but only that they should perceive the greatness of the Miracle
wrought, in the lengthening of the Day, he spoke according to their
apprehension. Possibly this Consideration moved Dionysius Areopagita to say
that in this Miracle the Primum Mobile stood still, and this stopping, all the
Celestial Spheres did of consequence stay: of which opinion is S. Augustine
himself, and Abulensis at large confirms it. Yea, that Joshua's intention
was, that the whole Systeme of the Celestial Spheres should stand still, is
collected from the command he gave at the same time to the Moon, although that
it had nothing to do in the lengthening of the day; and under the injunction
laid upon the Moon, we are to understand the Orbs of all the other Planets,
passed over in silence here, as also in all other places of the Sacred
Scriptures; the intention of which, was not to teach us the Astronomical
Sciences. I suppose therefore, (if I be not deceived) that it is very plain,
that if we allow the Ptolemaick Systeme, we must of necessity interpret the
words to some sense different from their strict signification. Which
Interpretation (being admonished by the most useful precepts of S. Augustine)
I will not affirm to be of necessity this abovementioned, since that some
other man may happily think of some other more proper, and more agreeable Sense.

But now, if this same passage may be understood in the Copernican Systeme, to
agree better with what we read in Joshuah, with the help of another Observation
by me newly shown in the Body of the Sun; I will propound it to consideration,
speaking always with those safe Reserves; That I am not so affectionate to my
own inventions, as to prefer them before those of other men, and to believe
that better and more agreeable to the intention of the Sacred Volumes cannot be
produced.

Supposing therefore in the first place, that in the Miracle of Joshuah, the
whole Systeme of the Celestial Revolutions stood still, according to the
judgment of the aforementioned Authors: And this is the rather to be admitted, to
the end, that by the staying of one alone, all the Constitutions might not be
confounded, and a great disorder needlessly introduced in the whole course of
Nature: I come in the second place to consider how the Solar Body, although
stable in one constant place, does nevertheless revolve in it self, making an
entire Conversion in the space of a Month, or thereabouts; as I conceive I have
solidly demonstrated in my Letters Delle Machie Solari: Which motion we
sensibly see to be in the upper part of its Globe, inclined toward the South;
and thence toward the lower part, to incline toward the North, just in the
same manner as all the other Orbs of the Planets do. Thirdly, If we respect the
Nobility of the Sun, and his being the Fountain of Light, by which, (as I
necessarily demonstrate) not only the Moon and Earth, but all the other
Planets (all in the same manner dark of themselves) become illuminated; I
conceive that it will be no unlogicall Illation to say, That it, as the Grand
Minister of Nature, and in a certain sense the Soul and Heart of the World,
infuseth into the other Bodies which environ it; not only Light, but Motion
also; by revolving (...) On its own Axis.
in it self: So that in the same manner that the motion of the Heart of an
Animal ceasing, all the other motions of its Members would cease; so, the
Conversion of the Sun ceasing, (...) Conversions of all the Planets would stand
still. And though I could produce the testimonies of many grave Writers to
prove the admirable power and influence of the Sun, I will content my self with
one sole place of Holy Dionisius Areopagita in his Book de Divinis Nominibus;
who thus writes of the Sun: Lux ejus colligit, convertitque ad se omnia, quae
videntur, quae moventur, quae illustrantur, quae calescunt, and uno nomine ea,
quae ab ejus splendore continentur. Itaque Sol (...) dicitur, quod omnia
congreget, colligatque dispersa.
His Light gathers and converts all things to himself, which are seen, moved,
illustrated, wax hot, and (in a word) those things which are preserved by his
splendour: Wherefore the Sun is called (...), for that he collecteth and
gathers together all things dispersed. And a little after of the Sun again he
adds; Si enim Sol hic quem videmus, eorum quae sub sensum cadunt, essentias and
qualitates, quaeque multa sint ac dissimiles, tamen ipse qui unus est,
aequaliterque lumen fundit, renovat, alit, tuetur, perficit, dividit,
conjungit, fovet, faecunda reddit, auget, mutat, firmat edit, movet, vitaliaque
facit omnia: and unaquaque res hujus universitatis, pro captu suo, unius atque
ejusdem Solis est particeps, causasque multorum, quae participent, in se
aequabiliter anticipatas habet, certe majori raticne, etc.
If this Sun which we see, as touching the Essences and Qualities of those
things which fall within our Sense, being very many and different; yet if he
who is one, and equally bestovves his Light, does renew, nourish, defend,
perfect, divide, conjoyn, cherish, make fruitful, increase, change, fix,
produce, move, and fashion all living creatures: And every thing in this
Universe at this Pleasure, is partaker of one and the same Sun; and the causes
of many things which participate of him, are equally auticipated in him:
Certainly by greater reason; etc. The Sun therefore being the Fountain of Light
and, Principle of Motion, God intending, that at the Command of Joshua, all the
Worlds Systeme, should continue many hours in the same state, it suffices to
make the Sun stand still, upon whose stay (all the other Conversions ceasing)
the Earth, the Moon, the Sun did abide in the same Constitution as before, as
likewise all the other Planets: Nor in all that time did the Day decline
toward Night, but it was miraculously prolonged: And in this manner, upon the
standing still of the Sun, without altering, or in the least disturbing the
other Aspects and mutual Positions of the Stars, the Day might be lengthned on
Earth; which exactly agrees with the Litteral sense of the Sacred Text.

But that of which, if I be not mistaken, we are to make no small account, is,
That by help of this Copernican Hypothesis, we have the Litteral, apert, and
Natural Sense of another particular that we read of in the same Miracle; which
is, That the Sun stood still in Medio Caeli: Upon which passage grave Divines
raise many questions, in regard it seems very probable, That when Joshuah
desired the lengthning of the Day, the Sun was near setting, and not in the
Meridian; for if it had been in the Meridian, it being then about the Summer
Solstice, and consequently the days being at the longest, it does not seem
likely that it was necessary to pray for the lengthning of the day, to
prosecute Victory in a Battle, the space of seven hours and more, which
remained to Night, being sufficient for that purpose. Upon which Grave Divines
have been induced to think that the Sun was near setting: And so the words
themselves seem to sound, saying, Ne movearis Sol, ne movearis. For if it had
been in the Meridian, either it had been needless to have asked a Mircale, or
it would have been sufficient to have only praid for some retardment. Of this
opinion is Cajetan, to which subscribeth Magaglianes, confirming it by saying,
that Joshua had that very day done so many other things before his commanding
the Sun, as were not possibly to be dispatched in half a day. Whereupon they
are forced to read the Words in Medio Coeli (to confess the truth) with a
little harshness, saying that they import no more than this: That the Sun stood
still, being in our Hemisphere, Solemn stetisse, dum adhuc in Hemisphaerio
nostro, supra scilicet Horizontem existeret. Cajetan in loco.
that is, above the Horizon. But (if I do not err) we shall avoid that and all
other harsh expositions, if according to the Copernican Systeme we place the
Sun in the midst, that is, in the Center of the Celestial Orbs, and of the
Planetary Conversions, as it is most requisite to do. For supposing any hour of
the day (either Noon, or any other, as you shall please nearer to the Evening)
the Day was lengthened, and all the Celestial Revolutions stayed by the Suns
standing still, In the midst, that is, in the Center of Heaven, where it
resides: A Sense so much the more accomodate to the Letter (besides what has
been said already) in that, if the Text had desired to have affirmed the Suns
Rest to have been caused at Noonday, the proper expression of it had been to
say, It stood still at Noonday, or in the Meridian Circle, and not in the
midst of Heaven: In regard that the true and only Middle of a Spherical Body
(as is Heaven) is the Center.

Again, as to other places of Scripture, which seem contrary to this position,
I do not doubt but that if it were acknowledged for True and Demonstrated those
very Divines who so long as they repute it false, hold those places incapable
of Expositions that agree with it would find such Interpretations for them, as
should very well suit therewith; and especially if to the knowledge of Divine
Learning they would but add some knowledge of the Astronomical Sciences: And
as at present, whilst they deem it false they think they meet in Scripture only
with such places as make against it, if they shall but once have entertained
another conceit thereof, they would meet peradventure as many others that
accord with it, and happily would judge, that the Holy Church does very appositly
teach, That God placed the Sun in the Center of Heaven, and that thereupon by
revolving it in it self, after the manner of a Wheel, He contributed the
ordinary Courses to the Moon and other Erratick Stars, whilst that she Sings,
Coeli Deus sanctissime,
Qui lucidum Centrum Poli,
Candore pingis igneo,
Augens decoro lumine,
Quarto die, qui flammeam
Solis rotam constituens
Lunae ministras ordinem,
Vagosque cursus Syderum.


They might say, that the Name of Firmament very well agrees, ad literam, to
the Starry Sphere, and to all that which is above the Planetary Conversions;
which according to this Hypothesis is altogether firm and immovable. Ad
litteram (the Earth moving circularly) they might understand its Poles, where
it is said, Nec dum Terram fecerat, and flumina, and Cardines Orbis Terrae,
Which Cardines or Or Poles.
Hinges seem to be ascribed to the Earth in vain, if it be not to turn upon
them.

FINIS.
AN ABSTRACT OF THE Learned Treatise OF JOHANNIS KEPLERUS, The Emperors
Mathematician: ENTITLED His Introduction upon MARS:
IT must be confessed, that there are very many who are devoted to Holiness,
that dissent from the Judgment of Copernicus, fearing to give the Lie to the
Holy Ghost speaking in the Scriptures, if they should say, that the Earth
moves, and the Sun stands still. But let such consider, that since we judge of
very many, and those the most principal things by the Sense of Seeing, it is
impossible that we should alienate our Speech from this Sense of our Eyes.
Therefore many things daily occur, of which we speak according to the Sense of
Sight, when as we certainly know that the things themselves are otherwise. An
Example whereof we have in that Verse of Virgil; Provehimur portu, Terraeque
urbesque recedunt.

So when we come forth of the narrow straight of some Valley, we say that a
large Field discovers it self. So Christ to Peter, Duc in altum; [Lanch forth
into the Deep, or on high,] as if the Sea were higher than its Shores; For so
it seems to the Eye, but the Optics show the cause of this fallacy. Yet
Christ uses the most received Speech, although it proceed from this delusion
of the Eyes. Thus we conceive of the Rising and Setting of the Stars, that is
to say, of their Ascension and Descension; when at the same time that we affirm
the Sun rises, others say, that it goes down. See my Optices Astronomiae,
cap. 10. fol. 327. So in like manner, the Ptolomaicks affirm, that the Planets
stand still, when for some days together they seem to be fixed, although they
believe them at that very time to be moved in a direct line, either downwards
to, or upwards from the Earth. Thus the Writers of all Nations use the word
Solstitium, and yet they deny that the Sun does really stand still. Likewise
there will never any man be so devoted to Copernicus, but he will say, the Sun
enters into Cancer and Leo, although he grants that the Earth enters
Capricorn or Aquarius: And so in other cases of the like nature. But now the
Sacred Scriptures, speaking to men of vulgar matters (in which they were not
intended to instruct men) after the manner of men, that so they might be
understood by men, do use such Expressions as are granted by all, thereby to
insinuate other things more Mysterious and Divine. What wonder is it then, if
the Scripture speaks according to man's apprehension, at such time when the
Truth of things does dissent from the Conception that all men, whether Learned
or Unlearned have of them? Who knows not that it is a Poetical allusion, Psalm.
19. where, whilst under the similitude of the Sun, the Course of the Gospel, as
also the Peregrination of our Lord Christ in this World, undertaken for our
sakes, is described, The Sun is said to come forth of his Tabernacle of the
Horizon, as a Bridegroom out of his Chamber, rejoicing as a Giant to run a
Race? Which Virgil thus imitates; Tithono croceum linquens Aurora cubile: For
the first Poets were amongst the Jews. The Psalmist knew that the Sun went not
forth of the Horizon, as out of its Tabernacle, and yet it seems to the Eye
so to do: Nor did he believe, that the Sun moved, for that it appeared to his
sight so to do. And yet he says both, for that both were so to his seeming.
Neither is it to be adjudged false in either Sense: for the perception of the
Eyes has its verity, fit for the more secret purpose of the Psalmist in
shadowing forth the current passage of the Gospel, as also the Peregrination of
the Son of God. Joshua likewise mentions the Valleys on or in, which the Sun
and Moon moved, for that they appeared to him at Jordan so to do: And yet both
these Penmen may obtain their ends. David, (and with him Syracides) the
magnificence of God being made known, which caused these things to be in this
manner represented to sight, or otherwise, the mystical meaning, by means of
these Visibles being discerned: And Joshua, in that the Sun, as to his Sense of
Seeing, staid a whole day in the midst of Heaven, whereas at the same time to
others it lay hid under the Earth. But incogitant persons only look upon the
contrariety of the words, The Sun stood still, that is, The Earth stood still;
not considering that this contradiction is confined within the limits of the
Optics and Astronomy: For which cause it is not outwardly exposed to the
notice and use of men: Nor will they understand that the only thing Joshuah
prayed for, was that the Mountains might not intercept the Sun from him; which
request he expressed in words, that suited with his Ocular Sense: Besides it
had been very unseasonable at that time to think of Astronomy, or the Errors
in Sight; for if any one should have told him that the Sun could not really
move upon the Valley of Ajalon, but only in relation to Sense, would not
Joshuah have replied, that his desire was that the day might be prolonged, so
it were by any means whatsoever? In like manner would he have answered if any
one had started a question about the Suns Mobility, and the Earths Motion. But
God easily understood by Joshuahs words what he asked for, and by arresting the
Earths Motion, made the Sun in his apprehension seem to stand still. For the
sum of Joshuahs Prayer amounts to no more but this, that it might thus appear
to him, let it in the mean time be what it would of it self. For that its so
seeming, was not in vain and ridiculous, but accompanied with the desired
effect. But read the tenth Chap. of my Book, that treats of the Optic part of
Astronomy, where thou shall find the Reasons why the Sun does in this manner
seem to all men's thinking to be moved, and not the Earth; as namely, because
the Sun appears small, and the Earth bigg. Again, the Motion of the Sun is
not discerned by the eye, by reason of his seeming tardity, but by
ratiocination only; in that after some time it varieth not its proximity to
such and such Mountains. Therefore it is impossible that Reason, unless it be
first instructed, should frame to it self any other apprehension, than that the
Earth with Heavens Arch placed over it, is as it were a great House, in which,
being immovable, the Sun like a Bird flying in the Air, passes in so small a
Species out of one Climate into another. Which imagination of all Mankind
being thus, gave the first line in the Sacred Leaves: In the beginning (says
Moses) God created the Heaven and the Earth; Genesis Chp. (...) v. 1.
for that these two are most obvious to the eye. As if Moses should have said
thus to Man; This whole Mundane Fabric which thou see, lucid above, and
dark, and of a vast extent beneath, wherein thou have thy being, and with which
thou art covered, was created by God.

In another place Man is questioned; Whether he can find out the height of
Heaven above, or depth of the Earth beneath: for that each of them appears to
men of ordinary capacity, to have equally an infinite extent. And yet no man
that is in his right mind will by these words circumscribe and bound the
diligence of Astronomers, whether in demonstrating the most contemptible
Minuity of the Earth, in comparison of Heaven, or in searching out Astronomical
Distances: Since those words speak not of the Rational, but real Dimention;
which to a Humane Body, whilst confined to the Earth, and breathing in the open
Air, is altogether impossible. Read the whole 38. Chapter of Job, and compare
it with those Points which are disputed in Astronomy, and Physiologie. If any
one do allege from Psalm. 24. That Psalm. 24. 2.
The Earth is founded upon the Seas, to the end that he may thence infer some
new Principle in Philosophy, absurd to hear; as, That the Earth does float upon
the Waters; may it not truly be told him, That he ought not to meddle with the
Holy Spirit, nor to bring him with contempt into the School of Physiologie. For
the Psalmist in that place means nothing else but that which men foreknow, and
daily see by experience; namely, That the Earth (being lifted up after the
separation of the Waters) does swim between the Grand Oceans, and float about
the Sea. Nor is it strange that the expression should be the same where the
Israelites sing, Psalm. 137. 1.
That they sat on the River of Babylon; that is, by the River side. or on the
Banks of Euphrates and Tygris.

If any one receive this Reading without scruple, why not the other; that so in
those same Texts which are wont to be alleged against the Motion of the Earth,
we may in like manner turn our eyes from Natural Philosophy, to the scope and
intent of Scripture. One Generation passes away, (says Ecclesiastes) and
another Generation comes: But the Earth abides for ever. Chap. 1. v. 4, to 9.
As if Solomon did here dispute with Astronomers, and not rather put men in
mind of their Mutability; whenas the Earth, Mankindes habitation, does always
remain the same: The Suns Motion does continually return into what it was at
first: The Wind is acted in a Circle, and returns in the same manner: The
Rivers flow from their Fountains into the Sea, and return again from thence
unto their Fountains: To conclude, The Men of this Age dying, others are born
in their room; the Fable of Life is ever the same; there is nothing new under
the Sun. Here is no reference to any Physical Opinion. (...) is Moral of a
thing in it self manifest, and seen by the eyes of all, but little regarded:
It Is that therefore which Solomon does inculcate. For who knows not that the
Earth is always the same? Who sees not that the Sun dotharise from the East;
That the Rivers continually run into the Sea; That the vicissitudes of the
Winds return into their primitive State; That some men succeed others? But who
considers that the self-same Scene of Life is ever acting, by different
persons; and that nothing is new in humane affairs? Therefore Solomon
instancing in those things which all men see, does put men in mind of that
which many thoroughly know, but too slightly consider.

But the 104. Psalm is thought by some to contain a Discourse altogether
Physical, in regard it only concerns Natural Philosophy. Now God is there
said, Psalm. 104. v. 5.
To have laid the Foundations of the Earth, that it should not be removed for
ever. But here also the Psalmist is far from the Speculation of Physical
Causes: For he does wholly acquiesce in the Greatness of God, who did all
these things, and sings an Hymn to God the Maker of them, in which he runs
over the World in order, as it appeared to his eyes. And if you well consider
this Psalm, it is a Paraphrase upon the six days work of the Creation: For as
in it the three first days were spent in the Separation of Regions; the first
of Light from the exterior Darkness; the second, of the Waters from the
Waters, by the interposition of the Firmament; the third, of the Sea from Land;
when also the Earth was clothed with Herbage and Plants: And the three last
days were spent in the filling the Regions thus distinguished; the fourth, of
Heaven; the fifth, of the Seas and Air; the sixth, of the Earth: So here in
this Psalm there are so many distinct parts proportionable to the Analogy of
the six days Works. For in Verse 2. he clothes and covers the Creator with
Light (the first of Creatures, and work of the first day) as with a Garment.
The second part begins at Verse 3. and treats of the Waters above the
Heavens, the extent of Heaven and of Meteors (which the Psalmist seems to
intend by the Waters above) as namely of Clouds, Winds, Whirl-winds,
Lightnings. The third part begins at Verse 6. and does celebrate the Earth as
the foundation of all those things which he here considers. For he refers
all things to the Earth, and to those Animals which inhabit it, for that in the
judgment of Sight the two principal parts of the World are Heaven and Earth. He
therefore here observes that the Earth after so many Ages has not faltered,
tired, or decayed; when as notwithstanding no man has yet discovered upon what
it is founded. He goes not about to teach men what they do not know, but
puts them in mind of what they neglect, to wit, the Greatness and Power of
God in creating so huge a Mass so firm and steadfast. If an Astronomer should
teach that the Earth is placed among the Planets, he overthrows not what the
Psalmist here says, nor does he contradict Common Experience; for it is true
notwithstanding, that the Earth, the Structure of God its Architect, does not
decay (as our Buildings are wont to do) by age, or consume by worms, nor sway
and lean to this or that side; that the Seats and Nests of Living Creatures
are not molested; that the Mountains and Shores stand immovable against the
violence of the Winds and Waves, as they were at the beginning. But the
Psalmist adds a most Elegant Hypothesis of the Separation of the Waters from
the Continent or Main-land, and adorns it with the production of Fountains, and
the benefits that Springs and Rocks exhibit to Birds and Beasts. Nor does he
omit the apparelling the Earths Surface, mentioned by Moses amongst the works
of the third Day, but more sublimely describes it in his Case in expressions
infused from Divine Inspiration; and flourishes out the commemoration of the
many commodities which redound from that Exornation for the Nourishment and
Comfort of Man, and Shelter.
Covert of Beasts. The fourth part begins at Verse 20. celebrating the fourth
days work, viz. The Sun and Moon, but chiefly the commodiousnesse of those
things, which in their Seasons befall to all Living Creatures and to Man; this
being the subject matter of his Discourse: So that it plainly appears he
acted not the part of an Astronomer. For if he had, he would not then have
omitted to mention the five Planets, than whose moiton nothing is more
admirable, nothing more excellent, nothing that can more evidently set forth
the Wisdom of the Creator amongst the Learned. The fifth part begins, Verse
25. with the fifth Days work. And it stores the Seas with Fishes, and covers
them with Ships. The sixth part is more obscurely hinted at, Verse 28. and
alludeth to the Land-Creatures that were created the sixth day. And lastly, he
declares the goodness of God in general, who daily creates and preserves
all things? So that whatever he said of the World is in relation to Living
Creatures; He speaks of nothing but what is granted on all hands; for that it
was his intent to extol things known, and not to dive into hidden matters, but
to invite men to contemplate the Benefits that redound unto them from the works
of each of these days.

And I do also beseech my Reader, not forgetting the Divine Goodness conferred
on Mankind; the consideration of which the Psalmist does chiefly urge, that
when he returns from the Temple, and enters into the School of Astronomy, he
would with me praise and admire the Wisdom and Greatness of the Creator,
which I discover to him by a more narrow explication of the Worlds Form, the
Disquisition of Causes, and Detection of the Errors of Sight: And so he will
not only extol the Bounty of God in the preservation of Living Creatures of
all kinds, and establishment of the Earth; but even in its Motion also, which
is so strange; so admirable, he will acknowledge the Wisdom of the Creator.
But he who is so stupid as not to comprehend the Science of Astronomy, or so
weak and scrupulous as to think it an offense of Piety to adhere to Copernicus,
him I advise, that leaving the Study of Astronomy, and censuring the opinions
of Philosophers at pleasure, he betake himself to his own concerns, and that
desisting from further pursuit of these intricate Studies, he keep at home and
manure his own Ground; and with those Eyes wherewith alone he sees, being
elevated toward this to be admired Heaven, let him pour forth his whole heart
in thanks and praises to God the Creator; and assure himself that he shall
therein perform as much Worship to God, as the Astronomer, on whom God has
bestowed this Gift, that though he sees more clearly with the Eye of his
Understanding; yet whatever he has attained to, he is both able and willing to
extol his God above it.

And thus much concerning the Authority of Sacred Scripture. Now as touching
the opinions of the Saints about these Natural Points. I answer in one word,
That in Theology the weight of Authority, but in Philosophy the weight of
Reason is to be considered. Therefore Sacred was Lactantius, who denied the
Earths rotundity; Sacred was Augustine, who granted the Earth to be round, but
denied the Antipodes; Sacred is the Officium
Liturgy of our Moderns, who admit the smallness of the Earth, but deny its
Motion: But to me more sacred than all these is Truth, who with respect to the
Doctors of the Church, do demonstrate from Philosophy that the Earth is both
round, circumhabited by Antipodes, of a most contemptible smalnesse, and in a
word, that it is ranked amongst the Planets.

AN ABSTRACT OF Some passages in the Commentaries of Didacus a Stunica, OF
SALAMANCA Upon JOB: The Toledo Edition, Printed by JOHN RODERICK, Anno 1584, in
Quarto, Page 205. and seqq. on these Words, Chap. 9. Verse 6.
Who shakes the Earth out of her place, and the Pillars thereof Tremble. THe
Sacred Penman here sets down another effect whereby God shows his Almighty
Power, joined with infinite Wisdom. Which place, though it must be confessed
very difficult to understand, might be greatly cleared by the Opinion of the
Pythagorians, who hold the Earth to be moved of its own Nature, and that the
Motion of the Stars can no other way be ascertained, they being so extremely
different in tardity and velocity. Of which judgment was Philolaus, and
Heraclides Ponticus, as Plutarch relates in his Book De Placitis
Philosophorum: Who were followed by Numa Pompilius, and, which I more regard,
The Divine Plato in his old age; insomuch that he affirmed that it was most
absurd to think otherwise, as the same Plutarch tells us in his In vita ejus.
Numa. And Hypocrates in his Book De Flatibus, calls the Air (...), i. e. The
Earths Chariot. But in this our Age, Copernicus does demonstrate the courses of
the Blanets to be according to this Opinion. Nor is it to be doubted but that
the Planets Places may be more exactly and certainly assigned by his Doctrine,
than by Ptolomies Great Almogest or Systeme, or the Opinions of any others. For
its manifest, that Ptolomy could never describe either the Motion of the
Equinoxes, or assign the certain and positive beginning of the Year: the which
he ingeniously confesses in Lib. 3. De Almagest. Magnum. Chapter 2. and which he
leaves to be discovered in after times by those Astronomers, who coming into
the World much later than he, might be able to invent some way to make more
accurate observations. And although the Followers of that Learned Kings
Hypothesis.
Alphonsines and Thebith Ben Core have attempted to explain them; yet it
appears that they have done as much as nothing. For the Positions of the
Alphonsines disagree amongst themselves, as Ricius proves. And although the
Reason of Thebith be more acute, and that thereby he determined the certain
beginning of the year, (being that which Ptolomy sought for) yet it is now
clear, that the Progressions of the Equinoxes are much longer than he conceived
they could be. Moreover, the Sun is found to be much nearer to us than it was
held to be in times past, by above forty thousand That is 5000 miles; eight of
these making an Italian. or English mile of a 1000. paces every pac^ containing
5. Feet.
Stadia, or furlongs. The Cause and Reason of whose Motion, neither Ptolomy nor
any other Astrologers could ever comprehend: And yet the Reasons of these
things are most plainly explained and demonstrated by Copernicus from the
Motion of the Earth, with which he shows that all the other Phenomenon of the
Universe do more aptly accord. Which opinion of his is not in the least
contradicted by what Solomon says in Chap. 1. v. 4.
Ecclesiastes: But the Earth abides for ever. For that Text signifies no more
but this, That although the succession of Ages, and generations of Men on
Earth, be various; yet the Earth it self is still one and the same, and
continues without any sensible alteration; For the words run thus: One
Generation passes away, and another Generation comes; but the Earth abides
for ever. So that it has no coherence with its Context, The Motion of the
Earth, not against Scripture.
(as Philosophers show) if it be expounded to speak of the Earths immobility.
And although in this Chapter Ecclesiastes, and in many others, Holy Writ
ascribes Motion to the Sun, which Copernicus will have to stand fixed in the
Center of the Universe; yet it makes nothing against his Position. For the
Motion that belongs to the Earth, is by way of speech assigned to the Sun, even
by Copernicus himself, and those who are his followers, so that the Revolution
of the Earth is often by them phrased, The Revolution of the Sun. To conclude,
No place can be produced out of Holy Scripture, which so clearly speaks the
Earths Immobility, as this does its Mobility. Therefore this Text, of which we
have spoken, is easily reconciled to this Opinion. And to set forth the
Wonderful power and Wisdom of God, who can indue and actuate the Frame of the
Whole Earth (it being of a monstrous weight by Nature) with Motion, this our
Divine penman adds; And the pillars thereof tremble: As if he would teach
us, from the Doctrine laid down, that it is moved from its Foundations.

AN EPISTLE Of the Reverend Father PAOLO ANTONIO FOSCARINI, A CARMELITE;
Concerning The PYTHAGORIAN and COPERNICAN Opinion OF The Mobility of the EARTH,
AND Stability of the SUN; AND Of the New Systeme or Constituion OF THE WORLD.
IN WHICH, The Authorities of SACRED SCRIPTVRE, and ASSERTIONS of DIVINES,
commonly alleged against this Opinion, are Reconciled. WRITTEN To the most
Reverend FATHER, SEBASTIANO FANTONI, General of the Order of CARMELITES.

Englished from the Original, BY THOMAS SALVSBVRIE.

So quis indiget sapientia, postulet a Deo.

Jacobi. 1. versu. 5. Optaevi, and datus est mihi sensus.

Sapientiae 7. versu. 7. LONDON, Printed by WILLIAM LEYBOVRN, MDCLXI.

To the Most Reverend Father SEBASTIANO FANTONI, General of the Order of
CARMELITES.
IN obedience to the command of the Noble Signore Vincenzo Carraffa, a
Neapolitan, and Knight of S. John of Jerusalem, (a person, to speak the truth,
of so great Merit, that in him Nobility of Birth, Affability of Manners,
Universal knowledge of Arts and things, Piety and Virtue do all contend for
pre-eminence) I resolved with my self to undertake the Defense of the Writings
of the New, or rather Renewed, and from the Dust of Oblivion (in which it has
long lain hid) lately Revived Opinion, Of the Mobility of the Earth, and
Stability of the Sun, in times past found out first by Pythagoras, and at last
reduced into Practice by Copernicus; who likewise has deduced the Position of
the Systeme and Constitution of the World and its parts from that Hypothesis:
on which Subject I have formerly writ to You, Most Reverend Sir: But in regard
I am bound for Rome to preach there by your Command; and since this Speculation
may seem more proper for another Treatise, to wit, a Volume of Cosmography,
which I am in hand with, and which I am daily busy about, that it may come
forth in company with my Compendium of the Liberal Arts, which I have already
finished, rather than now to discuss it by it self, I thought to forbear,
imparting what I have done for the present; Yet I was desirous to give, in the
mean time, a brief account of this my Determination, and to show You, Most
Reverend Father, (to whom I owe all my endeavors, and my very self) the
Foundations on which this Opinion may be grounded, least, whilst otherwise it
is favored with much probability, it be found in reality to be extremely
repugnant (as at first sight it seems) not only to Physical Reasons, and
Common Principles received on all hands (which cannot do so much harm) but also
(which would be of far worse consequence) to many Authorities of sacred
Scripture: Upon which account many at their first looking into it, explode it
as the most fond Paradox and Monstrous Capriccio that ever was heard of. Which
thing proceeds only from an antiquated and long confirmed Custom, which has
so hardened men in, and habituated them to Vulgar, Plausible, and for that
cause by all men (as well learned as unlearned) Approved Opinions, that they
cannot be removed one step from them: So great is the force of Custom (which
not unfitly is styled a second Nature) prevailing over the whole World, that
touching things men are rather pleased with, delighted in, and desirous of
those, which, though evil and obnoxious, are by use made familiar to them, than
such, wherewith, though better, they are not accustomed and acquainted. So in
like manner, and that chiefly, in Opinions, which when once they are rooted in
the Mind, men start at, and reject all others whatsoever; not only those that
are contrary to, but even all that ever so little disagree with or vary from
theirs, as harsh to the Ear, discolored to the Eye, unpleasant to the Smell,
nauseous to the Taste, rough to the Touch. And no wonder: For Physical Truths
are ordinarily judged and considered by men, not according to their Essence,
but according to the prescript of some one whose description or definition of
them gains him Authority amongst the vulgar. Which authority nevertheless
(since it is no more than humane) ought not to be so esteemed, as that that
which does manifestly appear to the contrary, whether from better Reasons
lately found out, or from Sense it self, should for its sake be contemned and
slighted; Nor is Posterity so to be confined, but that it may, and dares, not
only proceed farther, but also bring to light better and truer Experiments than
those which have been delivered to us by the Ancients. For the Genius's of the
Ancients, as in Inventions they did not much surpass the Wits of our times; so
for the perfecting of Inventions this Age of ours seems not only to equal, but
far to excel former Ages; Knowledge, whether in the Liberal or Mechanical
Arts, daily growing to a greater height. Which Assertion might be easily
proved, were it not that in so clear a case, there would be more danger of
obscuring, than hopes of illustrating it with any farther light.

But (that I may not wholly be silent in this point) have not the several
Experiments of Moderns, in many things, stopped the mouth of Venerable
Antiquity, and proved many of their greattest and weightiest Opinions, to be
vain and false? The Doctrine of the Antipodes by many of the Ancients of
approved Wisdom and Learning was held a Paradox no less absurd than this Our
Opinion of the Earths Motion may seem to be; as likewise that of the
Habitablenesse of the Torrid Zone: Of these Opinions, the first was accounted
unpossible by many, but the latter was absolutely denied by the unanimous
consent of all: But later Authors (to the great felicity and perpetual Glory of
their Age) have, not so much by Authority, as by accurate diligence and
indefatigable study to find out the truth, proved them both to be undoubtedly
true. Thus I affirm that the Ancients were deceived, and that in too lightly
challenging Credid and Authority for their Inventions, they discovered too much
folly. Here for brevities sake I pass by many Dreams lately detected, both of
Aristotle and other of the ancient Philosophers; who in all likelihood if they
had dived into the Observations of Modern Writers, and understood their
Reasons, would, by changing their judgments, have given them the precedence,
and would have subscribed to their manifest Truth. Hereby we see that we are
not to have so high a respect for the A^tiens, that whatever they assert should
be taken upon trust, and that Faith should be given to their sayings, as if
they were Oracles and Truths sent down from Heaven. But yet (which indeed is
chiefly to be regarded in these matters) if any thing be found out that is
repugnant to Divine Authority, or to the Sacred Leaves, that were dictated by
the Holy Ghost, and by His Inspiration expounded by the Holy Doctors of the
Church, Faith is more certain, than either Sense or Reason.
in this case not only Humane reason, but even Sense it self is to submitt:
which, though by all manner of weighty Conditions and circumstances it should
hold forth any thing contrary to Divine Authority, (which indeed is so plain,
that there is no way left to evade the right understanding of it) yet is it to
be rejected; and we must conclude our selves deceived by it, and believe that
that is not true which Sense and Reason represents unto us: For, however we
judge of things, we have, both in this and all other cases, a more certain
knowledge, which proceeds from Divine Faith; as S. Peter has most excellently
expressed it: Who though with his Senses he saw, and perceived the Glory of our
Lord in his Transfiguration, and heard his words manifesting his great Power,
yet nevertheless all these things compared with the Light of Faith, he adds: 2
Pet. 1. 19.
We have also a more sure word of Prophecy, etc. Wherefore since this Opinion
of Pythagoras and Copernicus has entered upon the Stage of the World in so
strange a Dress, and at the first appearance (besides the rest) does seem to
oppose sundry Authorities of Sacred Scripture, it has (this being granted)
been justly rejected of all men as a mere absurdity.

But yet because the common Systeme of the World devised by Ptolomy has
hitherto satisfied none of the Learned, hereupon a suspicion is risen up
amongst all, even Ptolemy's followers themselves, that there must be some other
Systeme, which is more true than this of Ptolemy; For although the Phenomenon
of Celestial Bodies may seem to be generally resolved by this Hypothesis, yet
they are found to be involved with many difficulties, and referred to many
devices; as namely, of Orbs of sundry Forms and Figures, Epicicles, Equations,
Differences, Excentricks, and innumerable such like fancies and Chymaera's
which savor of the Ens Rationis of Logicians, rather than of any Realem
Essentiam. Of which kind is that of the Rapid Motion, than which I find not
any thing that can be more weakly grounded, and more easily controverted and
disproved: And such is that conceit of the Or Primum Mobile.
Heaven void of Stars, moving the inferior Heavens or Orbs: All which are
introduced upon occasion of the variety of the Motions of Celestial Bodies,
which seemed impossible, by any other way, to be reduced to any certain and
determinate Rule. So that the Assertors of that common Opinion, freely confess,
that in describing the Worlds Systeme, they cannot as yet discover, or teach
the true Hypothesis thereof: But that their endeavors are only to find out,
amongst many things, what is most agreeable with truth, and may, upon better
and more accomodate Reasons, answer the Celestial Phenomenon.

Since that, the Telescope (an Optic Invention) has been found out, by help
of which, many remarkable things in the Heavens, most worthy to be known, and
till then unthought of, were discovered by manifest sensation; as for instance,
That the Moon is Mountainous; Venus and Saturn Tricorporeal; and Jupiter
Quadricorporeal: Likewise that in the Via Lactea, in the Pleiades, and in the
Stars called Nobulosae there are many Stars, and those of the greatest
Magnitude which are by turns adjacent to one another; and in the end it has
discovered to us, new fixed Stars, new planets, and new Worlds. And by this
same Instrument it appears very probable, that Venus and Mercury do not move
properly about the Earth, but rather about the Sun; and that the Moon alone
moves about the Earth. What therefore can be inferred from hence, but that the
Sun does stand immovable in the Center, and that the Earth, with the other
Celestial Orbs, is circumvolved about it? Wherefore by this and many other
Reasons it appears, That the Opinion of Pythagoras and Copernicus does not
disagree with Astronomical and Cosmographical Principles; yea, that it carries
with it a great likelihood and probability of Truth: Whereas amongst the so
many several Opinions, that deviate from the common Systeme, and devise others,
such as were those of Plato, Calippus, Eudoxus; and since them of Averroe,
Cardan de rerum va^iet. Lib. 1. Cap. 1.
Cardanus, Fracastorius, and others both Ancient and Modern, there is not one
found that is more facile, more regularly ahd determinately, accommodated to
the Phenomenon and Motions of the Heavens, without Epicycles, Excentrix,
Homocentricks Deferents, and the supputation of the Rapid Motion. And this
Hypothesis has been asserted for true, not only by Pythagoras, and, after
him, by Copernicus, but by many famous men, as namely, Heraclitus, and
Ecphantus, Pythagoreans, all the Disciples of that Sect, Miceta of Syracuse,
Martianus Capella, and many more. Amongst whom, those (as we have said) that
have attempted the finding out of New Systemes (for they refused both this of
Pythagoras, and that of Ptolemy) are numberless: who yet notwithstanding
allowed this Opinion of Pythagoras to carry with it much probability, and
indirectly confirmed it; inasmuch as that they rejected the common one as
imperfect, defective, and attended with many contradictions and difficulties.
Amongst these may be numbered Father P. Clavius in ultima suor. Operum editione.
Clavius, a most learned Jesuit; who, although he refutes the Systeme of
Pythagoras, yet acknowledges the Levity of the common Systeme, and he
ingeniously confesses, that for the removal of difficulties, in which the
common Systeme will not serve the turn, Astronomers are forced to enquire after
another Systeme, to the discovery of which, he does very earnestly exhort them.

Now can there a better or more commodious Hypothesis be devised, than this of
Copernicus,? For this Cause many Modern Authors are induced to approve of, and
follow it: but with much haesitancy, and fear, in regard that it seems in
their Opinion so to contradict the Holy Scriptures, as that it cannot possibly
be reconciled to them. Which is the Reason that this Opinion has been long
suppressed, and is now entertained by men in a modest manner, ad as it were with
a veiled Face; according to that advice of the Poet: Judicium populi nunquam
contempseris unus,
Ne nullis placeas, dum vis contemnere multos.


Upon consideration of which, (out of my very great love toward the Sciences,
and my ardent desire to see the increase and perfection of them, and the Light
of Truth freed from all Errors and Obscurities) I began to argue with my self
touching this Point after this manner: This Opinion of the Pythagoreans is
either true, or false; If false, it ought not to be mentioned, and deserves not
to be divulged: If true, it matters not, though it contradict all, as well
Philosophers as Astronomers: And though for its establishment and reducement to
use a new Philosophy and Astronomy, (founded upon new Principles and Hypothese)
should be constituted: For the Authority of Sacred Scripture will not oppose
it; neither does one Truth contradict another. If therefore the Opinion of
Pythagoras be true, without doubt God has disposed and dictated the words of
of Holy Writ in such a manner, that they may admit an apt sense and
reconciliation with that Hypothesis. Being moved by these Reasons, and the
probability of the said Opinion, I thought good to try whether Texts of Sacred
Scripture might be expounded according to Theological and Physical Principles,
and might be reconciled to it, so that (in regard that hitherto it has been
held probable) it may in after times, coming without scruple to be acknowledged
for true, advance it self, and appear in public with an uncovered Face,
without any man's prohibition, and may lawfully and freely hold a Sacred
intelligence with Holy Truth, so earnestly cove^ed and commended by good Men.
Which design, having hitherto been undertaken by none that I know, The Author
first Theologically d^fende^h the ^arths M^bility, approved by ^ary of the
Moderns.
will, I am persuaded, be very acceptable to the Studious of these Learnings,
especially to the most Learned Galilaeo Galilaei, chief Mathematician to the
most Serene Grand Duke of Tuscany, and John Kepler, chief Mathematician to his
Sacred and invincible Majesty, the Emperor, and to all that Illustrious, and
much to be commended Accademy of the Lynceans; whom, if I mistake not, are all
of this Opinion. Although I doubt not but they, and many other Learned Men
might easily have found out these or the like Reconciliations of Scriptural
expressions; to whom nevertheless I have thought fit (in respect of that
profession which I have undertaken, upon the faith of my soul, and the
propensity that I have toward Truth) to offer that of the Poet, Nullius
addictus jurare in verba Magistri.

And in testimony of my esteem to them and all the Learned, to communicate
these my thoughts; confidently assuring my self that they will accept them,
with a Candor equal to that wherewith I have written them.

Therefore to come to the business: All Authorities of Divine Writ which seem
to oppose this Opinion, are reducible to six Classes: The first is of those
that affirm the Earth to stand still, and not to move: as Psalm. 92. He framed
the round World so sure, that it cannot be moved: Also Psalm. 104. Who laid the
Foundations of the Earth, that it should not be removed for ever: And
Ecclesiastes 1. But the Earth abides for ever: And others of the like sense.

The second is of those which attest the Sun to move, and Revolve about the
Earth; as Psalm. 19. Or In Sole posuit tabernaculum suum, according to the
Translation our Author follows.
In them has he set a Tabernacle for the Sun, which comes forth as a
Bridegroom out of his chamber, and rejoices as a Giant to run his Course. It
comes forth from the uttermost part of the Heaven, and runs about unto the
end of it again; and there is nothing hid from the heat thereof. And
Ecclesiast. 1. The Sun rises, and the Sun goes down, and hastes to the place
where he arose: it goes toward the South, and turns about unto the North.
Whereupon the Suns Retrogradation is mentioned as a Miracle, Isaiah 38. The Sun
returned ten degrees. And Ecclesiasticus 48. In his time the Sun went backward,
and lengthened the life of the King. And for this reason it is related for a
Miracle, in the Book of Joshuah, that at the Prayers of that great Captain the
Sun stood still, its motion being forbidden it, by him: Josh. 10. Sun stand
thou still upon Gibeon. Now if the Sun should stand still, and the Earth move
about it, its station at that time was no Miracle; and if Joshuah had intended,
that the light of the day should have been prolonged by the Suns splendor, he
would not have said, Sun stand thou still, but rather Earth stand thou still.

The third Classis is of those Authorities which say, that Heaven is above, and
the Earth beneath; of which sort is that place of Joel, chap. 2. cited by S.
Peter, in Acts. 2. I will show wonders in Heaven above, and signs in the Earth
beneath, with others of the like purport. Hereupon Christ at his Incarnation is
said to come down from Heaven; and after his Resurrection to have ascended up
into heaven. But if the Earth should move about the Sun, it would be, as one
may say, in Heaven, and consequently would rather be above Heaven than beneath
it. And this is confirmed; For that the Opinion which places the Sun in the
Center, does likewise place Mercury above the Sun, and Venus above Mercury; and
the Earth above Venus, together with the Moon, which revolves about the Earth,
and therefore the Earth, together with the Moon, is placed in the third Heaven.
If therefore in Spherical Bodies, In Sphericall Bodies, Deorsum is the Center,
and Sursum the Circumference.
as in the World, beneath signifies no more than to be near to the center, and
above, than to approach the Circumference, it must needs follow, that for
making good of Theological Positions concerning the Ascension and Descension of
Christ, the Earth is to be placed in the center, and the Sun, with the other
Heavens in the Circumference; and not according to Copernicus, whose Hypothesis
inverts this Order: with which one cannot see how the true Ascension and
Descension can be consistent.

The fourth Classis is of those Authorities which make Hell to be in the Center
of the World, which is the Common Opinion of Divines, and confirmed by this
Reason, That since Hell (taken in its strict denomination) ought to be in the
lowest part of the World, and since that in a Sphere there is no part lower
then the Center, Hell shall be, as it were, in the Center of the World, which
being of a Spherical Figure, it must follow, that Hell is either in the Sun
(forasmuch as it is supposed by this Hypothesis to be in the Center of the
World) or else supposing that Hell is in the Center of the Earth, Hell is in
the center of the Earth, not of the World.
if the Earth should move about the Sun, it would necessarily ensue, that Hell,
together with the Earth, is in Heaven, and with it revolveth about the third
Heaven; than which nothing more absurd can be said or imagined.

The fifth Classis, Heaven and Eart^ are always (...) opposed to each other.
is of those Authorities which always oppose Heaven to the Earth, and so again
the Earth to Heaven; as if there were the same relation betwixt them, with that
of the Center to the Circumference, and of the Circumference to the Center. But
if the Earth were in Heaven, it should be on one side thereof, and would not
stand in the Middle, and consequently there would be no such relation betwixt
them; which nevertheless do, not only in Sacred Writ, but even in Common
Speech, ever and every where answer to each other with a mutual Opposition.
Whence that of Genes. 1. In the beginning God created the Heaven and the Earth:
and Psalm. 115. The Heaven, even the Heavens are the Lords; but the Earth has
he given to the Children of men^: and our Savior in that Prayer which he
prescribes to us, Matthew. 6. Thy will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven: and
S. Paul, 1 Corinthians. 15. The first man is of the Earth, earthy; the second man
is of Heaven, heavenly: and Coloss. 1. By him were all things created that are
in Heaven, and that are in Earth: and again, Having made peace through the
Blood of his Cross for all things, whether they be things in Earth or things
in Heaven: and Chap. 3. Set your affections on things above, not on things on
the Earth; with innumerable other such like places. Since therefore these two
Bodies are always mutually opposed to each other, and Heaven, without all
doubt, refers to the Circumference, it must of necessity follow, that the
Earth is to be adjudged the place of the Center.

The sixth and last Classis is of those Authorities, which (being rather of
Fathers and Divines, than of the Sacred Scripture) say, That the Sun, after the
day of Judgment shall stand immovable in the East, After the day of Judgment
the Earth shall stand immovable.
and the Moon in the West. Which Station, if the Pythagorick Opinion hold true,
ought rather to be ascribed to the Earth, than to the Sun; for if it be true,
that the Earth does now move about the Sun, it is necessary that after the day
of Judgment it should stand immovable. And truth is, if it must subsist
without motion in one constant place, there is no reason why it should rather
stand in one site of that Place than in another, or why it should rather turn
one part of it than another to the Sun, if so be that every of its parts
without distinction, which i^ destitute of the Suns light, cannot choose but be
dismal, and much worse affected than that part which is illuminated. Hence also
would arise many other absurdities besides these.

These are the Classes, etc. from which great assaults are made against the
structure of the Pythagorick Systeme; yet by that time I shall have first laid
down six Maxims or Principles, as impregnable Bulwarks erected against them,
it will be easy to batter them, and to defend the Hypothesis of Pythagoras
from being attaqued by them. Which before I propound, I do pro^ess (with that
Humility and Modesty which becomes a Christian, and a person in Religious
Orders) that I do with reverence submit what I am about to speak to the
Judgment of Holy Church. Nor have I undertaken to write these things out of any
inducements of Temerity, or Ambition, but out of Charity and a Desire to be
auxiliary to my neighbor in his inquisition after Truth. And there is nothing
in all this Controversy maintained by me (that expect to be better instructed
by those who profess these Studies) which I shall not retract, if any persons
shall by solid Reasons and reiterated Experiments, prove some other Hypothesis
to be more probable; but yet, until such time as they shall decide the Point, I
shall labor all I can for its support.

My first and chiefest Maxim is this; When any thing is attributed in Holy
Writ, to God, or to a Creature, that's not beseeming to, or incommensurate with
them, it must of necessity be received and expounded one, or more of the four
following ways; First, it may be said to agree with them Metaphorically, and
Proportionally, or by Similitude. Secondly, According to our manner of
Considering, Apprehending, Conceiving, Understanding, Knowing, etc. Thirdly,
according to the Opinion of the Vulgar, and the Common way of Speaking: to
which Vulgar Speech the Holy Ghost does very often with much study accomodate
it self. Fourthly, In respect of our selves, and for that he makes himself like
unto us. Of each of these ways there are these examples: God does not walk,
since he is Infinite and Immovable; He has no Bodily Members, since he is a
Pure Act; and consequently is void of all Passion of Mind; and yet in Sacred
Scripture, Genesis 3. verse. 8. it is said, He walked in the cool of the day: and
Job 22. verse. 14. it is said, He walks in the Circa Cardines Coeli.
Circuit of Heaven: and in many other places coming, departing, making have is
ascribed to God; and likewise Bodily parts, as Eyes, Ears, Lips, Face, Voice,
Countenance, Hands, Feet, Bow^^, Garments, Arms; as also many Passions, such as
Anger, Sorrow, Repentance, and the like. What shall we say therefore? Without
doubt such like Attributes agree with God (to use the Schoolmens words
Metaphorically, Proportionally, and by Similitude: And touching Passions, it
may be said, that God condescendeth to represent himself after that manner: as
for instance, The Lord is angry; i. e. He reveals himself as one that is
angry: He grieved; i. e. He reveals himself, as one that is sorrowful: It
repented him that he had made man; i. e. He seemed as one that repented. And
indeed all these things are Comparative ad nos, and in respect of us. So God is
said to be in Heaven, to move in time, to show himself, to hide himself, to
observe and mark our steps; to seek us, to stand at the door, to knock at the
door; not that he can be contained in a bodily place, nor that he is really
moved, nor in time; nor that humane manners or customs can agree with him,
save only according to our manner of Apprehension: This Conception of ours
orderly distinguishes these Attributes in him one from another, when,
notwithstanding, they are one and the same with him: This Apprehension of ours
divides also his actions into several times, which, nevertheless, for the
most part, are produced in one and the same instant: And this, to conclude,
always apprehends those things with some defect, which, notwithstanding are
in God most perfect. For this reas^n does the Sacred Scripture express it self
according to the Vulgar Opinion, whilst it ascribes to the Earth Ends and
Foundations, which yet it has not; to the Sea a Depth not to be fathomed; to
Death (which is a Privation, and consequently a Nonentity) it appropriates
Actions, Motion, Passions, and other such like Accidents, of all which it is
deprived, as also Epithites and Adjuncts, which really cannot suit with it: Is
not the bitterness of Death past? 1 Samuel 15. 32. Let death come upon them,
Psalm 6. He has prepared the Instruments of Death, Psalm. 7. 14. Thou raisest me
from the gates of Death, Psalm. 84. In the midst of the shadow of Death, Psalm.
23. Love is strong as Death, Cant. 8. 9. The Firstborn of Death. Job 18. 13.
Destruction and Death say, etc. Job 28. 22. And who knows not that the whole
History of the rich Glutton does consist of the like phrases of Vulgar Speech?
Luke 16.
So Ecclesiasticus, Chap. 27. verse. 11. The godly man abides in wisdom, as
the Sun; but a fool changes as the Moon; and yet the Moon according to the
real truth of the matter no ways changes, but abides the same for ever, as
Astronomers demonstrate, one half thereof remaining always lucid, and the
other always opacous. Not at any time does this state vary in it, unless in
respect of us, and according to the opinion of the Vulgar. Hence it is clear,
that the holy Scripture speaks according to the common form of speech used
amongst the unlearned, and according to the appearance of things, and not
according to their true Existence. In like manner Genes. 1. in the description
of the Creation of all things, the Light is said to be made first of all, and
yet it follows in the Text, And the Evening and the Morning made the first
day: and a little after the several Acts of the Creation are distinguished and
assigned to several days, and concerning each of them it is said in the Text,
And the Evening and the Morning made the second day; and then the third day,
the fourth day, etc. Hence many doubts arise, all which I shall propound
according to the common Systeme, that it may appear even from the Hypothesis of
that Systeme, that the sacred Scripture sometimes, for the avoiding of emergent
difficulties, is to be understood in a vulgar sense and meaning, and in respect
of us, and not according to the nature of things. Alia sunt notiora nobis,
alia, notiora natura, vel secundum se, Arist. lib. 1. Phys.
Which distinction even Aristotle himself seems to have hinted, when he
says, * Some things are more intelligible to us; others by nature, or secundum
se.

First therefore; If the light were made before heaven, then it rolled about
without heaven to the making of the distinction of Day and Night. Now this is
contrary to the very doctrine of these men, who affirm that no Celestial Body
can be moved unless per accidens, and by the motion of Heaven, and as a knot
in a board at the motion of the board. Again, if it be said, that the Light was
created at the same time with Heaven, and began to be moved with Heaven,
another doubt arises, that likewise opposes the foresaid common Hypothesis:
For it being said, that Day and Night, Morning and Evening were made, that same
is either in respect of the Universe, or only in respect of the Earth and us.
If so be that the Sun turning round (according to the Hypothesis of the Common
Systeme) does not cause the Night and Day, but only to opacous Bodies which are
destitute of all other light, but that of the Sun, whilst in their half part
(which is their Hemisphaere) and no more, (for that the Suns light passes over
but one half of an opacous Body, unless a very small matter more in those of
lesser bulk) they are illuminated by the Suns aspect, the other half remaining
dark and tenebrose, by reason of a shadow proceeding from its own Body.
Therefore the distinction of days by the light of heaven, according to the
description of them in the sacred Scriptures, must not be understood
absolutely, and secundum se, and Nature her self; but in respect of the Earth,
and of us its inhabitants, and consequently secundum nos. It Is not therefore
new, nor unusual in sacred Scripture to speak of things secundum nos, and only
in respect of us, and secundum apparentiam; but not secundum se, and rei
naturam, or Absolutely and Simply.

And if any one would understand these Days of sacred Scripture, not only
secundum nos, but also secundum naturam, as circulations of Celestial Light
returning to the self same point from whence it did at first proceed; so as
that there needs no respect to be had to Night or to Aut ad Umbram
Darkness, for which sole reason we are fain to embrace the Interpretation of
sacred Scripture secundum nos; In opposition to this we may thus argue: If the
sacred Scripture be understood to speak absolutely, of iterated and successive
circulations of light, and not respectu nostri, as if these words Evening and
Morning had never been inserted, which in their natural acceptance denote the
Suns habitude to us and to the Earth: For that the Morning is that time when
the Sun begins to wax light, and to rise above the Horizon in the East, and
become visible in our Hemisphaere, and Evening is the time in which the Sun
declines in the West, and approaches with its light nearer to the other
opposite Horizon and Hemisphaere, which is contiguous to this of ours. But the
word Day is a Corelative to the word Night. From hence therefore it evidently
appears, that these three words Evening, Morning, and Day, cannot be
understood of a Circulation of Light secundum se, and absolute, but only
secundum nos, and respectu nostri; and in that sense indeed the Morning and
Evening do make the Night and Day,

In like manner, Genesis 1. 16. it is said, God made two great Lights; the greater
Light to rule the Day, and the lesser Light to rule the Night, and the Stars.
Where both in the Proposition and in the specification of it, things are spoken
which are very disagreeing with Celestial Bodies. Therefore those words are in
that place to be interpreted according to the foresaid Rules; namely, according
to the third and fourth; so that they may be said to be understood according to
the sense of the vulgar, and the common way of speaking, which is all one, as
if we should say, secundum apparentiam, and secundum nos, vel respectu nostri.
For first, it is said in the Proposition, And God made two great Lights;
meaning by them the Sun and Moon, whereas according to the truth of the matter
these are not the Greater Lights; For although the Sun may be reckoned amongst
the Greater, the Moon may not be so, unless in respect of us. Because amongst
those that are absolutely the Greater, and a little lesser than the Sun (nay in
a manner equal to it) and far bigger than the Moon, Which are really the great
Lights in Heaven.
we may with great reason enumerate Saturn, or some of the Fixed Stars of the
first Magnitude, such as Canopus, (otherwise called Arcanar) in the end of a
River; or the Little Dog in the mouth of the Great Dog; or the Foot of Orion,
called Rigel, or his Right shoulder, or any other of that Magnitude. Therefore
the two great Lights are to be understood in respect of us, and according to
vulgar estimation, and not according to the true and real existence of such
Bodies. Secondly, in the specification of the Proposition it is said, The
greater Light to rule the Day; hereby denoting the Sun; in which the verbal
sense of Scripture agrees with the Truth of the Thing; For that the Sun is the
Greatest of all Luminaries, and Globes. But that which follows immediately
after, And the lesser Light to rule the Night, meaning the Moon, cannot be
taken in the true and real sense of the words: For the Moon is not the lesser
Light, but Mercury; which is not only much lesser than the Moon, but also than
any other Star. And if, again, it be said, That the Holy Text does not speak of
the Stars, but only of the Luminaries, for that presently after they are
mentioned apart, And the Stars; and that what we say is true touching the
comparison of the Stars amongst themselves, but not in respect* of the
Luminaries, namely, the Sun and Moon: This reply does discover a man to be
utterly ignorant in these Studies, and such who having not the least smattering
in them, does conceive an absurd and erroneous Opinion of the Celestial
Bodies. For the Moon and Sun, considered in themselves, and as they appear to
us, if they should be a far greater distance from us, than indeed they are,
would be no other, nor would appear to us otherwise than Stars, as the rest do
in the Firmament. But Great Luminaries they neither are, The Sun, Moon, and
Stars are one and the same thing.
nor seem to be, save only in respect of us: And so, on the other side, the
Stars, as to themselves, are no other than so many Suns and so many Moons; yet
are so far remote from us, that by reason of their distance they appear thus
small, and dim of light, as we behold them. For the greater and lesser distance
of heavenly Bodies ( caeteris paribus) does augment and diminish their
appearance both as to Magnitude and Light. And therefore the words which follow
in that place of Genesis, And the Stars (as distinguishing the Stars from the
Sun and Moon) are to be taken in no other acceptance than that which we have
spoken of, namely, according to the sense of the Vulgar, and the common manner
of speech. For indeed, according to the truth of the matter, all Celestial
Bodies, being shining Globes, are of a vast bigness, to which if we should be
so near as we are to the Moon, they would seem to us of as great, yea a greater
magnitude than the Moon: As likewise on the contrary, if we were as far distant
from the Sun and Moon, as we are from them, both Moon and Sun would show but as
stars to us. And yet the splendour of the Sun would doubtless be greater
intensive than that of any other star. For, although it should be granted that
some stars (as those of the Fixed that twinkle) do shine of themselves, and by
their own nature, as the Sun, that derives not its light from others (which yet
remains undecided and doubtful) and borrow not their light from the Sun;
Nevertheless since the brightness of none of the stars may be compared with the
Suns splendor, which was created by God first, and before all other
Luminaries, in the highest kind of Light, it would therefore notwithstanding
follow, that none of those stars, although placed in the same proximity to us
with the Sun, and therefore appearing to us of the same Magnitude as the Sun,
can bestow upon us so much Light as we receive from the Sun: As on the
contrary, the Sun, at the same remoteness from us as they are, would indeed,
as to its Magnitude, appear to us as one of those stars, but of a splendor
much more intense than that of theirs. So that, The Earth is another Moon or
Star.
now, the Earth is nothing else but another Moon or star, and so would it
appear to us, if we should behold it from a convenient distance on high. And in
it might be observed (in that variety of Light and Darkness which the Sun
produces in it by making Day and Night) the same difference of Aspects that
are seen in the Moon, and such as are observed in tricorporate Venus; in like
manner also it is very probable that the same might be discerned in other
Planets, which shine by no light of their own, but by one borrowed from the
Sun. What ever therefore may touching these matters be delivered in the sacred
Leaves or the common speech of men, dissenting from the real truth, it ought
(as we have said before) absolutely to be received and understood secundum
vulgi sententiam, and communem loquendi and concipiendi stylum.

And so, to return to our purpose, if, all this considered, the Pythagorian
opinion be true, it will be easy, according to the same Rule, to reconcile the
authority of sacred Scriptures with it, however they seem to oppose it, and in
particular those of the first and second Classis, scilicet by my first Maxim:
For that in those places the holy Records speak according to our manner of
understanding, and according to that which appears in respect of us; Why the
Sun seems to us to move, and not the Earth.
For thus it is with those Bodies, in comparison of us, and as they are
described by the vulgar and commune way of humane Discourse; So that the Earth
appears as if it were standing still and immovable, and the Sun, as if it were
circumambient about her. And so the Holy Scripture is used in the Commune and
Vulgar way of speaking; because in respect of our sight, the Earth seems rather
to stand fixed in the Center, and the Sun to circumvolve about it, than
otherwise: as it happens to those that are putting off from the Banks of a
River to whom the shore seems to move backwards, and go from them: but they do
not perceive (which yet is the truth) that they themselves go forwards. Which
fallacy of our sight is noted, and the Reason thereof assigned by the Optics;
upon which, as being strange to, and besides my purpose, I will not stay) and on
this account is Aeneas brought in by Virgil, saying; Provehimur portu,
terraeque urbesque recedunt.

But it will not be amiss to consider why the sacred Scripture does so
studiously comply with the opinions of the Vulgar, Aeneid. 3.
and why it does not rather accurately instruct men in the truth of the
matters, and the secrets of Nature. The Reason is, first, the benignity of
Divine Wisdom, whereby it sweetly accomodates it self to all things, in
proportion to their Capacity and Nature. Whence in Natural Sciences, it uses
natural and necessary causes, but in Liberal Arts it works liberally, upon
Generous Persons after a sublime and lofty manner; upon the Common People,
familiarly and humbly; upon the Skilful, learnedly; upon the Simple, vulgarly;
and so on every one, according to his condition and quality. Secondly, because
it is not its Intention to fill our minds in this life with vain and various
curiosities, which might occasion our doubt and suspense. For the truth is,
Eccles. c. 1. v. ult.
He that increases knowledge, increases sorrow. Moreover it did not only
permit, but even decree, that the World should be very much busied in
Controversies and Disputations, and that it should be employed about the
uncertainty of things; according to that saying of Ecclesiastes Chap. 3. v. 11.
He has set the World in their heart; so that no man can find out the work
that God makes from the beginning unto the end. And touching those doubts, God
will not permit that they shall be discovered to us before the end of the
World: 1 Cor. c. 4. v. 5.
At which time he will bring to light the hidden things of darkness: But Gods
only scope in the sacred Scripture is to teach men those things which conduce
to the attainment of Eternal Life; which having obtained, 1 Cor. c. 13. v. 12.
We shall see him face to face: 1 John c. 3. v. 2.
and shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is. Then shall he clearly a
Priori make known unto us all those Curiosities, and Dogmatical Questions,
which in this life, 1 Cor. c. 13. v. 12.
in which we see through a Glass darkly, could be known by us but imperfectly
and a postetiori, and that not without much pains and study. For this cause the
Wisdom of God, revealed to us in the sacred Leaves, is not styled Wisdom
absolutely, but Ecclesiast. 15. 3.
Saving Wisdom; Its only end being to lead us to salvation. And S. Paul
preaching to the Corinthians, says; 1 Cor. c. 2. v. 2.
I determined to know nothing among you, save Jesus Christ, and him crucified:
whereas notwithstanding he was thoroughly instructed, and profoundly learned in
all humane Sciences; but making no account of these things he professes that
it was his desire to teach them no more but the way to Heaven. Hence is that
which God speaks to us by Isaiah, Isa. c. 48. v. 17.
Ego Dominus Deus, docens te utilia [I am the Lord thy God which teaches thee
profitable things:] Where the Glossary adds, non subtilia [not subtilties.]
for God neither taught us, Whether the Materia Prima of Heaven, and the
Elements be the same; nor Whether Continual be composed of Indivisibles, or
whether it be divisible in infinitum; nor, whether the Elements are formally
mixed; nor how many the Celestial Spheres, and their Orbs are; Whether there be
Epicycles or Eccentricks; nor the Virtues of Plants and Stones; nor the Nature
of Animals; nor the Motion and Influence of the Planets; nor the Order of the
Universe; nor the Wonders of Minerals, and universal Nature: but only [utilia:]
things profitable, to wit, his Holy Law ordained to the end, that we being put
into possession of Blessedness, might at length be made capable of all perfect
knowledge, and the vision of the whole Order and admirable Harmony, as also the
Sympathy and Antipathy of the Universe and its parts, in his Word, wherein all
those things shall most clearly and distinctly, then, appear to us, which mean
while, in this life, he has remitted (as far as its ability reaches) to
humane search and enquiry: But it was not his purpose to determine any thing,
directly or indirectly, touching the truth of them. Because as the knowledge
thereof would little or nothing profit Us, but might in some cases prove
prejudicial; so the ignorance thereof can doubtless be no detriment, but may in
some cases be very beneficial to us. And therefore by his most admirable
Wisdom it comes to pass, that though all things in this World are dubious,
uncertain, wavering, and perplexed; yet his Holy Faith alone is most certain;
and although the opinions about Philosophical and Doctrinal points be diverse,
there is in the Church but one Truth of Faith and Salvation. Which Faith, as
necessary to Salvation, is so ordered by Divine Providence, that it might not
only be indubitable, but also unshaken, sure, immutable, and manifest to all
men: the infallible Rule of which he has appointed the Holy Church, that is
washed with his precious Blood, and governed by his Holy Spirit, to whom
belongs our Sanctification, as being his work. 1 Thessalonians. 4.
This therefore is the Reason why God would have Speculative Questions, which
nothing conduce to our Salvation and Edification, and why the Holy Ghost has
very often condescended to Vulgar Opinions and Capacities, and has discovered
nothing that is singular or hidden to us, besides those things that pertain to
Salvation. So that consequently it is clear by what has been said, how and why
nothing of certainty can be evinced from the foresaid Authorities to the
determining of Controversies of this Nature; as also with what Reason from this
first Axiom the Objections of the first and second Class are easily answered,
as also any other Authority of sacred Scripture produced against the
Pythagorian and Copernican Systeme so long as by other proofs it is true.

And the Authorities of the second Class in particular by this same Maxim, Of
the ordinary manner of apprehending things as they appear to us, and after the
common way of speaking, may be thus reconciled and expounded; namely,
Oftentimes an Agent is commonly, and not improperly said to move, (though it
have no motion) not because it does indeed move, but by extrinsick
denomination, because receiving its influence and action at the motion of the
Subject; the Form and Quality infused to the Subject by the said Agent does
likewise move. As for example, a Fire burning in a Chimney is an immovable
Agent, before which a man oppressed with cold sits to warm himself who being
warmed on one side, turns the other to the Fire, that he may be warmed on that
side also, and so in like manner he holds every part to the Fire successively,
till his whole body be warmed. It Is clear, that although the Fire do not move,
yet at the Motion of the Subject, to wit the Man, who receives the heat and
action of the Fire, the Form and Quality of its Heat does move singulatim, and
per parts, round about the man's body, and always seeks out a new place: and
so, though the Fire do not move, yet by reason of its effect, it is said to go
round all the parts of the Man's body, and to warm it, not indeed by a true and
real motion of the Fire it self, since it is supposed (and that not untruly)
not to move, but by the motion to which the Body is excited, out of a desire of
receiving the heat of the Fire in each of its parts. The same may be applied to
the Illumination impressed successively on the parts of any Globe, which moves
Orbicularly at the aspect of a shining immovable Light. And in the same manner
may the Sun be said to rise and set, and to move above the Earth, although in
reality he does not move, nor suffer any mutation; that is to say, Inasmuch as
his Light (which effect is the Form and Quality proceeding from him, as the
Agent, to the Earth as the Subject) does sensibly glide forwards, by reason of
the Orbicular motion of the Earth; and does always betake it self to some new
place of her surface; upon which ground he is truly said ( secundum vulgarem
sermonem) to move above, and revolve about the Earth: Not that the Sun does
move, (for by this Opinion we affirm the Earth to move, that it may receive the
Sun one while in one, another while in another part of it) but that at the
motion of the Earth her self a contrary way, the Quality diffused into her, and
impressed upon her by the Sun, namely the Light of the Day is moved, which
rises in one part of her, and sets in another contrary to that, according to
the nature and condition of her motion; And for this reason the Sun it self by
consequence is said to rise and set, (which notwithstanding ex Hypothesi stands
immovable) and that no otherwise then per donominationem extrinsecam, as has
been said.

After this manner the command of Joshuah, Joshua c. 10. ver. 12.
Sun stand thou still, and the Miracle of the Suns cessation of Motion wrought
by him, may be so understood, as that not the Solar Body properly, but the Suns
splendor upon the Earth stood still; so that not the Sun it self, (being of it
self before that time immovable) but the Earth that receives its splendor,
stayed her Motion; which, as she incessantly pursuing her ordinary Motion
toward the East, expected.
called up the Light of the Sun in the West, so standing still, the Suns light
impressed upon it likewise stood still. After the same manner proportionally is
that Text of Isaiah explained, Isa. c. 38. v. 8.
touching the Suns going ten degrees backward upon the Dial of Ahaz. So (which
may serve for another Example) the Hand being moved about the flame of a
burning Candle that stand^ still, the Light moves on the Hand, that is to say,
the said Hand is illustrated now in one part, anon in another, when as the
Candle it self all the while removes not out of its place: whereupon per
denominationem extrinsecam, the said Light may be affirmed to rise and set upon
the Hand, namely, by the sole motion of the said Hand, the Candle it self never
moving all the while. And let this suffice for the explanation of my first
Principle or Maxim, which by reason of its difficulty and extraordinary weight
required some prolixity in the handling of it.

My second Maxim is this, Things both Spiritual and Corporeal, Durable and
Corruptible, Moveable and Immovable, have received from God a perpetual,
unchangeable, and inviolable Law, constituting the Essence and Nature of every
one of them: according to which Law all of them in their own Nature persisting
in a certain Order and Constancy, and observing the same perpetual Course, may
deservedly be styled most Stable and Determinate. Thus Fortune (than which
there is nothing in the World more inconstant or fickle) is said to be constant
and unalterable in her continual volubility, vicissitude, and inconstancy,
which was the occasion of that Verse, Et semper constans in levitate sua est.

And thus the motion of Heaven (which by the constan Law of Nature ought to be
perpetual) may be said to be immutable and immovable, and the Heavens
themselves to be immoveably moved, and Terrene things to be immutably changed,
because those never cease moving, nor these changing. By this Principle or
Maxim all difficulties belonging to the first Classis are cleared, by which
the Earth is said to be stable and immovable, that is, by understanding this
one thing, That the Earth, as to its own Nature, though it include in it self a
local Motion, and that threefold, ^ Several Motions of the Earth according to
Copernicus.
according to the opinion of Copernicus (scilicet Diurnal, with which it
revolveth about its own Center; Annual, by which it moves through the twelve
Signs of the Zodiac, and the motion of Inclination, by which its Axis is
always opposed to the same part of the World) as also other Species of
Mutation, such as Generation and Corruption, Accretion and Diminution, and
Alteration of diverse kinds; yet in all these she is stable and constant, never
deviating from that Order which God has appointed her, but moves continually,
constantly and immutably, according to the six before named Species of Motion.

My third Maxim shall be this; When a thing is moved according to some part of
it, and not according to its whole, it cannot be said to be simply and
absolutely moved, but only per accidens, for that stability taken simply and
absolutely do rather accord with the same. As for example, if a Barrel or other
measure of Water be taken out of the Sea, and transferred to another place, the
Sea may not therefore absolutely and simply be said to be removed from place to
place, but only per accidens, and secundum quid, that is, according to a part
of it, but rather (to speak simply) we should say that the Sea cannot be
carried or moved out of its proper place,, though as to its parts it be moved,
and transferred to and again. This Maxim is manifest of it self, and by it may
the Authorities be explained which seem to make for the immobility of the Earth
in this manner; namely, The Earth per se and absolute considered as to its
Whole, is not mutable, seeing it is neither generated nor corrupted neither
increased nor diminished; neither is it altered secundum totum, The Earth
Secundum Totum is Immutable, though not Immovable.
but only secundum parts. Now it plainly appears, that this is the genuine and
true Sense of what is ascribed to it out of Ecclesiastes, cap. 1. v. 4. One
Generation passes away, and another Generation comes, but the Earth abides
for ever: as if he should say; although the Earth, according to its parts, does
generate and corrupt, and is liable to the vicissitudes of Generation and
corruption, yet in reference to its Whole it never generateth nor Corrupts,
but abides immutable for ever: Like as a Ship, which though it be mended one
while in the Sailyard, another while in the Stern, and afterward in other
parts it yet remains the same Ship as it was at first. But it is to be
advertized, that that Scripture does not speak of a Local Motion, but of
Mutations of another nature; as in the very substance, quantity or quality of
the Earth it self. But if it be said, that it is to be understood of a Local
Motion, then it may be explained by the ensuing Maxim, that is to say, a
respect being had to the natural Place assigned it in the Universe, as shall be
showed by and by.

The fourth Axiom is this; That every Corporeal thing, moveable or immovable
from its very first Creation, is allotted its proper and natural place; and
being drawn or removed from thence, its motion is violent, and it has a
natural tendency to move back thither again: also that nothing can be moved
from its natural place, secundum Totum; For most great and dreadful mischiefs
would follow from that perturbation of things in the Universe. The Earth cannot
Secundum Totum, remove out of its Natural Place.
Therefore neither the whole Earth, nor the whole Water, nor the whole Air can
secundum totum be driven or forced out of their proper place, site, or Systeme
in the Universe, in respect of the order and disposition of other mundane
Bodies. And thus there is no Star (though Erratick) Orb or Sphere that can
desert its natural place, although it may otherwise have some kind of motion.
Therefore all things, how moveable soever, are notwithstanding said to be
stable and immovable in their proper place, according to the foresaid sense,
i.e. secundum totum; For nothing hinders, but that secundum parts they may
some waymove; which motion shall not be natural, but violent. Therefore the
Earth, although it should be moveable, yet it might be said to be immovable,
according to the precedent Maxim, for that its neither moved in a right Motion
nor out of the Course assigned it in its Creation for the standing Rule of its
motion; but keep within its own site, being placed in that which is called the
Grand Orb, The Natural Place of the Earth.
above Venus, and beneath Mars, and being in the middle betwixt these (which
according to the common opinion is the Suns place) it equally and continually
moves about the Sun, and the two other intermediate Planets, namely Venus and
Mercury, and has the Moon (which is another Earth, The Moon is an Aetherial
Body.
but Aetherial, as Macrobius after some of the ancient Philosophers, will have
it) about it self. From whence, inasmuch as she persisteth uniformly in her
Course, and never at any time departs from it, she may be said to be stable
and immovable: and in the same sense Heaven likewise, with all the Elements,
may be said to be immovable.

The fifth Maxim follows, being little different from the former. Amongst
the things created by God, some are of such a nature, that their parts may be
ab invicem, or by turns, separated from themselves, and dis-joyned from their
Whole; others may not, at least, taken collectively: now those are perishable,
but these perpetual. The Earth therefore since it is reckoned amongst those
things that are permanent, The Earths Center keeps it in its Natural Place.
as has been said already, has its parts, not dissipable, nor ab invicem,
separable from its Center (whereby its true and proper place is assigned it)
and from its whole, taken collectively: because according to its whole it is
always preserved, compact, united, and cohaerent in it self, nor can its parts
be separated from the Center, or from one another, unless it may so fall out
per accidens, and violently in some of its parts; which afterward, the
obstacle being removed, return to their Natural Station spontaneously, and
without any impulse. In this Sense therefore the Earth is said to be
Immovable, and Immutable: yea even the Sea, Air, Heaven, and any other thing
(although otherwise moveable) so long as its parts are not dissipable and
seperable, may be said to be Immovable, at last taken collectively. This
Principle or Maxim differs from the precedent only in that this referrs to
the parts in order to Place, and this, in order to the Whole.

From this Speculation another Secret is discovered. Gravity and Levity of
Bodies, what it is.
For hence it is manifest wherein the proper and genuine formality of the
Gravity aad Levity of Bodies consists; a point which is not so clearly held
forth, nor so undeniably explained by the Peripatetick Philosophy. Gravity
therefore is nothing else according to the Principles of this new Opinion, than
a certain power and appetite of the Parts to rejoyn with their Whole, and there
to rest as in their proper place. Which Faculty or Disposition is by Divine
Providence bestowed not only on the Earth, and Terrene Bodies, All Celestial
Bodies have Gravity and Levity.
but, as is believed, on Celestial Bodies also, namely the Sun, Moon, and
Stars; all whose parts are by this Impulsion connected, and conserved together,
cleaving closely to each other, and on all sides pressing toward their Center,
until they come to rest there. From which Concourse and Compression a
Sphaerical and Orbicular Figure of the Caelestial Orbs is produced, wherein by
this occult Quality naturally incident to each of them they of themselves
subsist, and are always preserved. But Levity is the Extrusion and Exclusion
of a more tenuose and thin Body from the Commerce of one more Solid and dense,
Compressive Motion, proper to Gravity; the Extensive, to Levity.
that is Heterogeneal to it, by virtue of Heat. Whereupon, as the Motion of
Grave Bodies is Compressive, so the Motion of Light Bodies is Extensive: For
its the propperty of Heat to dilate and rarify those things to which it does
apply, conjoine and communicate it self. And for this reason we find Levity and
Gravity not only in respect of this our Terestrial Globe, and the Bodies
adjacent to it, but also in respect of those Bodies which are said to be in the
Heavens, in which those parts which by reason of their proclivity make toward
their Center are Grave, and those that incline to the Circumference Light. And
so in the Sun, Moon, and Stars, there are parts as well Grave as Light. Heaven
is not composed of a fifth Essence differing from the matter of inferior Bodies.
And consequently Heaven it self that so Noble Body, and of a fifth Essence,
shall not be constituted of a Matter different from that of the Elements, being
free from all Mutation in it is Substance, Quantity, and Quality: Nor so
admirable and excellent as Aristotle would make us to believe; Nor yet a Solid
or dense Body but Rare.
nor yet a solid Body, and impermeable; and much less (as the generality of
men verily believe) of an impenetrable and most obdurate Density: but in it (as
this Opinion will have it) Comets may be generated; and the Sun it self, as it is
probable, exhaling or attracting sundry vapors to the surface of its Body, may
perhaps produce those Spots which were observed to be so various, and irregular
in its Discus: of which Galilaeus in a particular Delle Macchie solarj.
Treatise has most excellently and most accurately spoken; insomuch, that
though it were not besides my present purpose, yet it is convenient that I
forbear to speak any thing touching those matters, least I should seem to do
that which he has done before me: But now if there be found in the Sacred
Scriptures any Authority contrary to these things, it may be salved by the
foresaid Arguments Analogically applied. And furthermore it may be said, that
that Solidity is to be so understood, as that it admits of no vacuum, cleft, or
penetration from whence the least vacuity might proceed. For the truth is, as
that cannot be admitted in bodily Creatures, so it is likewise repugnant to
Heaven it self, being indeed a Body of its own Nature the most Rare of all
others, Vnius Corporis simplicis, unus est motus simplex, et huic dua species,
Rectus and Circularis: Rectus duplex a medio, and ad medium; primus levium, ut
Aeris and Ignis: secundus gravium, ut Aquae and Terra: Circularis, quiest circa
medium competit Coelo, quod neque est grave, neque leve. Arist. de Coelo. Lib.
1.
and tenuose beyond all Humane Conception, and happly has the same proportion
to the Air, as the Air to the Water.

It is clear also from these Principles how false these words of Aristotle are,
that: Of one simple Body, there is one simple Motion; and this is of two
kinds, Right and Circular: the Right is twofold, from the medium, and to the
medium; the first of Light Bodies, as the Air and Fire: the second of Grave
Bodies, as the Water and Earth: the Circular, which is about the medium,
belongs to Heaven, which is neither Grave nor Light: For all this Philosophy
is now forsaken, and of it self grown into dis-esteem; for though it be
received for an unquestionable truth in this new Opinion, that to a simple body
appertains one only simple Motion, Vide Copernicum de Revolutionibus Coelest.
yet it grants no Motion but what is Circular, by which alone a simple body
is conserved in its natural Place, and subsists in its Unity, Simple Motion
peculiar to only Simple Bodies.
and is properly said to move in loco [in a place:] whereby it comes to pass
that a Body for this reason does continue to move in it self, [or about its own
axis;] and although it have a Motion, yet it abides still in the same place,
as if it were perpetually immovable. But right Motion, which is properly ad
locum, [to a place] can be ascribed only to those things which are out of their
natural place, being far from union with one another, and from unity with
their whole, yea that are separated and divided from it: Which being that it is
contrary to the Nature and form of the Universe, Right Motion belongs to
Imperfect Bodies, and that are out of their natural Places.
it necessarily follows, that right Motion does in short suit with those
things which are destitute of that perfection, that according to their proper
Nature belongs to them, and which by this same right Motion they labor to
obtain, until they are redintigrated with their Whole, and with one another,
and restored to their Natural place; in which at the length, having obtained
their perfection, they settle and remain immovable. Right Motion cannot be
Simple.
Therefore in right Motions there can be no Uniformity, nor simplicity; for
that they vary by reason of the uncertain Levity or Gravity of their
respective Bodies: for which cause they do not persevere in the same Velocity
or Tardity to the end which they had in the beginning. Hence we see that those
things whose weight makes them tend downwards, do descend at first with a slow
Motion; but afterward, as they approach nearer and nearer to the Center, they
precipitate more and more swiftly. And on the otherside, those things which by
reason of their lightness are carried upwards (as this our Terrestrial fire,
which is nothing else but a smoke that burns, and is inkindled into a flame)
are no sooner ascended on high, but, in almost the self-same moment, they fly
and vanish out of sight; by reason of the rare-faction and extension, that they
as soon as they acquire, are freed from those bonds which violently and against
their own Nature kept them under, Right Motion is ever mixed with the Circular.
and detained them here below. For which reason, it is very apparent, that no
Right Motion can be called Simple, not only in regard that (as has been said)
it is not aequabilis.
even and uniforme, but also because it is mixed with the Circular, which
lurketh in the Right by an occult consent, scilicet by reason of the Natural
affection of the Parts to conform unto their Whole. For when the Whole moves
Circularly, it is requisite likewith that the Parts, to the end that they may
be united to their Whole, (howbeit per accidens they are sometimes moved with a
Right Motion) do move (though not so apparently) with a Circular Motion, as
does their Whole. And thus at length we have envinced that Circular Motion only
is Simple, Uniform and Even. Circular Motion is truly Simple and Perpetual.
Aequable, and of the same tenor [or rate] for that it is never destitute of
its interne Cause: whereas on the contrary, Right Motion, (which pertains to
things both Heavy and Light) has a Cause that is imperfect and deficient, yea
that arises from Defect it self, and that tends to, and seeks after
nothing else but the end and termination of it self: in regard that Grave and
Light Bodies, when once they have attained their proper and Natural Place, do
desist from that Motion to which they were incited by Levity and Gravity.
Circular Motion belongs to the Whole Body, and the Right to its parts.
Therefore: since Circular Motion is proper to the Whole, and Right Motion to
the Parts, these differences are not rightly referred to Motion, so as to call
one Motion Right, another Circular, as if they were not consistent with one
another: Circular and Right Motion coincedent, and may consist together in the
same Body.
For they may be both together, and that Naturally, in the same Body; no less
than it is equally Natural for a Man to participate of Sense and Reason, seeing
that these differences are not directly opposite to one another. Hereupon Rest
and Immobility only are opposed to Motion; and not one Species of Motion to
another. And for the other differences a medio, ad medium, and circa medium,
they are distinguished not really, but only formally, as the Point, Line and
Superficies, none of which can be without the other two, or without a Body.
Hence it appears, that in as much as this Philosophy differs from that of
Aristotle, so in like manner does this New Cosmographical System vary from the
Common one, that has been hitherto received. But this by the way, upon
occasion of explaining the Fifth Maxim: For as to the truth or falsehood of
these foregoing Positions (although I conceive them very probable) I am
resolved to determine nothing at present, neither shall I make any farther
enquiry into them.

The Sixth and Last Maxim is this. Every thing is Simply denominated such as it
is in comparison of all things, or of many things which make the greater number
of that kind, but not in respect of a few which make but the lesser part of
them. As, for instance, a Vessel shall not be called absolutely Great because
it is so whilst it is compared with two or three others: but it shall be said
to be great absolutely, and will be so, if it exceed in magnitude all
indivials, or the greater part of them. Nor again shall a Man be said to be
absolutely Big, because he is bigger than a Pigmey; nor yet absolutely Little,
because less than a Giant: but he shall be termed absolutely Big or Little in
comparison of the ordinary Stature of the greater part of Men. Thus the Earth
cannot absolutely be said to be High or Low for that it is found to be so in
respect of some small part of the Universe; nor again shall it be absolutely
affirmed to be High, being compared to the Center of the World, or some few
parts of the Universe, more near to the said Center, as is the Sun, Mercury or
Venus: but it shall receive its absolute denomination according as it shall be
found to be in comparison of the greater number of the Spheres and Bodies of
the Universe. The Earth in (...) sense it may (...) be said (...) the lowest
(...) of the World.
The Earth therefore, in comparison of the whole Circuit of the Eighth Sphaere
which includes all Corporeal Creatures, and in comparison of Jupiter, Mars,
and Saturn together with the Moon, and much more in comparison of other Bodies,
(if any such there be) above the Eighth Sphere and especially the Empyrial
Heaven, may be truly said to be in the lowest place of the World, and almost in
the Center of it; nor can it he said to be above any of them, except the Sun,
Mercury and Venus: So that one may apply unto it the name of an Infime and Low,
but not a Supreme or Middle Body. And so to come down from Heaven, especially
the Empyrian, to it (as it is accepted in the Descent of Christ from Heaven to
his Holy Incarnation) and from it to go up to Heaven (as in Christ's return to
Heaven in his Glorious Ascension) is truly and properly to Descend from the
Circumference to the Center, Christ in his Incarnation truly descended from
Heaven, and in his Asce^sion truly ascended into Heaven.
and to ascend from the parts which are nearest to the Center of the World to
its utmost Circumference. This Maxim therefore may easily and according to
truth explain Theological Propositions: and this is so much the more
confirmed, in that (as I have observed) almost all Texts of Sacred Scripture
which oppose the Earth to Heaven, are most conveniently and aptly understood of
the Empyrial Heaven (being the Highest of all the Heavens, and Spiritual in
respect of its end) but not of the inferior or intermediate Heavens, which are
a Corporeal, and were framed for the benefit of Corporeal Creatures: and thus
when in the Plural Number Heavens are mentioned, then all the Heavens
promiscuously and without distinction are to be understood, as well the
Empyrian it self as the Inferior Heavens. And this Exposition indeed any man
(that does but take notice of it) may find to be most true. And so for this
Reason the Third Heaveu into which St. Paul was wrapped up, 2 Cor. c. 12. v. 3.
Whether in the body or out of the body, I cannot tell, The Sun is King, Heart
and Lamp of the World himself being (...) absolutely independent.)
by this Maxim may be taken for the Empyrean: if for the the First Heaven we
understand that immense Space of Erratick and Moveable Bodies illuminated by
the Sun, in which are comprehended the Planets, as also the Earth moveable, and
the Sun immovable, Who like a King upon his August Tribunal, sits with
venerable Majesty immovable and constant in Center of all the Sphaeres, and,
with his Divine Beams, does bountifully exhilerate all Celestial Bodies that
stand in need of his vital Light, for which they cravingly wander about him;
and does liberally and on every side comfort and illustrate the Theater of the
whole World, and all its parts, even the very least, like an immortal and
perpetual Lamp of high and unspeakable value. The Second Heaven shall be the
Starry Heaven, commonly called the Eighth Sphaere, or the Firmament, wherein
are all the Fixed Stars, which according to this Opinion of Pythagoras, is
(like as the Sun and Center) void of all Motion, the Center and utmost
Circumference mutually agreeing with each other in Immobility. And the Third
shall be the Empyrean Heaven, that is the Seat of the Blessed. And in this
manner we may come to explain and understand that admirable Secret, and
profound Mystery aenigmatically revealed by Plato to Dionysius of Syracuse: The
Aenigma of Plato.
Circa omni^m Regem sunt omnia. and Secunda circa Secundum, et Tertia circa
Tertium: Vide Theodo. de Graec. affect. curat. lib. 2. S^euch. lib. de Parennj.
Philoso.
All things are about the King of all things, Second things about the second,
and Third things about the Third: For that God being the Center of Spiritual
things, the Sun, of Corporeal, Christ, of those that are Mixed, or made up of
both, things do doubtless depend of that of these three Centres that is most
correspondent and proportionable to them, and the Center is ever adjudged to be
the nobler and worthier place: and therefore in Animals the Heart, in
Vegitables the Pith or Kernel wherein the Seed lies that conserveth their
perpetuity, and virtually includes the whole Plant, are in the Midst, and in
the Center: and thus much shall suffice to have hinted at, since there may
another occasion offer it self for a larger Explication of these things. By
this Maxim the Authorities and Arguments of the Third Fourth and Fifth Classes
are resolved.

It may be added withal, that even the Sun, Mercury and Venus (that is to say
in respect of the Earth) are to be thought above, and not beneath the Earth it
self, although in respect of the Universe, yea and also absolutely, they are
below. The reason is, because in respect of the Earth they always appear above
its Surface: and although they do not environe it, yet by the Motion of the
said Earth they behold one while one part, another while another part of its
Circumference. Since therefore those things which in a Sphaerical Body are
nearer to the Circumference and more remote from the Cenrre are said to be
above, but those that are next adjoining to the Center are said to be below; it
clearly follows that whilst the Sun, Mercury and Venus are not only turned
toward the Surface and Circumference of the said Earth, but are at a very
great distance without it, successively turned about it, and every way have a
view of it, and are very far remote from its Center, they may, in respect of
the said Earth, be said to be above it; as also on the other side, the E^ath in
respect of them may be said to be beneath: howbeit on the contrary, in respect
of the Universe, the Earth in reality is much higher than they. And thus is
salved the Authority of Ecclesiastes in many places, Eccles. c. 1. 2. 3. and
almost thoout.
expressing those things that are, or are done on the Earth in these words,
Which are done, or which are under the Sun, Quod fiunt, vel sunt sub sole.
And in the same manner those words are reduced to their true Sense wherein it
is said, That we are under the Sun, and under the Moon, whereupon Terrene
things are expressed by the name of Sublunary.

The Sixth Classis threatens a difficulty which is common as well to this of
Copernicus, as to the Vulgar Opinion; so that they are both alike concerned in
the solution of it: But so far as it opposes that of Copernicus, its answer is
easy from the First Maxim.

But that which is added in the Fourth Class, That it follows from this
Opinion, that Hell (for that it is included by the Earth, as is commonly held)
does move circularly about the Sun, and in Heaven, and that so Hell it self
will be found to be in Heaven; discovers, in my judgment, nothing but Ignorance
and Calumny, that insinuate the belief of their Arguments rather by a corrupt
sense of the Words, than by solid Reasons taken from the bosom of the Nature
of things. For in this place Heaven is no wise to be taken for Paradise, nor
according to the Sense of Common Opinion, Heaven according to Copernicus is the
same with the most* tenuous Ether; but different from Paradise, which
surpasses all the Heavens.
but (as has been said above) according to the Copernican Hypothesis, for the
subtilest and Purest Air, far more tenuous and rare than this of ours;
whereupon the Solid Bodies of the Stars, Moon, and Earth, in their Circular and
Ordinary Motions, do pass through it, (the Sphaere of Fire being by this
Opinion taken away.) And as according to the Common Opinion it was no absurdity
to say, That Hell being demerged in the Center of the Earth and of the World it
self, has Heaven and Paradise above and below it, yea and on all sides of it,
and that it is in the middle of all the Celestial Bodies (as if it were
posited in a more unworthy place) so, neither in this will it be deemed an
Error, if from the other System, which differs not much from the Vulgar one,
those or the like things follow as do in that. For both in that of Copernicus,
and the Vulgar Hypothesis, Hell is supposed to be placed amongst the very
dreggs of the Elements, and in the Center of the Earth it self, for the
confinement and punishment of the damned. Therefore we ought not for want of
Reasons to trifle away time in vain and impertinent strife about words, since
their true Sense is clouded then with no obscurity, and in regard that it is
very clear to any man endued with a refined Intellect, and that has but an
indifferent judgment in the Liberal Arts, and especially in the Mathematics,
that the same, or not very different Consequences do flow from both these
Opinions.

By these Maxims and their Interpretations it appears, that the Pythagorick and
Copernican Opinion is so probable, that its possible it may exceed even the
Ptolemaick in probability; and since there may be deduced from it a most
ordinate Systeme, and a more admirable and mysterious Hypothesis of the World
than from that of Ptolomy: the Authorities of Sacred Scripture and Theological
Tenants in the mean while not opposing it, being opportunely and appositely (as
I have shown how they may be) reconciled with it: And since that by it not only
the Phoenomena of all the Celestial Bodies are most readily ^alved, but also
many Natural Reasons are discovered, which could not otherwise, (but with
extreme difficulty) have been found out: And since it, last of all, does open a
more easy way into Astronomy and Philosophy, and rejects all those
superfluous and imaginary inventions produced by Astronomers to the end only,
that they might be able by them to render a reason of the so many and so
various Motions of the Celestial Orbs.

And who knows, but that in that admirable composure of the Candlestick which
was to be placed in the Tabernacle of God, he might out of his extraordinary
love to us have been pleased to shadow forth unto us the Systeme of the
Universe, and more especially of the Planets? Exodus 25. 31.
Thou shall make a Candlestick of pure Gold, (says the Text;) of beaten work
shall it be made: his Shaft, and his Branches, his Bowls, his Knops, and his
Flowers My Author following the vulgar Translation, which has an Eligance in
some things beyond ours, cites the words thus, Facies Candelabrum ductile de
auro mundissimo, Hastile ejus, and Calamos, and Sphaerulas, ac Lilia, ex ipso
procedentia.
shall be of the same. Here are five things described, the Shaft of the
Candlestick in the middle, the Branches on the sides, the Bowls, the Knops and
the Flowers. And since there can be no more Shafts but one, the Branches are
immediately described in these verse 12.
words: Six Branches shall come out of the sides of i^: three Branches out of
the one side, and three Branches out of the other side: Happly these six
Branches may point out to us six or Spheres.
Heavens, which are moved about the Sun in this order; Saturn, the slowest and
most remote of all, finisheth his course about the Sun thorrow all the twelve
Signs of the Zodiac in thirty Years: Jupiter, being nearer than he, in twelve
Years: Mars, being yet nearer than him, in two Years: The Earth, which is still
nearer than he, does perform the same Revolution, together with the Orb of the
Moon, in the space of a Year, that is in Twelve Months: Venus, which is yet
nearer than all these, in Though our Author speaks here positively of nine
Months, etc. Fathers are not agreed about the period of this planet, nor that
of Mercury, as you may see at large in Ricciolus, Almagest. nov. Tom. 1. part
1. l. 7. sect. 3. cha. 11. number. 11. page 627. where he makes Venus to
consummate her Revolution in near 225 days, or 7 /12 Mon. and Mercury in about
88 days, or 3 Months: in which he follows Kepl. in Epitome Astronom. p. 760.
9 Months: And last of all Mercury, whose vicinity to the Sun is the greatest
of all, accomplisheth its whole conversion about the Sun in eighty Days. After
the description of the six Branches, the sacred Text proceeds to the
description of the Bowls, the Knops, and the Flowers, saying, verse. 33, 34.
Three Bowls made like unto Almonds, with a Knop and a Flower in one Branch;
and three Bowls made like Almonds in the other Branch, with a Knop and a
Flower: this shall be the work of the six Branches that come out of the Shaft.
And in the Candlestick sball be four Bowls made like unto Almonds, with their
Knops and their Flowers: there shall be a knop under two branches of the same,
and a Knop under two Branches of the same, and a Knop under two Branches of the
same; which together are six Branches, proceeding from one Shaft. The truth is,
the shallowness of my understanding cannot fathom the depth of all the
Mysteries that are couched in this most wise disposure of things: nevertheless
being amazed, and transported with admiration, I will say; Who knows but that
those three Bowls like unto Almonds to be represented on each of the Branches
of the Candlestick may signify those Globes which are apter (as is this our
Earth) for the receiving than emitting of Influences? Perhaps also they denote
those Globes of late discovered by the help of the Optic Telescope, which
participate with Saturn, Jupiter, Venus, and possibly also with the other
Planets? Who knows likewise, but that there may be some occult proportion
between these Globes and those Mysterious Knops and Lilies insinuated unto us
in the sacred Scriptures? But this shall here suffice to bound humane
Presumption, and to teach us to exspect with an Harpocratick silence from Time,
the Indice of Truth, a discovery of these Mysteries: 1 Kings c. 7. v. 49. 2 Chronicles. c. 4. verse. 7.
Solomon made ten Candlesticks by the same Pattern of Moses, which he placed,
five on one hand and five on another, in the Temple erected by him in honor of
the most High God; which very thing does also, without all question, contain
most abstruse significations. Moreover, that Apple of the Knowledge of Good and
Evil prohibited our first Parents by God is not without a Mystery; which some
say was an Indian Figg. In which these things are to be observed: First, That
it is replete with many Kernels, every one of which has a particular Center.
Secondly, Though of it self it be hard and solid, yet about its Circumference
it is of a more rare and tenuouse substance; herein resembling the Earth, which
though in its Center, and those parts which are nearest to it, it be stony,
Metallic, and compact, yet the nearer one approaches to the Circumference,
its parts are seen to be the more rare and tenuouse: and withal it has
another body, more rare than its own, namely the Water, above which there is
yet another, more subtle than all the rest of inferior Bodies, that is to say,
the Air,

The same Representation with that of the Indian Figg is held forth to us by
the Malum Punicum, or Pomegranate, with its innumerable polycentrick Stones or
Kernels, all which in the parts more remote from their Center, and nearer
approaching toward the Circumference, are of a substance so subtle and rare,
that being but lightly compressed, they in a manner wholly convert into a most
tenuose Liquor or juice: Of which fruit it pleased Divine Wisdom to make
mention, and ordained that its Figure should be imbroidered and wrought with a
needle in the sacerdotal Garment of Aaron: Exodus 28. 33, 34, and 39. v. 24, 25,
26.
Beneath (says God) upon the hem of it thou shall make Pomegranates of blew,
and of purple, and of scarlet, round about the border thereof; and Bells of
gold between them round about: a golden bell and a pomegranate, a golden bell
and a pomegranate, upon the hem of the Robe round about. And that this was a
Mystical Representation of the Worlds Effigies, is averred by Solomon, saying;
Sap. c. 18. v. 24.
For in the long Exodus c. 28. v. 6, 9, 17, 36.
Garment that he had on was the Or, totus Orbis Terrarum, as the vulgar
Translation has it.
whole World; and in the four rows of the stones was the Glory of the Fathers
graven, and thy Majesty in the Diadem of his Head.

The same likewise is signified to us by the Grape, and in like manner by all
other Fruits; but especially the Figg, Grape, and Pomegranate: whence these
three are almost always placed together in the Sacred Scriptures. So Numb. 20.
the People of Israel complain against Moses and Aaron: Numb. c. 20. v. 5.
Wherefore have you made us to come up out of Egypt, to bring us into this evil
place, where there can grow no Seed, neither is there either Figgs, or Vines,
or Pomegranates? Intimating that these kinds of Fruits were preferred by them
for their excellency before all others. And in Joel Joel c. 1. v. 12.
The Vine is dried up, and the Fig Tree languisheth, the Pomegranate-tree, the
Palm Tree also, and the Apple Tree, even all the Trees of the field are
withered; because joy is withered away from the Sons of Men. Likewise in
Haggai: Hagg. c. 2. v. 19.
Is the seed yet in the Bud? and has as yet the Vine and the Fig Tree, and the
Pomegranate, and the Olive Tree brought forth? In like manner in Deuteronomie
the Land of Promise is commended to be Deuteronomy. c. 8. v. 8.
A Land of Wheat, and Barley, and Vines in which grow, Figg-trees, and
Pomegranates, and Olive Trees, etc. And in the Structure of the Temple
undertaken by Solomon upon Divine Inspiration the 1 Kings c 7. v. 20. and 2
Kings c. 25. v. 17. and 2 Chro. c. 3. v. 15, 16. etc. 4. v. 12. 13. and Jerem.
c. 52. v. 21, 22.
Chapiters of the Pillars were adorned with several rows of Pomegranates:
which particular is mentioned, not in one but many places of Holy Writ. Yea and
sometimes accidentally and occasionally the Holy has Ghost aenigmatically
represented this most admirable and Most Wise Structure of the World, the Order
of the Heavens, and the disposure of Creatures Spiritual and Corporeal by
Emblems, Parables, and Figures, least they should be as it were dazzled and
blinded, by the refulgent splendour of so excellent an Object. Hence we see,
that in these Doctrinal and Dubious Points we may discourse in such manner by
help of the Holy Scripture as is meet for the understanding of the Prophets;
which seeing they are very obscure, they shall be fully understood, and may be
aptly applied only then when they shall be fulfilled, and not before: So also
when once the true Systeme of the Universe is found out, then, and no^ till
then, the meaning of these Figures, and Aenigma's shall be made known unto us:
Thus before the coming of the Son of God had discovered unto us the Mystery of
the Holy Trinity, none were able to comprehend or imagine what was concealed
under those words; Genesis c. 1. v. 1.
In Principio creavit Elohim Coelum and Terram: for that they did not see how
the Noun Plural Elohim (which is as much as to say Dij, [Gods] should be joined
with the Verb Singular, Creavit: But the Mystery of the Unity of Essence and
Trinity of Persons in God being revealed, it was presently known, that the
Singular Number, Creavit, had reference to the Unity of Essence, (in regard
that the Works of the Trinity ad extra are indivisible) and the Plural, Elohi^,
to the Persons. Who, I pray, in elder times could have found out this Mystery?
And thus the Name of God is thrice repeated in Psalm. 67. Psalm. 67. v. 6* 7.
God, even our God shall bless us, God shall bless us, etc. Which at first
might seem a Pleonasme, and superfluous repetition; but afterward it was
evident that David did there set out the Benedictions of several Persons
employed, to wit, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Innumerable Examples of the
like kind may be found in the Sacred Leaves. Therefore, to conclude, I will say
with Psalm. 9*. v. 5, 6.
David, Psalm. 92. Oh Lord how glorious are thy Works! thy thoughts are very
deep: an unwiseman knows not, and a fool does not understand these things.

These are the particulars that I have thought fit to offer, as a Divine,
concerning the not-improbable Opinion of the Mobility of the Earth and
Stability of the Sun: which I hope will be acceptable to you, Reverend Sir, out
of the love and diligence wherewith you pursue Virtue and Learning. But (to the
end that you may also receive an account of my other Studies) I hope very
shortly to publish in Print my Second Tome Institutionum omnium Doctr^narum.
Of the Institutions of all Learnings, which shall contain all the Liberal
Arts, as I have already signified in that Syntax, and Spicimen by me heretofore
put forth, and published under your Name. The other five following Tomes by me
promised (which shall treat of Philosophy and Theology) are not altogether so
forward, nevertheless they will be speedily finished. In the mean time there
will come forth my Book Concerning De Oraculis.
Oracles, now finished, together with a Treatise De Divinati^-ne artificiosa.
Of Artificial Divination. And for a pledge thereof, I send you at this time
annexed to this Epistle a Tract De Divinati^ne Naturali Cosmologica.
Concerning Natural Cosmological Divination, or of Natural Prognostics, and
Presages of the Changes of Weather, and other things which fall within the
compass of Nature. God grant you all Happiness.

NAPLES, from the Covent of the Carmelites, Jan. 6. 1615. Most Reverend Sir
Your Most Humble Servant PAOLO ANTONIO FOSCARINI.

FINIS.
Imprimatur,

P. ANT. GHIBERT, Vic. Genesis JOANNES LONGUS Can. and Cur. Archiep. Neap. THEOL.
Vidit.

MATHEMATICAL COLLECTIONS AND TRANSLATIONS: THE SECOND TOME. THE SECOND PART;
Containing, I. D. BENEDICTUS CASTELLUS, his DISCOURSE of the MENSURATION of
RUNNING WATERS. II. His Geometrical DEMONSTRATIONS of the Measure of RUNNING
WATERS. III. His LETTERS and CONSIDERATIONS touching the Draining of FENNS,
Diversions of RIVERS, etc. IV. D. CORSINUS, His RELATION of the state of the
Inundations, etc. in the Territories of BOLOGNA, and FERRARA.


By THOMAS SALUSBURY, Esquire.

LONDON, Printed by WILLIAM LEYBOURNE, MDCLXI.

OF THE MENSURATION OF RUNNING WATERS. An Excellent Piece Written in ITALIAN BY
DON BENEDETTO CASTELLI, Abbot of St. BENEDETTO ALOYSIO, and Professor of the
Mathematics to Pope URBAN VIII. in ROME.

Englished from the Third and best Edition, with the addition of a Second Book
not before extant: By THOMAS SALUSBURY.

LONDON, Printed by WILLIAM LEYBOURN, 1661.

THE AUTHORS EPISTLE TO Pope URBAN VIII.
I Lay at the Feet of your Holiness these my Considerations concerning the
MENSURATION OF RUNNING WATERS: Wherein if I shall have succeeded, being a
matter so difficult and unhandled by Writers both Ancient Modern, the discovery
of any thing of truth has been the Effect of Your Holinesses Command; and if
through inability I have missed the Mark, the same Command will serve me for an
Excuse with Men of better Judgment, and more especially with Your Holiness, to
whom I humbly prostrate my self, and kiss Your Sacred Feet.

From ROME. Your Holinesses Most humble Servant BENEDETTO. A Monk of Cassino.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE Author and Work.
DON BENEDETTO CASTELLI, the famous Author of these ensuing Discourses of the
Mensuration of Running Waters, is descended from the Worshipful FAMILY of the
CASTELLII, and took his first breath near to the lake THRASIMENVS, (where
Hanibal gave a fatal overthrow to the Roman Legions) in that sweet and fertile
part of happy ITALY, called the Territory of PERUGIA, a branch of the Dukedom
of TUSCANY, which at present submits to the Jurisdiction of the Church, as
being a part of St. PETER'S Patrimony. His Parents, who were more zealous of
the good of his Soul than observant of the Propension of his Genius, dedicated
him (according to the Devotion of that Country) to the Service of the Church;
and entered him into the Flourishing Order of Blackfriars, called from the
place Moncks of Monte Casino, and from the Founder Benedictines. Nature, that
She might consummate the Profusion of her Favors upon him, sent him into the
World in an Age that was so ennobled and illuminated with Eminent Scholars in
all Kinds of Literature, that hardly any Century since the Creation can boast
the like.

. In particular, the SCIENCES MATHEMATICAL had then got that Fame and Esteem in
the Learned World, that all men of Spirit or Quality became either Students in,
or Patrons of those Sublime Knowledges. On this occasion the Curiosity of our
AUTHOR being awakened, his Active Wit could not endure to be any longer
confined to the Slavish Tuition of Hermetical Pedagogues; but in concurrence
with the Genius of the Age, he also betook himself to those most Generous and
Liberal Studies. His helps in this his design were so many, and so
extraordinary, that had his Inclination been weaker, or his Apprehension
lesser, he could hardly have failed attaining more than a Common Eminency in
these Sciences. For besides the Deluge of Learned and Useful Books, which the
Press at that time sent forth from all parts of EUROPE, he had the good
Fortune to fall into the Acquaintance, and under the Instruction of the most
Demonstrative and most Familiar Man in the World, the Famous GALILEO: whose
success being no less upon this his Pupil than upon the rest of those
Illustrious and Ingenious Persons that resorted from all parts to sit under his
Admirable Lectures, he in a short time attained to that Name in the
Mathematics, that he was invited to ROME, Complemented, and Preferred by his
then Holiness the Eighth URBAN, upon his very first Accession to the Papacy,
which was in the Year 1623.

. This Pope being moved with a Paternal Providence for the Concerns of his
Subjects in that part of ITALY about BOLOGNA, FERRARA, and COMMACHIO, lying
between the Rivers of PO and RENO, which is part of Lo Stato della Chiesa, or
the Church Patrimony, appoints this our CASTELLI in the Year 1625, to accompany
the Right Honorable Monsignore CORSINI (a most observant and intelligent
person in these affairs, and at that time Superintendent of the General
Draines, and President of ROMAGNA) in the Grand Visitation which he was then
ordered to make concerning the disorders occasioned by the Waters of those
parts.

. CASTELLI, having now an Opportunity to employ, yea more, to improve such
Notions as he had imbued from the Lectures of his Excellent MASTER, falls to
his work with all industry: and in the time that his Occasions detained him in
ROMAGNA he perfected the First Book of this his Discourse concerning the
Mensuration of Running Waters. He confesses that he had some years before
applied himself to this part of Practical Geometry, and from several
Observations collected part of that Doctrine which at this time he put into
Method, and which had procured him the Repute of so much Skill that he began to
be Courted by sundry Princes, and great Prelates. In particular about the
beginning of the Year 1623. and before his Invitation to ROME he was employed
by Prince Ferdinando I, Grand Duke of TUSCANY, to remedy the Disorders which at
that time happened in the Valley of PISA in the Meadows that lie upon the Banks
of Serchio and Fiume Morto: and in the presence of the Grand Duke, Grand
Duchess Mother, the Commissioners of Sewers, and sundry other Persons in a
few hours he made so great a progress in that affair, as gave his Most Serene
Highness high satisfaction, and gained himself much Honor.

. No sooner had he in his forementioned Voyage to ROMAGNA (which was but few
Months after, in the same Year) committed his Conceptions to paper, but he
communicated them to certain of his Friends. In which number we find Signore
Giampoli Secretary of the Popes Private Affairs; whom in the beginning of the
First Book he gratefully acknowledges to have been contributary, in his Purse,
toward defraying the charge of Experiments, and in his Person, toward the
debating and completing of Arguments upon this Subject. Some few years after
the Importunity of Friends, and the Zeal he had for the Public Good prevailed
with him to present the World with his First Discourse, accompanied with a
Treatise of the Geometrical Demonstrations of his whole Doctrine. What
Reception it found with the Judicious must needs be imagined by any one that
has observed how Novelty and Facility in conjunction with Verity make a Charm
of irresistible Operation.

. New it was, for that no man before him had ever attempted to Demonstrate all
the three Dimensions, to wit, the Length, Breadth and Profundity, of this Fluid
and Current Element. And he detecteth such gross Errors in those few that had
untertook to write upon the Subject (of which he instanceth in Frontinus and
Fontana, as those that include the rest) and delivers such singular and
unheard of Paradoxes (for so they sound in Vulgar Ears) as cannot but procure
unspeakable delight to his Reader.

. Easy it is likewise and True; and that upon so Familiar Experiments and
Manifest Demonstrations, that I have often questioned with my self which merited
the greater wonder, he, for discovering, or all men that handled the Argument
before him for not discovering a Doctrine of such strange Facility and
Infallibility. But yet as if our Author designed to oblige the whole World to
him by so excellent a Present, he selects a Subject that he knew would be
carressed by all persons of Nobler Souls, upon the accounts aforementioned, and by
all Mankind in General, as gratifying them in their much adored Idol Utility.
And to render his Art the more profitable, he reduces the lofty, and easy
to-be-mistaken Speculations of the Theory, into certain and facile Directions
for Practice; teaching us how to prevent and repair the Breaches of Seas, and
Inundations of Rivers; to draine and recover Fenns and Marches; to divert,
conveigh and distribute Waters for the Flowing and Stercoration of Grounds,
strengthening of Fortifications, serving of Aquaducts, preserving of Health (by
cleansing Streets, and scowring Sewers) and maintaining of Commerse (by
defending Bridges, clearing Rivers, and opening Pores and Channels) with
innumerable other Benefits of the like nature. And, that I may omit no
circumstance that may recommend my Author, the Fortune of this his Treatise
has been such, that as if he intended a Plus ultra by it, or as if all men
despaired to outdo it, or lastly, as if CASTELLI has been so great a Master
that none have presumed to take Pencil in hand for the finishing of what he
Pourfoild, this small Tract like the Arabian Phoenix (of which it is said Unica
semper Avis) did for several years together continue single in the World, till
that to verify it to be truly Phoenician, it renewed its Age by undergoing a
second Impression. And as if this did not make out the Immortal virtue of it,
it has had Anno 1660 a third Circulation, and risen in this last Edition as it
were from the Vrne of its Author; and that so improved by the Addition of a
second part, that it promises to perpetuate his Merits to all Posterity. To be
brief, the mere Fame of this Work resounded the Honorable Name of CASTELLI
into all the Corners of Italy, I may say of Europe; insomuch, that, in hopes to
reap great benefit by his Art, the respective Grandees of the adjacent
Countries courted his Judgment and Advice about their Draining of Fenns,
Diversion of Rivers, Evacuation of Ports, Preventing of Inundations, etc. So
that every Summer he made one or more of these Journies or Visitations.
Particularly, the Senate of Venice consulted him about their Lake; to whom he
delivered his Opinion in May 1641. and upon farther thoughts he presented them
with another Paper of Considerations the 20 December following. Prince LEOPOLDO
of TUSCANY likewise requested his Advice in the beginning of the ensuing year
1642, which occasioned his Letter to Father Francesco di San Giuseppe, bearing
date February 1, To which Signore Bartolotti opposing, he writes a second
Letter, directed to one of the Commissioners of Sewers, vindicating his former,
and refuting Bartolotti, both which I here give you.

. The Preferments which his Merits recommended him unto, were first to be Abbot
of Cassino, from which he was removed Anno 1640, or thereabouts, unto the Abbey
of Santo Benedetto Aloysio; and much about the same time preferred to the
Dignity of Chief Mathematician to his grand Patron Pope URBAN VIII. and
Public Professor of Mathematics in the University of ROME.

. Here a Stop was put to the Carier of his Fortunes, and being fuller of Honor
than of Years, was by Death, the Importunate Intrerupter of Generous Designs,
prevented in doing that farther Good which the World had good reason to promise
it self from so Profound and Industrious a Personage, leaving many Friends and
Disciples of all Degrees and Qualities to lament his loss, and honor his
Memory.

. His singular Virtues and Abilities had gained him the Friendship of very
many; as to instance in some, he had contracted strict Amity with Monsignore
Maffei Barberino a Florentine, Prefect of the Public Ways, and afterward
Pope with the Name of URBAN VIII. as was said before; with the abovenamed
Monsignore Corsini Superintendant of the General Draines: with Monsignore
Piccolomini Archbishop of Siena: with Cardinal Serra: with Cardinal Caponi,
who has studied much and writ well upon this Subject; and with Cardinal
Gaetano who frequently consulted with him in his design of Draining the Fenns
of ROMAGNA. Moreover Prince LEOPOLDO, and his Brother the Grand Duke had very
great kindness for him; which speaks no small attractions in him, considering
him as a favorite of the Family of Barberini, between whom and the House of
Medeci there is an inveterate Fewd. Amongst persons of a lower Quality he
acknowledges Signore Ciampoli the Popes Secretary, Sig. Ferrante Cesarini,
Sig. Giovanni Basadonna Senator of Venice; and I find mentioned Sig. Lana, Sig.
Albano, Padre Serafino, Pad. Francesco de San. Giuseppe, and many others.

. The Works in which he will survive to all succeeding Ages are first His solid
and sober Confutation of the Arguments of Signore Lodovico dell Columbo, and
Signore Vincentio di Gratia against the Tract of Galileo Delle cose che stanno
sopra Aqua, wherein he vindicates bis said Master with a Gratitude that Tutors
very rarely reap from the pains they take in Cultivating their Pupils. This
Apology was first Printed Anno 1615. and was a second time published, as also
those of his Antagonists, amongst the Works of GALILEO, set forth by the
Learned Viviani 1656. He has likewise writ several other curious Pieces, as I
am informed by the most Courteous Carolo Manolessi of Bologna; amongst others
an excellent Treatise concerning Colors, which he puts me in hopes to see
printed very speedily. And last of all these Discourses and Reflections upon
the Mensuration of Running Waters, with the addition of a Second Book, three
Epistles, and four Considerations upon the same Argument, which conduce much to
Illustrate his Doctrine and Facilitate the Practice of it; and which with a
Relation of Monsignore Corsini, make the second part of my First Tome.

. I might here sally forth into the Citation of sundry Authors of Good
Account, that have transmitted his Character to Posterity, but shall confine my
self to only two; the one is of his Master, the other of his Scholar; than
whom there cannot be two more competent Judges of his Accomplishments. To begin
with his Master, the Quick-sighted, and truly Lyncean GALILEO, who speaking of
his Abilities in Astronomy says Nella continuatione dell Nuntio siderio.
Che la felicita del suo ingegno non la fa bisognosa dell' opera suo. And
again, submitting a certain Demonstration, which he intended to divulge, to the
Judgment of this our Abbot, he writes to him in this manner: L^ttera al P.
Abba^^ D. B. Castelli D'A^cetro; li. 3. December. 16 9.
Questo lo comunico a V. S. per lettera prima che ad alcun altro, con
attenderne principalmente il parer suo, e doppo quello de' nostri Amici
discosti, conpensiero d' invia^ne poi altre Copy ad altri Amici d'Italia, e di
Francia, quando io ne venga da lei consigliato: e qui pregandola a farci part
d' alcuna delle sue peregrine speculationi; con sincerissimo affetto, etc. And
the most acute Mathematician Signore Evangelista Terricelli, late Professor to
the Grand Duke in immediate Succession after GALILEO, makes this Honorable
and Grateful Mention of him, and his Book: De Motu Aquan^. ^ib. 2. Prop. 37. p.
191.
Omitto magnum illum nutantis Maris motum; Praetereo etiam omnem Fluminum,
Aquarumque Currentium tum mensurum, tum usum, quarum omnis doctrina reperta
primum fuit ab Abbate BENEDICTO CASTELLIO Preceptore meo. Scripsit ille
Scientiam suam, and illam non solum demonstratione, verum etiam opere
confirmavit, maxima cum Principum and populorum utilitate, majore cum
admiratione Phylosophorum. Extat illius Liber, vere aureus.

. I have only two particulars more to offer the English Reader: The one
concerns the Book, and it is this, That after the general Aprobation it has
had in Italy, I cannot but think it deserves the same Civil Entertainment with
us, in regard that it comes with no less Novelty, Facility, Verity, and
Utility to us than to those whom the Author favored with the Original. Our
Rivers and Sewers through Public Distractions and Private Encroachments are
in great disorder, as those Channels for iustance which formerly were Navigable
unto the very Walls of York and Salisbury, etc: Our Ports are choked and
obstructed by Shelfes and Setlements: Our Fenns do in a great part lie waste
and unimproved: Now all these may be (and, as I find by the Confession of some
whose Practices upon the Copy of the First Book only of our Author has got
them both Money and Reputation, in part have been) remedied by the Ways and
Means he here sets down. The truth is the Argument has been past over with an
Universal Silence; so that to this day I have not seen any thing that has been
written Demonstratively and with Mathematical Certainty concerning the same,
save only what this Learned Prelate has delivered of his Own Invention in
these Treatises: who yet has so fully and plainly handled the Whole Doctrine,
that I may affirm his Work to be every way absolute. It must be confessed the
Demonstration of the Second Proposition of the Second Book did not well please
the Author, and had he lived he would have supplied that defect, but being
prevented by Death, the Reader must content himself with the Mechanical Proof
that he gives you of the truth of so Excellent a Conclusion.

. The other particular that I am to offer is, that out of my desire to
contribute what lies in me to the completing of this Piece for English
Practice, I have exeeded my promise not only in giving you the Second and
following Books which were not extant at the time of tendering my Overtures, but
also in that I have added ^ Map or Plat of all the Rivers, Lakes, Fenns, etc.
mentioned through out the Work. And if I have not kept touch in point of Time,
let it be considered that I am the Translator and not the Printer. To conclude,
according to your acceptance of these my endeavors, you may expect some other
Tracts of no less Profit and Delight. Farewell.

T. S.

ERRATA of the second PART of the first TOME.
In PREFACE, read Ferdinando II. ibid. l'Aqua.

PAGE 2. LINE 26, for must read much. P. 3. l. 22, r. and let. l. 25. r. water,
from l. 41. r. Tappe, ( as every where else). Page 4. l. 18. r cords. Page 6.
l. 9. r. acquire, or. Page 9. l. 1. r. irreperable. P. 10. l. 13. r.
dissimboguement. For Page 17. r. P. 15. P. 15. l. 27, r. in. l. 36, r. is as.
l. 38, r. Panaro. P. 17. l. 12, Giulto. l. 17. r. Measurers. l. 25, r. measured
it,. r. necessarily. P. 23. l. 19. r. for help. for Page 31. r. P. 32. P. 24.
l. 14, r. to. l. 17, r. namly, of the. l. 23, r. easy. P. 25. l. 38. r. Cock.
p. 29. l. 7. r. lasted,. p. 31. l. 32. r. So^. p. 41. l. 20. r. to the line. p.
48. l. 19. r. us the *. id. Figure false p. 52. l. 30, and 31. for Theorem r.
Proposition. p. 53. l. 29. r. again. p. 57. l. 19, r. same if. l. 44. r.
bodily. p. 58. l. 9. r. gathering. l. 40. omit;. p. 60. l. 2. omit, if. p. 65.
l. 1. r. tide dele;. p. 66. l. 35. r. Stoppage of. p. 68. l. 12, for Lords the
r. Lords. l. ult. for they r. it. p. 69. l. 14. r. to one. id. carried dele to.
p. 71. l. 20, r. and that. l. 25, r. Braces; it. l. 29. r. Braces. l. 44, r the
Bre^t. p. 72. l. 23. r. Serene Highness. p. 73. l. 24, r. deliberation:. l.
26, for sum r. Moddel. l. 40. r. Months. p. 79. l. 18. r. that into. p. 82.
l. 22. dele;. p. 85. l. 9, 10. dele a free drame. p. 88. l. 5. r. Palms. p.
89. l. 8. r. Princes. p. 92. l. 3. r. Discourses. p. 93. l. 31. r. Tautologie.
p. 94. l. 9. r. miracle;. p. 97. l. 13. r. weighty. p. 101. l. 21. r. Marrara.
p. 107. l. 28, r. Patrimony. l. 40, r. above. p. 111. l. 16. r. said. For p.
432. r. p. 114. p. 114. l. 35. r. of 200. l. 41. r. closed. p. 115. l. 29. r.
constant;.

OF THE MENSURATION OF Running Waters*
LIB. I.
WHat, and of how great moment the consideration of Motion is in natural
things, is so manifest, that the Prince of Peripateticks pronounced that in his
Schools now much used Sentence: Ignorato motu, ignoratur natura. Thence it is
that true Philosophers have so travailed in the contemplation of the Celestial
motions, and in the speculation of the motions of Animals, that they have
arrived to a wonderful height and sublimity of understanding. Under the same
Science of Motion is comprehended all that which is written by Mechanitians
concerning Engines moving of themselves, Machins moving by the force of Air,
and those which serve to move weights and immense magnitudes with small force.
There appertains to the Science of Motion all that which has been written of
the alteration not only of Bodies, but of our Minds also; and in sum, this
ample matter of Motion is so extended and dilated, that there are few things
which fall under man's notice, which are not conjoined with Motion, or at least
depending thereupon, or to the knowledge thereof directed; and of almost every
of them, there has been written and composed by sublime wits, learned
Treatises and Instructions. And because that in the years past I had occasion
by Order of our Lord Pope Urban 8. to apply my thoughts to the motion of the
Waters of Rivers, (a matter difficult, most important, and little handled by
others) having concerning the same observed some particulars not well observed,
or considered till now, but of great moment both in public and private
affairs; I have thought good to publish them, to the end that ingenious spirits
might have occasion to discuss more exactly then hitherto has been done, so
necessary and profitable a matter, and to supply also my defects in this short
and difficult Tractate. Difficult I say, for the truth is, these knowledges,
though of things next our senses, are sometimes more abstruce and hidden, then
the knowledge of things more remote; and much better, and with greater
exquisitness are known the motions of the Planets, and Periods of the Stars,
than those of Rivers and Seas: As that singular light of Philosophy of our
times, and my Master Signore Galileo Galilei wisely observes in his Book
concerning the Solar spots. And to proceed with a due order in Sciences, I will
take some suppositions and cognitions sufficiently clear; from which I will
afterward proceed to the deducing of the principal conclusions. But to the end
that what I have written at the end of this discourse in a demonstrative and
Geometrical method, may also be understood of those which never have applied
their thoughts to the study of Geometry; I have endeavored to explain my
conceit by an example, and with the consideration of the natural things
themselves, must after the same order in which I began to doubt in this matter;
and have placed this particular Treatise here in the beginning, adverting
nevertheless, that he who desires more full and absolute solidity of Reasons,
may overpass this prefatory discourse, and only consider what is treated of in
the demonstrations placed toward the end, and return afterward to the
consideration of the things collected in the Corollaries and Appendices; which
demonstrations notwithstanding, may be pretermitted by him that has not seen
at least the first six Books of the Elements of Euclid; so that he diligently
observes that which follows.

I say therefore, that having in times past, on diverse occasions heard speak of
the measures of the waters of Rivers, and Fountains, saying, such a River is
two or three thousand feet of water; such a spring water is twenty, thirty, or
forty inches, etc. Although in such manner I have found all to treat thereof in
word and writing, without variety, and as we are wont to say, constanti
sermon, yea even Artists and Ingeneers, as if it were a thing that admitted
not of any doubt, yet howsoever I remained still infolded in such an obscurity,
that I well knew I understood nothing at all, of that which others pretended
full and clearly to understand. And my doubt arose from my frequent observation
of many Trenches and Channels, which carry water to turn Mills, in which
Trenches, and Channels, the water being measured, was found pretty deep; but if
afterward the same water was measured in the fall it made to turn the Wheel of
the Mill, it was much less, not amounting often to the tenth part, nor
sometimes to the twentieth, insomuch, that the same running water came to be
one while more, another while less in measure, in diverse parts of its Channel;
and for that reason this vulgar manner of measuring running Waters, as
indeterminate and uncertain, was by me justly suspected, the measure being to
be determinate, and the same. And here I freely confess that I had singular
help to resolve this difficulty from the excellent and accurate way of
discoursing, as in allother matters, so also in this, of the Right Honorable
and Truly Noble Signior Ciampoli, Secretary of the Popes secret affairs. Who
moreover, not sparing ^or the costs of the same, generously gave me occasion a
few years past to try by exact experiments that which past concerning this
particular. And to explain all more clearly with an example; we suppose a
Vessel filled with Water, as for instance a Butt, which is kept full, though
still water runs out, and the Water run out by two Taps equal of bigness,
one put in the bottom of the Vessel, and the other in the upper part; it is
manifest that in the time wherein from the upper part shall issue a determinate
measure of water from the inferior part there shall issue four, five, and many
more of the same measures, according to the difference of the height of the
Taps, and the distance of the upper Tap from the Superficies and level of the
water of the Vessel: and all this will always follow, though, as has been
said, the Taps be equal, and the water in discharging keep the said Taps
always full. Where first we note, that, although the measure of the Taps be
equal, nevertheless there issues from them in equal times unequal quantities
of water, And if we should more attentively consider this business, we should
find, that the water by the lower Tap, runs and passes with much greater
velocity, then it does by the upper, whatever is the reason. If therefore we
would have such a quantity of Water discharge from the upper tap, as would
discharge from the nether in the same time, it is plain, that either the upper
Taps must be multiplied in such sort, that so many more Taps in number be
placed above than below, as the nether tap shall be more swift than the upper,
or the upper Tap made so much bigger than the nether, by how much that beneath
shall be more swift than that above; and so then in equal times, the same
quantity of Water shall discharge from the upper, as does fromth^e nether part.

I will declare my self by another example. If we should imagine, that two
cords or lines of equal thickness, be drawn through two holes of equal bore;
but so that the first pass with quadruple velocity to the second: It is
manifest, that if in a determinate time, we shall by the first bore have drawn
four Else of the line, in the same time, by the second hole we shall have drawn
but one Ell of cord only; and if by the first there pass twelve Else, then
through the second there shall pass only three Else; and in short the
quantity of cord shall have the same proportion to the cord, that the volocity
has to the velocity. And therefore we desiring to compensate the tardity of
the second cord, and maintaining the same tardity to draw through the second
hole as much cord as through the first, it will be necessary to draw through
the second bore four ends of cord; so that the thickness of all the cords by
the second hole, have the same proportion to the thickness of the cord which
passes only by the first, as the velocity of the cord by the first hole has
reciprocally to the velocity of the cod^s by the second hole. And thus its
clear, that when there is drawn through two holes equal quantity of cords in
equal time, but with unequal velocity, it will be necessary, that the thickness
of all the four cords shall have the same reciprocal proportion to the
thickness of the swifter cord, that the velocity of the swifter cord has to
the velocity of the slower. The which is verified likewise in the fluid Element
of Water.

And to the end that this principal fundamental be well understood, I will also
note a certain observation made my me in the Art of Wyer-drawing, or spinning
Gold, Silver, Brass, and Iron, and it is this; That such Artificers desiring
more and more to disgrosse and subtillize the said Metals, having wound about a
Rocket or Barrel, the thread of the Metal, they place the Rocket in a frame
upon a steadfast Axis, in such sort that the Rocket may turn about in it self;
then making one end of the thread to pass by force through a Plate of Steel
pierced with diverse holes, greater and lesser, as need requires, fastening the
same end of the thread to another Rocket, they wind up the thread, which
passing through a bore less than the thickness of the thread, is of force
constrained to disgrosse and subtillize. Now that which is intensly to be
observed in this business, is this, That the parts of the thread before the
hole, are of such a thickness, but the parts of the same thread after it is
passed the hole, are of a lesser thickness: and yet nevertheless the mass
and weight of the thread which is drawn forth, is ever equal to the mass and
weight of the thread which is winded up. But if we should well consider the
matter, we should find, that the thicker the thread before the hole is, than
the thread passed the hole, the greater reciprocally is the velocity of the
parts of the thread passed the hole, than the volocity of the parts before the
hole: Insomuch that if verbi gratia the thickness of the thread before the
hole, were double to the thickness after the hole, in such case the velocity
of the parts of the thread passed the hole, should be double to the velocity of
the parts of the thread before the hole; and thus the thickness compensates
the velocity, and the velocity compensates the thickness. So that the same
occurreth in the solid Metals of Gold, Silver, Brass, Iron, etc. that eveneth
also in the fluid Element of Water, and other liquids, namely, That the
velocity bears the same proportion to the velocity, that the thickness of
the Metal, or Water, has to the thickness.

And therefore granting this discourse, we may say, that as often as two Taps
with different velocity discharge equal quantities of Water in equal times, it
will be necessary that the Tap less swift be so much greater, and larger, than
the Tap more swift, by how much the swifter superates in velocity the slower;
and to pronounce the Proposition in more proper terms, we say; That if two Taps
of unequal velocity, discharge in equal times equal quantities of Water, the
greatness of the first shall be to the greatness of the second, in reciprocal
proportion, as the velocity of the second to the velocity of the first. As for
example, if the first Tap shall be ten times swifter than the second Tap, it
will be necessary, that the second be ten times bigger and larger than the
first; and in such case the Taps shall discharge equal quantities of water in
equal times; and this is the principal and most important point, which ought to
be kept always in mind, for that on it well understood depend many things
profitable, and worthy of our knowledge.

Now applying all that has been said nearer to our purpose, I consider, that
it being most true, that in diverse parts of the same River or Current of
running water, there does always pass equal quantity of Water in equal time
(which thing is also demonstrated in our first Proposition) and it being also
true, that in diverse parts the same River may have various and different
velocity; it follows of necessary consequence, that where the River has less
velocity, it shall be of greater measure, and in those parts, in which it has
greater velocity, it shall be of less measure; and in sum, the velocity of
several parts of the said River, shall have eternally reciprocal and like
proportion with their measures. This principle and fundamental well
established, that the same Current of Water changes measure, according to its
varying of velocity; that is, lessening the measure, when the velocity
increases, and increasing the measure, when the velocity decreaseth; I pass
to the consideration of many particular accidents in this admirable matter, and
all depending on this sole Proposition, the sense of which I have often repeated,
that it might be well understood.

COROLLARIE I.
ANd first, we hence conclude, that the same Streams of a Torrent, namely,
those streams which carry equal quantity of Water in equal times, make not the
same depths or measures in the River, in which they enter, unless when in the
entrance into the River they acquire; or to say better, keep the same velocity;
because if the velocicities acquired in the River shall be different, also the
measures shall be diverse; and consequently the depths, as is demonstrated.

COROLLARIE II.
ANd because successively, as the River is more and more full, it is
constituted ordinarily in greater and greater velocity: hence it is that the
same streams of the Torrent, that enter into the River, make less and less
depths, as the River grows more and more full; since that also the Waters of
the Torrent being entered into the River, go acquiring greater and greater
velocities, and therefore diminish in measure and height.

COROLLARIE III.
WE observe also, that while the main River is shallow, if there fall but a
gentle rain, it suddenly much increases and rises; but when the River is
already swelled, though there fall again another new violent shower, yet it
increases not at the same rate as before, proportionably to the rain which
fell: which thing we may affirm particularly to depend on this, that in the
first case, while the River is low, it is found also very slow, and therefore
the little water which enters into it, passes and runs with little velocity,
and consequently occupies a great measure: But when the River is once
augmented, by new water being also made more swift, it causes the great Flood
of water which falls, to bear a less measure, and not to make such a depth.

COROLLARIE IV.
FRom the things demonstrated is manifest also, that whilst a Torrent enters
into a River, at the time of Ebb, then the Torrent moves with such a certain
velocity, what ever it be, passing by its extremest parts, wherewith it
communicates with the River; in which parts, the Torrent being measured, shall
have such a certain measure: but the River swelling and rising, also those
parts of the Torrent augment in greatness and measure, though the Torrent, in
that instant, dis-imbogue no more water than it did before: so that the River
being swelled, we are to consider two mouths of the same Torrent, one less
before the rising, the other greater after the rising, which mouths discharge
equal quantities of water in equal times; therefore the velocity by the lesser
mouth shall be greater than the velocity by the greater mouth; and thus the
Torrent shall be retarded from its ordinary course.

COROLLARIE V.
FRom which operation of Nature proceeds another effect worthy of
consideration; and it is, that the course of the water retarding, as has been
said in those ultimate parts of the Torrent, if it shall happen that the
Torrent grow torbid and muddy, and its stream be retarded in such a degree,
that it is not able to carry away those minute grains of Earth, which compose
the muddinesse; in this case the Torrent shall clear away the mud, and carry
away the Sand at the bottom of its own Chanel, in the extreme parts of its
mouth, which raised and voided Sand, shall again afterward be carried away,
when the River abating, the Torrent shall return to move with its primitive
velocity.

COROLLARIE VI.
WHilst it is demonstrated, that the same water has different measures in its
Chanel or course, according as it varieth in velocity; so that the measure of
the water is always greater, where the velocity is lesser; and on the
contrary, the measure lesser, where the velocity is greater: from hence we may
most elegantly render the reason of the usual Proverb, Take heed of the still
waters: For that if we consider the self same water of a River in those parts,
wherein it is less swift, and thence called still or smooth water, it shall be,
of necessity, of greater measure than in those parts, in which it is more
swift, and therefore ordinarily shall be also more deep and dangerous for
passengers; whence it is well said, Take heed of the still Waters; and this
saying has been since applied to things moral.

COROLLARIE VII.
LIkewise, from the things demonstrated may be concluded, that the winds,
which stop a River, and blowing against the Current, retard its course and
ordinary velocity shall necessarily amplify the measure of the same River, and
consequently shall be, in great part, causes; or we may say, potent con-causes
of making the extraordinary inundations which Rivers use to make. And its most
certain, that as often as a strong and continual wind shall blow against the
Current of a River, and shall reduce the water of the River to such tardity of
motion, that in the time wherein before it run five miles, it now moves but
one, such a River will increase to five times the measure, though there should
not be added any other quantity of water; which thing indeed has in it
something of strange, but it is most certain, for that look what proportion the
waters velocity before the wind, has to the velocity after the wind, and
sueh reciprocally is the measure of the same water after the wind, to the
measure before the wind; and because it has been supposed in our case that
the velocity is diminished to a fifth part, therefore the measure shall be
increased five times more than that, which it was before.

COROLLARIE VIII.
WE have also probable the cause of the inundations of Tyber, which befell at
Rome, in the time of Alexander the Sixth, and of Clement the Seventh; which
innundations came in a serene time, and without great thaws of the Snows; which
therefore much puzzled the wits of those times. But we may with much
probability affirm, That the River rose to such a height and excrescence, by
the retardation of the Waters dependant on the boistrous and constant Winds,
that blew in those times, as is noted in the memorials.

COROLLARIE. IX.
IT being most manifest, that by the great abundance of Water the Torrents may
increase, and of themselves alone exorbitantly swell the River; and having
demonstrated that also without new Water, but only by the notable retardment
the River rises and increases in measure, in proportion as the velocity
decreaseth: hence it is apparent, that each of these causes being able of it
self, and separate from the other to swell the River; when it shall happen that
both these two causes conspire the augmentation of the River, in such a case
there must follow very great and irrepable innundations.

COROLLARIE X.
FRom what has been demonstrated, we may with facility resolve the doubt which
has troubled, and still poseth the most diligent, but incautelous observers of
Rivers, who measuring the Streams and Torrents which fall into another River;
as those for instance, which enter into the Po, or those which fall into Tiber;
and having summed the total of these measures, and conferring the measures of
the Rivers and Brooks, which fall into Tiber, with the measure of Tiber, and
the measures of those which disimbogue into Po, with the measure of Po, they
find them not equal, as, it seems to them, they ought to be, and this is
because they have not well noted the most important point of the variation of
velocity, and how that it is the most potent cause of wonderfully altering the
measures of running Waters; but we most facilly resolving the doubt, may say
that these Waters diminish the measure, being once entered the principal
Channel, because they increase in velocity.

COROLLARIE XI.
THrough the ignorance of the force of the velocity of the Water, in altering
its measure, and augmenting it when the velocity diminishes; and diminishing
it when the velocity augmenteth: The Architect Giovanni Fontana, endeavored to
measure, and and to cause to be measured by his Nephew, all the Brooks and
Rivers which discharged their Waters into Tiber, at the time of the
Innundation; which happened at Rome in the year 1598, and published a small
Treatise thereof, wherein he summeth up the measures of the extraordinary Water
which fell into Tiber, and made account that it was about five hundred Else
more than ordinary; and in the end of that Treatise concludes, that to remove
the Innundation wholly from Rome, it would be necessary to make two other
Channels, equal to that at present, and that less would not suffice; and
finding afterward that the whole Stream passed under the Bridge Quattro-Capi,
(the Arch whereof is of a far less measure then five hundred Else) concludes,
that under the said Bridge past a hundred fifty one Else of Water compressed,
(I have set down the precise term of comprest Water, written by Fontana)
wherein I find many errors.

The first of which is to think that the measures of these Waters compressed in
the Channels of those Brooks and Rivers, should maintain themselves the same in
Tiber, which by his leave, is most false, when ever those waters reduced into
Tiber, retain not the same velocity which they had in the place in which
Fontana and his Nephew measured them: And all this is manifest from the things
which we have above explained; for, if the Waters reduced into Tiber increase
in velocity, they decrease in measure; and if they decrease in velocity, they
increase in measure.

Secondly, I consider that the measures of those Brooks and Rivers, which enter
into Tiber at the time of Innundation, are not between themselves really the
same, when their velocities are not equal, though they have the same names of
Else and Feet; for that its possible that a disinboguement of ten Else
requadrated (to speak in the phrase of Fontana) of one of those Brooks, might
discharge into Tiber at the time of Innundation, four, ten, and twenty times
less Water, than another mouth equal to the first in greatness, as would occur
when the first mouth were four, ten, or twenty times less swift than the
second. Whereupon, whilst Fontana sums up the Else and Feet of the measures
of those Brooks and Rivers into a total aggregate, he commits the same error
with him, which would add into one sum diverse moneys of diverse values, and
diverse places, but that had the same name; as if one should say ten Crowns of
Roman money, four Crowns of Gold, thirteen Crowns of Florence, five Crowns of
Venice, and eight Crowns of Mantua, should make the same sum with forty
Crowns of Gold, or forty Crowns of Mantua.

Thirdly, It might happen that some River or Current in the parts nearer Rome,
in the time of its flowing, did not send forth more Water than ordinary; and
however, its a thing very clear, that whilst the stream came from the superior
parts, that same Brook or River would be augmented in measure, as has been
noted in the fourth Corollary; in such sort, that Fontana might have
inculcated, and noted that same River or Current as concurring to the
Innundation, although it were therein altogether unconcerned.

Moreover, in the fourth place we must note, That it might so fall out, that
such a River not only was uninteressed in the Innundation, though augmented in
measure, but it might I say happen, that it was instrumental to the asswaging
the Innundation, by augmenting in the measure of its own Channel; which matter
is sufficiently evident; for if it be supposed that the River in the time of
flood, had not had of it self, and from its proper springs more Water than
ordinary, its a thing certain, that the Water of Tiber rising and increasing;
also that River, to level it self with the Water of Tiber, would have retained
some of its Waters in its own Chanel, without discharging them into Tyber, or
else would have ingorged and swallowed (if I may so say) some of the water of
Tyber; and in this case, at the time of Inundation, less abundance of water
would have come to Rome, and yet nevertheless the measure of that River would
have been increased.

Fifthly, Fontana deceives himself, when he concludes, that to remove the
Inundation from Rome, it would be necessary to make two other Channels of
Rivers, that were as large as that, which is the present one, and that less
would not suffice, which, I say, is a fallacy: and to convince him easily of
his error, it suffices to say, that all the Streams being passed under the
Bridge Quattro-Capi, as he himself attests, a Channel would suffice only of the
capacity of the said Bridge, provided that the water there might run with the
same velocity, as it did under the Bridge at the time of Inundation; and on the
contrary, twenty Currents of capacity equal to the present one, would not
suffice, if the water should run with twenty times less velocity, than it made
at the time of the Inundation.

Sixthly, to me it seems a great weakness to say, that there should pass
under the Bridge Quattro-Capi, an hundred fifty one else of water compressed;
for that I do not understand that water is like Cotton or Wool, which matters
may be pressed and trod, as it happens also to the air, which receives
compression in such sort, that after that in some certain place a quantity of
air shall be reduced to its natural constitution; and having taken up all the
said place, yet nevertheless compressing the first Air with force and
violence, it is reduced into far less room, and will admit four or six times as
much air, as before, as is experimentally And as is at large demonstrated by
that most excellent and Honorable personage Mr. Boil in the industrious
experiment of his Pneumatical Engine.
seen in the Wind-Gun, invented in our days by M. Vincenzo Vincenti of Vrbin,
which property of the Air of admitting condensation, is also seen in the
portable Fountains of the same M. Vincenzo: which Fountains spirt the Water on
high, by force of the Air compressed, which whilst it seeks to reduce its self
to its natural constitution, in the dilation causes that violence. But the
water can never, for any thing I know, crowd, or press so, as that if before
the compression it held or possessed a place, being in its natural constitution,
I believe not, I say, that it is possible, by pressing and crowding to make it
possess less room, for if it were possible to compress the Water, and make it
to occupy a less place, it would thence follow, that two Vessels of equal
measure, but of unequal height, should be of unequal capacity, and that should
hold more water which was higher; also a Cylinder, or other Vessel more high
than broad, would contain more water erected, than being laid along; for that
being erected, the water put therein would be more pressed and crowded.

And therefore, in our case, according to our principles we will say, that the
water of that Stream passes all under the said Bridge Quattro-Capi, for that
being there most swift, it ought of consequence to be less in measure.

And here one may see, into how many errors a man may run through ignorance of
a true and real Principle, which once known and well understood, takes away all
mists of doubting, and easily resolves all difficulties.

COROLLARIE. XII.
THrough the same inadvertency of not regarding the variation of velocity in
the same Current, there are committed by Ingineers and Learned men, errors of
very great moment (and I could thereof produce examples, but for good reasons I
pass them over in silence) when they think, and propose, by deriving new
Channels from great Rivers, to diminish the measure of the water in the River,
and to diminish it proportionally, according to the measure of the Water which
they make to pass through the Channel, as making v. g. a Channel fifty foot
broad, in which the derived water is to run waste, ten foot deep, they think
they have diminished the measure of the Water in the River five hundred feet,
which thing does not indeed so fall out; and the reason is plain; for that the
Chanel being derived, the rest of the main River, diminishes in velocity, and
therefore retains a greater measure than it had at first before the derivation
of the Chanel; and moreover, if the Chanel being derived, it shall not conserve
the same velocity which it had at first in the main River, but shall diminish
it, it will be necessary, that it has a greater measure than it had before in
the River; and therefore to account aright, there shall not be so much water
derived into the Channel, as shall diminish the River, according to the
quantity of the water in the Channel, as is pretended.

COROLLARIE XIII.
THis same consideration gives me occasion to discover a most ordinary error,
observed by me in the business of the water of Ferara, when I was in those
parts, in service of the most Reverend and Illustrious Monsignor Corsini; the
sublime wit of whom has been a very great help to me in these contemplations;
its very true, I have been much perplexed, whether I should commit this
particular to paper, or pass it over in silence, for that I have ever doubted,
that the opinion so common and moreover confirmed with a most manifest
experiment, may not only make this my conjecture to be esteemed far from true,
but also to discredit with the World the rest of this my Treatise:
Nevertheless I have at last resolved not to be wanting to my self, and to
truth in a matter of it self, and for other consequences most important; nor
does it seem to me requisite in difficult matters, such as these we have in
hand, to resign our selves to the common opinion, since it would be very
strange if the multitude in such matters should hit on the truth, nor ought
that to be held difficult, in which even the vulgar do know the truth and
right; besides that I hope morever to prove all in such sort, that persons of
solid judgment, shall rest fully persuaded, so that they but keep in mind the
principal ground and foundation of all this Treatise; and though that which I
will propose, be a particular, as I have said, pertaining only to the
interests of Ferara; yet nevertheless from this particular Doctrine well
understood, good judgment may be made of other the like cases in general.

I say then, for greater perspecuity, and better understanding of the whole,
That about thirteen miles above Ferara, near to Stellata, the main of Po,
branching it self into two parts, with one of its Arms it comes close to
Ferara, retaining the name of the Po of Ferara; and here again it divides it
self into two other branches, and that which continues on the right hand, is
called the Po of Argenta, and of Primaro; and that on the left the Po of
Volana. But for that the bed of the Po of Ferara being heretofore augmented and
raised, it follows that it rests wholly deprived of the Water of the great
Po, except in the time of its greater swelling; for in that case, this Po of
Ferara being restrained with a Bank near to Bondeno, would come also in the
overflowings of the main Po, to be free from its Waters: But the Lords of
Ferara are wont at such time as the Po threateneth to break out, to cut the
bank; by which cutting, there disgorgeth such a Torrent of Water, that it is
observed, that the main Po in the space of some few hours abateth near a foot,
and all persons that I have spoken with hitherto, moved by this experiment,
think that it is of great profit and benefit to keep ready this Vent, and to
make use of it in the time of its fulness. And indeed, the thing considered
simply, and at the first appearance, it seems that none can think otherwise;
the rather, for that many examining the matter narrowly, measure that body of
Water which runs by the Channel, or Bed of the Po of Ferara, and make
account, that the body of the Water of the great Po, is diminished the quantity
of the body of the Water which runs by the Po of Ferara. But if we well
remember what has been said in the beginning of the Treatise, and how much the
variety of the velocities of the said Water imports, and the knowledge of
them is necessary to conclude the true quantity of the running Water, we shall
find it manifest, that the benefit of this Vent is far less than it is
generally thought: And mereover, we shall find, if I deceive not my self, that
there follow from thence so many mischiefs, that I could greatly incline to
believe, that it were more to the purpose wholly to stop it up, than to
maintain it open: yet I am not so wedded to my opinion, but that I am ready to
change my judgment upon strength of better reasons; especially of one that
shall have first well understood the beginning of this my discourse, which I
frequently inculcate, because its absolutely impossible without this
advertisement to treat of these matters, and not commit very great errors.

I propose therefore to consideration, that although it be true, that whilst
the water of the main Po is at its greatest height, the Bank and Dam then cut
of the Po of Ferara, and the superior waters having a very great fall into the
Channel of Ferara, they precipitate into the same with great violence and
velocity, and with the same in the beginning, or little less, they run toward
the Po of Volana, and of Argenta on the sea coasts; yet after the space of some
few hours, the Po of Ferara being full, and the superior Waters not finding so
great a diclivity there, as they had at the beginning of the cutting, they fall
not into the same with the former velocity, but with far less, and thereby a
great deal less Water begins to issue from the great Po; and if we diligently
compare the velocity at the first cutting, with the velocity of the Water after
the cutting made, and when the Po of Ferara shall be full of Water, we shall
find perhaps that to be fifteen or twenty times greater than this, and
consequently the Water which issues from the great Po, that first impetuosity
being past, shall be only the fifteenth or twentieth part of that which issued
at the beginning; and therefore the Waters of the main Po will return in a
small time almost to the first height. And here I will pray those who rest not
wholly satisfied with what has been said, that for the love of truth, and the
common good, they would please to make diligent observation whether in the time
of great Floods, the said Bank or Dam at Bondeno is cut, and that in few hours
the main Po diminishes, as has been said about a foot in its height; that
they would observe I say, whether, a day or two being past, the Waters of the
main Po return almost to their first height; for if this should follow, it
would be very clear, that the benefit which resulteth from this diversion or
Vent, is not so great as is universally presumed; I say, it is not so great as
is presumed; because, though it be granted for true, that the Waters of the
main Po, abate at the beginning of the Vent, yet this benefit happens to be but
temporary and for a few hours: If the rising of Po, and the dangers of breaking
forth were of short duration, as it ordinarily befalls in the overflowings of
Torrents, in such a case the profit of the Vent would be of some esteem: But
because the swellings of Po continue for thirty, or sometimes for forty days,
therefore the gain which results from the Vent proves to be inconsiderable. It
remains now to consider the notable harms which follow the said Sluice or
Vent, that so reflection being made, and the profit and the detriment compared,
one may rightly judge, and choose that which shall be most convenient. The
first prejudice therefore which arises from this Vent or Sluice, is; That the
Channels of Ferara, Primaro, and Volana filling with Water, all those parts
from Bondeno to the Sea side are allarmed and endangered thereby. Secondly, The
Waters of the Po of Primaro having free ingresse into the upper Valleys, they
fill them to the great damage of the Fields adjacent, and obstruct the course
of the ordinary Trenches in the same Valleys; insomuch that all the care, cost,
and labor about the draining, and freeing the upper Valleys from Water, would
also become vain and ineffectual. Thirdly, I consider that these Waters of the
Po of Ferara being passed downwards toward the Sea, at the time that the main
Po was in its greater excrescences and heights, it is manifest by experience,
that when the great Po diminishes, then these Waters passed by the Po of
Ferara begin to retard in their course, and finally come to turn the current
upwards toward Stellata, resting first iu the intermediate time, almost fixed
and standing, and therefore deposing the muddinesse, they fill up the Channel
of the River or Current of Ferara. Fourthly and lastly, There follows from
this same diversion another notable damage, and it is like to that which
follows the breaches made by Rivers; near to which breaches in the lower
parts, namely below the breach, there is begot in the Channel of the River, a
certain ridge or shelf, that is, the bottom of the River is raised, as is
sufficiently manifest by experience; and thus just in the same manner cutting
the Bank at Bondeno, there is at it were a breach made, from which follows
the rising in the lower parts of the main Po, being past the mouth of Pamaro;
which thing, how pernicious it is, let any one judge that understands these
matters. And therefore both for the small benefit, and so many harms that ensue
from maintaining this diversion, I should think it were more sound advice to
keep that Bank always whole at Bondeno, or in any other convenient place, and
not to permit that the Water of the Grand Po should ever come near to Ferara.

COROLLARIE XIV.
IN the Grand Rivers, which fall into the Sea, as here in Italy Po, Adige,
Artesia.
And Arno, which are armed with Banks against their excrescencies, its observed
that far from the Sea, they need Banks of a notable height; which height goes
afterward by degrees diminishing, the more it approaches to the Seacoasts:
in such sort, that the Po, distant from the Sea about fifty or sixty miles at
Ferara, shall have Banks that be above twenty feet higher than the ordinary
Water-marks; but ten or twelve miles from the Sea, the Banks are not twelve
feet higher than the said ordinary Water-marks, though the breadth of the River
be the same, so that the excrescence of the same Innundation happens to be far
greater in measure remote from the Sea, then near; and yet it should seem, that
the same quantity of Water passing by every place, the River should need to
have the same altitude of Banks in all places: But we by our Principles and
fundamentals may be able to render the reason of that effect, and say; That
that excess of quantity of Water, above the ordinary Water, goes always
acquiring greater velocity; the nearer it approaches the Sea, and therefore
decreaseth in measure, and consequently in height. And this perhaps might have
been the cause in great part, why the Tyber in the Innundation Anno 1578.
issued not forth of its Channel below Rome toward the Sea.

COROLLARIE XV.
FRom the same Doctrine may be rendered a most manifest reason why the falling
Waters go lessening in their descent, so that the same falling Water, measured
at the beginning of its fall, is greater, and bigger, and afterward by degrees
lesseneth in measure the more it is remote from the beginning of the fall.
Which depends on no other, than on the acquisition, which it successively
makes of greater velocity; it being a most familiar conclusion among
Philosophers, that grave bodies falling, the more they remove from the
beginning of their motion, the more they acquire of swiftness; and therefore
the Water, as a grave body, falling, gradually velocitates, and therefore
decreaseth in measure, and lesseneth.

COROLLARIE XVI.
ANd on the contrary, the spirtings of a Fountain of Water, which spring on
high, work a contrary effect; namely in the beginning they are small, and
afterward become greater and big; and the reason is most manifest, because
in the beginning they are very swift, and afterward gradually relent their
impetuosity, and motion, so that in the beginning of the excursion that they
make, they ought to be small, and afterward to grow bigger, as in the effect
is seen.

APPENDIX. I.
INto the error of not considering how much the different velocities of the
same running water in several places of its current, are able to change the
measure of the same water, and to make it greater, or less, I think, if I be
not deceived, that Ginlio Frontino a noble ancient Writer, may have fallen in the
Second Book which he writ, of the Aqueducts of the City of Rome: Whilst finding
the measure of the Water Commentarius bears many senses, but in this place
signifies a certain Register of the quantities of the Waters in the several
public Aquiducts of Rome; which word I find frequently used in the Law Books
of ancient Civilians: And by errogation we are to understand the distribution
or delivering out of those stores of Water.
Commentariis less than it was in erogatione 1263. Quinaries, he thought that
so much difference might proceed from the negligence of the Measures; and when
afterward with his own industry he measured the same water at the beginning of
the Aqueducts, finding it near 10000. Quinaries bigger than it was in
Commentariis he judged, that the overplus was imbeziled by Ministers and
Partakers; which in part might be so, for it is but too true, that the public
is almost always defrauded; yet nevertheless, I verily believe withal, that
besides the frauds of these Officers, the velocities of the water in the place
wherein Frontino measured, it might be different from those velocities, which
are found in other places before measured by others; and therefore the measures
of the waters might, yea ought necessarily to be different, it having been by
us demonstrated, that the measures of the same running water have reciprocal
proportion to their velocities. Which Frontino not well considering, and
finding the water in Commentariis 12755. Quinaries in erogatione 14018, and in
his own measure ad capita ductuum, at the head of the fountain 22755.
Quinaries, or thereabouts, he thought, that in all these places there past
different quantities of water; namely, greater at the fountain head then that
which was in Erogatione, and this he judged greater than that which was in
Commentariis.

APPENDIX II.
A Like mistake chanced lately in the Aqueduct of Acqua-Paola, which Water
should be 2000 Inches, and so many effectively ought to be allowed; and it has
been given in so to be by the Signors of Bracciano to the Apostolick-Chamber;
and there was a measure thereof made at the beginning of the Aqueduct; which
measure proved afterward much less and short, considered and taken in Rome,
and thence followed discontents and great disorders, and all because this
property of Running-Waters, of increasing in measure, where the velocity
decreased; and of diminishing in measure, where the velocity augmented, was not
looked into.

APPENDIX III.
A Like error, in my judgment, has been committed by all those learned men,
which to prevent the diversion of the Reno of Bologna into Po by the Channels,
through which it at present runs, judged, that the Reno being in its greater
excrescence about 2000. feet, and the Po being near 1000. feet broad, they
judged, I say, that letting the Reno into Po, it would have raised the Water of
Po two feet; from which rise, they concluded afterward most exorbitant
disorders, either of extraordinary Inundations, or else of immense and
intolerable expenses to the people in raising the Banks of Po and Reno, and
with such like weaknesses, often vainly disturbed the minds of the persons
concerned: But now from the things demonstrared, it is manifest, That the
measure of the Reno in Reno, would be different from the measure of Reno in Po;
in case that the velocity of the Reno in Po, should differ from the velocity of
Reno in Reno, as is more exactly determined in the fourth Proposition.

APPENDIX IV.
NO less likewise are those Ingeneers and Artists deceived, that have affirmed,
That letting the Reno into Po, there would be no rise at all in the Water of
Po: For the truth is, That letting Reno into Po, there would always be a
rising; but sometimes greater, sometimes less, as the Po shall have a swifter
or slower Current; so that if the Po shall be constituted in a great velocity,
the rise will be very small; and if the said Po shall be slow in its course,
then the rise will be notable.

APPENDIX V.
ANd here it will not be besides the purpose to advertise, That the measures,
partments, and distributions of the Waters of Fountains, cannot be made
exactly, unless there be considered, besides the measure, the velocity also of
the Water; which particular not being thoroughly observed, is the cause of
continual miscariages in such like affairs.

APPENDIX VI.
LIke consideration ought to be had with the greater diligence, for that an
error therein is more prejudicial; I say, ought to be had by those which part
and divide Waters; for the watering of fields, as is done in the Territories
of Brescia, Bergama, Crema, Pavia, Lodigiano, Cremona, and other places: For if
they have not regard to the most important point of the variation of the
velocity of the Water, but only to the bare Vulgar measure, there will
always very great disorders and prejudices ensue to the persons concerned.

APPENDIX VII.
IT seems that one may observe, that whilst the Water runs along a
Channel, Current, or Conduit, its velocity is retarded, withheld, and impeded
by its touching the Bank or side of the said Channel or Current; which, as
immovable, not following the motion of the Water, interrupteth its velocity:
From which particular, being true, as I believe it to be most true, and from
our considerations, we have an occasion of discovering a very nice mistake,
into which those commonly fall who divide the Waters of Fountains. Which
division is wont to be, by what I have seen here in Rome, performed two ways;
The first of which is with the measures of like figures, as Circles, or
Squares, having cut through a Plate of metal several Circles or Squares, one of
half an inch, another of one inch, another of two, of three, of four, etc. with
which they afterward adjust the Cocks to dispense the Waters. The other
manner of dividing the Waters of Fountains, is with rectangle paralellograms,
of the same height, but of different Bases, in such sort likewise, that one
paralellogram be of half an inch, another of one, two, three, etc. In which
manner of measuring and dividing the Water, it should seem that the Cocks being
placed in one and the same plain, equidistant from the level, or superior
superficies of the water of the Well; and the said measures being most exactly
made, the Water ought consequently also to be equally divided, and parted
according to the proportion of the measures. But if we well consider every
particular, we shall find, that the Cocks, as they successively are greater,
discharge always more Water than the just quantity, in comparison of the
lesser; that is, to speak more properly, The Water which passes through the
greater Cock, has always a greater proportion to that which passes through
the lesser, than the greater Cock has to the lesser. All which I will declare
by an example.

Let there be supposed for more plainness two Squares; (the same may be
understood of Circles, and other like Figures) The first Square is, as we will
suppose, quadruple to the other, and these Squares are the mouths of two Cocks;
one of four inches, the other of one: Now its manifest by what has been said,
that the Water which passes by the less Cock, finds its velocity impeded in
the circumference of the Cock; which impediment is measured by the said
circumference. Now it is to be considered, that if we would have the Water
which passes through the greater Cock, to be only quadruple to that which
passes through the less, in equal spaces of time, it would be necessary, that
not only the capacity and the measure of the greater Cock be quadruple to the
lesser Cock, but that also the impediment be quadrupled. Now in our case it is
true, That the belly and mouth of the Cock is quadrupled, and yet the
impediment is not quadrupled, but is only doubled, seeing that the
circumference of the greater Square, is only double to the circumference of
the lesser Square; for the greater circumference contains eight of those
parts, of which the lesser contains but four, as is manifest by the described
Figure; and for that cause there shall pass by the greater Cock, above four
times as much Water, as shall pass by the lesser Cock.

The like error occurreth also in the other manner of measuring the Water of
a Fountain, as may easily be collected from what has been said and observed
above.

APPENDIX VIII.
THe same contemplation discovers the error of those Architects, who being
to erect a Bridge of sundry Arches over a River, consider the ordinary breadth
of the River; which being v. g. forty fathom, and the Bridge being to consist
of four Arches, it suffices them, that the breadth of all the four Arches
taken together, be forty fathom; not considering that in the ordinary Channel
of the River, the Water has only two impediments which retard its velocity;
namely, the touching and gliding along the two sides or shores of the River:
but the same water in passing under the Bridge, in our case meets with eight
of the same impediments, bearing, and thrusting upon two sides of each Arch (to
omit the impediment of the bottom, for that it is the same in the River, and
under the Bridge) from which inadvertency sometimes follow very great
disorders, as quotidian practice shows us.

APPENDIX IX.
IT is also worthy to consider the great and admirable benefit that those
fields receive, which are wont to drink up the Rainwater with difficulty,
through the height of the water in the principal Ditches, in which case the
careful Husbandman cutteth away the reeds and rushes in the Ditches, through
which the waters pass; whereupon may be presently seen, so soon as the reeds
and rushes are cut, a notable Ebb in the level of the water in the Ditches,
insomuch that sometimes it is observed, that the water is abated after the said
cutting a third and more, of what it was before the cutting. The which effect
seemingly might depend on this, That, before those weeds took up room in the
Ditch, and for that cause the water kept a higher level, and the said Plants
being afterward cut and removed, the water came to abate, possessing the place
that before was occupied by the weeds. Which opinion, though probable, and at
first sight satisfactory, is nevertheless insufficient to give the total reason
of that notable abatement which has been spoken of: But it is necessary to
have recourse to our consideration of the velocity in the course of the water,
the chiefest and true cause of the variation of the measure of the same
Running-Water^; for, that multitudes of reeds, weeds, and plants dispersed
through the current of the Ditch, do chance notably to retard the course of the
water, and therefore the measure of the water increases; and those impediments
removed, the same water gains velocity, and therefore decreaseth in measure,
and consequently in height.

And perhaps this point well understood, may be of great profit to the fields
adjacent to the Pontine Fens, and I doubt not but if the River Ninfa, and the
other principal Brooks of those Territories were kept well cleansed from weeds,
their waters would be at a lower level, and consequently the drains of the
fields would run into them more readily; it being always to be held for
undoubted, that the measure of the water before the cleansing, has the same
proportion to the measure after cleansing, that the velocity after the
cleansing has to the velocity before the cleansing: And be cause those weeds
being cleansed away, the course of the water notably increases, it is
therefore necessary that the said water abate in measure, and become lower.

APPENDIX X.
WE having above observed some errors that are committed in distributing the
waters of Fountains, and those that serve to water fields; it seems now fit,
by way of a close to this discourse, to advertise by what means these divisions
may be made justly and without error. I therefore think that one might two
several ways exquisitly divide the water of Fountains; The first would be by
diligently examining, First, how much water the whole Fountain discharges in a
determinate time, as for instance: ow many Barrels, or Tuns it carries in a
set time; and in case you are afterward to distribute the water, distribute it
at the rate of so many Barrels or Tuns, in that same time; and in this case the
participants would have their punctual shares: Nor could it ever happen to send
out more water, than is reckoned to be in the principal Fountain; as befell
Giulio Frontino, and as also it frequently happens in the Modern Aqueducts,
to the public and private detriment.

The other way of dividing the same waters of a Fountain, is also sufficiently
exact and easy, and may be, by having one only size for the Cock or Pipe, as
suppose of an inch, or of half an inch; and when the case requires to dispense
two, three, and more inches, take so many Cocks of the said measure as do
evacuate the water, which is to be emitted; and if we are to make use only of
one greater Cock, we being to place one to discharge for example four inches;
and having the former sole measure of an inch, we must make a Cock that is
bigger, its true, than the Cock of one inch; but not simply in a quadruple
proportion, for that it would discharge more than just so much water, as has
been said above; but we ought to examine diligently how much water the little
Cock emitteth in an hour; and then enlarge, and contract the greater Cock, so,
that it may discharge four times as much water as the lesser in the same time;
and by this means we shall avoid the disorder hinted in the seventh Appendix.
It would be necessary nevertheless, to accomodate the Cocks of the Cistern so,
that the level of the water in the Cistern may always rest at one determinate
mark above the Cock, otherwise the Cocks will emit sometimes greater, and
sometimes less abundance of water: And because it may be that the same water
of the Fountain may be sometimes more abundant, sometimes less; in such case it
will be necessary to adjust the Cistern so, that the excess above the ordinary
water, discharge into the public Fountains, that so the particular
participants may have always the same abundance of water.

APPENDIX XI.
MUch more difficult is the division of the waters which serve to water the
fields, it not being possible to observe so commodiously, what quantity of
water the whole Ditch sends forth in one determinate time, as may be done in
Fountains: Yet nevertheless, if the second proposition by us a little below
demonstrated, be well understood, there may be thence taken a very safe and
just way to distribute such waters. The Proposition therefore by us
demonstrated is this: If there be two Sections, (namely two mouths of Rivers)
the quantity of the water which passes by the first, has a proportion to that
which passes by the second, compounded of the proportions of the first Section
to the second, and of the velocity through the first, to the velocity through
the second: As I will declare for example by help of practice, that I may be
understood by all, in a matter so important. Let the two mouths of the Rivers
be A, and B, and let the mouth A be in measure and content thirty two feet, and
the mouth B, eight feet. Here you must take notice, that it is not always
true, that the Water which passes by A, has the same proportion to that which
passes by B, that the mouth A has to the mouth B; but only when the
velocityes by each of those passages are equal: But if the velocityes shall be
unequal, it may be that the said mouths may emit equal quantity of Water in
equal times, though their measure be unequal; and it may be also, that the
bigger does discharge a greater quantity of Water: And lastly, it may be, that
the less mouth discharges more Water than the greater; and all this is
manifest by the things noted in the beginning of this discourse, and by the
said second Proposition. Now to examine the proportion of the Water that
passes by one Ditch, to that which passes by another, that this being known,
the same Waters and mouths of Ditches may be then adjusted; we are to keep
account not only of the greatness of the mouths or passages of the Water, but
of the velocity also; which we will do, by first finding two numbers that have
the same proportion between themselves, as have the mouths, which are the
numbers 32 and 8 in our example: Then this being done, let the velocity of the
Water by the passages A and B, be examined (which may be done keeping account
what space a piece of Wood, or other body that swimmeth, is carried by the
stream in one determinate time; as for instance in 50 pulses) and then work by
the golden Rule, as the velocity by A, is to the velocity by B, so is the
number 8, to another number, which is 4. It is clear by what is demonstrated in
the said second Proposition, that the quantity of water, which passes by the
mouth A, shall have the same proportion of that which passes by the mouth B,
that 8 has to 1. Such proportion being composed of the proportions of 32 to 8,
and of 8 to 4; namely, to the greatness of the mouth A, to the greatness of the
mouth B, and of the velocity in A, to the velocity in B. This being done, we
must then contract the mouth which discharges more then its just quantity of
water, or enlarge the other which discharges less, as shall be most commodious
in practice, which to him that has understood this little that has been
delivered, will be very afie.

APPENDIX XII.
THese opperations about Water, as I have hitherto on sundry occasions
observed, are involved in so many difficulties, and such a multiplicity of most
extravagant accidents, that it is no marvel if continually many, and very
important errors be therein committed by many, and even by Ingeneers
themselves, and Learned-men; and because many times they concern not only the
public, but private interests: Hence it is, that it not only belongs to
Artists to treat thereof, but very often even the vulgar themselves pretend to
give their judgment therein: And I have been troubled many times with a
necessity of treating, not only with those, which either by practice, or
particular study, understood somewhat in these matters; but also with people
wholly void of those notions, which are necessary for one that would on good
grounds discourse about this particular; and thus many times have met with more
difficulty in the thick skulls of men, than in precipitious Torrents, and vast
Fennes. And in particular, I had occasion some years past to go see the Cave or
Emissary of the Lake of Perugia, made many years agon by Braccio Fortobraccio,
but for that it was with great ruins by Time decayed, and rendered unuseful, it
was repaired with industry truly heroical and admirable, by Monsignor Maffei
Barherino, then Prefect for the Ways, and now Pope. And being necessitated,
that I might be able to walk in the Cave, and for other causes, I let down the
Sluices of the said Cave, at the mouth of the Lake: No sooner were they stopped,
but a great many of the people of the Towns and Villages coasting upon the Lake
flocking thither, began to make grievous complaints, that if those Sluices were
kept shut, not only the Lake would want its due Vent, but also the parts
adjacent to the Lake would be over flown to their very great detriment. And
because at first appearance their motion seemed very reasonable, I found my
self hard put to it, seeing no way to persuade such a multitude, that the
prejudice which they pretended I should do them by keeping the Sluices shut for
two days, was absolutely insensible; and that by keeping them open, the Lake
did not ebb in the same time so much as the thickness of a sheet of Paper: And
therefore I was necessitated to make use of the authority I had, and so
followed my business as cause required, without any regard to that Rabble
tumultuously assembled. Now when I am not working with Mattock or Spade, but
with the Pen and Discourse, I intend to demonstrate clearly to those that are
capable of reason, and that have well understood the ground of this my
Treatise, that the fear was altogether vain which those people conceited. And
therefore I say, that the Emissary or Sluice of the Lake of Perugia, standing
in the same manner as at present, and the water passing through it with the same
velocity as now; to examine how much the Lake may abate in two days space, we
ought to consider, what proportion the superficies of the whole Lake has to
the measure of the Section of the Emissary, and afterward to infer, that the
velocity of the water by the Emissary or Sluice, shall have the same proportion
to the abatement of the Lake, and to prove thoroughly and clearly this discourse,
I intend to demonstrate the following Proposition.

Suppose a Vessel of any bigness, and that it has an Emissary or Cock, by
which it discharges its water. And look what proportion the superficies of the
vessel has to the measure of the section of the cock, such proportion shall
the velocity of the Water in the Cock have to the abatement of the Lake. Let
the Vessel be ABCD, HILB, through which the Water runs, the superficies of
the Water in the Vessel AD, and the section of the Cock HL: and let the Water
in the Vessel be supposed to have fallen in one determinate time from A to F. I
say that the proportion of the superficies of the Vessel AD is in proportion to
the measure of the section of the Emissary HL, as the velocity of the Emissary
or Cock to the line AF; which is manifest, for that the Water in the Vessel
moving by the line AF; as far as F, and the whole mass of Water AG discharging
it self, and in the same time the same quantity of Water being discharged by
the section of the Emissary HL; it is necessary by what I have demonstrated in
the third Proposition, and also explained in the beginning of this Treatise,
that the velocity by the Emissary or Cock be in proportion to the velocity of
the abatement, as the superficies of the Vessel to the measure of the section
of the Emissary, which was to be demonstrated.

That which has been demonstrated in the Vessel, falls out exactly also in our
Lake of Perugia, and its Emissary; and because the immensity of the superficies
of the Lake is in proportion to the superficies of the Emissary or Sluice, as
many millions to one, as may be easily calculated; it is manifest, that such
abatement shall be imperceptible, and almost nothing, in two days space, nay
in four or six: and all this will be true, when we suppose that for that time
there enters no other Water into the Lake from Ditches or Rivolets, which
falling into the Lake would render such abatement yet less.

Now we see, that it is necessary to examine such abatements and risings, with
excellent reasons, or at least, with accurate experiments, before we resolve
and conclude any thing; and how far the vulgar are distant from a right
judgment in such matters.

APPENDIX XIII.
FOR greater confirmation of all this which I have said, I will instance in
another like case, which also I met with heretofore, wherein, for that the
business was not rightly understood, many disorders, vast expenses, and
considerable mischiefs have followed. There was heretofore an Emissary or
Sluice made to drain the Waters, which from Rains, Springs, and Rivolets fall
into a Lake; to the end, the shores adjoining on the Lake, should be free from
the overflowing of the Waters; but because perhaps the enterprise was not well
managed and carried on, it fell out, that the Fields adjacent to the said
Chanel could not drain, but continued under water; to which disorders a present
remedy has been used, namely, in a time convenient to stop up the Sluice, by
means of certain Floodgates kept on purpose for that end; and thus abating the
Level of the Water in the Emissary, in the space of three or four days, the
Fields have been happily drained. But on the other part, the proprietors
bordering on the Lake opposed this, grievously complaining, that whilst the
Floodgates are shut, and the course of the Water of the Sluice hindered, the
Lake overflowes the Lands adjacent, by means of the Rivers that fell into it,
to their very great damage; and so continuing their suits, they got more of
vexation than satisfaction. Now, being asked my opinion herein, I judged it
requisite (since the point in controversy was about the rising and falling of
the Lake) that the said abatement, when the Floodgates are open, and increase
when they are shut should be exactly measured, and told them, that it might be
easily done at a time when no extraordinary Waters fell into the Lake, neither
of Rain, or otherwise; and the Lake was undisturbed by winds that might drive
the Water to any side, by planting near to an Islet, which is about the middle
of the Lake, a thick post, on which should be made the marks of the Lakes
rising and falling for two or three days. I would not, at that time, pawn, or
resolutely declare, my judgment, in regard I might be, by diverse accidents
misled. But this I told them, that (by what I have demonstrated, and
particularly that which I have said above touching the Lake of Perugia) I
inclined greatly to think, that these risings and fallings would prove
imperceptible, and inconsiderable; and therefore, that in case experience
should make good my reason, it would be to no purpose for them to continue
disputing and wrangling, which causes, (according to the Proverb) A great deal
of cry, but produces not much Wool.

Lastly, it importing very much to know what a Rain continued for many days
can do in raising these Lakes, I will here insert the Copy of a Letter, which I
writ formerly to Signior Galilaeo Galilaei, chief Philosopher to the Grand Duke
of Tuscany, wherein I have delivered one of my conceits in this business, and
it may be, by this Letter, I may, more strongly, confirm what I have said above.

The Copy of a Letter to Signore GALILAEO GALILAEI, Chief Philosopher to the
most Serene Great Duke of TVSCANY.
Worthy and most Excellent SIR,
IN satisfaction of my promise, in my former Letters of representing unto you
some of my Considerations made upon the Lake Thrasimeno, I say, That in times
past, being in Perugia, where we held our General Convention, having understood
that the Lake Thrasimeno, by the great drought of many Months was much abated,
It came into my head, to go privately and see this novelty, both for my
particular satisfaction, as also that I might be able to relate the whole to my
Patrons, upon the certitude of my own sight of the place. And so being come to
the Emissary of the Lake, I found that the Level of the Lakes surface was ebbed
about five Roman Palms of its wonted watermark, insomuch that it was lower
than the transome of the mouth of the Emissary, by the length of -- this
described line, and therefore no Water issued out of the Lake, to the great
prejudice of all the places and villages circumjacent, in regard that the Water
which used to run from the said Lake turned 22 Mills, which not going,
necessitated the inhabitants of those parts to go a days journey and more, to
grind upon the Tiber. Being returned to Perugia, there followed a Rain, not
very great, but constant, and even, which lasted for the space of eight hours,
or thereabouts; and it came into my thoughts to examine, being in Perugia, how
much the Lake was increased and raised by this Rain, supposing (as it was
probable enough) that the Rain had been universal over all the Lake; and like
to that which fell in Perugia, and to this purpose I took a Glass formed like
a Cylinder, about a palm high, and half a palm broad; and having put in water
sufficient to cover the bottom of the Glass, I noted diligently the mark of
the height of the Water in the Glass, and afterward exposed it to the open
weather, to receive the Raine-water, which fell into it; and I let it stand for
the space of an hour; and having observed that in that time the Water was risen
in the Vessel the height of the following line --, I considered that if I had
exposed to the same rain such other vessels equal to that, the Water would have
risen in them all according to that measure: And thereupon concluded, that also
in all the whole extent of the Lake, it was necessary the Water should be
raised in the space of an hour the same measure. Yet here I considered two
difficulties that might disturb and altar such an effect, or at least render it
inobserveable, which afterward well weighed, and resolved, left me (as I will
tell you anon) in the conclusion the more confirmed; that the Lake ought to be
increased in the space of eight hours, that the rain lasted eight times that
measure. And whilst I again exposed the Glass to repeat the experiment, there
came unto me an Ingeneer to talk with me touching certain affairs of our
Monastary of Perugia, and discoursing with him, I showed him the Glass out at
my Chamber-window, exposed in a Courtyard; and communicated to him my fancy,
relating unto him all that I had done. But I soon perceived that this brave
fellow conceited me to be but of a dull brain, for he smiling said unto me;
Sir, you deceive your self: I am of opinion that the Lake will not be increased
by this rain, so much as the thickness of A Coin of Pope Julius worth six
pence.
Julio. Hearing him pronounce this his opinion with freeness and confidence, I
urged him to give me some reason for what he said, assuring him, that I would
change my judgment, when I saw the strength of his Arguments: To which he
answered, that he had been very conversant about the Lake, and was every day
upon it, and was well assured that it was not at all increased. And importuning
him further, that he would give me some reason for his so thinking, he proposed
to my consideration the great drought passed, and that that same rain was
nothing for the great parching: To which I answered, I believe Sir that the
surface of the Lake, on which the rain had fallen was moistened; and therefore
saw not how its drought, which was nothing at all, could have drunk up any part
of the rain. For all this he persisting in his conceit, without yielding in the
least to my allegation; he granted in the end (I believe in civility to me)
that my reason was plausible and good, but that in practice it could not hold.
At last to clear up all, I made one be called, and sent him to the mouth of the
Emissary of the Lake, with order to bring me an exact account, how he found the
water of the Lake, in respect of the Transome of the Sluice. Now here, Signore
Galilaeo, I would not have you think that I had brought the matter in hand to
concern me in my honor; but believe me (and there are witnesses of the same
still living) that my messenger returning in the evening to Perugia, he brought
me word, that the water of the Lake began to run through the Cave; and that it
was risen almost a fingers breadth above the Transome: Insomuch, that adding
this measure, to that of the lowness of the surface of the Lake, beneath the
Transome before the rain, it was manifest that the rising of the Lake caused by
the rain, was to a hair those four fingers breadth that I had judged it to be.
Two days after I had another bout with the Ingeneer, and related to him the
whole business, to which he knew not what to answer.

Now the two difficulties which I thought of, able to impede my conclusion,
were these following: first, I considered that it might be, that the Wind
blowing from the side where the Sluice stood, to the Lake-ward; the mole and
mass of the Water of the Lake might be driven to the contrary shore; on which
the Water rising, it might be fallen at the mouth of the Emissary, and so the
observation might be much obscured. But this difficulty wholly vanished by
reason of the Aires great tranquillity; which it kept at that time, for no Wind
was stirring on any side, neither whilst it rained, nor afterward.

The second difficulty which put the rising in doubt, was, That having observed
in Florence, and elsewhere, those Ponds into which the rainwater, falling from
the house, is conveyed through the Common-shores: And that they are not thereby
ever filled, but that they swallow all that abundance of water, that runs into
them by those conveyances which serve them with water; insomuch that those
conveyances which in time of drought maintain the Pond, when there come new
abundance of water into the Pond, they drink it up, and swallow it: A like
effect might also fall out in the Lake, in which there being many veins (as it
is very likely) that maintain and feed the Lake; these veins might imbibe the
new addition of the Rainwater, and so by that means annull the rising; or else
diminish it in such sort, as to render it inobservable. But this difficulty was
easily resolved by considering my Treatise of the measure of Running-Waters;
forasmuch as having demonstrated, that the abatement of a Lake bears the
reciprocal proportion to the velocity of the Emissary, which the measure of the
Section of the Emissary of the Lake, has to the measure of the surface of the
Lake: making the calculation and account, though in gross; by supposing that
its veins were sufficiently large, and that the velocity in them were notable
in drinking up the water of the Lake; yet I found nevertheless, that many weeks
and months would be spent in drinking up the new-come abundance of water by
the rain, so that I rested sure, that the rising would ensue, as in effect it
did.

And because many of accurate judgment, have again caused me to question this
rising, setting before me, that the Earth being parched by the great drought,
that had so long continued, it might be, that that Bank of Earth which
environed the brink of the Lake, being dry, and imbibing great abundance of
Water from the increasing Lake, would not suffer it to increase in height: I
say therefore, that if we would rightly consider this doubt here proposed, we
should, in the very consideration of it, see it resolved; for, it being
supposed that that list or border of Banks which was to be occupied by the
increase of the Lake, be a Brace in breadth quite round the Lake, and that by
reason of its dryness it sucks in water, and that by that means this proportion
of water co-operates not in raising of the Lake: It is absolutely necessary on
the other hand, that we consider, That the Circuit of the water of the Lake
being thirty miles, as its commonly held, that is to say, Ninety thousand
Braces of Florence in compass; and therefore admitting for true, that each
Brace of this Bank drink two quarts of water, and that for the spreading it
require three quarts more, we shall find, that the whole agregate of this
portion of water, which is not employed in the raising of the Lake, will be
four hundred and fifty thousand Quarts of water; and supposing that the Lake be
sixty square miles, three thousand Braces long, we shall find, that to
dispense the water possessed by the Bank about the Lake, above the total surface
of the Lake, it ought to be spread so thin, that one sole quart of water may
overspread ten thousand square Braces of surface: such a thinness, as must
much exceed that of a leaf of beaten Gold, and also less than that skin of
water which covers the Bubbles of it: and such would that be, which those men
would have subtracted from the rising of the Lake: But again, in the space of
a quarter of an hour at the beginning of the rain, all that Bank is soaked by
the said rain, so that we need not for the moistning of it, employ a drop of
that water which falls into the Lake. Besides we have not brought to account
that abundance of water which runs in time of rain into the Lake, from the
steepness of the adjacent Hills and Mountains; which would be enough to supply
all our occasions: So that, neither ought we for this reason to question our
pretended rising. And this is what has fallen in my way touching the
consideration of the Thrasimenian Lake.

After which, perhaps somewhat rashly, wandering beyond my bounds, I proceeded
to another contemplation, which I will relate to you, hoping that you will
receive it, as collected with these cautions requisite in such like affairs;
wherein we ought not too positively to affirm any thing of our own heads for
certain, but ought to submit all to the sound and secure deliberation of the
Holy Mother Church, as I do this of mine, and all others; most ready to change
my judgment, and conform my self always to the deliberations of my Superiors.
Continuing therefore my abovesaid conceit about the rising of the water in the
glass tried before, it came into my mind, that the forementioned rain having
been very gentle, it might well be, that if there should have fallen a Rain
fifty, an hundred, or a thousand times greater than this, and much more intense
(which would ensue as often as those falling drops were four, five or ten times
bigger than those of the abovementioned rain, keeping the same number) in such
a case its manifest, that in the space of an hour the Water would rise in our
Glass, two, three, and perhaps more Yards or Braces; and consequently, if such
a Rain should fall upon a Lake, that the said Lake would rise, according to
the same rate: And likewise, if such a Rain were universal, over the whole
Terrestrial Globe, it would necessarily, in the space of an hour, make a
rising of two, or three braces round about the said Globe. And because we have
from Sacred Records, that in the time of the Deluge, it rained forty days and
forty nights; namely, for the space of 960 hours; its clear, that if the said
Rain had been ten times bigger than ours at Perugia, the rising of the Waters
above the Terrestrial Globe would reach and pass a mile higher than the tops of
the Hills and Mountains that are upon the superficies of the Earth; and they
also would concur to increase the rise. And therefore I conclude, that the rise
of the Waters of the Deluge have a rational congruity with natural Discourses,
of which I know very well that the eternal truths of the Divine leaves have no
need; but however I think so clear an agreement is worthy of our consideration,
which gives us occasion to adore and admire the greatness of God in his mighty
Works, in that we are sometimes able, in some sort, to measure them by the
short Standard of our Reason.

Many Lessons also may be deduced from the same Doctrine, which I pass by, for
that every man of himself may easily know them, having once stablished this
Maxim; That it is not possible to pronounce any thing, of a certainty,
touching the quantity of Running Waters, by considering only the single vulgar
measure of the Water without the velocity; and so on the contrary, he that
computes only the velocity, without the measure, shall commit very great
errors; for treating of the measure of Running Waters, it is necessary, the
water being a body, in handling its quantity, to consider in it all the three
dimensions of breadth, depth, and length: the two first dimensions are observed
by all in the common manner, and ordinary way of measuring Running Waters; but
the third dimension of length is omitted; and happily such an oversight is
committed, by reason the length of Running Water is reputed in some sense
infinite, in that it never cease to move away, and as infinite is judged
incomprehensible; and such as that there is no exact knowledge to be had
thereof; and so there comes to be no account made thereof; but if we should
make strict reflection upon our consideration of the velocity of Water, we
should find, that keeping account of the same, there is a reckoning also made
of the length; forasmuch as whilst we say, the Water of such a Spring runs with
the velocity of passing a thousand or two thousand paces an hour: this in
substance is no other than if we had said, such a Fountain discharges in an
hour a Water of a thousand or two thousand paces long. So that, albeit the
total length of Running water be incomprehensible, as being infinite, yet
nevertheless its rendered intelligible by parts in its velocity. And so much
suffices to have hinted about this matter, hoping to impart on some other
occasion other more accurate Observations in this affair.

LAVS DEO.

GEOMETRICAL DEMONSTRATIONS OF THE MEASURE OF Running Waters.

BY D. BENEDETTO CASTELLI, Abbot of CASSINA, and Mathematician to P. URBAN.
VIII.

DEDICATED To the most Illustrious, and most Excellent Prince DON THADDEO
BARBERINI, PRINCE OF PALESTRINA, AND GENERAL of the HOLY CHURCH.

LONDON, Printed Anno Domini, MDCLXI.

OF THE MENSURATION OF Running Waters.
SUPPOSITION I.
LEt it be supposed, that the banks of the Rivers of which we speak be erected
perpendicular to the plane of the upper superficies of the River.

SUPPOSITION II.
WE suppose that the plane of the bottom of the River, of which we speak is at
right angles with the banks.

SUPPOSITION III.
IT is to be supposed, that we speak of Rivers, when they are at ebb, in that
state of shallowness, or at flowing; in that state of deepnesse, and not in
their transition from the ebb to the flowing or from the flowing to the ebb.

Declaration of Terms.
FIRST.

IF a River shall be cut by a Plane at right angles to the surface of the water
of the River, and to the banks of the River, that same dividing Plane we call
the Section of the River; and this Section, by the Suppositions above, shall be
a right angled Parallelogram.

SECOND.

WE call those Sections equally Swift, by which the water runs with equal
velocity; and more swift and less swift that Section of another, by which the
water runs with greater or less velocity.

AXIOM I.
SEctions equal, and equally swift, discharge equal quantities of Water in
equal times.

AXIOM II.
SEctions equally swift, and that discharge equal quantity of Water, in equal
time, shall be equal.

AXIOM III.
SEctions equal, and that discharge equal quantities of Water in equal times,
shall be equally swift.

AXIOM IV.
WHen Sections are unequal, but equally swift, the quantity of the Water that
passes through the first Section, shall have the same proportion to the
quantity that passes through the Second, that the first Section has to the
second Section. Which is manifest, because the velocity being the same, the
difference of the Water that passes shall be according to the difference of
the Sections.

AXIOM V.
IF the Sections shall be equal, and of unequal velocity, the quantity of the
Water that passes through the first, shall have the same proportion to that
which passes through the second, that the velocity of the first Section, shall
have to the velocity of the second Section. Which also is manifest, because the
Sections being equal, the difference of the Water which passes, depends on
the velocity.

PETITION.
A Section of a River being given, we may suppose another equal to the given,
of different breadth, height, and velocity.

PROPOSITION I.
The Sections of the same River discharge equal quantities of Water in equal
times, although the Sections themselves he unequal.
LEt the two Sections be A and B, in the River C, running from A, toward B; I
say, that they discharge equal quantity of Water in equal times; for if greater
quantity of Water should pass through A, than passes through B, it would
follow that the Water in the intermediate space of the River C, would increase
continually, which is manifestly false, but if more Water should issue through
the Section B, than enters at the Section A, the Water in the intermediate
space C, would grow continually less, and always ebb, which is likewise false;
therefore the quantity of Water that passes through the Section B, is equal to
the quantity of Water which passes through the Section A, and therefore the
Sections of the same River discharge, etc. Which was to be demonstrated.

PROPOSITION II.
In two Sections of Rivers, the quantity of the Water which passes by one
Section, is to that which passes by the second, in a Proportion compounded of
the proportions of the first Section to the second, and of the velocitie
through the first, to the velocitie of the second.
LEt A, and B be two Sections of a River; I say, that the quantity of Water
which passes through A, is to that which passes through B, in a proportion
compounded of the proportions of the first Section A, to the Section B; and of
the velocity through A, to the velocity through B: Let a Section be supposed
equal to the Section A, in magnitude; but of velocity equal to the Section B,
and let it be G; and as the Section A is to the Section B, so let the line F be
to the line D; and as the velocity A, is to the velocity by B, so let the line
D be to the line R: Therefore the Water which passes through A, shall be to
that which passes through G (in regard the Sections A and G are of equal
bigness, but of unequal velocity) as the velocity through A, to the velocity
through G; But as the velocity through A, is to the velocity through G, so is
the velocity through A, to the velocity through B; namely, as the line D, to
the line R: therefore the quantity of the Water which pass the through A,
shall be to the quantity which passes through G, as the line D is to the line
R; but the quantity which passes through G, is to that which passes through
B, (in regard the Sections C, and B, are equally swift) as the Section G to the
Section B; that is, as the Section A, to the Section B; that is, as the line F,
to the line D: Therefore by the equal and perturbed proportionality, the
quantity of the Water which passes through A, has the same proportion to that
which passes through B, that the line F has to the line R; but F to R, has a
proportion compounded of the proportions of F to D, and of D to R; that is, of
the Section A to the Section B; and of the velocity through A, to the velocity
through B: Therefore also the quantity of Water which passes through the
Section A, shall have a proportion to that which passes through the Section B,
compounded of the proportions of the Section A, to the Section B, and of the
velocity through A, to the velocity through B: And therefore in two Sections of
Rivers, the quantity of Water which passes by the first, etc. which was to be
demonstrated.

COROLLARIE.
THe same follows, though the quantity of the Water which passes through the
Section A, be equal to the quantity of Water which passes through the Section
B, as is manifest by the same demonstration.

PROPOSITION III.
In two Sections unequal, through which pass equal quantities of Water in equal
times, the Sections have to one another, reciprocal proportion to their
velocitie.
LEt the two unequal Sections, by which pass equal quantities of Water in equal
times be A, the greater; and B, the lesser: I say, that the Section A, shall
have the same Proportion to the Section B, that reciprocally the velocity
through B, has to the velocity through A; for supposing that as the Water that
passes through A, is to that which passes through B, so is the line E to the
line F: therefore the quantity of water which passes through A, being equal to
that which passes through B, the line E shall also be equal to the line F:
Supposing moreover, That as the Section A, is to the Section B, so is the line
F, to the line G; and because the quantity of water which passes through the
Section A, is to that which passes through the Section B, in a proportion
composed of the proportions of the Section A, to the Section B, and of the
velocity through A, to the velocity through B; therefore the line E, shall be
the line to F, in a proportion compounded of the same proportions; namely, of
the proportion of the Section A, to the Section B, and of the velocity through
A, to the velocity through B; but the line E, has to the line G, the
proportion of the Section A, to the Section B, therefore the proportion
remaining of the line G, to the line F, shall be the proportion of the velocity
through A, to the velocity through B; therefore also the line G, shall be to
the line E, as the velocity by A, to the velocity by B: And conversly, the
velocity through B, shall be to the velocity through A, as the line E, to the
line G; that is to say, as the Section A, to the Section B, and therefore in
two Sections, etc. which was to be demonstrated.

COROLLARIE.
HEnce it is manifest, that Sections of the same River (which are no other than
the vulgar measures of the River) have betwixt themselves reciprocal
proportions to their velocities; for in the first Proposition we have
demonstrated that the Sections of the same River, discharge equal quantities of
Water in equal times; therefore, by what has now been demonstrated the
Sections of the same River shall have reciprocal proportion to their
velocities; And therefore the same running water changes measure, when it
changes velocity; namely, increases the measure, when it decreaseth the
velocity, and decreaseth the measure, when it increases the velocity.

On which principally depends all that which has been said above in the
Discourse, and observed in the Corollaries and Appendixes; and therefore is
worthy to be well understood and heeded.

PROPOSITION IV.
If a River fall into another River, the height of the first in its own Chanel
shall be to the height that it shall make in the second Chanel, in a proportion
compounded of the proportions of the breadth of the Chanel of the second, to
the breadth of the Chanel of the first, and of the velocitie acquired in the
Chanel of the second, to that which it had in its proper and first Chanel.
LEt the River AB, whose height is AC, and breadth CB, that is, whose Section
is ACB; let it enter, I say, into another River as broad as the line OF, and
let it therein make the rise or height DE, that is to say, let it have its
Section in the River whereinto it falls DEF; I say, that the height AC has to
the height DE the proportion compounded of the proportions of the breadth OF,
to the breadth CB, and of the velocity through DF, to the velocity through AB.
Let us suppose the Section G, equal in velocity to the Section AB, and in
breadth equal to OF, which carries a quantity of Water equal to that which the
Section AB carries, in equal times, and consequently, equal to that which DF
carries. Moreover, as the breadth OF is to the breadth CB, so let the line H
be to the line I; and as the velocity of DF is to the velocity of AB, so let
the line I be to the Line L; because therefore the two Sections AB and G are
equally swift, and discharge equal quantity of Water in equal times, they shall
be equal Sections; and therefore the height of AB to the height of G, shall be
as the breadth of G, to the breadth of AB, that is, as OF to CB, that is, as
the line H to the line I: but because the Water which passes through G, is
equal to that which passes through DEF, therefore the Section G, to the
Section DEF, shall have the reciprocal proportion of the velocity through DEF,
to the velocity through G; but also the height of G, is to the height DE, as
the Section G, to the Section DEF: Therefore the height of G, is to the height
DE, as the velocity through DEF, is to the velocity through G; that is, as the
velocity through DEF, is to the velocity through AB; That is, finally, as the
line I, to the line L; Therefore, by equal proportion, the height of AB, that
is, AC, shall be to the height DE; as H to L, that is, compounded of the
proportions of the breadth OF, to the breadth CB, and of the velocity through
DF, to the velocity through AB: So that if a River fall into another River,
etc. which was to be demonstrated.

PROPOSITION V.
If a River discharge a certain quantity of Water in a certain time; and after
that there come into it a Flood, the quantity of Water which is discharged in
as much time at the Flood, is to that which was discharged before, whilst the
River was low, in a proportion compounded of the proportions of the velocity of
the Flood, to the velocity of the first Water, and of the height of the Flood,
to the height of the first Water.
SUppose a River, which whilst it is low, runs by the Section AF; and after a
Flood comes into the same, and runs through the Section DF, I say, that the
quantity of the Water which is discharged through DF, is to that which is
discharged through AF, in a proportion compounded of the proportions of the
velocity through DF, to the velocity through AF, and of the height DB, to the
height AB; As the velocity through DF is to the velocity through AF, so let the
line R, to the line S; and as the height DB is to the height AB, so let the
line S, to the line T; and let us suppose a Section LMN, equal to DF in height
and breadth; that is LM equal to DB, and MN equal to BF; but let it be in
velocity equal to the Section AF, therefore the quantity of Water which runs
through DF, shall be to that which runs through LN, as the velocity through
DF, is to the velocity through LN, that is, to the velocity through AF; and the
line R being to the line S, as the velocity through DF, to the velocity through
AF; therefore the quantity which runs through DF, to that which runs
through LN, shall have the proportion of R to S; but the quantity which runs
through LN, to that which runs through AF, (the Sections being equally
swift) shall be in proportion as the Section LN, to the Section AF; that is, as
DB, to AB; that is as the line S, to the line T: Therefore by equal proportion,
the quantity of the water which runs through DF, shall be in proportion to
that which runs through AF, as R is to T; that is, compounded of the
proportions of the height DB, to the height AB, and of the velocity through DF,
to the velocity through AF; and therefore if a River discharge a certain
quantity, etc. which was to be demonstrated.

ANNOTATION.
THe same might have been demonstrated by the second Proposition above
demonstrated, as is manifest.

PROPOSITION VI.
If two equal streams of the same Torrent, fall into a River at diverse times,
the heights made in the River by the Torrent, shall have between themselves the
reciprocal proportion of the velocities acquired in the River.
LEt A and B, be was equal streams of the same Torrent, which falling into a
River at diverse times, make the heights CD, and FG; that is the stream A,
makes the height CD, and the stream B, makes the height FG; that is, Let
their Sections in the River, into which they are fallen, be CE, and FH; I say,
that the height CD, shall be to the height FG, in reciprocal proportion, as the
velocity through FH, to the velocity through CE; for the quantity of water
which passes through A, being equal to the quantity which passes through B,
in equal times; also the quantity which passes through CE, shall be equal to
that which passes through FH: And therefore the proportion that the Section
CE, has to the Section FH; shall be the same that the velocity through FH,
has to the velocity through CE; But the Section CE, is to the Section FH, as
CD, to FG, by reason they are of the same breadth: Therefore CD, shall be to
FG, in reciprocal proportion, as the velocity through FH, is to the velocity
through CE, and therefore if two equal streams of the same Torrent, etc. which
was to be demonstrated.

OF THE MENSURATION OF Running Waters.
Lib. II.
HAving, in the close of my Treatise of the Mensuration of Running Waters
promised to declare upon another occasion other particulars more obscure, and
of very great concern upon the same argument: I now do perform my promise on
the occasion that I had the past year 1641. to propound my thoughts touching
the state of the Lake of Venice, a business certainly most important, as being
the concernment of that most noble and most admirable City; and indeed of all
Italy, yea of all Europe, Asia, and Africa; and one may truly say of all the
whole World. And being to proceed according to the method necessary in
Sciences, I will propose, in the first place certain Definitions of those Terms
whereof we are to make use in our Discourse: and then, laying down certain
Principles we will demonstrate some Problemes and Theoremes necessary for the
understanding of those things which we are to deliver; and moreover, recounting
sundry cases that have happened, we will prove by practice, of what utility
this contemplation of the Measure of Running Waters is in the more important
affairs both Public and Private.

DEFINITION I.
TWo Rivers are said to move with equal velocity, when in equal times they
pass spaces of equal length.

DEFINITION II.
RIvers are said to move with like velocity, when their proportional parts do
move alike, that is, the upper parts alike to the upper, and the lower to the
lower; so that if the upper part of one River shall be more swift than the
upper part of another; then also the lower part of the former shall be more
swift than the part correspondent to it in the second, proportionally.

DEFINITION III.
TO measure a River, or running Water, is in our sense to find out how many
determinate measures, or weights of Water in a given time passes through the
River, or Channel of the Water that is to be measured.

DEFINITION IV.
IF a Machine be made either of Brick, or of Stone, or of Wood, so composed
that two sides of the said Machine be placed at right angles upon the ends of a
third side, that is supposed to be placed in the bottom of a River, parallel to
the Horizon, in such a manner, that all the water which runs through the
said River, passes through the said Machine: And if all the water coming to be
diverted that runs through the said River, the upper superficies of that
third side placed in the bottom do remain uncovered and dry, and that the dead
water be not above it; This same Machine shall be called by us Or Sluice.
REGULATOR: And that third side of the Machine which stands Horizontally is
called the bottom of the Regulator; and the other two sides, are called the
banks of the Regulator; as is seen in this first Figure: ABCD, shall be the
Regulator; BC the bottom; and the other two sides AB, and CD are its banks.

DEFINITION V.
BY the quick height, we mean the Perpendicular from the upper superficie of
the River, unto the upper superficies of the bottom of the Regulator; as in the
foregoing Figure the line. GH.

DEFINITION VI.
IF the water of a River be supposed to be marked by three sides of a
Regulator, that Rightangled Parallelogram comprehended between the banks of the
Regulator, and the bottom, and the superficies of the Water is called a Section
of the River.

ANNOTATION.
HEre it is to be noted, that the River it self may have sundry and diverse
heights, in several parts of its Chanel, by reason of the various velocities of
the water, and its measures; as has been demonstrated in the first book.

SUPPOSITION I.
IT is supposed, that the Rivers equal in breadth, and quick height, that have
the same inclination of bed or bottom, ought also to have equal velocities, the
accidental impediments being removed that are dispersed throughout the course
of the water, and abstracting also from the external winds, which may
velocitate, and retard the course of the water of the River.

SUPPOSITION II.
LEt us suppose also, that if there be two Rivers that are in their beds of
equal length, and of the same inclination, but of quick heights unequal, they
ought to move with like velocity, according to the sense explained in the
second definition.

SUPPOSITION III.
BEcause it will often be requisite to measure the time exactly in the
following Problems, we take that to be an excellent way to measure the time,
which was showed me many years since by Signore Galilaeo Galilaei, which is as
follows.

A string is to be taken three Roman feet long, to the end of which a Bullet of
Lead is to be hanged, of about two or three ounces; and holding it by the other
end, the Plummet is to be removed from its perpendicularity a Palm, more or
less, and then let go, which will make many swings to and again, passing and
repassing the Perpendicular, before that it stay in the same: Now it being
required to measure the time that is spent in any whatsoever operation, those
vibrations are to be numbered, that are made whilst the work lasts; and they
shall be so many second minutes of an hour, if so be, that the string be three
Roman feet long, but in shorter strings, the vibrations are more frequent, and
in longer, less frequent; and all this still follows, whether the Plummet be
little or much removed from its Perpendicularity, or whether the weight of the
Lead be greater or lesser.

These things being pre-supposed, we will lay down some familiar Problems, from
which we shall pass to the Notions and questions more subtle and curious; which
will also prove profitable, and not to be slighted in this business of Waters.

PROPOSITION I. PROBLEM I.
A Chanel of Running-Water being given, the breadth of which passing through a
Regulator, is three Palms; and the height one Palm, little more or less, to
measure what water passes through the Regulator in a time given.
FIrst, we are to dam up the Chanel; so that there pass not any water below the
Dam; then we must place in the side of the Chanel, in the parts above the
Regulator three, or four, or five Bent-pipes, or Siphons, according to the
quantity of the water that runs along the Chanel; in such sort, as that they
may drink up, or draw out of the Chanel all the water that the Chanel bears
(and then shall we know that the Siphons drink up all the water, when we see
that the water at the Dam does neither rise higher, nor abate, but always
keeps in the same Level.) These things being prepared, taking the Instrument
to measure the time, we will examine the quantity of the water that issues by
one of those Siphons in the space of twenty vibrations, and the like will we do
one by one with the other Siphons; and then collecting the whole sum, we will
say, that so much is the water that passes and runs through the Regulator or
Chanel (the Dam being taken away) in the space of twenty second minutes of an
hour; and calculating, we may easily reduce it to hours, days, months, and
years: And it has fallen to my turn to measure this way the waters of Mills
and Fountains, and I have been well assured of its exactness, by often
repeating the same work.

CONSIDERATION.
ANd this method must be made use of in measuring the waters, that we are to
bring into Conducts, and carry into Cities and Castles, for Fountains; and that
we may be able afterward to divide and share them to particular persons
justly; which will prevent infinite suits and controversies that every day
happen in these matters.

PROPOSITION II. THEOREM. I.
If a River moving with such a certain velocitie through its Regulator, shall
have a given quick height, and afterward by new water shall increase to be
double, it shall also increase double in velocitie.
LEt the quick height of a River in the Regulator ABCD, be the perpendicular
FB, and afterward, by new water that is added to the River, let the water be
supposed to be raised to G, so that GB may be double to EB. I say, that all the
water GC shall be double in velocity to that of EC: For the water GF, having
for its bed the bottom OF, equally inclined as the bed BC, and its quick height
GE being equal to the quick height EC, and having the same breadth BC, it shall
have of it self a velocity equal to the velocity of the first water FC: but
because, besides its own motion, which is imparted to it by the motion of the
water EC, it has also over and above its own motion, the motion of EC. And
because the two waters GC, and EC, are alike in velocity, by the third
Supposition; therefore the whole water GC shall be double in velocity to the
water EC; which was that which we were to demonstrate.

This demonstration is not here inserted, as perfect, the Author having by
several letters to his friends confessed himself unsatisfied therewith; and
that he intended not to publish the Theorem without a more solid demonstration,
which he was in hope to light upon. But being overtaken by Death, he could not
give the finishing touch either to this, or to the rest of the second Book. In
consideration of which, it seemed good to the Publisher of the same, rather to
omit it, than to do any thing contrary to the mind of the Author. And this he
hints, by way of advertisement, to those that have Manuscript Copies of this
Book, with the said demonstration. For this time let the Reader content himself
with the knowledge of so ingenious and profitable a Conclusion; of the truth of
which he may, with small expense and much pleasure, be assured by means of the
experiment to be made in the same manner, with that which is laid down in the
second Corollary of the fourth Theorem of this, with its Table, and the use
thereof annexed.

COROLLARIE
HEnce it follows, that when a River increases in quick height by the
addition of new water, it also increases in velocity; so that the velocity
has the same proportion to the velocity that the quick height has to the
quick height; as may be demonstrated in the same manner.

PROPOS. III. PROBLEM II.
A Chanel of Water being given whose breadth exceeds not twenty Palms, or
thereabouts and whose quick height is less than five Palms, to measure the
quantity of the Water that runs through the Chanel in a time given.
PLace in the Chanel a Regulator, and observe the quick height in the said
Regulator; then let the water be turned away from the Chanel by a Chanellet of
three or four Palms in breadth, or thereabouts: And that being done, measure
the quantity of the water which passes through the said Chanellet, as has been
taught in the second Proposition; and at the same time observe exactly how much
the quick height shall be abated in the greater Chanel, by means of the
diversion of the Chanellet; and all these particulars being performed, multiply
the quick height of the greater Chanel into it self, and likewise multiply into
it self the lesser height of the said bigger Chanel, and the lesser square
being taken, from the greater, the remainder shall have the same proportion to
the whole greater square, as the water of the Chanellet diverted, has to the
water of the bigger Chanel: And because the water of the Chanellet is known by
the Method said down in the first Theorem, and the terms of the Theorem being
also known, the quantity of the water which runs through the bigger Chanel,
shall be also known by the Golden Rule, which was that that was desired to be
known. We will explain the whole business by an example.

Let a Chanel be, for example, 15 Palms broad, its quick height before its
diversion by the Chanellet shall be supposed to be 24 inches; but after the
diversion, let the quick height of the Chanel be only 22 inches. Therefore the
greater height to the lesser, is as the number 11. to 12. But the square of 11.
is 121, and the square of 12. is 144, the difference between the said lesser
square and the greater is 23. Therefore the diverted water, is to the whole
water, as 23. to 144: which is well near as 1 to 6^: and that is the proportion
that the quantity of the water which runs through the Chanellet shall have,
to all the water that runs through the great Chanel. Now if we should find
by the Rule mentioned above in the first Proposition, that the quantity of the
water that runs through the Chanellet, is v. g. an hundred Barrels, in the
space of 15 second minutes of an hour, it is manifest, that the water which
runs through the great Chanel in the said time of 35 min. sec. shall be
about 600 Barrels.

The same operation performed another way.

ANd because very often in applying the Theory to Practice it happens, that
all the necessary particulars in the Theory cannot so easily be put in
execution; therefore we will here add another way of performing the same
Problem, if it should chance to happen that the Chanellet could not
commodiously be diverted from the great Chanel, but that it were easier for the
water of another smaller Chanel to be brought into the greater Chanel; which
water of the smaller Chanel might be easily measured, as has been shown in
the first Problem; or in case that there did fall into a greater Chanel, a
lesser Chanel that might be diverted and measured. Therefore I say in the first
case, If we would measure the quantity of the water that runs in a certain
time through the greater Chanel, into which another lesser Chanel that is
measurable may be brought, we must first exactly measure the Chanellet, and
then observe the quick height of the greater Chanel, before the introduction of
the lesser; and having brought in the said Chanellet, we must agnin find the
proportion that the water of the Chanellet has to all the water of the great
Chanel; for these terms of the proportion being known, as also the quantity of
the water of the Chanellet, we shall also come to know the quantity of the
water that runs through the great Chanel. It is likewise manifest, that we
shall obtain our intent, if the case were that there entered into the great
Chanel, another lesser Chanel that was measurable, and that might be diverted.

CONSIDERATION.
IT would be necessary to make use of this Doctrine in the distribution of the
waters that are employed to overflow the fields, as is used in the Brescian,
Cremonese, Bergamase, Lodigian, Milanese, territories, and many other places,
where very great suits and differences arise, which not being to be determined
with intelligible reasons, come oftentimes to be decided, by force of arms;
and instead of flowing their Grounds with Waters, they cruelly flow them with
the shedding of humane blood, impiously inverting the course of Peace and
Justice, sowing such disorders and feuds, as that they are sometimes
accompanied with the ruin of whole Cities, or else unprofitably charge them
with vain, and sometimes prejudicial expenses.

PROPOS. IV. THEOR. II.
If a River increase in quick height, the quantity of Water which the River
discharges after the increase, has the Proportion compounded of the
Proportions of the Quick height to the Quick height, and of the velocity to the
velocity.
LEt there be a River, which whilst it is low, runs through the Regulator DF,
with the Quick height AB, and afterward let a Flood come; and then let it run
with the height DB, I say, that the quantity of the Water that is discharged
through DF, to that which discharges through AF, has the proportion
compounded of the proportions of the velocity through DF to the velocity
through AF, and of the height DB to the height AB. As the velocity through DF
is to the velocity through AF, so let the line R be to the line S; and as the
height DB is to the height AB; so let the line S be to the line T. And let a
Section be supposed LMN equal to the Section DF in height and length, but let
it be in velocity equal to the Section AF. Therefore the quantity of the Water
that runs through DF to that which runs through LN, shall be as the
velocity through DF, to the velocity of LN, that is, to the velocity through
LN, that is, to the velocity through AF. therefore the quantity of Water which
runs through DF, to that which passes through LN, shall have the proportion
that R has to S; but the quantity of the Water that runs through LN, to
that which runs through AF; (the Sections being equally swift) shall have
the proportion that the Section LN has to the Section AF, that is, that the
height BD has to the height BA, that is, that S has to T. Therefore, by equal
proportion, the quantity of the Water which runs by DF, to that which
runs by AF, shall have the proportion of R to T, that is, shall be
compounded of the proportions of the height DB, to the height AB; and of the
velocity through DF, to the velocity through AF. And therefore if a River
increase in quick height, the quantity of the Water that runs after the
increase, to that which runs before the increase, has the proportion
compounded, etc. Which was to be demonstrated.

COROLLARIE I.
HEnce it follows, that we having shown, that the quantity of the Water which
runs, whilst the River is high, to that which ran, whilst it was low, has
the proportion compounded of the velocity to the velocity, and of the height to
the height. And it having been demonstrated, that the velocity to the velocity
is as the height to the height; it follows, I say, that the quantity of the
Water that runs, whilst the River is high, to that which runs, whilst it
is low, has duplicate proportion of the height to the height, that is, the
proportion that the squares of the heights have.

COROLLARIE II.
Upon which things depends the reason of that which I have said, in my second
Consideration, that if by the diversion of 59. of the Water that enters by
the Rivers into the Moor or Fen, the Water be abated such a measure, that same
shall be only one third of its whole height; but moreover diverting the 49, it
shall abate two other thirds, a most principal point; and such, that its not
having been well understood, has caused very great disorders, and there would
now, more than ever, follow extreme damage, if one should put in execution the
diversion of the Sile and other Rivers; and it is manifest, that in the same
manner, wherewith it has been demonstrated, that the quantity of the Water
increasing quadruple, the height would increase only double, and the quantity
increasing nonuple, the height increases triple; so that, by adding to units
all the odd numbers, according to their Series, the heights increase according
to the natural progression of all the numbers, from units. As for example,
there passing through a Regulator such a certain quantity of Water in one time;
adding three of those measures, the quick height is two of those parts, which
at first was one; and continuing to add five of those said measures, the
height is three of those parts which at first were one; and thus adding seven,
and then nine, and then 11. and then 13, etc. the heights shall be 4. then 5,
then 6. then 7, etc. And for the greater facility of the Work, we have
described the following Table, of which we will declare the use: The Table is
divided into three Series or Progressions of Numbers: the first Series
contains all the Numbers in the Natural Progression, beginning at a Unit, and
is called the Series of the Heights; the second contains all the odd
numbers, beginning at an unit, and is called the Series of the Additions: the
third contains all the square numbers, beginning at an unit, and is called
the Series of Quantity.

Heights. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 Additions. 1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21
Quantities. 1 4 9 16 25 36 49 64 81 100 121

The use of the aforementioned Table.
FIrst, if we suppose the whole quick height of a River of Running Water to be
divided into any number of equal parts, at pleasure, and would abate the same
one fifth, by means of a division; let there be found in the Table in the Series
of heights the number 5. the denominator of the part which the River is to
abate, and take the number that is immediately under it in the row of
Additions, which is 9. which let be subtracted from the number 25. placed
underneath the same in the row of Quantities, the remainder 16. signifies that
of the 25. parts of Water that ran in the River, whilst it was 5 measures high,
there do only run 16. parts; so that to make it abate it is necessary to take
925 from the Water that the whole River did carry; so that with substracting
somewhat more than one third of the Water of the River, it is abated but only
one fifth.

2. And thus, in the second place, if on the contrary, one would know how much
water is to be added to the said River to make it increase one fifth more in
height, so as that it may run in the Regulator 6. of those parts high; of which
it ran before but 5. let 6 be found in the row of heights, and let the number
11. standing under the same be taken and added to the number 25. that is placed
under the number 9. in the Additions, and 5. in the heights, and you shall have
36; which is the quantity of the water that runs with the height of the
River, when it is high 6 of those parts, whereof it was before but 5.

3. But if it should be desired, to know how much water it is requisite to add
to make the River rise so, as that it may run in height 8. of those parts of
which before it ran but 5; one ought to take the sum of the number of the
Series of Additions standing under 8. 7. and 6, which are 15. 13. and 11. that
is, 39. and this shall be the sum that must be added to 25: So that to make
the River to run 8. of those parts in height, of which it before did run 5, it
will be necessary to add 39. of those parts, of which the River before was 25.

4. Likewise the same Table gives the quantity of water that runs from time
to time through a River, that increases by the addition of new water to the
same in one* of its heights, the quantity of its water be known. As for
example: If we knew that the River in one minute of an hour discharges 2500.
of those measures of water, and runs in height 5. parts in the Regulator,
and afterward should see that it runs 8 Palms high, finding in the row of
quantity the number placed under 8. which is 64. we would say that the River
heightened, carries of water 64. of those parts whereof it carried before but
25; and because before it carried 2500. measures, by the Golden Rule we will
say, that the River carries 6400. of those measures, of which before it
carried 2500.

In this progress of Nature, is one thing really curious, and that at first
sight seems to be somewhat Paradoxal, that we proceeding ordinately in the
diversions and additions, with additions and diversions so unequal, the
abatings do notwithstanding always prove equal, and so do the risings: And who
would ever think that a River in height, v. g. 10. Palms, running and carrying
an hundred measures in a minute of an hour, is to abate but one Palm, only by
the diversion of 19. of those measures; and then again, that the business
comes to that pass, that it abateth likewise a Palm by the diversion of three
only of those measures, nay, by the diversion of but one measure? and yet it
is most certain: And this truth meets with so manifest proofs in experience,
that it is very admirable! And for the full satisfaction of those, who not
being able to comprehend subtle demonstrations, desire to be clearly informed
by the matters of fact, and to see with their bobily eyes, and touch with their
hands, what their understanding and reason cannot reach unto: I will hear add
another very easy way to reduce all to an experiment, the which may be made in
little, in great, or in very great; of which I make use frequently, to the
admiration of such as see it.

I prepared an hundred Siphons, or, if you will, bowed Pipes, all equal; and
placed them at the brim of a Vessel, wherein the water is kept at one and the
same level (whether all the Siphons work, or but a certain number of them) the
mouths by which the water issues being all placed in the same level, parallel
to the Horizon; but lower in level than the water in the Vessel; and gathered
all the water falling from the Siphons into another Vessel standing lower than
the former, I made it to run away through a Chanel, in such manner inclined,
that wanting water from the Siphons, the said Chanel remained quite dry.

And this done, I measured the quick* height of the Chanel with care, and
afterward divided it exactly into 10 equal parts, and causing 19. of those
Siphons to be taken away, so that the Chanel did not run water, save only with
81 of those Siphons, I again observed the quick height of the water in the same
site observed before, and found that its height was diminished precisely the
tenth part of all its first height; and thus continuing to take away 17. other
Siphons, the height was likewise diminished 1/10 of all its first quick height;
and trying to take away 15. Siphons, then 13, then 11, then 9, then 7, then 5,
and then 3. always in these diversions, made in order as has been said, there
ensued still an abatement of 1/10 of the whole height.

And here was one thing worthy of observation, that the water increasing in [or
through] the Chanel, its quick height was different in different sites of the
Chanel, that is still lesser, the more one approached to the Outlet;
notwithstanding which the abatement followed in all places proportionably, that
is in all its sites the first part of the height of that site diminished: And
moreover the water issued from the Chanel, and dilated into a broader course,
from which likewise having diverse Out-lets and Mouths; yet nevertheless in that
breadth also the quick heights successively varied and altered in the same
proportions. Nor did I here desist my observation, but the water being
diminished, that issued from the Siphons, and there being but one of them left
that discharged water; I observed the quick height that it made in the
abovesaid sites, (the which was likewise 1/10 of all the first height) there
being added to the water of that Siphon, the water of three other Siphons; so
that all the water was of 4 Siphons, and consequently quadruple to the first
Siphon; but the quick height was only double, and adding five Siphons, the
quick height became triple, and with adding seven Siphons, the height increased
quadruple; and so by adding of 9. it increased quintuple, and by adding of 11.
it increased sextuple, and by adding of 13. it increased septuple, and by
adding of 15. octuple, and by adding of 17. nonuple, and lastly by adding 19.
Siphons; so that all the water was centuple to the water of one Siphon, yet
nevertheless the quick height of all this water was only decuple to the first
height conjoined by the water that issued from one only Siphon.

For the more clear understanding of all which, I have made the following
Figure; in which we have the mouth A, that maintains the water of the Vessel
BC in the same level; though it continually run; to the brim of the Vessel are
put 25. Siphons (and there may be many more) divided into 5 Classes, DEFGH, and
the first D, are of one only Siphon; the second E, of three Siphons; the third
F, of five; the fourth G, of 7; the fifth H, of 9; and one may suppose the
sixth of 11, the seventh of 13 Siphons, and so of the other Classes, all
containing in consequent odd numbers successively (we are content to represent
in the Figure no more but the five forenamed Classes to avoid confusion) the
gathered water DEFGH, which runs through the Chanel IKL, and falls into the
outlet MNOP; and so much suffices for the explanation of this experiment.



PROPOS. V. PROB. III.
Any River of any bigness, if being given to examine the quantity of the Water
that runs through the River in a time assigned.
BY what we have said already in the two preceding Problems, we may also
resolve this that we have now before us; and it is done, by diverting in the
first place from the great River a good big measurable Chanel, as is taught in
the second Problem, and observing the abatement of the River, caused by the
diversion of the Chanel; and finding the proportion that the Water of the
Chanel has to that of the River, then let the Water of the Chanel be measured
by the second Problem, and work as above, and you shall have your desire.

CONSIDERATION. I.
ANd although it seems as if it might prove difficult, and almost impossible
to make use of the Regulator number, if one be about to measure the water of
some great River, and consequently would be impossible, or at least very
difficult to reduce the Theory of the first Problem into practice: Yet
nevertheless, I could say that such great conceits of measuring the water of a
great River, are not to come into the minds of any but great Personages, and
potent Princes; of whom it is expected for their extraordinary concerns, that
they will make these kind of enquiries; as if here in Italy it should be of
the Rivers Tyber, Velino, Chiana, Arno, Serchio, Adice, in which it seems
really difficult to apply the Regulator, to find exactly the quick height of
the River: But because in such like cases sometimes it would turn to account to
be at some charge, to come to the exact and true knowledge of the quantity of
water which that River carries, by knowledge whereof, other greater
disbursments might afterward be avoided, that would often times be made in vain;
and prevent the disgusts, which sometimes happen amongst Princes: Upon this
ground I think it will be well to show also the way how to make use of the
Regulator in these great Rivers; in which if we will but open our eyes, we
shall meet with good ones, and those made without great cost or labor, which
will serve our turn.

For upon such like Rivers there are Wears, or Locks made, to cause the Waters
to rise, and to turn them for the service of Mills, or the like. Now in these
Cases it is sufficient, that one erect upon the two extremes of the Wear two
Pilasters either of Wood or Brick, which with the bottom of the Wear do
compose our Regulator, wherewith we may make our desired operation, yea the
Chanel it self diverted shall serve, without making any other diversion or
union. And in brief, if the businesses be but managed by a judicious person,
there may ways and helps be made use of, according to occasion, of which it
would be too tedious to speak, and therefore this little that has been hinted
shall suffice.

CONSIDERATION II.
FRom, what has been declared, if it shall be well understood, may be deduced
many benefits and conveniences, not only in dividing of Running Waters for
infinite uses that they are put to in turning of Corne-Mills, Paper-Mills,
Gins, Powder-Mills, Rice-Mills, Iron-Mills, Oil-Mills, Sawing-Mills,
Mirtle-Mills, Felling-Mills, Fulling-Mills, Silk-Mills, and such other
Machines; but also in ordering Navigable Channels, diverting Rivers and Channels
of Waters, or terminating and limiting the sizes of Pipes for Fountains: In all
which affairs there are great errors co^^^^^ed, to the loss of much expense,
the Channels and Pipes that are made, sometimes not being sufficient to carry
the designed Waters, and sometimes they are made bigger than is necessary;
which disorders shall be avoided, if the Engineer be advised of the things
abovesaid: and in case that to these Notions there be added the knowledge of
Philosophy and Mathematics, agreeable to the sublime Discoveries of Signore
Galilaeo, and the further improvement thereof by Signore Evangelista
Torricelli, Mathematician to the Grand Duke of Tuscany, who has subtly and
admirably handled this whole business of Motion, one shall then come to the
knowledge of particular notions of great curiosity in the Theoricks, and of
extraordinary benefit in the Practicks that daily occur in these businesses.

And to show, in effect, of what utility these Notions are, I have thought fit
to insert, in this place, the Considerations by me made upon the Lake of
Venice, and to represent, at large, by the experience of the last year 1641.
the most Serene Erizzo, then Duke of the said Republique. Being therefore at
Venice, in the year aforesaid, I was requested by the most Illustrious and most
Excellent Signore Giovanni Basadonna, a Senator of great worth and merit, that
I would ingenuously deliver my opinion touching the state of the Lake of
Venice; and after I had discoursed with his Honor several times, in the end I
had order to set down the whole business in writing, who having afterward
read it privately, the said Signore imparted the same, with like privacy, to
the most Serene PRINCE, and I received order to represent the same to the full
College, as accordingly I did in the Month of May, the same year, and it was
as follows.

CONSIDERATIONS Concerning the LAKE OF VENICE BY D. BENEDETTO CASTELLI, Abbot
of S. Benedetto Aloysio, Mathematician to Pope URBAN VIII. and Professor in
ROME.
CONSIDERATION I.
THough the principal cause be but one only, that in my judgment threatens
irreparable ruin to the Lake of Venice, in the present state in which it now
stands; Yet nevertheless, I think that two Heads may be considered. And this
Consideration may peradventure serve us for to facilitate and explain the
opportune remedies, though not to render the state of things absolutely
unchangeable and eternal: an enterprise impossible, and especially in that
which having had some beginning, ought likewise necessarily to have its end; or
at least to prevent the danger for many hundreds of years; and possibly it may,
in the mean time, by the mutation it self be brought into a better condition.

I say therefore, that the present disorder may be considered under two Heads;
One is the very notable discovery of Land that is observed at the time of low
Water, the which, besides the obstructing of Navigation in the Lake and also in
the Channels, does likewise threaten another mischief and disorder worthy of
very particular consideration, which is, That the Sun drying up that mudde,
especially in the times of hot Summers, does raise thence the putrified and
pernicious vapors, fogs, and exhalations that infect the Air, and may render
the City unhabitable.

The second Head is the great Stoppage that daily is growing in the Ports,
especially of Venice, at Malamoco; concerning which matters I will hint certain
general points, and then will proceed to the more particular and important
affairs.

And first, I say, that I hold it altogether impossible to effect any thing,
though never so profitable, which does not bring with it some mischief; and
therefore the good and the hurt ought to be very well weighed, and then the
less harmful part to be embraced.

Secondly, I propose to consideration, that the so notable discovery of Earth
and Mud, has not been long observed, as I understand, from old persons that
can remember passages for fifty years past; which thing being true, as to me it
seems most true, it should appear that it could not but be good to reduce
matters to that pass that they were at formerly, (laying aside all affection
or passion that self-flattering minds have entertained for their own conceits)
or at least it shall be necessary speedily to consult the whole.

Thirdly, I hold that it is necessary to weigh, whether from the foresaid
discovery of Land, it follows, that only the Earth rises, as it is commonly
thought by all, without dispute; or whether the Waters are abated and fallen
away; or else whether it proceeds from both the one and other cause. And here
it would be seasonable to enquire, what share the said causes may have, each
considered apart in the foresaid effect. For, in the first case, if the Earth
have been raised, it would be necessary to consider of taking it down, and
removing it: But if the Waters have failed or abated, I believe that it would
be extremely necessary to restore and raise them: And if both these reasons
have conspired in this effect, it will be necessary to remedy them each apart.
And I do, for my part, think, that the so notable appearance of Shelves at the
time of low Water, proceeds principally from the decrease and abatement of the
Waters, which may confidently be affirmed to need no other proof, in regard
that the Brent has been actually diverted which did formerly discharge its
Water into the Lake.

As to the other point of the great Stoppage of Ports, I hold, that all
proceeds from the violence of the Sea, which being sometimes disturbed by
winds, especially at the time of the waters flowing, does continually raise
from its bottom immense heaps of sand, carrying them by the tide; and force of
the waves into the Lake; it not having on its part any sttength of current that
may raise and carry them away, they sink to the bottom, and so they choke up
the Ports. And that this effect happens in this manner, we have most frequent
experiences thereof along the Seacoasts: And I have observed in Tuscany on the
Roman-shores, and in the Kingdom of of Naples, that when a river falls into
the Sea, there is always seen in the Sea it self, at the place of the rivers
outlet, the resemblance, as it were, of an Half Moon, or a great shelf of
settled sand under water, much higher then the rest of the shore, and it is
called in Tuscany, il Cavallo; and here in Venice, lo Scanto: the which comes
to be cut by the current of the river, one while on the right side, another
while on the left, and sometimes in the midst, according as the Wind sits. And
a like effect I have observed in certain little Rillets of water, along the
Lake of Bolsena; with no other difference, save that of small and great.

Now who so well considers this effect, plainly sees that it proceeds from
no other, than from the contrariety of the stream of the River, to the impetus
of the Sea-waves; seeing that great abundance of sand which the Sea continually
throws upon the shore, comes to be driven into the Sea by the stream of the
river; and in that place where those two impediments meet with equal force, the
sand setleth under water, and thereupon is made that same Shelf or Cavallo; the
which if the river carry water, and that any considerable store, it shall be
thereby cut and broken; one while in one place, and another while in another;
as has been said, according as the Wind blows: And through that Chanel it is
that Vessels fall down into the Sea, and again make to the river, as into a
Port. But if the Water of the river shall not be continual or shall be weak, in
that case the force of the Sea-Wind shall drive such a quantity of sand into
the mouth of the Port, and of the river, as shall wholly choke it up. And
hereupon there are seen along the Seaside, very many Lakes and Meers, which at
certain times of the year abound with waters, and the Lakes bear down that
enclosure, and run into the Sea.

Now it is necessary to make the like reflections on our Ports of Venice,
Malamocco, Bondolo, and Chiozza; which in a certain sense are no other than
Creeks, mouths, and openings of the shore that parts the Lake from the main
Sea; and therefore I hold that if the Waters in the Lake were plentiful, they
would have strength to scowr the mouths of the Ports thoroughly, and with great
force; but the Water in the Lake failing, the Sea will without any opposal,
bring such a drift of sand into the Ports; that if it does not wholly choke
them up, it shall render them at least unprofitable, and impossible for Barks
and great Vessels.

Many other considerations might be propounded concerning these two heads of
the stoppage of the Ports, and of the appearance of the Ouze and Mud in the
Lakes, but so much shall suffice us to have hinted, to make way for discoursing
of the operations about the oportune remedies.

Yet before that I propound my opinion, I say, That I know very well that my
proposal, at first sight, will seem absurd and inconvenient; and therefore, as
such, will perhaps be rejected by the most: and so much the rather, for that it
will prove directly contrary to what has hitherto been, and as I hear, is
intended to be done: And I am not so wedded to my opinions, but that I do
consider what others may judge thereof: But be it as it will, I am obliged to
speak my thoughts freely, and that being done, I will leave it to wiser men
than my self; when they shall have well considered my reasons, to judge and
deliberate of the quid agendum: And if the sentence shall go against me, I
appeal to the most equitable and inexorable Tribunal of Nature, who not caring
in the least to please either one party or another, will be always a punctual
and inviolable executrix of her eternal Decrees, against which neither humane
deliberations, nor our vain desires, shall ever have power to rebel. I added
by word of mouth that which follows.

Though your Highness interest your self in this Noble College, and cause it
to be confirmed in the In Pregadi, a particular Council, the Senators of which
have great Authority.
Senate by universal Vote, that the Winds do not blow, that the Sea does not
fluctuate, that the Rivers do not run; yet shall the Winds be always deaf, the
Sea shall be constant in its inconstancy, and the Rivers most obstinate: And
these shall be my Judges, and to their determination I refer my self.

By what has been said, in my opinion, that is made very clear and manifest,
which in the beginning of this discourse I glanced at; namely, That the whole
disorder, although it be divided into two heads, into the discovery of the Mud,
and of the stoppage Ports, yet nevertheless, by the application of one only
remedy, and that in my esteem very easy, the whole shall be removed: And this
it is; That there be restored into the Lake as much Water as can be possible,
and in particular from the upper parts of Venice, taking care that the Water be
as free from Mud as is possible. And that this is the true and real remedy of
the precedent disorders, is manifest: For in the passage that this Water shall
make through the Lakes, it shall of it self by degrees clear the Channels in
sundry parts of them, according to the currents that it shall successively
acquire, and in this manner being dispersed through the Lake, it shall maintain
the waters in the same, and in the Channels much higher, as I shall prove
hereafter; a thing that will make Navigation commodious; and that, which
moreover is of great moment in our business; those Shelves of Mud which now
discover themselves at the time of Low-Waters shall be always covered, so that
the putrefaction of the Air shall also be remedied.

And lastly, this abundance of Water being always to discharge it self into
the Sea by the Ports, I do not doubt, but that their bottomes will be scoured.
And that these effects must follow, Nature her self seems to persuade, there
remaining only one great doubt, whether that abundance of Water that shall be
brought into the Lake may be really sufficient to make the Waters rise so much
as to keep the Shelves covered, and to facilitate Navigation, which ought to be
at least half a A Venice Brace is 11/16 of our yard.
Brace, or thereabouts. And indeed it seems at first sight to be impossible,
that the sole Water of the A River of that name.
Brent let into the Lake, and dispersed over the same, can occasion so notable
an height of water; and the more to confirm the difficulties, one might say,
reducing the reason to calculation, that in case the Brent were 40. Braces
broad, and two and an half high, and the breadth of the Lake were 20000.
Braces, it would seem necessary that the height of the water of the Brent
dilated and distended through the Lake would be but only 1/100 of a Brace in
height, which is imperceptible, and would be of no avail to our purpose; nay
more, it being very certain that the Brent runs very muddy and foul, this
would occasion very great mischief, filling and contracting the Lake, and for
that reason this remedy ought, as pernicious, to be totally excluded and
condemned.

I here confess that I am surprised at the form of the Argument, as if I were
in a certain manner convinced, that I dare not adventure to say more, or open
my mouth in this matter; but the strength it self of the Argument, as being
founded upon the means of Geometrical and Arithmetical Calculation, has opened
me the way to discover a very crafty fraud that is couched in the same
Argument, which fraud I will make out to any one that has but any insight in
Geometry and Arithmetic. And as it is impossible, that such an argument should
be produced by any but such as have tasted of these, in such affairs, most
profitable, and most necessary Sciences; so do not I pretend to make my self
understood, save only by such, to whom I will evince so clearly, as that more
it cannot be desired, the error and fraud wherein those Ancients and Moderns
have been, and always are entangled, that have in any way yet handled this
matter of considering the Measure and Quantity of the Waters that move. And so
great is the esteem that I have for that which I am now about to say touching
this particular, that I am content that all the rest of my Discourse be
rejected; provided, that that be perfectly understood, which I am hereafter to
propose, I holding and knowing it to be a main Principle, upon which all that
is founded that can be said either well or handsomely on this particular. The
other Discourses may have an appearance of being probable, but this hits the
mark as full as can be desired, arriving at the highest degree of certainty.

I have, seventeen years since, as I represented to the most Serene Prince, and
to the Right Honorable the President of the Lords the Commissioners of the I.
Savii dell' Acque, a particular Council that take care of the Lakes and other
Aquatick affairs.
Sewers, written a Treatise of the Measure of the waters that move, in which I
Geometrically demonstrate and declare this business, and they who shall have
well understood the ground of my Discourse, will rest fully satisfied with that
which I am now about to propose: But that all may become the more easy, I will
more briefly explicate and declare so much thereof as I have demonstrated in
the Discourse, which will suffice for our purpose: And if that should not be
enough, we have always the experiment of a very easy and cheap way to clear
up the whole business. And moreover I will take the boldness to affirm, that
in case there should not for the present any deliberation be made concerning
this affair, according to my opinion; yet nevertheless it will be, at some
time or other; or if it be not, things will grow worse and worse.

For more clear understanding, therefore, it ought to be known, that it being
required, as it is generally used, to measure the waters of a River, its
breadth and its depth is taken, and these two dimensions being multiplied
together, the product is affirmed to be the quantity of that River: As for
example, if a River shall be 100. feet broad, and 20. feet high, it will be
said, that that River is 2000 feet of Water, and so if a Ditch shall be 15.
feet broad, and 5. feet high, this same Ditch will be affirmed to be 75. feet
of Water: And this manner of measuring Running Water has been used by the
Ancients, and by Moderns, with no other difference, save only that some have
made use of the Foot, others of the Palm, others of the Brace, and others of
other measures.

Now because that in observing these Waters that move, I frequently found, that
the same Water of the same River was in some sites of its Chanel pretty big,
and in others much less, not arriving in some places to the twentieth, nor to
the hundredth part of that which it is seen to be in other places; therefore
this vulgar way of measuring the Waters that move, for that they did not give
me a certain and stable measure and quantity of Water, began deservedly to be
suspected by me, as difficult and defective, being always various, and the
measure, on the contrary, being to be always determinate, and the same; it is
therefore written, that Pondus and Pondus, Mensura and Mensura, utrumque
abominabile est apud Deum, Exodus I considered that in the Territory of Brescia,
my native Country, and in other places, where Waters are divided to overflow
the Grounds, by the like way of measuring them, there were committed grievous
and most important errors, to the great prejudice of the Public and of
Private persons, neither they that sell, nor they that buy understanding the
true quantity of that which is sold and bought: In regard that the same square
measure, as is accustomed in those parts, assigned one particular person,
carried to sometimes above twice or thrice as much water, as did the same
square measure assigned to another. Which thing proves to be the same
inconvenience, as if the measure wherewith Wine and Oil is bought and sold,
should hold twice or thrice as much Wine or Oil at one time as at another. Now
this Consideration invited my mind and curiosity to the finding out of the
true measure of Running Waters. And in the end, by occasion of a most important
business that I was employed in some years since, with great intensenesse of
mind, and with the sure direction of Geometry, I have discovered the mistake,
which was, that we being upon the business of taking the measure of the Waters
that move, do make use of two dimensions only, namely, breadth and depth,
keeping no account of the length. And yet the Water being, though running, a
Body, it is necessary in forming a conceit of its quantity, in relation to
another, to keep account of all the three Dimensions, that is of length,
breadth, and depth.

Here an objection has been put to me, in behalf of the ordinary way of
measuring Running Waters, in opposition to what I have above considered and
proposed: and I was told, Its true, that in measuring a Body that stands still,
one ought to take all the three Dimensions; but in measuring a Body that
continually moves, as the Water, the case is not the same: For the length is
not to be had, the length of the water that moves being infinite, as never
finishing its running; and consequently is incomprehensible by humane
understanding, and therefore with reason, nay upon necessity it comes to be
omitted.

In answer to this, I say, that in the abovesaid Discourse, two things are to
be considered distinctly; First, whether it be possible to frame any conceit of
the quantity of the Body of the Water with two Dimensions only. And secondly,
whether this length be to be found. As to the first, I am very certain that no
man, let him be never so great a Wit, can never promise to frame a conceit of
the quantity of the Body of Water, without the third Dimension of length: and
hereupon I return to affirm, that the vulgar Rule of measuring Running water is
vain and erroneous. This point being agreed on, I come to the second, which is,
Whether the third Dimension of length may be measured. And I say, that if one
would know the whole length of the water of a Fountain or River, thereby to
come to know the quantity of all the Water, it would prove an impossible
enterprise, nay the knowing of it would not be useful. But if one would know
how much water a Fountain, or a River carries in a determinate time of an
hour, of a day, or of a month, etc. I say, that it is a very possible and
profitable enquiry, by reason of the innumerable benefits that may be derived
thence, it much importing to know how much Water a Chanel carries in a time
given; and I have demonstrated the same above in the beginning of this Book;
and of this we stand in need in the business of the Lake, that so we may be
able to determine how much shall be the height of the Brent, when it is spread
all over the Lake: For the three dimensions of a Body being given, the Body is
known; and the quantity of a Body being given, if you have but two dimensions,
the third shall be known. And thus diving farther and farther into this
Consideration, I found that the Velocity of the course of the water may be an
hundred times greater or lesser in one part of its Chanel than in another. And
therefore although there should be two mouths of Waters equal in bigness; yet
nevertheless it might come to pass, that one might discharge an hundred or a
thousand times more water than another: and this would be, if the water in one
of the mouths should run with an hundred or a thousand times greater velocity,
than the other; for that it would be the same as to say, that the swifter was
an hundred or a thousand times longer, than the slower: and in this manner I
discovered that to keep account of the velocity, was the keeping account of the
Length.

And therefore it is manifest, that when two Mouths discharge the same quantity
of Water in an equal velocity, it is necessary that the less swift Mouth be so
much bigger than the more swift; as the more swift exceeds in velocity the
less swift; as for example.

In case two Rivers should carry equal quantity of water in equal times, but
that one of them should be four times more swift than the other, the more slow
should of necessity be four times more large. And because the same River in any
part thereof always discharges the same quantity of Water in equal times (as
is demonstrated in the first Proposition of the first Book He here intends the
Demonstrations following, at the end of the first Book
of the measure of Running Waters;) but yet does not run thorowout with the
same velocity: Hence it is, that the vulgar measures of the said River, in
diverse parts of its Chanel, are always diverse; insomuch, that if a River
passing through its chanel had such velocity, that it ran 100 Braces in the
1/1/60 of an hour-and afterward the said River should be reduced to so much
tardity of motion, as that in the same time it should not run more than one
Brace, it would be necessary that that same River should become 100. times
bigger in that place where it was retarded; I mean, 100. times bigger than it
was in the place where it was swifter. And let it be kept well in mind, that
this point rightly understood, will clear the understanding to discover very
many accidents worthy to be known. But for this time let it suffice, that we
have only declared that which makes for our purpose, referring apprehensive
and studious Wits to the perusal of my aforenamed Treatise; for therein he
shall find profit and delight both together.

Now applying all to our principal intent, I say, That by what has been
declared it is manifest, that if the Brent were 40. Braces broad, and 2 1/2
high, in some one part of its Chanel, that afterward the same Water of the
Brent falling into the Lake, and passing through the same to the Sea, it should
lose so much of its velocity, that it should run but one Brace, in the time
wherein whilst it was in its Chanel at the place aforesaid, it ran 100. Braces.
It would be absolutely necessary, that increasing in measure, it should become
an hundred times Deeper.
thicker; and therefore if we should suppose that the Lake were 20000. Braces,
the Brent that already has been supposed in its Chanel 100. Braces, being
brought into the Lake, should be 100. times 100. Brates; that is, shall be
10000. Braces in thickness, and consequently shall be in height half a Brace;
that is, 100/200 of a Brace, and not 1^^/200 of a Brace, as was concluded in
the Argument.

Now one may see into what a gross error of 99. in 100. one may fall through
the not well understanding the true quantity of Running Water, which being well
understood, does open a direct way to our judging aright in this most
considerable affair.

And therefore admitting that which has been demonstrated, I say, that I would
(if it did concern me) greatly incline to consult upon the returning of the
Brent again into the Lake: For it being most evident, that the Brent in the
Chanel of its mouth, is much swifter than the Brent being brought into the
Lake, it will certainly follow thereupon, that the thickness of the Water of
Brent in the Lake, shall be so much greater than that of Brent in Brent, by how
much the Bront in Brent is swifter than thh Brent in the Lake.

1. From which operation does follow in the first place, that the Lake being
filled and increased by these Waters, shall be more Navigable, and passible,
than at present we see it to be.

2. By the current of these Waters, the Channels will be scoured, and will be
kept clean from time to time.

3. There will not appear at the times of low-waters so many Shelves, and such
heaps of Mud, as do now appear.

4. The Air will become more wholesome, for that it shall not be so infected by
putrid vapors exhaled by the Sun, so long as the Miery Ouze shall be covered
by the Waters.

5. Lastly, in the current of these advantageous Waters,, which must issue out
of the Lake into the Sea, besides those of the Tide, the Ports will be kept
scoured, and clear: And this is as much as I shall offer for the present,
touching this weighty buisiness; always submitting my self to sounder
judgments.

Of the abovesaid Writing I presented a Copy at Venice, at a full College, in
which I read it all, and it was hearkened to with very great attention; and at
last I presented it to the Duke, and left some Copies thereof with sundry
Senators, and went my way, promising with all intenseness to apply my pains
with reiterated studies in the public service; and if any other things should
come into my mind, I promised to declare them sincerely, and so took leave of
His serenity, and that Noble Council. When I was returned to Rome, this
business night and day continually running in my mind, I happened to think of
another admirable and most important conceit, which with effectual reasons,
confirmed by exact operations, I with the Divine assistance, made clear and
manifest; and though the thing at first sight seemed to me a most extravagant
Paradox, yet notwithstanding, having satisfied my self of the whole business, I
sent it in writing to the most Illustrious and most Noble Signore Gio.
Basadonna; who after he had well considered my Paper, carried it to the
Council; and after that those Lords had for many months maturely considered
thereon, they in the end resolved to suspend the execution of the diversion
which they had before consulted to make of the River Sile, and of four other
Rivers, which also fall into the Lake; a thing by me blamed in this second
Paper, as most prejudicial, and harmful. The writing spoke as follows.

CONSIDERATIONS Concerning the LAKE OF VENICE.
CONSIDERATION II.
IF the discoursing well about the truth of things, Most Serene Prince, were as
the carrying of Burdens, in which we see that an hundred Horses carry a greater
weight than one Horse only; it would seem that one might make more account of
the opinion of many men, than of one alone; But because that discoursing more
resembles running, than carrying Burdens, in which we see that one Barb alone
runs faster than an hundred heavy-heel'd Jades; therefore I have ever more
esteemed one Conclusion well managed, and well considered by one understanding
man, although alone, than the common and Vulgar opinions; especially, when they
concern abstruce and arduous points: Nay in such cases the opinions molded and
framed by the most ignorant and stupid Vulgar, have been ever suspected by me
as false, for that it would be a great wonder if in difficult matters a common
capacity should hit upon that which is handsome, good, and true. Hence I have,
and do hold in very great veneration the sum of the Government of the most
Serene, and eternal Republic of Venice; which although, as being in nature a
Commonwealth, it ought to be governed by the greater part; yet nevertheless,
in arduous affairs, it is always directed by the Grave Judgment of few, and
not judged blindly by the Plebeian Rout. It Is true, that he that propounds
Propositions far above the reach of common capacity, runs a great hazard of
being very often condemned without further Process, or knowledge of the Cause;
but yet for all that, the truth is not to be deserted in most weighty affairs,
but ought rather to be explained in due place and time with all possible
perspicuity; that so being well understood, and considered, it may come
afterward for the Common good to be embraced.

This which I speak in general, has often been my fortune in very many
particulars, not only when I have kept within the bounds of mere speculation,
but also when I have chanced to descend to Practice, and to Operations: and
your Highness knows very well what befell me the last Summer 1641. when in
obedience to your Sovereign Command, I did in full College represent my
thoughts touching the state of the Lake of Venice; for there not being such
wanting, who without so much as vouchsafing to understand me, but having only
had an inkling, and bad apprehension of my opinion, fell furiously upon me, and
by violent means both with the Pen and Press, full of Gall, did abuse me in
reward of the readiness that I had expressed to obey and serve them: But I was
above measure encouraged and pleased, to see that those few who vouchsafed to
hear me, were all either thoroughly persuaded that my opinion was well grounded,
or at least suspended their prudent verdict to more mature deliberation. And
though at the first bout I chanced to propose a thing that was totally contrary
to the most received and antiquated opinion, and to the resolutions and
consulations taken above an hundred years ago: Moved by these things, and to
satisfy also to the promise that I had made of tendering unto them what should
farther offer it self unto me touching the same business; I have resolved to
present to the Throne of your Highness, another Consideration of no less
importance, which perhaps at first sight will appear a stranger Paradox; but
yet brought to the Test and Touchstone of experience, it shall prove most
clear and evident. If it shall be accounted of, so that it succeeds to the
benefit of your Highness, I shall have obtained my desire and intent: And if
not, I shall have satisfied my self, and shall not have been wanting to the
Obligation of your most faithful Servant, and native subject.

That which I propounded in the Mouths pass, touching the most important
business of the Lake, though it did only expressly concern the point of the
diversion of the Mouth of the Lake, already made and put in execution; yet it
may be understood and applied also to the diversion under debate, to be made of
the other five Rivers, and of the Sile in particular.

Now touching this, I had the fortune to offer an admirable accident that we
meet with when we come to the effect, which I verily believe will be an utter
ruin to the Lake of Venice.

I say therefore, that by diverting these five Rivers that remain, although
their water that they discharge for the present into the Lake is not all taken
together 4/5 parts of what the Brent alone did carry, yet nevertheless the
abatement of the water of the Lake which shall ensue upon this last diversion
of four parts, which was the whole water, shall prove double to that which has
happened by the diversion of Brent only, although that the Brent alone carried
five parts of that water, of which the Rivers that are to be diverted carry
four: A wonder really great, and altogether unlikely; for the reducing all this
Proposition to be understood, is as if we should say, that there being given us
three Rivers, of which the first discharges five parts, the second three, and
the third one, and that from the diversion of the first, there did follow such
a certain abatement or fall; from the taking away of the second there ought to
follow also so much more abatement; And lastly, from the withdrawing of the
third the water ought to fall so much more, which is wholly impossible: And yet
it is most certain, and besides the demonstration that persuades me to it,
which I shall explain in due time, I can set before your eyes such an
experiment as is not to be denied by any one, although obstinate: and I will
make it plainly seen and felt, that by taking away only four parts of the five,
which shall have been taken away, the abatement proves double to the abatement
ensuing upon the diverting first of the five only; which thing being true, as
most certainly it is, it will give us to understand how pernicious this
diversion of five Rivers is like to prove, if it shall be put in execution.

By this little that I have hinted, and the much that I could say, let your
Highness gather with what circumspection this business ought to be managed,
and with how great skill he ought to be furnished who would behave himself well
in these difficult affairs.

I have not at this time explained the demonstration, nor have I so much as
propounded the way to make the Experiment, that I am able to make in
confirmation of what I have said, that so by some one or others
mis-apprehending the Demonstration, and maiming the Experiment, the truth may
not happen to shine with less clarity than it does, when all mists of
difficulty are removed: and if so be, no account should be made of the Reasons
by me alleged, and that men should shut their eyes against the Experiments
that without cost or charge may be made, I do declare and protest that there
shall follow very great damages to the Fields of the main Land, and
extraordinary sums shall be expended to no purpose. The Lake undoubtedly will
become almost dry, and will prove impassible for Navigation, with a manifest
danger of corrupting the Air: And in the last place there will unavoidably
ensue the choking and stoppage of the Ports of Venice.

Upon the 20th. of December, 1641. I imparted this my second Confideration to
the most Excellent Signore Basadonna, presenting him with a Copy thereof
amongst other Writings, which I have thought good to insert, although they seem
not to belong directly to our business of the Lake.

The way to examine the MUD and SAND that enters and remains in the LAKE of
VENICE.
To the most Excellent SIGNORE GIO. BASADONNA.
TWo very considerable Objections have been made against my opinion concerning
the Lake of Venice: One was that, of which I have spoken at large in my first
Consideration, namely, that the Brents having been taken out of the Lake,
cannot have been the occasion of the notable fall of the Waters in the Lake, as
I pretend, and consequently, that the turning Brent into the Lake would be no
considerable remedy, in regard that the water of Brent, and the great expansion
of the Lake over which the water of Brent is to diffuse and spread being
considered, it is found that the rise proves insensible.

The second Objection was, that the Brent is very muddy, and therefore if it
should fall muddy into the Lake, the Sand would sink and fill up the same.

Touching the first Query, enough has been said in my first Consideration,
where I have plainly discovered the deceit of the Argument, and shown its
fallacy; It remains now to examine the second: to which in the first place I
say, that one of the first things that I proposed in this affair was, that I
held it impossible to do any act, though never so beneficial, that was not also
accompanied by some inconvenience and mischief; and therefore we are to
consider well the profit, and the loss and prejudice; and they both being
weighed, we shall be able to choose the lesser evil: Secondly, I admit it to be
most true, that Brent is at some times muddy, but it is also true, that for the
greater part of the year it is not muddy. Thirdly, I do not see nor understand
what strength this objection has, being taken so at large, and in general; and
methinks that it is not enough to say, that the Brent runs muddy, and to
assert that it deposes its Muddinesse in the Lake, but we ought moreover to
proceed to particulars, and show how much this Mud is, and in what time this
choking up of the Ports may be effected. For the Reasons are but too apparent
and particular, that conclude the ruin of the Lake, and that in a very short
time, (for mention is made of days) the Waters diversion being made, and
moreover we have the circumstance of an Experiment, the state of things being
observed to have grown worse since the said diversion. And I have demonstrated,
that in case the Diversion of the Sile and the other Rivers should be put in
execution, the Lake would in a few days become almost dry; and the Ports would
be lost, with other mischievous consequences. But on the other side, although
that we did grant the choking of them, we may very probably say, that it will
not happen, save only in the succession of many and many Centuries of years.
Nor can I think it prudent counsel to take a resolution and embrace a Design
now, to obtain a benefit very uncertain, and more than that, which only shall
concern those who are to come very many Ages after us, and thereby bring a
certain inconvenience upon our selves, and upon our children that are now alive
and present.

Let it be alleged therefore, (although I hold it false) that by the
diversions of the Rivers the Lake may be kept in good condition for several
years to come.

But I say confidently, and hope to demonstrate it; That the Diversions will
bring the Lake, even in our days, to be almost dry, and at least will leave so
little water in it, that it shall cease to be Navigable, and the Ports shall
most infallibly be choked up. I will therefore say upon experience, in answer
to this Objection, that it is very necessary first well to discourse, and
rationally to particularize and ascertain the best that may be this point of
the quantity of this sinking Mud or Sand.

Now I fear I shall make my self ridiculous to those, who measuring the things
of Nature with the shallowness of their brains do think that it is absolutely
impossible to make this enquiry, and will say unto me, Quis mensus est pugillo
aquas, and terram palmo ponderavit? Yet nevertheless I will propound a way
whereby, at least in gross, one may find out the same.

Take a Vessel of Cylindrical Figure, holding two barrels of water, or
thereabouts; and then fill it with the water of Brent, at its Mouth or Fall
into the Lake; but in the Lake at the time that the Brent runs muddy, and
after it has begun to run muddy for eight or ten hours, to give the mud time
to go as far as S. Nicolo, to issue into the Sea; and at the same time take
another Vessel, like, and equal to the first, and fill it with the water of the
Lake toward S. Nicolo, (but take notice that this operation ought to be made
at the time when the waters go out, and when the Sea is calm) and then, when
the waters shall have settled in the aforesaid Vessels, take out the clear
water, and consider the quantity of Sand that remains behind, and let it be set
down, or kept in mind: And I am easily induced to think, that that shall be a
greater quantity of Sand which shall be left in the first Vessel, than that
left in the second Vessel. Afterward when the Brent shall come to be clear,
let both the operations be repeated, and observe the quantity of Sand in the
aforesaid Vessels; for if the Sand in the first Vessel should be most, it would
be a sign, that in the revolution of a year the Brent would depose Sand in the
Lake: And in this manner one may calculate to a small matter what proportion
the Sand that enters into the Lake, has to that which remains: And by that
proportion one may judge how expedient it shall be for public benefit. And if
at several times of the year you carefully repeat the same operations, or
rather observations, you would come to a more exact knowledge in this business:
And it would be good to make the said operations at those times, when the Lake
is disturbed by strong high Winds, and made muddy by its own Mud, raised by the
commotion of the Waters.

This notion would give us great light, if the same observations should be made
toward the Mouth of Lio, at such time as the waters flow and ebb, in calm
seasons; for so one should come to know whether the waters of the Lake are more
thick at the going out, than at the entrance. I have propounded the foregoing
way of measuring Sands and Mud, to show that we are not so generally, and
inconsiderately to pronounce any sentence, but proceed to stricter inquiries,
and then deliberate what shall be most expedient to be done. Others may propose
more exquisite examinations, but this shall serve me for the present.

I will add only, that if any one had greater curiosity (it would be
profitable to have it) in investigating more exactly the quantity of the Water
that enters into the Lake, by the means that I have shown in the beginning
of this Book: When he shall have found the proportion of the quantity of water
to the quantity of Sand or Mud, he shall come to know how much Sand the Brent
shall leave in the Lake in the space of a year. But to perform these things,
there are required persons of discretion, and fidelity, and that are employed
by public Order; for there would thence result eminent benefit and profit.

Here are wanting LETTERS from several persons.

To the Reverend Father, Francesco di S. GIUSEPPE.
IN execution of the command that you laid upon me in your former Letters, by
order from the most Serene, my Lord, Prince Leopold; that I should speak my
judgment concerning the disimboguement of the River called Fiume morto,
whether it ought to be let into the Sea, or into Serchio; I say, that I chanced
18. years since to be present, when the said Mouth was opened into the Sea, and
that of Serchio stopped; which work was done to remedy the great Innundation that
was made in all that Country, and Plain of Pisa, that lies between the River
Arno, and the Mountains of S. Giuliano, and the River Serchio; which Plain
continued long under water, insomuch that not only in the Winter, but also for
a great part of the Summer, those fields were overflowed; and when that the
Mouth of Fiume morto was effectually opened into the Sea, the place was
presently freed from the waters. and drained, to the great satisfaction of the
Owners of those Grounds. And here I judge it worth your notice, that for the
generality of those that possess estates in those parts, they desired that the
Mouth of Fiume morto might stand open to the Sea, and those who would have it
open into Serchio, are persons that have no other concernment there, save the
hopes of gaining by having the dispose of Commissions, and the like, etc,

But for the more plain understanding of that which is to be said, it must be
known, That the resolution of opening the said Mouth into Serchio, was taken in
the time of the Great Duke Ferdinando the first, upon the same motives that are
at this time again proposed, as your Letters tell me, Since that, it manifestly
appearing, that Fiume morto had, and has its Mouth open to the Sea, the Plain
has been kept dry; and it being also true, that the fury of the South, and
South-West-Winds carried such abundance of sand into the Mouth, or Outlet of
Fiume morto, that it wholly stopped it up: especially when the waters on Pisa
side were low and shallow, And they think, that turning the Lake of Fiume morto
into Serchio, and the Serchio maintaining continually its own Mouth with the
force of its waters open to the Sea, and consequently also Fiume morto, they
would have had the Outlet clear and open; and in this manner they think, that
the Plain of Pisa would have been freed from the waters. The business passes
for current, at first sight; but experience proves the contrary, and Reason
confirms the same: For the height of the water of those Plains, was regulated
by the height of the waters in the Mouth of Fiume morto; that is, The waters at
the Mouth being high, the waters also do rise in the fields; and when the
waters at the Mouth are low, the waters of the fields do likewise abate: Nor is
it enough to say, That the Outlet or Vent of Fiume morto is continual, but it
must be very low: Now if Fiume morto did determine in Serchio, it is manifest
that it would determine high; for Serchio terminating in the Sea, when ever it
more and more abounds with water, and rises, it is necessary that also Fiume
morto has its level higher, and consequently shall keep the waters in the
Plains higher. Nay, it has happened sometimes (and I speak it upon my own
sight) that Fiume morto has reversed its course upwards toward Pisa; which
case will ever happen, whenever the Pisan waters chance to be lower than the
level of those of Serchio; for in that case the waters of Serchio return back
upon the Plains through Fiume morto in such sort, that the Muddinesses, and the
Serchio have been observed to be carried by this return as far as the Walls of
Pisa; and then before such time as so great waters can be assuaged, which come
in with great fury, and go out by little and little, there do pass very many
days, and months, nay sometimes one being never able to find the waters of
Serchio, when at the shallowest, so low as the Sea in level; (which is the
lowest place of the waters) it thence does follow, that the waters of Fiume
morto should never at any time of the year, so long as they determine in
Serchio, be so low, as they come to be when the same Fiume morto determines in
the Sea. It Is true indeed, that the Mouth of Fiume morto, opened into the Sea,
is subject to the inconvenience of being stopped up by the force of Winds: But in
this case, it is necessary to take some pains in opening it; which may easily
be done, by cutting that Sand a little which stays in the Mouth, after that
the Wind is laid; and it is enough if you make a Trench little more than two
Palms in breadth; for the water once beginning to run into it, it will in a few
hours carry that Sand away with it, and there will ensue a deep and broad
Trench that will drain away all the water of the Plains in very little time.
And I have found by practice, that there having been a great quantity of Sand
driven back, by the fury of the South-West-Wind, into the Mouth of Fiume morto,
I having caused the little gutter to be made in the Morning, somewhat before
Noon, a Mouth has been opened of 40. Braces wide, and notably deep, insomuch
that the water, which before had incommoded all the Champian ran away in less
than three days, and left the Country free and dry, to the admiration of all
men. There was present upon the place, at this business, on the same day that I
opened the Mouth, the most Serene great Duke, the most Serene Arch-Dutchess
Mother, all the Commissioners of Sewers, with many other Persons and Peasants
of those parts; and they all saw very well, that it was never possible that a
little Bark of eight Oars, which was come from Legorn to wait upon the great
Duke, should ever be able to master the Current, and to make up into Fiume
morto; and his Highness, who came with an intent to cause the said Mouth
toward the Sea to be stopped; and that into Serchio to be opened, changed his
judgment, giving order that it should be left open toward the Sea, as it was
done. And if at this day it shall return into Serchio, I am very certain that
it will be necessary to open it again into the Sea. And there was also charge
and order given to a person appointed for the purpose, that he should take care
to open the said Mouth, as has been said upon occasion. And thus things have
succeeded very well unto this very time. But from the middle of October, until
this first of February, there having continued high South, and
South-West-Winds, with frequent and abundant Rains; it is no wonder that some
innundation has happened; but yet I will affirm, that greater mischiefs would
have followed, if the Mouth had been opened into Serchio. This which I have
hitherto said, is very clear and intelligible to all such as have but competent
insight, and indifferent skill in these affairs. But that which I am now about
to propose farther, will, I am very certain, be understood by your self, but it
will seem strange and unlikely to many others. The point is, that I say, That
by raising the level of Fiume morto, one half Brace, only at its Mouth, (it
will penipenitrate into Serchio farther than it would into the Sea) it shall
cause the waters to rise three, or perhaps more Braces upon the fields toward
Pisa, and still more by degrees as they shall recede farther from the Seaside;
and thus there will follow very great Innundations, and considerable mischiefs.
And to know that this is true, you are to take notice of an accident, which I
give warning of in my discourse of the Measure of Running Waters: where also I
give the reason thereof, Lib. 1.
Coroll. 14. The accident is this, That there coming a Land-Flood, for example,
into Arno, which makes it to rise above its ordinary Mouth within Pisa, or a
little above or below the City six or seven Braces; this same height becomes
always lesser and lesser, the more we approach toward the Seaside; insomuch,
that near to the Sea the said River shall be raised hardly half a Brace: Whence
it follows of necessary consequence, that should I again be at the Seaside,
and knowing nothing of what happens, should see the River Arno raised by the
accession of a Land-flood, one third of a Brace; I could certainly infer, that
the same River was raised in Pisa those same six or seven Braces. And that
which I say of Arno, is true of all Rivers that fall into the Sea. Which thing
being true, it is necessary to make great account of every small rising, that
Fiume morto makes toward the Seaside by falling into Serchio. For although
the rising of Fiume morto, by being to disgorge its Waters into Serchio,
toward the Sea, were only a quarter of a Brace; we might very well be sure,
that far from the Sea, about Pisa, and upon those fields the rise shall be
much greater, and shall become two or three Braces: And because the Country
lies low, that same ^ise will cause a continual Innundation of the Plains,
like as it did before; I caused the Mouth to be opened into the Sea. And
therefore I conclude that the Mouth of Fiume morto, ought by no means to be
opened into Serchio; but ought to be continued into the Sea, using all
diligence to keep it open after the manner aforesaid, so soon as ever the Wind
shall be laid. And if they shall do otherwise, I confidently affirm, that there
will daily follow greater damages; not only in the Plains, but also in the
wholesomness of the Air; as has been seen in times past. And again, It ought
with all care to be procured, that no waters do by any means run or fall from
the Trench of Libra, into the Plain of Pisa, for these Waters being to
discharge into Fiume morto, they maintain it much higher than is imagined,
according to that which I have demonstrated in my consideration upon the state
of the Lake of Venice. I have said but little, but I speak to you, who
understands much, and I submit all to the most refined judgment of our most
Serene Prince Leopold, whose hands I beseech you in all humility to kiss in my
name, and implore the continuance of his Princely favor to me; and so desiring
your prayers to God for me, I take my leave.

Rome 1. Feb. 1642. Your most affectionate Servant, D. BENEDETTO CASTELLI.


The answer to a Letter written by BARTOLOTTI, touching the difficultyes
observed.
The former part of the Letter is omitted, and the discourse begins at the
first Head.

ANd first I say, Whereas I suppose that the level of the Serchio is higher
than that of Fiume morto; this is most true, at such time as the waters of
Fiume morto are discharged into the Sea; but I did never say that things could
never be brought to that pass, as that the level of Fiume morto should be
higher than Serchio: and so I grant that it will follow, that the waters of
Fiume morto shall go into Serchio, and its very possible, that the Drain of
Fiume morto into Serchio may be continuate; and I farther grant, that its
possible, that the Serchio does never disgorge through Fiume morto toward Pisa;
Nay, I will yet farther grant that it might have happened, that Fiume morto
might have had such a fall into Serchio, as would have sufficed to have turned
Mills: But then I add withal, that the Plains of Pisa, and the City it self
must be a mere Lake.

2. Signore Bartolotti says confidently, that when the Sea swells by the
South-West, or other Winds, the level of Serchio in the place marked A in the
Platt, distant about 200. Braces, rises very little: But that Fiume morto in
D, and in E, many miles more up into Land rises very much, and that certain
Fishermen confirm this, and show him the signs of the rising of the Water. I
grant it to be very true, and I have seen it with my own eyes: But this comes
to pass, when the Mouth of Fiume morto is stopped up by the Sea; as I shall show
by and by. And this rising near the Seaside, is of no considerable prejudice
to the fields. And this is as much as I find to be true in the assertion of
Signore Bartolotti, (without his confirming it by any other proof; as indeed it
needs none) That the level of Fiume morto rises in E, and many miles farther
upwards it rises much; nor did I ever affirm the contrary.

3. Concerning the difficulty of opening the Mouth of Fiume morto into the Sea,
that which Il Castellano says is most certain; namely, That at the entrance
upon the opening of the Mouth, it is necessary to make a deep Trench: But I
say, that at that time it is difficult to open it, unless upon great occasions;
for that the difficulty proceeds from the waters of Fiume morto being low,
and the fields drained.

4. As to the particular of the Causes that you tell me men press so much unto
the most Serene Grand Duke, and to the Prince, I have not much to say, because
it is not my profession; nor have I considered of the same: Yet I believe, that
when the Prince and his Highness see the benefit of his People and Subjects in
one scale of the Balance, and the accommodation of Huntsmen in the other, his
Highness will incline to the profit of his subjects; such have I always found
his Clemency and Nobleness of mind. But if I were to put in my vote upon this
business, I would say, that the points of Spears, and the mouths of Guns; the
yelping of Dogs, the wiliness of Huntsmen, who run through and narrowly search
all those Woods, Thickets and Heathes, are the true destroyers of Bucks and
Boares, and not a little Salt Water, which setleth at last in some low places,
and spreads not very far. Yet nevertheless, I will not enter upon any such
point, but confine my self solely to the business before me.

5. That Experiment of joining together the water of Fiume morto, and that of
Serchio by a little trench to see what advantage the Level E has upon the
Level I, does not give me full satisfaction, taken so particularly, for it may
come to pass, that sometimes E may be higher, and sometimes A lower, and I do
not question but that when Serchio is low, and Fiume morto full of Water, the
level of Fiume morto will be higher than that of Serchio. But Serchio being
full, and Fiume morto scant of Water, the contrary will follow, if the Mouth
shall be opened to the Sea. And here it should seem to me, that it ought to be
considered, that there is as much advantage from E to the Sea through the
little Trench opened anew into Serchio, as from E to the Sea by the Mouth of
Fiume morto. But the difficulty (which is that we are to regard in our case)
is, that the course of the Waters through the Trench is three times longer than
the course of the Mouth of Fiume morto, as appears by the Draught or Plat
which you sent me, which I know to be very exactly drawn, for that the
situation of those places are fresh in my memory. Here I must give notice, that
the waters of Fiume morto determining through the Trench in Serchio (the waters
of which Fiume morto are, for certain, never so low as the Sea) their pendency
or declivity shall, for two causes, be less than the pendency of those waters
through the Mouth toward the Sea, that is, because of the length of the line
through the Trench, and because of the height of their entrance into Serchio, a
thing which is of very great import in discharging the waters which come
suddenly, as he shall plainly see, who shall have understood my Book of the
Measure of Running Waters* And this was the Reason why all the Country did
grow dry upon the opening of the Mouth into the Sea. And here I propose to
consideration that which the Peasants about Pisa relate, namely, That the Water
in the Fields does no considerable harm by continuing there five or six, yea,
or eight days. And therefore the work of the Country is to open the Mouth of
Fiume morto, in such manner, that the Water being come, they may have the
Trench free and ready, when that the Water comes it may have a free drain, and
may not stay there above eight or nine days, for then the overflowings become
hurtful. It is to be desired also, that if any Proposition is produced touching
these affairs, it might be propounded the most distinctly that may be possible,
and not consist in generals, especially when the Dispute is of the risings, of
velocity, of tardity, of much and little water; things that are all to be
specified by measures.

6. Your Letter says, in the next place, that Signore Bartolotti confesses,
that if the Mouth of the Fiume morto might always be kept open, it would be
better to let it continue as it is: the which, that I may not yield to him in
courtesy, I confess, for the keeping it stopped on all sides would be a thing
most pernicious. But admitting of his confession I again reply, that Fiume
morto ought not to be let into Serchio, but immediately into the Sea; because
although sometimes the Mouth to seawards be stopped up, yet for all that, the
raising of the Bank above the Plains (which is all the business of importance)
shall be ever lesser, if we make use of the Mouth leading to the Sea, than
using that of Serchio.

7. I will not omit to mention a kind of scruple that I have concerning the
position of Sign. Bartolotti, that is, where he says that the two Mouths A and
D are equal to the like Mouths into the Sea; Now it seems to me, that the Mouth
A of Fiume morto into Serchio is absolutely within Serchio, nor can it be made
lower, and is regulated by the height of Serchio: But the Mouth of Fiume morto
terminates, and ought to be understood to terminate in the Sea it self, the
lowest place. And this I believe was very well perceived by Sig. Bartolotti,
but I cannot tell why he past it over without declaring it: and we see not that
the Mouth D falls far from the Sea, which Mouth ought to be let into the Sea
it self, and so the advantage of the Mouth into the Sea more clearly appears.

8. That which Sig. Bartolotti adds, that when it is high Waters, at such
time as the Waters are out, and when Winds choke up Fiume morto, they not only
retard it, but return the course of the Waters upwards very leasurely,
persuades me more readily to believe that Sig. Bartolotti knows very well,
that the Mouth of Fiume morto let into Serchio is hurtful: for by this he
acknowledges that the Mouth toward the Sea does in such sort drain the
Country of the Waters, as that they become very low; and therefore upon every
little impetus the waters turn their course: And from the motions, being
exceeding slow, is inferred, that the abundance of Seawater that comes into
Fiume morto, is so much as is believed, and as Sig. Bartolotti affirms.

9. After that Sig. Bartolotti has said what he promises above, namely, that
when the Winds blowing strongly do stop up Fiume morto, and not only retard
but turn the course upwards, the time being Rainy, and the Mouth of Fiume morto
shut up, the Waves of the Sea pass over the Bank of Fiume morto; at that time,
says Signore Bartolotti, the Champain shall know the benefit of Fiume morto
discharged into Serchio, and the mouth A shall stand always open; and Fiume
morto may always constantly run out, as also the Rains and Rain-waters,
although the hurtful Tempest should last many days, etc. And I reply, that all
the Art consists in this; for the benefit of those Fields does not depend on,
or consist in saying, that Fiume morto is always open, and Fiume morto
draineth continually; But all the business of profit lies and consists in
maintaining the Waters low in those Plains, and those Ditches, which shall
never be effected whilst the World stands, if you let Fiume morto into Serchio;
but yet it may, by opening the mouth into the Sea: and so much reason and
nature proves, and (which imports) Experience confirms.

10. In the tenth place I come to consider the answer that was made to another
Proposition in the Letter which I writ to Father Francesco, which prudently of
it self alone might serve to clear this whole business. I said in my Letter,
That great account is to be made of every small rising and ebbing of the Waters
near to the Sea in Fiume morto, for that these risings and fallings, although
that they be small near to the Seaside, yet nevertheless, they operate and
are accompanied by notable risings and fallings within Land, and far from the
Seaside, and I have declared by an example of Arno, in which a Land-flood
falling, that made it increase above its ordinary height within Pisa six or
seven Braces, that this height of the same Flood becomes still lesser, the
nearer we approach to the Seacoasts. Nor shall the said River be raised hardly
half a Brace; whereupon it necessrily follows, that if I should return to the
Seaside, and not knowing any think of that which happens at Pisa, and seeing
the River Arno raised by a Land-flood half a Brace, I might confidently affirm
the said River to be raised in Pisa those six or seven Braces, etc. From such
like accidents I conclude in the same Letter, that it is necessary to make
great account of every little rise that Fiume morto shall make toward the Sea.
Now comes Bartolotti (and perhaps because I knew not how to express my self
better, understands not my Proposition) and speaks that which indeed is
true, but yet besides our case: Nor have I ever said the contrary; and withal
does not apply it to his purpose. Nay I say, that if he had well applied it,
this alone had been able to have made him change his opinion. And because he
says, that I said, that it is true, when the abatement proceeds from some
cause above, as namely by Rain, or opening of Lakes; But when the cause is from
below, that is, by some stop, as for instance some Fishers Wears or Locks; or
some impediment remote from the Sea, although at the Level it shall rise some
Braces where the impediment is, yet that rising shall go upwards; and here he
finisheth his Discourse, and concludes not any thing more. To which I say
first, that I have also said the same in the Proposition, namely, that a Flood
coming (which makes Arno to rise in Pisa six or seven Braces (which I take to
be a superior cause whether it be Rain or the opening of Lakes, as best
pleases Bartolotti) in such a case I say, and in no other (for toward the
Seacoasts it shall not cause a rising of full half a Brace; and therefore
seeing Arno at the Seaside to be raised by a Flood, whether of Rain, or of
opening of Lakes half a Brace) it may be inferred, that at Pisa it shall be
raised those six or seven Braces; which variety, well considered, explaineth
all this affair in favor of my opinion: For the rising that is made by the
impediment placed below, of Fishing Wears and Locks, operateth at the
beginning, raising the Waters that are near to the impediment; and afterward
less and less, as we retire upwards from the impediment: provided yet that we
speak not of a Flood that comes by accession, but only of the ordinary Water
impeded. But there being a new accession, as in our case, then the Water of the
Flood, I say, shall make a greater rising in the parts superior, far from the
impediment; and these impediments shall come to be those that shall overflow
the Plains, as happened eighteen or nineteen years ago, before the opening of
Fiume morto into the Sea, The same will certainly follow, if Fiume morto be let
into Serchio. Here I could allege a very pretty case that befell me in la The
Country or Province lying round the City heretofore called Latium*
Campagna di Roma, near to the Seaside. where I drained a Bog or Fen, of the
nature of the Waters of Pisa, and I succeeded in the enterprise, the Waters in
their site toward the Sea abating only three Palms, and yet in the Fen they
fell more than fifteen Palms. But the business would be long, and not so
easily to be declared, and I am certain that Sig. Bartolotti having considered
this, would alter his judgment, and withal would know that remitting that
impediment anew, which I had left for less than three ^almes toward the Sea,
the Waters in the Fen would return with the first Floods and Raines to the same
height as before, as likewise Fiume morto will do if it shall be let again into
Serchio.

Here I entreat your Honor to do me the favor to importune P. Francesco in my
behalf, that he would be pleased to deelare my meaning in the aforesaid Letter
to Sig. Bartolotti, for I hope that if he will understand this point, he will
be no longer so tenacious in his opinion.

Next that these Lords in the Commission of Sewers, with the Right Honorable
the Marquess of S. Angelo, and your Honor do approve of my judgment, does
very much rejoice me; but because that I know that they do it not in design to
complement me, but only to serve his Highness our Grand Duke, I freely profess
that I will pretend no farther obligations from them therein, than I account my
self to owe to those whose opinions are contrary to mine, for that I know that
they have the same end. The definitive sentence of this whole business is, that
they give these Plains, these Draines, and these Waters far fetched
appellations.

11. As to the quantity of the Water that Fiume morto discharges into the Sea,
there are very great disputes about it, and I have been present at some of
them. But let your Honor believe me, that as this is not continual, but only
during a few days, so it will never be of any great prejudice to these Fields;
and if your Lordship would be ascertained thereof, you may please to go to
Fiume morto at about a mile's distance from the Sea, in the time of these
strong Winds, and observe the current from thence upwards, for you shall find
it extreme slow, and consequently will know that the quantity of the Water that
is repulsed is very small. And this seems to be contradicted by the rule of
Risings proceeding from causes below, which occasion no considerable alteration
far from the Sea.

I am necessitated to go to morrow out of Rome with his Eminence Cardinal
Gaetano about certain affairs touching Waters, therefore I shall not farther
enlarge, but for a close to this tedious Discourse, I conclude in few words,
that Fiume morto is by no means to be let into Serchio, nor are there any means
intermediate courses to be taken, for they will always be prejudicial; but
Fiume morto is to be discharged immediately into the Sea. When it is stopped up
by the fury of the Sea-waves, I affirm that it is a sign that there is no need
of opening it; and if there be any occasion to open it, it is easily done. As
for the rest your Lordship may please to keep account of all the particulars
that occur, for the memory of things past is our Tutresse in those that are to
come. If occasion shall offer, I entreat you to bow humbly in my name to His
Highness the Grand Duke, and the most Serene Prince Leopold; and to attend the
service of Their Highnesses, for you serve ^rinces of extraordinary merit; And
to whom I my self am also exceedingly obliged. In the controversies that arise
respect the pious end of speaking the Truth, for then every thing will succeed
happily. I kiss the hands of Padre Francesco, of Sig. Bartolotti, and of your
Lordship.

Rome, 14. March 1642. Your Honors most Obliged Servant D. BENEDETTO CASTELLI.


Upon this occasion I will here insert a Discourse that I made upon the
Draining and improvement of the Pontine Fens, for that I think that whatsoever
may be done well and to purpose in this matter has absolute dependence on the
perfect knowledge of that so important Proposition, by me demonstrated and
explained in my Treatise of the Mensuration of Running Waters, namely, That the
same water of a River does continually change Measures, according as it
alters and changes the velocity of its course; so that the measure of the
thickness of a River in one Site, to the measure of the same River in another
Site, has the same proportion reciprocally that the velocity in this site has
to the velocity in the first site. And this is a Truth so constant and
unchangeable, that it alters not in the least point on any occurrences of the
Water that change: and being well understood, it opens the way to the
knowledge of sundry advertisements in these matters, which are all resolved by
this sole Principle; and from it are derived very considerable benefits; and
without these it is impossible to do any thing with absolute perfection*

A CONSIDERATION Upon the DRAINING OF THE Pontine Fenns.
BY D. BENEDETTO CASTELLI, Abbot of S. BENEDETTO ALOISIO, and Professor of the
Mathematics to P. Urban VIII. in the University of ROME.
CONSIDERATION III.
AMongst the enterprises by me esteemed, if not absolutely impossible,, at
least exceeding difficult, one was that famous one of Draining the Pontine
Fenns; and therefore I was thoroughly resolved never to apply my mind thereunto,
although by my Patrons I should be commanded to the same: accounting that it
was an occasion rather of losing reputation by the miscarriage of the attempt,
than of gaining fame by reducing things to a better pass then they now are at.
Yet nevertheless, having of late years observed the place, and sailed through
those Channels, and those Waters; after I had made some reflection thereupon, I
thought that the enterprise was not so difficult as I had at first conceited it
to be; and I am the more confirmed in this opinion, upon the inducement of that
which I have written Geometrically in my Treatise of the Mensuration of Running
Waters; so that talking with several persons, I adventured to affirm, in
discoures, that this improvement might possibly be brought into a good estate.

Now I have resolved to set down my thoughts in writing, and to honor this my
Paper with the Noble Name of your Lordship, to render it the more credible and
conspi^uous at the first view, if it should chance that the Subject I treat of,
were not of such moment* as that it did deserve to be valued for any other
reason. Pardon me, Sir, if I have been too bold, and continue me in the number
of your Servants.

The enterprise of Draining a great part of the Territories of the Pontine
Fenns, has been undertaken both in the time of the ancient Romans, and last of
all, in our days; yea in the late times by Sixtus V. I do not doubt in the
least, but that it will be possible yet to reduce things to a very good pass;
and if I be not mistaken, with a very small charge in comparison of the profit
that would be received from those rich Grounds. This improvement was of great
expense in the time of Sixtus Quintus, but by reason the thing was not rightly
understood, there were made many Drains; a great part of which were
unprofitable and vain: and amongst so many operations, there happened some to be
made that succeeded, as was desired; but not being understood, they were held
in no account; and thus the business being neglected, the waters are returned
into the same state as they were at first, before the improvement. Here I have
by familiar discourses with my friends, explained this enterprise undertaken by
Sixtus V. and happily also by some more ancient, with the example of the Fable of
Orilo, in Ariosto. This Monster was made up with such enchantment, that men
fought with him always in vain; for though in the Combat he were cut in
pieces, those divided Members presently reunited, and returned to the fight
more fierce then ever. But the Paladine Astolfo coming to undertake him, after
a long dispute, at the end he cut his head sheer off from the shoulders at one
blow; and nimbly alighting from his Horse, took the Monstrous head, and
mounting again, as he rid away he fell to shave the Pole of that Monster, and
so he lost the Lock of Hair, in which alone the enchantment lay; and then the
horrible Head in an instant manifested signs of death, and the trunk which ran,
seeking to reunite to it anew, gave the last gasp, and in this manner the
enchantment ended. The Book of Fate served admirably to the Paladine, whereby
he came to understand that Charm; for by shaving his whole head, the enchanted
hairs came to be cut off amongst the rest: In the same manner, I say, that it
has sometimes happened in Draining those Fields; for that amongst so many
trials as have been made, that also was light upon, on which the improvement
and remedy to the disorder did depend. And to us my forenamed Treatise shall
serve for a Rule, which being well understood, shall make us to know wherein
consists, and whereon depends this miscarriage, and consequently it will be
easy to apply thereunto a seasonable remedy.

And first I say, That there is no doubt but that the waters continue so high
on those Plains because they are so high in the principal River, which ought to
receive them, and carry them into the Sea. Now the Causes of the height of the
River, may in my judgment be reduced to one alone; which is that by me so
often mentioned for the most Potent one, and declared in my aforementioned
Tractate; to wit, The tardity of the motion of the waters, which does always
infallibly, and precisely cause the self same Running Water to change the
measure of its thickness at such a rate, that the more it increases in
velocity, the more it decreaseth in measure; and the more it decreaseth in
velocity, the more it increases in measure: As for example; If a River run in
such a place with the velocity of moving a mile in the space of an hour, and
afterward the same River in another place does increase in velocity, so as to
make three miles an hour; that same River shall diminish in thickness two
thirds: And on the contrary, If it shall diminish in velocity so, as that it
runs but half a mile in the same time, it shall increase the double in
thickness and measure. And in a word, look what proportion the velocity in the
first place, has to the velocity in the second, and such has reciprocally the
measure of the thickness in the second place, to the measure in the first; as I
have clearly demonstrated in my Treatise: Which I repeat so frequently, that I
fear the Professors of Polite Learning will charge me with Tuatologie, and vain
Repetition. But I am so desirous in this most important point to be well
understood, because it will then be easy to comprehend all the rest; and
without this it is impossible (I will not say difficult, but absolutely
impossible) to understand, or ever to effect any thing to purpose. And the
better to explain the example, let it be supposed, That the water of a River
AD, runs high at the level of AF, with such a certain velocity; and let it,
by the same water, be velocitated three times more; I say, that it will abate^,
and shall stand at the level in BE; and if it shall more velocitate, it will
abate the more at the Sea; But if it should retard more than it did at the
level AF, it would rise yet more above the said level AF; although that the
self same quantity of water runs all the while. By the abovenamed solid
Principle I resolve extravagant Problems in my Treatise, and assign the Reasons
of admirable effects of Running Waters: But as for what concerns our purpose
of the Pontine Fenns, we have the Causes very plain and clear; for which, by
the trampling of Cattle which pass through the Draining River, the waters abate
so notably, that it is as it were a miracle for those Reeds, Flags, and Weeds
that spring up, increase, and spread all over the River, stop and impede that
velocity of the waters which they would have by means of their declivity. But
that passage of those Beasts, treading down those Weeds unto the bottom of the
River, in such sort, as that they no longer hinder the Current of the Water;
and the same Waters increasing in their course, they do diminish in measure and
height; and by this means the Ditches of the Plains empty into the same
successfully, and leave them free from Waters, and Drained. But these Weeds in
a short time sprouting up anew, and raising their stalks through the body of
the Waters, they reduce things to the same evil state, as before, retarding the
velocity of the Water, making it to increase in height, and perhaps do occasion
greater mischiefs; seeing that those many knots which each plant shoots forth,
begets a greater multitude of Stalks, which much more incumbering the Water of
the River, are a greater impediment unto its velocity, and consequently make
the height of the waters to increase so much the more, and do more mischief
than before.

Another head to which these harms may be reduced, but proceeding from the same
Root, which has a great part in this disorder, is the impediment of those
Wears in the River which are made by heightning the bed of the same, for
placing of fishing-nets; of which Piscaries I reckoned above ten, when I made a
voyage through those waters to Sandolo. And these Fishing-Wears are such
impediments, that some one of them makes the water of the River in the upper
part to rise half a Palm, and sometimes a whole Palm, and more; so that when
they are all gathered together, these impediments amount to more than seven, or
possibly than eight Palms.

There concurreth for a third most Potent Cause of the waters continuing high
in the evacuating, or Draining Chanel, and consequently on the Plains; The
great abundance of water that issues from Fiume Sisto, the waters of which do
not keep within its Banks when they are abundant; but increasing above its
Chanel, they unite with those of the Evacuator, and dispersing through the Fens
are raised with great prejudice, and much greater than is conceived, according
to what has been demonstrated in the Second Consideration upon the Lake of
Venice. Nor is it to any purpose to say, that if we should measure all the
Waters that disimbogue from Fiume Sisto, and gather them into one sum, we
should not find them to be such, as that they shall be able to make the Waters
of the Fens to increase, by reason of the great expansion of them, over which
that body of water is to distend: for to this instance we answer with that
which we have given notice of in the First Consideration touching the Lake of
Venice, treating of the abatement that is caused by the Brent let into the
Lake. And moreover, if I shall add thereto that which I write in the Second
Consideration, it will be very apparent how greatly harmfull and prejudicial
these excursions of Waters from Fiume Sisto may be, which are not kept under,
and confined within the River: Therefore, proceeding to the provisions, and
operations that are to be accounted Principal, I reduce them to three Heads.

In the first place it is necessary to throw down those Wears, and to take the
Pisciaries quite away, observing a Maxim, in my judgment, infallible, that
Fishing and Sowing are two things that can never consist together; Fishing
being on the Water, and Sowing on land.

Secondly, it will be necessary to cut under Water in the bottom of the River
those Weeds and Plants that grow and increase in the River, and leave them to
be carried into the Sea by the Stream; for by this means these Reeds shall not
spring up and distend along the bottom of the River, by means of the Beasts
treading upon them; And the same ought to be done often, and with care, and
must not be delaied till the mischief increase, and the Champain Grounds be
drowned, but one ought to order matters so, as that they may not drown. And I
will affirm, that otherwise this principal point would become a most
considerable inconvenience.

Thirdly, it is necessary to make good the Banks of Fiume Sisto on the left
hand, and to procure that those Waters may run in the Chanel, and not break
forth. And it is to be noted, that it is not enough to do one or two of those
things, but we are to put them all in execution; for omitting any thing, the
whole machine will be out of tune, and spoiled. But proceeding with due care,
you shall not only Drain the Pontine Fens, but by means of this last particular
the Current of Fiume Sisto shall scowr its own Chanel of its self, even to the
carrying part of it away: and happily with this abundance of water that it shall
bear, the Mouth della Torre may be opened, and kept open into the Sea. And it
would, last of all, be of admirable benefit to cleanse Fiume Sisto from many
Trees and Bushes wherewith it is overgrown.

And with this I conclude, that the Improvement or Drain possible to be made
consists in these three particulars. First, in taking away the Fishing
Wears, leaving the Course of the Waters free. Secondly, in keeping the
Principal Rivers clear from Weeds and Plants. Thirdly, in keeping the water of
Fiume Sisto in its own Chanel. All which are things that may be done with very
little charge, and to the manifest benefit of the whole Country, and to the
rendering the Air wholsomer in all those Places adjoining to the Pontine Fens.

A CONSIDERATION Upon the DRAINING Of the Territories of Bologna, Ferrara, AND
Romagna.
BY D. BENEDETTO CASTELLI, Abbot of S. BENEDETTO ALOISIO, Mathematician to P.
Urban VIII. and Professor in the University of ROME.
THe weghty business of the Draining of the Territories of Bologna, Ferrara,
and Romagna having been punctually handled and declared in writing from the
excellent memory of the Right Honorable and Noble Monsignore Corsini, who was
heretofore Deputed Commissary General, and Visitor of those Waters; I am not
able to make such another Discourse upon the same Subject, but will only say
somewhat for farther confirmation of that which I have said in this Book upon
the Lake of Venice, upon the Pontine Fens, and upon the Draining of those
Plains of Pisa, lying between the Rivers Arno and Serchio; whereby it is
manifest, that in all the aforementioned Cases, and in the present one that we
are in hand with, there have, in times past, very gross Errors been
committed, through the not having ever well understood the true measure of
Running waters; and here it is to be noted, that the business is, that in
Venice, the diversion of the waters of the Lake, by diverting the Brent was
debated, and in part executed, without consideration had how great abatement of
water might follow i^ the Lake, if the Brent were diverted, as I have shown in
the first Consideration upon this particular, from which act there has insued
very bad consequences, not only the difficulty of Navigation, but it has
infected the wholsomnesse of the Air, and caused the stoppage of the Ports of
Venice. And on the contrary, the same inadvertency of not considering what
rising of the Water the Reno, and other Rivers being opened into the Valleys of
Bologna and Ferrara, might cause in the said Valleys, is the certain cause that
so many rich and fertile Fields are drowned under water, converting the happy
habitations and dwellings of men into miserable receptacles for Fishes: Things
which doubtless would never have happened, if those Rivers had been kept at
their height, and Reno had been turned into Main-Po, and the other Rivers into
that of Argenta, and of Volano. Now there having sufficient been spoken by the
abovenamed Monsig. Corsini in his Relation, I will only add one conceit of my
own, which after the Rivers should be regulated, as has been said, I verily
believe would be of extraordinary profit, I much doubt indeed that I shall
find it a hard matter to persuade men to be of my mind, but yet nevertheless I
will not question, but that those, at least, who shall have understood what I
have said and demonstrated concerning the manners and proportions, according to
which the abatements and risings of Running waters proceed, that are made by
the Diversions and Introductions of Waters, will apprehend that my conjecture
is grounded upon Reason. And although I descend not to the exactness of
particulars, I will open the way to others, who having observed the requisite
Rules of considering the quantity of the waters that are introduced, or that
happen to be diverted, shall be able with punctuality to examine the whole
business, and then resolve on that which shall be expedient to be done.

Reflecting therefore upon the first Proposition, that the Risings of a Running
Water made by the accession of new water into the River, are to one another, as
the Square-Roots of the quantity of the water that runs; and consequently,
that the same comes to pass in the Diversions: Insomuch, that a River running
in height one such a certain measure, to make it increase double in height, the
water is to be increased to three times as much as it ran before; so that when
the water shall be quadruple, the height shall be double; and if the water were
centuple, the height would be decuple only, and so from one quantity to
another: And on the contrary, in the Diversions; If of the 100. parts of water
that run through a River, there shall be diverted 19/1^^, the height of the
River diminishes only 1/10, and continuing to divert 17/100, the height of
the River abateth likewise 1/10, and so proceeding to divert 15/100 and then
13/100, and then 11/100, and then 9/100, and then 7/100, and then 5/100, and
then 3/106, always by each of these diversions, the height of the Running
Water diminishes the tenth part: although that the diversions be so unequal.
Reflecting I say upon this infallible Truth, I have had a conceit, that though
the Reno and other Rivers were diverted from the Valleys, and there was only
left the Chanel of Navigation, which was only the 1/20 part of the whole water
that falls into the Valleys; yet nevertheless, the water in those same
Valleys would retain a tenth part of that height that became conjoined by the
concourse of all the Rivers: And therefore I should think that it were the best
resolution to maintain the Chanel of Navigation (if it were possible)
continuate unto the Po of Ferrara, and from thence to carry it into the Po of
Volano; for besides that it would be of very great ease in the Navigation of
Bologna, and Ferrara, the said water would render the Po of Volano navigable as
far as to the very Walls of Ferrara, and consequently the Navigation would be
continuate from Bologna to the Seaside.

But to manage this enterprise well, it is necessary to measure the quantity of
the Water that the Rivers discharge into the Valleys, and that which the Chanel
of Navigation carries, in manner as I have demonstrated at the beginning of
this Book; for this once known, we shall also come to know, how profitable this
diversion of the Chanel of Navigation from the Valleys is like to prove; which
yet would still be unprofitable, if so be that all the Rivers that discharge
their waters into the Valleys, should not first be Drained, according to what
has been above advertised.

Abbot CASTELLI, in the present consideration referring himself to the Relation
of Monsig. Corsini, grounded upon the Observations and Precepts of the said
Abbot; as is seen in the present Discourse. I thought it convenient for the
completing of the Work of our Author, upon these subjects, to insert it in
this place.

A Relation of the Waters in the Territories of Bologna and Ferrara.
BY The Right Honorable and Illustrious, Monsignore CORSINI, a Native of
Tuscany, Superintendent of the general DRAINS, and President of Romagna.
THe Rheno, and other Brooks of Romagna, were by the advice of P. Agostino
Spernazzati the Jesuit, toward the latter end of the time of Pope Clement
VIII. notwithstanding the opposition of the Bolognesi, and others concerned
therein, diverted from their Channels, for the more commodious cleansing of the
Po of Ferrara, and of its two Branches of Primaro, and Volano; in order to the
introducing the water of the Main-Po into them, to the end that their wonted
Torrents being restored, they might carry the Muddy-water thence into the Sea,
and restore to the City the Navigation which was last, as is manifest by the
Brief of the said Pope Clement, directed to the Cardinal San Clemence, bearing
date the 22. of August, 1604.

The work of the said cleansing, and introducing of the said Po, either as
being such in it self, or by the contention of the Cardinal Legates then in
these parts; and the jarrings that happened betwixt them, proved so difficult,
that after the expense of vast sums in the space of 21. years, there has been
nothing done, save the rendering of it the more difficult to be effected.

Interim, the Torrents with their waters, both muddy and clear, have damaged
the Grounds lying on the right hand of the Po of Argenta, and the Rheno those
on its Banks; of which I will speak in the first place, as of that which is of
greater importance, and from which the principal cause of the mischiefs that
result from the rest does proceed.

This Rheno having overflowed the Or Lordship.
Tennency of Sanmartina, in circumference about fourteen miles given it before,
and part of that of Cominale given it afterward, as it were, for a receptacle;
from whence, having deposed the matter of its muddiness, it issued clear by the
Mouths of Masi, and of Lievaloro, into the Po of Primaro, and of Volano; did
break down the encompassing Bank or Dam toward S. Martino, and that of its new
Chanel on the right hand near to Torre del Fondo.

By the breaches on this side it streamed out in great abundance from the upper
part of Cominale, and in the parts about Raveda, Pioggio, Caprara, Ghiare di
Reno, Sant' Agostino, San Prospero, San Vincenzo, and others, and made them to
become incultivable: it made also those places above but little fruitful, by
reason of the impediments that their Draines received, finding the Conveyances
called Riolo and Scorsuro, not only filled by la Motta and la Belletta, but
that they turned backwards of themselves.

But by the Mouths in the enclosing Bank or Dam at Borgo di S. Martino issuing
with violence, it first gave obstruction to the ancient Navigation of la Torre
della Fossa, and afterward to the modern of the mouth of Masi, so that at
present the Commerce between Bologna and Ferrara is lost, nor can it ever be in
any durable way renewed, whilst that this exceeds its due bounds, and what ever
moneys shall be employed about the same shall be without any equivalent
benefit, and to the manifest and notable prejudice of the The Popes Exchequer.
Apostolic Chamber.

Thence passing into the Valley of Marzara, it swells higher, not only by the
rising of the water, but by the raising of the bottom, by reason of the matter
sunk thither after Landfloods, and dilateth so, that it covers all the
Meadows thereabouts, nor does it receive with the wonted facility the Drains of
the upper Grounds, of which the next unto it lying under the waters that return
upwards by the Conveyances, and the more remote, not finding a passage for
Rain-waters that settle, become either altogether unprofitable or little better.

From this Valley, by the Trench or Ditch of Marzara, or of la Duca by la
Buova, or mouth of Castaldo de Rossi, and by the new passage it falls into
the Po of Argenta, which being to receive it clear, that so it may sink farther
therein, and receiving it muddy, because it has acquired a quicker course,
there will arise a very contrary effect.

Here therefore the superficies of the water keeping high, until it come to the
Sea, hinders the Valleys of Ravenna, where the River Senio, those of San
Bernardino where Santerno was turned, those of Buon' acquisto, and those of
Marmorto, where the Idice, Quaderna, Sellero fall in, from swallowing and
taking in their Waters by their usual In-lets, yet many times, as I my self
have seen in the Visitation, they drink them up plentifully, whereupon, being
conjoined with the muddinesse of those Rivers that fall into the same, they
swell, and dilate, and overflow some grounds, and deprive others of their
Drains in like manner as has been said of that of Marrara, insomuch that from
the Point of S. Giorgio, as far as S. Alberto all those that are between the
Valleys and Po are spoiled, of those that are between Valley and Valley many
are in a very bad condition, and those that are some considerable space above
not a little damnified.

In fine, by raising the bottom or sand of the Valleys, and the bed of Reno,
and the too great repletion of the Po of Primaro with waters, the Valleys of
Comacchio (on which side the Banks are very bad) and Polesine is a plat of
Ground almost surrounded with Bogs or waters, like an Island
Polesine di S. Grorgio are threatened with a danger, that may in time, if it be
not remedied, become irreparable, and at present feels the incommodity of the
Waters, which penetrating through the pores of the Earth do spring up in the
same, which they call Purlings, which is all likely to redound to the prejudice
of Ferrara, so noble a City of Italy, and so important to the Ecclesiastic
State.

Which particulars all appear to be attested under the hand of a Notary in the
Visitation which I made upon the command of His Holiness, and are withal
known to be true by the People of Ferrara.
Ferraresi themselves, of whom (besides the request of the Bolognesi) the
greater part beg compassion with sundry Memorials, and remedies, as well for the
mischiefs past, as also for those in time to come, from which I hold it a duty
of Conscience, and of Charity to deliver them.

Pope Clement judged, that the sufficient means to effect this was the said
Introduction of the Main Po into the Chanel of Ferrara; a resolution truly
Heroical, and of no less beauty than benefit to that City, of which I speak
not at present, because I think that there is need of a readier and more
accomodate remedy.

So that I see not how any other thing can be so much considerable as the
removal of Reno, omitting for this time to speak of In Channels made by hand.
enclosing it from Valley to Valley until it come to the Sea, as the Dukes of
Ferrara did design, forasmuch as all those Ferraresi that have interest in the
Polesine di S. Giorgio, and on the right hand of the Po of Argenta do not
desire it, and do, but too openly, protest against it; and because that before
the Chanel were made as far as the Sea, many hundreds of years would be spent,
and yet would not remedy the damages of those who now are agrieved, but would
much increase them, in regard the Valleys would continue submerged, the Drains
stopped, and the other Brooks obstructed, which would of necessity drown not a
few Lands that lie between Valley and Valley; and in fine, in regard it has
not from San Martina to the Sea for a space of fifty miles a greater fall then
19, 8, 6, feet, it would want that force which they themselves who propound
this project do require it to have, that so it may not depose the matter of the
muddiness when it is intended to be let into Volana.

So that making the Line of the bottom near to Vigarano, it would rise to
those prodigious terms that they do make bigger, and they may thence expect
those mischiefs, for which they will not admit of introducing it into the said
Po of Volana.

Amongst the ways therefore that I have thought of for effecting that same
remotion, and which I have caused to be viewed by skilful men that have taken a
level thereof, (with the assistance of the venerable Father, D. Benedetto
Castelli of Casina, a man of much fidelity and honesty, and no less expert in
such like affairs touching waters, than perfect in the Mathematick Disciplines)
two only, the rest being either too tedious, or too dangerous to the City,
have seemed to me worthy, and one of them also more than the other, to offer to
your Lordship.

The one is to remit it into the Chanel of Volana, through which it goes of its
own accord to the Sea.

The other is to turn it into Main-Po at Stellata, for, as at other times it
has done, it will carry it to the Sea happily.

As to what concerns the making choice of the first way, that which seems to
persuade us to it is, that we therein do nothing that is new, in that it is but
restored to the place whence it was removed in the year 1522. in the time of
Pope Adrian, by an agreement made in way of contract, between Alfonso, Duke of
Ferrara, and the Bolognesi; and that it was diverted for reasons, that are
either out of date, or else have been too long time deferred.

In like manner the facility wherewith it may be effected, letting it run into
the divided Po, whereby it will be turned to Ferrara, or else carrying it by
Torre del Fondo, to the mouth of Masi, and from thence through the Trench made
by the Ferraresi, along by Panaro, where also finding an ample Bed, and high
and thick Banks, that will serve at other times for it, and for the waters of
Po, there may a great expense be spared.

That what ever its Fall be, it would maintain the same, not having other
Rivers, which with their Floods can hinder it; and that running confined
between good Banks, without doubt it would not leave la Motto by the way; but
especially, that it would be sufficient if it came to Codigoro, where being
assisted by the Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea, it would run no hazard of having
its Chanel filled up from thence downwards.

That there might thence many benefits be derived to the City, by means of the
Running Waters, and also no mean Navigation might be expected.

On the contrary it is objected, That it is not convenient to think of
returning this Torrent into the divided Po, by reason of the peril that would
thence redound to this City.

And that going by Torre del Fondo, through Sanmartina to the Mouth de Masi by
the Chapel of Vigarano unto the Sea, it is by this way 70. miles; nor is the
Fall greater than 26. 5. 6. Feet, so that it would come to fall but 4. inches
and an half, or thereabouts in a mile; whereas the common opinion of the
skillful (to the end that the Torrents may not depose their sand that they
bring with them in Land-Floods) requires the twenty fourth part of the
hundredth part of their whole length, which in our case, accounting according
to the measure of these places, is 16. inches a The inch of these places is
somewhat bigger than ours.
mile; whereupon the sinking of the Mud and Sand would most certainly follow,
and so an immense heightning of the Line of the Bottom, and consequently a
necessity of raising the Banks, the impossibility of maintaining them, the
danger of breaches and decays, things very prejudicial to the Islets of this
City, and of San Giorgio, the obstruction of the Drains, which from the Tower
of Tienne downwards, fall into the said Chanel; to wit, those of the Sluices of
Goro, and the Drains, of the Meadows of Ferrara: And moreover, the damages that
would arise unto the said Islet of S. Giorgio, and the Valleys of Comachio, by
the waters that should enter into the Goro or Dam of the Mills of Belriguardo,
through the Trenches of Quadrea, which cannot be stopped, because they belong to
the Duke of Modena, who has right of diverting the waters of that place at his
pleasure to the work of turning Mills.

The greater part of which Objections, others pretend to prove frivolous, by
saying, that its running there till at the last it was turned another way, is a
sign that it had made such an elevation of the Line, of its Bed as it required;
denying that it needs so great a declivity as is mentioned above; and that
for the future it would rise no more.

That the said Dra^ns and Ditches did empty into the same, whilst Po was there;
so that they must needs be more able to do so when only Reno runs that way.

That there would no Breaches follow, or if they did, they would be only of
the water of Reno, which in few hours might be taken away (in those parts they
call damming up of Breaches, and mending the Bank, taking away the Breaches)
and its a question whether they would procure more inconvenience than benefit,
for that its Mud and Sand might in many places, by filling them up, occasion a
seasonable improvement.

Now omitting to discourse of the solidity of the reasons on the oneside, or on
the other, I will produce those that move me to suspend my allowance of this
design.

The first is, that although I dare not subscribe to the opinion of those that
require 16. inches Declivity in a mile to Reno, to prevent its deposing of Mud;
yet would I not be the Author that should make a trial of it with so much
hazard, for having to satisfy my self in some particulars caused a Level to be
taken of the Rivers L'amone, Senio, and Santerno, by Bernardino Aleotti, we
found that they have more Declivity by much than Artists require, as also the
Reno has from la Botta de Ghislieri to the Chapel of Vigarano, for in the
space of four miles its Bottom-Line falls five feet and five inches. So that
I hold it greater prudence to depend upon that example, than to go contrary to
a common opinion, especially since, that the effects caused by Reno it self do
confirm me in the same, for when it was forsaken by the Po, after a few years,
either because it had choked up its Chanel with Sand, or because its too long
journey did increase it, it also naturally turned aside, and took the way of
the said Po toward Stellata. Nay, in those very years that it did run that
way, it only began (as relations say) to make Breaches, an evident sign that it
does depose Sand, and raise its Bed; which agrees with the testimony of some
that were examined in the Visitation of the Public Notary, who found great
benefit by having Running Water, and some kind of passage for Boats, and yet
nevertheless affirm that it for want of Running Water had made too high
Stoppages and Shelfes of Sand; so that if it should be restored to the Course
that it forsook, I much fear that after a short time, if not suddenly, it would
leave it aagain.

The second I take from the observation of what happened to Panaro, when with
so great applause of the Feraresi, it was brought by Cardinal Serra into the
said Chanel of Volana; for that notwithstanding that it had Running Waters in
much greater abundance than Reno; yet in the time that it continued in that
Chanel it raised its Bed well near five feet, as is to be seen below the Sluice
made by Cardinal Capponi to his new Chanel; yea, the said Cardinal Serra who
desired that this his undertaking should appear to have been of no danger nor
damage, was constrained at its Overflowings, to give it Vent into Sanmartina,
that it might not break in upon, and prejudice the City; which danger I should
more fear from Reno, in regard it carries a greater abundance of Water and
Sand.

Thirdly, I am much troubled (in the uncertainty of the success of the affair)
at the great expense thereto required; For in regard I do not approve of
letting it in, near to the Fortress, for many respects, and carrying it by la
Torre del Fondo to the Mouth de Masi, it will take up eight miles of double
Banks, a thing not easy to be procured, by reason that the Grounds lie under
Water; but from the Mouth de Masi unto Codigoro, it would also be necessary to
make new Scowrings of the Chanel; to the end, that the Water approaching (by
wearing and carrying away the Earth on both shores, might make a Bed sufficient
for its Body, the depth made for Panaro not serving the turn, as I conceive;
and if it should suffice, when could the people of Ferrara hope to be
re-imbursed and satisfied for the charge thereof?

Fourthly, it serves as an Argument with me, to see that the very individual
persons concerned in the Remotion or Diversion of the said Torrent, namely, the
Bolognesi do not incline unto it, and that the whole City of Ferrara, even
those very persons who at present receive damage by it, cannot endure to hear
thereof. The reason that induces these last named to be so averse thereto, is,
either because that this undertaking will render the introduction of the Water
of Main-Po more difficult; or because they fear the danger thereof; The others
decline the Project, either for that they know that Reno cannot long continue
in that Course, or because they fear that it is too much exposed to those men's
revengeful Cutting of it who do not desire it should; and if a man have any
other ways, he ought, in my opinion, to forbear that, which to such as stand
in need of its Removal, is less satisfactory, and to such as oppose it, more
prejudicial.

To conclude, I exceedingly honor the judgment of Cardinal Capponi, who having
to his Natural Ability and Prudence added a particular Study, Observation, and
Experience of these Waters for the space of three years together, does not
think that Reno can go by Volana; to which agrees the opinion of Cardinal S.
Marcello, Legate of this City, of whom, for his exquisite understanding, we
ought to make great account. But if ever this should be resolved on, it would
be materially necessary to unite the Quick and Running Waters of the little
Chanel of Cento, of the Chanel Navilio, of Guazzaloca, and at its very
beginning those of Dardagna, which at present, is one of the Springs or Heads
of Panaro, that so they might assist it in carrying its Sand, and the matter of
its Muddiness into the Sea; and then there would not fail to be a greater
evacuation and scowring; but withal the Proprietors in the Islet of San
Giorgio and of Ferrara must prepare themselves to endure the inconveniences of
Purlings or Sewings of the Water from the River through the Boggy Ground
thereabouts.

I should more easily incline therefore to carry it into Main-Po at Stellata,
for the Reasons that Cardinal Capponi most ingeniously enumerates in a short,
but well-grounded Tract of his: not because that indeed it would not both by
Purlings and by Breaches occasion some inconvenience; especially, in the
beginning: but because I hold this for the incomodities of it, to be a far less
evil than any of the rest; and because that by this means there is no occasion
given to them of Ferrara, to explain that they are deprived of the hope of ever
seeing the Po again under the Walls of their City: To whom, where it may be
done, it is but reason that satisfaction should be given.

It is certain that Po was placed by Nature in the midst of this great Valley
made by the Appennine Hills, and by the Alps, to carry, as the Master-Drain to
the Sea, that is the grand receptacle of all Waters; those particular streams
which descend from them.

That the Reno by all Geographers, Strabo, Pliny, Solimas, Mella, and others is
enumerated among the Rivers that fall into the said Po.

That although Po should of it self change its course, yet would Reno go to
look it out, if the works erected by humane industry did not obstruct its
passage; so that it neither is, nor ought to seem strange, if one for the
greater common good should turn it into the same.

Now at Stellata it may go several ways into Po, as appears by the levels
that were taken by my Order; of all which I should best like the turning of it
to la Botta de' Ghislieri, carrying it above Bondeno to the Church of
Gambarone, or a little higher or lower, as shall be judged least prejudicial,
when it comes to the execution, and this for two principal reasons: The one
because that then it will run along by the confines of the Church P^trimony,
without separating Ferrara from the rest of it; The other is, Because the Line
is shorter, and consequently the fall greater; for that in a space of ten miles
and one third, it falls twenty six feet, more by much than is required by
Artists; and would go by places where it could do but little hurt,
notwithstanding that the persons interressed study to amplify it incredibly.

On the contrary, there are but only two objections that are worthy to be
examined; One, That the Drains and Ditches of S. Bianca, of the Chanel of
Cento, and of Burana, and all those others that enter into Po, do hinder this
diversion of Reno, by the increasing of the waters in the Po. The other is that
Po rising about the Transom of the Pilaster-Sluice, very near 20 feet, the Reno
would have no fall into the same; whereupon it would rise to a terrible height,
at which it would not be possible to make, or keep the Banks made, so that it
would break out and drown the Meadows, and cause mischiefs, and damages
unspeakable and irreparable; as is evident by the experiment made upon Panaro,
which being confined between Banks, that it might go into Po, this not being
neither in its greatest excrescense, it broke out into the territories of
Final, and of Ferrara. And though that might be done, it would thereupon ensue,
that there being let into the Chanel of Po, 2800. square feet of water (for so
much we account those of Reno and Panaro, taken together in their greatest
heights) the superficies of it would rise at least four feet, insomuch that
either it would be requisite to raise its Banks all the way unto the Sea, to
the same height, which the treasures of the Indies would not suffice to effect;
or else there would be a necessity of enduring excessive Breaches. To these two
Heads are the Arguments reduced, which are largely amplified against our
opinion; and I shall answer first to the last, as most material.

I say therefore, that there are three cases to be considered: First, Po high,
and Reno low. Secondly, Reno high, and Po low. Thirdly, Reno and Po both high
together.

As to the first and second, there is no difficulty in them; for if Po shall
not be at its greatest height, Reno shall ever have a fall into it, and there
shall need no humane Artifice about the Banks: And if Reno shall be low, Po
shall regurgitate and flow up into the Chanel of it; and also from thence no
inconvenience shall follow. The third remains, from which there are expected
many mischiefs; but it is a most undoubted truth, that the excrescencies of
Reno, as coming from the adjacent Appennines and Rains, are to continue but
seven, or eight hours at most, and so would never, or very rarely happen to be
at the same time with those of Po, caused by the melting of the snowes of the
Alps, at least 400. miles distance from thence. But because it sometimes may
happen, I reply, that when it comes to pass, Reno shall not go into Po, but it
shall have allowed it one or two Vents; namely, into the Chanel of Ferrara, as
it has ever had; and into Sanmartina, where it runs at present, and
wherewith there is no doubt, but that the persons concerned will be well
pleased, it being a great benefit to them, to have the water overflow their
grounds once every four or five years, instead of seeing it anoy them
continually. Yea, the Vent may be regulated, reserving for it the Chanel in
which Reno at present runs; and instead of turning it by a Dam at la Betta
de Ghislieri, perhaps, to turn it by help of strong Sluices, that may upon all
occasions be opened and shut. And for my part, I do not question but that the
Proprietors themselves in Sanmartina would make a Chanel for it; which
receiving, and confining it in the time of the Vents, might carry the Sand into
the Po of Primaro: Nor need there thence be feared any stoppage by Mud and
Sand, since that it is supposed that there will but very seldom be any
necessity of using it; so that time would be allowed, upon occasion, to scowr
and cleanse it.

And in this manner all those Prodigies vanish that are raised with so much
fear from the entrance of the Water of Reno swelled into Po, when it is high,
to which there needs no other answer; yet nevertheless we do not take that
quantity of Water, that is carried by Reno, and by Panaro, to be so great as is
affirmed: For that P. D. Benedetto Castelli has no less accutely than
accurately observed the measures of this kind, noting that the breadth and
depth of a River is not enough to resolve the question truly, but that there is
respect to be had to the velocity of the Waters, and the term of time, things
hitherto not considered by the Skilful in these affairs; and therefore they are
not able to say what quantity of Waters the said Rivers carry, nor to conclude
of the risings that will follow thereupon. Nay, it is most certain, that if all
the Rivers that fall into Po, which are above thirty, should rise at the rate
that these compute Reno to do, and hundred feet of Banks would not suffice, and
yet they have far fewer: So that this confirms the Rule of R. P. D. Benedetto,
namely, that the proportion of the height of the Water of Reno in Reno to the
height of the Water of Reno in Po, is compounded of the proportion of the
breadth of the Chanel of Po to that of Reno, and of the velocity of the Water
of Reno in Po to the vel^city of the Water of Reno in Reno; a manifest argument
that there cannot in it, by this new augmentation of Waters follow any
alteration that necessitates the raising of its Banks, as appears by the
example of Pavaro, which has been so far from swelling Po, that it has rather
assuaged it, for it has carried away many Shelfs and many Islets that had
grown in its Bed, for want of Waters sufficient to bear away the matter of
Land-floods in so broad a Chanel; and as is learnt by the trial made by us in
Panaro with the Water of Burana; for erecting in the River standing marks, and
shutting the said Sluice, we could see no sensible abatement, nor much less
after we had opened it sensible increasment; by which we judge that the same is
to succeed to Po, by letting in of Reno, Burana having greater proportion to
Panaro than Reno to Po, considering the state of those Rivers in which the
Observation was made. So that there is no longer any occasion for those great
raisings of Banks, and the danger of the ruptures as well of Reno as of Po do
vanish, as also the fear lest that the Sluices which empty into Po should
receive obstruction: which if they should, yet it would be over in a few hours.
And as to the Breaches of Panaro which happened in 1623. I know not why, seeing
that it is confessed that the Po was not, at that time, at its height, one
should rather charge it with the crime, than quit it thereof. The truth is,
that the Bank was not made of proof, since that the same now continues whole
and good, and Panaro does not break out; nay, there was, when it brake more
than a foot and half of its Banks above the Water, and to spare; but it broke
through by a Moles working; or by the hole of a Water-Rat, or some such vermin;
and by occasion of the badness of the said Banks, as I find by the testimony
of some witnesses examined by my command, that I might know the truth thereof.
Nor can I here forbear to say, that it would be better, if in such matters men
were more candid and sincere. But to secure our selves nevertheless, to the
utmost of our power, from such like Breaches which may happen at the first, by
reason of the newness of the Banks, I presuppose that from Po unto the place
whence Reno is cut, there ought to be a high and thick Fence made with its
Banks, so that there would be no cause to fear any whatsoever accessions of
Water, although that concurrence of three Rivers, which was by some more
ingeniously aggravated than faithfully stated by that which was said above were
true; to whom I think not my self bound to make any farther reply, neither to
those who say that Po will ascend upwards into Reno, since that these are the
same persons who would introduce a small branch of the said Po into the Chanel
of Ferrara, that so it may conveigh to the Sea, not Reno only, but also all
the other Brooks of which we complained; and because that withal it is
impossible, that a River so capacious as Po should be incommoded by a Torrent,
that, as I may say, has no proportion to it.

I come now to the business of the Ditches and Draines; and as to the
Conveyance of Burana; it has heretofore been debated to turn it into Main-Po,
so that in this case it will receive no harm, and though it were not removed,
yet would it by a Trench under ground pursue the course that it now holds,
and also would be able to dis-imbogue again into the said new Chanel of Reno,
which conforming to the superficies of the Water of Po, would continue at a
lower level than that which Panara had when it came to Ferrara, into which
Burana did nevertheless empty it self for some time.

The Conveyance or Drain of Santa Bianca, and the little Chanel of Cento may
also empty themselves by two subterranean Trenches, without any prejudice where
they run at present, or without any more works of that nature, they may be
turned into the said new Chanel, although with somewhat more of inconvenience;
and withal, the Chanel of Ferrara, left dry, would be a sufficient receptacle
for any other Sewer or Drain whatsoever, that should remain there.

All which Operations might be brought to perfection with 150. thousand Crowns,
well and faithfully laid out; which sum the Bolognesi will not be unwilling to
provide; besides that those Ferraresi ought to contribute to it, who shall
partake of the benefit.

Let me be permitted in this place to propose a thing which I have thought of,
and which peradventure might occasion two benefits at once, although it be not
wholly new. It was in the time of Pope Paul V. propounded by one Crescenzio an
Ingineer, to cut the Main-Po, above le Papozze; and having made a sufficient
evacuation to derive the water thereof into the Po of Adriano, and so to
procure it to be Navigable, which was not at that time effected, either by
reason of the oppositions of those, whose possessions were to be cut through, or
by reason of the great sum of money that was necessary for the effecting of it:
But in viewing those Rivers, we have observed, that the sedge cutting might
easily be made below le Papozze, in digging through the Bank called Santa Maria,
and drawing a Trench of the bigness that skilful Artists shall judge meet unto
the Po Of Adriano.
of Ariano, below the Secche of the said S. Maria; which as being a work of not
above 160. Perches in length, would be finished with only 12000. Crowns.

First; it is to be believed, that the waters running that way, would nor fail
to open that Mouth into the Sea, which at present is almost choakt up by the
Shelf of Sand, which the new Mouth of Ponto Virro has brought thither; and
that it would again bring into use the Port Gero, and its Navigation.

And happily experience might teach us, that the superficies of Po might come to
fall by this asswagement of Water, so that the accession of Reno would
questionless make no rising in it: Whereupon, if it should so fall out, those
Princes would have no reason to complain; who seem to question, lest by this
new accession of water into Po, the Sluices might be endangered. Which I
thought not fit to omit to represent to your Lordship; not, that I propose it
to you as a thing absolutely certain, but that you might, if you so pleased,
lay it before persons whose judgments are approved in these affairs.

I return now from where I degrest, and affirm it as indubitable, that Reno
neither can, nor ought to continue longer where it at this day is; and that it
cannot go into any other place but that, whither Cardinal Capponi designed to
carry it, and which at present pleases me better than any other; or into
Volana, whence it was taken away; the vigilance of Men being able to obviate
part of those mischiefs, which it may do there.

But from its Removal, besides the alleviation of the harm which by it self is
caused, there would also result the diminution of that which is occasioned by
the other Brooks, to the right hand of the Po of Argenta; forasmuch as the said
Po wanting all the water of Reno, it would of necessity come to ebb in such
manner, that the Valleys would have a greater Fall into the same, and
consequently it would take in, and swallow greater abundance of water; and by
this means the Ditches and Draines of the Up-Lands would likewise more easily
Fall into them; especially if the scouring of Zenzalino were brought to
perfection, by which the waters of Marrara would fall into Marmorta: And if
also that of Bastia were enlarged, and finished, by which there might enter as
much water into the said Po of Argenta, as is taken from it by the removal of
Reno; although that by that means the water of the Valleys would assuage
double: Nor would the people of Argenta, the Isles of S. Giorgio, and Comacchio
have any cause to complain; for that there would not be given to them more
water than was taken away: Nay sometimes whereas they had Muddy waters, they
would have clear; nor need they to fear any rising: And furthermore, by this
means a very great quantity of ground would be restored to culture; For the
effecting of all which, the sum of 50. thousand Crowns would go very far, and
would serve the turn at present touching those Brooks, carrying them a little
farther in the mean time, to fill up the greater cavities of the Valleys, that
we might not enter upon a vaster and harder work, that would bring with it the
difficulties of other operations, and so would hinder the benefit which these
people expect from the paternal charity of His Holiness.

TO The Right Honorable, MONSIGNORE D. Ferrante Cesarini.
MY Treatise of the MENSURATION of RUNNING WATERS, Right Honorable, and most
Noble Sir, has not a greater Prerogative than its having been the production
of the command of Pope Urban VIII. when His Holiness was pleased to enjoin me
to go with Monsignore Corsini, in the Visitation that was imposed upon him in
the year 1625. of the Waters of Ferrara, Bologna, Romagna, and Romagnola; for
that, on that occasion applying my whole Study to my service and duty, I
published in that Treatise some particulars till then not rightly understood
and considered (that I knew) by any one; although they be in themselves most
important, and of extraordinary consequence. Yet I must render thanks to Your
Lordship for the honor you have done to that my Tract; but wish withal, that
your Esteem of it may not prejudice the universal Esteem that the World has of
Your Honor most refined judgment.

As to that Point which I touch upon in the Conclusion, namely, That the
consideration of the Velocity of Running Water supplyeth the consideration of
the Larghezza, but misprinted.
Length omitted in the common way of measuring Running Waters; Your Lordship
having commanded me that in favor of Practice, and for the perfect discovery
of the disorder that commonly happens now adays in the distribution of the
Waters of Fountains, I should demonstrate that the knowledge of the Velocity
serves for the finding of the Length: I have thought fit to satisfy your
Command by relating a Fable; which, if I do not deceive my self, will make out
to us the truth thereof; insomuch that the rest of my Treatise shall thereby
also become more manifest and intelligible, even to those who find therein
some kind of obscurity.

In the days of yore, before that the admirable Art of Weaving was in use,
there was found in Persia a vast and unvaluable Treasure, which consisted in an
huge multitude of pieces of Ermesin, or Damask, I know not whether; which, as I
take it, amounted to near two thousand pieces; which were of such a nature,
that though their Breadth and Thickness were finite and determinate, as they
use to be at this day; yet nevertheless, their Length was in a certain sense
infinite, for that those two thousand pieces, day and night without ceasing,
issued out with their ends at such a rate, that of each piece there issued 100.
Else a day, from a deep and dark Cave, consecrated by the Superstition of those
people, to the fabulous Arachne. In those innocent and early times (I take it
to have been, in that so much applauded and desired Golden age) it was left to
the liberty of any one, to cut off of those pieces what quantity they pleased
without any difficulty: But that felicity decaying and degenerating, which was
altogether ignorant of Meum and Tuum; terms certainly most pernicious, the
Original of all evils, and cause of all discords; there were by those people
strong and vigilant Guards placed upon the Cave, who resolved to make
merchandise of the Stuffes; and in this manner they began to set a price upon
that inestimable Treasure, selling the propriety in those pieces to diverse
Merchants; to some they sold a right in one, to some in two, and to some in
more. But that which was the worst of all, There was found out by the
insatiable avarice of these men crafty inventions to deceive the Merchants
also; who came to buy the aforesaid commodity, and to make themselves Masters,
some of one some of two, and some of more ends of those pieces of stuff; and in
particular, there were certain ingenuous Machines placed in the more secret
places of the Cave, with which at the pleasure of the Guards, they did retard
the velocity of those Stuffs, in their issuing out of the Cave; insomuch, that
he who ought to have had 100. Else of Stuff in a day, had not above 50, and he
who should have had 400, enjoyed the benefit of 50. only; and so all the rest
were defrauded of their Rights, the surplusage being sold, appropriated, and
shared at the will of the corrupt Officers: So that the business was without
all order or justice, insomuch that the Goddess Arachne being displeased at
those people, deprived every one of their benefit, and with a dreadful
Earthquake for ever closing the mouth of the Cave, in punishment of so much
impiety and malice: Nor did it avail them to excuse themselves, by saying that
they allowed the Buyer the Breadth and Thickness bargained for; and that of the
Length, which was infinite, there could no account be kept: For the wise and
prudent Priest of the Sacred Grotto answered, That the deceit lay in the
length, which they were defrauded of, in that the velocity of the stuff was
retarded, as it issued out of the Cave: and although the total length of the
Piece was infinite, for that it never ceased coming forth, and so was not to be
computed; yet nevertheless its length considered, part by part, as it came out
of the Cave, and was bargained for, continued still finite, and might be one
while greater, and another while lesser, according as the Piece was constituted
in greater or lesser velocity; and he added withal, that exact Justice
required, that when they sold a piece of stuff, and the propriety or dominion
therein, they ought not only to have ascertained the breadth and thickness of
the Piece, but also to have determined the length, determining its velocity.

The same disorder and confusion, that was represented in the Fable, does come
to pass in the History of the Distribution of the Waters of Conduits and
Fountains, seeing that they are sold and bought, having regard only to the two
Dimensions, I mean of Breadth and Height of the Mouth that discharges the
Water; and to remedy such an inconvenience, it is necessary to determine the
length in the velocity; for never shall we be able to make a guess at the
quantity of the Body of Running Water, with the two Dimensions only of Breadth
and Height, without Length.

And to the end, that the whole business may be reduced to a most easy
practice, by which the waters of Aqueducts may be bought and sold justly, and
with measures always exact and constant.

First, the quantity of the Water ought diligently to be examined, which the
whole principal * Pipe discharges in a time certain, as for instance, in an
hour, in half an hour, or in a less interval of time, (for knowing which I
have a most exact and easy Rule) and finding that the whole principal pipe
discharges v. g. a thousand Tuns of Water in the space of one or more hours,
in selling of this water, it ought not to be uttered by the ordinary and false
measure, but the distribution is to be made with agreement to give and maintain
to the buyer ten or twenty, or a greater number of Tuns, as the bargain shall
be made, in the space of an hour, or of some other set and determinate time.
And here I add, that if I were to undertake to make such an adjustment, I
would make use of a way to divide and measure the time with such accuratenesse,
that the space of an hour should be divided into four, six, or eight thousand
parts without the least error; which Rule was taught me by my Master Sign.
Galilaeo Galilaei, Chief Philosopher to the most Serene Grand Duke of Tuscany.
And this way will serve easily and admirably to our purpose and occasion; so
that we shall thereby be able to know how many Quarts of Water an Aqueduct will
discharge in a given time of hours, months, or years. And in this manner we
may constitute a Cock that shall discharge a certain and determinate quantity
of water in a time given.

And because daily experience shows us, that the Springs of Aqueducts do not
maintain them always equally high, and full of Water, but that sometimes they
increase, and sometimes decrease, which accident might possibly procure some
difficulty in our distribution: Therefore, to the end that all manner of
scruple may be removed, I conceive that it would be convenient to provide a
Cistern, according to the occasion, into which there might always fall one
certain quantity of water, which should not be greater than that which the
principal pipe discharges in times of drought, when the Springs are bare of
water, that so in this Cistern the water might always keep at one constant
height. Then to the Cistern so prepared we are to fasten the Cocks of
particular persons, to whom the Water is sold by the Reverend Apostolic
Chamber, according to what has been observed before; and that quantity of
Water which remains over and above, is to be discharged into another Cistern,
in which the Cocks of the Waters for public services, and of those which
people buy upon particular occasions are to be placed. And when the business
shall have been brought to this pass, there will likewise a remedy be found to
the so many disorders that continually happen; of which, for brevity sake, I
will instance in but four only, which concern both public and private
benefit, as being, in my judgment, the most enormous and intolerable.

The first inconvenience is, that in the common way of measuring, dispensing,
and selling the Waters of Aqueducts, it is not understood, neither by the Buyer
nor Seller, what the quantity truly is that is bought and sold; nor could I
ever meet with any either Engineer or Architect, or Artist, or other that was
able to decypher to me, what one, or two, or ten inches of water was. But by
our above declared Rule, for dispensing the Waters of Aqueducts we may very
easily know the true quantity of Water that is bought or sold, as that it is so
many Tuns an hour, so many a day, so many in a year, etc.

The second disorder that happens, at present, in the distribution of
Aqueducts is, that as the business is now governed, it lies in the power of a
sordid Mason to take unjustly from one, and give undeservedly to another more
or less Water than belongs to them of right: And I have seen it done, of my
own experience. But in our way of measuring and distributing Waters, there can
no fraud be committed; and putting the case that they should be committed, its
an easy matter to know it, and amend it, by repairing to the Tribunal
appointed.

Thirdly, it happens very often, (and we have examples thereof both ancient and
modern) that in dispensing the Water after the common and vulgar way; there is
sometimes more Water dispended than there is in the Register, in which there
will be registered, as they say, two hundred inches (for example) and there will
be dispensed two hundred and fifty inches, or more. Which passage happened in
the time of Nerva the Emperor, as Giulio Frontano writes, in his 2. Book, De
Aquaductibus Vrbis Romae, where he observes that they had in Commentariis
12755. Quinaries of Water; and found that they dispensed 14018. Quinaries. And
the like Error has continued, and is in use also modernly until our times.
But if our Rule shall be observed, we shall incur no such disorder, nay there
will always be given to every one his share, according to the holy end of
exact justice, which dat unicuique quod suum est. As on the contrary, it is
manifest, that His Divine Majesty hates and abominateth Pondus and pondus,
Mensura and mensura, as the Holy Ghost speaks by the mouth of Solomon in the
Proverbs, Chap. 20. Pondus and Pondus, Mensura and Mensura, utrumque
abominabile est apud Deum. And therefore who is it that sees not that the way
of dividing and measuring of Waters, commonly used, is expressly against the
Law of God. Since that thereby the same measure is made sometimes greater, and
sometimes lesser; A disorder so enormous and execrable, that I shall take the
boldness to say, that for this sole respect it ought to be condemned and
prohibited likewise by human Law, which should Enact that in this business
there should be employed either this our Rule, or some other that is more
exquisite and practicable, whereby the measure might keep one constant and
determinate tenor, as we make it, and not, as it is now, to make Pondus and
Pondus, Mensura and Mensura.

And this is all that I had to offer to your most Illustrious Lordship, in
obedience to your commands, reserving to my self the giving of a more exact
account of this my invention, when the occasion shall offer, of reducing to
practice so holy, just, and necessary a reformation of the Measure of Running
Waters and of Aqueducts in particular: which Rule may also be of great benefit
in the division of the greater Waters to overflow Grounds, and for other uses:
I humbly bow,

Your Most Devoted, and Most Obliged Servant, D. Benedetto Castelli, Abb. Casin.

FINIS.
A TABLE Of the most observable matters in this Treatise of the MENSURATION of
RUNNING WATERS.
A
ABatements of a River in different and unequal Diversions, is always equal,
which is proved with 100. Siphons. Page 75 Arno River when it rises upon a
Land-Flood near the Sea one third of a Brace, it rises about Pisa 6. or 7.
Braces. 82
B
Banks near to the Sea lower, than far from thence. Corollary XIV. 16 Brent
River diverted from the Lake of Venice, and its effects. 64 Brent supposed
insufficient to remedy the inconveniences of the Lake, and the falsity of that
supposition. 67 Brent, and its benefits in the Lake. 70 Its Deposition of Sand
in the Lake, how great it is. 78, 79 Bridges over Rivers, and how they are to
be made. Appendix VIII. 20 Burana River, its rising, and falling in Panaro. 110
C
Castelli applied himself to this Study by Order of Urban VIII. 2 Chanel of
Navigation in the Valleys of Bologna, and its inconveniences. 99 Carried into
the Po of Ferrara, and its benefits ibid. Ciampoli a lover of these
Observations of Waters. 3
D
Difficulty of this business of Measuring Waters. 2 Disorders that happen in
the distribution of the Waters of Aqueducts, and their remedies. 113
Distribution of the Waters of Fountains, and Aqueducts. Appendix X. 22
Distribution of Water to overflow Grounds. Appendix XI. 23, 69, 70 Diversion
of Reno and other Brooks of Romagna, advised by P. Spernazzati to what end it
was. 100 Drains and Ditches, the benefit they receive by cutting away the Weeds
and Reeds. Appendix IX. 21 Drains and Sewers obstructed, in the Diversion of
Reno into Main Po, and a remedy for the same. 110
E
Engineers unvers'd in the matter of Waters. 2 Erour found in the common way of
Measuring Running Waters: 68, 69 Error inderiving the Water of Acqua Paola.
Appendix II. 17, 18 Error of Bartolotti. 86, 87 Errors of Engineers in the
Derivation of Chenels. Corollary XII. 12 Error of Engineers in Measuring of
Reno in Po. Appendix III. ibid. Error of other Engineers, contrary to the
precedent. Appendix IV. ibid. Error of Giovanni Fontana in Measuring Waters.
Corollary XI. 9 Error of Giulio Frontino in Measuring the Waters of Aqueducts.
Appendix. I. 17 Errors committed in cutting the Bank at Bondeno, in the
swellings of Po: Corollary XIII. 81
F
Fenns Pontine, Drained by Pope Sixtus Quintus, with vast expense. 92 The ruin
and miscarriage thereof. 93 Tardity of the principal Chanel that Drains them,
cause of the Drowning. ibid. They are obstructed by the Fishing-Wears, which
swell the River. 94 Waters of Fiume Sisto, which flow in great abundance into
the Evacuator of the said Fenns. 94, 95 Remedies to the disorders of those
Fenns. 95, 96 Fontana Giovanni, his errors in Measuring Waters. Corollary XI.
9 Fiume Morto, whether it ought to fall into the Sea, or into Serchio, 79 Let
into Serchio and its inconveniences. 79, 80 The dangerous rising of its Waters,
when to be expected. 81 Its inconveniences when it is higher in level than
Serchio, and why it rises most On the Seacoasts, at such time at the Winds
make the Sea to swell. 83
G
Galilaeo Galilaei, honorably mentioned. Page 2, 28 His Rules for measuring
the time. 49
H
Height, vide Quick Heights different, made by the same stream of a Brook or
Torrent, according to the diverse Velocities in the entrance of the River.
Corollary I. 6 Heights different, made by the Torrent in the River, according
to the different heights of the River. Corollary II. ibid.
K
Knowledge of Motion how much it imports. 1
L
Lake of Perugia, and, he Observation made on it. Appendix XII. 42 Lake of
Thrasimenus and Considerations upon it, a Letter written to Sig. Galilaeo
Galilaei. 28 Lake of Venice, and Considerations upon it. 63, 73 Low Waters
which let the bottom of it be discovered. 64 The stoppage and choking of the
Ports, a main cause of the disorders of the Lake, and the grand remedy to those
disorders what it is. 66 Lakes and Meers along the Sea-ccosts, and the causes
thereof. 65 Length of Waters, how it is to be Measured. 70
M
Measure and Distributions of Waters. Appendix V. 18 Measure of Rivers that
fall into others difficult. Coroll. X. 9 Measure of the Running Water of a
Chanel of an height known by a Regulator of a Measure given, in a time
assigned. Proposition I. Problem I. 50 Measure of the Water of any River, of
any greatness, in a time given. Proposition V. Problem III. 60 Measure that
shows how much Water a River discharges in a time given. 48 Mole-holes,
Motion the principal subject of Philosophy. 1 Mud. Vide Sand.
N
Navigation from Bologna to Ferrara, is become impossible, till such time as
Reno be diverted. 101 Navigation in the Lake of Venice endangered, and how
restored. 65, 70
P
Perpendicularity of the Banks of the River, to the upper superficies of it. 37
Perpendicularity of the Banks to the bottom. 37 Perugia. Vide Lake. Pontine.
Vide Fenns. Ports of Venice, Malamocco, Bondolo, and Chiozza, choked up for
w^nt of Water in the Lake. 65 Proportions of unequal Sections of equal
Velocity, and of equal Sections of unequal Velocity. Axiom IV. and V. 38
Proportions of equal and unequal quantities of Water, which pass by the
Sections of different Rivers. Proposition II. 39 Proportions of unequal
Sections that in equal times discharge equal quantities of Water. Proposition
III. 41 Proportion wherewith one River falling into another, varieth in height.
Proposition IV. 44 Proportion of the Water discharged by a River in the time of
Flood, to the Water discharged in an equal time by the said River, before or
after the Flood. Proposition V. 44 Proportion of the Heights made by two equal
Brooks or Streams falling into the same River. Proposition VI. 45 Proportion of
the Water which a River discharges increasing in Quick-height by the addition
of new Water, to that which it discharges after the increase is made.
Proposition IV. Theor. II. 54 Proportion of a River when high^^ to it self when
low. Coroll. I. 55
Q
Quantity of Running Waters is never certain, if with the Vulgar way of
Measuring them, their Velocities be not considered. 32 Quantities of Waters
which are discharged by a River, answer in equality to the Velocities and times
in which they are discharged. Axiom I, II, III. 38 Quick-Height of a River,
what it is. Definition V. 48
R
Reason of the Proverb, Take heed of the still Waters. Coroll. VI. 7 Reasons of
Monsignore Corsini against the diversion of Reno into the Po of Volano. 105
Reasons of Cardinal Capponi and Monsig. Corsini, for the turning of Reno into
Main Po. 106 Two objections on the contrary, and answers to them. 104 and 105
What ought to be the proportion of the Heights of Reno in Reno, and of Reno in
Po. 110 Regulator what it is. Definition IV. 48 Relation of the Waters of
Bologna and Ferrara, by Monsignore Corsini 100 Reno in the Valleys, and its bad
effects. 100, 101 Two ways to divert it. 103 The facility and utility of those
ways. Ibid. The difficulties objected. 104 Reply to Bartolotti touching the
dangers of turning Eiume Morto into Serchio. 83 Retardment of the course of a
River caused by its Banks. Appendix VII. 19 Risings made by Floodgates but
small. Appendix XIII. 26 Rivers that are shallow swell much upon small showers,
such as are deep rise but little upon great Floods. Corollary III. 6 Rivers the
higher they are, the swifter. Ibid. Rivers the higher they are, the less they
increase upon Floods. 49 Rivers when they are to have equal and when like
Velocity. Ibid. Rivers in falling into the Sea, form a Shelf of Sand called
Cavallo. 65 Five Rivers to be diverted from the Lake of Venice, and the
inconveniences that would ensue thereupon. 74, 75 A River of Quick-height, and
Velocity in its Regulator being given, if the Height, be redoubled by new
Water, it redoubleth also in Velocity. Proposition II. Theorem I. 51 Keeps
the proportion of the heights, to the Velocities. Corollary 52
S
Sand and Mud that enters into the Lake of Venice, and the way to examine it.
76 Seas agitated and driven by the Winds stop up the Ports. 64, 65 Sections of
a River what they are. Definition I. 37 Sections equally swift what they are.
Definition II. Ibid. Sections of a River being given, to conceive others equal
to them, of different breadth, height and Velocity. Petition. 38 Sections of
the same River, and their Proportions to their Velocities. Coroll. I. 42
Sections of a River discharge in any whatsoever place of the said River, equal
quantities of Water in equal times. Proposition I. 39 Sile River what
mischiefs it threatens, diverted from the Lake. 74 Spirtings of Waters grow
bigger the higher they go. Coroll. XVI. 16 Streams of Rivers how they increase
and vary. Coroll. I. 6 Streams retarded, and the effects thereof. Coroll. IX. 8
T
Table of the Heights, Additions, and Quantities of Waters, and its use. 56
Thrasimenus. Vide Lake. Time how its measured in these Operations of the
Waters. 49 Torrents increase at the increasing of a River, though they carry no
more Water than before Coroll. IV. 6 Torrents when they depose and carry away
the Sand. Coroll. V. 7 Torrents and their effects in a River. 6, 7 Torrents
that fall into the Valleys, or into Po of Valano, and their mischiefs
prevented, by the diverting of Reno into Main Po. 100 Tyber and the causes of
its inundations. Coroll. VIII. 8
V
Valleys of Bologna and Ferrara, their inundations and disorders, whence they
proceed. 97 Velocity of the Water shown by several Examples. 3 Its proportion
to the Measure. 5 Velocities equal, what they are. 47 Velocities like, what
they are. 47, 48 Velocities of Water known, how they help us in finding the
Lengths. 113 A Fable to explain the truth thereof. Ibid. Venice. Vide Lake. Use
of the Regulator in measuring great Rivers. Consideration I. 60
W
Waters falling, why they disgross. Coroll. XVI. 16 Waters, how the Length of
them is Measured. 70 Waters that are employed to flow Grounds, how they are to
be distributed. 19, 53, 54 Waters to be carried in Pipes, to serve Aquaducts
and Conduits, how they are to be Measured. 15, 116 Way to know the rising of
Lakes by Raines. 28 Way of the Vulgar to Measure the Waters of Rivers. 68 Wind
Gun, and Portable Fountain of Vincenzo Vincenti of Urbin. 11 Winds contrary,
retard, and make Rivers increase. Coroll. VII. 8
The END of the TABLE of the Second Part of the First TOME.

