Sober Singularity, OR An Antidote against Infection By the example of A
MULTITUDE Being Practical Meditations, On Exodus 23. verse. 2.

Wherein is opened, the Influence of the practice of a Multitude, to draw men
to Sin; the special cases, wherein it concerns us to be most cautious; Reasons
why we must not follow them; together with the Application of the whole.

And therein, Besides the General improvement of the point, an Instance given
of Nineteen practices of the Multitude to be avoided Seven of their Grand
Principles to be rejected: Sundry Particulars concerning Peace, and Unity, and
the Sanctification of the Lords day, useful for these times.

By R. Stedman, M. A.

1 Timothy 5.22. Be not Partaker of other men's sins. Keep thy self pure. Defensio
communis furoris est furentium Multitudo M.F. Oct. LONDON, Printed by for
Thomas Parkurst, at the Golden Bible on London-Bridg, under the Gate. 1668.

A PREFACE To the READER.
AS the just measure of the truth of all Theological Assertions, is to be taken
from their consonancy to the word of God: So the usefulness and profit of any
undertaking of that nature is to be estimated by the seasonableness and
subserviency thereof to the grand Designs of the Gospel. In both which
respects the following Treatise, however attended with many imperfections, may
for the substance and scope of it, make Appeal to the judgments of such as are
really touched with the concerns of Religion; and have their senses exercised
to discern wherein it is interest lies, and how the progress of it is retarded.

The great Intendments of the Gospel, to the propagation and furtherance
whereof all particular attempts should be subordinated, are mostly reducible to
three heads. The illustration and magnifying of the Grace of God, in the
salvation of lost sinners. The Exaltation and advancement of our Lord Jesus
Christ, the only Mediator of the Covenant of Grace. The vindication and
promoting of real holiness and purity, amongst the children of men. And the
drift and purport of the Tract ensuing more directly relates to the last of
these: To minister help in the following after Godliness, and to remove out of
the way the main impediments, that hinder from an hearty closure therewith.

It is a point as clear as the Noonday, and cannot be denied by such as own
the Scriptures, that a vigorous and cordial prosecution of holiness in the
greatest strictness and height of it, is of indispenseable necessity to the
Beatifical vision, and enjoyment of God. Without which, all professions of
faith and love to God are but empty names, and counterfeits; indeed, a mere
mockery of the most High. How shall any be induced to believe, that a man does
unfeignedly embrace and love the principles, by which he refuses to steer his
course? Or that such divine truths have a real seat in his affections, which
are openly disavowed and contradicted in his conversation. He that will give a
solid testimony of his sincere respects to the doctrine of Christianity, must
do it by a demeanor answerable thereunto. It is by upright and humble walking
as in the sight of God, that Religion must be adorned, that it may attract the
hearts of them that are without: Hereby our profession must be justified, both
in the sight of men and to the approbation of our own consciences: And in this
way alone, we can comfortably expect to be conducted with safety to the Kingdom
of Heaven.

When the nature and excellency of holiness and the fear of the Lord, are
considered separately, in themselves, without reflection upon the quality of
the persons pressed thereunto, it may seem a needless task, to spend much time,
or many words, in defense of it. Who would not fear thee, O King of nations!
for unto thee it does appertain? Jer. 10.7. Who, that has any spark of sound
wisdom, would not be found faithful, in the covenant of God? Who, that has an
insight into the beauty of holiness, would not admire and fall in love, with it?

But such is the enmity radicated in men's hearts, against the Lord, and their
perverse disputings against the purity of the ways of God; and their
addictedness to conform unto this world; that it is rather a wonder of free
grace, that any persons are prevailed upon, to close effectually with the power
of Godliness; than that it should be confined within so narrow a compass, as
the experience of all ages, too abundantly manifests it to be. Besides, it is
a matter of no difficult observation, to a thoughtful Christian, who has his
eyes open, and is in the least degree akin to the children of Issachar, that
had understanding of the times, what have been the crafty machinations and
methods of the Devil, and his adherents, in these late days, to bring the
strictness of Religion into contempt, and to make it a reproach; by casting
loads of accusations upon the professors thereof: that so Godliness may be
wounded through their loins, and the spirits of men deterred, and discouraged
from the sedulous pursuance of it. And what if the miscarriages and
extravagancies of some who seemed to be eminent for piety, have ministered too
much occasion to them, that lie at the catch, to raise an evil report, and to
vent their slanderous revilings against the truth? Yet it must needs appear to
be but a very ridiculous piece of Logic, to argue from the corruption of some,
to the condemnation of all. As if all sorts of money were to be rejected in
payment, because some pieces are but brass silvered over: especially seeing it
is none other, than what the spirit of God has plainly intimated, that there
will be tares mingled with the wheat until the harvest: There will be
hypocrites and dissemblers in outward fellowship with the Saints, even unto the
end.

However, from hence arises a necessity of Pleas, Apologies, and vindications
to wipe off the slurres and calumnies, which men of profligate principles and
seared consciences are wont to cast on the face of religion: And a like
necessity of arguments and provocatives to quicken men to follow after
righteousness: and of answers to be returned to the carnal reasonings, whereby
they cavil against the truth; and study to evade the convictions that are
sometimes wrought upon their spirits.

If the Meditations here commended to thy candid and serious perusal, may
contribute assistance to this purpose; that any of the Truths that are
according to Godliness may be cleared up; The prejudices and stumbling blocks
removed out of the way of salvation; such as are declining may be recalled, and
those that are sound in the faith further settled and established; the Author
has attained his end; and let all the glory be ascribed unto God. To whom does
most deservedly appertain, All honor, and praise, love, submission, and
service, in the Church, by Christ Jesus, throughout all ages, world without
end. Amen.

A TABLE OF THE CONTENTS.
SECT. I.
THE Connection and explication of the Text. Page 2. Doct. In order to keep
close to the Commandments of God, and for the right ordering our conversations
in his presence, it concerns us to take heed, that at no time whatsoever, we
follow a Multitude to do evil. p. 6.
SECT. II.
Qu. 1. What are we to understand by the doing of evil? Answer, In five
Conclusions. Concl. 1. This caution against the doing of evil, is to be taken
in the greatest latitude and comprehensiveness, as it sets against all degrees
and kinds of sin. p. 8. Concl. 2. The doing of evil, is nothing else, but a
breaking the Law of God, or walking contrary to the dictates of his revealed
will. p. 9. Concl. 3. The Commission of sin is called the doing of evil,
because of the malignity and destructiveness of sin; and the evil consequents
that attend thereupon. Opened in five particulars. p. 10. Concl. 4. All the
evils perpetrated in the life of a sinner, proceed from within, out of the
native pravity, and corruption of the heart. p. 14. Concl. 5. Although the
internal and inbred corruption of the Soul, is the seed-plot of evil, whence it
does spring up: yet outward occasions end provocatives, have a great influence
to educe that corruption into exercise, and to the actual production of evil.
p. 17.
SECT. III.
Quest. 2. What usual influence has the example of a Multitude to incline a
person to the doing of evil? Ans. It has a sevenfold influence to that
purpose. Infl. 1. The Example of a Multitude does minister an Argument to the
sinner, for the justifying of sin. Opened in three propositions. p. 19. Three
Particulars insisted on, to deaden this influence. p. 24. Infl. 2. The Example
of a Multitude is commonly a powerful inducement to the Commission of sin, by
contributing to the extenuation of the evil of sin. p. 37. Three
Considerations, to abate the force of this influence. p. 29. Infl. 3. By the
practice of a Multitude, men are drawn to sin, by taking encouragement from
thence, to expect impunity in their sins. p. 33. The vanity of these
expectations discovered. p. 35. Infl. 4. Sinners are induced to follow the
example of a Multitude in the commission of evil; because that is a ready fence
against the shame, that would otherwise arise from the evil committed. p. 40.
Three things to enervate the strength of this influence. p. 42. Infl. 5.
Persons are easily prevailed with to follow a Multitude in their sins, least
they should be reproached and reviled, for dissenting from them. p. 45. To
fence against the prevalency of this temptation, five things to be weighed. p.
46. Infl. 6. Sinners are soon persuaded to comply with a Multitude in sin,
least they should be persecuted, and opposed by them. p. 52. To abate the
efficacy of this influence, three special Truths to be minded. p. 55. Infl. 7.
There is a secret inclination in men's spirits to conform to the Multitude,
because it is a pleasant thing to walk with company; and in competition
therewith, the ways of holiness, seem to be sad, melancholic, and tedious
ways. p. 58. The folly, and weakness of this Argumentation discovered. p. 59.
SECT. IV.
Qu. 3. In what cases especially, does it concern us to be most cautious and
circumspect, that we be not led into sin by the practice of a Multitude? Ans.
In six special Cases. 1. In case of our Ancestors, and Forefathers that have
gone before us. p. 62. Five lessons to set us right in this matter. p. 63. 6.
In case of Great men, and Rulers, that are set over us. p. 69. Arguments
quickening to circumspection in this respect. p. 71. 2. In case of near
Relations, and kindred; intimate friends, and acquaintance. p. 73. To fortify
our spirits for vanquishing this temptation, four points to be observed. p. 75.
4. In case of Professors of Religion. p. 80. Preservatives against infection,
on this account. p. 82. 5. In case of men of excellent parts, knowledge and
learning. p. 85. Preventives against falling, by this seduction. p. 86. 6. In
case of the Inhabitants of the places where we dwell, and the persons amongst
whom much of our business lies, in matters of the world. p. 90. A special
Antidote, against their seducement. p, 92.
SECT. V.
Qu. 4. What Arguments may be produced, and pressed on our hearts, against
compliance with a Multitude in sin? Arg. 1. From the spiritual state, and
condition, wherein the Multitude are, the way wherein they travel, and the
place whether they are going. p. 96. Arg. 2. From the concernment that lies on
us to prove our own spritual state, that we are the peculiar people of God. p.
97. This Argument opened in three gradual Propositions. p. 98. Arg. 3. From the
duties incumbent on us in relation to the Multitude, when they sin; wholly
inconsistent with compliance with them. p. 102. Four duties of this nature
mentioned. Ibid. Arg. 4. From the danger that will arise, by following the
example of the Multitude. p. 107.
SECT. VI.
Inferences drawn from the Doctrine. Inf. 1. The servants of Christ must of
necessity be endued with a Spirit of courage, and fortitude. p. 109. Inf. 2.
The People of God must be men of singularity. p. 111. A threefold singularity
explained. p. 112. Inf. 3. Unity, Unanimity, and Uniformity, are not in all
cases to be commended: But only where they are exercised, and as far as they
are exercised in doing of Good. p. 116. This Inference opened in 4. distinct
Propositions. p. 118. A Grand Objection against the fourth proposition,
Answered under five heads. p. 123.
SECT. VII.
Exhortation, Let us seriously weigh and ponder this lesson, in our thoughts;
and endeavor to practice it, in the particulars of our conversations. p. 128.
This Exhortation managed four ways. 1. By way of Exemplification, and
Instance, under five General Heads. Head. 1. As to the Ground of Religion,
whereon it is bottomed. The Generality of people take up the Principles and
Mysteries of Religion, upon trust: But do you search the Scriptures, and build
your faith upon the infallible word of the Lord. p. 131. This point pressed by
three considerations p. 133. Head. 2. In respect of the Matter and Substance of
Religion, wherein it is placed, and whereunto the Multitude confine it. This
Point enlarged upon in five Instances. Inst. 1. The Multitude place the whole
of their religion, in the reformation of their lives: But seldom or never think
of the necessity of having their state changed, or their nature sanctified. p.
136 Three considerations in reference to this. p. 137. Inst. 2. The Multitude
confine their Religion, to acts of immediate worship; but mind it not in their
secular affairs. p. 138. Motives to holiness in our civil concernments. p. 139.
Inst. 3. The Generality are accustomed to place their Religion only in external
performances; but little study to engage their hearts and spirits in the
service of God. p. 141. Provocatives to spiritualness in Holy duties. p. 142.
Inst. 4. Most people limit Religion to an abstinence and freedom from gross
pollutions? but make no conscience of lesser impieties. p. 143. The danger of
living in smaller transgressions. p. 144. Inst. 5. The Multitude put Religion
in observing of places, where the worship of God is performed; and think the
worship is more acceptable, when tendered in such places: But little study to
get into Christ, or to make a right use of his intercession. p. 146. A position
asserted concerning places of worship. Confirmed by four considerations. p.
150. Head. 3. In regard of the Method and order, wherein Religion is
prosecuted, by the Multitude. p. 156. A five-fold primacy or priority, that
Religion must have before all other affairs. p. 157. Head. 4. In respect of
the Time and Season, when Religion is minded. Four instances given under this
head. Inst. 1. As to Time in general. The Multitude even of those that will not
spend their time in profaness and debauchery, make little conscience of
spending their time in vanity and idleness. p. 159. Reasons quickening to the
redemption of time. p. 160. Inst. 2. In respect of the special time, to be
appropriated to the more immediate worship of God. The Multitude have been set
on the observation of days of man's devising; but little concerned in the
sanctification of the Lords day. p. 163. The Morality of the Sabbath. p. 165.
The chang of the Sabbath, and divine Institution of the Lords day. p. 167.
Three further Texts of Scripture opened for confirmation of the
Lords-day-Sabbath, Mat. 24.20. Psalm. 118.22, 23, 24. Heb. 4.9, 10. p. 168.
Inst. 3. The Generality of persons cry unto God, only in times of sickness and
trouble: But forget the Lord in days of health and prosperity. p. 179. Inst.
4. The Multitude neglect the present time, and are much addicted to
procrastinate in the concernments of eternity. p. 181. The present time the
most convenient for Repentance. p. 182. Head. 5. Follow not the Multitude, as
to particular duties, wherein they are apt to miscarry. Eight of those duties
mentioned. p. 184.
SECT. VIII.
2. Directions prescribed, for prevention of compliance with the Multitude in
sin. Dir. 1. Be diligent in studying the scripture, and get a clear insight
into the will of God, therein revealed. p. 196. Dir. 2. Labor to be strongly
fenced against the importunity of sinners. p. 197. Dir. 3. Get that other
Spirit, which the world cannot receive. p. 198. Dir. 4. If you will not be led
into sin by the Multitude's practice, take heed of entertaining their
principles. Ibid. Seven corrupt and rotten Principles, embraced by the
Multitude, to be diligently eradicated out of our hearts. Princip. 1.
Concerning the nature of God. p. 199. Four scripture principles to be erected
in the room of this. p. 200. Princip. 2. Relating to the quality of Godliness.
p. 204. Three contrary principles to be settled in the stead of it. p. 206.
Princip. 3. Respecting the benefit arising from the service of God. p. 208.
Considerations to rectify men's apprehensions, in this respect. p. 209.
Princip. 4. In reference to the way of salvation, and the means of coming to
the kingdom of Heaven. p. 213. Three contrary principles to be fastened in our
hearts, instead of this. p. 215. Princip. 5. Touching the accommodations and
comforts of this life. p. 220. Considerations to prevent the embracing of this
Principle. p. 221. Princip. 6. Concerning the evil of the sins wherein they
live. p. 223. Two interrogatories to be set home on the Conscience as to this.
p. 224. Princip. 7. The last Principle of the multitude relates to the electing
grace of God p. 226. To silence corrupt reasonings in this respect, four
contrary Principles are to be settled in our spirits. p. 227 Dir. 5. If you
would not conform to the Multitude in sin, hold no familiar correspondency with
them. p. 232. Dir. 6. Learn the great Gospel Lesson of Selfdenyal. p. 233.
SECT. IX.
3. By way of Provocative. Motives to provoke us to watchfulness, that we be
not ensnared in sin by the Multitudes example. Ibid. 4. By way of Retortion.
Qu. What use are we to make of the sinful practices of the Multitude, seeing we
must not follow their example? Answ. Four spiritual Lessons to be learnt from
thence. p. 234.
ERRATA.
Page 42. l. 11. r. revolve. p. 52. l. 14. r. his. p. 58. l. 12. r. loneliness.
p. 78. l. 7. r. me. p. 89. l. 24. r. are. p. 112. l. 1. r. (...) p. 116. l. 19.
r. are p. 118. l. 15. r. bringing. p. 123. l. 8. r. wrest. p. 128. l. 5. r.
should. p. 130. l. 26. r. of the. p. 150. l. 5. r. excellency. p. 188. l. 31.
r. (...).

THere is newly Published an Excellent Treatise, Entitled The Saints Mystical
Union with Christ; etc. By the same Author; Sold by Thomas Parkhurst, at the
Golden Bible on London Bridge, under the Gate.

Sober Singularity.
Exodus 23. The former part of the 2d. verse. Thou shall not follow a Multitude,
to do evil.
SECT. I.
THese latter times have been observed to abound, above other ages, with sects
and parties, as to the matters of Religion. And if an enquiry be made, who have
mostly prevailed to draw disciples after them: It might, not untruly, be
answered, these two, Custom and Example. The most numerous Sects are those of
the Atheists, and Worldlings; and the greatest Sect-masters in religion are
Custom and Example. For the generality of people are not wont to consider, how
they ought to Qua itur non qua eun^^^.
walk: but they either follow the old course, wherein they have been educated
and trained up; or else conform themselves to the practice of others, and do as
the rest of their neighbors do. And the more universal and extensive an
example is, the greater commonly is the contagion; and the more forcible
influence it has to lead others along with it. When the most go before us in
any course, or practice, we are easily wrought into Praecepta docent, exempla
trabunt.
a compliance with them; and that without any demurrer, or examination of the
grounds, and principles, whereupon such a practice is undertaken. And therefore
the Lord has often warned us to take heed of this cheat, that we be not snared
by the practice of the multitude. Though the greatest part of the world should
turn aside into any way of ungodliness, it will not justify us in saying A
confederacy with them: But our work is to keep on in the path of righteousness,
though never so many others depart from it: and to hate the evil of sin, though
a multitude embrace it. Thou shall not follow a multitude, to do evil.

Which words have an entire sense in themselves, and hold forth a perfect
lesson, or instruction of themselves: and therefore we shall not need to spend
time, in searching into the relation which they bear, unto any precedent
passages of this book. Only thus much in the general: the Text seems to come
in, as a word of direction and advice, what course we must take and what
circumspection we should use, that we may live up to the Precepts of God, and
not be carried away from the observance of his commandments. Why, to this end
we must diligently see to it, that we be not swayed and overruled by the
example of others, be they never so many. In this and the former chapter we
have a solemn promulgation of the divine laws, by which the Lord would have his
people to be guided: and the Text is introduced as a serious caution, to warn
us to stick close to those laws; though others reject them, and trample them
under foot. Although a multitude forsake them, yet must not we: that will not
bear us out in any sin whatsoever. Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil.

That we may open this portion of Divine writ, more clearly and methodically:
let us take it asunder into 3 parts. Here is,

1. The end intended: or the design, that is carried on by this counsel: and
that is to preserve us from evil. [Thou shall not do evil] 1. Primarily, it is
to preserve us from the evil of sin and transgression. 2. Consequentially to
keep us from the evil of affliction and judgment, which is deserved by Sin: and
which God is usually provoked to inflict upon sinners. If we would escape the
evil of suffering, and sorrow; we must carefully avoid the evil of iniquity,
and disobedience. Thou shall not do evil.

2. The direction prescribed, in order to the attainment of that end. Why, to
this purpose you must take heed, that you be not led by the multitude. Thou
shall not follow a multitude to do evil. Thou shall not follow them] It is a
comprehensive expression, (...) Non eris post multos, Ar. Mont.
Thou shall not be after them. It may reach to these 3. things. 1. Thou shall
not follow them, in point of inclination. Thy heart shall not hanker after
their ways: thou shall not desire to join with them in any wickedness. This is
to follow a thing, in the dialect of the Scripture, when the affections are
touched with any propension toward it. As the understanding is the eye of the
Soul, whereby we discern or see into an object, so the will and affections are
the feet of the Soul, whereby it goes out unto it, or follows after it. So that
it imports thus much, thou shall not so much as have any liking, or the least
inclination in thy Spirit, to be of their society and fellowship. 2. Thou shall
not follow them, in respect of encouragement, q. d. This shall not imbolden
thee to sin against God, because thou see many others to sin against him.
What people are afraid to venture upon singly and by themselves; they will be
animated unto, by observing others to go before them. But let it not be so,
says the Lord, in the case of Sin; though you see never so many go before you.
3. Thou shall not follow them, in point of actual concurrence. You must not
tread in their steps, if it be a sinful way wherein they travel. You must not
take your pattern, from their practice: nor act according to the tenor of
their actions, if they be evil. This I take to be principally meant, and the
other in reference hereunto. Thus you read of those carnal wretches, They
followed the way of Balaam, i. e. Their carriage was correspondent to his
carriage; and their hearts went after covetousness, even as his, 2 Pet. 2.15.
And it is mentioned of Jehoahaz, the son of Jehu, that he followed the sins of
Jeroboam, that is, he carried on the same carnal interest, and committed the
same abominations, This is the second thing to be noted in the Text.

3. We have observable, the manner of the prescribing this rule of direction:
how the caution is delivered, as to this matter. And that is, 1. Singularly, or
personally, included in the verb. 2. Negatively.


1. The prohibition is laid down singularly, or personally. Thou] that it might
extend to all sorts of people, without exception of any: that every one of us
might take it home to our selves, and apply it to our own souls: that none
might think himself exempted from the obligatory power of this prohibition. As
the prophet Malachi: speaks unto the Priests, cap. 2.1. This commandment is for
you. The like may I say, in this case, to men of all ranks and qualities. Art
thou a master, or governor? This precept is for thee. Art thou a child, or
servant? This prohibition reaches thee. Art thou a Magistrate, or a subject?
young, or old? rich, or poor? Jew, or Gentile? whatever thy condition is, thou
art included herein. Thou shall not follow, etc.

2. It is delivered negatively. It is one of those precepts which are usually
called negative precepts: That it might be of a binding force as to all times
and seasons. Herein is a special difference betwixt affirmative and negative
precepts. The affirmative commandments always bind, but not to all times. For
instance, Hear the word: Search the Scriptures: Give alms of thy Goods. These,
and such like injunctions, always bind, but not to all times and seasons, i. e.
I am not obliged to be every moment of my life, in the actual discharge of
those duties. But negative precepts bind universally and unlimitedly, to all
times and seasons, ex. gr. Lie not one to another. Thou shall not steal. There
is no time of a man's life, wherein these may be done. And such a precept is
this of not complying with the multitude. Sinners are apt to think, they must
strictly walk up to such rules, whilst they may be observed with safety: But in
perilous times they must be excused; when it may cost them their livelyhoods,
or their lives, if they step out of the common road. Nay, but you must never
take the liberty to break the bounds of this law: you must see to it that, at
no time, you say a confederacy with the multitude, in sin.

The Text being thus explained, will affourd us this practical lesson.

Doct. That in order to our keeping close to the commandments of the Lord, and
for the right ordering our conversations in the presence of the Lord; we must
take heed to our selves, that at no time whatsoever we follow a multitude to do
evil.

We must not sin against God, though we see never so many go on in sin before
our faces. We must stick fast to Gods testimonies, and do only what is
acceptable in his sight, though we have very few to bear us company: though we
are forced to go alone in the ways of holiness, Hos. 4.15. Though thou Israel
play the harlot, yet let not Judah offend. Israel was the greatest body of the
people; it contained ten of the Tribes, whereas the kingdom of Judah consisted
but of two. Why but, says the Lord, though they are a very numerous company,
that have fallen off to Idolatry, and your selves are but an handful in
comparison; yet you must not give ground, because of their multitude: though
you have the 10. Tribes to lead you the way in iniquity, yet you must not be
led by their example. This was the doctrine in which Isaiah was instructed with
a mighty hand; intimating that it is a difficult point to be learnt, and a
matter of great concernment: If we will be the servants of God in truth, we
must learn this Lesson, Isa. 8.11, 12. For the Lord spoke thus to me with a
strong hand, and instructed me, that I should not walk in the way of this
people, saying, say ye not a confederacy to all them, to whom this people shall
say, a confederacy: neither fear ye their fear, nor be afraid; q. d. Though the
whole people combine together to do wickedness, cast not in thy lot amongst
them: keep thy self far from their combination. Dare not to tread in their
steps, nor join in their association, be they never so numerous a company: keep
thy self free from their confederacy, and fear the Name of the Lord.

For the handling of this Point, as a Preservative against infection by the
practice of the multitude, I shall lightly pass over four Heads of enquiry in
the doctrinal part of our discourse; and then close up all, with a practical
improvement of the whole.

1. What are we to understand by the doing of evil? which is the matter to be
avoided. 2. What usual influence has the practice of a multitude, to incline a
man or woman to the doing of evil? 3. In what cases especially does it concern
us to be most cautious, upon this account, that we be not drawn to evil by the
example of a multitude? 4. What are the principal reasons, that may be produced
for the confirmation of this point; and pressed upon our hearts, to preserve us
from seduction by the example of a multitude?
SECT. II.
QU. 1. To begin with the first of these. What are we to understand by the
doing of evil? which is the matter to be avoided. Thon shall not do evil.

Ans. In answer to this enquiry, I shall speak very briefly; as being a matter
that needs not any large explication. All that I have to deliver under this
Head, shall be gathered into five plain Conclusions.

Concl. 1. This caution, that is laid down here against the doing of evil (for
the extent of it, how far it reaches) may be well taken in the greatest
latitude, and comprehensiveness of the expression: as it sets against all
sorts, and kinds, and qualities of sin whatsoever. Whether they are greater, or
lesser; sins of omission, or commission; against the first table of the Law, or
the second: Whether they are sinful contrivances of the mind, or inordinate
passions working in the heart and spirit; whether it be rotten communication
that proceeds out of the mouth, or any manner of disorderliness in the
outward behavior, and carriage.

A man's actions or doings, in a restrained sense, are sometimes
contradistinguished, and opposed to his words, and thoughts, and affections,
Col. 3.17. In word, or deed. Jam. 2.12. So speak ye, and so do. But in this
place you may take it without any limitation, or restriction: for it is
delivered indefinitely, and without exception. It may possibly have a special
reference to the sin of bearing false witness, (as some think) which is
mentioned immediately before the Text; or to the sin of wresting judgment
(according to the apprehensions of others) being the sin which is condemned in
the words following the Text: But it ought not to be confined to either. As,
where the holy Ghost has not distinguished, we must not distinguish: so where
the Spirit of God has not set restrictions and limits, we must not restrain.
Besides, The original word is in the plural. Thou shall not follow a multitude
(...) ad mala, to evils, i. e. not to any sort of evil. So that the meaning may
be this. Thou shall not join with a multitude, in their plots and contrivances
against the ways of God. Thou shall not talk vainly, and frothily, or in any
wicked manner, as they speak. You must not act in any thing after the pattern
and similitude of their sinful actions: But in every thing keep your selves
pure, and unspotted, from the taint of their abominations.

Concl. 2. This doing of evil (for the nature of it, wherein it consists) is a
breaking of the Law of God, or walking contrary to the dictates of his revealed
will, which he has given as the rule for the guidance of our steps. It is the
neglecting of any thing, which God has enjoined to be performed; or the doing
of that which he has forbidden to be done. Herein lies the ratio formalis, or
the nature of sin, that it is a want of conformity to the Law of God, or a
transgression of it, 1 John 3.4. So that if you would examine your selves, in
order to repentance, what evils you have done; you must compare your actions
with the Law of God, and bring your lives and conversations unto the word of
the Lord, Psalm. 119.59. I thought on my ways, and turned my feet to thy
testimonies. So in relation to the time to come; if you would be directed for
the avoiding of evil, you must be well verst in the Law of God, and get a
through insight into the word of God, Psalm. 119.9. Wherewithal shall a young
man cleanse his way? By taking heed thereto according to thy word. Sin is
sometimes called, A going astray, and a turning aside, Isa. 53.6. All we like
sheep have gone astray, Psalm. 14.3. They are all gone aside, they are
altogether become filthy. The word of the Lord is compared to the way, wherein
a Believer is to travel, that he may arrive at the land of promise: Now the
doing of evil is nothing but a declension from that path, or a stepping aside
out of the way, Deuteronomy. 5.32. You shall observe to do therefore, as the Lord your
God commands you: you shall not turn aside to the right hand, or to the left.

Concl. 3. For the reason of the name and appellation. The committing of sin,
or breaking the Law of God, is called the doing of evil: because of the
destructiveness and malignity that is in sin, and the sad and fearful
consequences that attend thereupon.

It is the most poisonous and venomous thing in the world: the most mischievous
thing under the Sun. It is the great evil; the most signal evil. Sinners may
have low thoughts, and slight apprehensions of it: They are apt to ask, when
they are charged with some kinds of ungodliness, What hurt is there in them?
But in the conclusion they will be found to be the principal evils. When God
does awaken the conscience, or begin to take the work of judgment into his
hands, sinners shall be forced to acknowledge it to be so, Jer. 44.4. Oh, do
not this abominable thing that I hate. And v. 7. Wherefore commit ye this great
evil against your souls? Neh. 13.17. What evil thing is this that ye do, and
profane the Sabbath day? Men imagine it is for their ease, and pleasure, and
sometimes for their profit and good to break the Sabbath, and to borrow now and
then a point of conscience: But in the upshot you will find it to be for your
hurt and ruin. We reckon poverty in the estate, and sickness of body, and
outward disasters and calamities, to be the main evils: But, alas, they are
nothing, if laid in the balance with sin. That is the great evil in a fivefold
respect.

1. It is sin which hinders us in the enjoyment of God, which is the chiefest
good: that does put an obstacle in the way of the participation of his favor,
and the light of his countenance, which is better than life it self, Isa. 59.1,
2. Behold, the Lord's hand is not shortened, that it cannot save; nor his ear
heavy, that it cannot hear: But your iniquities have separated between you and
your God: and your sins have hid his face from you, that he will not hear. It Is
that which is a contempt of the divine Majesty, who is an infinite and
incomprehensible Being. It is that which makes Jehovah to become our adversary,
who is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords: in whose hands our breath, and our
days, and all our comforts are. For Sirs, God does not abhor and cast off any
of the children of men, because they are poor or friendless, or low in the
world; but because they are workers of iniquity. Therefore his wrath is kindled
against them, and they suffer evil from him, because they do evil against him,
Deuteronomy. 32.29.

2. It is sin which murders and destroys the soul: which is the principal
part of man, and ought chiefly to be regarded by him. So Job calls it, Job
30.15. Terrors are turned upon me: they pursue my soul [(...) my principal
one] as the wind. In comparison of the soul all the riches of the earth are as
nothing, Mark 8.36, 37. For what shall it profit a man, if he shall gain the
whole world, and lose his own soul? Or what shall a man give in exchange for
his soul? Now, The more excellent the subject is upon which an evil falls, the
greater is the evil that falls upon it. And sin is that which is a plague to
the soul, and brings desolation upon the soul: and murders the immortal part,
which all the men on earth are not able to kill, Prove. 8.36. He that sins
against me [they are the words of Christ, the infinite wisdom of God] wrongeth
his own soul: all they that hate me, love death.

3. It is sin which makes persons miserable for ever: that renders them
everlastingly wretched, without cessation or end: that does cast them into that
pit, from whence there is no redemption. Other evils have their period, and
determinate time of continuance; and then they are removed from us, or we shall
be removed from them. But now sin does expose a man to eternal vengeance. The
guilt of the least transgression, if laid upon the sinner, would sink him
unavoidably into the bottomless pit of destruction, from whence there is no
deliverance. You read of it as the just guerdon and punishment of ignorance;
which many account so small a sin, that they hope thereby to excuse all their
other impieties, 2 These. 1.8, 9. When the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from
Heaven, with his mighty Angels in flaming Fire, taking vengeance on them that
know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. Who shall
be punished with everlasting destruction, from the presence of the Lord, and
from the glory of his power.

4. To commit sin is to do evil; For that is the fountain evil: the original
and wellspring of all other evils whatsoever. It is the evil of transgression,
that brings affliction upon men's persons, and a curse into their families and
estates, and puts vanity and vexation into their creature comforts, and
accommodations. It is sin that lets in wars and commotions into kingdoms, and
burns up Towns and Cities; and makes a Land desolate, by turning a fruitful
place into barrenness. It Is sin that brings diseases upon the body, and
fills the spirit with bitterness, and puts fear, and horror, and
astonishment into the heart: that compasses a person about with terrors on
every side, and at last carries him to the King of terrors, Romans 5.12. By one
man sin entered into the world, and death by sin: and so death passed upon all
men, for that all have sinned. What is the source of all that wretchedness and
misery, that follows the children of men continually at the heels? See the
answer returned by the Lord himself, Jer. 13.22. And if thou say in thy heart,
Wherefore come these things upon me? For the greatness of thine iniquity are
thy skirts discovered, and thy heels made bare. Read Job 20. from v. 12. to the
end.

5. To commit wickedness, is to do evil: For sin, in a right sense, is the only
evil, and nothing but evil. All other things are no further evil, than they are
contempered with sin, and proceed from thence, or have a tendency thereto. The
sorest afflictions and calamities have something of good in them: As they come
from the Lord, and are the operation of his hands; as they are domonstrations
of his being, and righteousness; and means for the vindication of his holiness.
For the Lord is known by the judgments which he executes. But iniquity and
transgression is purely evil, nothing but evil, and that which makes other
things to be evil. For the sting of death is sin, 1 Cor. 15.56. The bitterness
of sickness is from sin: and the poison of all corrections and distresses is
from thence, Psalm. 107.17, 18. Fools, because of their transgressions; and
because of their iniquities, are afflicted. Their soul abhors all manner of
meat, and they draw near to the gates of death. It is that which puts gall and
wormwood, into whatsoever we find made bitter unto us, Jer. 23.10, 11, 12, 14,
15.

Concl. 4. For the original of it, whence it does proceed: All the evils which
are done in the life of a sinner, proceed from within out of the heart, and
flow from the native pravity and corruption of the Spirit. When a person
walks in any sinful course, he does but, as the spider, weave a cursed web
out of his own poisonous bowels. At the first, man's sinful and irregular
actions did corrupt his nature; and now, our polluted nature does transmit
defilement into our actions. We are not forced and compelled unto the practice
of evil, but our hearts incline and carry us thereunto, Mar. 7.21.22. For from
within out of the heart of men, proceed evil thoughts, adulteries,
fornications, murders, thefts, covetousness, wickedness, deceit,
lasciviousness, an evil eye, blasphemy, pride, foolishness: all these evils
come from within. This is a point of great concernment to be studied, and
effectually pressed upon the conscience. (1) That it may work in us an holy
shame, and self abhorrence in respect of actual transgressions; and we may be
induced to loath our selves in our own sight. For my brethren, a person will
never be thoroughly humbled for the sins of his life, till he has learnt to
trace them unto his heart, and sees them to be streams issuing out of that
sink of filth and folly that is within him, Psalm. 73.21, 22. Ezekiel. 6.9. (2)
That it may leave full convictions upon our spirits, of the absolute necessity
of sanctifying and regenerating grace: that our natures must be changed, and
our very spirits within us must be purified, in order to fellowship with God,
and that we may be fitted for his service; because the principal seat of
pollution is within, and all inordinate motions in the practice are but
rivulets flowing from that troubled sea, whose waters cast up mire and dirt,
Psalm. 51.5, 6, 7, 10. (3) That it may prevail upon us, to keep a continual eye
of suspicion and jealousy upon our hearts, and to be in a constant posture of
watchfulness over them, least they should carry us aside. For he that trusts
in his own heart, is a fool. Prove. 28.26. i. e. He is groslly deluded, and
mistaken, in the internal disposition and bent of his own spirit. He does not
know what a deceitful, and treacherous piece, his heart is: what very madness,
and wickedness, is bound up within him. For did a sinner know, that there are
seven abominations [all sorts and kinds of corruption] within him, he would
never put confidence in his heart; but would work out his salvation with fear
and trembling, least he should miscarry. (4) Again, this is a point to be
thoroughly studied and considered, that we may not hearken to those vain
excuses, whereby we are apt to cover our sins, and to translate the guilt from
off our selves. There is a proness in sinners, to lay the blame of their
miscarriages upon any thing, rather then upon themselves; and they are hardly
wrought to an ingenious acknowledgment of their evil doings: but they have ever
something to plead in their own vindication, and to maintain their innocence.
The woman whom thou gave to be with me, she gave me of the tree, and I did
eat, Genesis 3.12. The serpent beguiled me, and I did eat, v. 13. I saw the people
were scattered from me, and that thou came not within the days appointed,
and that the Philistines gathered themselves together to Michmash, etc. I
forced my self therefore, and offered a burnt offering, 1 Samuel 13.11, 12. We
have spared of the best of the sheep and of the oxen, to sacrifice unto the
Lord thy God, 1 Samuel 15.15. Such evasions men have to avoid conviction: and
such pretenses they plead, to color over their rebellion; and to put a fair
gloss upon their iniquities. God knows my heart is good, will a carnal person
say, but the Devil owed me a spite, and he drove me on to this practice. I am
necessitated, says another, to take this course. I am in a mean estate and
have a multitude of business on my hands, and have no time to spare to mind
religion, and converse with God; But I mean well, and my heart is for God. Thus
they dig deep, to hide their wickedness; and stand up in defense of the
integrity of their hearts, whetever their conversations have been: Whereas Sirs
all evil comes out of the heart, Mat. 12.35. A good man out of the good
treasure of the heart, brings forth good things: and an evil man out of the
evil treasure, brings forth evil things. So that, Let no man say, when he is
tempted, I am tempted of God, i. e. Let not the children of men charg their
sins either directly or consequentially upon the God of heaven. Let them not
say, The Lord made me thus; it was my fate and destiny, and I could not
withstand what he had appointed me to. Let them not say, that God does
necessitate them to sin. Let them not lay the fault upon the condition of life
wherein God has placed them, or upon the providence under which he does
exercise them. For all sin proceeds from within out of the heart. For God
cannot be tempted with sin, neither tempts he any man. But every man is
tempted, when he is drawn aside of his own lust, and enticed, Jam. 1.13, 14.
Suggestions from without can do nothing, except there were Lust within, to
swallow the bait, and to give entertainment to the allurements of the world,
and solicitations of the devil.

Concl. 5. Although the internal and inbred corruption and wickedness of the
heart of a sinner, is the seedplot of evil, whence it does spring up; yet
outward occasions and provocatives, have commonly a great influence to the
educing of that corruption into exercise, and to the actual production of that
which is evil. From thence it is that the heart of a man, which is full of sin,
is irritated and emboldened to the commission of sin. These are the motives and
arguments which Satan does make use of, to instigate and stir up the children
of men, to acts of wickedness; and to incite and encourage them in a way that
is not good. As now for instance, when sinners abuse the patience of God, to
strengthen their hands in a course of ungodliness; It is the heart of the sons
of men that is set to do evil; and the forbearance and long-suffering of God
that is made use of for an encouragement unto the doing of it, Eccl. 8.11. When
persons defile themselves with sin, that they may avoid trouble and
persecution; it is corruption in the heart, that does lead them unto sin, and
is the agent in sin; and it is ease and safety, and the advancement of a carnal
interest, which helps to draw forth that corruption, Gal. 6.12. And herein does
appear the desperate wickedness and malignity of man's heart: As it is full of
evil, and of a cursed forwardness unto evil; so it is apt to pervert all sorts
of providence thereunto. A sinner, like a toad, will suck poison out of every
thing. Or like the salt sea, will turn all sorts of water into its own brinish
taste. As a believer improveth all kinds of dispensations, to set him with
greatest detestation against sin: so does a carnal heart make use of them, as
motives and arguments unto sin.

Now amongst other encouragements unto evil, the example of a multitude is wont
to be of much prevailing efficacy. The practice of the generality should
increase detestation; but sinners are apt to make use of it to encourage
imitation. And therefore in the text we have a special warning given, that we
be not led into sin, by seeing a multitude go before us. So I descend to the
second head of enquiry.

SECT. III.
Q. 2. WHat usual influence has the example of a multitude, to incline a man
or woman to the doing of evil? This prohibition does suppose there is an
inclination to follow them. Now the question is, whereupon is this inclination
grounded? or How does the practice of a multitude put forth its effieacy, to
encourage a sinner to do evil?

Ans. I answer, There is a seven fold-influence it has to this purpose. There
are seven things arising from the practice of the multitude, from whence
persons are imboldened, and incited to do evil.

1. The example of the multitude, does minister an argument unto the Soul, for
the justifying of sin: that it may appear to be nothing but the doing of that
which may lawfully and warrantably be done. When a considerable number join
together in a sinful action, persons are apt from thence to plead against the
sinfulness of it: and to have good thoughts of it, as that which is just and
honest; upon that very account because many do it: especially if it be in a
matter that is not exceeding clear, and obvious to the meanest apprehension; if
it will but admit of the least debate. What! will they say, do you think if
such a thing were evil, and abominable in the sight of God, so many would
venture upon the doing of it? Would not they see it is sinfulness, as well as
our selves? shall we think our selves wiser than the greatest part of men
besides, to condemn that which they unanimously practice; and to scruple that
which they make no question of? This may seem to be overmuch strictness, and
curiosity, 1 Pet. 4.4. Wherein they think it strange, that you run not with
them, to the same excess of riot. Insolens illis videtur (as one renders the
place) It seems to them to be an insolent thing, an act of pride, and
self-opinionatedness; it has a tang of high-mindedness and self conceit, in
their apprehensions, for you that are but a handful to prefer your judgment
before theirs. It seems strange, Absurdum illis videtur (as another expresses
it) In their account it is an absurd, and unreasonable thing, that you will not
subscribe to their practice. Is it not more equitable that a few should give up
themselves to the guidance of many, than that many should alter their course
upon the apprehensions of a few? If there were any hurt in these revellings,
banquettings, wantonness, and excess of wine, why should not they discern it
themselves, as well as you? It seems a strange thing, an unreasonable thing,
that your single opinion should carry more weight, than their united judgment.
Or they think it strange, (...), rem novam, peregrinam, and admirandam esse
ducunt (thus others) It is a matter of admiration and astonishment, that any
people should be so nice, as to question that which is of general practice.
Thus they stifle the convictions of conscience; and silence the clamours
thereof, when it charge them with sin, by producing the general practice as
an argument against the sinfulness of their way.

A little to open this point more fully and clearly to the understanding, let
us take it asunder into three distinct propositions.

Prop. 1. One of the usual ways which sinners are wont to take, that they may
go on freely, and uncontroledly, in a course of sin, is by stopping the mouth
of conscience; that would otherwise check them for their sin; and perplex and
disturb them in their course. Conscience is Gods officer, whom he has
appointed to this purpose to warn men of sin, and to restrain them from it: to
make them restless in spirit, whilst they are doing of evil; and to terrify
them in apprehensions of divine wrath, which is thereby provoked, and so cause
them to desist from their ungodliness. Hence it is the design of the devil, to
sear men's consciences, and to lull them asleep in security, that they may not
be disquieted or interrupted in his service. And they are willing for the most
part, to comply with Satan herein; Fain they would drink down the pleasures of
sin, without any remorse upon their spirits, to embitter that cup. They desire
to be soothed up in their wickedness, and cannot endure any thing that has a
tendency to discover the evil they are about; or to awaken them out of their
carnal peace. Isa. 30.10. They say to the Seers, see net: and to the Prophets,
Prophecy not unto us right things: Speak unto us smooth things, prophecy
deceits, Jer. 5.31. The Prophets prophecy falsely, and the Priests bear rule by
their means, and my people love to have it so. This is that which pleases them
well, if ministers would deal tenderly with them, and never meddle with their
sins: If they would bear them in hand, that they might be saved without leaving
their wonted practice. For then a sinner might say as the drunkard, Prove.
23.35. They have stricken me, and I was not sick: they have beaten me and I felt
it not. I took my liberty to serve my lusts, and never felt the smart of it.
For when conscience is seared, then Satan leads the sinner captive at his
pleasure: He can satisfy his inordinate desires, and yet have no convictions
to affright him.

Prop. 2. A special means that is made use of, by the sons and daughters of
men, to stifle the workings of conscience, that it may not rebuke and condemn
them for sin, is by standing up in justification and defense of their sin: that
so it may seem to be a matter that may be justly practiced, and no way
displeasing in the sight of God. When the affections are violently bent on that
which is evil, they do prompt the understanding to find out arguments to plead
for it. Corrupt passions blind the judgment, and sometimes Perit rectum
judicium, cum res transic in affectus.
bribe the judgment, to invent ways and reasons to guild over a wickedness;
that it may not appear in its proper colors: But may look like that which is
good and honest. Therefore you read of persons washing over their iniquities,
and pleading innocence in their transgressions, Jer. 2.22. Though thou wash
thee with nitre; and take thee much soap, yet thine iniquity is marked before
me says the Lord God, i. e. Though thou put a fair gloss upon a foul
matter, and have many excuses and evasions whereby to avoid the charg of guilt
upon thy soul; yet it is naked and evident before mine eyes, says the Lord.
Again v. 23. How can thou say, I am not polluted? And v. 24. Wherefore will
ye plead with me? intimating that they were ready to justify their wickedness,
and had somewhat to plead for the warrant of it. See what pains Saul takes to
cover his sin, and to maintain his rebellion, 1 Samuel 15.20. I have obeyed the
voice of the Lord, and have gone the way which the Lord sent me, etc.

Prop. 3. To complete this matter and bring it home to our purpose, take this
third proposition. That the example of the multitude is a principal argument,
which sinners produce to this end, and much insist upon to this purpose; namely
to justify and defend their ungodly deeds, and to maintain the corruptions
wherewith they are defiled. If such an action were sinful, do ye think so many
persons would comply with it? Have not they cause to be careful of their souls,
as well as we? And have not they as good knowledge of the mind of God, as we
have? If it were so bad to tipple and lie in the alehouse, now and then, do you
think, so many judicious men would practice it? If it were a sinful thing to
game, and revel, and the like, would not others leave it? If such a worship
were corrupt, can you imagine, that so many knowing men would not abhor it?
shall we think our selves to be wiser then the most? These are the reasonings
of men's spirits, whereby they strive to defend their crooked ways. As Eliphas
speaks to Job cap. 15.7, 8, 9. Art thou the first man that was born? Or wast
thou made before the hills? Have thou heard the secret of God? and do thou
restrain wisdom to thy self? What know thou that we know not? what
understandest thou which is not in us? So are sinners apt to argue the case,
when they are reproved for any indirect practice. Do you think your self wiser
than the most? They make no scruple at such things, and have they not as much
knowledge as we? Shall we be so arrogant as to restrain wisdom to our selves?
Surely it is not to be condemned, or otherwise so many would not approve of it,
and follow it. For mind it Sirs as a most certain rule; that as the custom and
the commoness of the practice of sin, does usually take away the sense and
conscience of sin, in them that commit it; so it many times takes away the
opinion of sin, in them that observe it. Surely, think they, if there were any
harm in it, people would not so readily and universally close with it. It was
the very argument they brought against our Lord Jesus Christ, and the religion
of his followers, because it was generally opposed, Act. 28.22. As concerning
this sect, we know it is every where spoken against.

Now for the deadning of this influence I shall entreat you to observe and lay
to heart these three things.

1. That this is double wickedness in the sight of God, and so may justly
expose us to a greater measure of his indignation, for a person not only to
live in the practice of sin, but to defend and justify those practices. For a
man first to break the law of God, and then to plead against the law, and as
much as in him lies to enervate and invalidate the obligatory power of it.
This is one of the greatest contempts that can be offered against the Lord of
glory. And it is far from the temper of a true believer. A child of God may
fall, through temptation, into sin; but he will not plead the cause of sin; He
will stand up in defense of the word of God against himself, and take confusion
of face unto himself. But when a wicked man does endeavor to maintain his
wickedness, that is an high affront unto the Sovereign Lord, and Lawgiver: It
is in effect to set his mouth against the heavens, as it is expressed, Psalm.
73.8, 9. I remember, an heathen Philosopher being asked his opinion, what they
deserved who committed murder, or adultery, in their drunkeness, and then
excused it because they were in drink: His answer was that such should be twice
punished; first for the fact committed, and again for their drunkenness. So may
I say of sinners of this sort, God may justly execute upon them the fierceness
of his anger, and make them taste the sorest of his displeasure; He may destroy
them with a double destruction; first for the evils which they commit, and
again for the justifying of those evils. You have a particular woe denounced on
this account Isa. 5.20. Woe unto them that say concerning evil, it is good; and
of good, it is evil: that put darkness for light, and light for darkness: that
put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter.

2. For a person thus to plead in defense of his sin, it is to put himself at
the greatest distance from repentance and conversion, and consequentially from
the pardoning grace and favor of God annexed thereunto. The reason is
apparent, because conviction is the first step that leads to conversion. It is
impossible a sinner should be humbled for, or turned from his ungodliness, till
he be convinced of it. As long as he stands up in justification of his
corruptions, he will never loath and abhor himself for them. And therefore when
the Lord comes in a way of saving mercy to a soul, and takes him into a
covenant with himself, he does take them off, from pleading in their own
justification any further, that they may lie down in their shame, Ezekiel. 16.62,
63. And I will establish my covenant with thee, and thou shall know that I am
the Lord. That thou may remember, and be confounded, and never open thy
mouth any more because of thy shame, when I am pacified toward thee, for all
that thou have done, says the Lord God. Mark it, before time, their mouths
were opened and they had something to speak in their own behalf, all the world
almost went on in such a way, and why might not we as well as others? and the
like. But when the spirit works effectually, and brings them into the bond of
the covenant, you shall not hear a word more of these corrupt reasonings. Now
they see their vileness, and that they have nothing farther to plead; but they
lay their hands upon their mouth.

3. The rectitude, or irregularity, of any course or action, is not to be
measured and judged from the carriage of the greatest number of men, but by the
word of the living God. It is the scripture which is the standard both for the
trying of doctrines, whether they are sound or corrupt; and for the weighing of
actions whether they are sinful or warrantable. Non eo animentur quia multi
sunt, sed hoc ipso mag is reprimantur, quia non pauci sunt. Nihil ad
extenuationem delicti numerus impudens valere consuevit. Cypr. Epist. 26.
Indeed the practices of the generality are so far from justifying any
proceedings whatsoever, that we have cause to suspect them, on that very
account: Because it is such an ordinary thing for them to combine together in
the service of the devil, Jer. 5.11, 12. For the house of Israel, and the house
of Judah have dealt very treacherously against me says the Lord. They have
belied the Lord, and said, it is not he, neither shall evil come upon us,
neither shall we see sword nor famine, Jer. 6.13. From the least of them, even
unto the greatest of them, every one is given to covetousness: and from the
prophet even unto the priest, every one deals falsely. Mark it, it was not
here and there a single person, but the whole body of the people collectively
and unanimously were corrupted, men of all ranks and conditions. So that for
the trying of the particulars of your conversation you must not pass sentence
according to the general practice; but have recourse to the Law and the
testimony, Psalm. 119. v. 59. I thought on my ways, and turned my feet unto thy
testimonies. So much for the first influence which the example of the multitude
has to lead into sin, viz. By ministering an argument for the justification of
sin.

2. The example of a multitude is commonly a powerful inducement to the
commission of sin, By contributing to the extenuation and lessening of the evil
of sin. From hence persons will conclude that, if an action be granted to be
evil, yet undoubtedly it is not so great an evil, as some would persuade them:
surely it is but a small matter, and of no heinous nature, or else others would
avoid it, and it would not be so commonly embraced. Thus Sirs; if a man has
but slight and low apprehensions of the evil of sin, he will never be steadfast
and resolute in opposition against it: he will soon be brought to a compliance
with it. As your thoughts of sin are, so your carriage toward it in a measure
will be. If it be reckoned as a little evil, men will never be at any great
cost, or make much ado for the avoiding of it. Now, the consideration of the
practice of a multitude, that many walk in such a way, does hugely tend to the
extenuation of the evil of it, in a man's thoughts. It is a difficult thing, to
keep up abhorring thoughts, in the Soul, of that which multitudes live in the
practice of. They will be ready to conclude that, without controversy, there is
no great hurt in it, nor any considerable danger: or otherwise so many would
not agree together therein. Ezekiel. 8.17. Then he said unto me, have thou seen
this, O son of man? It it a light thing to the house of Judah that they commit
the abominations which they commit here? Observe, it was a general corruption,
and so accounted small in their eyes. Is it a light thing? q. d. It is in your
estimation, but a small matter. Certainly you reckon it but a light and trivial
thing, little to be regarded. And thus the people answered the prophet Jeremie,
when he labored to set before them the greatness of their folly, and
wickedness; they produce the general practice for it. It is that which we have
done, we, and our fathers, our Kings, and our Princes, in the cities of Judah,
and in the streets of Jerusalem, Jer. 44. v. 7.17.

To abate the force of this influence, let us duly ponder and press upon our
spirits, these three particulars.

1. Although all sins, if considered comparatively, are not equally heinous,
some being of lesser malignity, and others of a crimson die; yet there is no
sin little in it self, or that has but little evil in the nature of it. It is
an argument of a graceless heart, that is an utter stranger to the spirit of
regeneration, to account any sin to be a small evil. For had thou layn under
the burden of thine iniquities, and felt that smart, and bitterness in the
sense of sin, which is the usual preparative, and antecedent to a saving
conversion, it would rectify thy thoughts in this respect: thou would
account the guilt of the least sin, to be an insupportable burden. And indeed
there is reason for it: For the least transgression cannot be expiated at a
lower rate, then by the precious blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, as of a lamb
without spot, or blemish. All the angels in heaven, and all the treasures upon
earth, cannot make an atonement, for the least offense, against the Law of
God. The smallest sin is a contempt of the great King, even of the Lord of
hosts, who is of infinite and unsearchable majesty, and excellency. You know,
the horridness of a fact is not only to be collected from the matter wherein it
does consist, but principally from the object against whom it is committed.
That which is but a petty misdemeanor if against another, is treason if done
against a King. Why, Sirs, every sin is a slighting of the King of Kings, and
the Lord of Lords; it is a rising up in rebellion against the sovereign
possessour of heaven. As Joseph argues against the temptation, Genesis 39.9. How
can I do this great wickedness and sin against God? So should you reason the
case against conjunction with a multitude, in any unjust way: Though all the
world be defiled, with this, or the other abomination, yet I perceive it is
rebellion against the Omne peccatum est Deicidium.
incomprehensible God, and how shall I dare to join in confederacy with them?
Isa 7.13. Hear ye now, O house of David, Is it a small thing for you to weary
men, but will ye weary my God also? q. d. Can that be a light thing, which is a
despising of the Lord, and an ecclipsing of his glory? Is it a small matter
that opens the door of hell, and makes the sinner liable to everlasting
condemnation? Why, the wages of sin [ quatenus sin, and therefore of the
smallest transgression] is death [everlasting death and destruction, as
appears by its opposition to eternal life] Romans 6.23.

2. This is so far from lessening the evil of sin, because it is generally
practiced; that it is one aggravating circumstance of it, whereby the danger is
increased: And therefore it should render us more watchful against it, and
cause us to be very cautious and circumspect, least we be defiled therewith, As
with an infectious disease, the more epidemical it is, the more perilous; and
the greater care will persons take against the contagion. I dare say, that in a
town where is the plague, or pestilence, the farther it spreads, the more
fearful would the inhabitants be. O that men would tender the health of their
souls, according to the care they take of their bodies! And that they were
affected with spiritual evils and maladies, as they are wont to be with
temporal! Then they would keep a strict watch against common abominations. The
Prophet speaks of it as an heightner of the guilt, that it was like a spreading
leprosy that went through the whole body of the Land, Jer. 6.26, 28. O
daughter of my people, gird thee with sackcloth, and wallow thy self in ashes:
make thee mourning as for an only son, most bitter lamentation: for the spoiler
shall come suddenly upon us. What is the provocation, whereby this sore evil is
procured? Why see v. 28. They are all grievous revolters, walking with
slanders: they are brass and iron, they are all corrupters. And again, Mal.
3.9. Ye are cursed with a curse [i. e. you are certainly, and dreadfully, and
terribly, accursed] for you have robbed me, even this whole Nation.

3. Is it a small matter (as thou pleadest) that is thus done against the Lord?
Why, then the greater is thy contempt of his Majesty, and the more inexcusable
art thou, in despising the Holy one of Israel. Will thou prefer a trivial
matter before the pleasing of God, and the enjoyment of his favor? This is a
shrewd sign that thou would not serve him in a greater. How could thou
lay down thy life for his sake, and part with all that thou have at his call,
who wilt disobey him for a trisle, as it is in thine account? If you go to a
neighbor, or friend, to lend you a small sum of money, or to do you a lesser
kindness, and he will not do it; you will presently conclude, He would never be
at any great expense to do you good, nor trust you with a matter of any
considerable value. So may the Lord say in this case, This is an hypocritical
wretch who thus complieth with the multitude, to sin against me, in a small
matter; Surely he will never stick close to me, in times of danger, and
difficulty; when he must exercise any greater measure of self-denial. You know
the words of our Savior unto Peter, Mat. 26.40. He come^h unto the disciples,
and finds them asleep, and says unto Peter, What, could ye not watch with me
one hour? What may be the reason, that he does expostulate the case with Peter,
more particularly, than with the rest? Why, you shall find in 35. v. Peter had
promised, that although he should die with Christ, yet he would not deny him:
and and therefore he said unto Peter, What, could ye not watch with me one
hour? q. d. How could thou die for me? If thou faulter in the smallest, how
would thou be able to grapple with greater hardships? So should you reason
the case with your own spirits: If I will be a Christian indeed, I must be
ready to forsake all that I have at his command, and to follow him through
tribulations and distresses whithersoever he leads me: And how shall I be
able to do it, if I stick with him for a trifle? Besides, as was intimated
before, It is a monstrous and intolerable slighting, and undervaluing the
autherity of God, and that eternal blessedness to be enjoyed in his presence,
to venture the loss of it, for matter of little weight and moment. This is
instead of counting all things to be but dross and dung, in comparison of the
favor of God, to esteem dross and dung above the light of his countenance.
Jer. 2.11, 12, 13. Has a Nation changed their gods, which yet are no gods? But
my people have changed their glory, for that which does not profit. Be
astonished, O ye heavens, at this, and be horribly afraid, be ye very desolate,
says the Lord. For my people have committed two evils: they have forsaken me
the fountain of living waters, and hewed them out cisterns, broken cisterns,
that can hold no water; q. d, If they had exchanged me for something of worth
and value, the contempt had not been so great: but they cast me off, for that
which is of no worth. The weaner and the slighter is the object, wherewith you
close in contradiction unto Gods precepts, the greater is your contempt of his
Majesty, and the lighter esteem you have of his loving kindness. So much for
the second influence, which the practice of the multitude has to draw persons
to sin, viz. By contributing to the extenuation, and lessening the evil of sin.

3. By the practice of the multitude men are usually drawn into sin, By being
from thence encouraged, to expect impunity in their sins; and to be free from
the judgments that are deserved thereby. Surely, think they, the Lord will
spare us, for we are a great number; he will not execute his wrath upon so
many. Take it thus, Sirs: That passion which God does make especial use of, as
a preservative against sin, it is the passion of fear, and dread of his
judgments; and that both as to the righteous and the wicked, the just and
unjust. This made Laban the Idolater, that he durst not meddle with Jacob, nor
speak a word to his hurt, because the dread of the wrath of God was upon him,
Genesis 31.24, 29. And this restrained the Heathen, that they durst not disturb
Jehoshaphat in his reformation, The fear of God was upon all the Kingdoms of
those Countries, when they had heard that the Lord fought against the enemies
of Israel, 2 Chronicles. 20.29. And what made Job so strict and precise in his
carriage, that he made a Covenant with his eyes, that he might not so much as
think upon a maid? that he did not despise the cause of his manservant or his
maidservant when they contended with him? See what account he gives of it,
himself, Job 31.1, 2, 3. Is not destruction to the wicked, and a strange
punishment to the workers of iniquity? And again v. 23. For destruction from
God was a terror to me, and by reason of his highness I could not endure. So
that, when sinners have gotten but some competent measure of presumptuous
hopes, that they shall be free from divine vengeance, notwithstanding their
transgressions; this will let loose the reins of restraint, and open the
current to all profaness and licentiousness, Psalm. 10.13. Wherefore does the
wicked contemn God? He has said in his heart, Thou will not require it. And so
much is plainly intimated, in the Apostles question to the impenitent, Romans
2.3. And think thou this, O man, that judge them which do such things, and
do the same, that thou shall escape the judgment of God? q. d. Certainly
these are thy vain imaginations, and the secret workings of thy spirit. For did
the ungodly believe and consider, that they shall be everlastingly damned for
sin, It would cause their hearts to tremble, in the very apprehensions of lying
under the guilt of it. If they were in expectation of the judgments of God, as
the certain consequent of their impieties, they would hasten to make their
peace with him; and nothing should hinder them from returning to him by
repentance. But, the truth is, they hope to escape, and to have peace, though
they walk in the imaginations of their evil hearts. Now, the example of a
multitude does confirm these hopes, and strengthen them mightily in such
expectations. For they are apt to conceive, that however the Lord may proceed
in severity against some particular persons, yet he will not destroy a
multitude when they are joined together. See how sinners argue themselves into
a Fools-confidence from this very consideration, Ezekiel. 33.24. Son of man, they
that inhabit those wastes of the land of Israel speak, saying, Abraham was one,
and he inherited the land: But we are many, the land is given us for an
inheritance. Mark it, They make no question, but God would deal favorably with
them, because they were many. The Lord had threatened them by his Prophets,
with utter desolation and ruin, because of their abominations; and that the
land wherein they dwelt should spue them out. Yea, but, say they, we cannot
believe it; God gave this land to Abraham, who was but one, and behold we are
many; and therefore undoubtedly he will have mercy upon us.

To discover a little the weakness and folly of this argumentation, let me
beseech you to give heedful attendance to these three particulars.

1. Although the consideration of a multitude may carry some stroke with men,
as to the mitigating, or withholding the punishment deserved: yet it is of no
validity whatsoever, to stave off the execution of the vengeance of God, or to
abate the severity of his proceedings. For he is of infinite power, and
everlastingly blessed in the enjoyment of himself. Indeed, men are wont to
forbear the executing the rigor of the Law, when a multitude offend together;
or at most they punish but some, for an example and terror to the rest. And
what is the reason of it? Why, possibly it may be dangerous to provoke many
thousands, by the rigor of the law; and may force them to run upon desperate
courses: Perhaps, they to whom the administration of justice is committed, have
not power to bring under the whole body of a rebellion, without using
lenitives, and mildness toward some; and engaging for their security and
indemnity. Or in some cases, the commonwealth would be impaired, and a Nation
or Kingdom dispenpled, if all that have their hand in a rebellion should be cut
off together. But alas, what are these things in reference to the God of
heaven? Is there any thing too hard for the Lord? Is it not as easy for him,
to cut off many as few? Does he stand in need of your service, that he should
spare you, out of respect to his own advantage? Why man, All thy service and
homage does not extend unto the Lord. He has thousand thousands ministering
unto him, and ten thousand times ten thousand attending upon him. He can bring
glory to himself in thine utter extirpation and destruction. And see what he
has said, Psalm. 9.17. The wicked shall be turned into hell, and all the
nations that forget God. So that, if a whole Kingdom or Country; nay, if many
people and Countries conspire together in sin, the Lord will not spare them;
but will bind them in bundles together, and cast them into the furnace of fire.
So in that dreadful parable of the boiling pot, Ezekiel. 24.6. Woe to the bloody
City, to the pot whose scum is therein, and whose scum is not not gone out of
it; bring it out piece by piece, let no lot fall upon it. It is as much as if
God had said, They are universally corrupted, and I will destroy them all, I
will not have compassion on any one of them. It is spoken in allusion to the
practice of Commanders in war; when Soldiers mutiny, they do not wont to cut
off a whole legion, or regiment; but only some are made exemplary, and to that
end they used to c^st lots, who should die, and which of them should be spared:
and the like lottery was used, when captives were taken, for the saving of
some, and putting others to the sword. Well, but, says the Lord of Hosts, I
will deal with these rebels after another rate; I will utterly consume them
without exemption of any: There shall no lot fall upon them. And study well
that Scripture which is peculiarly designed to overthrow this ground of
presumption, Prove. 11.21. Though hand join in hand, the wicked shall not be
unpunished; i. e. Though sinners strengthen themselves by mutual counsels and
combinations; and join together in parties, for the doing of evil, yet it shall
not stand them in stead: The God of heaven will break in upon them, in his
fury, and sweep them away with the besom of destraction: He will pull them out
piecemeal, one after another, and there shall none of them escape. And if you
do not see this always executed visibly, in signal outward judgments; yet you
must remember there are spiritual plagues poured out upon the wicked here,
which are the forest of judgments; and that the wicked are reserved unto the
day of destruction, and shall be brought forth to the day of wraths.

2. The examples of the judgments of God, that are upon record in the word, may
abundantly suffice to show the vanity of this kind of reasoning. When the
greatest numbers have conspired, to reject his word, and to trample upon his
glory, what has been the manner of his dealing with them? Why, He has come
down in the height of indignation, against them, and set them forth as
Paradeigmes, or public examples of his justice; that others might be induced
to take warning. Look into the wilderness, when the people did join themselves
to Baal Peor, and did eat the sacrifices of the dead, Psalm. 106.28. i. e. when
they did partake of the worship that was tendered to Idols, which are but dead
Gods, which never had any reality of being, and forsook Jehovah who is the
living and true God: when they were sharers with Idolaters in their offerings:
or by the sacrifices of the dead, you may understand, the funeral banquets
which amongst Idolatrous Nations were used by way of solemn parentation to the
dead. You will find that this idolatry was a spreading corruption, multitudes
were defiled with it: And were they delivered because of their multitude? Why,
consult the History, Number. 25. The plague brake in amongst them, and there dyed
in one day three and twenty thousand; and afterward a thousand more. And this
instance of severity is recorded for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the
world are come, 1 Cor. 10.8, 11. Let us look a little higher into the case of
Sodom and Gomorrha, Admah, and Zeboim, the inhabitants of which Cities were a
great company, and they were in confederacy together in sin, both old and
young, all the people from every quarter: And were they spared because they
were many? See Genesis 19.24, 25. Then the Lord rained upon Sodom and Gomorrha
brimstone and fire from the Lord, out of heaven. And he overthrew those Cities,
and all the plain, and all the inhabitants of the Cities, and that which grew
upon the ground. In the old world there was a numerous multitude, and all flesh
had corrupted their way, and filled the earth with violence. And were they
exempted from punishment upon the account of their numbers? Indeed the Lord
spared them for a time, and his long-suffering waited expecting their
repentance; but at length he brought the flood upon the world of the ungodly.
The fallen angels were a very comprehensive body, of glorious creatures, and
yet when they kept not their first estate, but left their own habitationp God
has reserved them in everlasting chains under darkness, unto the judgment of
the great day. But, you will say, what are these examples unto us? We hope the
Lord will not be so severe now in the days of the Gospel. Mark therefore how
the Apostle Peter does argue from this Topic, 2 Pet. 2.4, 5, 6, 9. If God
spared not the angels that sinned, but cast them down into hell, etc. and
spared not the old world, etc. and turning the cities of Sodom and Gomorrha
into ashes, condemned them with an overthrow, making them an ensample to those
that after should live ungodly: The Lord knows how to deliver the godly out
of temptations, and to reserve the unjust to the day of judgment to be
punished: q. d. He is the same God, as holy and just as ever, and hates
iniquity with as perfect an hatred, and will repay them that hate him to their
face.

3. The conjunction of many together, in any evil way, is so far from procuring
freedom from punishment, that is a shrewd argument of unavoidable wrath and
destruction, hanging over the heads of such persons. This very thing will
accelerate and hasten the ruin and desolation; and cause it to come with the
greater speed, undoubtedness and severity, when sin begins to grow ripe, by
spreading it self amongst a multitude. So that it is a gross and palpable
delusion, to imagine, that God will forbear to punish, because a multitude sin;
for however he may deal with single persons, yet he will never suffer an united
company to escape, Jer. 8.10, 13. Therefore will I give their wives to others,
and their fields to them that shall inherit them, for every one, from the least
even to the greatest, is given to covetousness: from the Prophet, even unto the
Priest, every one deals falsely, Isa. 2.8, 9. Their land also is full of
idols, they worship the work of their own hands, that which their own fingers
have made: And the mean man boweth down, and the great man humbles himself,
therefore forgive them not. That is the third way, how the practice of a
multitude does encourage men to sin, by causing them to hope for impunity in
their sins.

4. Sinners are induced to follow the example of a multitude in the commission
of evil, Because that is a ready fence against the shame, that would otherwise
arise from the evil committed. People think it no shame, to do what is commonly
done, though it be never so vile: They never blush to walk in a sinful course,
wherein they have the generality to lead them the way. Let me open it thus unto
you, my brethren. The reason why many abstain from the actual perpetration of
some wickednesses, to which they are much inclined, it is not for conscience
toward God, or out of any respect they have to his commandments; But shame of
the world does restrain them, and keep them within compass. The world would cry
out of them, if they did such an evil: it would tend to their reproach, and
disgrace, and ignominy, in the face of all that dwell round about them: they
should not be able to look their neighbors in the face. And therefore it is,
that in secret they can take liberty to give those corruptions vent, which are
kept under, and smothered in open view: They will not stick to do those things
in the closet, and in the private chambers, which they are very loath should
come upon the public stage of the world. You read of such persons, who in the
eyes of men carried matters smooth and fair, and possibly with a seeming
austerity and gravity; when it was a shame to speak of those things, which were
done of them in secret, Ephesians. 5.12. So that if the shame of the world were
removed, if that obstacle were but taken out of the way, then they could run on
freely to all excess of riot: and make no bones in swallowing such impieties as
now they boggle at. We find it of the men of Laish, that they dwelt careless
and secure, for there was no Magistrate to put them to shame in any thing,
Judge. 18.7. Now the commonness of a sin does usually take from the shamefulness
of it. Indeed it is always a shameful thing in it self; but the seeing of
multitudes commit it, does notably help to harden men's faces, and to steel
their foreheads, that they are not sensible of it. Men are ashamed to go on
singly, and personally, in any way of ungodliness; when they are no whit
ashamed to be led by the company of others, and to do as the rest of their
society does. You read in Jer. 6.13. of a general deluge of corruption and
naughtiness that had overflowed the whole land: and mark what follows, v. 15.
Were they ashamed when they had committed abomination? nay, they were not at
all ashamed, neither could they blush.

To enervate the strength of this fourth influence it has, let us often
resolve in our most serious and deliberate contemplations these three following
truths.

1. That it is a sure token of abundant, desperate atheism, lodging in the
heart, and that mightily prevails over the heart, when a sinner is kept from
pollutions, merely from the shame of the world, and is not afraid of them in
the presence of God. Why man, do thou believe that there is a God in heaven,
that beholds all the dwellers upon earth? whose eyes are upon all the ways
of man, and who pondereth all his goings? And art thou not ashamed to commit
abominations in his sight? Should not the regard of the most high have a
greater efficacy upon thy spirit, to keep thee from sin, than all the cries of
the children of men? The truth of it is, thou art an atheist, and do not
believe there is a God, or else thou castest the thoughts of him behind thy
back, Psalm. 10. v. 4, 5. And if thou forgettest the Lord, or denyest his being,
never expect that God should in mercy be mindful of thee: Well may thou fear
lest he should come upon thee in some dreadful and terrible judgments, in order
to the confutation of thy atheistical heart, Psalm. 50.22. Consider this ye that
forget God, lest I tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver.

2. Although an impenitent sinner may escape the shame of the world here, yet
he shall not be able to escape everlasting shame and contempt hereafter, when
he is brought before the tribunal seat of our Lord Jesus Christ. How will he
then be ashamed of his foolishness, and madness, in regarding the cries of men,
more than the word of God? How will he be then filled with confusion, to
bethink himself, that he was so sottish and vile as to serve the devil, the
Prince of darkness, rather than to be obedient to the voice of the Lord of
glory? With what vexation and torment will it then fill a man's spirit, to
remember, that he was offered salvation amongst the little flock of Jesus
Christ, but he chose rather to go to hell with the multitude? A reflection upon
this will cover the sinners face with blackness, and make him ready to tear out
his very bowels with indignation. O, will he think, what phrensy did possess
me, that I should act after this manner? What a wretch was I, thus to neglect
my soul? What a blind ignorant unadvised course did I take, to go with the
multitude in the broad way of destruction? Then shall the wicked be covered
with shame, and their everlasting confusion shall never be forgotten, as the
expression is Jer. 20.11. When the Saints of God shall lift up their heads with
boldness and confidence, then shall all the ungodly hang down their heads as a
bulrush, and be ashamed to look Jesus Christ in the face, whose laws they
despised, and preferred the pleasing and regarding the multitude before him.
For you know that is one of the differences which God will put between his own
servants, and evil doers hereafter, Dan. 12.2. And many of them that sleep in
the dust of the earth shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame
and everlasting contempt.

3. All sin whatsoever is shameful in its own nature and tendency, as
considered in it self, and however it is committed; though no eye of the world
take cognizance of it. Is it not a shameful thing for a rational creature to be
in subjection to base and sensual lusts and pleasures? For a man to degenerate
into a condition, viler than the beasts that perish? For a person to be so
besotted, as to sell his soul for a trifle? Is it not a shameful thing for a
knowing creature to rebel against his creator, upon whom he has his constant
dependence, and by whom he wholly subsist? Why Sirs, if ever God intend you
mercy, he will cause you to bear your shame, and to loath your selves upon the
account of your iniquities: He will open your eyes, and cause you to see that
the shamefulness of sin does not only lie in the opinions of men, but in its
own nature and tendency, Ezekiel. 20.43. And there you shall remember your ways,
and all your doings wherein ye have been defiled, and ye shall loath your
selves in your own sight, for all the evils that ye have committed. And see the
language of true converts, Jer. 3.25. We lie down in our shame and our
confusion covers us: for we have sinned against the Lord our God, we and our
fathers from our youth even unto this day, and have not obeyed the voice of the
Lord our God. Thus I have dispatched the fourth encouragement to sin taken from
the practice of the multitude.

5. Persons are easily prevailed with, to follow a multitude in their sins;
Lest they should be reproached and reviled, for dissenting from them: lest they
should bespatter them, and cast dirt upon them, if they withdraw from their
fellowship. My brethren, if a man will not join with the multitude in the work
of their hands, he shall be sure to suffer under the lash of their tongue. If
he will not do evil with them, they will be sure to speak evil of him. They
will brand him for a factious, troublesome, and seditious person; one that is
over much wedded to his own way; and proud, and high conceited of himself. They
will be apt to mark him as the troubler of Israel, and the pest and plague of
the land wherein he dwells, 1 Pet. 4.4. Wherein they think it strange, that
you run not with them to the same excess of riot? speaking evil of you. Mind
it, if you separate from them in your conversation, they will do what in them
lies, to blast your reputation. And to avoid this reproach, people are easily
persuaded to close with them. For it is an hard thing to suffer taunts, and
revilings, for the sake of Christ: because of that monstrous pride that is in
men's hearts. They have high thoughts of themselves, and therefore cannot endure
that others should vilify and debase them. There are many who can rather
suffer loss in their estates, and some pains to be inflicted on their bodies,
than reproach should be cast upon their names. Hence they are called cruel
mockings; because they pierce deep into the soul, and lie heavy upon the
spirit, Heb. 11.36. And the heart of David was even broken with them, Psalm.
69.20. Reproach has broken my heart, and I am full of heaviness. This had
almost turned aside the Prophet Jeremie from the course of obedience, had he
not been kept by an almighty power, and followed with the effectual operation
of the spirit of God, Jer. 20.7, 8, 9, 10. I am in derision daily, every one
mocketh me. For since I spoke, I cried violence and spoil, because the word of
the Lord was made a reproach unto me, and a derision daily. Then I said I will
not make mention of him, nor speak any more in his name. But his word was in
mine heart as a burning fire shut up in my bones, and I was weary with
forbearing, and I could not stay.

To fence you against the prevalency of this powerful temptation, there are
five things worthy to be seriously weighed.

1. Are you likely to be reproached for the sake of Christ, and because you
will not say, a confederacy with the multitude in sin? Why, this is none other
than he has particularly warned you of, that you should expect, and look for,
if you will be faithful unto him, and steadfast in his covenant. This is one of
the terms and articles, upon which salvation by Christ is propounded and
offered unto sinners, that you be willing to be made a reproach for his sake,
and to be accounted as the scum of the world, and the offscouring of all
things. If you are Israelites indeed, disciples of Christ in reality, this will
undoubtedly come upon you: You will be reckoned as the worst and vilest of men,
especially at some seasons, when religion is discountenanced. So that this is
part of the cost you must reckon to be at, if you will be wise builders in the
matters of eternity. This is one of the encumbrances that is entayled upon
godliness, and the favor of the most High: and if you will enjoy his favor,
you must have it with all the encumbrances that attend it, Mat. 10.21. You
shall be hated of all men for my names sake, And v. 25. If they have called the
master of the house Beelzebub, how much more shall they call them of his
household? q. d. You must expect to be accounted, as very monsters of men, nay
as very devils, if you will be upright with the Lord. So that you have no cause
to complain of religion, or the ways of holiness, when you find your selves
reproached for them: because it is no more than you were told of, before you
entered into that estate. As when we fell a commodity in the market, that has
some defect and imperfection, and we deal openly and plainly with the buyer,
giving him information of it, and yet he will have it; If afterward he come
and complain of it, we are ready to say, Did not I tell you what it was? Have I
done you any wrong? Were not you acquainted with it before hand? So may the
Lord say unto such as profess his name for a while, and at length boggle at his
precepts, when they find themselves reproached: Friends, I have done you no
wrong. Did not I warn you of it before hand, that it would surely come thus to
pass? If you were not resolved to go through good report and evil report, why
did you list your selves amongst the number of my followers, when as I took you
into my service upon no other terms and covenants? And pray mark it Sirs,
Christ has forwarned us of reproaches attendant upon godliness, to this very
purpose, that when we happen to meet with them we might not be offended with
him, or his ways, on that account, Joh. 16.1, 2, 3, 4. These things have I
spoken to you, that ye should not be offended. They shall put you out of the
Synagogues: yea the time comes that whosoever kills you, will think that he
does God service. And these things they will do unto you, because they have not
known the Father, nor me. But these things have I told you, that when the time
shall come, ye may remember that I told you of them.

2. Art thou reproached for following the Lord Jesus Christ, and keeping close
to him, when the generality of people depart from him? Why remember how he was
reproached for thy sake, if thou belongest unto him; and what revilings he
endured for the salvation of thy soul. He was stigmatized for a glutton, and a
winebibber, and one that encouraged profane sinners in their profanefs: He was
accounted a Witch and a Conjurer, as one that held confederacy with Beelzebub
the prince of the devils: He was reckoned for a rebel and traitor, an enemy to
Caesar; and a seditions murderer was preferred before him. He was buffered and
spit upon, and reviled upon every hand: The Soldiers reviled him, saying,
Prophecy who smote thee. The people reviled him, If thou be the Son of God,
come down from the Cross and we will believe. One of them that suffered with
him reviled him. And he was put to an ignominious, and reproachful death. Was
he willing to suffer this reproach and disgrace, for our spiritual and
everlasting advantage, and shall we flinch back from him, for fear of some
scoffs and reproaches, that we may suffer? Look unto Jesus, when this
temptation begins to prevail, fix your eyes upon Jesus, the author and finisher
of our faith, who for the joy that was set before him, endured the cross,
despising the shame, and is set down at the right hand of the throne of God.
For consider him that endured such contradiction of sinners against himself,
lest ye be wearied, and faint in your minds, Heb. 12. v. 2, 3. See the carriage
of the Apostles in this respect, Act. 5.41. They departed from the presence of
the counsel, rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer shame for his
name. Why for his name? Why, because he is the Son of God, and so able to
recompense them plentifully, for any loss they sustained in his service: He
loved them with the most affectionate love, and that unto the end: He had
suffered shame for their sakes, and in order to the carrying on of their
Salvation.

3. The day of judgment, that is at hand, will be a day of revelation as well
as of recompense. If you be unjustly reproached and scandalized now, then you
shall be cleared, and acquitted, and discharged with honor, in the face of all
the world. For as that will be a judicature appointed for the trying of titles,
so for the clearing of the people of God from all the blots that were cast upon
them, and the hard speeches that were vented against them. As there will be a
resurrection of bodies out of the dust of the earth, so there shall be a
resurrection of the names of true believers out of that dirt and filth wherein
they have been buried. This quieted the spirit of S. Paul when he was censured,
and scandalized, 1 Cor. 4.3, 4, 5. With me it is a very small thing, that I
should be judged of you, or of man's judgment: (i. e. I am little troubled at
your censures and reproaches) yea I judge not my own self. For I know nothing
by my self, yet am I not hereby justified: but he that judges me is the Lord.
Therefore judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come, who both will
bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest the
counsels of the hearts: and then shall every man have praise of God; i. e. Then
it will be discovered, who are praiseworthy: The Lord will cause the
uprightness of the upright to appear, and he will vindicate their reputation in
the presence of men and Angels.

4. The best and most comfortable way, as much as is possible, to avoid
reproach and disgrace, it is, not to join in correspondency with the wicked;
but to endeavor to be exact and circumspect in your carriage before the
wicked, that they may not have so much as an occasion whereupon to bottom an
evil report. As a Philosopher being told that some evil minded men did charge
him with such and such miscarriages. And I, answered he, will so demean my
self, that none shall believe them. Here Sirs, is an excellent means to prevent
reproaches, and a good use to be made of them. Do men charge thee with pride
and haughtiness of spirit? Carry thy self with that humility and meekness, that
none may believe them. Art thou cried out of as a turbulent, factious, and
seditious, person? Let thy demeanor be so quiet, and peaceable, and
inoffensive, that none may give credit to the report. Labor to cut off
occasion of evil speaking, from them that desire occasion: And if
notwithstanding they will defame thee, study to prove them liars amongst all
with whom thou do converse. And this is the very counsel of the Holy Ghost, 1
Pet. 2.11, 12. Dearly beloved, I beseech you, as strangers and pilgrims,
abstain from fleshly lusts, which war against the soul. Having your
conversation honest among the Gentiles, that whereas they speak against you, as
evil doers, they may by your good works which they shall behold, glorify God
in the day of visitation. And v. 15. For so is the will of God, that with
well-doing ye may put to silence the ignorance of foolish men. And if
nevertheless it be your lot to be scorned and despised for your holiness, then
remember for your consolation, and support; that you have a promise of
blessedness, on this very account, Mat. 5.11, 12. Blessed are ye when men shall
revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against you
falsely for my sake. Rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is your reward in
heaven: for so persecuted they the Prophets which were before you.

5. If you cannot bear reproaches, for the sake of Christ, and upon the account
of holiness, God may justly give you up to the lusts of your own hearts, to
fall into some horrid, monstrous, and unheard of abomination, that you may get
a blot upon that account, which shall never be wiped out. If men will not
suffer for God, they may justly expect to suffer under the hand of God. As I
have read of a Smith in Queen Mary's days, who was convinced of the truth, and
being pressed by a message from one of the Martyrs, not to dissemble his
profession but to own it; returned answer, He could not burn: But within a
while it fell out, that his Shop was on fire, and was burnt down to the ground,
and himself in it, as he was endeavoring to quench the fire. He that could not
burn in the cause of God, was burnt under the just judgments of God. The like
may befall you in the case of reproach and revilings: If you cannot bear them,
in the way of righteousness, the Lord may deliver you over into the hands of
the devil, and to be led by your own hearts into some desperately wicked
courses, that you may suffer reproach as the devils Martyrs: and such reproach
as may stick by you for ever. And this is none other than what God has
threatened upon such as despise commandments See this expressly denounced
against Zedekiah; He was afraid of being mocked, if he kept the word of the
Lord; and by his disobedience he should be made a Taunt and a byword. So that
the evil he feared came upon him, Jer. 38.19, 20, 21, 22, 23.
, that he will make them a reproach, either by the execution of temporal or
spiritual judgments, Ezekiel. 5.14, 15. Moreover, I will make thee waste, and a
reproach among the Nations that are round about thee, in the sight of all that
pass by, Jer. 23.40. And I will bring an everlasting reproach upon you, and a
perpetual shame which shall not be forgotten. See also Jer. 29.18, 19.

So much for the fifth way how this temptation prevails.

6. Sinners are soon persuaded to go down the stream with a multitude, in sin,
Because otherwise they should be persecuted, and opposed by them. They are
willing to live at ease and quiet, and to sleep in a whole skin (as we are wont
to express it) and therefore they dare not contradict the generality, lest they
should be set against by them, and be reduced into sufferings under their
hatred and malice. Thus it wrought with those false teachers mentioned, Gal.
6.12. As many as desire to make a fair show in the flesh, they constrain you to
be circumcised: only lest they should suffer persecution for the Cross of
Christ. Mark it, The most of the Jews were eagerly set upon the retaining of
circumcision and other ceremonies of the Mosaical paedagogy; and they were apt
to be violently bent against any that went about the abrogation of them. Now
these false teachers knew well enough, that all such types were abolished, by
the death of Christ; but they durst not own it; still they preached up
circumcision, and forced it upon the practice of the converts at Galatia,
against the light and convictions of their own consciences. What was the reason
of it? Why, they knew that if they stiffly adhaered to the simplicity of the
Gospel, and waved the Mosaical ceremonies, which most of the Jews were zealous
for, they should be persecuted by them: And this was the only reason that
induced them to comply with the multitude. My brethren, you have many that
would willingly be the disciples of Christ and his followers, as long as they
may do it with safety, without endangering their estates, or life's, or their
liberties by it: But when they come to take up the Cross there they faulter. As
the rottenness, and unsoundness, the hypocrisy, and unbelief of the heart is
the fountain whence apostasy proceeds: so the days of tribulation and distress
are the time of discrimination, when Apostates are wont to discover themselves.
They can well be contented to make a profession of godliness, and to perform
some of the external duties, but they are not able to go through persecutions.
And therefore they keep all things fair with the multitude, and walk in ways
of compliance with them; lest if they followed truth and holiness too close at
the heels, it should strike out their teeth: lest if they withdrew from the
multitude, they should be hated and persecuted by them. For pray Sirs, what is
the reason why the world hates, and sets against the people of God? Why, It is
for this very thing, because they walk in a way by themselves, and will not do
as the rest of their neighbors do: they separate themselves from the
generality in their practice, and walk more strictly and precisely, and dare
not allow themselves in such licentious courses, wherein others live: and so
their lives are a practical condemnation of the others, and as a corrosive to
their consciences, Joh. 15.19. If ye were of the world, the world would love
his own: But because you are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the
world, therefore the world hates you. Mark it, If believers were of
confederacy with the wicked; if they could drink, and revel, and be vain, and
wanton, as others are, and did not take a different course by themselves, they
should be cherished and beloved as well as others: but therefore they are
hated, and persecuted, because they are a select company, and have a peculiar
way by themselves. And to escape this hatred and persecution, people are apt to
join with the world, and to walk according to their pattern and practice.

To abate the edge, and take off the efficacy of this influence, let me counsel
you to be frequent in the meditation upon these three spiritual truths.

1. That the everlasting wrath of God, which is reserved as the portion of the
wicked hereafter, is an evil infinitely beyond all the tribulations and
persecutions that can come upon the godly here. So that if thou can not bear
some sharp afflictions for a time, How will thou be able to lie under torments
for ever? If thou dare not walk in the ways of holiness, for fear of some
trouble and persecution from men, How will thou stand under the wrath of God,
when he will glorify his power in the destruction of his adversaries? Why
Sirs, one of these will unavoidably befall you; either you must live godly in
Christ Jesus, and then you will suffer persecution; or else you must go down
with the multitude, into perdition: either you must through much tribulation
enter into the kingdom of heaven, or everlastingly be sent into hell torments.
And can you dwell with everlasting burnings? Are you able to stand before the
devouring fire? Lay these in the balance together, and see which is to be
chosen. Should not a man willingly undergo the greatest hardships upon earth,
rather than fall into the damnation of Hell. See how pathetically our Savior
presses this very point, Mark 9. 43, 44. If thy hand offend thee cut it off:
[that is, mortify and keep under the most beloved corruption, deny thy self in
the dearest enjoyments thou have, willingly suffer and undergo the greatest
troubles, and the sorest distresses] It is better for thee to enter into life
maimed, then having two hands to go into hell, into the fire that shall never
be quenched: where their worm dies not, and the fire is not quenched.

2. That even the inward peace and consolation of the spirit, that is to be had
in the ways of holiness, is abundantly to be preferred before that outward
quiet and safety, which sinners promise themselves by compliance with the
multitude in their wickedness. Shall thou be thereby freed from persecutions
without? But what if God send trouble and horror upon the conscience within?
That will be an heavier, and a more insupportable burden, than all external
calamities whatsoever. It is not the favor and friendship of all the men in
the world, that can minister support and comfort against the clamours of an
evil conscience, when it is thoroughly a wakened by the spirit of God, Prove.
18.14. The spirit of a man will sustain his infirmity; but a wounded spirit who
can bear?

3. When God does suffer his people to fall into persecutions, for their
righteousness sake, He does not leave them alone: but has promised himself to
be graciously present with them. He will minister strength to enable them to
bear their burdens: and will dart comfort into their souls, that shall sweeten
the most bitter cup of tribulation. He will restrain the rage and fury of their
oppressors, that they shall not lay upon them more than is conducible unto
their spiritual good: For although God does sometimes let his children fall
into the hands of the ungodly, yet he never delivers them over to the will of
the ungodly. At length he will make a way for them to escape, and cause all
their sufferings to work together for their good: and give them an ample
recompense, that shall make a plentiful amends, for whatever cost they have
been at in his service, Isa. 43.1, 2. When thou passest through the waters, I
will be with thee: and through the rivers, they shall not overflow thee: when
thou walk through the fire, thou shall not be burnt: neither shall the flame
kindle upon thee. For I am the Lord thy God, the holy one of Israel thy
Savior. And are the consolations of God small unto you? Is it a light thing to
be under the promise of his special presence, and providence? Woe be to sinners,
when trouble comes from the hand of God, and there is no ministration of
support from the gracious assistance of God. What will they then do in the day
of tribulation? But the Lord will not leave his own people comfortless, but
will come himself, and minister unto them. This made the Apostle Paul that he
could rejoice in his sufferings, 2 Cor. 12.10. Therefore I take pleasure in
infirmities, in reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions, in distresses for
Christ's sake: for when I am weak, then am I strong, i. e. when I am at the
lowest ebb of outward enjoyments, then is the Lord pleased to communicate the
greatest spiritual vigor, and consolation unto my heart. When my body is at
the lowest, and my outward man at the weakest, then is my soul filled with
special refreshments from above. God does make up the oppressions of my outward
man, by imparting grace unto, and lifting up the light of his countenance upon,
my inward man; so that I have no cause to complain.

This shall suffice, to be spoken unto the sixth way how this temptation
works.

7. And lastly. There is a secret inclination in men's spirits to follow the
example of a multitude in sin: Because it is a pleasant thing to walk with
company; and in competition therewith; the ways of holiness and the fear of
the Lord, seem to be sad, melancholy, and tedious ways. It is a kind of
irksome and unpleasant thing for a man to go alone in any course; but to walk
with company is delightsome, and suitable to a man's heart and spirit. Now
therefore, to avoid the loneliness of the service of God, people are ready to
comply with the multitude of the ungodly. As the Israelites argued the case
with Samuel in respect of a King, 1 Samuel 8.5, 20. We will be like all the
nations, and that our King may judge us. So are sinners apt to plead themselves
into wickedness: We cannot endure to be solitary, and in a path by our selves;
but let us do as others do. You have a particular caution from S. Paul to
take heed of this reasoning, 1 These. 5.6. Therefore let us not sleep, as do
others: but let us watch and beasober, intimating, that there is a great
proness in men's spirits, to do as others do, and to travel in that road where
they may have much company with them.

Now to show you the folly and weakness of this kind of argumentation, I will
only subjoyn these two considerations.

1. That a sound believer, that lives by faith in Christ, and in the exercise
of repentance, and purifieth himself as Christ is pure, has the infinitely
blessed God, for the man of his counsel, and to bear him fellowship in his way.
And is not he Sirs, the best companion in the world? that can give you the best
help and succor upon every occasion, and bring the greatest and most
heart-warming joy and gladness into the soul? As the glory of God is a
believers ultimate end at which he aims; and as the spirit of God is his
principal guide by whom he is conducted; and as the word of the Lord is the
highway wherein he travels; So the Lord of hosts himself is his constant
companion. It Is said of Enoch, He walked with God three hundred years, Genesis
5.22. And Noah was a just man and perfect in his generations, and Noah walked
with God, Genesis 6.9. And my brethren, can that be a tedious and melancholy way,
where the God of consolations is ever at hand, he that dwells in the souls of
his children, that he may revive their spirits? The truth is, most men's hearts
are carnal, and sensual, and they cannot taste the sweetness of communion with
God, or else they would not complain for want of society, and fellowship. The
Apostle speaks of it, as the highest privilege under the sun, and that in a way
of gloriation, and boasting, 1 Jo. 1.3, 4. That which we have seen and heard,
declare we unto you, that ye also may have fellowship with us; and truly our
fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ. And these things
write we unto you, that your joy may be full, q. d. Here is the wellspring of
joy, here is a sovereign antidote against sadness and disconsolatness of
spirit: this will cause you to abound in joy, above the joy of harvest, above
what will arise from the increase of corn and wine and oil. if you will have
your vessels filled, come unto these waters, secure your interest in this
blessed fellowship.

2. If you would have the society of men, your fellow creatures, to go along
with you; Why, the wisest course to be taken for the attainment of that, is not
to comply with the wicked; but to labor what in you lies, to turn them from
their wickedness. So that, be much in prayer for them, that God would open
their eyes and show them the way of truth; that he would sanctify their
hearts, and turn them unto the truth: Set a good example before them, that they
may be won over by the loveliness of your conversations: Deal faithfully with
their Souls by meekness of reproof, and admonition, as there is occasion: Often
provoke and stir them up to follow after righteousness, that so they may bear
you company in the way to heaven. Let me give you the counsel of the Lord to
Jeremy in this case, Jer. 15.19. Let them return unto thee, but return not thou
unto them. But perhaps you will object and say, this is the work of a Minister.
Yea, my brethren, and it is incumbent on every particular Christian also, what
in them is, to render the ways of God lovely and amiable in the sight of
others, and to endeavor to win them over, by all means to an effectual closure
with those ways, Prove. 11.30. He that wins souls is wise, Jam. 5.19, 20.
Brethren, if any of you do err from the truth, and one convert him [any one,
this is a work to be minded by every one of you, without exception] Let him
know, that he which converteth a sinner from the error of his way, shall save
a soul from death, and shall hide a multitude of sins. So we are come to the
close of the second head of enquiry, concerning the influence which the
practice of a multitude has, to incline a man or woman to do evil.

SECT. IV.
Qu. 3. IN what cases especially, does it concern us, to be most cautious and
circumspect, upon this account, that we be not drawn to evil by the practice of
a multitude.

Ans. For satisfaction to this enquiry, you must well observe and remember,
that this caution is needful in every case, and does oblige us to be
circumspect in every respect, to keep a strict eye of jealousy upon our selves
at every turn, that we be not ensnared or drawn aside into sin by following a
multitude. The counsel is delivered indefinitely without limitation to times,
persons, or cases: and is equipollent to an universal prohibition. For as where
the spirit of God has not added, we must not make additions; so where he has
not limited, we must not set bounds and limits, by a narrowing interpretation.
Thou shall not follow a multitude, i. e. not any multitude, of what sort
soever, wheresoever they are, or in what ages or places soever they live, in
the doing of evil.

Nevertheless there are some peculiar cases, in which this word of advice does
especially concern us: wherein we are more than usually inclined, to follow the
multitude, and therefore ought to be more than ordinarily watchful over our
hearts, that they do not turn us aside upon this temptation. I will only
mention six.

1. In case of our Ancestors, and progenitors, that have gone before us. When
our forefathers have generally taken any corrupt way, there is a great
addictedness in their posterity to take the same course, and there needs a
great measure of caution, that we be not followers of them. What! will some
say, shall we condemn our forefathers, and judge our selves wiser and better
then all that have been before us? they made no scruple of such and such
actions; they worshipped God in this, or the other manner; and shall we be more
scrupulous then they were? No, we will be for the old way, and cleave to that
religion, which our fathers were of. This was the argument which the woman of
Sychar produced, in her discourse with Christ, to countenance the schismatical
temple on Mount Gerizim, Joh. 4.20. Our fathers worshipped in this mountain,
and ye say, that in Jerusalem is the place where men ought to worship. As if
she had said, whatever scriptures you may bring, or reasons you may press, to
keep close to the institution of God, and to worship him at Jerusalem; yet I am
sure, Our fathers were of another mind: They thought the punctilio's of
institution, and divine appointment, were not so stiffly to be adhered unto:
and why should not we do, as our fathers have done? And how hot were the
Scribes and Pharisees for maintaining and upholding their fathers traditions?
though some of them were down right contradictions against, and others corrupt
additions unto the word of the Lord? See how they plead and quarrel with
Christ, and his disciples for their nonconformity therein, Mar. 7.5. Then the
Pharisees and Scribes asked him, why walk not thy disciples according to the
tradition of the elders, but eat bread with unwashen hands? q.d. This
constitution we received from our fathers, the elders of former generations:
and why should not you be concluded by it, and give obedience thereunto? If it
had been a novel, upstart opinion, something might be said against it: but it
has continued a long time in the Church, even since the days of our
forefathers.

To set you right in this matter, and to discover the vanity, and danger of
this way of ratiocination; Give me leave to put you in mind of these five
things.

1. It was one end of the death of our Lord Jesus Christ, wherein all those are
sharers, that are saved by him, that he might redeem his people from the vain
conversation received by tradition from their fathers: that he might bring them
to embrace the commandments of God, and to give up themselves entirely in
subjection to the Law of the Lord. So that, mark it Sirs, Have you an interest
in the blood of Jesus Christ? would you make it appear that you are reconciled
unto God by the sufferings of his Son? Why, this is one way to prove it, By
renouncing the vain traditions of your Fathers, as far as they are
dissentaneous to the word of God, and have no footing in the word. As Christ
redeemed God's peculiar people from the curse of the Law, that their persons
might be accepted, and their iniquities forgiven: and as he redeemed them from
their bondage unto Satan, that their natures might be sanctified, and
themselves set apart unto communion with God: So he redeemed them also from the
vain practices of their Fathers, that their lives might be ordered according to
the Law of the Lord. What can be more perspicuous and evident? 1 Pet. 1.18, 19.
Forasmuch as ye know, that ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, as
silver and gold, from your vain conversation received by tradition from your
fathers. But with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb without blemish
and without spot.

2. One special reason, why the Lord was graciously pleased to give forth the
Scriptures, and to leave his will upon record in the Scriptures was this, that
we might not pin our faith upon our fathers sleeves, nor think it enough to do,
as our ancestors have done. Sirs, If God had intended the traditions of our
fathers as a rule of direction for us, and that they should have been
obligatory upon us on all occasions, he would have left us unto them, and not
have signified his will by writing in the word. So that take heed left you
frustrate the grace of God, in sending the holy Ghost to endite the Scriptures,
and stirring up the Prophets and holy men of God, to be the penmen thereof,
that we might have a certain rule from which we must not recede. For as the
Apostle argues in the case of justification. If righteousness came by the
moral Law, then there was no need of the death of Christ: the same will hold
good in case of the rule of life, If the traditions of our fathers were a
sufficient guide, then there was no need of the Scriptures. And therefore you
shall find that the Lord gave forth his statutes and testimonies, as to supply
the deficiency of the light of nature; so to call men off from cleaving to the
corruptions of their fathers, Psalm. 78.5, 6, 7, 8. For he established a
testimony in Jacob, and appointed a Law in Israel, which he commanded our
fathers: that they should make them known to their children. That the
generation to come might know them, even the children which should be born: who
should arise and declare them to their children. That they might set their hope
in God, and not forget the works of God; but keep his commandments: And might
not be as their Fathers, a stubborn and rebellious generation.

3. Whereas people are apt to plead for the Religion of their forefathers, and
to be in love with it, because of its antiquity; that being the old way, to
which therefore they will adhaere; You must observe, That it is not every old
way, without limitation or exception, that is to be approved, but the old way
of holiness, and the fear of the Lord, which ought to be regulated by the word
of the Lord; and which becomes vain and sinful when it is taught according to
the traditions of men, Jer. 6.16. Thus says the Lord, stand ye in the ways,
and ask for the old paths, where is the good way, and walk therein, and ye
shall find rest for your souls. Mark Sirs, It is not every old way that will
bring spiritual peace, and lead you to everlasting rest, but the good old way.
For most damnable corruptions may plead prescription of time, and in some sort
their antiquity. There is the old way of sin and wickedness, which leads
directly to the chambers of death, Job 22.15, 16, 17. Host thou not marked the
old way, which wicked men have trodden? which were cut down out of time, whose
foundation was overflown with a flood. Which said unto God, Depart from us, and
what can the Almighty do for them? There is the old way of ignorance, and
atheism, and error, and superstition, and profaneness: There is the old way of
Popery, with its palpable blindness, blood-thirstiness, and idolatry. And
indeed Sirs, if you will hold to this principle, To be of the Religion of your
forefathers, you must return to the vomit of Popery with all its abominations:
you must wallow in the mire of all their filthiness, and blasphemies; or else
you must become Heathens and Infidels. For as Joshua speaks unto the
Israelites, Jos. 24.2. Your fathers dwelt on the other side of the flood of old
time, even Terah the father of Abraham, and the father of Nachor: and they
served other gods. The like may I say to you in this case, Your fathers of old
time were Idolaters, they were drencht in the polluted waters of Popish
darkness, Idolatry, and Superstition: within the compass of two hundred years,
they worshipped God in a language they understood not; they gave heed to
seducing spirits, and doctrines of Demons; they gave adoration to Saints and
Angels; nay, they worshipped bread and wine, and dumb pictures and images. Or
if you will go some hundreds of years higher into old times; then your fathers
were downright Heathens, without the knowledge of Christ, or of God in Christ,
that worshipped and served the creature more than the Creator. Which then is
the good old way, that we may walk therein? Why, It is the Scripture-way, the
highway of holiness, which God delivered unto his people in the writings of
Moses and the Prophets, those ancient records of the Church, which are of
greater antiquity than any profane Heathen writings whatsoever. For the
prophecy came not, in old time, by the will of man: but holy men of God spoke
as they were moved by the holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 1.21. The good old way, is the way
of the Saints in the primitive ages of the Church; wherein they travailed
toward the kingdom of heaven: the way of Abel, and Enoch, and Noah, and
Abraham, and other the servants of the most-High. And therefore when Peter
calls them to the old times, it was to the times of Abraham the father of the
faithful, 1 Pet. 3.5. For after this manner in the old time, the holy women
also who trusted in God adorned themselves, being in subjection unto their own
husbands. Even as Sarah obeyed Abraham. The good old way, Sirs, is the way of
righteousness, innocence, and integrity, obedience to the Law of the Lord, and
subjection to his will: which can plead its antiquity beyond that of sin, which
is but a novel invention of the devil (in comparison) and proceeds from the
vain imagination of man's heart, Eccl. 7.29. God made man upright: but they have
sought out many inventions.

4. Are you resolved to be of the Religion of your fathers, and to walk in
their ways, whatever they have been? Why, Remember, this was the very weapon,
with which the unbelieving Jews fought against the Gospel. It was the very
argument which they pressed against Christ and his disciples, and the way to
heaven which he preached. So that if you had lived in the days of Christ, you
would have persecuted him, as the Jews did; and would have opposed the
Apostles, and sought to have rooted up the doctrines of life and salvation. How
was Paul principled, when he was a persecutor? Why he was zealous against any
thing that opposed the traditions of his fathers; And that blind zeal made him
mad, against the Church, Gal. 1.14. Phil. 3.6. Act. 26.11. What had they to
object against Stephen for which he was stoned? Why, the principal article of
his charge was this, that he had preached against their customs, Act. 6.14.

5. This does mightily enhance and aggravate the sinfulness of a sin, and tends
to ripen the sinners for destruction, when iniquity does descend from one
generation to another; and persons continue to walk in those evil courses
wherein their fathers have walked. For we should take warning from them, not to
commit the like abominations. Their evil actions should be our admonitions, to
keep free from the pollutions wherewith they were defiled. As hereditary
diseases which come in a blood, and by descent from parents to their children,
are the most dangerous diseases; so hereditary sins and transgressions are the
most destructive. Mark how Nehemiah pleads against Sabbath-breaking on this
account, Neh. 13.17, 18. What evil thing is this that ye do, and profane the
Sabbath day? Did not your fathers thus, and did not our God bring all this evil
upon us, and upon this City? yet ye bring more wrath upon Israel, by profaning
the Sabbath Day? God is wont to spare a rebellious people, till the measure of
their iniquities are filled up; and then he sweeps them away, with the besom of
destruction, Genesis 15.16. But, you will say, when is iniquity like to come to
its full? Why, when one generation goes on after another, to slight the
Majesty of the Lord, and to trample upon his word. Then God will visit upon
such a people their own sins, and their fathers also. He will visit their
iniquity to the third and fourth generation, Mat. 23.31, 32. Ye are the
children of them which killed the Prophets. Fill ye up then the measure of your
fathers. And Isa. 65.6, 7. Behold it is written before me, I will not keep
silence: But will recompense, even recompense into their bosom, your iniquities
and the iniquities of your fathers together (says the Lord) which have burnt
incense upon the mountains, and blasphemed me upon the hills: therefore I will
measure their former work into their bosom. So that I may fitly conclude this
point with the instruction of the Prophet Zechariah, Chap. 1.4. Be ye not as
your fathers, unto whom the former Prophets have cried, saying, Thus says the
Lord of Hosts, Turn ye now from your evil ways, and from your evil doings: but
they did not hear, nor hearken unto me, says the Lord. That Is the first case
wherein it concerns us to use abundant circumspection.

2. In case of great men, and mighty men, that are set over us. When
Magistrates and Rulers turn aside unto vanities, the people are ready to comply
with them. And carnal reason is at hand to prompt arguments for it; because
this is the way to be countenanced and respected by Governors: Here lies the
plain road to preferment. And herein sinners think they have something to say
for themselves to justify their compliance, Must we not obey authority? and
shall we not submit our selves to them that are set over us? Have not they
souls to save as well as we? and if they do thus and thus, why should we be so
precise to scruple at it? So that, my Brethren, there needs special caution to
keep our selves pure in this case, Prove. 29.12. If a Ruler hearken unto lies,
all his servants are wicked. i. e. They will be sure to suit their carriage, in
a comportment with his corrupt humor: they will seek to ingratiate themselves,
by being like unto him. The mistakes and miscarriages of private men are like a
pocket-watch that goes false, that deceives but one or two: But the sins of
Princes and great men are like the ill-going of a Town-clock that deceives all
the neighborhood. Therefore it is said of Jeroboam, that he did not only sin
himself, but he made Israel to sin also, 1 King. 15.34. How did he make them to
sin? Well he might force them to suffer, but he could not compel them to sin:
many would not be made to sin by him, whose hearts were upright with Jehovah,
but rather left their possessions and all that they had in Israel. The meaning
then is this; Jeroboam, and his Princes, and Counselors, led them the way, and
the people were soon wrought upon to conform to their example, Hos. 5.11.
Ephraim is oppressed, and broken in judgment: because he willingly walked after
the commandment; i. e. after the commandment of Jeroboam and his Counselors,
whereby the worship of Dan and Bethel was established, and set up. See how the
people plead from the practice of their Princes, and their forefathers
together, Jer. 44.16, 17. As for the word that thou have spoken to us in the
name of the Lord, we will not hearken unto thee. But we will certainly do
whatsoever thing goes forth out of our own mouth, to burn incense unto the
Queen of heaven, and to pour out drink offerings unto her; as we have done, we,
and our Fathers, our Kings, and our Princes, in the Cities of Judah, and in the
streets of Jerusalem; q. d. What does this man tell us so much of the word of
the Lord? Have any of the Rulers observed such precepts? If they have
worshipped the queen of heaven, why may not we do so likewise? Some
Interpreters think the Text has a special eye upon this, Thou shall not follow
a multitude, (...) magnates, the mighty, so they render it; And the word may
well take in both interpretations.

To quicken you therefore to caution in this respect, consider:

1. That God is the chief governor of the world, who has an absolute
dominion, and supremacy, over all people, and nations: and the greatest
princes, and men in highest places upon earth, are but his deputies, and
substitutes, and under Officers: they are but our fellow servants in relation
to the most-High. So that, in the first place, we must have regard to the voice
of the Lord; and respect the examples of great men, no further than they are
correspondent to his good pleasure and will. Let me clear it up to you by a
familiar instance. If a King command me, upon a certain day, to appear at such
a Town; and a Justice of peace require me at the same time to be at another
place, far distant from it; whom must I herein obey? You will all conclude,
that undoubtedly I must obey the King, because he is the Supreme, and the
Justice is but his Substitute; and so the commands of the King do supersede the
others injunctions. Why Sirs, This is the very case: God is a great King, the
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords: and Magistrates and Rulers have their
authority by deputation from him: they are his delegates, and act under him. So
that first I must give obedience to the word of the Lord, who is the Sovereign.
For the Kingdom is the Lords, and he is the Governor [the supreme Governor,
the alone absolute, and unaccountable Governour] among the Nations, Psalm.
22.28. All others are accountable for the exercise of their power unto God.
This is a point so clear, that the Apostles durst appeal to their very judges
and adversaries, concerning it, Act. 4.19. Whether it be right in the sight of
God, to hearken unto you, more than unto God, judge ye.

2. Though Rulers, and great men, may give thee countenance and preferment upon
the earth, yet they cannot save thee from the wrath of an incensed God. So
that, do not provoke God to anger, to pleasure the mightiest man in the world;
for he cannot uphold thee in the day of the Lords indignation. When persons
would employ us in any dangerous service, we are wont to say, Will you bear me
out, and stand by me, and see that I shall sustain no damage by it? Pray think
of it Sirs, To sin against the Lord is very dangerous service: and when thou
art venturing upon it, to humor, and comply with great men, consider whether
they are able to bear thee out in it, and can maintain thy cause, when the Lord
arises to execute vengeance; whether they can keep thee from being called unto
an account at the Judgmentseat of Christ, and save thee from everlasting
burnings. Alas, they are not able to save themselves. For he accepts not the
persons of princes, nor regards the rich more than the poor: for they are all
the work of his hands, Job. 34.19. He shall break in pieces mighty men without
number, and set others in their stead, v. 24, He shall cut off the spirit of
princes; he is terrible to the kings of the earth, Ps. 76.12. So that I will
shut up this point, with that passage of Solomon, Prove. 29.26. Many seek the
Rulers favor, but every man's judgment comes from the Lord. Men may think it
is a point of wisdom and policy, to please Rulers, and to keep in with them,
though to the defiling of conscience, and robbing the Lord of his glory: But in
the end it will appear to be gross folly and sottishness: For it is upon the
God of heaven we have our constant dependence, both for this life, and
eternity: And if God adjudge thee to hell, for thy sinful compliance; who can
reverse the sentence, or can be able to deliver thee out of his hands?

That is the second case wherein special caution is required.

3. In case of near relations, and kindred, and intimate friends and
acquaintance. Their practice has a more than ordinary attractive influence.
This is a snare of the devil, wherein many have been taken captive: an engine
whereby Satan has drawn abundance to destruction. Persons are apt to plead for
themselves, that they must carry it fairly and courteously toward their
relations and friends; and hold a familiar correspondency with them: so that if
their relations be vain, themselves must be so too; and if they be wicked, how
should they help it, but that they must sometimes partake with them in their
wickedness? What would you have us to do, will they say? Would you have us cast
off our dearest friends, and to separate from our nearest relations? This is
given as the reason of the wickedness of Jehoram, His relations were sinners,
and he joined with them: He had contracted affinity with a wicked family, and
so drank of the cup of their abominations, 2 Chronicles. 21.6. He [Jehoram] walked
in the way of the Kings of Israel, like as did the house of Ahab: for he had
the daughter of Ahab to wife: and he wrought that which was evil in the eyes of
the Lord. And this was one of the reasons why God did so frequently and
severely charge his ancient people, that they should not make a league, nor
join themselves in affinity with Idolaters: Because he knew it would be a
strong incentive, to carry them into the like courses: and woeful experience
proved it to be a truth, Deuteronomy. 7.2, 3, 4. Thou shall make no covenant with
them, nor show mercy unto thm. Neither shall thou make marriages with them; thy
daughter thou shall not give unto his son, nor his daughter shall thou take
unto thy son. For they will turn away thy son from following me, that they may
serve other gods: so will the anger of the Lord be kindled against you, and
destroy thee suddenly. As godly relations and acquaintance, that follow after
holiness, may be a means to turn a man unto the Lord; or at least a great
restraint to withold from open profaneness, and professed rebellion against
the Lord: so it is upon the other hand, When most of a man's relations, and
kindred, and acquaintance, are evil, it proves a strong temptation to lead him
unto evil with them, and to make him such as they are.

Now therefore to fortify your spirits, for the vanquishing of this
temptation, let these following truths sink deep into your hearts.

1. That the best love you can manifest, and the most signal kindness you can
show, to your dear friends and relations, is to endeavor to turn them from
their sins; and so to be a means of promoting their deliverance from the
infernal pit of perdition. And if you will walk humbly and seriously as in the
sight of God and thereby adorn the doctrine of the gospel, and put a luster
upon religion, to the practical condemnation of their evil deeds; who knows
what effect it may have to their conviction, and consequently to their
conversion, and the salvation of their souls? So that here is the question,
Do thou love thy relations indeed? Have thou an affectionate desire of the
welfare of thy friends? Why, here is the way to do them the greatest office of
love; by endeavoring to engage them in the way that leads to eternal life.
If thou do comply with them in sin, that will but further harden them, and
help them forward to hell: whereas if thou art perfect and upright with the
Lord: Peradventure thy counsels and example may win them over to the ways of
holiness. As the Apostle speaks in the case of conjugal relation, 1 Cor. 7.16.
What know thou, O wife, whether thou shall save thine husband? Or how
know thou, O man, whether thou shall save thy wife? The like may I press
upon you as to all kinds of relations. How know thou, but thou may be a
means to convert thy friends and acquaintance? Or how can thou tell but thou
may save the souls of thy relations, at least of some of them? As thy self
art a servant of God, so thou may possibly bring them into the same covenant
with the Lord.

2. It is no point of incivility and discourteousness (however persons may call
it) for a man to stop his friends or acquaintance in a course of ungodliness,
and to pull them as firebrands out of the burning. This I add, to obviate the
vain objections, and to prevent the carnal excuses that sinners commonly insist
upon to shift off their duty in this respect. Alas, will they say, would not
you have us, to be courteous toward them, and to deal civily with them? Why
man, it is the greatest incivility imaginable, for thee to see thy friend, or
thy brother, or some of thy near relations, to be in danger every day of being
everlastingly undone, and dropping down into hell; and for thee to look on and
let them perish, without speaking a word in order to the prevention; and not to
make use of any means for their deliverance; but rather to hasten their eternal
ruin and destruction. Put the case, that one of your dearest friends or
nearest relations were distracted and mad, and you should see him take up a
sword into his hand that he might fall upon it, and destroy himself: Would you
let him alone, and say; I am loath to disturb him, He is my dear friend. and I
would not deal uncivily with him? Or would not you rather make have, and snatch
the weapon away, to prevent his killing? This is parallel to the case that we
are upon. For Sirs, all impenitent sinners are mad, and besides themselves,
they have lost the right use of their reason, Eccl. 9.3. The heart of the sons
of men is full of evil, and madness is in their heart whilst they live. And by
going on, and continuing, in any course of ungodliness they do murder and
destroy their own souls. Hos. 13.9. O Israel thou have destroyed thy self,
Ezekiel. 18.31. Cast away from you all your transgressions, whereby ye have
transgressed, and make you a new heart and a new spirit: for why will you die,
O house of Israel? q. d. else you will perish unavoidably, you will die
eternally: there is no other way to escape the damnation of hell, which is the
second death. And art not thou a hard-hearted wretch, that can stand by, and
behold thy friend murdering himself, and never step in for his deliverance? Art
not thou a very dissembler, a Judas under the name of a friend, that betrayest
him with a kiss: that is, that let him destroy his soul in thy sight, and
wilt not put in thy hand to save him, under the pretense of civility? It were
the part of a true friend, to help him, what in thee lies, out of his
miserable and wretched estate, Psalm. 141.5. Let the righteous smite me, it
shall be a kindness: and let him reprove me, it shall be an excellent oil,
which shall not break my head, Prove. 27.5, 6. Open rebuke is better than secret
love. Faithful are the wounds of a friend: but the kisses of an enemy are
deceitful. And what, if they do not so account of it at present, but take a
loving reproof, for an high affront? Yet remember, if the Lord shall once bring
them to a right understanding of their spiritual estate, they will acknowledge
your faithfulness, and love you the better. For he that rebukes a man,
afterward shall find more favor, than he that flattereth with the tongue,
Prove. 28.23. See the answer of the false prophets, when reclaimed from their
error Zech. 13.6. And one shall say unto him, what are these wounds in thine
hands? Then shall be answer, those with which I was wounded in the house of my
friends, q. d. O, they have dealt very friendly with me, I now acknowledge it
as an act of eminent kindness, in that they stopped me in my course, and did not
suffer, to run headlong into destruction.

3. Be very careful, and prudent, and exceeding wary, in the choice of
relations, and acquaintance. Make no friendship with evil men: do not put your
selves by any contract of marriage, or service, into a wicked family: make no
affinity with a wicked kindred. Indeed as to natural relations, as that of
parents, or brethren, or sisters, or the like, our whole work lies in a way of
caution: but as to relations upon choice, there is a work to be done by way of
prevention. And indeed Sirs, it is a point of extreme folly, for any person
whatsoever that would save his soul, to join himself, by way of choice unto
wicked relations. Herein is a particular, wherein the rich in the world, have a
great advantage above others. They have commonly the choice of most of an
inferior rank and condition, in point of marriage: and with a little more than
ordinary cost, they may have the choice of all in respect of servants, and
attendants. But their common neglect in improving this advantage, and usually
preferring the trash and dung of the earth, before holiness and piety, in the
choice of relations, is to me an undeniable practical evidence, How much this
world is sought after more than the world to come. Take the resolution of David
therefore as a copy to write after, Psalm. 101.4, 5, 6. A froward heart shall
depart from me; I will not know aw icked person. Mine eyes shall be upon the
faithful of the land, that they may dwell with me. And take the Testimonial of
Ahimalech concerning David, as an encouragement hereunto, 1 Samuel 22.14. Who is
so faithful as David in all thine house? Who will be so faithful in their
places and fill up their relations with the duties incident to them, so
diligently, and conscientiously, as they that are in covenant with God, and
have their hearts fashioned after his heart? From whom can you exspect so much
comfort in this life, and so much furtherance in seeking after eternal life, as
from the godly, who dare not wrong you, lest they should sin against the Lord?
And, on the other side, if you do willingly join your selves in affinity, or
familiarity with the wicked, justly may the Lord give you up to follow their
wickedness. For you can never comfortably expect, that God should preserve you
from the commission of sin, unless you shun and avoid the occasions of it.

4. Seriously mind the articles of the covenant of peace, and reconciliation;
whereupon Christ does enroll persons amongst the number of his disciples, and
does undertake to conduct them unto the Father. Why, it is expressly upon this
condition, that they follow him rather than their dearest relations; and cleave
unto him, in all estates, though to the utter rejecting and casting them off,
Luke 14.26. If any man come unto me, and hate not his father, and mother, and
wife, and children, and brethren, and sisters, yea and his own life also, he
cannot be my disciple. Not as if we were positively to hate our relations; for
the doctrine of the gospel, is a great promoter of love: It commands us to love
our very enemies, much more our intimate frinds and acquaintance. But the
meaning is this, if he do not hate them, i. e. if he do not love them, in a
lesser degree than he does Christ, which is comparatively a kind of hatred: If
he be not ready to reject and cast them off, as we do that which we hate,
rather than sin against the Lord, and reject his word: If he do not stop his
ears against their follicitations unto sin, and stand fast against their
enticements: If he do not follow Christ's command, and example, rather then
theirs, when they come in a competition; he is but an hypocrite, whatsoever
profession he makes. See that strict and severe injunction, as to the Sin of
idolatry, to the Israelites of old, Deuteronomy. 13.6, 8, 9. If thy brother, the son
of thy mother, or thy son, or thy daughter, or the wife of thy bosom, or thy
friend which is as thine own soul, entice thee secretly saying, let us go and
serve other gods, which thou have not known, thou, nor thy fathers: Thou shall
not consent unto him, nor hearken unto him, neither shall thine eye pity him,
neither shall thou spare, neither shall thou conceal him. But thou shall surely
kill him; thine hand shall be first upon him to put him to death, and
afterward the hand of all the people.

That is the third case, that requires more than ordinary caution.

4. The fourth is in case of professors of religion, and such as make a show
of godliness, and have, or seem to have good acquaintance with the Almighty.
People are apt to think, that they are bound to conform to their pattern, and
to swallow down whatsoever they embrace, though it be corrupt and liable to
just exception; especially if they are persons of any note and eminency in
Religion. Whom may we imitate, if not those that belong to the Lord, and call
themselves his servants? Here is much danger of being defiled, wherein we see
such as are accounted eminent professors to defile themselves. My brethren, as
a godly man may fall foully into heinous transgressions, so a company of
professors of godliness may join together in so doing: And in such a case it
is an easy thing for a man or woman to slip insensibly into the same error,
and to be entangled with them in the same pollution. For this you have a
notable instance in the person of Barnabas, touching the religious observance
of the ceremonial law. When the believing Jews came from James to Antioch, they
would not eat with the Gentiles, as putting an holiness in abstinence from
those things wherein Christ had purchased liberty: And the Apostle Peter and
other Jews of Antioch, dissembled in the matter and joined with them in their
separation. And when Barnabas saw such an eminent man as Peter and so many
godly persons take that course, he was quickly led into the same error with
them. And had not S. Paul withstood them boldly, and rebuked Peter to the face,
and stood up in the vindication of Christian liberty, who knows how far the
Gangrene might have spread? See the history of it at larg, Gal. 2.11, 12, 13,
14. They were men of repute for godliness, and believed in Jesus Christ; and
this mightily prevailed upon Barnabas, and carried him away. And upon this
account it is that the devil acts most powerfully, and does greatest mischief,
by transforming himself into an Angel of light, and when his ministers
transform themselves into the ministers of righteousness. For he knows, that
under a show of Religion, and in compliance with them that are highly esteemed
for godliness, many will be wrought upon to such things as otherwise they would
abhor, 2 Cor. 11.13, 14, 15.

To give you some preservatives against infection on this account, let me take
the liberty to set before you these three Scripture truths.

1. That the examples of the very best, and choicest of the servants of God
upon earth, are not absolute and unquestionable rules for the guidance of our
practice: but they must be reduced unto the great example, even that of our
Lord Jesus Christ; and no further owned, than they are conformable and
consentaneous thereunto. He did no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth:
He fulfilled all righteousness without defect, or imperfection: He was a Lamb
without spot, or blemish: and therefore we may be concluded by his pattern. But
the most eminent Saints have their spots and blemishes. Godly men and women do
not always act their godliness, but sometimes vent their corruptions as well
as others. The principle of grace Sirs does always act like it self, but a
gracious man does not always act like himself, Jam. 3.2. For in many things we
offend all. Eccl. 7.20. There is not a just man upon earth, that does good, and
sins not. So that their examples must be tried by the Law, and the
testimony; they must be examined as to their answerableness to the great
example. Indeed, in many cases, the practice of the Saints is a good Expositor
of the rule, and ought to be improved as an argument to quicken us to live up
to the rule of the word of God: but it is not sufficient of it self to
constitute a rule, nor to justify any action that is condemned thereby. And
therefore, as we are commanded in one place to be followers of the Saints; so
you have it restrained in another place with this limitation, as far as they
are followers of Jesus Christ. Compare Heb. 6.12. with 1 Cor. 11.1. If a man
were tied up in every thing to follow the example of the godly, he might at
some times act like the devil, and do that which tends to promote his interest,
Mat. 16.23. He turned and said unto Peter, Get thee behind me Satan, thou art
an offense unto me: for thou savourest not the things that be of God, but those
that be of men.

2. The very use that we should make of the failings and miscarriages of the
godly, is not to encourage us to imitation, but to quicken us to the more
heedful circumspection; that we may not fall into their sins. Thus should we
reason with our spirits, If such or such eminent Christians have warped in this
point, or the other; what need have we to watch and pray, lest we should enter
into temptation? Let him that thinks he stands, take heed least he fall.
See the pleading of Nehemiah from this Topic, Neh. 13.25, 26. Ye shall not
give your daughters unto their sons, nor take their daughters unto your sons,
or for your selves. Did not Solomon King of Israel sin by these things? yet
among many Nations was there no King like him, who was be^^^d of his God, and
God made him King over all Israel; never theless, even him did outlandish women
cause to sin.

3. As a preventive against falling by this kind of seduction, be very
cautious, that you do not divide asunder into sects, and parties, in the
business of Religion. For then this temptation is apt to work more powerfully
and prevalently, when we are of a party, and the evil is practiced by men of
the same confederacy and persuasion with us. When one Christian is for Paul,
and another of Apollos, and a third of Cephas: when believers are crumbled into
divisions, and take upon them names of distinction and separation one from
another: In such a case, it is easy to be misled and corrupted. People are apt
to swallow down the tenants of that party to which they are joined, without
weighing them in the balance of the sanctuary; and to write after Vix dici
potest quanto libentius imilemur, quibus favemus. Fab.
their copy, without questioning the warrantableness of it. And truly Sirs,
there is utterly a fault-amongst us at this day, concerning this matter. I am
persuaded, there are many, who would seem to be something for godliness, can
give you little or no grounds from the Scripture, for diverse things which they
maintain and practice; only they take it upon trust from the men of their way
and persuasion. And therefore my counsel is that of our Savior, Mat. 23.8, 9,
10. Call no man father upon the earth, for one is your father which is in
heaven. Neither be ye called masters: for one is your master, even Christ. i.
e. Do not build your faith, upon any man's judgment or opinion, but search the
Scriptures that you may know what is the mind of God: Do not make parties in
Religion, nor impose upon men's faith, but teach them those things, which I have
commanded you. It seems to be spoken in opposition to the corrupt usage amongst
the Jews, who were miserably rent into Sects, and were ready to follow, some
the dictates of one Rabbi, and some of another, who were the fathers or
Ringleaders of their Sect. But Sirs, all sincere Christians are of one
society, and have but one master even Christ. His sheep hear his voice, and
follow him, for they know his voice. But a stranger they will not follow, but
will flee from him: for they know not the voice of strangers, Joh. 10.4, 5.

So much for the fourth case that requires such abundant circumspection, that
we be not ensnared by the example of the multitude.

5. The fifth is, In case of men of excellent parts, and learning, and
knowledge, above others. When many of that rank, such as are accounted wise,
understanding, judicious persons, shall act sanfully, and turn aside into
crooked ways; then the common sort of people think they may warrantably tread
in the same path, when they have men of renown for knowledge, to go before
them. Surely, will they argue, If there were any hurt in such things, so many
learned Doctors would not approve of them. Shall we be so highly conceited of
our selves, as to think we are wiser than such great Scholars, and Teachers of
the word of God? Herein seems to lie the force of the argument that was
brought against the officers, who durst not lay hands upon Christ, because they
took him for a Prophet, for that never man, spoke like him, Jo. 7.47, 48, 49.
Then answered them the Pharisees, are ye also deceived? Have any of the Rulers,
or of the Pharisees believed on him? But this people that knows not the law
are cursed. As if they had said, do but observe Christ's followers, and you
shall find that generally they are but a company of poor, ignorant, and
illiterate people: you have hardly one learned man amongst them that owneth
him. Do you think that if he were indeed the Messiah, the Pharisees would
oppose him, who are men well skilled in the Law? Would not the Rulers close
with him? will you be so proud and arrogant as to prefer your judgment before
theirs?

To quicken you a little to be cautious in this respect, there are four things
worthy to be considered in this behalf.

1. That the promises for discovering the will and mind of the Lord, in
reference to matters of everlasting concernment, are not made to men of great
parts and learning; but to such as serve the Lord in simplicity, and integrity
of heart. When a person is truly desirous to fear the name of God, and makes
it his study and principal design to commend his conscience in his sight; such
a one, though he be but of meaner parts and accomplishments, is in a greater
likelihood to be clearly instructed in the things concerning the kingdom of
heaven, Nisi fidelium operum usus praecesserit doctrinae cognitio non
apprehendetur: Hill. in Ps. 118.
then the greatest scholars, that are strangers to the sanctifying grace of the
spirit, Psalm. 25.12. What man is he that fears the Lord? Him he will teach in
the way that he shall choose. And v. 14. The secret of the Lord is with them
that fear him, and he will show them his covenant. Mark it Sirs, it is not much
learning in the head, but godly sincerity and the fear of the Lord in the
heart, that does entitle us to these promises of divine teaching. So that this
is a poor argument of the goodness, or justifiableness of any way, because many
great scholars and wise men walk in it. Besides, the Holy Ghost is express in
this point, that most wise men after the slesh are strangers unto the power of
godliness, and enemies to the way of salvation, 1 Cor. 1.26, 27. For you see
your calling, brethren, how that not many wise men after the flesh, not many
mighty, not many noble are called. But God has chosen the foolish things of
the world, to confound the wise: and God has chosen the weak things of the
world, to confound the things that are mighty. Some there are of all sorts that
are gathered into the kingdom of Christ (for it is not the condition or state
of life, but the constitution or frame of the heart, which is the hindrance
unto salvation) But there are not many of this sort, namely, of them that are
learned and wise after the flesh: The greatest number of such are usually
adversaries to the truth. See the words of our Savior in his thanksgiving unto
God, Mat. 11.25. At that time Jesus answered and said, I thank thee, O Father,
Lord of heaven and earth, because thou have hid these things from the wise and
prudent, and have revealed them unto babes.

2. Are they men of wisdom and understanding, whose examples are pleaded, in
opposition to the commands of Jesus Christ? But how shall it be known, whether
they are wise indeed? All is not gold, we say, that makes a glittering show:
so, All is not true wisdom that carries the face of it, and has that name and
title given to it. They alone are truly wise who keep exactly close to the word
of God, and that dare not venture to do what is displeasing in his sight.
Whatsoever has a tendency to carry a man in opposition to the word, or to
cause him to reject the law of the Lord of hosts, is but the appearance, and
show of wisdom; it is indeed the greatest madness and folly. There are two
places of divine writ for the confirmation of this point, worthy to be wrote on
the tables of men's hearts as in letters of Gold, and as with the pen of a
Diamond, that they may never be obliterated. The first is that, Deuteronomy. 4.5, 6.
Behold I have taught you statutes and judgments, even as the Lord my God
commanded me, that ye should do so, in the Land whither ye go to possess it.
Keep therefore and do them, for this is your wisdom, and your understanding in
the sight of the nations, which shall hear all these statutes, and say, Surely
this great nation is a wise and understanding people. By contempt of the word
of Christ we provoke to indignation the God of infinite power, against whom
never man hardened himself and prospered. And is it not perfect madness to
engage him to be our adversary? It is a point of the highest wisdom to keep in
with the most high, and to get an interest in his favor? Obedience to the
statutes of God has the promise of a blessing annexed to it; and the contrary
is attended with a curse, that will secretly insinuate it self into all a man's
enjoyments, and eat out the comfort of them. It is by the word of Christ you
must be judged hereafter, and sentenced to receive your everlasting portion;
And therefore it must needs be an act of the highest wisdom, not to despise the
word, nor to set up the dictates of men above the word. The other text you have
Jer. 8.9. The wise men are ashamed, they are dismayed and taken. Lo, they have
rejected the word of the Lord, and what wisdom is in them?

3. God does many times leave many learned, and wise men, unto themselves, to
fall into errors and corruptions, to this very purpose, that others may be
tried by them, whether they will follow their opinion and judgment, or stick
fast to Gods testimonies, Dan. 11.35. And some of them of understanding shall
fall, to try by them. We read it, to try them: But the words are (...) ad
probandum per illos, to prove others by their example; They shall therefore be
suffered to fall into many sins and corruptions, (for of that sort of falling
it may well be understood) that it may be seen, who will cleave unto the word
of God, rather than to the opinions of learned men.

4. Whereas they were wont to be charged as proud, arrogant, and self-conceited
persons, that will not in all things subscribe to the judgments of learned men;
but scruple such things as many understanding judicious persons make no bones
of: You must remember as to this, that it is rather an act of the greatest
pride and arrogance in the most learned men, to set up their dictates in
opposition to the commands of Jesus Christ. All that are truly humble will
stoop to his precepts, and subject themselves to his guidance and governance, 1 Timothy 6.3, 4. If any man teach otherwise, and consent not to wholesome words, even
the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine which is according to
godliness: He is proud, knowing nothing, Neh. 9.29. Thou testifiedst against
them, that thou might bring them again unto thy law: yet they dealt proudly,
and hearkened not unto thy commandments. Mark it, here are the proud and
arrogant persons, that think themselves wiser than God, and will not submit to
his instructions and counsels. This is pride indeed, and monstrous
self-conceitedness. And therefore let me close this head with the advice of
Solomon, Prove. 3.5, 6. Trust in the Lord with all thine heart, and lean not to
thine own understanding. In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct
thy paths.

6. The last case I shall mention, wherein especial care is to be taken, lest
we be ensnared by the example of the multitude, is in case of the Inhabitants
of the places where we live, and amongst whom we dwell: and (that I may
comprize them together) in case of the persons with whom much of our business
lies in matters of the world, and with whom we often converse in our secular
negotiations and affairs. I join them together, because there is a near
cognation and similitude betwixt them, and the temptation works in both, upon
the same ground and motive. People are willing to do, as their neighbors do:
and to take the same course, as their ordinary companions take, and men of the
same rank and outward condition with them. Will the tradesman be apt to plead,
other men of my profession commonly sit and tipple at the alehouse, and tavern,
and they say, they cannot make a good bargain without it; or they should lose
their custom, except they humor their enstomers in their lusts; And why may
not I do the same? Others say, they cannot live if they should speak the truth
in their markets, and not take the liberty to dissemble or lie as to the price
of their commodities; and why should I be more strict than they? Will the
gentleman argue, other men of my rank and estate spend their time in hawking,
and hunting, and carding, and gaming, and revelling; they never think of a
calling, or how to be serviceable to God in their generations; and why may not
I take the same liberty? Most in the town and parish neglect studying the word,
and never pray in their families, nor instruct their children, and servants;
and what reason is there that we should be more precise than all the neighbor
hood besides? As persons love to be in the common fashion, as to their garb and
habit; So in respect of their moral actions and behavior: So much is clearly
employed in the words of Joshua, cap. 24.15. If it seem evil to you to serve the
Lord; choose you this day whom you will serve, either the gods which your
fathers served, that were on the other side of the flood, or the gods of the
Amorites in whose land ye dwell. He knew, that men are inclined to be of the
same religion with the people of the place where they dwell, and to conform to
the inhabitants of the neighborhood, that are round about them. And therefore
the Lord does warn his people to take heed of the sins of the Canaanites when
they should come to dwell in the land of Canaan, Deuteronomy. 6.10, 11, 14. And it
shall be when the Lord thy God shall have brought thee into the land, which he
swear unto thy fathers, etc. Then beware lest thou forget the Lord, which
brought thee forth out of the land of Egypt; from the house of bondage. And v.
14. Ye shall not go after other gods of the gods of the people which are round
about you, q. d. You have heard already of their abominations, and perhaps
think you abhor them; but the danger will be when you come into their land, and
to have your habitations amongst them: then you will be apt to do after their
customs. Now to fence you against the prevalence of this temptation, let me
beseech you to lay to heart this one particular. That by casting our lot
amongst evil neighbors, and in the midst of a wicked people, God does try us
whether our hearts are sound in his statutes, or not; and whether we will deal
faithfully, or falsely, in his covenant. And will not you be careful to be found
upright, when you are upon the trial? If a master should leave a sum of money,
scattered up and down in a room, as if it were neglected; and the servant
knows that it is but purposely to try his honesty; and that his master has
told it exactly, and knows if any be missing; only he takes this way to try
his truth, and fidelity: Would not the servant be very careful and wary in such
a case, when he knows he stands upon his trial? Why man, thus it is in this
matter. Is thine habitation fixed amongst workers of iniquity? Does much of thy
business lie with those that are profane and ungodly? Why, now thou stand
upon thy trial, and God does order it to be so, to this very end, that he may
try thy truth and fidelity, and the honesty of thy heart, whether thou will
follow his word, or their examples. That Is a notable text to this purpose,
Judge. 3.1, 4. Now these are the Nations, which the Lord left to prove Israel by
them. And v. 4. And they were to prove Israel by them, to know whether they
would hearken to the commandments of the Lord, which he commanded their fathers
by the hand of Moses. God could have drove out all the idolatrous Nations
together, and have utterly rooted them up at first before the face of his
people: But he left some to be dispersed amongst them. To what end were they
left? Why to this very end, that he might try his people, whether they would
cleave unto him, with full purpose of heart, or not. So God could gather his
Saints together, and destroy the wicked from amongst them: But he leaves them
scattered up and down in the midst of the ungodly, and surrounded with them on
every side, to this very purpose, That he may try them, whether they will fear
and serve him, or be conformed to the wicked amongst whom they dwell.

And therefore it is worth your observing by the way, That there are three
sorts of providential dispensations, whereby God does especially set his people
upon the trial.

1. By permitting errors, and heresies to be vented amongst them: By suffering
men to vent their own corrupt notions, instead of divine truths; and to set up
their own superstitious inventions, in the place of Christ's Ordinances. These
are a great trouble and perplexity upon the spirits of the godly; and perhaps
sometimes they are apt to wonder, that the Lord does not take more care of his
own worship and institutions, but suffers them to be defiled with humane
devices, and sinful mixtures. Why Sirs, God is jealous of his truth, and
worship; but he suffers these errors, and corruptions for a time, that
Professors may be tried, concerning the soundness of their profession: whether
they will be blown aside by every wind of doctrine, and be carried by every
specious pretense, to follow the fancies of men; or will hold fast the truth
and simplicity of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 11.19. For there must be also heresies
among you, that they which are approved, may be made manifest among you.

2. God does put his people upon the trial, by letting forth the rage of
unreasonable men against them: and by exercising them under hardships and
difficulties, upon the score of Religion. For times of suffering for
righteousness sake, are discriminating seasons. The boystrous wind of
persecution will drive away the chaff, and the wheat only will abide. And
therefore such dispensations are called trials, because Gods end therein is,
that his people may be proved. He does not give them into the hands of his
adversaries, as if he did not regard their welfare, or sought their ruin, or
delighted in their afflictions and sorrow; but his intent is to try them, 1
Pet. 4.12. Beloved, think it not strange concerning the fiery trial, which is
to try you, as if some strange thing happened unto you, Jam. 1.2, 3. My
brethren, count it all joy when ye fall into diverse temptations: knowing this
that the trying of your faith works patience.

3. The Lord does put his servants upon the trial, by dispersing them amongst
the ungodly, and fixing their habitations in the midst of sinners. For God has
appointed before, the bounds of men's dwellings, here, as well as their eternal
condition hereafter, Act. 17.26. And he could gather his people into a body
together: But he has scattered them up and down, here a person, and there a
family, and the wicked are one very side: and it is done to this end, that they
may be proved, whether they will go down the stream with the multitude, or walk
in the narrow way of holiness, and the fear of God. And would not you be found
faithful upon trial? Take the resolution of David as a pattern, Psalm. 17.3, 4.
Thou have proved mine heart, thou have visited me in the night, thou have tried
me, and shall find nothing: I am purposed that my mouth shall not transgress.
Concerning the works of men, by the word of thy lips, I have kept me from the
paths of the destroyer.

This is all that I shall speak under the third general Head, Touching the
special cases that require most diligent circumspection, lest we be drawn aside
into sin by following the multitude.

SECT. V.
THe next Point to be handled is, the demonstration or proof of the Doctrine,
The question is this.

Quest. 4. What reasons may be produced, against compliance with the multitude
in sin, which we may press upon our hearts, in order to abate the edge of that
inclination that is apt to be within us, to follow their example?

Ans. I shall reduce all that shall be delivered in answer to this Question,
unto four Heads. The arguments may be drawn from four Topics.

From 1. The spiritual estate, wherein the multitude are. 2. The concernment
that lies upon us, to prove our own spiritual estate, and condition. 3. The
duties that are incumbent on us, in relation to the multitude, which are
altogether inconsistent with our compliance with them. 4. The danger that will
arise by following them.


1. The first Argument is taken, from the spiritual estate wherein most persons
are, and the way wherein they travel, or the place whither they are going. Why
Sirs, the greatest number of people are the children of the devil, and lie in
the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity: they go in the broad way
that leads to hell and destruction. So that, if you will follow their example,
it must of necessity end in the ruin of your precious, and immortal souls. If
you will travel toward heaven, you must expect but few to bear you company,
and to be of your society, and fellowship. The multitude take another course,
and their journeying tends to another place, even to the chambers of eternal
death, 1 John 5.19. And we know that we are of God, and the whole world lies
in wickedness. The whole world] that is, the greatest part of the world, the
generality of people: the denomination is given to the major part. And will you
follow them that lie in wickedness? that are wholly drencht in sensuality and
ungodliness? Is their carriage a good pattern for imitation, that are
altogether dead in sin, and even buried in it? that lie in sin as in a dead
sleep, and are under the power and command of the prince of darkness? This is
the reason which our Savior presses, Mat. 7.13, 14. Enter ye in at the strait
g^te; for wide is the gate, and broad is the way that leads to destruction,
and many there le which go in thereat: Because strait is the gate, and narrow
is the way which leads unto life, and few there be that find it. It amounts
to thus much, as if Christ had said, The whole world is divided into two
companies, or secieties, and they take different courses; some are traveling
toward heaven, but, alas, they are but an handful, in comparison of the
multitudes that flock together in the way to hell and damnation: Do not you
therefore consort with them, but associate your selves with the little flock,
to whom the Father has designed to give the Kingdom. If your hearts hanker
after consociation, and fellowship with the multitude, you will be sure to find
them in the way to eternal perdition.

2. Therefore you should take heed that you be not led by the multitude, that
you may evidence your selves to be the peculiar people of God, such as are
taken into the bond of the Covenant of reconciliation with him, and that shall
everlastingly dwell in his presence. Which you cannot do if you follow the
multitude: for the children of God are a selected company, such as are called
and picked out from the multitude, that they may drive on other designs, and
take a way by themselves. Although believers are in the world, yet they are not
of the world; but a spiritual body gathered out of the world, Joh. 17.16. They
are not of the world, even as I am not of the world. Psalm. 14.3. Know that the
Lord has set apart him that is godly for himself. How are such set apart for
the enjoyment of God? Why, as in the designation and fore-appointment of the
Father before time, so he does set them apart in time, by the grace of
conversion, whereby they are plucked out from amongst the generality, who are
still suffered to walk in their own ways. This is an argument of great
strength and efficacy, if rightly managed and improved: And therefore give me
leave to open it more distinctly in three Conclusions.

1. It concerns us, as we tender our own spiritual comfort and welfare, not
only to resign and give up our selves to be the Lords, but also to make it
manifest, and evident that we are the Lords: not only to become unfeignedly the
servants of God, but to clear it up to our hearts, that we are indeed his
servants, and that he has made with us an everlasting Covenant. For herein
lies the sweetness of Religion, and that which will put life, and comfort, into
every condition and providence; when we can assure our hearts, that through
grace we are beloved of the Lord. Then a person may eat his bread with joy, and
drink his wine with a merry heart, he may partake of all his enjoyments wiht
delight, and pass through every estate without any perplexity or trouble, when
he knows, that God has accepted him, Eccl. 9.7. And moreover, the joy
arising from this knowledge will wonderfully enlarge the heart, and minister
strength to the spirit in running the steps of Gods commandments. The love of
God when it is thus shed abroad into our souls, will constrain us to love him
again, and to put forth our utmost vigor and might in keeping his statutes.
And therefore we are so earnestly called upon, To make our calling and election
sure, 2 Pet. 1.10. And to examine our selves whether we are in the faith? 2
Cor. 13.5.

2. The sure way to make it evident, without danger of being deceived, that we
are the Lords, and that he is our father, is by a serious reflecting upon our
carriage toward him, and diligently observing the tenor of our conversation
before him. If you would prove that there is a principle of grace in your
hearts, it must be by the exercise of grace, in bringing forth fruits of
holiness in your lives. It Is by our conversations Christ will judge us
hereafter; and therefore according to the tenor thereof we must pass sentence
upon our selves here. That is they way to prevent self-deception, and to put it
out of question, that the root of the matter is in us, Gal. 6.4. Let every man
prove his own work, and then he shall have rejoicing in himself alone, and not
in another. And v. 7. Be not deceived, God is not mocked: for whatsoever a man
sows, that shall he also reap.

3. To bring the matter home to our purpose, you must observe, That if your
conversation be molded according to the example of the multitude, and if you
walk no otherwise than the generality walk, it will never conduce to this end:
nor be effectual to evidence that you are of the number of Gods children.
Common practices will not be evidential of special grace. It is a singularly
righteous and holy conversation that must prove you to be partakers of a saving
conversion. If you will make it appear that you are chosen out of the world you
must not be conformed unto the world. For the children of God are a chosen
generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation, and a peculiar people, 1 Pet.
2.9.

And therefore take notice by the way, that such a conversation, as is
evidential of saving grace in the heart, and consequentially of the persons
being translated into the state of grace, must have these three poperties.

It must be 1. A spiritual. 2. An uniform. 3. A singular.
Conversation.

1. It must be a spiritual conversation, or obedience. When a man does the
commandments of God from the heart, and with the soul and spirit; out of an
awful regard, that is within him, to the majesty of God; and a conscientious
respect unto the law of the Lord. External duties may be performed by an
hypocrite; and are no certain caracters of a sanctified heart: But they are
born of God, who do engage their very spirits to approach unto him. When a
person does serve the Lord because he loves him; and does obey his voice
because be delights in it: when he does act righteously in his life, and his
heart goes along with him in his actions: Here is the note of an Israelite
indeed. It was this comforted Hezekiah, Issa. 38.3. Remember now, O Lord, I
beseech thee, how I have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart,
and have done that which is good in thy sight.

2. It must be a settled and uniform conversation when holiness is a clew of
thread, that runs through the whole of a man's course, and does interest it self
in his constant and continued practice. It is not a fit of affection, or some
obedience tendered upon occasion, when the sinner is in a good mood; that will
prove him to be a regenerate person: But when he does wholly dedicate himself,
and his time, unto the service of God; and bringe^h all other affairs and
concernments into a subordination thereunto. As it is not every particular act
of sin, that will denominate the party offending to be an impenitent sinner;
except he make it his way and course wherein he walks: So it is not every
particular act of righteousness, that will bespeak the person performing it a
righteous person; except holiness be the high way where in he walks, and he
take it along with him into all conditions, and companies, into all his
concernments and undertakings, Psalm. 106. 3. Blessed are they that keep
judgment, and he that does righteousness, at all times. And Enoch had this
testimony, that he pleased God: For he walked with God, three hundred years, i.
e. He was in the fear of the Lord all his life time, Heb. 11.5. Genesis 5.22.

3. It must be a special, or singular conversation, such as is differenced from
that of the generality of people. If you walk as they do, you will prove your
selves to be such as they are. How shall it appear that you are a peculiar
people, unless your demeanor be answerable, i.e. a peculiar demeanor? It is
upon this condition, that God does accept of you as his, and makes over
himself unto you, That you do not walk as others walk, a Cor. 6.17, 18.
Wherefore come out from amongst them, and be ye separate, says the Lord, and
touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive you. And I will be a father to
you, and ye shall be my sons and daughters, says the Lord Almighty.

That is the second argument, for demonstration of the doctrine.

3. A third reason that may be pressed against following a multitude in evil,
is taken, from the duties that are incumbent on us in relation unto them, when
they sin against the Lord, and do that which is displeasing in his sight. There
are such duties required at our hands, as are not only inconsistent with
confederating with them, and walking after their example, but diametrally
opposite, and contrary thereunto, as light is to darkness. I might insist upon
many, but shall content my self to instance in these four only.

1. It is our duty to pity them, and mourn over them, and to take up a
lamentation on their account: To make it the grief of our spirits, to see the
name of God dishonored, and his statutes contemned, and the blood of the Lord
jesus despised, and poor souls running headlong to destruction. This has been
the carriage of the Saints of God, in times of corruption and wickedness, Psalm.
119.136. Rivers of waters run down mine eyes: because they keep not thy law. As
David was humbled for his own transgressions, so it was an heartbreaking to
him, to see others transgress. And see how the prophet Jeremy was affected with
the sin and misery of the disobedient, Jer. 13.17. But if not will not hear it,
my soul shall weep in secret places, for your pride; and mine eye shall weep
sore, and run down with tears, because the Lords flock is carried away captive.
Now these compassionate workings, and godly sorrow, are a frame of spirit, at a
great distance from compliance with the ungodly. And this is one particular
that will render us conformable unto our Lord and master: As he loved his own
unto the end, with an insuperable, everlasting, and unparalleled love; so his
bowels were moved with pity and compassion toward his very enemies, that set
against him, because of their folly and the wretched estate into which they had
plunged themselves, Luke 19.41, 42. And when he was come near, he beheld the
City, and wept over it, saying, if thou had known, even thou, at least in
this thy day, the things which belong unto thy peace! but now they are hid from
thine eyes. Mark the speech of Christ here, how it is made up of a kind of
abrupt expressions, as proceeding from a spirit full of affection and
tenderness, and seeking as it were, to ease it self in a passionate
lamentation. If thou had known, q.d. Alas poor Jerusalem! thy desolation is
approaching, because thou had not known the things that belong unto thy
peace. Well had it been for thee, if thou had but known them! Would to God
thou had been so wise, as to have taken them into thy knowledge and
consideration; that so thy calamities might have been averted and prevented! O
what a grief is it to my heart, that thou bost not known them! So that here is
our duty, if God has cast our lot amongst many wicked, that commit
abominations in his sight, we should be so far from joining in a combination
with them, that it should stir up an holy mourning in our souls, to see them
trampling upon the word of God, and lightly esteeming the rock of our
salvation. And these are the persons whom, in times of public judgments, the
Lord is pleased to set a mark upon; namely, such as do not only cry out of
their own sins, but are filled with sorrow for the abominations of the
multitude. See it in Ezekiels vision, Ezekiel. 9.4. And the Lord said unto him, Go
through the midst of the City, through the midst of Jerusalem, and set a mark
upon the foreheads of the men that sigh, and that cry for all the abominations
that be done in the midst thereof. Set a mark upon them, i. e. a mark of
special and gracious observation, here are the people that are beloved of the
Lord, unto such as these he will have respect: and secondly a mark for sure
deliverance and preservation; when others fall at their right hand and at their
left, the evil determined shall not come near unto them, as it is, v. 6. Come
not near any man upon whom is the mark. You know the Angel could do nothing as
to the overthrowing of Sodom, till Lot was secured. What was he above other
men? See, 2 Pet. 2.7, 8. And he delivered just Lot, vexed with the filthy
conversation of the wicked: For that righteous man dwelling amongst them, in
seeing and hearing, vexed his righteous soul, from day to day, with their
unlawful deeds.

2. When others sin, it is our duty to reprove them, as we have occasion, and
opportunity: and that plainly and faithfully, with christian prudence and
discretion. And this is utterly inconsistent with following their example Turpe
est doctori cum culpa redarguit ipsum.
For thou art altogether inexcusable, O man, whosoever thou art, that judge
them that do evil, and do the same: for wherein thou judge another, thou
condemnest thy self. He that would do good by reproving another, must be sure
to look warily to himself; that he be not involved in the same guilt: lest his
words recoyle into his own face, and be retorted unto his own shame and
confusion. That is an excellent saying of the vulgar latin, and the original
text, will well bear the translation, (...)
Prove. 18.17. Justus primus est accusator sui: venit amicus ejus, and
investigabit eum. A just man before he meddle in the reproof of others, will
diligently search his own Soul, and see to the cleansing and reforming of his
ways. So that the duty of reproving the ungodly, does suppose we ought to keep
free from the taint of their ungodliness. This is the Apostle Paul's way of
argumentation, Ephesians. 5.11. Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of
darkness, but rather reprove them.

3. Our duty in relation unto sinners is, what in us lies, to convert them and
win them over to the truth: To endeavor that of ignorant, they may become
verst in the ways of God; and of wicked and sinful, they may become serious
and holy; and of enemies of religion, they may be sure friends and assertours
of it. And this is far from imitation of them: For if you comply with them in
sin, that will harden them exceedingly, and make them more bold and venturous,
and obstinate in their evil ways. They will argue after this sort, well may we
take this course, for such professors of religion join with us, and such as
are accounted godly are men of our confederacy. It is charged upon the prophets
of Jerusalem, that they committed adultery, and walked in lies, and
strengthened the hands of evil doers, that none did return from his wickedness,
Jer. 23.14. How did they strengthen their hands? Not only by their corrupt
doctrine, and flattering sermons; but also by their wicked lives, and
conversations. That did minister an argument to the evil doers, whereby to
maintain their presumptuous hopes of salvation; and from whence to take
encouragement not to repent of their abominations. This compliance with
sinners, instead of helping to convert them, does lay a stumbling block in
their way. And indeed there is scarcely a greater obstacle in the way of the
conversion of the wicked, than the sinful compliance of carnal professors.

4. It is expressly required as our duty, in relation to sinners, to withdraw
from them, that they may be ashamed, Prove. 1.15. My son walk not thou in the
way with them, refrain thy feet from their path. So Prove. 9.6. Forsake the
foolish and live; and go in the way of understanding, 2 These. 3.14. And if any
man obey not our word by this Epistle, note that man, and have no company with
him, that he may be ashamed. And were this duty but strictly and
conscientiously practiced by the body of professors of religion, to withdraw
from such as walk disorderly, who knows what good effects it might produce
unto their conviction, humiliation, and salvation? A remarkable instance we
have in the Ecclesiastical histories. When Simeon a Bishop in Persia was led to
prison for refusing to communicate in their idolatrous worship; As he was
going, there was sitting at the gate of the Kings Court an old Eunuch that had
been the Kings Tutour; called Ustazares, once a Christian, but now fallen from
his profession: who seeing Simeon led by, rose up and did him reverence: On the
contrary Simeon would not show him any respect, but turned away from him with
indignation, and rebuked him for revolting from the truth. And what effect had
it upon the Eunuchs spirit? Why, immediately Usthazares burst forth into
weeping, and laid aside his rich apparel, and sitting at the Court gate, he
cried out, Woe is me, with what face shall I hereafter look upon God, seeing
Simeon disdaineth to behold me? and presently he renounced his idolatry,
repented of his former inconstancy, and died a martyr for the faith.

That Is the third argument to strengthen the doctrine.

4. The last reason, which I shall mention, to dissuade from following a
multitude in sin, shall be taken from the danger that will arise by so doing.
If you sin with them, you must expect to be plagued as they are. If you will
eat of their dainties you must also drink of their cup, i. e. the cup of the
Lords indignation, which he has in store to put into their hands. There is no
way in the world to avoid the fury of God, that is to be poured forth upon the
wicked, but by withdrawing from them, and not daring to tread in their steps.
For the Lord, in the execution of judgment, is no respecter of persons: He
deals impartially and alike with all sorts and conditions. He will not spare
professors, because of their profession, when he comes to punish the
inhabitants of the earth: But if their actions be alike, they shall receive the
like portion also. See what the Lord says to Judah, because they turned aside
unto idolatry after Isreal's example, Ezekiel. 23.31. Thou have walked in the way
of thy sister, therefore I will give her cup into thine hand. Nay let me tell
you, that profess religion, and yet follow the multitude in evil; you shall
receive the greater condemnation: You will not only be chargeable with your own
personal sins and impenitence; but with the sins of others, that were induced
to follow them by your example; and with the impenitence of others, wherein
they persisted through your encouragement. So that if you would be free from a
most certain and sore destruction; do not say a confederacy with the multitude
in sin. Some indeed understand that place, Rev. 18.4. of a local separation;
but I think it is rather meant of a spiritual separation from Antichristian
pollutions: However, if that be included, this is not excluded: with which text
I shall shut up this head, Rev. 18.4. And I heard another voice from heaven,
saying, Come out of her my people that ye be not partaker of her sins, and that
ye receive not of her plagues.

SECT. VI. For Application of the Doctrine.
HAving finished the doctrinal part of this point, I shall now proceed to the
practical improvement of it; for our edification, and building up in knowledge
and holiness, unto everlasting life. Let me therefore speak a little, to the
usefulness of this lesson, By way of 1. Information. 2. Exhortation.


1. By way of Information. There are three special inferences, that naturally
flow from what has been delivered.

Infer. 1. If a Christian must not be led by the example of a multitude, but
must stand fast against their example and solicitations unto sin: then hence
it follows, That such as are indeed the servants of Christ, and will walk
uprightly with the Lord, in the conscientious observance of his laws and
precepts, they must of necessity be endued with a spirit of fortitude and
courage. Why? Because in many cases they are to withstand the multitude; and to
walk in a way, that is opposite, and contradictory to that of the greatest
number of persons: and this will never be done, without much courage and
resolvedness. A man that swimmeth against the stream, and the tide, and the
wind together, need to put forth the utmost of his strength, and to strike
vigorously and strenuously; or else he will be carried away: Such is the course
of every godly man. He must swim against the stream of corrupt nature, that
would carry him headlong into evil, as the horse rusheth into the battle: He
must strive against the wind of satanical temptations, and carnal reasonings;
they would drive him back into the haven of ease and pleasure, or outward
profit and greatness: And then he must contend likewise against the tide of the
multitude, who come against him as so many tempestuous waves: So that if he do
not act with all his might, and set himself with a full purpose of heart, to
hold on his course; he will certainly be overborn by the violence of their
opposition. A cowardly Christian is a contradiction in adjecto; for such a man
will never be faithful unto God: because he is to bear up against the
multitude. And therefore you shall find the Lord pressing his people to courage
on this very account, 2 Chronicles. 15.7, 8. Be strong therefore, and let not your
hands be weak: for your work shall be rewarded. And when Asa heard these words,
and the prophecy of Oded the prophet, he took courage, and put away the
abominable idols out of all the land of Judah and Benjamin. Mark, it was a time
of general defection and apostasy, and therefore God does exhort them to be
valiant for the truth. There need to be a good measure of resolvedness, in the
spirit, to stand fast against the enticements and provocations of some
particular sinners: much more when a Christian is to walk in a contrariety to
the most, and has a multitude to contest and encounter with, Ezra 10.4. Be of
good courage, and do it, Josh. 1.7. Only be thou strong, and very courageous,
that thou may observe to do according to all the law, which Moses my servant
commanded thee.

That Is the first deduction from the point.

2. If a believer must not act after the pattern of the multitude, then hence I
gather, that such as will approve themselves unto God, and not deal falsely and
unfaithfully in the covenant of God, they must be men of singularity. As they
must walk regularly, so they must walk singularly, in a way by themselves: in
respect to abstinence from sin, in regard of purity of heart, and holiness of
life and conversation. They are not permitted a compliance with the greatest
number of men, in any indirect course. As in respect to the grace of conversion
and sanctification, though the servants of God are in the world, yet they are
not of the world, but gathered, and culled, and chosen out of it, Jo. 15.19.
Jo. 17.16. So must it be in relation to their practice also, though they abide
in the world, yet they must not be conformed unto the world, but keep
themselves unspotted from the pollutions of it. This is pure religion, and
undefiled before God, and the Father, Jam. 1.27.

Some there are that plead against holiness, and for the countenancing of their
corruptions: What, would you have us to be singular? Must we be more precise
than others, and take a course by our selves? Why Sirs, If you will be
Christians in good earnest, and follow the Lord fully, it is the very thing
which God requires and expects at your hands, that you be men of singularity.
For the Lord has set apart him that is godly for himself, Ps. 4.3. (...)
segregavit, divisit, signo aliquo excellenti separavit. He has put a
remarkable difference betwixt his own people and others, in respect of his
blessings upon them; and therefore may justly expect that they should be
singular in their carriage, and demeanor toward him.

I would not be mistaken in this point, and therefore must take liberty to
distinguish of a threefold singularity.

There is a 1. Fantastical. Singularity. 2. Affected. Singularity. 3. Sober.
Singularity.


1. There is a Fantastical singularity, in respect of opinion: When persons
have odd crotchets and fancies of their own, wherein they differ from serious,
and sober Christians, in all ages; and in the maintaining of which opinions,
they sometimes excessively pride themselves, as if they had gotten some higher
seize than the rest. This is an evil, to which professors of godliness,
amongst us, have been hugely addicted, in these latter days: When they have
gotten some uncouth notion or expression by the end; they espouse its interest,
and think they are some body more than ordinary, in the matters of religion.
When they have entertained a peculiar fancy of their own, contrary to the
sentiments of all soberminded believers; hereof they will boast as of an higher
degree of perfection. This sort of singularity commonly proceeds from a mixture
of pride and ignorance. When persons have high conceits of themselves, and in
the mean time have little clear and distinct knowledge of the principles of
godliness; possibly they have some loose and broken insight into divine truths,
but do not understand the mysteries of religion in their combination, as they
are connected and knit together: In such case they are exceeding apt to run
into these by-waies of their own. The Apostle seems to reduce it unto these
two heads, viz. ignorance and self conceitedness, 1 Timothy 6.3, 4. If any man
teach otherwise, and consent not to wholesome words, even the words of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine which is according to godliness: He is proud,
knowing nothing, but doting about questions and strifes of words, etc. In
reference hereunto the faith of believers is the common faith, Tit. 1.4. Which
was once delivered unto the Saints, Jude. 3. Upon this account, we should
labor to be of one judgment, That with one mind, and one mouth, we may
glorify God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 15.5, 6. We should
be very cautious of espousing any singular notion, without clear warrant from
the word, and consulting the apprehensions of godly ministers, and serious
Christians. And for prevention of this singularity, let every man study his own
weakness, and think soberly of himself, least instead of Juno he embrace a
cloud; least in the place of a more spiritual and refined truth, he fall into
some dangerous and soul-destructive error. And the rather ought we, in this
case, to give the more earnest heed; because when weak Christians are
inconsiderately caught in this snare, it is a difficult thing to be delivered
out of it. They think it concerns them in point of honor, and as they tender
their reputation, to justify and maintain the notions which they have avowedly
held, and professed: And this is a strong temptation to a settled continuance
therein. And therefore, I say through the grace given unto me, to every man
that is among you, not to think of himself more highly than he ought to think:
but to think soberly, according as God has dealt to every man the measure of
faith, Romans 12.3.

2. There is an affected singularity; as to a man's outward garb and ornaments
of the body; as to civil salutations and courteous demeanor, and the like.
When persons make it a part of their Religion, to abstain from that decency of
habit, or gesture, or civility of expression, which is commonly used; and
delight in this regard to act in a mode by themselves. And on the other hand,
when others place Religion in using such habits and gestures, and the like
fooleries, which God has not required. This is that which renders Religion
contemptible and ridiculous in the eyes of carnal people, and makes them think
it is nothing but a kind of niceness, as to such toys and trifles. So the
Pharisees of old, neglected the power of godliness, judgment, mercy, and faith,
and kept a great ado about washing of pots, and cups, and making broad their
phylacteries, and many other things, which they had received to hold. They left
the commandments of God, to follow the devices and imaginations of their own
hearts, Mar. 7.4. Col. 2.20, 21, 23. These things may have a show of wisdom in
will worship; at least in the fancies of some, they appear to have it. Here is
a fair pretense, of greater strictness than the rest: whereas true wisdom
consists in fearing the Lord, and doing his commandments, Psalm. 111.10. That
wherein the Saints of God differ from the rest of men, is in the hidden man of
the heart, in the unblameableness and holiness of the life; from whence will
flow likewise a sobriety, moderation, and inoffensiveness in all particulars.
The kingdom of God is not meat and drink (it does not consist in contests, and
disputes, and animosities, about such trivial things) but righteousness, and
peace, and joy in the holy Ghost. For he that in these things serves Christ,
is acceptable to God, and approved of men, Romans 14.17, 18.

3. But lastly, There is a sober singularity; when men keep themselves free
from the real corruptions of the times, wherein they live; and of the places,
and persons, where their lot is cast, and with whom they converse. When they
will not wallow in the filth and mire of the world, nor defile themselves with
the abominations and defilements of the wicked; though in matters warrantable,
and not dissonant to Gods word, they do as the rest of men do. In this respect,
all sincere Christians must be singular; they must not follow a multitude to do
evil. When others are lukewarm in the service of God, they must be fervent in
spirit, serving the Lord, Romans 12.11. Whilst others place their worship in
shadows and ceremonies, and a a pompous outside of devotion; they must worship
God in spirit and in truth, Joh. 4.24. And glorify him both with their bodies
and with their spirits, which are Gods, 1 Cor. 6.20. When others drink, and
card, and dice, and are vain, and wanton; they must study to live quiet and
peaceable lives, in all godliness and honesty, 1 Timothy 2.2. To walk honestly as
in the day, not in rioting and drunkenness, not in chambering and wantonness,
not in strife and envying But putting on the Lord Jesus Christ, and not making
provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof, Romans 13.13, 14. When
others walk carelessly, they must be precise and circumspect, Ephesians. 5.15. You
must not be afraid of being exactly conscientious, in Gods way, or of bearing
an awful respect to all, even the least of, his commandments, for fear of being
singular, or so accounted. For that is the way which he has chalked out for
you. Thou shall not follow a multitude to sin. So much for the second Inference.

3. If we must not follow a multitude to do evil, Then from hence we may draw
this Conclusion, as an undeniable truth; That unity, and unanimity, and
uniformity, wherein persons join together with one consent, and without any
divisions amongst them, is not in all cases to be commended and approved: but
only where they are exercised, and as far as they are employed, in the doing of
good. For if people commit evil in the sight of the Lord, I must not sin with
them for uniformities sake.

These very expressions of unity and uniformity have made a great deal of
bustle in the world; and they are engines whereby poor ignorant souls are
commonly deluded, and imposed upon. Will you break asunder the unity that ought
to be amongst Christians? You ought to do thus or thus, were it but for
uniformities sake. Such fallacious argumentations are usually pressed, to
deceive the hearts of the simple. Whereas Sirs, uniformity, or a general and
unanimous agreement is not a matter commendable, in all cases whatsoever,
without limitation or restriction: but only so far, as the persons at unity are
engaged in following that which is good. If they be doing of evil, there must
be no union or conjunction with them. We read of as great unity and uniformity,
as is lightly imagined amongst a people that set themselves in open rebellion
against the most-High, and for which very thing the Lord threatened to bring
them to utter desolation, Jer. 44.15, 16, 17. Then all the men which knew that
their wives had burnt incense unto other gods, and all the women that stood by,
a great multitude, even all the people that dwelt in the land of Egypt, in
Pathros, answered Jeremiah, saying, As for the word that thou have spoken to
us, in the name of the Lord, we will not hearken unto thee. But we will
certainly do whatsoever thing goes forth out of our own mouth, to burn incense
unto the Queen of heaven, and to pour out drink offerings to her; as we have
done, we and our fathers, our kings and our princes, in the Cities of Judah,
and in the streets of Jerusalem. Mark it, Here was a great measure of unity,
and a full consent and harmony, in their resolutions, and practices. But see
the dreadful doom wherewith they are sentenced, v. 25, 26, 27. There is no
society of men, but are subject to corruptions, and may be guilty of imposing
some things to be believed and practiced, which are corrupt and sinful: And it
is utterly impossible to prove, that Christianity obliges a man to
communicate, or comply with that which is corrupt and abominable. In such
cases, the whole stress of a controversy lies in the proof of the lawfulness,
and warrantableness, of the matter enjoined and practiced; or else an argument
from uniformity, is of no validity, and will signify nothing at all with
judicious persons. For we must not join with the greatest number, to do evil.

A little to open this matter more distinctly, and to clear it up more fully to
your apprehensions, let these four things be observed.

1. That unity and uniformity, an unanimous consent, and agreement, are of the
number of those things, which borrow their goodness or evil, that are
commendable, or to be condemned, from the nature and quality of the subject,
unto which they are annexed. Just as it is in case of forwardness and activity
of spirit: If men are vigorous and active in carrying on a mischievous design,
in bring forth the fruits of unrighteousness, as some men commit wickedness
with both hands, earnestly; There activity of spirit is odious in the sight of
God: But if men be diligent and industrious, about that which is good; then is
their industry worthy of praise and honor. The like may be said, in case of
unanimity, and general agreement. As Astronomers speak of the Planet Mercury,
that he has little distinct influence of his own, but is malignant, or
auspicious, according to the nature of the other Planets with which he is in
conjunction: So does unity and uniformity accomodate themselves to the subject
matter about which they are exercised. Uniformity, Sirs, will not justify a
sinful action; But it is, the holiness of the action must commend the
uniformity. And therefore it is not a bare unity, which the holy Ghost presses
upon Believers; But unity of the spirit, when persons, with one consent, hold
the doctrines taught by the spirit, and are uniform in their subjection to the
dictates of the spirit, and in following the guidance of the holy Ghost, Ephesians.
4.3. Endeavoring to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace.

2. If this unity and uniformity be fixed upon, and conversant about, that
which is holy and honest, it renders that holiness, exceeding amiable and
lovely. It puts a luster and beauty upon men's fear and worship of the Lord;
when they serve him with one heart, and in one way: And helps to prevent
manifold mischiefs and inconveniences, which dissension and multiformity are
apt to introduce into the Church of Christ. For difference in worship, is apt
to breed distance and alienation in affection; and from thence arise
animosities, and spiritual feuds, and perverse disputings. So that I have not a
word to speak against a Religious uniformity, in that which is excellent, and
so far as it goes hand in hand with the divine Institutions and appointments
of our Lord Jesus Christ; and does not entrench upon his royal prerogative,
Psalm. 133.1. Behold how good, and how pleasant it is, for brethren to dwell
together in unity! O the abundant benefit of the communion of Saints! as the
contents of the Psalm seem to explain that passage, Psalm. 122.1, 2, 3, 4. I was
glad when they said unto me, Let us go into the house of the Lord. Our feet
shall stand within thy gates, O Jerusalem. Jerusalem is builded as a City, that
is compact together. Whither the tribes go up, the tribes of the Lord, unto the
testimony of Israel: to give thanks unto the name of the Lord. Psalm. 42.4. When
I remember these things, I pour out my soul in me; for I had gone with the
multitude, I went with them to the house of God, with the voice of joy and
praise, with a multitude of them that kept holy day. For such united societies,
and combinations of believers, God has in store a peculiar blessing, and is
wont to be amongst them with his especial favor and presence. For the Lord
loves the gates of Sion, more than all the dwellings of Jacob, Psalm. 87.2. And
therefore it is mentioned, as one of the great evangelical mercies promised, to
make way for the conveyance of further grace and mercy, Jer. 32.39. And I will
give them one heart, and one way, that they may fear me for ever, for the good
of them, and of their children after them.

3. But when a people unite, and join together, in what is sinful; if their
uniformity consist in the joint and unanimous practice of superstition and
will worship; or in any thing that is contradictious to the Law and commandment
of the Lord; In such case it becomes exceeding sinful and detestable, and a
very great provocation of the wrath of God. This kind of uniformity is nothing
else but a grand conspiracy against the God of heaven; a closely compacted
rebellion against the King of Kings. Thus the Pharisees and all the Jews did
uniformly practice their superstitious washings, and other ceremonious
observances received by tradition from the Elders; There were no Schisms or
divisions amongst them about such matters, Mark 7.3. But what says our Savior
in the case? See Mat. 15.9. In vain do they worship me, teaching for doctrines
the commandments of men. And again, v. 13, 14. Every plant which my heavenly
father has not planted, shall be rooted up. Let them alone: they be blind
leaders of the blind: And if the blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the
ditch. Such a kind of unity, was that of the High Priest and the people, in
their martyring of Stephen, They ran upon him (...) with one accord, They were
all linkt together in the same mind, Act. 7.57. And that of the Kings of the
earth, and Rulers, that set themselves, and took counsel together against the
Lord, and against his Christ, Psalm. 2.2, 3. And in this case we must say as the
Patriarch Jacob, Genesis 49.6. O my soul, come not thou into their secret: unto
their assembly, mine honor, be thou not united. I must not do evil to bring
about uniformity, nor unite with any in that which is sinful.

4. Lastly, observe under this head, That the only way to settle and compass,
such a kind of uniformity as is enjoined of the Lord, and pleasing unto him, is
to keep exactly close to the rule of Gods word, to take heed of making
additions thereunto, and not to be wise above what is written. Here is the
ready way to prevent Schisms, and divisions, and the breaking a sunder into
Sects and parties; when we keep up to this one, uniform, and perfect rule of
Worship. My brethren, If persons be guided by traditton, and impose upon men's
consciences, humane inventions and traditions: that is a most sovereign way, to
perpetuate Schism to the end of the Chapter. If persons will load the spirits
of their brethren, with their burdensome ceremonies, under whatever pretext of
decency or uniformity they are pressed: If they will force men's consciences to
stoop under the weight of their Canons; here is a sure way to cause separations,
and divisions, without remedy. But if you would indeed attain to such
uniformity, as is according to the mind of God, To the Law and to the
Testimony, Isa. 8.20. Traditions are multiform, and Canons of Counsels are
multiform, vain customs urged under the specious pretenses of order and decency
are multiform; and therefore will undoubtedly produce variance, and strife, and
multiformity. Besides, coming into the worship of God, without the stamp of
divine authority, they want a power and energy to settle the conscience: there
is no firm footing, where a Christian may tread in fuch cases, without danger,
or fear of pricking his feet among briars and thorns. But the word of God is
uniform, and at perfect peace with it self, and lays a sure foundation whereon
to bottom in all soul-concernments. And hereupon must you build all your
superstructures, in order to the erecting and setting up of uniformity amongst
Christians. This is very plain from former and latter woeful experiences. Look
into primitive times; what a stir was there in the Church about the keeping of
Easter? What tumults, bickerings, and heart-burnings, both here in Britain,
and in many other parts? Why? Because they had recourse to tradition, and
rested thereupon; and endeavored to impose one upon another, their own private
sentiments and practices: whereas the Scriptures would quickly have ended the
controversy. When divisions were risen up in the Church of Corinth,
particularly in the point of the Lord's Supper; what means does S. Paul make
use of, that the strife might cease? He puts them in remembrance of the words
of the Lord Jesus Christ, and brings them close to the first institution. For I
have received of the Lord, that which also I delivered unto you. 1 Cor. 11.23.
Mark them which cause divisions and offenses, contrary to the doctrine which ye
have learnt, and avoid them. Keep up Sirs, to the doctrines of the old and new
Testament, and let them be the standard of peace and unity.

Obj. All sorts of persons are pretenders to Scripture; even such as rest and
pervert it to their own destruction. The vilest heretics will Father their
erroneous doctrines upon the word, and profess to deduce them from thence. How
then is it possible, that we should rationally expect unity and concord in the
Church by this means? seeing the most notorious heretics will have this
pretext; they will shelter their monstrous opinions under the protection, and
patronage of the Scriptures?

Sol. This is a trite objection, much insisted on, by them that are
contentious, and of an imposing spirit; and are loath to be concluded and shut
up in the exercise of their power, within the limits and boundaries of the word
of God. And therefore deserves to be answered more largely, than at present I
can spare time to do. All that I shall speak unto it, which yet may
sufficiently discover the vanity of this cavil, I shall gather into five heads.

1. There will be heresies maintained in the Church of Christ, amongst people
that call themselves his disciples and servants, in all ages unto the end. It
is a matter that will fall out unavoidably, and cannot be otherwise. As there
will be men of corrupt lives, tares mingled with the wheat, in the kingdom of
the Son of man: so there will be men of corrupt notions and doctrines, that
speak perverse things to draw away disciples after them, 1 Cor. 11.19. For
there must be also heresies among you, that they which are approved, may be
made manifest among you. Mark, It must be, there is a necessity of it: Not a
necessity of precept, God is a God of truth, he requires truth in the judgment,
as well as integrity in the heart; he calls for soundness of mind, as well as
fervor of affection: But in respect of the event, there is a necessity; it
will certainly be so: and the Lord has excellent ends to accomplish thereby;
and therefore will suffer errors to be vented and spread abroad. But there were
false Prophets also among the people, even as there shall be false teachers
among you, who privily shall bring in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord
that bought them, and bring upon themselves swift destruction, 2 Pet. 2.1. See
also 1 Timothy 4.1, 2. Act. 20.30.31. This is no excuse unto the Authors and
broachers of any cursed opinions: But it is an useful lesson or document for
the servants of God, that they may be quickened to get their judgments
principled with sound knowledge, and to beware lest they be led aside from the
way, by the errors of the wicked, and so fall from their own stedfastness. That
is pertinent on this account, which our Savior speaks as to scandals in
general, Mat. 18.7. Woe unto the world because of offenses: For it must needs be
that offenses [heresies] come; but woe to that man by whom the offense [heresie]
comes.

2. The people of God have no just cause, to think ever a jot the worse of
Religion and godliness, because of the heresies that sometimes abound in the
Church of Christ. It should rather confirm us in the belief of the truth of the
Gospel: Our Savior having foretold us that thus it will be, and we seeing it
verified before our eyes. As the Apostle exhorts the Thessalonians, that no man
might be moved by his afflictions, For (says he) your selves know that we were
appointed thereunto, 1 These. 3.3. And v. 4. For verily when we were with you,
we told you before that we should suffer tribulation, even as it came to pass,
and ye know. So may I speak in the case of errors and heresies. Let no man
stumble, or be offended, at the ways of Christ, upon this account. Let not
your faith be weakened, nor your progress in holiness retarded, because of
these corrupt opinions, and heresies; For your selves know, that Christ by his
Spirit has foretold of these things; that it must come to pass, as it is in
all ages. And he has therefore warned you of it beforehand, lest you should be
offended, Joh. 16.1, 2, 3, 4.

3. When we speak of unity in Christian fellowship, and uniformity in the
worship and service of God, it must not be interpreted of union and combination
with such as are heretics: It must not be taken, as if it were meant, that we
must unite, and go hand in hand with such persons. Our Lord Christ has left
upon record, sufficient directions in this case, how to purge his Church of
such vermin, and to keep our selves free from the taint of their pollutions;
as well as in the case of those who are profane and disorderly in their
conversations. A man that is an heretic, after the first and second
admonition, reject: Knowing that he that is such, is subverted and sins,
being condemned of himself, Tit. 3.10, 11. From such withdraw thy self, 1 Timothy
6.3, 4, 5. If there come any unto you, and bring not this doctrine, receive him
not into your house, neither bid him God speed, 2 John 10. See also Gal. 1.9.
Romans 16.17. Rev. 2.2, 20, 24, 25.

4. But then, as to sound and sober Christians, let this be observed: That the
principles of the doctrine of Christ, which may be a sufficient ground for
their uniting in the worship and service of God, are plainly delivered in the
Scriptures, and to be clearly and easily deduced from thence. They are wrote in
legible characters, that he that runs may read them. And why should not those
things which will declare a man a sound believer, capacitate him for communion
with believers? These things are written plainly, as with the Pen of a diamond;
and inculcated frequently, that they may be apprenended, by the meanest of the
Saints, Isa. 45.19. I have not spoken in secret, in a dark place of the earth.
The oracles of God are not delivered darkly and obscurely: they are not folded
and wrapped up in intricate and ambiguous sentences; as the devils oracles, the
answers of false gods, were wont to be delivered, in caves, and grotto's, and
corners under the ground. The truths of God are set forth perspicuously. They
are all plain to him that understands, and right to them that find knowledge,
Prove. 8.9. For this commandment which I command thee this day, is not hidden,
neither is it far off: It is not in heaven, that thou should say, Who shall
go up for us to heaven, and bring it to us, that we may hear it and do it?
Neither is it beyond the Sea, that thou should say, Who shall go over the
Sea for us, and bring it unto us, that we may hear it, and do it? But the word
is very nigh unto thee, in thy mouth, and in thine heart, that thou may do
it. Indeed, prating fools (as the holy Ghost calls them), will seek nodum in
scirpo; they will find matter to wrangle with the most undeniable principles;
But the foundation-truths of Christianity are fully proclaimed in the ears of
all within the pale of the Church, that will lend their ears attentively to the
sound of the Gospel, and will diligently study divine mysteries. And the people
of God are under precious promises of the Spirits instruction, to guide them
into the knowledge of all necessary points, Joh. 16.13. 1 John 2.20, 27. Psalm.
25.12, 14. And why should not those, who are, under the conduct of the same
truths, in the way of holiness unto eternal life hereafter, unamimously join
together in the service of God here? Let us not fall out by the way, for we are
brethren.

5. As to all other matters, that are more abstruse and difficult, and where in
there is a great deal of variety in the interpretation of the Scripture, even
amongst sober Christians themselves; In such cases, unity and concord must be
built upon the foundation of forbearance, and mutual tenderness of believers
one toward another. If in order to peace and union in the Church, the judgment
of some that are in power, be set up as the Standard, unto which the
consciences of the rest, in the minutest affairs, are to be reduced; if peace
and unity, I say, depend upon these ticklish terms, it is likely never to be
attained whilst the world endures. As soon may you cut all men to the same
stature, as bring their judgments in all things to the same size. But if we
would follow after the things that make for peace and unity, let us with all
lowliness and meekness, with long-suffering forbear one another in love. Ephesians.
4.2, 3. Shall not Christians forbear, where the God of heaven is pleased to
forbear? Sold not we deal tenderly with such, and give them the right hand of
fellowship, whom God does tender as the apple of his eye? Romans 14.3. That is an
excellent Rubric for direction in the Saints Liturgy, Philip. 3.15, 16. Let us
therefore as many as are perfect, be thus minded: And if in any thing ye be
otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this unto you. Nevertheless, whereto we
have already attained, let us walk by the same rule, let us mind the same thing.

So much for the first use of the point, by way of information.

SECT. VII. 2. For Exhortation.
IF God has given us strict charg, that we do not comply with a multitude in
doing of evil, let us then seriously ponder and weigh this lesson in our
thoughts, and endeavor to practice it in all the particulars of our
conversations. Take heed lest Satan pravail upon you, through this wile and
artifice, of persuading you to that which is sinful, because a multitude
embrace it. Take the example of Noah for imitation herein, Genesis 6.9. Noah was a
just man, and perfect in his generations, and Noah walked with God. Mark it,
the generation wherein he lived was excessively corrupt, and sinful; it was
egregiously profane and debauched; wickedness, as a deluge, forerunner of the
other, had overspread the whole face of the earth: And yet Noch was upright,
and kept close to the Lord, thereby condemning the world of the ungodly. Take
the instance of Obadiah, who dwelt in Ahabs family, a man that sold himself to
wickedness in the sight of the Lord, that there was none like unto him: He
lived in days of such general Apostasy and Idolatry, that Elijah thought there
had been none left but himself, who had any zeal for Jehovah, and had not dealt
falsely in his covenant: And yet in such place and time, Obadiah feared the
Lord greatly, 1 Kings 18.3. See the carriage of the Christians at Pergamus for
encouragement herein. They dwelt where the Devil had his seat, where he was set
upon the throne, and had many servants and followers: And yet they departed not
from God, they would not say a confederacy with them in sin: They held fast the
name of Christ, and did not deny the faith, though in days when persecution
raged, and reached unto the death, Rev. 2.13. Has God cast your lot in a
wicked family, amongst carnal relations, in times of general atheism,
corruption and debauchery? Labor as Obadiah, to fear the Lord greatly; do they
entice thee to sin? Walk not thou in the way with them, refrain thy foot from
their path, Prove. 1.15. Do they violently and furiously rebel against the Lord,
and make a scoff of godliness, and oppose the professors of it? Do you study
to serve him the more eminently, and to walk with God, as Noah, the more
closely and strictly. Let no man deceive you with vain words: (Let not their
enticements prevail with you, let not their presumptions embolden you to fin
with them, let not their reproaches cause you to desist from your course) For
because of these things comes the wrath of God upon the children of
disobedience. Be not ye therefore partakers with them, Ephesians. 5.6, 7. So keep
your selves free from any sinful correspondency with the ungodly, be they never
so many, that you may be blameless and harmless, the sons of God, without
rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and perverse nation, among whom ye shine as
lights in the world: Holding forth the word of life, Philip. 2.15, 16.

In managing this use of exhortation, I shall speak something to you under
these four heads.

1. By way of particular exemplification, or instance, Wherein you should
beware that you do not follow the multitude. 2. By way of special direction,
what course you ought to take, that ye be not entangled with their example. 3.
By way of motive or provocative, to quicken you to a closure with that course,
and a diligent observing this counsel. 4. By way of Retortion, I shall show you
what use you should make of the example multitude, seeing you must not join in
combination with them.
1. By way of particular exemplification and instance. Wherein we should beware
that we be not led into sin by the example of the multitude. For the better
digesting whereof, and that the truths I shall deliver may be more easily
imprinted upon, and firmly retained in your thoughts, and memories; I will cast
them into five ranks.

1. The Ground of religion, whereon it is bottomed. 2. The matter of religion,
wherein it is placed. 3. The method and order, wherein it is prosecuted. 4. The
time and season, when it is minded. 5. Sundry particular duties, wherein the
multitude are prone to miscarry.
1. As to the ground of religion, whereon it is bottomed. The generality of
people are wont to take up the principles and mysteries of godliness wholly
upon trust: They build their faith upon the dictates and opinions of men. they
believe that Christ is the Savior, and accordingly call themselves his
servants; they acknowledge such and such ordinances, ought to be attended upon,
and accordingly lend their bodily presence at them; and the like: But if you
enquire into the ground and reason, why they believe and embrace this way of
religion and worship; all they can truly say, is, because the Minister tells
them it is so; or their parents bred them up in this way: They hold these
things for truths, for they are points which they have held ever since they can
remember; they were of this religion from their very childhood, and infancy;
and were brought up in these performances. But do you my brethren, build your
faith upon the infallible word of the Lord, and get an insight into the
everlasting gospel: Search the scriptures daily, and diligently, and make use
of the ministry of men to help you to get knowledge of the scriptures; that your
belief may not rest upon the bare opinions of men, but upon the mouth of the
Lord. That you may be able to say, not only, I acknowledge these doctrines to be
divine, and practice this and the other duty, because men have persuaded me;
But because I find them contained in the Law of the Lord, and that they are
agreeable to his mind, and will: and that herein by the ministry I have been
instructed in that which God himself has revealed, and prescribed, who is a
God of truth and faithfulness; upon whose living word I bottom my trust and
confidence. Thus did the noble Beraeans, and therefore many of them were
converted, and savingly wrought upon. They did not take matters upon trust, no
not from Paul and Silas; but they would see, whether they taught them
faithfully, what they received from above. And mark the note of excellency or
asterisk that is set by the Holy Ghost, upon their heads; and the blessed issue
of their enquiry, Acts 17.11, 12. These were more noble than those in
Thessalonica, in that they received the word with all readiness of mind, and
searched the scriptures daily, whether those things were so. Therefore many of
them believed. Do not think it enough, to receive information of truth; but
examine whether they are indeed of heavenly extraction. Search the Scriptures,
Jo. 5.39. They are appointed of God, to be the sure doctrinal foundation,
whereupon our faith is to be bottomed, Ephesians. 2.20. Ye are built upon the
foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief
corner stone.

That I may awaken you to heedfulness, in this regard, let me beseech you to
study thoroughly these three following considerations.

1. If your faith be not bottomed upon a divine testimony, even upon the word
of the Lord, it can amount no higher, than an humane faith: It cannot be a
divine faith, which receives mattes wholly upon trust, from the dictates of
men. For Sirs, the nature of faith is not diversified by the quality of the
principles and truths, that are believed; but by the grounds whereupon, and the
reasons why they are believed. Then is it an humane faith, when built upon
humane testimony: and then is it divine faith, when the testimony is divine,
whereupon credence is given. Else a man may receive spiritual and supernatural
truths, divine doctrines, by a mere common faith, an humane faith; when he
takes them wholly upon trust from the credit of men. If you would see the
difference betwixt these two, that text is full by way of illustration, Jo.
4.39, 40, 41, 42. And many of the Samaritans of that City believed on him, for
the saying of the woman, which testified, he told me all that ever I did. And
many more believed because of his own word: And said unto the woman, Now we
believe, not because of thy saying: for we have heard him our selves, and know
that this is indeed the Christ the Savior of the world, See also, 1 These. 2.13.

2. If you do not search into the word, and bottom your belief thereon, you
can never be steadfast and settled in the ways of the Lord, nor in any of the
truths of religion. You will be still in a wavering, inconstant, condition; and
in danger to be turned aside from the faith. And the reason is apparent,
because the dictates of men are variable, and inconstant. One man may press
upon you this, as a point to be believed, and another may possibly instruct you
in the contrary, as a truth. Nay the same persons at different seasons, may
vent doctrines of a different nature: To be laid in the balance, they are
altogether lighter than vanity; And therefore, if you build your faith upon
their opinions, you must of necessity be left at great uncertainties. But the
word of the Lord is fixed, and permanent, always consonant and agreeable unto
it self. There you may rest as upon a rock that can never be moved. For every
word of God is pure. Prove. 30.5. The words of the Lord are pure words; as
silver tried in a furnace of earth purified seven times, Psalm. 12.6. Men are
subject to mistakes and errors, but the word of the Lord will never deceive
you; that cannot be mistaken.

3. Unless you try doctrines by the rule of the scriptures, and bottom your
faith upon the word of the Lord, you do not give glory to God in believing:
Unless you take it upon his word and receive it as proceeding out of his mouth,
you do not give unto God the honor of believing the truth. If you receive the
matters of religion, only upon the dictates of men, you rob God of his glory,
and give it unto them. For this is a special part of our worship of God, and
one of the peculiar prerogatives, which he does challeng unto himself, that we
give up our judgments absolutely unto his guidance; and yield perfect credence
unto his word, Jo. 4.20.21. Our fathers worshipped in this mountain, and ye say
that Jerusalem is the place where men ought to worship, Jesus says unto her,
Woman believe me, etc. q. d. You are apt to pin your faith upon the sleeves of
your fathers; whereas this is one of the glorious Royalty Magnus Dei cultus
fides. Magna in Deum blasphemia, incredulitas.
which appertain unto me, who am the Christ, to have the absolute command of
your faith: you must try the doctrines and practices of your fathers; and all
the opinions of men, are to be estimated, according to their consonancy unto my
word. As in performance of duty, we should be careful to give unto God the
glory of his Sovereign authority; which is, when we do the work of the Lord,
because it is commanded to be done by him: So in our assent to the truths of
the Gospel, we should give unto God the glory of his truth, and faithfulness:
which is, when we believe what is spoken of the Lord, because we know the mouth
of the Lord has spoken it. It is said of Abraham, Romans 4.20. He staggered not
at the promise through unbelief; but was strong in faith, giving glory to God.
Why Sirs, this is the way to give glory to God, when we set to our seals to the
doctrines of godliness, because they proceed from the God of heaven: believing
the things which are written by the Prophets and Apostles, those faithful
Amanuenses of the Spirit of God, who spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost.

2. Take heed of being corrupted by the example of the multitude, in respect of
the matter, and substance of Religion, wherein it is placed, and whereunto they
confine it. For commonly people are wont to be too narrow and short upon this
account.

Q. Wherein do the multitude for the most part, place their Religion?

Ans. I shall instance only in sive things.

1. The generality of people place the whole of their Religion, In the
reforming and ordering their lives and actions: But they seldom or never think
of the necessity of sanctifying their natures. They sometimes consider what
they have done, but never bethink themselves in what spiritual state they are.
When their consciences are a little awakened, and fly in their faces, perhaps
they consider, for that fit, what sins they have committed, and make
resolutions against them: But then they proceed no further; They consider not
at all how to be at peace with God, through the blood of sprinkling, nor
whether they are in Covenant with God by the Mediator of the Covenant. They
mind to reform their lives, to still the clamours of conscience: but few think
they must be partakers of regenerating grace. Whereas the Law of God is the
rule of our natures, as well as of our actions: It shows us what manner of
persons we should be, as to habitual principles; as well as what we should do,
in the right ordering our practices. You cannot possibly be soved, except you
be sanctified. So that, be not like unto the multitude, in this respect. But
examine your selves, whether you be in the faith. See whether Jesus Christ be
formed in you, 2 Cor. 13.5. Be earnest with God, to create in you a clean
heart, and to renew within you a right spirit, Psalm. 51.10. First endeavor to
get into Christ, that you may then bring forth acceptable fruits of
righteousness unto God. First get your natures sanctified, that you may walk in
the ways of new and evangelical obedience, Ezekiel. 18.31. Cast away from you all
your transgressions, whereby ye have transgressed; and make you a new heart,
and a new spirit: for why will ye dye, O house of Israel! Consider, in
reference hereunto three things.

1. That the acceptance of a man's actual righteousness, and obediential
performances, does depend upon his spiritual estate, and the sanctification of
his nature. First God has respect to the person, and then to the duties
practiced by that person, Genesis 4.4. If you remain in the state of nature,
without the work of regeneration wrought within you, though you may do many
things for the matter, which God has required, yet all you do will be an
abomination unto the Lord. For they that are in the flesh cannot please God,
Romans 8.8. If there be corruptions unmortified in the person, they will taint
and defile the best performances. For, as our Savior says, Mat. 12.33, 34.
Either make the tree good, and his fruit good: or else make the tree corrupt,
and his fruit corrupt: for the tree is known by his fruit. O generation of
vipers, how can ye being evil, speak good things? for out of the abundance of
the heart, the mouth speaks.

2. The main enquiry of Jesus Christ, in the day of accounts, will be, into the
nature, and quality, of men's spiritual state, and condition: And he will
examine their ways and conversations, as an evidence of their estate. So that
here is the great matter to be sought after, whether you are converted or
unconverted; whether you are implanted into Christ, or belong to the kingdom of
the devil, Mat. 25.32, 33. Before him shall be gathered all nations, and he
shall separate them one from another, as a shepherd divides his sheep from the
goats: And he shall set the sheep on his right hand, but the goats on the left.

3. Unless your state be changed, and your hearts sanctified and renewed by the
holy Ghost, you have no interest in the blood of the Covenant, nor can you
plead any title to the death of Jesus Christ, the Mediator of the Covenant:
whatsoever reformation be wrought in your lives. For it is by the Spirit, and
faith, that persons are united unto Christ, and ingraffed into him: without
which there can be no saving interest in him, 2 Cor. 5.17. If any man be in
Christ, he is a new creature. Romans 8.9. Now if any man have not the Spirit of
Christ, he is none of his.

That Is the first instance, as to the matter of Religion.

2. The generality of people confine their Religion only to spiritual
exercises, and immediate worship: But they mind it not in their secular
affairs, and civil negotiations, and employments. They think that Religion
lies only in hearing the word of God, and praying, and receiving Sacraments,
and the like. But when they come to their particular callings, and places, and
the businesses of this world, there they conclude they may take their liberty,
as being things of another nature, wherein godliness is not concerned. Do not
you follow their example in so doing: But labor to set the Lord always before
you, Psalm. 16.8. and to interest the glory of God, in all your undertakings.
Thus in a measure it will be in the day of conversion, Zech. 14.20. In that day
shall there be upon the bells of the horses, Holiness unto the Lord: and the
pots in the Lords house shall be like the bowls before the altar. Yea, every
pot in Jerusalem, and in Judah, shall be Holiness unto the Lord of Hosts. In
that day, i. e. When the Spirit is poured out upon the servants of God, Chap.
12.9, 10. When the people are washed from their guilt, in the fountain that is
set open for sin, and uncleanness, Chap. 13.1. Then they will carry themselves
in this sort, so as to interest Religion in all their concernments. To this
purpose remember these two or three motives.

1. That the word of God, in its directive power and influence, is very
extensive, and exceeding broad. It reaches to all the particulars of a man's
life and carriage. It is not only a rule for guidance in matters of worship,
but takes in all our affairs in this world, within the compass of it, Psalm.
119.96. I have seen an end of all perfection; but thy commandment is exceeding
broad. How broad is it? Why, It is of as great a latitude on the one hand, as
the corruption of nature is on the other; which, you know, brings pollution and
defilements into all our ways and affairs: It rides a large circuit; it is of
the same extent with all the workings of a man's heart; It is of equal latitude
and comprehensiveness, as a man's life upon earth. When thou go, it shall
lead thee: when thou sleep, it shall keep thee: and when thou awakest, it
shall talk with thee.

2. Except you interest God in your secular concernments, and manage them in
obedience to his will, and with a due subordination to his glory, How can you
comfortably expect his gracious presence with you, and his blessing upon your
affairs? Wherever you would have God to go with you, by the influence of his
grace, you must study to walk with God in the exercise of your graces. If you
would keep under the verge of his merciful promises, you must have a
conscientious regard to his divine precepts. You cannot look that the Lord
should succeed and prosper your business in the world, to your good; unless you
manage it in a subserviency to his honor and glory, Prove. 3.6. In all thy
ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths.

3. If you are earthly, and sensual, and do not walk with God, in your
particular places, and callings, and then think to make it up by duties of
worship, Such worship is detestable in his sight, and will not be received
favorably at your hands. God will reckon all such acts of worship, but as the
dissimulation of hypocrites, who pretend to love him, but are indeed his
enemies, Jor. 7.9, 10, 11. Will ye steal, and murder, and commit adultery, and
swear falsely, and burn incense unto Baal, and walk after other Gods whom ye
know not; And come and stand before me in this house, which is called by my
name, and say, We are delivered to do all these abominations. Is this house
which is called by my name, become a den of robbers in your eyes? Behold I have
seen it, says the Lord. Do you think by religious exercises, and acts of
devotion, to expiate the guilt of your unrighteous dealings and other crying
enormities? Behold I have seen it, says the Lord; i. e. not only with an eye
of observation and knowledge, but with an eye of indignation and fury; I will
recompense your ways upon your heads. Brethren, let every man wherein he is
called, therein abide with God, 1 Cor. 7.24. Let pure Religion, and the fear of
the Lord, go with you into your fields, and accompany you in your markets, and
abide with you in your shops, and be closely impacted and interwoven, with all
your civil affairs. As he which has called you is holy, so be ye holy in all
manner of conversation, 1 Pet. 1.15.

This is the second instance, as to the matter of Religion.

3. The multitude are accustomed to place their Religion only in external
performances and outward acts of piety: But they little study to engage their
hearts and spirits in the service of God. They give him their bodies and
outward demeanor; but surely, think they, our thoughts are free; and they heed
not to mortify vile and inordinate affections, provided that they break not
forth into any overt acts of ungodliness, Prove. 21.2. Every way of a man is
right in his own eyes: but the Lord pondereth the hearts; q. d. Men commonly
neglect the consideration of their hearts; they think it enough to mind their
outward actions, but little regard the workings of their spirits. But ye, my
beloved, keep your hearts above all keeping: Give unto God your very souls and
spirits, and see that all that is within you be employed in his service, Psalm.
103.1, 2. Let us cleanse our selves from all the filthiness, both of the flesh
and spirit, 2 Cor. 7.1. And therefore be much in the study of these three
considerations following.

1. The greatest number of transgressions, whereof sinners are ordinarily
guilty, are sins of the spirit; and the most heinous impieties keep their
residence and habitation there. As the heart of man is the cursed principle,
from whence they flow; so it is the shop, where they are forged. These
spiritual sins are the most devilish wickednesses, as carrying the greatest
conformity and resemblance to the deeds of the Prince of darkness. And then, as
I said, they are ever the greatest number, Prove. 26.25. When he speaks fair,
believe him not: for there are seven abominations in his heart. Seven
abominations, i. e. a multitude of abominations, wickednesses of every kind.
For one gross act of murder committed, there is much hatred, and malice, which
are spiritual murder, in the sight of God. For one robbery done, there is
abundance of envy, and covetousness. For one gross act of fornication or
adultery, there is much sinful lusting, which is adultery in the heart. Now
where sin has its principal residence, there should a Christian be most
vigilant and careful.

2. God does judge, and pass sentence upon men's outward actions, according as
the heart is engaged in them. So much of the spirit as is employed in duty, so
much worth and excellency in the duty: and so much of the heart as is set upon
the commission of a sin, so much malignity and sinfulness is therein, Jer.
17.10. I the Lord search the heart, I try the reins, even to give every man
according to his ways, and according to the fruit of his doings, Jer. 30.21.
Who is this that engaged his heart to approach unto me, says the Lord?

3. The God whom we serve, and with whom in all concernments we have to do, is
such a being as we call a spiritual being, that is, incorporeal, and invisible.
And therefore bare external acts of obedience carry no proportion, or
suitableness to his nature and excellencies. That service which is acceptable
unto God, must have in some measure, an answerableness unto the nature and
perfections of the God, that is served. It must be a walking worthy of the
Lord, Col. 1.10. Now this can never be absolved by mere outward devotion. For
God is a spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in spirit and in
truth, Jo. 4.24. We are the circumcision, who worship God in the spirit, Phil.
3.3.

That Is the third instance, as to the matter of religion.

4. Most persons limit their religion to a freedom and abstinence from grosser
acts of pollution, and heinous enormities: But they make nothing to swallow
down lesser impieties, that make no such noise in the ears of the world.
Provided they be not drunkards and swearers, and guilty of such other acts of
debauchery; they think some lighter offenses are inconsiderable. What if they
take liberty, now and then to talk vainly, and frothily, and wantonly? What if
they defraud, and go beyond their brethren, if it be but in a small matter,
wherein they receive no great damage or detriment? Surely, think they, we need
not be so exact and precise as to these things. But, my brethren, do not you
write after their copy; stand you in awe of the least of Gods commandments.
Whatsoever is the object of divine displeasure and indignation, let it be the
object of your hatred and detestation. Take the prayer of David for your
pattern, Psalm. 119.133. Order my steps in thy word: and let not any iniquity
have dominion over me. These are the persons whom the Lord has blessed, Who
are undefiled in the way, that walk in the law of the Lord: These also do no
iniquity: they walk in his ways, Psalm. 119.1, 3. Isa. 56.1, 2.

Besides what I have mentioned in this case, in the doctrinal part of this
subject, let me give you farther these three particulars.

1. Lesser sins, if they are maintained and allowed, and harbored in the
heart; if they are customarily practiced in the life, they become, upon that
account, exceeding heinous. The greatest sums are made up of unites; the
vastest mountains are made up of small dust and gravel, that will crumble
between the fingers. Smaller iniquities continued in, will bring upon the soul
a load of guilt, of weight enough to sink it into the pit of destruction. Is
the matter little, wherein thou sinnest? and so thy transgressions small as
thou imaginest? Yet the custom in sin is no small matter: and perhaps the
aggravating circumstances may be very heinous, when thou sinnest against light,
and knowledge, and under the means of grace, 2 Pet. 2.14. An heart they have
exercised with covetous practices; cursed children. Mark it, therefore vile
wretches, accursed children, because accustomed to that which is evil. Hereby
sinners are shut up as in a prison, fettered and manacled that they cannot get
free, Jer. 13.23. Can the Ethiopian chang his skin, or the Leopard his spots?
Then may ye also do good, that are accustomed to do evil.

2. Lesser sins, as thou accountest them, will make way for greater; and serve
the devil as an engine, whereby to carry sinners to the most horrid
abominations. You read of the wiles, and methods Ephesians. 6.11. (...).
of the devil. He carries on his work of deluding and destroying souls,
orderly, and methodically. And this is one of his usual methods: He is not wont
to tempt men to the height of wickedness presently, but first he makes way
into the soul by smaller transgressions, that he may gradually bring him to
comply with greater, 2 Timothy 2.16. Shun profane and vain bablings, for they will
increase unto more ungodliness, Prove. 23.31, 32, 33. Look not thou upon the
wine when it is red, when it gives his color in the cup, when it moves it
self aright. At the last it biteth like a serpent, and stingeth like an adder.
Thine eyes shall behold strange women, and thine heart shall utter perverse
things. Tippling and drinkings, will in a while become drunkeness and
debauchery, wanton words and dalliances will bring forth adulteries.
Forgetfulness of God will increase, till it grow up into atheism. He that
takes liberty to allow himself in the smallest impieties, is like one that
breaks up an hedge, whereby an entrance is set open, for the whole herd of
ungodliness.

3. The smallest sins, if continued in, will bring as certain damnation upon
the sinner, as the greatest. Though the destruction of heinous sinners will be
moresore, yet the destruction of such as live in lesser transgressions will be
as sure and unavoidable. For salvation and damnation, according to the tenor
of the gospel, do not lie in the smallness or greatness of the sins committed;
but in men's repentance, or impenitence in a course of sin, Mat. 5.19. Whosoever
therefore shall break one of the least of these commandments, and shall teach
men so, he shall be called the least in the kingdom of heaven, Ezekiel. 18.30.
Repent and turn your selves from all your transgressions; so iniquity shall not
be your ruin.

That Is the fourth instance as to the matter of religion.

5. Lastly, The generality of people put much of their religion, in the
observing of places, where the worship of God is performed. And they think it
does much add to the excellency of their worship, when it is tendered and
discharged in such places. As if that were the main matter to be regarded: They
look upon them as holy places. They little mind to make evangelical
applications unto Jesus Christ, and to get into him; they seldom think of
putting their offerings into his hands, who is consecrated to be our
High Priest for ever; or of presenting their sacrifices, by laying them upon
that Gospel altar, appointed to sanctify all our spiritual duties: But if they
pray in such a place, and hear the word in such a place, then they hope their
prayers will be acceptable, and their hearing tend to their salvation. I am
persuaded, these are apprehensions rivited in the hearts of the most, That the
worship of God is far more acceptable and pleasing unto God, if performed
there, than it is in any other place whatsoever. But, my beloved, be not ye
like unto them: But make sure your interest in the righteousness of the Lord
Jesus, and make use in every place of his Advocateship, and intercession; and
then you may come boldly unto the throne of grace, to obtain mercy, and to find
grace to help in time of need, Heb. 4.16. Mark that passage of the Apostle Paul
to Timethy 1 Timothy 2.8. I will therefore that men pray every where, lifting up
holy hands, without wrath and doubting. Mind it Sirs, It is not so much to be
regarded, in what place you pray, as with what spirit, and affections, with
what holiness of heart, and with what faith and fervency you pour out your
supplications. It is a corrupt notion and fancy (a Jewish fancy) to put
holiness now in the days of the gospel in one place rather than another. It is
a Popish and Antichristian notion. For they make pilgrimages for devotion, to
this and the other holy place. And for my part I am apt to think, that if ever
God shall please to suffer Popery with its pollutions and idolatries to prevail
again in the Nations, out of which it has been extirpated; this very principle
of the Holiness of places, being rivited in the hearts of the vulgar, will
contribute no little assistance, to the introduction and settlement thereof.
Now to clear up the truth in this particular, more distinctly, let us first
concede and grant, what is to (...) granted, in reference to places of worship.
And there are these five things must be acknowledged.

1. That it is not only lawful, but commendable, to appoint and bestow public
places and buildings upon the Churches of Christ, for their attendance upon the
worship of God. Not to render the worship better, and more acceptable, because
there performed; but for their commodiousness and convenience in attendance
thereon. It was an act of kindness in Philemon, to afford the Church, a room in
his house, for their religious Assemblies. Philem. 2. Much more is it to erect
an edifice, purposely to that end.

2. These places and buildings so designed and provided, are ordinarily to be
preferred before other places; when the worship in them performed is according
to Christ's institution, and the people of God join unanimously together in
managing the service of God, according to his will. Not as if such a place did
meliorate the worship, or contribute any real, intrinsic worth thereunto, more
than if performed elsewhere: But only for convenience sake as before.
Christians will commonly resort thither with greater freedom, and without those
suspicions and jealousies, which sometimes are in their spirits, of being
burdensome to the people, in whose habitations they convene. And unbelievers
and such as are without, will easier be induced to come there, that they may
hear the word, and understand what is spoken in defense of the doctrines of
godliness: who may possibly be savingly wrought upon, to conversion, and
carried further than ever was intended by them, through the powerful efficacy
of Gospel Administrations, 1 Cor. 14.24, 25.

3. In such places, all things requisite for an assembly of Christians, ought
to be fitted and disposed in a seemly and decent manner; and ordered to the
best advantage of the congregation; That matters may be carried on in a comely
way, with least disturbance, or cause of distraction, 1 Cor. 14.40.

4. All manner of irreverent, and unseemly actions, must be abstained from in
such places, as any way reflect dishonor, or contempt, upon the worship of
God, which is there performing or has been performed; or that may render the
place unmeet for religious services afterward. Not as if the building were
more holy than others; but because it is sinful by any means to cast disgrace
upon holy duties; wherein our business consists in attendance upon the Great
King, the Lord of hosts, whose name is dreadful throughout the earth; See Mr.
Jenkins's Farewell Sermon.
and who is a jealous God, even a consuming fire, Deuteronomy. 4.24.

5. Lastly, let it be observed, That the opinion of the holiness of one place
above another is, for the most part, but a fond conceit that has obtained
amongst the multitude of the most ignorant people; the tincture of which
conceit has, not improbably, continued from the very days of popery, as their
addictedness to some other fopperies has done. But it is an opinion exploded
and rejected by the Protestant Churches. This is conspicuously evident amongst
our selves. 1. By the general permission of Schoolmasters and Writing Masters
to teach in such places. 2. By the usual meetings there about all Parish
affairs, as rating assessments, and giving orders for mending highways, and
the like. 3. By the public order for private dwellings to be erected in
several of such places in the great City, whereby they are converted to civil
uses. For as for the papalizing doctrines and superstitious practices of some,
whereby the vulgar are hardened, in their apprehensions, being but the
offspring of their own brain, it is equitable they be laid at no door but
their own.

These particulars being premised, let me lay down and confirm this plain
position, further than decency, and convenience in attendance upon the worship
of God, there is no manner of holiness, now in the days of the gospel, in one
place more than another, nor has one place pre-eminence above another. This
seems to be covertly intimated by our Savior. Jo. 4.21, 23. Where the question
was, touching the place of worship whether upon mount Geriz^m, or in Jerusalem.
Jesus says unto her, woman, believe me, the hour comes when ye shall neither
in this mountain, nor yet at Jer^salem worship the father Futurum tempus
gratiae novi Testamenti, evacuantis utrumque locum, imo omnem locum, praedicit.
Per haec duo exclusa loca (neque in hoc mon^e, neque Hierosolymis) ntelliguntur
exclusa omnia alia loca Cajet.
But the hour comes, and now is, when the true worshippers shall worship the
Father in spirit and truth. As if our Savior had said, the time is shortly at
hand, the gospel state of the Church, when all difference of places, as to the
worship of God, shall cease: and the main things to be looked after therein,
will be whether the worship of God be spiritually performed, and according to
his own prescription and institution. This is a lesson and Instruction hardly
learnt by some, who mind forms and ceremonies, more than the life and
fulstance of godliness; and whose interest leads them to oppose such truths.
And therefore give me leave to hint unto you these four things.

1. That the very synagogues, or places of public assemblies amongst the Jews,
had nothing of holiness in them above other places; only they were appointed
for convenience in the serving of God. They were places where their Courts of
judicature met, as well as their religious exercises were performed. On the
week days their civil courts were convened in them, and on the sabbath day
their religious assemblies. Some think that the Synagogues were public places
of meeting; as well for civil, as sacred affairs. Eng. Annot. in Mat. 10.17.
As if there should be a meeting of Christians in Guild Hall, or in
Westminster-hal, where at other times the Judges sit. And therefore you read of
Beating in their Synagogues, Act. 22.19. And punishing often in every Synagogue,
Acts 26.11. And Christ tells his disciples, that they should be brought unto
the synagogues, and unto magistrates and powers, Luke 12.11. And that they
should be delivered up to the synagogues, and into prisons, being brought
before Kings and rulers for his names sake, Luke 21.12. I any persons shall say
that the Jews had two sorts of Synagogues, one for religious and the other for
civil assemblies; their proof is expected. Bare unscriptural assertions weigh
little in the balance with understanding Christians.

2. Whereas some fetch their arguments from the holiness of the Temple and
tabernacle of old, and apply to places, now the passages that are upon record
concerning the sanctuary, there needs little pains to be taken to show the
weakness and invalidity of such arguments. Who knows not, that they were
places designed and set apart by God himself, and appointed as Symbols of his
presence? 2 Kings 23.27. Heb. 8.5. Who knows not, that they were tipes and
shadows of good things to come, and therefore to continue till the time of
reformation? Christ has put an end to these legal ceremonies. He came and
tabernacled (...) Jo. 1.14.
amongst us. He suffered death in the Temple Joh. 2.21, 22.
of his body? Who knows not, that there were special promises of mercy
annexed to worshipping in the temple, and toward the Temple? 1 Kin. 8.33, 38,
39. 1 King. 9.3. Let any of these be shown concerning places of worship, now in
the times of the gospel: else the arguments run a baculo in angulum. The
promise of acceptance is made to the ordinances and institutions of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and to the persons that wait upon the Lord in those institutions,
without any respect to the place. Where two or three are gathered together in
my name, there am I in the midst of them, Mat. 18.20. Superstition and
will worship, humane inventions and observances of our own devising, are
abominations in the sight of the Lord, in what place soever they are practiced:
and religious duties of Gods appointment discharged according to his revealed
will, are pleasing unto the Lord, wheresoever they are performed. God is
graciously present in the place, for his ordinance sake, and for his peoples
sake; and not a whit the more amongst them, for the places sake, 1 Cor. 1.2, 3.
To them that are sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be Saints, with all that
in every place, call upon the name of Jesus Christ our Lord, both theirs and
ours. Grace be to you, and peace, from God our Father, and from the Lord Jesus
Christ. And mark that eminent prophecy of gospel times, Mal. 1.11. For from the
rising of the sun, even unto the going down of the same, my name shall be great
among the Gentiles, and in every place incense shall be offered unto my name
and a pure offering: For my name shall be great among the heathen, says the
Lord of hosts. q. d. For the present, many parts of my solemn worship, are
limited, and confined unto certain places; but the time is at hand, when my
glory shall be revealed unto all people, and then the distinction of places
shall be done away.

3. The worship of God in the pure primitive times, was performed by the people
of God, according to their convenience, without being tied or restrained to
certain determinate places. See the example of Christ in the first place;
sometimes he preaches in the house, where the people were congregated. Again,
at another time, by the seaside and out of a ship; And sometimes in the
Synagogues: And when his audience was so great, that a particular building
could not probably contain them, you shall find him preaching upon a mountain,
Mat. 5.1, 2. Mar. 2.13: Mar. 4.1, 2. See the practice of believers, in
scripture times, after the ascension of Christ. Then mostly they met in private
houses. In hac consuescitis part crimen nobis maximum impietatis affigere,
quod neque aedes sacras venerationes ad officia construamus -- Templa extruimus
nulla -- Arnob. contra Gentes.
Because that was most convenient to avoid the fury of the adversaries, who
persecuted them for their meetings. This is so plain and obvious, that he seems
little to consult his readers patience, that shall spend much time or paper in
the proof of it, Acts 2.46. Acts 12.12. Acts 20.7, 8. From hence, as I
conceive, you have that common expression in some of Paul's Epistles, the Church
that is in such a ones house, i. e. The Church that was wont there to assemble,
and meet together, to partake of the ordinances of the gospel, 1 Cor. 16.19.
Col. 4.15. Why else should the Apostle speaking of Priscilla and Aquila, greet
the Church in their house? and presently after changing his expression, salute
Aristobulus household, and the household of Narcissus which were in the Lord?
Romans 16.5, 10, 11. Well then; the Church of Christ met in any place, according
to their convenience: And in this respect those public buildings (which are
commonly called Churches) are ordinarily to be preferred before other places,
where there is freedom for the purity of the worship of God; as being best
fitted, and ordered, for convenience.

But if the room of a private dwelling be large enough, for the company, that
attend upon the service of God, and fitly disposed for orderliness, and
decency, in their attendance thereupon; there is as great an excellency
therein, and the duties there performed are as acceptable as in any other place
whatsoever. For it passes the reach of my understanding to conceive, how that
crossings and holy water, and such superstitious devices with the rest of the
pageantry See Rhem. Annot. in 2 Timothy 4. sect. 12, 13. and Bellarm. lib. 3. cap.
7. de Sanctis.
used amongst the Papists in the consecration of Churches (where there are no
footsteps in scripture, for direction in such a practice) should any thing
avail, to the putting a standing excellency in those places.

4. Lastly, let it be observed, that whereas ignorant people are wont to have
an high reverence, and esteem, for such a place, and to think the worship of
God is more acceptable therein, because (as they speak) it is the Church, and
the house of God; this very thing is one sign and taken of their ignorance. For
the building or structure is called the Church, only figuratively and
metonymically, because the Church is accustomed there to assemble together. As
we call one place in Westminster Hall the Court of Chancery, and another
partition, the Court of common pleas; because there those courts are wont to
sit for deciding of controversies. Else, it is the congregation of the
faithful, that is the Church of Christ. The living members of Christ, and the
servants of God are his house and temple. And wherever they are wont to meet
together, though in an upper chamber, that is the Church metonymically as well
as any other building, which we usualy so call, Act. 12.5. Prayer was made
without ceasing of the Church unto God for him, and v. 1. Herod the King
stretched forth his hands, to vex certain of the Church, 1 Cor. 14.12. Seek
that ye may excel, to the edifying of the Church, Ephesians. 5.25. Husbands love your
wives, as Christ also loved the Church, and gave himself for it. So that, look
what is the object of the persecution of the wicked; by whom are prayers and
supplications sent up unto the throne of grace; Who are edified unto salvation,
by the ordinances of the gospel; for whom Christ died and shed his precious
blood; they are the Church of Jesus Christ, and the place no otherwise, than as
there they congregate. Know ye not that ye are the temple of God, and that the
spirit of God dwells in you? 1 Cor. 3.16. For the temple of God is holy,
which temple ye are, v. 17. Christ [was faithful] as a son over his own house:
whose house are we, if we hold fast the confidence and the rejoicing of the
hope, firm unto the end, Heb. 3.6. The persecutors and the profane who vilify
the Saints and set against them, are the persons that are guilty of despising
the Church, and of bearing no respect or reverence unto the Church.

So much for the second point, wherein it concerns us to be cautious that we be
not led by the multitude; namely as to the matter of Religion wherein it is
placed.

3. See to it, that you be not carried down the stream with the multitude, in
respect of the method, and order, wherein religion is prosecuted. The most
people pursue the interest of religion and the fear of the Lord in a secondary
way; in a subserviency to the promoting of some carnal and worldly interest.
Men profess godliness, that they may be well esteemed amongst the godly; that
they may gain the favor, or friendship, of this or the other holy man, from
whom they expect to reap advantage; that they may get the better credit among
such with whom they have to deal; and so drive on their worldly designs with
greater likelihood of success, or the like. At least they have some earthly and
carnal interest, which they pursue in coordination, and conjunction, with the
service of God. They think they may serve God, and the world together; that
they may be true Christians, and yet mammonists also.

But, my beloved, be not ye conformed to the multitude. Serve the Lord in
singleness, and godly simplicity of Spirit. Let all other concernments stoop to
the matters of the kingdom of heaven. Serve the Lord only, and undividedly, and
dedicate your selves and all that you have wholly, and entirely, to the masters
use. Let godliness have the pre-eminence, and superiority, in all your affairs
and undertakings, Mat. 6.33. Seek ye first the kingdom of God and the
righteousness thereof: and all these [earthly] things shall be added unto you.
How should the kingdom of God and the righteousness thereof be sought after in
the first place? Why, there is a five-fold primacy, or priority, which they may
justly callenge, and must of necessity be given them, if you will deal
faithfully with God, and make sure work, in the working out your salvation. 1.
They must have the priority, in respect of our thoughts and studies. This is
the main business we should aim at the accomplishment of, and be plotting and
laying contrivances, how to effect: That God may be honored by us, and that we
may get an interest in his favor, and in the light of his countenance. We may
lawfully contrive, how to manage the affairs of this world, with prudence and
discretion: But our principal care must be, how to get a portion in the world
to come, to lay hold on eternal life, 2 Timothy 2.15. Study to show thy self a man
approved of God, Prove. 4.7. Wisdom is the principal thing, therefore get
wisdom, and with all thy getting [or above all thy getting] get understanding.
Look upon other matters as trifles in comparison of this, and lay them all
aside till this be finished. 2. They must have the priority, or uppermost room,
in our affections. These are the things which your hearts must earnestly pant
after, and your spirits be restless and indefatigable in the pursuance of. We
may love our relations, and comforts, in a secondary way; but the enjoyment of
God and his glory, must have the top and cream of our love. Psalm. 63.1, 8. O
God, thou art my God, early will I seek thee: my soul thirsts for thee, my
flesh longs for thee, in a dry and thirsty land, where no water is, and v. 8.
My soul follows hard after thee, thy right hand upholdeth me. 3. They must be
firstly and primarily sought after, in respect of the time of our lives, and
pilgrimage upon the earth. We must give unto God the primitiae or first fruits
of our being, Eccl. 12.1. Remember now thy creator, in the days of thy youth,
while the evil days come not, nor the years draw nigh, when thou shall say, I
have no pleasure in them. 4. They must have the priority, and precedence, in
respect of the work of every particular day. The things of God should enjoy our
virgin thoughts, in the morning; before they be adulterated and embased with
any lower matters. How may I be instrumental to advance the excellencies of God
this day? what special corruptions have I to watch against? and what special
temptations am I likely to meet with? how may I fill up my place and relations
with holiness and comfort to my own soul. Psalm. 139.18. When I awake I am still
with thee. 5. The things of God must have the pre-eminence, when they come in
competition, with any other matters whatsoever. They must out all corruptions,
that are incompatible therewith, and make all interests whatsoever, how down
before them. They must have the whole man, and the whole strength, and the
whole time of our lives, Mat. 22.36, 37, 39. God does account an hypocritical
religion, no better than atheism and infidelity; and a divided heart, to be a
false heart. Religion indeed, and the fear of the Lord, is of that power and
purity, that it will not mingle interests with any other design: it will be
sovereign commander wherever it comes, Mat. 6.24. No man can serve two masters.
Ye cannot serve God and Mammon. Besides, if you pursue any other interest in
coordination with the interest of godliness, it is impossible you should be
steadfast in the covenant of God. Providence may so concenter, that if you will
not make shipwreck of faith and a good conscience, you must cast all your
outward enjoyments overboard; if you will hold fast the truth, you must part
with all things besides it, even your very lives, Mar. 8.34, 35. Whosoever will
come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me. For
whosoever will save his life shall lose it: But whosoever will lose his life
for my sake, and the gospels, the same shall save it.

That Is the third point, I intended to touch upon.

4. Let not your demeanor be ordered after the example of the multitude, in
respect of the time, and season, when religion is minded. Herein they commonly
faulter, and you must not be followers of them. This I shall branch forth into
four heads.

1. As to the time in general, and the improvement of it. Most, even of those
that in some sort abhor to spend their days in profaness and open
abominations, make little conscience of spending their times in idleness: If
they should employ it wickedly in rioting, and luxury, and such inordinate
courses, they think they should be worthily condemned: But they never regard
the redeeming of time, or the right improvement of it, that it may be
profitably managed, in the doing, and getting of good. My brethren, beware that
you tread not in their steps. But see that ye walk circumspectly, not as fools,
but as wise: Redeeming the time, because the days are evil, Ephesians. 5.15, 16. And
to this purpose, let me beseech you seriously to ponder in your thoughts, and
press upon your hearts, these three ensuing particulars.

1. That the trade and employment of godliness, is a very busy employment, such
as brings much work along with it, and has abundance of affairs appertaining
to it. If it be minded thoroughly and effectually, you will find no time to
spare, to be spent unprofitably, or squandred away upon vanity; unless you
bestir your selves to purpose, your glass will be run out before your spiritual
work is at an end: and then you are undone eternally, and irrecoverably. For
there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave, whither
thou g^est, Eccl. 9.10. The reason Sirs why men are no more choice of their
time, is because they are so little sensible of the weight and greatness of
their work. Did they considerately mind, how many spiritual lessons must be
learnt, how many strong corruptions must be mortified, what variety of duties
there are to be faithfully performed, what several methods the devil has
whereby to deceive us in his temptations, that should be carefully enquired
into, that he may not get advantage against us, together with the difficulties
attendant upon each of these; would they trifle away their times as if they had
nothing to do? Did we consult the scriptures, and see what is expected at our
hands in order to eternal life; surely we should be ready to answer, when our
sinful temper prompts us to slothfulness, or when any vanities and follies
invite us to slacken our pace, as Nehemiah answered the adversaries, Neh. 6.3.
I am doing a great work, so that I cannot come down: Why should the work cease,
whilst I leave it, and come down to you? I am exercising my self in a busy
business, of everlasting weight and moment, and it infinitely concerns me not
to do it by halfes, or leave it unfinished, and unperfected; even in laying up
in store a good foundation against the time to come, that I may lay hold upon
eternal life: Why should the work cease, whilst I spend my time in trifles? I
have not an hour to spare, that may be passed away in idleness and negligence;
in doing nothing or what is as good as nothing.

2. This was one of the sins of Sodom, for which they were destroyed in such a
dreadful manner, by fire from heaven, and upon which account they are set forth
as an example, suffering the vengeance of eternal fire; namely, the spending
their time in idleness, and vanity, without taking care for the right
improvement of it. And very probably this sin might be a means to carry them
into those other horrid abominations, for which they are branded to all the
succeeding generations. For when men take liberty to spend their time in
idleness, and make no conscience of laying it out, to the ends for which they
are entrusted with it, they will soon be wrought upon to spend it wickedly.
Through idleness and slothfulness (or that which is tantamount) vain delights
and fooleries, sinners are obnoxious and exposed to all Satanica^ assaults,
ready to run upon any of the devils errands. Whereas if Christians were exact,
and conscientious, in filling up their time with duty, there would be no such
room left open, for the devils suggestions to enter in at: Besides it is putting
them under the verg of Gods protection and safe custody, Ezekiel. 16.49. Behold
this was the iniquity of thy sister Sodom: pride, fullness of bread, and
abundance of idleness was in her, and in her daughters.

3. This is one of the Talents, for which you are strictly accountable, at the
great and notable day of the Lord, viz. All the time of your continuance upon
the face of the earth. You read, the kingdom of heaven is compared to a man
traveling into a far country, who called his servants, and delivered certain
Talents unto them, to be employed according to their several abilities. And
after a long time, the Lord of those servants comes and reckons with them.
Now pray what are those Talents, which God will call us to a reckoning for?
Why, as there are talents of grace, so there are talents of nature: such as
strength of body, parts, and endowments of the mind, and the like. And amongst
these, the time which is allotted to us is not the meanest, or least
considerable. How has that been managed, in the Masters service? What good
have you done answerably to the time you have enjoyed? Rev. 2.21. I gave her
space to repent of her fornication, and she repented not. And mark it, my
beloved, If you would come off with comfort at the day of accounts, and be
found unto praise and glory, at the glorious appearance of our Lord Jesus
Christ, it will not be enough to plead that you spent not your time profanely,
or licentiously: It will suffice to bring you under a sentence of condemnation,
if it were spent idly, vainly, and unprofitably, Mat. 25.30. Cast ye the
unprofitable servant into outer darkness, there shall be weeping, and gnashing
of teeth. What millions of gold would sinners then give, for the least portion
of that time to repent in, which now they throw away, as if it were not to be
regarded?

This is the first thing I would note, as to the time of religion, when it is
minded.

2. In respect of the special time, that is to be consecrated, and appropriated
to the more immediate service of God. The multitude have been much set upon the
observation of the days, of man's devising and inventing; but little concerned
in the sanctification of the Lords day. If they spend two or three hours in the
public exercises of religion, then they think themselves acquitted for the
rest of that day: they find their own pleasures, and follow their recreations,
and sports; they let their tongues loose, to vain and worldly discourses; if
they have any visit to make, or merriment to be at, this is the day wherein
they have best leisure for it. And yet, as the whore in the Proverbs, they wipe
their mouths, and say, We have done no wickedness. But ye, my friends, be not
acted with the spirit of the multitude: Give unto the Lord that which is due
unto him. He has graciously allowed you six days, for your own employments,
wherein you may lawfully labor, and do all that you have to do; and he has
reserved a seventh day for himself, a whole seventh day, as he has granted
unto us the six. Do not grudg the Lord, and your souls, this equitable and
merciful proportion. Be not as the rich man in Nathans parable, who had many
flocks and herds; and yet when the wayfaring man came to him, he spared to take
of his own flock, but took the poor man's lamb, that lay in his bosom, and
dressed it for the man that was come unto him, 2 Samuel 12. Thus, do the carnal
world deal with the God of heaven; He has given to them a whole flock of
days, and kept unto himself but one Lamb, the Lords day: And yet when they
have a journey to take, or an errand to do, some mirth and pleasure to follow,
or bodily ease to indulge; they spare of their own flock, and make bold with
the Lords. But, my brethren, be not ye like unto them; As you would expect a
blessing upon your souls, and a blessing upon your labors on the six days, be
careful of the spiritual and entire sanctification of the Lords day, the
Christian Sabbath. For blessed is the man that does this, and the son of man
that lays hold on it, that keeps the Sabbath from polluting it, and keeps
his hand from doing any evil, Isa. 56.2.

That you may be careful in the discharge of this great daty, and not fall
short of the blessedness thereto annexed, suffer me to leave upon you a few
words, by way of advice and counsel.

1. Study much the morality of the Law of God, concerning the weekly Sabbath:
That it is a commandment which carries with it a perpetual and everlasting
obligation. The ceremonial Sabbaths were observan^^s that disappeared, upon the
death of the Lord our righteousness: When the Sun was risen in his glory, the
shadows vanished: But the weekly Sabbath was appointed to continue in the
Church of Christ unto the end. Be well settled, I say, in this great truth: For
if there be haesitation in your thoughts, of the obligation of the commandment,
you will proportionably waver in your obedience unto the commandment. Wavering
and unstedfast obedience, is the usual product of fluchuating apprehensions. An
unsettled judgment will usher in unconstant service. And therefore be well verst
in the morality of the weekly Sabbath. 1. It was part of the Law given unto our
first parents, in the state of innocence: when there was no ground for
distinction of Jew and Gentile, Genesis 2.2, 3. And on the seventh day God ended
his work which he had made. And God blessed the seventh day and sanctified it,
because that in it he had refted from all his work which God created and made.
And our Savior, in his sermons, when he was upon the earth, endeavored to
reduce the people unto the Institutions of God, as they were established from
the beginning, Mat. 19.8. The argument, indeed, is pressed as to the ordinance
of marriage; but the reason holds the same in relation unto the Sabbath. 2. It
was not delivered by way of appendix, or additament: to another precept, but it
is in it self, one entire precept of the Decalogue; One of those ten words
which were wrote in tables of stone, by the Lord of hosts, Deuteronomy. 10.4, If the
law of the Sabbath be abrogated, it will from thence follow, that there are but
nine commandments; whereas the Holy Ghost expressly mentions them to be ten,
Exodus 3^ 28. Deuteronomy. 10.4. And this precept is written, as one of them, Exodus
20.8. Deuteronomy. 5.12, 13, 14. When Christ was entering upon his discourse concerning
the T^n Commandments, in vindicating several of them, from the false glosses
and interpretations of the Scribes and Pharisees, he delivered before hand this
doctrine of the perpetuity, of the obligatory virtue of the Law, Mat. 5.17, 18.
Think not that I am come to destroy the Law, or the Prophets. I am not come to
destroy, but to fulfill. For vertly I say unto you, till heaven and earth pass,
one jot or one tittle shall in no wise pass from the law, till all be
fulfilled. And the Apostle James treating of some of the Ten Commandments,
bottometh his argument upon this, as an undoubted axiom that one of those
c^mmandments has the same perpetual obligation upon us to obedience, as
another. So that the reason is strong for the Sabbath upon the Apostles
foundation: For he that said, honor thy Father, and thy Mother, said also
Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy. Now if thou obey thy parents, yet if
thou profane the Sabbath day, thou art become a transgressour of the law, Jam.
2.10, 11. 3. Let such as plead for the reversing, or repealing of the law of
the Sabbath, now under the Gospel, show us cut of the Gospel, where it is
repealed: which they are in no wise able to perform; for though there be made
an alteration of the day, yet there is not to be found any abrogation of the
commandment. And therefore it is observable that even in the pub like liturgy,
this prayer is added at the close of the 4. Commandment as well as of the
other, Lord have mercy upon us, and inclene our hearts to keep this law.

2. Be well settled, in the grounds of the chang and alteration of the day: from
the Jewish sabbath to the first day of the week. Clear convictions in the
judgment, of the divine institntion of the Lords day, will help to engage the
heart unto the solemn devoting thereof to the Lord. Many considerations might
be insisted on to this end. (1) The name, and title, which is attributed unto
it of the Holy Ghost, The Lords day, Rev. 1.10. I was in the Spirit on the
Lords day. What better reason can be given of that appellation, than that it
was constituted and ordamed of the Lord, in memory of his resurrect on, and our
redemption completed thereupon? Even as the Sacrament of the Eucharist is
called the Lords supper, because of the Lord Christ's appointment, and in
remembrance of his passion. (2) The appearance of Christ to his disciples,
after he was risen from the dead, several times, on the first day of the week,
Jo. 20.19, 26. Why should our Savior pass by the Jewish sabbaths, and make
choice of the first day of the week, and the Holy Ghost set such an emphatical
note Then the same day at evening, being the first day of the week -- came
Jesus, etc. Jo. 20.19.
upon it, that it was indeed upon that day, but that he intended to intimate,
that this was the day establshed for Christian-sacred-assemblies? (3) The
practice of the Apostles, and the Church, after Christ's ascension, in observing
the Lords day for their coming together, to partake of the ordinances of the
gospel. When they were met together, on that day, with one accord, the Holy
Ghost came down upon the Apostles, Act. 2.1, 2, 3, 4. And the disciples
assembling on that day, is not spoken of as a practice newly taken up; but in
such a manner, as may intimate, it was their usual course and custom, Act.
20.7. (4) The ordination of Paul in the churches of Galatia and Corinth, that
their collections should be made every first day of the week: which plainly
(...) the believers (...) ^ssem^^ies: And you know S. Paul professes he
received of the Lord what he delivered to his people; and that his established
(...), were the same in all the churches of Christ, 1. Cor. 16.1, 2. Mark it, I
say, every first day of the week: for so the words are to ^e rendered, (...).
Every first day of the week, one after another, as (...). every month, qu.
(...) in singulis verbis. Aristop^. (...) oppidatim. (...) vicatim. (...)
viritim. Many things might be added for the e^ucidation, and vindic^ting of
these scripture considerations: But I shall choose rather to open three other
texts, which are not so commonly dwelt upon to this end, wherein yet I have
several of eminence, both for piety and learning to go before me. The first is
that of the counsel of our Savior to his disciples, in re^erence to the
destruction of Jerusalem, and the sore calamities that were to (...) the land
of Judaea. It is in the gospel written by S. Matthew cap. 24.20. But pray ye
that your flight be not in the winter, neither on the Sabbath day. Not in the
winter, because it would be troublesome to their bodies, to be then driven away
from their habitations. It would expose them to manifold inconveniences, Tum ob
frigoris rigorem, tum ob dierum lucisque brevitatem. Not on the sabbath day,
because it would be matter of grief and perplexity in their spiries, to be then
forced to shift away for their lives, when they should have their hearts
engaged in solemn attendance upon the Lord, and communion with him. So that (1)
Here is full proof of the continuance of a sabbath, to be celebrated by
believers in the days of the gospel: That the law of the Sabbath was not to
expire, and be annulled upon the death of the Messiah,b but to be still
observed and kept by Christ's disciples. Those sad times, where in our Savi^ur
speaks of their flying, were to fall out near upon forty years after his
cracifixion and suffering: and still there was to be a Sabbath. (2) The
disciples of Christ (unto whom he gave this counsel privately, and apart by
themselves, Mat. 24.3.) before this time of their flight kept their assemblies
wholly apart from the Jews. and kept the Lords day, the first day of the week;
having altogether cost off the Jewish sabbath: whence we may conclude, that
these words of our Savior are meant not of the Jewish, but of the Christian
sabbath, wherein his own people were concerned. Indeed sometimes we meet, in
the Acts of the Apostles, with mention made of the seventh day sabbath: The
Apostles taking the advantage of that day, to preach to the Jews in their
Synagogues, but we never find it mentioned after that meeting at Troas, Act.
20.7. So that long before the time of their flight, they wholly withdrew from
the Jews, and kept their assemblies separated by themselves, on the Lords day.
(3) It was an ordinary thing with our Savior, before his death and passion, to
instruct his disciples, in many divine truths, which they did not rightly
understand till after his resurrection, or ascension: When the Holy Ghost was
sent to that end, to bring his words to their remembrance, and to teach them
the right meaning of the same. See, Jo. 2.20, 21, 22. Jo. 12.16. Luke 9.44, 45.
Luke 24.44, 45, 46. Act. 11.15, 16. This, if well observed, will take off the
force of their objection, who plead that Christ's words must needs be meant of
the Jewish Sabbath, because say they, his disciples undoubtedly so understood
them. This I acknowledge as probable, that they took his speech, as meant of the
Jewish, when yet our Savior intended it of the Christian Sabbath: It being
usual with him to deliver many things unto them, which they did not rightly
understand, till he was risen from the dead. Probably this very business of the
alteration of the Sabbath, was one of the things which he had to say unto them,
but they could not then bear them, Jo. 16.12. And one of those many things,
touching the kingdom of God, which he taught them between his resurrection and
ascension, Acts 1.3. See the words of Bishop Andrews concerning this text in
his Pattern of Catechistical doctrine, upon the fourth commandment. All
ceremonies were ended in Christ, but so was not the Sabbath: for Mat. 24.20.
Christ bids his disciples pray, that their visitation be not on the Sabbath
day: So that there must needs be a Sabbath after Christ's death. Mr. Fennor in
his treatise called the Spiritual man's Directory, brings this in, as a
special argument for a Sabbath now in the days of the Gospel, because (as he
expresses it) Christ speaking of those days, when all the ceremonial law was
dead and buried, shows the Sabbath to stand still, quoting for it this text.
Take the concurrent testimony of A. B. Usher. Our Savior Christ willing his
followers, that should live about 40. years after his ascension, to pray that
their flight might not be on the Sabbath day, to the end they might not be
hindered in the service of God, does thereby sufficiently declare, that he held
not this commandment in the account of a ceremony. And lastly (which may
abundantly show that it is not any novel interpretation) Mr. Palmer and Mr.
Cawdrey give this paraphrase upon the words. As if Christ said, unto his
disciples, the Jews have charged me as a breaker of the Sabbath; but whatever
disputes and reasonings you have heard betwixt me and them, concerning that
subject, I would not have you to think, that I am an enemy to the Sabbath, or
that I mean to put an end to that commandment: For I tell you there shall still
remain a Sabbath day to be observed to God for his worship. In token whereof I
admonish you to pray, that your flight be not on that day.

The Second text I would touch upon, is that prophecy of the Psalmist
concerning the resurrection of Christ, Psalm. 118.22, 23, 24. The stone which
the builders refused, is become the head stone of the corner. This is the Lords
doing: it is mavelous in our eyes. This is the day which the Lord has made:
We will rejoice and be glad in it. From which words (as I remember) I have met
with this close and formal argument. The day wherein the stone which the
builders refused, became the head stone of the corner, that is the day which in
the times of the gospel the Lord has made, ( i. e. which he has appointed and
set apart solemnly to be observed in religious duties, one of which special
evangelical duties, viz. praise and thanksgiving, joy and gladness in the Lord,
is instanced in.) But the first day of the week, or the day of the resurrection
of Jesus Christ, is that day wherein the stone which the builders refused
became the head stone of the corner. Therefore, the first day of the week, or
the day of the resurrection of Jesus Christ is the day which, in the times of
the Gospel, the Lord has made, i. e. which he has consecrated and set apart
for the solemn attendance upon religious duties. The major proposition lies
fair and clear in the text. And the minor is bottomed upon the Apostle Peter's
comment upon the text (which comment he Acts 4.10, 11.
made by the inspiration of the Holy Ghost) who speaks of this Scripture as
meant of the day of our Saviors resurrection from the dead. I leave therefore
the conclusion to be considered. Wherein I have learned Dr. Ames his concurrent
apprehensions. Neque facile rejiciendum est, quod ab antiquis quibusdam urgetur
[pro die Dominica] ex Psalm. 118.24. Haec est dies quam fecit Jehova: Eo enim
loco agitur de resurrectione Christi, Christo ipso interpret, Mat. 21.41.

The last Scripture I will name, on this account, is that of the Apostle to the
Hebrews, cap. 4.9, 10. There remains therefore the keeping of a Sabbath
[(...)] unto the people of God. for he that is entered into his rest, he also
has ceased from his works, as God did from his own. As if the Apostle had
said, will you fall off from attendance upon gospel ordinances, and question
the celebration of the Christian Sabbath, that you may return to Judaism again?
Why, let me tell you, the Lords-day-sabbath which now remains when the other
is abolished, is of Gods own appointment and institution. David prophesied
concerning it, for this is the day of rest which he spoke of in the 95. Psalm:
And besides, it is bottomed on a very equitable foundation. For as when God had
ended the work of creation, which was peculiarly his work, he ordained the
seventh day Sabbath in commemoration thereof: So has Christ the mediator
finished the work of redemption, and is entered into his rest, as God entered
into his; and therefore has appointed the Christian Sabbath for celebration of
the work of man's redemption. I must not dwell upon all the particulars that
might be insisted for the clearing, and vindication of this sense of the words,
from the manifold exceptions that are likely to be made against it. Only let
these few things be seriously weighed. (1) That the Hebrews unto whom the
Apostle writes this Epistle, and with whom he deals in this place, were
declining apace from gospel administrations, and ready to embrace again the
Mosaical pedagogy: and probably their deferting the Lords day Sabbath and
adhering to the Jewish was one special part of their apostasy. The first of
these is plain to any understanding Christian that shall thoroughly study the
whole scope and drift of the Epistle: And, I think, we may very probably
suppose the truth of the latter also. What part of the old administration were
they more likely to be zealous of, than the Seventh day Sabbath, in the
observation whereof they had formerly been so excessively and rigorously
superstitious? Mat. 12.2. Mar. 3.2. And therefore it may seem consonant to the
Apostles scope, as to set forth the vanishing and disappearing of the legal
oblations and sacrifices; so to speak, as here, concerning the abrogation of
their Sabbath, and substitution of the Lords day in the room of it. (2) The
Holy Ghost speaks here of a certain day of rest: the celebration of a set,
determinate day; and not of the whole season of the gospei indefinitely. And
what set, determinate, day is there that may be fitly assigned as the time of a
believers rest, but the Lords day? See v. 7. Again, he limiteth a certain day
(...) Saying in David, to day, after so long a time as it is said, to day if ye
will hear his voice, hardon not your hearts. And then it follows thereupon,
v. 9. There remains therefore the celebration of a Sabbath. (3) This
determinate day of rest, which the Apostle calls the Sabbath that is to be
kept, is clearly to be meant of that day, wherein the people of Christ meet
together in the worship of God, and provoke and quicken one another to hear the
word of the Lord. For so it plainly appears from the 95. Psalm, from which
portion of Scripture the Apostles argument is taken, and upon which his whole
discourse of this matter is built. See the whole entrance of the Psalm:
particularly the sixth and seventh verses. O come let us worship, and bow down:
Let us kneel before the Lord our maker. For he is our God, and we are the
people of his pasture and the sheep of his hand. To day if ye will hear his
voice.

It is of this day, and the rest of it, which the text I am opening is to
bemeant: And what day is that, in the times of the gospel, but the Christian
Sabbath? There is not to be met with any other day, wherein the Saints can be
supposed, ordinarily, to exhort and quicken each other unto the worship of God.
The other six days are appointed for labor. (4) A believers personal rest
into which he enters by faith, was enjoyed by the Saints in the times of the
old Testament; For they were saved by the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, even
as we: But the Apostle treats here, out of the words of David, of a rest or
Sabbath to be celebrated a long time after, even in the days of the New
Testament for that Psalm is a prophesy of evangelical dispensations. As it is
said in David, to day, after so long a time. By the same reason that the
Apostle proves, that this day of rest must not be meant of the Jewish Sabbath,
because that was instituted from the beginning of the world, Heb. 4.3. We may
prove, it is not meant primarily of a believers personal rest by faith, because
that was enjoyed by the Saints in all ages of the Church, before the days of
David: But here he prophecieth of a privilege, that was to be conferred on the
people of Christ, a long time after, (5) The Apostle is to be understood of the
celebration of such a Sabbath, as is to be kept upon the like ground, in
reference to the Lord Christ's ceasing from his work, as the Seventh days
Sabbath was, in relation to Gods ceasing from his work. For so it is in v. 10.
which I mentioned. For he that is entered into his rest, that is, the Lord Jesus
Christ our Redeemer, has ceased from his work, as God did from his own. And
therefore there remains a Sabbath for Christians to cefebrate. I know the
words are usually understood of a Believers ceasing from the works of sin. But
let it be well considered, that the Holy Ghost speaks of such a ceasing, as
Gods was, when the creation was finished: He rested the seventh day, and was
refreshed; he looked on every thing that he made, and beheld it was very good,
entirely good, nothing but Good. This is justly attributable unto Christ's work
of redemption; but cannot so fitly be applied unto the Saints: When they cease
from sin, behold it appears unto them exceeding evil, and bitter, and they
are filled thereupon with godly shame and self abhorrence Ezekiel. 36.26, 29, 31.
Besides the Apostle speaks afterward, of Christ's passing into the heavens,
as relating to somewhat that had been before delivered. And unto what can it
refer, but unto his entering into his rest, which includes his passing into the
heavens? So it follows v. 14. Seeing then, that we have a great high Priest
that is passed into the heavens, Jesus the Son of God, let us hold fest our
profession. Mark, it is the same person, that is said to have passed into the
heavens, v. 14. that is spoken of as entering into his rest v. 10. For seeing
that he is passed into the heavens: And he that is entered into his rest, is the
person that has ceased from his work, as God did from his own: And upon this
account, there remains the celebration of a Sabbath unto the people See
Carter on the Covenant with Abraham, page 6, 7, etc. And Cotton on singing of
Psalms, p. 10, 11. From whom I have borrowed much of this matter.
of God. Further yet; the Holy Ghost seems plainly to distinguish in that 10.
v. between the works of redemption, which are ascribed to the Son, and the
works of Creation, which are peculiarly attributed to the Father, and are
therefore called his own works, as the Text is to be rendered. (...).
A believer upon his conversion is delivered indeed, from the dominion and
power of sin, but not wholly freed from all remainders of pollution; still
there is a Law in his members, warring against the Law of his mind, and leading
him often captive, to the performance of his works, even to manifold sins
through infirmity. So that it cannot so fully be said of a Christian, whilst in
the body, that he has ceased from his works: But of our Lord Jesus Christ, it
is exactly verified, who upon his rising from the dead came forth as a victor
from the conquest which he made; and entered into his state of exaltation. (6)
The Psalmist treating of this day of rest, which the Apostle refers to, does
instance in most of the Solemn parts of worship which are to be discharged on
the Sabbath. 1. Singing of Psalms, Psalm. 95.1, 2. 2. Prayer v. 6.3. Hearing the
word, which implies the Preaching of the word, v. 7, 8. All to be performed by
the united companies of the people of God, on that day of rest. (7) The
Psalmist urges to the practice of those duties, from the consideration,
mainly, of Gods work of Creation, v. 4, 5, 6, 7. Which is the reason given for
the institution of a Sabbath: To the commemoration whereof, the Lords day fitly
serves, as being a seventh day; as well as to the celebration of the work of
Redemption, being the Resurrection day, the first day of the week. (8) The
Apostle presses the Hebrews to the observation of this rest, from two special
arguments, which may seem clearly to relate to the work of the Sabbath. 1.
Because it would be a special means to prevent Apostasy, Heb. 4.11. Lest any
man fall. And what duty is likely to be more effectual to that end, than a
conscientious sanctification of the Lords day? 2. From the mighty influence and
efficacy of the word of God, upon men's hearts, v. 12. q. d. Be very diligent
and heedful to keep this day of rest, and to wait upon God in his ordinances,
and to give attendance upon his word, for it is not in vain so to do: His word
will cleanse your hearts, and consciences, from dead works, for it is quick and
powerful, and sharper than any two edged sword. I might add. 3. From the
consideration of the omniscience and heart seurching power of God, with whom
our business lies in all religious exercises especially. See v. 13. But I must
forbear. Pardon this larg digression or outleap; which yet will not be
unuseful, if it may but serve to provoke some others, of greater abil^ties, to
make a more diligent search into the Scope and drift of this Scripture. I will
study brevity in that which does remain.

3. To preserve you from infection by the example of the multitude, as to the
neglect of the Sabbath, Be often meditating upon the manifold advantages, that
will arise from a conscientious sanctification thereof; and the blessings
entailed thereupon. This is the way to attain the most intimate acquaintance
with God, and to get tastes of the sweetness of the way of holiness. There are
many persons who complain of a strict course of religion, as a tedious, and
burdensome way: Behold what a weariness it is unto their spirits! and they never
found that sweetness, and that spiritual joy and refreshment, which believers
are wont to speak of. Probably. the reason may be, for want of diligence and
faithfulness in sanctification of the Sabbath: for thereunto is the promise of
divine consolations annexed. Finally, it has assurance of the mercies of this
life, and of that which is to come. Be much in studying that pregnant text,
Isa. 58.13, 14. If thou turn away thy foot from the sabbath, from doing thy
pleasure, on my holy day, and call the Sabbath a delight, the holy of the Lord,
honorable, and shall honor him; not doing thine own ways, nor finding thine
own pleasure, nor speaking thine own words. Then shall thou delight thy self in
the Lord, and I will cause thee to ride upon the high places of the earth, and
feed thee with the heritage of Jacob thy father: for the mouth of the Lord has
spoken it.

This is the second thing to be noted, as to the time of religion.

3. The generality of people will cry unto God, and seem tobe much displeased
with their sins, only in the time of sickness and adversity, when the hand of
God is upon them, and his rod upon their backs: But in the days of their
health and prosperity, they forget the Lord, and perhaps entertain not so much
as a serious thought of him, from one end of the day to the other. This the
Prophet notes as a common evil, Isa. 26.10. Let favor be showed to the wicked,
yet will he not learn righteousness: in the land of uprightness will he deal
unjustly, and will not behold the majesty of the Lord. But let him be reduced
into straits and exigencies, and bound with fetrers of affliction, on the bed
of sorrows; then he will at least seemingly lament and mourn, and be earnest
in seeking unto God. For so it follows v. 16. Lord, in trouble have they
visited thee: they poured out a prayer, when thy chastening was upon them. This
was the temper of the Israelites of old, and the multitude take the like
course. Psalm. 78.34, 35, 36, 37. When he slew them then they sought him, and
they returned, and inquired early after God. And they remembered, that God was
their rock, and the high God their Redeemer. Nevertheless they did flatter him
with their mouth, and lied unto him with their tongues. For their heart was not
right with him, neither were they steadfast in his covenant. My brethren you
must not herein follow the track of the multitude: Labor as to improve
afflictions, so to spiritualize all your comforts, and to serve the Lord with
the best of your strength, and abilities. Do not put him off with your sickbed
devotions, and some flittering promises of obedience when you are in distress;
but manifest the sincerity of your hearts, by dedicating your most prosperous
days, and enjoyments, unto his glory. That is the sure way to lay up in store
a good foundation of support and comfort, against the day of trouble. Else what
cause will there be to suspect, that your affliction-eries are but the howling
of hypocrites? Hos. 7.14. How can you, with such confidence, address your
selves to the Lord, for succor in the day of tribulation and adversity, if you
forget him in the time of your prosperity and peace? May not you justly fear
least he should laugh at your calamity, and mock when your fear comes? least
he should refuse to answer any of your requests in mercy? least he should put
you off to the world, which you served, and to the lusts which you satisfied,
to fetch your comfort from thence, when you are surrounded with sorrows? And
they would be sure to prove very miserable comforters: Instead of asswaging
your grief, they would increase your anguish, and bring further horror and
perplexity into your spirits. So he threatened tha^ sinful people, Jer. 2.27,
28. They say unto a stock, thou art my father, and to a stone, thou have
brought me forth: for they have turned their back unto me, and not the face.
But in the time of their trouble, they will say, arise and save us. But where
are thy Gods, which thou have made thee? Let them arise, if they can save thee,
in the time of thy trouble. q. d. You would have none of me for your master;
when the Sun of prosperity shone upon your tabernacles; and now you are reduced
into straits and extremities, I will have nothing to do with you, except it be
in a way of wrath and judgment. My brethren, if you be guilty of the like
impiety, how justly may you fear the same dreadful dismission. Often read and
study that awakening scripture, Deuteronomy. 28.45, 46, 47, 48. Moreover, all these
curses shall come upon thee, and shall pursue thee, and overtake thee, till
thou be destroyed, because thou hearkenedst not to the voice of the Lord thy
God, to keep his commandments, and his statutes which he commanded thee. And
they shall be upon thee for a sign and for a wonder, and upon thy seed for
ever: Because thou servedst not the Lord thy God, with joyfulness and with
gladness of heart, for the abundance of all things. Mark it Sirs, if you do not
labor to be holy in the time of your health and prosperity, there is a curse
from the Lord of hosts gone forth against you, and who knows the power of his
anger? what a dreadful thing is it to be a man or woman accursed of God? But we
hope, may the sinner say this curse does contain no great matter of evil; some
curses indeed of the law are terrible, but others are less to be feared. Why
but, O vain man, thou ar^ under all the curses mentioned in the Law of Jehovah.
Well, but these curses may remain unaccomplished, and we hope, God will not be
so severe as his word. Nay, but they shall certainly be fulfilled and come to
pass: All these curses shall come upon thee. If thou fly from them, they shall
pursue thee: And if thou think to hasten thine escape, it shall not avail, for
they shall overtake thee. And least thou should expect to get from under
them, they shall lie upon thee, and that perpetually, till thou be destroyed.
If you will not fear the Lord, in the enjoyment of all things, therefore v. 48.
Thou shall serve thine enemies which the Lord shall send against thee, in
hunger, and in thirst, and in nakedness, and in want of all things. And he
shall put a yoke of iron upon thy neck, until he have destroyed thee.

That Is the third thing to be observed, as to the time of religion.

4. The multitude neglect the present time, and are much addicted to
procrastinate, as to the concernments of eternity. Most that call themselves
Christians, will acknowledge a necessity of believing, and repenting, and
minding the ways of holiness, in order to the kingdom of heaven: But they say
in their hearts, these are matters to be thought upon hereafter; for the
present we may take our fill of carnal pleasures, and worldly vanities, and
follow our worldl delights; provided that we repent and make our peace with
God, before we dye. At least we may give our selves liberty, for a little
longer, to satisfy our fleshly desires, and hereafter we will be serious in
the working out our salvation. Time enough to think of that, for the future,
before we depart hence, Ezekiel. 12.27. Son of man, behold they of the house of
Israel say, the vision that he sees is for many days to come, and he
prophecieth of the times that are far off. Take heed that you be not herein
conformed to the multitude. Do not defer your repentance, and turning to the
Lord a moment; upon any pretense of finding a more convenient season. For the
time present is, in every respect, the most convenient season. 1. It Is the only
certain season; you cannot promise your selves another hours continuance upon
the earth. How many unexpected providence are the children of men subject to,
that may take us away in an instant? So that man knows not his time, as the
fishes that are taken in an evil net, and as the birds that are caught in the
snare, so are the sons of men snared in an evil time, when it falls suddenly
upon them. How many hidden diseases may lie lurking in the body, and
inclinations unto diseases apoplexies, impostumations, and the like, which may
break forth as in the twinkling of an eye, and carry the sinner irrecoverably
to his long home? And then where is the promise of his repenting hereafter? Go
to now ye that say, to morrow or the next day, when this business is over, or
the other season is come, we will return to the Lord, and be reconciled to him.
Whereas you know not what shall be on the morrow. For what is your life? It is
even as a vapor, that appears for a little time and then vanishes away,
Jam. 4.14. The time to come is Gods to dispose of, and he has allotted only
the present to make sure of our salvation. 2. The present time is the season
which alone has the promise of acceptance. Acquaint now thy self with God,
and be at peace; thereby good shall come unto thee, Job. 22.21. Behold now is
the accepted time, now is the day of Salvation, 2 Cor. 6.2. If you put off the
Lord till hereafter, and quench the present motions of his spirit, how justly
may that come upon you which is spoken of by the prophet Zechariah, cap. 7.13.
Therefore it is come to pass, that as he cried, and they would not hear: so
they cried and I would not hear says the Lord of hosts. 3. The time present is
the fittest season, in order to prevention of the farther hardening your
hearts. The longer you lie in the state of sin, the more seared and secure will
your consciences grow, and be more difficultly wrought upon to any cordial
compliance with the right ways of the Lord. To day if ye will hear his voice,
harden not your hearts, Heb. 3.7. 4. The present season is the most convenient,
because though you should through the longsuffering of the Lord live to repent
hereafter, yet late repentance is seldom true, and evangelical. Thou may
perhaps be filled with some legal sorrow for sin, and repent as Judas repented,
and yet perish for ever. And it is to be feared that this is the case of the
multitude. For my part, I know not one passage of scripture, whereupon a
sinner, that lives under the means of grace, and being convinced of the
necessity of repentance, shall break through those convictions, and put it off
till hereafter, can bottom the least comfortable hopes, that his future
repentance will be sincere and saving: But there are many places, from which he
may have just cause to fear the contrary. Qualis vita, finis ita. Commonly as
wicked men live, so they die, and perish without any saving change upon their
hearts: and their deathbed repentings prove but hypocritical and rotten, Job.
27.8, 9. For what is the hope of the hypocrite, though he has gained, when God
takes away his soul? Will God hear his cry, when trouble comes upon him? i.
e. It will not be such a cry, as God will have any gracious regard unto, Prove.
5.22, 23. His own iniquities shall take the wicked himself, and he shall be
holden in the cords of his sins. But he may repent when he comes to die, and
then all his sins will be forgiven. I tell you, says the Holy Ghost, it will
be otherwise. So it follows, v. 23. He shall die without instruction, and in
the greatness of his folly he shall go astray, q. d. The promise of his future
repentance, his deathbed repentance, will come to nothing, Prove. 29.1. He that
being often reproved hardneth his neck, shall suddenly be destroyed, and that
without remedy. Mark it, suddenly, i. e. in a spiritual sense, before he is
prepared to give up his accounts, with comfort: So all impenitent sinners dye
suddenly, though not ever taken away by signal outward judgments, Mat. 24.48,
49, 50, 51. But, and if that wicked servant shall say in his heart, My Lord
delayeth his coming. And shall begin to smite his fellow servants, and to eat
and drink with the drunken [If he shall encourage himself in sin, and delay his
repentance, upon hopes that he has time enough to make his peace with God
hereafter.] The Lord of that servant shall come in a day that he looks not
for him, and in an hour that he is not ware of. And shall cut him asunder, and
appoint him his portion with the hypocrites: there shall be weeping and
gnashing of teeth.

So much for the fourth general head, wherein we must be cautious that we
follow not the example of the multitude; namely the timeing of religion, when
it is prosecuted.

5. Lastly, I shall instance in some particular duties, wherein the multitude
are prone to miscarry; that I may not be over-tedious and burdensome, I will
only name these eight.

6. Most persons think is enough, if they take a little care of their words,
and external demeanor; but seldom or never mind the regulation of their
thoughts They may rove and wander, whether they please; They may be working
toward vanity, and folly; They may be customarily employed in sins of any
sort; and men charg not themselves with guilt, upon that account. Contemplative
wickedness is as nothing in their esteem. It is an ordinary saying amongst
them, that thought is free. Or at best, if their spirits rise up in any kind of
detestation against horrid, blasphemous, murderous thoughts, and the like; yet
they suppose themselves no way concerned in mortifying vain thoughts, and
keeping their spirits free from fruitless, foolish and disorderly imaginations.
Do you then, my brethren, keep sentinel upon your hearts, as to these matters.
Let not sinful thoughts not so much as vain thoughts lodge within you, Jer.
4.14. See to it, that the imaginative powers of your souls, be rightly
principled, and employed about that which is honest and good. For, remember,
they are the first inlet to the suggestions of the devil: so that if you are
careless and negligent in your watch there, you minister advantage to the
Prince of darkness, to be tampering with you. And if the serpent get in his
head, he will quickly wriggle in his whole body. If the way be set open for
entrance, into your thoughts, the passage is obvious, from thence unto your
hearts and affections. A Christian is much known, by the working of his
imaginations. Therefore when the Lord sets forth the malignity and wickedness
of the old world, this is the particular mainly insisted on, Every imagination
of the thoughts of their heart, was only evil, and that continually, Genesis 6.5.
And when David made an humble appeal unto God concerning his integrity, he
specially mentioned the workings of his thoughts. Psalm. 139.23, 24. Search me,
O God, and know my heart, try me, and know my thoughts: And see if there be any
wicked way in me, and lead me unto the way everlasting. One of the first steps
to a sound and sincere conversion, is the rectifying of the Soul in this
respect, and rooting up those false notions and conceits which are by nature
rivited in the thoughts of sinners. As long as there be extenuating thoughts of
the evil of sin, the heart will never be in bitterness for it. False
apprehensions of the nature of God, will make men slight, and formal, and
corrupt, in their obedience unto God. Flattering thoughts of a man's spiritual
estate, will keep him from pressing after deliverance. Unbelieving thoughts of
the word of the Lord, will put a bar in the way of an awful regard unto the
word, Isa. 55.7. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the man of iniquity his
thoughts, and let him return to the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him: and
to our God, for he will multiply to pardon.

2. The generality are wont to be defective, in looking to their words. If they
abstain from rotten, filthy, and profane communication, they hope it may
suffice; however they are addicted to talk idly, and frothily, and to multiply
words without bounds. There are few that live as if they did believe our
Savior, when he tells us, That of every word that men shall speak, they
shall give account thereof at the day of judgment, Mat. 12.36. Let not your
practice herein be according to the multitude: but follow the example of David,
in being earnest in prayer unto God, to set a watch before your mouth, and to
keep the door of your lips? Psalm. 141.3. Why is a watch set before the gates of
a City? and to what end do keepers stand before the doors of men's houses? To
apprehend suspicious passengers, and to examine such as are going in, whence
they come, and whither they go, and what their errand and business is. How much
guilt might be prevented, if you would but observe this course, to let no words
pass without apprehending, and calling them to an account? Whence came you?
From love or hatred, or flattery which is the worst sort of hatred? Come you
from grace or corruption? What errand go you about? Is it for good or evil? Be
not hasty to blatter out speech without due premeditation, and advise. The
tongue is the hearts interpeter, and therefore should first take counsel of the
heart. Shun not only wicked talk, but tatling also, and talkativeness. The sin
of talkativeness is noted by the Holy Ghost as an evil to which women are
mostly inclined: and therefore they ought to give the more earnest heed against
it. 1 Timothy 5.12, 13.
Let every man be swift to hear, slow to speak, slow to wrath, Jam. 1.19. For
in the multitude of words and many dreams, there are also diverse vanities: but
fear thou God. Eccl. 5.7. Think it not enough to speak truly, unless withal
you speak seasonably and profitably. A Christian is not bound always to speak
of grace, but let your speech be always with grace, sensoned with salt, that ye
may know how ye ought to answer every man. Col. 4.6.

3. The greatest number of persons, even of those that will not be so vile as
to raise a scandal, and be the first broachers of an evil report, yet if such a
matter come to their cognizance, being raised by others, they are too apt to
receive it, with both their ears, greedily. And sometimes their hearts are
ready to leap within them, with a secret joy and gladness, when they hear
others bespattered, and defamed. And the reason is, because men think it
redounds to their own commendation, if they are free from the sins, wherewith
others are charged. But do not follow their example herein. We say in the case
of robbery, the receiver is as bad as the thief: The like may be said in the
case of slandering and defamation, he that cherishes and fostereth an evil
report, is in some respect, as bad as the first parent and deviser. This I
mention the rather, because I find it in the words immediately preceding the
Text, Exodus 23.1. Thou shall not raise or (as the word is rendered in the
marginal reading) thou shall not receive, a false report. They may be well
coupled together, the raiser and the receiver: For they are both servants to
the same master, and carry on the same devilish accursed design, to wound or
destroy the reputation of their neighbor. It is said of the false witness,
Prove. 25.18. He is a maul, and a sword, and a sharp arrow. He does a threefold
mischief by one sinful action: As a maul, he beats down the good name of his
neighbor: He darts a lie, as with a sharp arrow, into the breast of him to whom
he speaks: And as with a sword, he destroys his own soul. And it is the
receiver of false reports, by whom he is animated in his mischievous
undertaking. Were there none that readily hearkened to lies, the slanderer
himself would be discouraged. The Holy Ghost observes it as the character of
the man that fears the Lord, That as he backbiteth not with his tongue, so he
takes not up a reproach against his neighbor. (...) He cannot bear it, to
hear his brother defamed; It is a burden to his spirit: He is ready to chase
away the slanderer with his severest reproofs, he cannot endure it, Psalm. 15.3.
Be not talebearers your selves, and discourage them that are such. That is the
way to maintain peace, and love, to prevent heart-burnings, and animosities;
whence come debates and contentions, Prove. 26.20. Where no wood is, the fire
goes out: So where there is no talebearer, the strife cease. In all sinful
quarrels and contests, corruption within is the fire that burns; The
talebearer adds fuel to the fire, and the receiver and spreader of the false
report, of the others framing, blows with the devils bellows, lest the fire
should be extinguished. But I must contract my meditations.

4. The religion of the multitude consists wholly in open acts of piety and
devotion, done in the face of the world, where they may be seen of men. But do
you study to be accepted of God, who sees in secret. Mat. 6.3, 4. Renounce the
hidden things of dishonesty; and look well to your carriage, when you are alone
in secret, where there is no eye upon you, but that of God, and your own
consciences. Be serious, constant, and diligent in the performance of spiritual
duties, where you are not in a capacity to receive applause from men: as closet
prayer, frequent meditation upon the Scriptures, contemplation of the
excellencies of God, Self-examination as to your hearts, and ways, sedulom
evangelical mortification of inordinate passions and inward motions of the Soul
to sin, dealing your bread to the hungry, where the left hand knows not what
the right hand does. These, and such like, are duties to which the multitude
are strangers: But if you labor herein to have a due regard to the precepts of
God, and to approve your selves in secret unto him, your heavenly Father, who
sees in secret, himself will reward you openly.

5. The multitude are a generation of narrow and selfish spirits. Empty vines
(as it is said of Israel) they bring forth fruit unto themselves. But little
are affected with the concernments of others, or of the people of God. If they
thrive in the world, they can rejoice; let public affairs go backward or
forward, let the interest of the Church of Christ sink or swim. For all men
seek their own, not the things which are Jesus Christ's, i. e. Most of the
children of men, are of this temper Nota universalitatis ponitur pro plerisque,
Rav. Philip. 2.21. They drink wine in bowls, and anoint themselves with the
chief ointments: but they are not grieved for the affliction of Joseph, Amos
6.6. My beloved, labor ye, in a contradiction to the multitude, to be of
public spirits. Remember them that are in bonds, as bound with them. Rejoice
with them that do rejoice, and weep with them that weep. Be kindly affectioned
one toward another, with brotherly love. And above all, lay to heart the
suffering estate of the Church, and people of Christ. Be of the number of
those, that are sorrowful for the solemn assemblies, to whom the reproach of
them is a burden: that the Lord may rejoice over you, to do you good, and may
gather and save you, as he has spoken, Heb. 13.3. Romans 12.15. Zeph. 3.17, 18.

6. Most persons have an eye to the enjoyment of outward mercies, but they mind
not the sanctifying of the mercies which they enjoy. But do you be more
industrious to get the mercies, and comforts, sanctified, which you have, than
to reach after more, which you seem to want. Better is a little with the
blessing of God, upon it, than great revenues, and treasures, with a curse
intermingled. So in ease of affliction, be more earnest with the Lord, that the
trouble may be sanctified, than to get a bare, naked, deliverance from the
trouble. Afflictions may be removed in wrath, but the Sanctification of
afflictions is one of the choicest blessings. And if you be thus careful, and
diligent, to get every condition sanctified, you will not only be sure to
obtain that mercy, but may also comfortably expect to receive outward mercies
and deliverances, as far as they are for your good, 1 King. 3.11, 12, 13. And
God said unto him, because thou have asked this thing, and have not asked for
thy self long life, neither have asked riches for thy self, neither have asked
the life of thine enemies; but have asked for thy self understanding to discern
judgment. Behold I have done according to thy word: Lo I have given thee a wise
and understanding heart, so that there was none like thee before thee, neither
after thee shall any arise like unto thee. And I have given thee also that
which thou have not asked, both riches and honor, so that there shall not be
any among the Kings like unto thee, all thy days.

7. The multitude take up their rest in avoiding such things, as are openfaced
evils; sins which are capable of no colorable pretense for their excuse, and
cannot be gilded over by any artifice. But do you abstain also, from every
thing, that has really the appearance of evil. 1 These. 5.22. Do not content
your selves to flee from open ungodliness, but keep at a distance from such
things as are justly offensive, and carry the face of ungodliness. Indeed, as
to principles of faith, and necessary duties of religion, you must hold them
fast whatever offenses arise. Si enim de veritate aut sanctitate scandalum
sumatur, melius est ut scandala oriantur, quam ut ista relinquantur. But in all
points of indifferency, meddle not, where it may prove a stumbling block to the
weak. Though in no case I must betray my christian liberty, yet in many cases I
am bound to forbear the use of my liberty, rather than make my brother offend,
1 Cor. 8.9, 10, 11.12.13. Keep your selves pure and untainted, not only from
fouler blots, in matters apparently evil; but from the stain of any thing that
is of evil report; hating even the garment spotted with the flesh, Jude 23.
Finally, brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest,
whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are
lovely, whatsoever things are of good report: if there be any virtue, and if
there be any praise, think on these things, Phil. 4.8.

8. Lastly, the multitude are commonly like the corrupt teachers of old time
amongst the Jews; they think they must love and deal kindly with their
friends, and relations; but they cannot but hate and malign such as are their
enemies. They will deal justly and fairly, with those who deal justly and
regularly with them; but if any do them an injury, be sure they will be
revenged on him. They will give railing for railing, and rapine for rapine, and
injury for injury: And this they conceive is a matter justifiable, when they do
but pay men in their own coin, and give them no worse than they brought, Mat.
5.38, 43. But Sirs, if you will act as Christians, do not follow the multitude.
Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you,
and pray for them that despitefully use you and persecute you: That ye may be
the children of your Father which is in heaven. For he makes his Sun to rise
upon the evil and on the good, and sends rain on the just and on the unjust.
For if ye love them which love you, what reward have ye? Do not even the
publicans the same? And if ye salute your brethren only, what do you more than
others? [(...); what extraordinary matter is it? what excellent thing do ye?
wherein do you go beyond the multitude?] do not even the publicans so? Mat.
5.44, 45, 46, 47. Say not, I will do so to him as he has done to me; I will
render to the man, according to this work, Prove. 24.29. But you will be apt to
reply, why should I not right my self upon him from whom I have suffered wrong?
why should I put up an affront at his hands? If I do mine adversary a kindness,
he will not thank me for it. Mark therefore what the Lord has spoken, by way
of encouragement unto this duty, Prove. 25.21, 22. If thine enemy be hungry,
give him bread to eat: and if he be thirsty, give him water to drink. For thou
shall heap coals of fire on his head, and the Lord shall reward thee, q. d.
Possibly thy Christian carriage may overcome his rugged disposition; thy
kindness may melt him into love, and cause him of an enemy to become thy sure
friend: However thou shall in no wise lose thy reward, for the Lord has
undertaken it, who is a sure play master.

Thus I have dispatched the first thing I designed under the use of
Exhortation, by way of exemplification or instance, wherein we ought to be
cauious not to follow the multitude.

SECT. VIII.
2. GIve me leave to add some few things, by way of direction, what course we
must take to prevent seduction, by the example of the multitude.

Dir. 1. If you would not be led into sin, by the example of the multitude, be
diligent in studying the word of God, and get a clear insight into the will of
God therein revealed. This will be of great use, not only as a Chart or compass
whereby to steer your course, when the wind and tide of their practice would
carry you aside into evil: But will furnish you also with arguments, on all
occasions, to oppose their solicitations, Romans 12.2. Be not conformed to this
world, but be ye transformed by the renewing of your mind, that ye may prove
what is that good, that acceptable, and perfect will of God. Mark it, if ye
will not be forced down the current of the world, you must be well verst and
instructed, in the mind of God: that you may have the scripture in a readiness,
wherewithal to answer their temptations.

Dir. 2. To preserve you from compliance with the multitude in sin, labor to
be strongly fenced against the importunity of sinners. You must get a kind of
stifness and stoutness of spirit, that will not be easi^y bent, or bowed, one
way or other, by the humors of men. As you ought to be pliable, and yielding
to the commandments of God; gentle, and easy to be entreated to the doing of
good; so you must be strong to resist all incitations to evil. Some are of that
ductile, and facile disposition, that they are easily impressive of any form,
and quickly turned aside into crooked ways. Such a one was King Joash, after
his uncles decease: First the Princes of Judah fell away to idolatry, and they
came and made obeisance to the King, and he presently yielded his consent, 2 Chronicles. 24.17, 18. And it is a matter of easy observation, how that many are
utterly ruined, by this soft, Hic murus aboneus esto. Nil conscire sibi nulla
pallescere culpa. Hor.
and ductile temper, which men falsely call a good nature. S. Paul was a man of
another frame of spirit, when he was bound in the spirit, for Jerusalem, his
companions beseeched him, and his friends wept over him, but he would not be
persuaded, Act. 21.13, 14. Such a kind of holy obstinacy, must you get into
your souls, if you will stand fast in the way of righteousness. For be sure
your friends will reason with you, and your acquaintance will importune you, to
join in their confederacy: So that you must be fixed, as a rock in the sea, that
remains unmovable, though all the waves and billows toss, and dash
themselves against it. Remember, if sinners are importunate to induce you to
sin, the God of heaven is importunate to keep you in the path of holiness; and
whose importunacy should mostly prevail upon you, judge ye. Does not wisdom cry?
and understanding lift up her voice? She stands in the top of high places, by
the way, in the places of the paths. She cries at the gates, at the entry of
the City, at the coming in of the doors. Unto you, O men, I call, and my voice
is to the sons of men. O ye simple, understand wisdom; and ye fools be ye of an
understanding heart, Prove. 9.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.

Dir. 3. In order to keep you from infection, by the practice of the multitude,
Be sure to get your natures sanctified. Earnestly pray to the Lord, for the
grace of regeneration. Do not content your selves, with any common endowments;
but get the spirit of conversion, that other spirit, which the world cannot
receive. For if your qualifications be no other than the world has, your
conversations will be alike also. What made Caleb remain upright with Jehovah,
when the other Spies turned aside unto vanity, and lying? Because he was a man
of another spirit. Number. 14.24. But my servant Caleb, because he had another
spirit with him, and followed me fully. If you will follow the Lord fully, when
the whole world wondereth after the beast ( as the apostasy of the latter times
is expressed, Rev. 13.3.) you must be otherwise spirited, than the world is.
Common graces and indowments, will never be productive of a singular
conversation.

Dir. 4. If you will not be led aside into sin, by the multitudes's practice,
Take heed of entertaining their principles; but endeavor to erect and to set
up principles of holiness in the stead of them. For Mark it my brethren, as
your minds are affected with right or corrupt notions touching the matters of
religion, so will your conversations be regularly, or corruptly, ordered. If
your judgments be distempered with rotten principles, they will certainly
transmit answerable defilement into your lives. Therefore you shall find that
it is one of the special works of God in the day of conversion, to eradicate,
and pluck up these false pinciples, out of men's spirits: as being the strong
holds of the devil whereby he keeps possession of their hearts, and some of the
principal engines, where by he hurrieth them on to works of darkness, 2 Cor.
10.4, 5. For the weapons of our warfare, are not carnal, but mighty through
God, to the pulling down of strong holds. Casting down imaginations and every
high thing that exalts it self against the knowledge of God, and brings into
captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ. So that you must beg
instantly of God, that he would please to throw down these towering thoughts,
and make your hearts sound in his statutes, as is the prayer of David, Ps.
119.80. It would be an endless task, to pass over all the rotten principles
that are in the hearts of the multitude. I will only mention the principal, and
for methods sake, reduce them to seven heads.

1. The first principle of the multitude, concerns the nature of God, and it is
this. That God is not so severe and exact in the observing men's ways and
actions, as some precise ministers would bear them in hand he is. Surely think
they, the Lord does not make any such great matter, whether we be holy or not;
he does not so much stand upon strictness, and circumspection in our carriage;
nor will he be so rigorous as to require it of us. Only these puritan preachers
tell us stories of that nature, and they must say something, to fill up the
time. Thus they reason themselves into wickedness, and the wicked one strikes
in to promote these reasonings, Psalm. 10.11. He has said in his heart, God
has for gotten it: he hides his face, he will never see it. Again v. 13.
Wherefore does the wicked contemn God? He has said in his-heart, thou will not
require it, Ezekiel. 8.12. Then said ^e unto me, Son of man, have thou seen what
the ancients of the house of Israel do in the dark, every man in the chambers
of his imagery? For they say, the Lord sees us not, the Lord has forsaken the
earth. Mark it, they went on in sin, and idolatry, being acted by the influence
of this cursed principle. Now therefore, this principle must be demolished, and
thrown down: For men will never venture through the oppositions and reproaches
of the multitude, that they may be accepted of God, unless they be fully
convinced, that God minds their ways, and that holiness is pleasing in his
sight, Genesis 17.1. Walk before me, and be thus perfect, Job. 31.4. Does not he
see my ways, and count all my steps? Prove. 5.20, 21. Why will thou, my Son, he
ravished with a strange woman, and embrace the bosom of a stranger? For the
ways of man are before the eyes of the Lord, and he pondereth all his goings.

In the room and place of this first rotten principle, let these scripture
principles be erected.

1. That the conscience of a man is Gods deputy, and substitute, set up in the
soul to this purpose; that it may judge the sinner for his wickedness, and bind
him over to appear before the judgment seat of Christ, Romans 2.15, 16. Jo. 8.9.
Let me therefore ask thee this one question. Does not thy conscience sometimes
smite thee, for thy profaness and hypocrisy? Does not that give thee, many a
secret gripe at thy heart, and lie as a worm gnawing within thy entrals? Does
it not step in, now and then, in the times of thy jovialty, and merriment, and
spoil all thy sport? and warn thee of coming before a greater judge? Why, O vain
man, does conscience observe which God has planted in thy breast? and does not
God observe more exactly, by whom it was planted? For if our heart condemn us,
God is greater than our heart, and knows all things. 1 Jo. 3.20. Understand,
O ye brutish among the people, and ye fools when will ye be wise? He that
planted the ear, shall not he hear? He that formed the eye [this internal,
reflective eye of the soul] shall not he see? He that chastizeth the heathen,
shall not he correct? He that teaches man knowledge, shall not he know? The
Lord knows the thoughts of man, that they are vanity, Psalm. 94.8, 9, 10, 11.

2. Settle this principle also in the place of the other, that all the
dispensations of God toward the children of men, have a direct and natural
tendency to lead them to repentance, and to quicken them to walk in ways of
holiness. To this end he gave his word to instruct them, and his spirit to
strive with them, and has appointed his ordinances to be attended upon by
them. Upon this account he does wait in the exercise of his long suffering
toward some, and sends his ministers to treat with them in his name. To this
end, he executes sore judgments upon others, and makes them to taste the
bitterness of sin in the fruits of it. This is the proper end of all
exhortations and counsels, of all comminations on the one hand, and promises on
the other hand; of all mercies and afflictions, and providence of every sort.
And can you be so sottish, as to imagine that the infinitely wise God would be
at such cost and pains, to drive men out of their sins and to draw them to
godliness, and yet not regard whether they are holy or not? You will not impute
such folly to a considerate, sober man; that he would be at a vast expense in
order to accomplish a design, and then not care whether it be accomplished or
no? And dare thou to charg this folly upon God, whose wisdom is
incomprehensible, and of whose understanding there is no searching out?
Consider, O man, what expense the Lord has been at upon thy soul. Sometimes he
has watered thee with his blessings from heaven, and again exercised thee
under sharp corrections. Now he has indulged thee the use of spiritual
opportunities, and dealt with thee by inward convictions, and anon deprived
thee of these excellent advantages that you might learn their worth by the want
of them, if by any means you might be prevailed with to forsake the evil of
your ways. And does not he care, for all this, whether you forsake them or
not? What could have been done more to my vineyard, that I have not done in it?
[what cost or pains could be bestowed, that has not been spent upon you?]
Wherefore when I looked that it should bring forth grapes, brought it forth
wild grapes? Isa. 5.4.

3. The account and reckoning unto which sinners must be called, at the
tribunal seat of Jesus Christ, will be a very strict and exact reckoning, and
his proceedings with them will be severe proceedings. For God will bring every
work into judgment, and every secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it
be evil, Eccl. 12.14. He will bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and
make manifest the counsels of the heart, 1 Cor. 4.5. And if his eyes were not
upon all the ways of man, how could he bring them to such a precise account?
How could God thus judge the world? He will sentence the wicked unto eternal
burnings, unto intolerable torments, which shall never have an end, Mat. 25.41.
Depart from me ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil, and
his angels. And can it be imagined that he will do thus, for a matter that he
does not regard? Will he put his creatures to this inexpressible torment, for
doing that, which he makes no account of? Is God unrighteous that takes
vengeance? God forbid. Let not such a cursed thought be harbored within your
spirits.

4. Though the ungodly may be suffered to prosper for a while in reference to
the things of this life, yet there are sore spiritual judgments inflicted on
them here, and they are reserved also to the day of destruction. This is a
principle needful to be riveted in men's spirits, in opposition to that of the
multitude: For it is the want of a right understanding of this, which is the
ground whereupon they embrace that. Why do sinners think, that God regards it
not, whether they be strict or loose? whether they walk after the spirit, or
according to the lusts of the flesh? Because they see the ungodly prosper in
the world, and there is no difference put, in the providence of God, between
the righteous and the wicked: all things come alike unto all, Mal. 2.17. Ye
say, every one that does evil is good in the sight of the Lord, or where is the
God of judgment, q. d. If God be so much displeased with sin, why does he not
punish the sinners? If he love the ways of holiness, why does he not deal
favorably, and kindly, with them that are holy? If any are fat, and in a
flourishing condition, it is for the most part the workers of iniquity: and if
any are in adversity, more than others, it is such as seem to be more strict
and upright than others. Well, but mind it Sirs, As the Lord has spiritual
blessings, the choicest favors, hidden manna, which the world sees not, to
bestow upon his children: So he has spiritual plagues, the sorest effects of
his indignation in this life, which are poured Psalm. 106.15.
out upon the ungodly. And the time of remarkable difference, betwixt Saints
and Sinners, is reserved till the end of this world, when the wicked shall be
turned into hell, and all that forget God: and then shall the righteous shine
as the stars for ever in the kingdom of their Father, Job. 21.7, 8, 9, 29, 30.
Wherefore do the wicked live, become old, yea are mighty in power? Their seed
is established in their sight, and their offspring before their eyes. Their
houses are safe from fear, neither is the rod of God upon them. Mark the answer
to this quaery, v. 29.30. Have ye not asked them that go by the way? and do not
ye know their tokens? That the wicked is reserved to the day of destruction,
they shall be brought forth to the day of wrath.

So much for the first great principle of the multitude, which concerns the
nature of God.

2. The second principle of the multitude, whereby they force themselves into
sin, relates to the quality of godliness, viz. That a man's heart may be good in
the sight of the Lord, though he be not precise and strict in the avoiding of
sin, and mortification of it; though he do not walk up to the rule of the word,
nor is active and forward in the works of holiness. Thus they are ready, upon
all occasions, to boast of the integrity of their hearts. It is true, they
cannot deny, but that their lives are not so regular and orderly as they should
be; they now and then take liberty to satisfy their carnal desires; but God
knows their hearts, that they mean well, and love the Lord, and intend as much
good as they that are more exact in their ways. It is true, they neglect
prayer, and seldom study the scriptures, and comply with the corruptions of the
times. But their wills are as good, as they that are most opposite to those
corruptions, and make the greatest show of diligence, and faithfulness in the
duties of godliness. They hope God will accept of the will, for the deed. Has
he not a special regard unto the heart? and he knows that their hearts are as
good as others. Thus Jehu gloried in the goodness of his heart, though he only
carried on his own secular interest, and departed not from the sins of Jereboam
the Son of Nebat, 2 Kings 10.15. Is thine heart right, as mine heart is with
thy heart? And thus Saul pleaded that he meant well, however he kept not the
commandment of the Lord, 1 Samuel 13.11, 12. My brethren, if you will stand fast
against the seductions of the multitude, you must get rid of this rotten
principle: and know, that if there be truth and uprightness in the heart, there
will be a proportionable degree and measure of the power of godliness expressed
in the life and conversation. According to grace within, so will be the tenor
of your carriage without, 1 Jo. 3.7. Little children, let no man deceive you;
he that does righteousness, is righteous, even as he is righteous. Again v. 10.
In this the children of God are manifest, and the children of the devil:
whosoever does not righteousness, is not of God, to keep you, from under the
sway, and power, of this principle of the multitude, get these three contrary
principles, rivited in your hearts, in the room of it.

1. That the heart of a man, as it is the seat of internal spiritual
qualifications, so it is the wellspring of action. All external practices are
but streams, that flow from that fountain; but fruit, that grows upon that
tree. So that if your conversations be vile and abominable, it is impossible
but your hearts should be filled with wickedness, and abominations also. If the
words be light and frothy, the heart cannot be serious: Because the mouth
speaks out of the abundance of the heart. If the carriage be wanton and
effeminate, the heart cannot be chaste, for all that wantoness proceeds out of
the heart, and so I might instance in other cases, Mar. 7.21, 22, 23. For from
within out of the heart of men, proceed evil thoughts, adulteries;
fornications, murders, thefts, covetousness, wickedness, deceit,
lasciviousness, an evil eye, blasphemy, pride, foolishness: All these evil
things come from within, and defile the man. Mark it, if there be any sin and
wickedness allowed in the life, it will of necessity follow, that the heart is
corrupt and naught: That is the source and original from whence sinful actions
are derived.

2. The new creature, which is formed in the hearts and spirits of all the
children of God, whereby alone they are made good and upright, is in its own
nature and tendency, an active principle. It will raise a man from earth to
heaven, and keep him from sin and impiety, that he may be holy in all manner of
conversation. Grace within is as the ointment of the right hand, that will
discover it self. So that if you live in the practice of any known sin, or in
the neglect of any known duty, glory not, and lie not against the truth (as S.
James expresses it, cap. 3.14.) i. e. Do not boast of the goodness of your
hearts; for it is a lie: They cannot be good unless your lives be filled with
all goodness. If your hearts are right with the Lord, your ways will be
replenished with the fruits of righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ unto
his praise and glory. A good man out of the good treasure of his heart,
brings forth good things: and an evil man out of the evil treasure, brings
forth evil things, Mat. 12.35. Whosoever is born of God, does not commit sin:
for his seed remains in him. And he cannot sin, because he is born of God, 1
Jo. 3.9.

3. The rule which Christ will observe, in his judicial proceedings, according
to which he will pronounce the sentence of absolution or condemnation, and send
the sons of men to their eternal estate, will be according to their works. He
will judge of your hearts, by the tenor of your conversations: And then the
foolishness of this pretense will appear. that a man's heart may be good when
his ways are corrupt: For Christ will give to every man according to his
ways, Rev. 20.12. And I saw the dead small and great, stand before God: and
the books were opened: and another book was opened, which is the book of life.
And the dead were judged out of those things which were written in the books,
according to their works. Again v. 13. And they were judged every man,
according to their works. So that, Be not deceived, God is not mocked: for
whatsoever a man sows, that shall he also reap. For he that sows to the
flesh shall of the flesh reap corruption: but he that sows to the spirit,
shall of the spirit reap life everlasting, Gal. 6.7, 8.

That Is the second principle of the multitude, of which you must beware.

3. The third principle of the multitude, which you must carefully avoid, that
you may not be led by their example into the commission of sin, has respect to
the benefit arising from the service of God. The principle is this, That the
following of the world brings visible profit, and advantage along with it: but
there is no benefit or emolument that does come byst rictness in the ways of
religion. The fear of the Lord seems a fruitless way, in their eyes. They
cannot but confess, that God has commanded them, to be much in seeking after
him, to pray without ceasing, to be steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in
the work of the Lord: But what good is there to be got by so doing? Where is
the income of religion, that it brings along with it? What advantage do men
get by setting apart so many days of fasting, and prayer, and the like
spiritual exercises? Job. 21.14, 15. Therefore they say unto God, depart from
us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways. What is the Almighty, that we
should serve him? and what profit shall we have, if we pray unto him? And you
find this principle in the hearts of those stubborn, and refractory sinners,
Mal. 3.14. Ye have said, it is vain to serve God, and what profit is it that we
have kept his ordinance, and that we have walked mournfully before the Lord of
hosts? q. d. Men grow rich and wealthy by compliance with sin, but there is
nothing to be gotten, at all, by walking humbly with God, and attendance upon
his service. This false principle Sirs, must be rejected, and disowned, if you
will keep your selves free from the taint of worldly pollutions: For by walking
contrary to the multitude, by the straight line of pure religion, you may
possibly be surrounded with many dangers, and suffer much loss; and that you
will never willingly do, unless you see something in godliness, able to
countervail those dangers, and to make reparation of your losses. Except you
apprehend a good conscience to be a matter of considerable worth, and value,
you will never be at any great cost and expense in order to keep a good
conscience.

For the excluding therefore of these corrupt apprehensions, endeavor to
fasten three contrary principles, upon your spirits in their stead; which I
shall but just touch upon.

1. That walking closely with God, in the high way of holiness is a sure means
to evidence that God has made with you an everlasting covenant, and to keep
you under the verg of his peculiar favor, and regard. And is it no profit, to
have the Lord of hosts to be your fast friend, and portion for ever? Is it
nothing to be made a special favorite, unto the King of heaven? Why man, the
earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof: The heart of all men, even the
Kings heart is in the hands of the Lord, and as the rivers of water, he turns
it whether he pleases. All the Armies of heaven, and the Inhabitants of the
world, are at his beck, and under his guidance. And, is it nothing to be under
the special care and protection of this Generalissimo? this sovereign
commander? Is it a matter little to be regarded, to enjoy the smiles and tokens
of his reconciled countenance? Are the consolations of God, become small in
your eyes? Surely David put another kind of estimate upon them, Psalm. 4.6.
There be many that say who will show us any good? Lord, lift thou up the light
of thy countenance upon us, Psalm. 34.2. My soul shall make her boast in the
Lord. I have sometimes read of one of the Kings of France, that when the
Spanyard sent to denounce war against him, and the Herald proclaimed all his
masters titles, as King of Castile, Arragon, Sicelie, Naples, and the rest; The
French King returned to every one of them distinctly, I am King, of France, I
am King of France: thereby intimating, that by that one flourishing Kingdom of
France, he was able to out boast the other in the multitude of his dominions.
So may a believer by the enjoyment of one God, be able to outboast the
worldling in all that he possesses. Has he abundance of riches? But I, may a
sincere Christian say, have the eternal God for my portion, who is the giver of
all things, from whom every good and perfect gift does proceed. Has the
worldling the favor of great men, of Kings, and Emperors? But I have the
friendship of God, who is the supreme King; and all Princes and potentates upon
earth are but his vassals and subjects. Is he advanced to honor and great
dignity? Well, but I am a son or daughter of the living God, which is far
higher preferment than the mightiest men can confer on their favorites. All
that the worldling possesses, is but for a small pittance of time; but a
believer has interest in eternal mansions, in a crown and kingdom that cannot
be shaken. And is the way to this kingdom an unprofitable way? Mind what the
Psalmist says in this respect, Psalm. 84.10, 11. For a day in thy Courts is
better then a thousand. I would choose rather to sit at the threshold, in the
house of my God, than to dwell in the tents of wickedness. For the Lord God is
a Sun, and a shield; The Lord will give grace, and glory: No good thing will he
withold, from them that walk uprightly.

2. The profit and advantage of godliness, is principally spiritual profit,
whereas the hearts of the unregenerate are earthly, sensual, and carnal; and
therefore it is, that they are not able to discern the sweetness and excellency
of religion. Not as if there were no such thing to be perceived, but their
spirits are indisposed, and altogether incapable of the right perception
thereof. For to a through discerning of any excellency whatsoever, there must
be always a proportion betwixt the excellency discerned, and the power or
faculty by which it is discerned. To make it clear by a familiar illustration.
If I discourse with an Husbandman, of some profitable way of manuring of land,
or concerning the best method of ordering grain and tillage; he will easily
discern the import of such discourse, and the benefit of such experiments, as
are commended to him in that behalf. But if you should read to him the most
admirable lecture, in Geometry, Optics, Metaphysics, or the like: He will not
apprehend the usefulness of it. Why? Because there is a suitableness in his
understanding, for the reception of the one, and not of the other. Thus it is
in this case: If a man would discern spiritual excellencies, he must have a
spiritual eye. If he would taste sweetness in the service of God, he must have a
spiritual palate. But now the unregenerate are carnal, and earthly: Their
spirits lie grovelling upon the earth, and their minds are linked and fastened
to things below, 1 Cor. 2.14. The natural man receives not the things of the
spirit of God: for they are foolishness to him. Neither can he know them,
because they are spiritually discerned. If a blind man do not perceive the
beauty and loveliness of the Sun; It is not from any defect in that glorious
body: but through the defect of his sight. So if the wicked do not see the
profit of godliness, it is not through any defect in religion; But because
themselves are blind, and cannot see afar off, 2 Pet. 1.9.

3. The great reason, why persons go empty away from the service of God, and so
bring up an evil report upon godliness, as if it were an unprofitable work, is
because their hearts are not upright in the sight of the Lord, but they deal
falsely in his covenant.

They do their work by halfes, and in a slight and superficial way; and so fall
short of their expectations in the performance of it, Isa. 58.3. Wherefore have
we fasted say they, and thou see not? Wherefore have we afflicted our Souls,
and thou take no knowledge? Mark the answer that is returned to these
groundless complaints. Behold in the day of your fast you find pleasure, and
exact all your labors. Behold, you fast for strife and debate, and to smite
with the fist of wickedness. Is it such a fast that I have chosen? q. d. If you
did not play the Hypocrites, in the obedience you tender; you should never have
cause to complain of my unreadiness to reward you. If you were faithful in the
observation of my statutes, I would in no case fail the expectation of your
souls. But ye brought that which was torn, and the lame, and the sick: Thus you
brought an offering: Should I accept of this at your hand, says the Lord? Mal.
1.13. My brethren, the emolument and advantage of religion, is entailed upon
the power of godliness: No wonder, that they find it not, who have only the
form. For bodily exercise profits little: But godliness [reall and
substantial godliness] is profitable unto all things, having promise of the
life that now is, and of that which is to come, 1 Timothy 4.8. And therefore the
Lord appeals to the very consciences of his people, whether ever they could
say, that they had sought him in vain, when they did seek him in sincerity,
Mic. 2.7. O thou that art named, the house of Jacob, Is the spirit of the Lord
straightened? Are these his doings? Do not my words do good, to him that walks
uprightly?

That is the third principle of the multitude, to be rooted up, out of your
spirits.

4. The fourth Principle of the multitude which you must utterly reject, if you
will not be led aside by their error into sin, has reference to the way of
salvation, and the means of coming to the kingdom of heaven. That a person need
not take so much pains, nor make so much ado, in order to the attainment of
eternal life, as commonly Ministers press men unto: But a man may be saved well
enough, without preciseness and circumspection over his ways. They cannot but
acknowledge, but that the Holy Ghost in the scriptures exhorts men to be
vigilant, and watchful, in every thing to be circumspect, and not to come near
to an evil matter: To contend earnestly for the faith, and to strive to enter
in at the strait gate. And indeed, will they say, these things are not amiss in
Ministers, that have nothing else to mind, but to inveigh against sin, and to
study the word of the Lord: But they cannot believe, they are of absolute
necessity to salvation; but that a man may do well enough, though he, now and
then, indulge himself to satisfy his lusts. They will never be persuaded, that
God will damn all that come not up to these rigid terms. Thus they harden their
hearts against the fear of the Lord, and set open a door unto licentiousness.
Deuteronomy. 29.19. I shall have peace, though I walk in the imagination of mine
heart, to add drunkeness to thirst. As if the sinner should have said, as
carnal people in our days are wont to do. Do you think, Heaven was appointed
only for a company of Puritans, that make more Scruples than they need? Why may
not a man take his fill of pleasures upon earth, and yet come to the kingdom of
heaven as well as others? surely God never intended, to tie us up in such
narrow bounds as these Strait-lac't Preachers would persuade us. Come, let us
fill our selves with strong drink, and take our freedom whilst we may, and yet
our souls shall do as well as theirs. If you would see the farther workings of
this cursed and Hellish principle, consult, Psalm. 10.3. Isa. 28.14, 15. And
Jer. 5.12.13.

My beloved, if you will keep your selves unspotted from the world, great care
must be taken that you give not the least reception or entertainment, unto
these devilish dictates. For if once such libertine thoughts do but enter into
your heads, they will quickly fall down, as a mighty Torrent, upon your hearts,
and carry you headlong to all excess of riot. As the first point of wisdom is,
to pitch upon the right end: So the next is, to take care of electing and
closing with the sure and proper means, for compassing that end. If you fancy
to your selves, an easy way to salvation, you do thereby tempt the tempter, to
lead you in the broad way to destruction. Your spirits are thereby as a City
without gates or walls, open to all the inroades of that wicked one, and of
wicked men that are his instruments. And therefore to Antidote your souls
against this Poisonous principle, let these three contrary principles sink deep
within you.

1. That the Holy Ghost is express concerning it, that the way of salvation is
a narrow, and difficult way: and that there are but few of those, that sit
under the teachings of the word of God, that will arrive with safety at the
kingdom of heaven. Mark it, I say, these are truths which are frequently
inculcated and very clearly asserted. They are not dark notions, and
conclusions, that are pretended to be drawn by far-fetcht consequences, from
the scripture; but they are delivered so plainly, that there is no way left for
evading the force of them. Mat. 7.13, 14. Enter ye in at the straitgate: for
wide is the gate and broad is the way, that leads to destruction, and many
there be which go in thereat. Because strait is the gate [or how strait is the
gate?] amd narrow is the way that leads unto life, and few there be that find
it. Not only the way of holiness, in the utmost extent of it, is a difficult
way; but the way that leads unto life; such holiness, as is of absolute
necessity to conduct a sinner to salvation; And they are but an handful in
comparison that walk in it. But this may be meant, will the carnal professor
say, in relation to Heathens and Infidels, and gross Idolaters, that worship a
false God, and never had the knowledge of a Mediator. We are Christians, and
members of the Church, and hear the word of the Lord. Se therefore what our
Savior says in another place, Mat. 22.14. For many are called, but few are
chosen. When are sinners externally called, by a common vocation, but when the
word of God sounds in their ears, inviting them to repentance, and the Spirit
of God deals by his motions with their hearts, admonishing and persuading them
to come unto Christ, that they may be saved? And few of this sort attain to
eternal life. Look into the old world, and there were but eight persons saved
from the deluge, whereof there was one, at least, an hypocrite; and the rest of
the world were swept away, not only with the besom of temporal destruction, but
into the pit of eternal perdition. Consider the state of Sodom, and there could
not be found ten righteous persons in that populous City. But least you should
say that these were professed Atheists, and Infidels, and so the case not
parallel, with such as are called the people of God: Let us therefore make
inspection into the body of Israel, when Elias made intercession to the Lord
against them, who thought that only himself had been left alone faithful unto
Jehovah. And pray, what was the answer of God unto him? See Romans 11.4. I have
reserved to my self, seven thousand men, who have not bowed the knee to the
image of Baal. Mark it, but seven thousand in the whole kingdom of Israel, that
consisted of ten of the Tribes. We read of eleven hundred and threescore
thousand mighty men of valor, at one time, in the two tribes of Judah and
Benjamin, besides the soldiers that kept the garrisons: Now if you should
reckon proportionably, concerning the ten tribes, and make but a reasonable
computation of the rest of the people, men and women, What were seven thousand
in respect of the whole? What an inconsiderable pittance? scarcely, one of a
thousand. However the case is plain, there are but few in comparison that hear
the word of the Lord, that will come to the state of blessedness in the
enjoyment of the Lord. And, to bring this matter to an head, if the way to
Heaven were easy, how comes it to pass that such multitudes perish? If men
might be saved at a cheap rate, without strictness, and diligence, whence is it
that the greatest number fall short of salvation? If the careless and sensual
are in the way to heaven, who are the multitude, in the visible Church, that
Christ tells us, shall be sent into the chains of darkness? Do not you tremble,
when you meet with such passages in the Bible? I am afraid, Sirs, you dare not
seriously study and meditate upon such scripture-truths, least they should make
your hearts to ache, and awaken you out of your golden dreams.

2. Though there are degrees of grace, and different measures of holiness in
the Saints and servants of God: and many persons that are saved never attained
to that stature and pitch of godliness in this life, at which some have
arrived: Yet there are such things of absolute and indispensable necessity to
salvation, and to evidence that you are partakers of saving grace in the
smallest degree, that will sufficiently manifest that Heaven is not to be got
without much pains and diligence in the pursuance of it, Mat. 11.12. The
kingdom of heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by force. There
is no geting into that City, except you storm it: unless you vehemently strive
to lay hold upon it. Lazy wishings and wouldings will never bring you thither.
Lukewarmness and slothfulness will certainly fall short of it. The bare
external and superficial performance of some duties whilst in other things you
take liberty to indulg the flesh, will undoubtedly leave you still in the state
of Damnation; what ever fond conceits you may have of the contrary.

Let us lightly pass over the mention of some particulars that are of absolute
necessity to eternal life. (1) The whole nature must be cleansed from the power
of sin, and every corruption mortified and brought into subjection, Romans 6.6,
14. 2 Cor. 5.17. (2) The whole person must be devoted and consecrated unto the
Lord; and surrendered into his hands, to be at Gods disposal, and to follow him,
at his feet, without reservation and exception of any part or faculty, Isa.
44.5. 2 Cor. 8.5. (3) All the time of a man's life must be dedicated to the
service of the most high; and to the employment of holiness, Luke 1.75. 1 Pet.
1.17. (4) Every known sin must be actually abandoned and forsaken they must be
utterly abandoned and cast off, never to be followed any more, Ezekiel. 18.21.
Galat. 5.19, 21. (5) All the commandments of the Lord must be respected, and a
conscientious regard must be had unto the due performance of every known duty,
Psalm. 119.6. (6) The whole flock of our outward enjoyments must be managed in a
subordination to the glory of God, and eternal concernments: and be readily
abandoned and rejected, even the dearest of them, when they come in competition
with close walking with God: and the forest tortures and afflictions willingly
submitted to, rather than be driven back into the ways of sin, Mat. 16.24, 25,
26. Heb. 11.35. Now let us cast our eyes back on these things, and see whether
they can be done with a wet finger. The reason, why carnal people imagine, that
they may come to heaven, without much circumspection and strictness, is,
because they know not what real holiness is, nor wherein it does consist,
which is the only way that leads to heaven.

3. Let this principle also be erected and set up in your souls, that although
no Christian does attain to an absolute perfection of grace or holiness in this
life; yet the meanest sincere Christian, every true believer, is still pressing
after perfection. He does not allow himself in the least iniquity, but is still
cleansing himself further every day, and pressing forward in godliness, till he
has gotten to the Mark. He does not content himself with any seize
received; but is ever laboring after more intimate acquaintance with God, and
a closer fellowship and communion with him, Phil. 3.13, 14. Every sound
Christian takes the life of Christ, for his pattern. And though sometimes it
falls out that he makes blots and blurres in transcribing, yet he studieth
to write as near as may be according to that copy, 1 Jo. 3.3. Every man that
has this hope in him, purifieth himself, even as he is pure.

So much for the raising of that fourth cursed and corrupt Principle of the
Multitude.

5. The next Principle of the multitude, is touching the accomodations of this
life, the good things of this world. That it is a point of the greatest wisdom,
to make sure of all that can be gotten here, and let us trust God with our
souls, for they cannot be left in better hands. They think Gold and silver are
sure friends, upon all occasions; and make way for a man in any business
whatsoever: And therefore they count such men fools and idiots, that know not
their own concerns, who will part with these things upon the niceties of
conscience; and will lose their worldly advantages, upon any ground whatsoever.
For themselves, they had rather trust God with their souls, than men with their
bodies and estates. So that whatever comes of it, they will be sure to get,
what they can, that they may have somewhat to rely upon, in the time of need,
Prove. 18.11. The rich man's wealth is his strong City, and an high wall in his
own conceit.

For the prevention of the workings of this soul-destructive principle, let
these ensuing lessons be well imprinted on your spirits, and frequently weighed
and pondered in your thoughts.

1. The God of holiness has threatened to blast the endeavors, and bring the
labors to naught, of such as eagerly and obstinately pursue the things of this
life, and neglect to be diligent in laying up a good foundation for eternity.
When they are earnestly set upon getting riches, and care not to keep undefiled
consciences, the Lord is wont to send a curse upon their blessings, and to
shrivel their gains into a very narrow compass. So that, what profit has a
man, in such a case, of all his pains and labor, whereby his heart has been
disquieted? Why Sirs, it is the blessing of God that makes rich, Prove. 10.22.
And what if that blessing be withholden from you? Then all your enjoyments will
wither and crumble into dust, even as flowers fade at the departure of the Sun.
And this is none other, than you may well expect, if you follow this world to
the neglect of the other world. This he is wont to execute, upon the children
of men, when they wound their souls and consciences, to get the trash and dung
of the earth: when they follow after this world and take no heed to walk in the
steps of his precepts. Sometimes God blows upon their labor, and travel,
that they weary themselves as in thefire for very vanity, Hag. 1.9. Ye looked
for much, and lo, it came to little; and when ye brought it home, I did blow
upon it. Why, says the Lord of hosts? Because of mine house that is waste and
ye run every man to his own house. Sometimes he suffers them to have much, but
does not give them an heart to enjoy what they have: They have no profit, nor
can suck any sweetness, or comfort, out of their greatest abundance, Eccles.
6.1, 2. Sometimes he leaves them to the swing of their lusts, to spend what
they got for their bodies, to the ruin and destruction of their souls: So that
all they have is too little, to satisfy those, unsatiable, and untamed, lusts.
Eccl. 5.13, 14. Prove. 1.32.

2. It is but yet a little while, and all the good things of this world shall
not, in the least be able to do you good. They cannot support under the
terrors of conscience, in this life; much less can they prevent the stroke of
death, or allay the bitterness of that passage. They may add to the tortures
of conscience, because of their evil getting, and misemployment; but cannot
minister a dram of consolation to the departing spirit, Prove. 10.2. They may
increase the punishment assigned, in the day of judgment: but no way prevail to
the alteration, or revocation, of the sentence of the Judge. he will not regard
thy riches, nor thousands of gold and silver. When a rich man dies, he shall
carry nothing away: His glory shall not descend after him. Though whiles he
lived, he blessed his Soul; and men will praise thee, when thou do well to
thy self: He shall go to the generation of his fathers; they shall never see
light, Psalm. 49.17, 18, 19. Now it is accounted a piece of the chiefest wisdom,
to get much in this world, however it be gotten. But in the end, the worldling
shall be a fool, Jer. 17.11. i. e. Then it will appear what an egregious Dolt
he was; his folly will be declared before men and Angels.

3. Whereas the Earthworm pretends, that he will trust God with his Soul, know,
that the Lord will have nothing to do, in a way of mercy, with such: but will
leave them to fall and perish by their own counsels. But will not God preserve
those that trust in him? Yea, but this is not to trust in the Lord, but
profanely to tempt him: And he will repay such as hate him to their face. Then
do we place our confidence under his shadow, when our dependence is acted in
the way of righteousness: When we give up our selves, in integrity, to be his
servants, and keep the way of the Lord, Psalm. 4.5. Psalm. 37.3, 7, 34. If
persons live in sin, and mind earthly things, and yet say they lean upon the
Lord: This very presumption will bring upon them a sore, and inevitable,
destruction, Mic. 3.11, 12.

So much, to eradicate and pluck up that fifth Principle out of your hearts.

6. The sixth hellish principle espoused, and embraced, by the multitude
concerns the evil of those sins, in which they live, and with the filth whereof
they are wont to defile themselves. Their Tenent is this, that there is no
great hurt in their irregularities and transgressions: nor are they such
mischievous things, as many are pressed to believe. What harm is there (will
they say) if a man talk idly and frothily? If they now and then revel, and
tipple, in a way of merriment, and to pass away their time? They hope, no body
is the worse for it; they know indeed, they are actions condemned in the word,
but what hurt is there in them, if they tend to no man's loss, or detriment?
They pray God, they may never do worse, and the like. They cannot deny, but
they are forbidden to add to the word of the Lord; To introduce men's
inventions into his worship; To set their Posts by his Posts, and their
thresholds by his threshold. But what need men keep such a do against them,
being innocent harmless things; especially if they are appointed for decency
and edification? However they are confident, that if they do no good, yet there
is no great matter of hurt in them. This I might instance in many cases: For it
is the ordinary plea, which sinners produce, to justify much of their impiety,
Ezekiel. 16.20. Is this of thy whoredoms a small matter, q. d. Surely it appears a
small matter in your eyes. These are sinful apprehensions which are sedulously
to be mortified, and subdued: For unless your minds are possessed with
abhorring thoughts of sin, your souls can never be thoroughly humbled for it;
nor will be at much pains or expense to escape the pollution. But I have spoken
abundantly to this, in one or two places before. Only let me beseech you to put
these two interrogatories, home upon your consciences.

Q. 1. Is there no hurt, in provoking the Lord of glory to indignation?

Is not he the life of thy life, and the strength of thy heart, and the Author
and giver of all the mercies, which thou enjoyest? Cannot he strip thee naked,
and leave thee desolate, in a moment? Is not he able to fill thy bones with
sorrows, and thy Spirit with anguish, and to crush thee in pieces, with the
least effects of his wrath? Did ever man or woman harden themselves against
God, and prospered? And is there no hurt in that which stirs up his fury
against thy Soul? Do you provoke him to anger, and do not you provoke your
selves, to the confusion of your own faces? Jer. 7.19. Why man, Gods wrath is
incensed, by the smallest of thine abominations. See what order he gave in case
of the profanation of the Sabbath, when the man gathered sticks in the
wilderness on that day. Number. 15.35. The Lord said unto Moses, the man shall be
surely put to death, all the congregation shall stone him with stones, without
the camp. See how Jealous he was, in the case of his instituted worship. When
Nadab and Abihu Priests whom the Lord had consecrated, offered up incense
before him. They were engaged in the service of the true God, and in the
duties, for the main, of his own appointment: Only they took liberty to make
use of strange fire, which God had not commanded. And there went out fire from
the Lord, and devoured them, and they died before the Lord. Lev. 10.2. Observe
how severely he dealt in the case of Uzzah, who did but touch the ark, when the
Oxen shook it; probably out of a good intention. And the anger of the Lord was
kindled against Uzzah, and he smote him, because he put his hand to the Ark:
and there he died before God, 1 Chronicles. 13.10. Lastly, mind what dreadful
comminations are denounced against the smallest presumptuous sins, (such as
thine are, for which thou pleadest, as having no hurt in them.) Number. 15.30, 31.
But the Soul that does ought presumptuously, whether he be born in the land, or
a stranger, the same reproacheth the Lord: and that soul shall be cut off from
among his people. Because he has despised the word of the Lord, and has
broken his commandment: that soul shall utterly be cut off: his iniquity shall
be upon him. Mark it, the least presumptuous sin is a reproaching of God, and
despising his word. It reproacheth God as a liar, as if he would not make good
his threatenings: It reproacheth him, as a countenancer of wickedness: As unjust
and unrighteous in his doings: and it exposes the sinner to be utterly cut
off, and to die in his sins. And is there no hurt in such things?

Q. 2. What apprehensions are you likely to have of these impieties, at the day
of accounts? Then, when conscience is awakened, they will appear in their
danger and loathsomness. Then, when punishment is at hand, your souls will rue
it, that ever you meddled with them: that ever you were so sottish, as to follow
after lying vanities. For the day of Judgment will be a day of conviction, as
well as of recompense, Jude 15. O my beloved, lay these things to heart
betimes, whilst you are yet in the way. It is a dreadful thing to be
unconvinced of the bitterness of sin, till the torments of hell convince you.

7. The last principle of the multitude, which I shall mention, has an eye
upon the electing grace of God. Will they say, If God has appointed to save
us, we shall be saved; though we be never so great strangers to the ways of
holiness: And if he has appointed us to wrath, we shall perish; all our
obedience and endeavors will be to no purpose, to withstand or alter his
counsels. Thus the Devil has taught ungodly men to reason, and the
Semi-pelagians are his Ushers to instruct them more artificially to manage this
wretched principle. This is one of the strong holds of Satan, whereby he keeps
possession of the souls of the unregenerate. By thus arguing, they remove all
hindrances out of the way, that they may give themselves up freely to
lasciviousness, to commit iniquity with greediness. It is the very principle
which S. Paul mentions to be in the hearts of the impenitent, and which he
rebukes with such vehemence and holy indignation, Romans 9.18, 19. He has mercy
on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he hardens. Thou will say then
unto me, why does he yet find fault? for who has resisted his will. As if they
should say, our salvation, we see, depends wholly on the will and pleasure of
God; If he has decreed to bring us to heaven, we shall get thither, however we
demean our selves: and if God has decreed us to condemnation, we shall be
condemned, whatever pains we take to walk in the strict ways of religion. For
his will is arbitrary and unchangeable, such as cannot be resisted.

My brethren, these corrupt reasonings must be silenced? else they will cut the
sinews of all vigorous endeavors, to please the Lord, and to be found faithful
unto him. The doctrine of Gods Prescience and Decrees is no countenancer of
slothfulness, no enemy to godliness, but a promoter thereof, if rightly weighed
and considered. It mightily tends to the advancement of the Grace of God, 2 Timothy, 1.9. To empty a man of himself, and to stop the mouth of all proud,
carnal, gloriation and boasting, 1 Cor. 4.7. To quicken and provoke us to
diligence, and exactness in the works of piety, that thereby it may appear that
we are a chosen people whom God has called according to his purpose, 1 These.
1.4, 5, 6, 7. And therefore, to stop the mouth of those sin-advancing, and
soul-ruining reasonings, and to set your spirits right in this particular: Let
these four contrary principles be well settled and fastened in your souls.

1. Whom God has appointed to salvation as the end, he has appointed to
regeneration, and universal obedience in the life, as the means leading to that
end. Whom he has predestined to partake of the kingdom of Heaven, by virtue
of the Merits of the death of Jesus Christ, he has predestined to be
conformed to the image of his Son, Romans 8.29. These things are so inseparably
connected together in Gods decree, that they cannot possibly be parted. God
has not determined to conduct, such, or such, to eternal life, though they
live in a course of sin, and lie polluted in their blood. If any plead form
such apprehensions, let them know, that this is not the scripture doctrine of
Gods decrees, but a wicked slur and aspersion whereby the adversaries of free
grace, endeavor to bring up an evil report upon the truth. The scripture
doctrine is this, That whom God purposes to save from the wrath to come, he
does purpose to sanctify, and cleanse from all their filthiness: and to guide
them by his spirit in the way of holiness. What can be more plain, if ungodly
men had not a mind wilfully to pervert the words of the Holy Ghost, and to
wrest the Scriptures to their own destruction, 2 These. 2.13, 14. God has from
the beginning chosen you to salvation, through sanctification of the spirit,
and belief of the truth: Whereunto he has called you by our Gospel, to the
obtaining of the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ. Therefore, brethren, stand
fast, and hold the traditions which ye have been taught, whether by word, or
our epistle, 1 Pet. 1.3. Elect according to the fore-knowledg of God the
Father, through sanctification of the spirit unto obedience, and sprinkling of
the blood of Jesus Christ, Romans 8.30. Mereover, whom he did predestinate, them
he also called; and and whom he called them he also justified: and whom he
justified, them he also glorified. Mark it, where the Lord has decreed
glorification for the end, he has decreed conversion and holiness, and
evangelical obedience as the necessary means to lead thither. And what God has
joined together, let no sinner be so ^ardy, as to pluck asunder.

2. The rule for guidance of our conversations, at which we are to take counsel
for direction in all our actions, is not Gods will of purpose what he has
determined to do: But his will of precept, what he has appointed in his laws
and statutes to be done by us. Our work lies, in the diligent observation of
his commandments. His counsels are secrets, reserved in his own breast and
bosom, till by the uprightness of our hearts, and the integrity of our lives,
we make it appear that we are chosen of God. A man may have an hand in bringing
about much of the purpose of the Lord, and yet be a wicked rebel in so doing,
Act. 2.23. So that, I say, our business consists in hearkening to his law,
and conforming our selves to the dictates and injunctions of the same, Deuteronomy.
29.29. The secret things belong unto the Lord our God: But those things which
are revealed belong unto us, and to our children for ever, that we may do all
the words of this law.

3. Settle this as a principle in your hearts. That it is a point of egregious
folly and sottishness, to be more earnest and heedful in the preserving our
bodies, than in the saving our souls; and to venture our precious and immortal
souls, and the affairs of the world to come, in such a bottom, wherein we will
not venture to put our selves, as to the transitory enjoyments of this world.

This very consideration, if thoroughly laid to heart, will sufficiently show us
the wea^^^ss and gross stupidity of the multitude in their reasonings. For none
of them will be persuaded, thus to argue the case, in respect to their bodily
health, and outward estate. My beloved, as God has predetermined in the
matters of man's salvation: So he has fore ordained all things that come to
pass. There is not the smallest concernment, that befalls any of the children
of men, but it falls under the compass of Gods decrees, Ephesians. 1.11. Being
predestined according to the purpose of him, who works all things,
according to the counsel of his own will. Now take the profanest sinner, and he
will not plead, after this fashion, in relation to his outward man, and earthly
comforts. When a wicked man is bound upon the bed of sickness, he will not say,
If God has purposed I shall have ease of my pains, then I shall be sure to
have it, however disorderly I am: If God has decreed to recover me, I shall
recover, though I neglect the means: And if not, all my care and endeavors are
to no effect. No, but says he, send for the Physician; give me this potion,
which is proper to my distemper, and that cordial, which is of use to
strengthen nature: For I must use the means of health, if ever I would expect
the blessing of health. Take an unconverted sinner in his trade, and tr^ffique;
he will not thus reason the case, If God has purposed that I shall be rich,
then I am sure it will come to pass, however idle, and negligent, I am in my
calling: And if not, all my labor and industry will be unsuccesful. No, but he
will buy, and sell, and trade, and traffic; he will look carefully to his
shop, and live frugally, and look well to his business: For, says he, as the
blessing of God makes rich, so it is the diligent hand, which he has
appointed as the means conducing thereunto. And, pray mind it Sirs, is it an
equitable thing, thus to plead in the case of eternal salvation, when as you
will not be so sottish in the case of worldly accommodations? Methinks, if
sinners had a mind to make experiments, they should begin with their bodies,
and temporal estate, rather than with their Souls, which are of value
infinitely beyond them. Let me speak unto you in allusion to the words of the
Apostle, James cap. 5.7, 8. Be patient therefore brethren, unto the coming of
the Lord. Behold the husbandman waits for the precious fruit of the earth,
and has long patience for it. The like argument may I use in this particular
of Gods decrees. Do not reason your selves inso slothfulness, and impieties,
from the fore-appointment of God. Behold the Husbandman will not be so
senseless, as to reason in that sort: He will not say, if God has decreed I
shall have a good crop, and a plentiful harvest, it shall be so, though I sleep
and be careless; though I neither plow nor sow: And if he has decreed
otherwise, all my travel is in vain. No, but he will plow all day to sow; he
will open and break the clods of the ground: Does not he manure the soil? and
make plain the face of the earth? And ^ast in the principal wheat, and the
appointed barley, and the rye in their season For his God does instruct him to
discretion, and does teach him. He knows, that drowsiness will clothe a man
with rags: And that if he would attain the end, he must give diligence in the
use of the means. Be ye diligent also, in working out your salvation, and that
with fear and trembling.

4. As we must endeavor to walk by the rule of the gospel, so we must carry on
the business of eternity, in the order and method of the gospel. And this is
the order, not firstly to enquire into the counsels of God, whether you be
elected or not; but in the first place to be earnest with God for the grace of
conversion, and to press after purity of heart, and holiness of conversation,
that from thence you may be able to prove your election, 2 Pet. 1.10. Give
diligence to make your calling, and election sure. Mark it, first your calling
or conversion, unto God, and your election thereby. Else you begin at the wrong
end.

Thus I have largely insisted on the fourth Direction. If you would not be led
aside by the multitude's practice, Take heed that you entertain not their
principles.

Dir. 5. If you will not conform to the practice of the multitude, make them
not the men of your society and fellowship. Hold no familiar correspondency
with them: But make the people of God the men of your counsel. If you
familiarly converse with infected persons, you will be sure to catch the plague
of them. If you have intimacy with them, you will learn their ways, and bring
a snare to your souls, Prove. 22.24, 25. You have many professors think they
have writ of exemption from contracting defilement, by the society of the
ungodly: And therefore they make no bones of familiar correspondency with
sinners: Only they are resolved not to comply with them, in any thing sinful;
but will hold fast their integrity. Alas Christians, this is but to cheat and
cozen your own souls. Can a man carry fire in his bosom, and his clothes not be
burnt? Can he intimately converse with the ungodly, and not receive a tincture,
at least of their spirits? Be assured of this, if you do not some way or other
defile your selves, but deal truly and faithfully with the Lord, they will
either leave their ungodliness, or quickly be weary of, and loath your society.
The resolution of David is an excellent pattern, Psalm. 119.115. Depart from me,
ye evil doers: for I will keep the commandments of my God. As if he had said, I
shall be sure to deal falsely in the covenant of my God, and not keep his
commandments, unless I break off society with evil doers. And v. 63. I am a
companion of all them that fear thee: and of them that keep thy statutes.

Dir. 6. Lastly, if you would not be infected by the multitude, learn the great
gospel lesson of self-denial. Self-seeking will expose you to be caught in
every snare, Luke 9.23.

Thus I have done with the second head, by way of direction.

SECT. IX.
3. TO provoke and stir you up, to be watchful over your selves, that you do
not follow the multitudes example: I shall only put you in mind of three moving
considerations.

Mot. 1. If you be led by the example of the generality, and walk in their
steps: It will be a sure evidence that you are still the children of the Devil,
and under his government. For this is one of the properties of such as are dead
in sins, and trespasses, and are acted by the prince of the power of the air,
being children of disobedience: That they walk according to the course of the
world, Ephesians. 2.1, 2.

Mot. 2. If you live no otherwise than the multitude live, you will fall short
of many that fall short of heaven. Sundry hypocrites have out-gone you. This
the unjustified Pharisee could boast of, that he was not as other men, Luke
18.11. And if your righteousness be less than that of the Scribes and
Pharisees, who are excluded from the kingdom of Heaven; how will you be able to
escape the damnation of Hell!

Mot. 3. This argument from the multitude is commonly of no validity in respect
of outward evils; and why should it prevail as to spiritual evils, which are
the sorest, and whereby all outward judgments are pulled down upon our heads.
The covetous worldling will not cast away his riches, though all his neighbors
are poor and indigent: But he labors to outstrip them in worldly goods. Take a
man that has his health, when all about him are sick, impotent or diseased;
and he will not destroy his health, because he would be like unto others. Why
then should you murder your souls, because others walk in the path of
destruction? should we not be more stiff and resolute in laying up treasures
in heaven, than earth-wormes are to get honor and profits in the earth? They
seek after but a corruptible crown, but we an incorruptible, 1 Cor. 9.25.

4. Let me subjoyn a few things by way of Retortion, and so shut up this
discourse. Q1. What use ought we to make of the practice of the multitude in
doing evil; seeing we must not follow them, nor conform to their example?

Answ. There is a fourfold special use, to be made of their example; when a
multitude combine in a course of sin.

1. Observe from hence the special providence of God, in the preservation and
safeguard of his Church and people. Though they are but (...) a little,
diminitive flock, an handful, in comparison of the great numbers of those that
serve the Devil, and adhere to his interest: And though the wicked hate the
righteous, with a perfect hatred; and seek to root them out from being a
people, that the name of Israel may be no more in remembrance: Yet they are
still kept from desolation and ruin. Hic est digitus Dei. Certainly this is
the finger of God. If you should see a poor man wage law against an hundred,
that are rich, and mighty; and be able to make his part good against them,
spending penny for penny, and pound for pound; you would presently conclude, this
poor man has some others to back him; all his expenses come not out of his own
stock, else he were no way able to stand it out against them. Why Sirs, thus it
is in reference to Gods peculiar people and children: They are but a small
number of poor despised ones, and yet they are enabled to hold out,
notwithstanding the multitude of the wicked that plot their downfall. Surely
there is a mighty one to back them, even the Lord of hosts: For the wicked walk
on every side, and the vilest men are exalted. Well may the Saints of God speak
in the language of the Psalmist, Psalm. 124.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. If it had not been
Jehovah who was on our side, now may Israel say; If it had not been Jehovah who
was on our side, when men rose up against us: Then they had swallowed us up
quick, when their wrath was kindled against us. Then the waters had overwhelmed
us, the stream had gone over our soul. Then the proud waters had gone over our
soul, Blessed be the Lord, who has not given us a prey to their teeth.

2. Learn from the wickedness of the multitude, what pravity and corruption is
resident in your own hearts. Lay your hands upon your breasts, and say, this
wickedness which they perpetrate, and this vanity which they follow, is
radically and seminally in my soul: and if God had left me to my self, I should
have been a partner with them in the same abominations. For my brethren, the
vile actions of others, are evidences of the vileness of our hearts. There is
not that horrid wickedness, committed in the life of any man, but it is
seminally in the soul of every man. As in water face answers unto face, so
does the heart of man to man, Prove. 27.19. How then comes it to pass, that we
are not actually guilty of the like abominations? Why, because the Lord has
restrained and kept you back. Deuteronomy. 18.14. For these nations which thou shall
possess, hearkened unto observers of times, and diviners: But as for thee, the
Lord thy God has not suffered thee so to do, q.d. If God had permitted, and
left you to the natural inclination and bent of your own spirits, you would
have been conjurers and witches and charmers and fortune tellers: You would
have consulted with them, and have been in every respect, as notorious and
execrable wretches, as any others in the world.

3. Endeavor from the consideration of the sinfulness of the multitude, to
keep an holy jealousy and suspicion over your souls, least you should miscarry
in the way to heaven. Let him that thinks he stands take heed, lest he
fall, 1 Cor. 10.12. If the multitude go down the broad way to Hell, and perish
through their unbelief. Let us therefore fear, lest a promise being left us, of
entering into his rest, any of you should seem to come short of it, Heb. 3.19.
compared with Heb. 4.1.

4. Lastly, if God has given you good hopes through grace, that you are
converted, and taken near to himself by the blood of the everlasting covenant;
take advantage from the perverseness and corruption of the multitude, to adore
the unsearchable riches of the grace of God, and to magnify the abundance of
his loving-kindnesses. Say as David, 2 Samuel 7.18. O Lord, who am I, and what
have I deserved? that thou should take me from amongst the multitude of the
ungodly, and bring me hitherto, into a state of fellowship and communion with
thy self? For, as it is, Deuteronomy. 7.7, 8. The Lord did not set his love upon you
nor choose you, because you were more in number than any people, for ye were the
fewest of all people: But because the Lord loved you therefore he has selected
you, and taken you, into covenant with himself: Let his name be exalted, and
the high praises of this God be in your hearts, and lips, and lives for ever.

FINIS.

