THE STATUTE-LAWS PERUSED and REVIVED: OR, A REMEDY AGAINST PEDLERS, HAWKERS,
AND Petty Chapmen, etc.

Fit to be KNOWN by All CONSTABLES and Other PARISH-OFFICERS, ALSO BY THE
MINISTERS in the Country, and all Other Persons whatsoever.

LICENCED,

July 22. 1693


LONDON: Printed and are to be sold by Brab. Aylmer at the Three Pigeons in
Cornhill, over against the Exchange; William Miller at the Achorn in St. Paul's
Churchyard; Daniel Brown at the Bible and black Swan without Temple Bar; and
by several other Booksellers. 1693.

Price Six Pence.

blazon or coat of arms of the City of London Fleet Mayor.
A BILL for Prevention of Pedlers, Petty Chapmen, and other Unlawful Traders,
Wandering about within the CITY of LONDON and the Liberties thereof.
As the same was Settled and Approved by Advice of diverse Learned Council, and
accordingly Reported by the Committee the second Time, the 20th Day of June,
1693.
WHEREAS by the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, amongst other Things it is
Enacted, Ordained, and Declared, That all Pedlers and Petty Chapmen, Wandering
Abroad, shall be Taken, Adjudged, and Deemed Rogues and Sturdy Beggars, and
shall be Taken and Apprehended, and be Stripped Naked from the Middle upwards,
and be openly Whipped, until his or her Body be Bloody, and shall be further
Dealt with, as in and by the said Laws and Statutes is Directed and Appointed.
And Whereas, Also great Numbers of Vagrant and Idle Persons, both Men and
Women, either Unsettled, and having no Habitation, or Wandering and Roving from
the Places of their Abode and Habitations, do daily Resort to this City and the
Liberties thereof, as Pedlers and Petty Chapmen, Wandering up and down, Selling
or offering to Sale diverse sorts and kinds of small Wares, and other Goods and
Merchandises, Contrary to, and in Contempt of the said Good and Wholesome Laws
and Statutes, and also contrary to the Welfare and Good Government of this
City, and to the Manifest Loss, Damage and Detriment of the Honest and
Industrious Shopkeepers, Tradesmen, and Inhabitants thereof; For Prevention
whereof for the Time to come, and for the better and more effectual Repressing
the Mischiefs aforesaid, Be it Enacted and Ordained; and it is hereby Enacted
and Ordained by the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, the Right Worshipful the
Aldermen his Brethren, and the Commons in Common Counsel Assembled, That the
said Statutes shall from henceforth be strictly and duly put in Execution
against all such Offenders within this City and the Liberties thereof: And to
that End and Purpose, That all Constables and other Inferior Officers within
this City and the Liberties thereof, shall Seize, Take, and Apprehend all such
Vagrant and Wandering Persons, going and Wandering About within this City and the
Liberties thereof; or any of the Streets, Lanes, Allies, Passages, or Places
within the same, Selling, or exposing to Sale any manner of Wares or
Commodities whatsoever; and Inflict the Punishments by the said Statutes
appointed on such Offenders, and deal with, or cause such Offenders to be
strictly and severely dealt with as by the said Statutes are directed and
appointed. And that in case any Constable or other Inferior Officer shall
wilfully neglect or refuse to do and perform his Duty therein, that then, and
in such Case, the Penalty of 20 s. for every such Offense, shall be Levied upon
him so Offending, as by the said Laws and Statutes is directed and appointed.
And further, That the Sum of 5 l. shall be Required and Levied, and Received of
and upon every Person and Persons who shall let or hinder the due Execution of
the said Laws and Statutes, as by the said Laws and Statutes is also Enacted
and Ordained.

And Whereas, also by the ancient and laudable Customs of this City, no Wares,
Goods, or Merchandises whatsoever, ought to be Bought or Sold, or exposed to
Sale within this City or the Liberties thereof (save only in Public Markets or
in open Shops or Warehouses, kept and used for that Purpose, and Fairs) during
the time of such Markets and Fairs only: Yet, nevertheless, diverse and sundry
Lewd, and Idle, and Disorderly Persons Lodging or Living within the said City
and the Liberties thereof, or near Neighbourhoods or Places thereunto
adjoining, do frequently Sell, or expose to Sale diverse Goods, Wares, and
Merchandises, as Hawkers and Petty Chapmen; Going and Wandering in the Streets,
Lanes, Allies, and other Places thereof, from House to House, and from Door to
Door, contrary to the said good, laudible, and profitable Customs of this City;
by Reason whereof, the Citizens, Shopkeepers, and Inhabitants of the said City,
are not only greatly Hindered and Prejudiced in their Trades and Occupations,
but also many of Their Majesty's good Subjects Inhabiting and Residing within
the said City and the Liberties thereof; and others Resorting thereunto, are
frequently Cheated, and Defrauded, and Abused in buying bad and deceitful Wares
and Commodities of them; For Prevention whereof for the Time to come, and for
the better and more effectual putting in Execution the said ancient and
laudible Customs of this City, against such Offenders as aforesaid: Be it
further Enacted and Ordained, and it is hereby Enacted and Ordained by the said
Lord Mayor, and the said Aldermen his Brethren, and the said Commons in
Common Counsel Assembled, That from and after the First Day of August now next
ensuing, no Person or Persons whatsoever shall Sell, or expose to Sale any
Goods, Wares, or Merchandises in any Street, Lane, Public Passage, Tavern,
Inn, Alehouse, Coffee-House, or other Public Place within this City or the
Liberties thereof, unless it be in open Markets Appointed, Used, and Accustomed
for the Vending thereof, or in Common and Public Fairs, during the time of
such Markets and Fairs, upon pain to Pay and Forfeit the Sum of Forty Shillings
for every Offense, by him, her, or them committed, contrary hereunto. And that
no Person or Persons within this City or the Liberties thereof, shall buy any
such Wares, Goods, or Commodities so Exposed by such Person or Persons to Sale,
contrary to the true intent and meaning hereof, upon pain to Pay and Forfeit
for every Offense by him her, or them committed, contrary hereunto, the like
Sum of Forty Shillings. And for the better Prevention of the said Mischiefs for
the future, it is hereby further Enacted and Ordained, That no Keeper, or
Keepers of any Tavern, Inn, Alehouse, Coffee-House, or other Public or
Private House whatsoever, within this City or the Liberties thereof, shall
permit or suffer any such Hawker, or Wandering Peddler, or Petty Chapmen, in his,
her, or their House, or Houses, Shop, or Shops, or other Place or Places
belonging to him, her, or them, to Sell, or expose to Sale, any small Wares or
other Goods or Merchandises, contrary to the true intent and meaning of this
present Law. And that in Case any such keeper of any Tavern, Inn, Alehouse,
Coffee-House, or other public or private House within this City, or the
Liberties thereof, shall Offend therein, that then and in every such Case,
every such Person and Persons so Offending, shall for every such Offense Lose,
Forfeit, and Pay the Sum of Forty Shillings of lawful English Money. And it is
hereby also further Enacted and Ordained, That for the better putting in
Execution the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, a good and sufficient Whipping
Post, and also a good and sufficient pair of Stocks, at or before the said
First Day of August shall be made, provided, and set up (if not already done)
in some convenient and public Place in every respective Ward within this City;
and shall be from time to time kept in good and sufficient Repair, at the Costs
and Charges of the several and respective Wards of this City.

And it is hereby further Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That
all and every the Forfeitures, Penalties, Sum, and Sums of Money so Forfeited,
and to be paid by Force and Virtue of this present Act, as aforesaid, shall and
may be Sued for, and Recovered by Action or Actions of Debt, to be brought and
prosecuted in the Names of the Chamberlain of this City, for the time being, in
any of Their Majesty's Courts of Record within this City, where Actions of Debt
may be brought; and that the Sum and Sums so recovered (the Costs of such Suits
being first deducted) shall be disposed of as follows, Viz. One Moiety to the
use of the Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens of this City, and the other Moiety
to him or them that will first Discover and Sue for the same, according to the
ancient Custom of this City in that behalf.

Provided always nevertheless, That this present Act or any Thing therein
contained, shall not extend to or be construed or taken to hinder or prevent
any Maker or Makers of any Stuffs, Silks, Wares, or Goods whatsoever, from
carrying, or causing to be carried abroad, any such Goods by him or them so
made, to Sell or expose to Sale to any the Inhabitants, Freemen of this City,
or the Liberties thereof, exercising the Trade of Selling, and uttering by
Retail or Wholesale such respective Goods and Wares, who shall or may Buy the
same to Sell again, any thing in this present Act contained to the contrary
thereof, in any wise notwithstanding.

And whereas, also diverse good Acts have been heretofore made, and are still in
force, to prevent the irregular and disorderly Selling or exposing to Sale out
of the lawful Markets, Fish, Fruits, Roots, Herbs, and Plants, under severe
Penalties; therefore it is hereby Declared and Provided, That no new or further
Penalty Imposed by this present Act, shall extend to any Person or Persons
Inhabiting in this City or the Liberties thereof, for selling or exposing to
Sale any of the said Goods, or to Prohibit any Person or Persons from buying
any of the same.

What Alterations may happen before the Passing, by the various Interests or
Opinions in Common Counsel, shall be duly Noted and Advised of.

The City and Country press so hard on our Promise in April last, for an
Account of all these Affairs following, That we could not stay any longer, though
this BILL is ready to pass into an ACT, as above.

Whosoever shall know of any Money Forfeited by willful Breach of this BILL or
ACT (when Passed) and will not themselves Prosecute, are desired but to send
the needful Particulars in a Letter to Mr. Holt and Company, and all due Care
will be taken thereof.

An ABSTRACT of the CASE of the Cities, Corporations, and Market Towns of
England; of the present Act of the Common Counsel of London; of the late BILL
in Parliament; of the Present Laws against Pedlers, etc. with Plain Directions
for putting the same in Execution. Abstracted from the various Writings,
Prints, and Proceedings followed on that Occasion, through all kinds of
Difficulties, with all Diligence and Faithfulness, for these Four Years last
past; by which all known Objections are Answered, and Matters of Fact Attested
at large. To, For, and By RICHARD HOLT and Company, who have been at the Whole
and Continual Charge thereof, and now humbly Dedicate the same to all Persons,
who are Generously Inclined, for the PUBLIC GOOD.
THE said Corporations, Markets, and Market Towns (which are the Wombs of
Trade) do increase their Respective Trades and Values, according to the
Encouragement they receive by Mutual Commerce; and that Commerce receives its
Bounds and Improvement from such Regulations as our former Laws have aimed at
and intended, though some Difficulties have been found in putting the same in
Execution; partly for want of a right Understanding by the Constables and other
Officers, and Persons concerned, but most of all by Reason of the Charge and
Trouble that attends the Prosecution of them, especially against Rogues and
Vagabonds; most Persons imagining, that others enough will Contribute without
them; and so every Bodies Business becomes no Bodies, and the whole Suffers.

For so it is by the present Irregularities of Pedling and Hawking by Foot and
Horse-Packmen, and such Wandering and Unaccountable Persons, who pretend to sell
by Retail or by Wholesale, That

I. They can neither themselves be duly Taxed or made Serviceable to the
Offices and Duties of the Public; but on the contrary, they carry away the
Straw, and leave others to make the Bricks without it.

II. They Undermine, Discourage and Ruin many Thousands of Honest, Lawful,
Settled Traders and Manufacturers, and their numerous Families, by which

III. They cause great Impoverishment and Devastations in the said Markets and
Towns, and consequently the Disimprovements and Downfall of the Rents and
Profits both in, about, and near the same: For how can the Towns subsist to
take off the Product of the Country, and receive back no Advantage by Trade
from it?

IV. They are the occasion of Making, Vending, and Dispersing Uncustomed,
Imperfect and Deceitful Wares, false News, secret Plots, and pernicious Books;
and also, of Deceiving, Abusing, and sometimes of Robbing and Destroying Their
Majesty's Good Subjects, and Corrupting their Servants.

V. Of the great hindrance of Their Majesty's Revenue in their Taxes, Customs,
Excise, and Postage of Letters, especially cross the Countries, and of the
safety of Families, and of the Peace and good Government of the whole Kingdom.

VI. Of the hindrance and discouragement of serving Apprenticeships, and
thereby Exposing Youth, for want of lawful Callings, to great Hazards and
Misfortunes, and but too often to untimely Ends.

VII. Of the preventing of good Neighborhood and mutual Credit, and
consequently the Consumption of Goods and Commodities of English Growth and
Manufactures, by destroying the right and lawful Markets, and preventing
Investments of Stocks in Goods, by proper and able Tradesmen.

VIII. Of the rendering useless both Merchants, Shopkeepers, Artificers, Ships
of Burden and Trade to Remote Parts, as is most clearly made out at large, and
consequently thereby,

IX. Of making this most Noble and Potent Island, the which subsists chiefly by
Trade, more weak, and the more obnoxious to the Power of France, and all the
rest of its Enemies.

The deep sense of the Premises, has caused many Applications and Petitions
from all Parts of the Kingdom, to their respective Members, and to the
Parliament for Redress. Whereupon when a former was lost, a new BILL to prevent
the Decay of Trade in Cities, Corporations and Towns, was Elaborately Composed
and Prosecuted by the Help and Favor of the Right Honorable the present
Lord Keeper, and some other Worthy Members: But because the Delays and
Difficulties we met with, are unspeakable; We shall only say, That our BILL was
at last thrown out by the Lords, to our great Loss and Disappointment. Yet, we
hope, the longer their Honors and Lordships Consider of this Matter, the more
Favorable they will be to us when another Opportunity shall offer to renew our
humble Applications for the same Bill.

The Petitioners against the Bill were but only Six Linnen-Drapers, whose
Petition was thus Entitled, Viz. The Humble Petition of several Linnen-Drapers
and other Wholesale Dealers in and about the City of London, in behalf of
themselves and others of the same Trades, who Prayed to be heard, by the
Committee, in what they had to offer against the Bill; which was a Clause they
had prepared to get into our Bill, and in effect to Establish all Pedling and
Hawking by Law; and this they will ever Attempt, on all Occasions which shall
be offered, but after that, was then prevented, what Reasons they Alleged, was
looked upon by the Committee to be but very insignificant, and chiefly for
Delay. They afterward pursued the same Designs in the House; and we hear, that
against the next Session of Parliament, they design to get into their own hands
the Management of our BILL, that they may with less difficulty model it for
their own Purpose. One of their Reasons in Print to the Lords, indeed was a
strange one, especially from Shopkeepers, Viz. That if the Shopkeepers should
be so much Indulged as to have their Bill Pass, then there would be none to
follow any Laborious Employment; for then it was but for a Man to put his Son
Apprentice to a Country Mercer, and he might be sure to get an Estate, and to
live in all the Plenty, Ease, and Luxury imaginable.

After the loss of the Bill in Parliament, We did, by Advice of Council, get
Collected, and plainly Abridged, all the former Statutes in force against
Pedlers, etc. and Published the same, which now, with some Explanations and
Directions, as we promised, are Reprinted as follows. In the mean time, the
Pedlers and Hawkers are by fit Arguments already Convinced, That the new Law we
entreated for in Parliament, was more favorable to them than the old ones.

A Plain Abridgment of several Statutes in force, which may be Effectually put
in Execution against all Pedlers, Hawkers, and other Unlawful Traders; together
with the Opinion of Learned Council touching the same.
BRass and Pewter-Wares, by being carried about and sold Clandestinely, were
Made False and Deceitful; for Prevention whereof, it was Enacted by the 19 Hen.
VII. Cap. 6. That no Pewter or Brass-Wares whatsoever, should be Sold or
Changed by any Person using the Trade of Pewterers or Brasiers, but only in
open Fairs or Markets, or in their own Dwelling-Houses, on Forfeiture of Ten
Pounds to the King for every Offense: This Statute being found to be of great
Benefit, was per 4 Hen. VIII. Cap. 7. again Confirmed and Ordained to Endure
for Ever.

That whereas the Cities, Buroughs, Towns Corporate, and Market Towns, did
heretofore Flourish, and were highly serviceable to the Government, but were
brought to great Decay, and were like to come to utter Ruin and Destruction, by
Reason that Persons Dwelling out of the said Cities and Towns, came and took
away the Relief or Subsistence of the said Cities and Towns, by selling their
Wares there: For Remedy whereof, be it Enacted, etc. That no Person or Persons
Dwelling any where out of any of the said Cities or Towns (the Liberties of the
Two Universities only excepted) shall hereafter sell or cause to be sold by
Retail, any Woollen or Linen Cloth (except of their own Making) or any
Haberdashry, Grocery, or Mercery-Wares whatsoever, at or within any of the said
Cities, Buroughs, Towns Corporate, or Market Towns within this Realm (except
it be in open Fairs) on pain to Forfeit and Lose for every time so Offending 6
s. 8 d. and the whole Wares to be sold, proffered or offered to be sold; the
one Moiety of all which Forfeitures to be to the use of the King and Queen, and
the other Half to him or them that shall Seize or Sue for the same in any of
Their Majesty's Courts of Record, by Plaint, Action of Debt, Information, or
otherwise, wherein no Essoin, Protection, or Wager of Law shall be allowed, 1,
2 Philip and Mary, Cap. 7. So that,

If any Person whatsoever, Dwelling out of your Towns, comes into your Towns or
Markets, and sets up a Stall, or walks or stands in the Street, or keeps a Room
or Shop (which he Resides not at constantly;) if there he sells by Retail any
of these sorts of Goods, Viz. Any kind of Woollen or Linen Cloth (except it be
of his own Making) or any sort of Haberdashry, Grocery, or Mercery-Wares
whatsoever, he does Incur the Penalty of this Statute. Note, That Exposing to
Sale, is setting a Price, Hemging, Lying, or being carried about in a posture
of selling, Hose or Haberdashry, or Mercery-Wares, and all dry Goods
whatsoever, that are either worn or usually carried about a Man, are generally
included in this Statute; and on Trial may be so proved. The Goods, after you
can prove any part thereof sold, are all the rest to be seized by any Person
whatsoever, that will prosecute and recover the 6 s. 8 d. a time for every such
Offense; to do which, he must (with or without a Warrant) take a Constable and
seize, and let the Goods be wrapped and sealed up, and left in the hands of the
Constable, to be produced at the Trial, that those were the very Goods which
were some part sold out, and the rest exposed to sale, as above, in such a
place; and that the seller dwelt in such other place, or at least not in that
Town or Parish where part of the Goods were so sold. If the Offender brings his
Action, you may Plead the said Statute.

And be it also further Enacted, That all Tinkers, Pedlers, and Petty Chapmen
Wandering abroad, etc. shall be Taken, Judged, and Deemed Rogues and Vagabonds,
and shall Sustain all Punishment, as by this Act is appointed, viz. That every
such Person as shall be found Begging, Vagrant, or Wandering in any part of this
Realm, or the Dominion of Wales, shall upon their Apprehension by any Justice
of the Peace, or Constable, or Headburrough, or Tithing-Man of the same County,
Hundred, Tithing, or Parish where such Persons shall be taken (the Tithing-Man
or Headburrough being Assisted therein with the Advice of the Minister and some
one other of that Parish) shall cause the Offender to be stripped Naked from
the Middle upwards, and to be openly Whipped until his or her Body be Bloody;
and shall be forthwith sent, by a Testimonial, from Parish to Parish by the
Officer of every the same, the next way to the Parish where he or she was Born
or last Dwelt; and for want of one of those Places being known, then to the
Parish through which he or she last passed without Punishment, there to abide and
behave him, or her self as a good Subject ought to do; And if the said Person
do not accordingly, then to be again taken and Whipped in every Place, so often
as Default shall be found in him or her, contrary to the Form of this Statute;
The Minister shall Register the Substance of the Testimonial in a Parish-Book
for that purpose, upon pain to Forfeit Five Shillings for every Default. 39
Eliz. 4.

It is a Trader Wandering abroad, who either has no lawful and settled
Habitation, or else does Wander from it to sell, or expose any Wares to sale,
that makes or describes a Peddler or Petty-Chapman, as appears by the Exception
for Glass-Men, who might then wander by License; but that Clause being since
repealed, by 1 Jac. I. Cap. 7. Note therefore, That now all Licenses for
Pedling or Hawking, are against Law: The Pedlers are either Horse or Foot,
greater or smaller; the Law has made no Distinction between them, but if they
Wander Abroad, or about from one place to another, or are taken Wandering,
whether nearer their Habitations (if they have any) or further off from it,
they are Obnoxious alike: And though they have (for want of due Prosecution)
grown much bigger since this Law was made, yet on Trial they will find the Law
still too big for them; and it is as much the Duty of every Constable and other
Officer, to cause the Horse-Pedlers to be Whipped as the Foot-Pedlers or
Petty-Chapmen; for the greater the Peddler, the greater the Offender, and the
more Mischief to the Public: And it is a vulgar Error, That a Peddler may
Travel about so far as he may return home at Night, or that he may so Wander
about because he is a Housekeeper. No, every such Wandering Person must be taken
up in any Place where he can be found Wandering, by a Justice or by a Constable,
or by any other Officer, as the Statute does Direct, with a Warrant or without
a Warrant; nay, though there be neither Justice or Constable present: If he
appear to be such a Wanderer, he must forthwith, viz. On his Apprehension be
Dealt with and Punished by the Headburrough or Tithing-Man, and forwith passed
away as the Statute does direct: If the Constable, or other Officer cannot
cause the Law to be Executed by Commanding some Inferior Officer, or other
Person to do it, he must do it himself, and so as the Statute Directs; or he
incurs not only the Penalty of 10 s. by this Statute, and 20 s. by 14 Car. II.
Cap. 12. but breaks his Oath as a Constable.

Yet it was by this Act Provided, That Glass-Men that Wandered by License, from
two Justices of the Peace, were excepted and permitted to Travel: But it was
soon found, thereupon, That so many Notorious Rogues took upon them to Exercise
the Trade of Glass-Men, and did Wander and Travel about diverse Countries, and
commit many petty Fellonies, for which Reason, 1 Jac. I. Cap. 7. That Clause
was Repealed. And all Persons Wandering up and down to sell Glasses, are again
to be Adjudged and Taken as Rogues and Vagabonds, and to be Punished
accordingly, as by the Act of 39 Eliz. Cap. 4.

This Statute of 1 Jac. I. Cap. 7. most plainly shows the meaning of the other,
viz. Who are to be Deemed and Punished as Rogues and Vagabonds; and that by
Pedlers and Petty-Chapmen are mean'd Traders, and such as Carry and Wander
about with Goods to sell; and that those very Men (without Distinction) are to
be Deemed and Punished as Rogues and Vagabonds; otherwise how came the
Glass-Men to be Concerned: And if some of those Pedlers are so willful that
they will not be reclaimed from such a Disorderly course of Life, let them see
what follows in the next Paragraph, besides some other very Severe Statutes not
here mentioned.

Provided further, That if any such Person shall appear to be Dangerous, or
such as will not be Reformed, then it may be Lawful for any Two Justices of the
Peace of that Limit (one to be of the Quorum) to Commit him to the House of
Correction or the Goal of the County, till the next Sessions, where the
Justices may Lawfully Banish him out of this Realm; and if he returns back
without License, he is to suffer as a Felon, 39 Eliz. 4.

If in any Town, Parish, or Village, the Constable, Headburrough, or
Tithing-Man, do neglect to do his or their Duty, touching the Execution hereof,
he shall Forfeit and Lose 10 s. for every Omission, and by 14 Car. II. Cap. 12.
he shall Forfeit 20 s. And if any Person does Let or Disturb the Execution
hereof, he shall Forfeit 5 l. to the use of the City or Town, to be Levied by
the Justices Warrant, and shall be bound to the good Behavior, 39 Eliz. Cap. 4.

If you see a Peddler, etc. you are to stay him, and call and send for a
Constable or other Officer; and if any of them Refuse or Neglect to come and do
his Duty; or if any Person does let or hinder them, then on your Complaint to
the Justice, he will grant you his Warrant to Levy the Forfeiture by Distress
on the Parties Goods, which are to be Appraised and Sold, and the Overplus, all
Charges Deducted, is to be Restored to the Owner.

Provided always, That if there be any Justice or Justices of the Peace for the
said Cities, Buroughs, or Towns Corporate, that no other Justice or Justices
of the Peace shall intermeddle with the Execution of any Branch of this Act,
for any Offense or Matter arising within the Liberties of such Cities or Towns
Corporate, but the Justice or Justices for the same, with the Mayor, Bailifs,
and other Head-Officers, may proceed within their Liberties to the Execution of
this Act, with as full Power as the Justices in any County may do within the
same, 39 Eliz. 4.

And be it further Enacted by, etc. That hereafter, etc. It shall not be Lawful
to any Person or Persons, other than such as now do lawfully Use or Exercise
any Art, Mystery, or Manual-Occupation, to set Up, Occupy, Use, or Exercise any
Art, Craft, Mystery, or Occupation now Used or Occupied within the Realm of
England or Wales, except he or she shall have been brought up therein an
Apprentice for S^ven Years, at the least; and that every Person Offending or
doing the Contrary, shall Forfeit and Lose for every Default 40 s. per Month,
half to the Queen, and half to the Person that will Sue for the same; in which
no Protection, Wager of Law, or Essom shall be Allowed; and the Mayor or other
Head-Officers of Cities or Towns Corporate, shall have full power to Hear and
Determine the same, and make Process, and Award Execution. vide Statute, 5
Eliz. 4.

This Statute does extend to Merchants; (as by a foregoing Clause in the same
Act) and therefore to all Traders, and to all Places whatsoever within this
Kingdom.

Whereas great Inconveniences do happen for want of due Execution of the Laws
that have been made against Rogues and Vagabonds; and because Constables and
Others may be at great Charge in Prosecuting the said Laws: Therefore, the said
Constables and other Officers so out of Purse, together with the Churchwardens
of any Parish, have power to make a moderate Rate, and Tax all Occupiers of
Land, and all other Inhabitants or Persons Chargeable; and lawfully may
Distrain for the same to reimburse themselves, ut per Stat. 14 Car. II. Cap. 13.

Observe how strictly all Persons are obliged to Contribute for and toward the
Charge of putting these Statutes in Execution.

If a Constable or other Officer or Prosecutor carries a Rogue or Vagabond
before a Justice of the Peace, the said Justice is to Authorize him or them to
receive 2 s. from the Officers of any other Parish through which the Offender
last passed, without Punishment, and so for every Rogue, ut per Stat. 14. Car.
II. 12.

By these Words, If, etc. It Is also plain, That a Constable or other Officer
may Prosecute or Punish such Offenders, without carrying them before a Justice;
and where the Offense is plain, it is not reasonable to give the Justice so
much trouble, when the Law has not enjoined it; nor can the Favor of a
Justice Acquit the Constable from his Forfeiture, if the Offender escapes
unpunished.

The Manner of a TESTIMONIAL.
THIS may Certify all whom it may Concern, That A. B. P. being here found
(...) has been Whipped, according to the Statute, and is to be sent, forward,
forthwith from Parish to Parish by the Officers of every the same, the next way
to (...) where he last (...)

Given under our Hands and Seals this (...) Day of (...) 169 To be Signed by
the Justice, or Constable, or Headburrough, and Tithing-Man.

And also, The Prosecutors Charge is to be paid out of the 20 s. Forfeiture of
the Neglecting Officers, ut per Stat. 14 Car. II. 12.

As it is in the Power of the City of London, by Virtue of their Charter, to
make for themselves Acts for the Re-inforcement of the Statute-Laws, and to
make any reasonable Bylaws 8 Part Cook's Rep. fol. 121. Case of London, 7 Jac.
I. 5 Part ditto, fol. 64. Clark's Case fol. 64. 38 Eliz. Hubert's Rep. fol.
210. Norris against Staps at Newbury, 14 Ja. 1.
(not contrary to the Statute-Laws) for the better Regulation and Improvement
of their Trade and Good Government; so it is generally in the Power of all
other Cities, Buroughs, and Towns Corporate throughout England and Wales (if
they Chose Good Magistrates) to do the same by Virtue of their Charters: London
has now done it by the Precedent Act of Common Counsel.

And what Occasion there is for others to follow their Example, they Themselves
Respectively are the best Judges, especially whilst they see that the Law
without Execution, is but a dead Letter.

Therefore being Desired by several Corporations, Companies, and Traders in
London and elsewhere; we shall give some short Account of the Methods of
Proceeding in and about London, upon our former Statutes.

At a General Sessions of the Peace held by the Justices at Hicks's-Hall in the
County of Middlesex, was made the following Order, Viz.
WHEREAS this Court is Informed, That great Numbers of Scotch and other Pedlers
and Petty Chapmen, do Wander Abroad up and down this City and County, contrary
to Law; We do hereby Recommend it to the Respective Justices of the Peace of
this County, to take Effectual Care to put the Laws in Execution against the
said Pedlers and Petty Chapmen; And all the Constables and Tithing-Men in their
Respective Precincts are required, so often as they shall find any of the said
Offenders, immediately to Whip them, in such manner as the Statutes of 39 Eliz.
Cap. 4. and the 1 Jac. Cap. 7. Directs, and in Default whereof, the Penalties
of the said Statutes are hereby Appointed to be Levied upon them.

The present Lord Mayor, Recorder, and other Justices within this City, and the
present Recorder, and other Justices for Westminster, Middlesex, Surry, Kent,
and Essex, without the City, have Issued out their Warrants, strictly
Commanding all Constables, etc. at their Perils, from time to time, and as
often as they shall be thereunto Required, and as often as they shall see or
have Notice of any Pedlers, Hawkers, and Petty Chapmen Wandering about, to
Apprehend them, and every of them, to the end, they may be Dealt with according
to Law.

And accordingly, several such Offenders have been both formerly and of late
Whipped in and about London, and diverse other parts of this Kingdom; also, some
of the greater and richer sort of them have been, and now are Prosecuted at
Law, where they use Chargeable Shifts to Defend Themselves and their Party, but
if followed, are generally Convicted to be Rogues and Vagabonds, as by that
Famous President Recorded in Roll 's Second Reports, fol. 172. Viz. The King
against Hollingsworth, who Dwell'd at Branford, and Wandered about to Sell
Wares at Hackney and other places, was upon a very notable Trial, after many
Evasions, Convicted upon the Statute of 39 Eliz. Cap. 4. etc. as by the said
Reports does at large appear.

Several Companies and Citizens met together, diverse times, in February last,
and Considered and Agreed what Courses to take for Redress, and in due time the
following Petition was Prepared, Viz.

To the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons in
Common Counsel Assembled.
The Humble Petition of the Shopkeepers and Inhabitants of the City of London,
and the Liberties thereof
Shows,
THAT whereas your Petitioners, being Freemen of this City, do bear Offices,
pay great Rents and Taxes, and Cheerfully Assist in the Support of the
Government on all Occasions; and do generally Subsist by their Respective
Trades, and are content to abide in their own Stations, and Exercise their said
Trades in such manner as the Laws and Customs of this City does permit; yet so
it is, nevertheless, That for want of due Execution of the several good Laws
heretofore Provided for their Relief; the Course whereof has since been
Obstructed, by Reason of an Illegal Patent obtained from King James II. That
therefore your Petitioners, in most places within this City and the Liberties
thereof, are so Discouraged, and Undermined, and Abused in their Respective
Trades, by the Insolent and Unlawful Practices and daily Increase of Pedlers,
Hawkers, and Petty Chapfolks, such as Wander about from place to place, and
carry and proffer to Sale all kinds of such Goods and Wares as your Petitioners
Deal in; so that great part of the good Citizens and Settled Inhabitants of
this City will not be able to pay their Rents, Taxes, and other Charges
Incumbent; and Themselves and their families will soon fall into inevitable
Decay and Ruin, if not timely prevented.

Therefore, the Petitioners do humbly pray, That now the Charter being
Restored, so the ancient Customs and present Laws of this City and Kingdom, may
by an Act of Common Counsel be reinforced and put in Execution against
Pedlers, Hawkers, Petty Chapmen, and all other Unlawful Traders, in such manner
as in your Grave Wisdom may be thought most Effectual.

And Your Petitioners shall ever Pray, etc. Signed by about One Hundred very
Eminent Citizens, and Presented.

The Petition being Read, a Committee of Four Aldermen and Eight Commoners were
appointed to prepare and bring in a BILL pursuant to the Prayer of the Petition.

Which in due time was accordingly done, and then Read the First, and
afterward a Second Time, and Committed to the said Committee, with the
Addition of more Aldermen and Commoners to the former; who, after very many
Meetings and Deliberate Advice with diverse Eminent Council, the said Committee
gave in their Report to this Effect, Viz.

To the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons in
Common Counsel Assembled.
WE, whose Names are here underwritten, have in Obedience to an Order of this
Honorable Court, made the 12th Day of April last, Met several times, and
Considered the Petition of the Shopkeepers and Traders of this City, for
Suppressing of Pedlers, Hawkers, and Petty Chapmen, which we find to be a very
great Prejudice to most of the Traders of this City, and tends very much to the
Weakening and Impoverishing the same.

Therefore in pursuance of the said Order (having) Advised with, and had the
Opinions of diverse Learned Council, we have well Considered the BILL hereunto
Annexed, for the more Effectual putting the Laws in Execution against all such
Offenders; which said BILL we humbly Present to this Court, Desiring (if it
shall be thought fit) that the same may be Passed into An Act of
Common Counsel: All which we humbly Submit to the Grave Wisdom of this
Honorable Court.

The Council with whom the Committee did Advise, touching the said BILL, were
principally these, viz. They had, first of all, in some Essential Parts of the
BILL, the Opinion of Sir George Treby, late Recorder of the City of London,
Attorney General, and now Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas; The present
Attorney General Ja. Ward; Sir Bartholomew Shower; Sir Salathiel Lovell the
present Recorder; Sir Francis Pemberton; Mr. Common Sergeant; and others of the
City-Councel.

Then a Common Counsel being called, the BILL (and the Report) being Presented
and Read the Third Time in Court, after some Amendments, the same was Passed
into an ACT.

Several Corporations, Companies, and Traders in London and elsewhere, have for
the general Good of the Public, Authorized and Desired Richard Holt, Citizen
and Merchant of London, and Company, at his House in Bishopsgate-Street, near
Cornhill; from time to time to procure Advice, and all Assistance Lawful and
Necessary, for and toward putting the abovementioned Laws in Execution, and
to Answer all Letters touching the same; in whose hands there will be some
Overplus of Money, which is to be Employed to Reimburse and Defend all Officers
and other Prosecutors of the said Laws, in all Places where they have
Subscribed toward the late general Charge thereof.

A LIST of the Pedler's Friends in London, will be seen in due time.

LONDON: Printed and are to be sold by Brab. Aylmer at the Three Pigeons in
Cornhill, over against the Exchange; William Miller at the Achorn in St. Paul's
Churchyard; and William Rogers at the Sun in Fleet Street, over against St.
Dunstan's Church; and by several other Booksellers. 1693.


