CAMPANALOGIA: OR THE ART OF RINGING Improved.

With plain and easy Rules to guide the Practitioner in the Ringing all kinds
of Changes.

TO Which is added, great variety of NEW PEALS.

LONDON, Printed by W. Godbid, for W.S. and are to be sold by Langley Curtis in
Goat-Court on Ludgate Hill. 1677.

TO THE HONORED AND TO His much Esteemed FRIENDS, The Members of the Society
of COLLEGE YOUTHS.
Gentlemen,
AS your Society even ab origin has deservedly acquired an eminency in many
respects above others of this kind; so more especially for the pregnancy of its
Members in the composing of Peals. For when the Art of Cross-pricking lay
enveloped in such obscurity, that it was thought impossible that double Changes
on five bells could be made to extend farther than ten, and triple and double
Changes on six farther than sixty; then it was that a worthy and knowing Member
of your Society, to dissipate those mists of Ignorance, and to usher in the
bright morn of Knowledge, pricked those much applauded Peals of Grandsire and
Grandsire Bob; which for their excellency have for many years together
continued triumphant in practice amidst all others whatsoever; and which indeed
have been a great light in the production of that great variety of new Peals
herein contained; the greatest part of which being also the offspring of your
Society, I therefore thought fit to usher them into the world under the wings
of your Protection.

Gentlemen, as a member I held my self obliged to add my Mite to your full
fraught Treasury of Speculative and Practical Knowledge of this kind; though I
confess your acquisition on this account will be very mean, since my want of
ability sufficient to undertake a thing of this nature, and also want of
opportunity by converse with others to supply my own defects, have rendered the
Book less acceptable than it might have been done by some more knowing head and
acuter Pen. And although I am conscious that it meriteth not your acceptance;
yet I assume the confidence to believe that you will favor it with a kind
entertainment amongst you; and the rather; for that I know you are too
judicious to sentence it without first casting into the balance of your
indifferent judgments some Grains of Allowance: The countenance you show it
will silence Detractors, and be Armor of proof against the fools bolts which
may happen to be soon shot at the Author, who is

Gentlemen, A constant Well-wisher to the Prosperity (though an unworthy
member) of your Society, F. S.

ERRATA.
Courteous Reader,
SOme few faults have escaped the Press: as page 27 line the 4th, for grateful
read graceful. page 31. line the 19th. for imitatieg read imitating, with some
others, which you are desired either heartily to amend, or tacitly to pass over.

OF THE ART OF Changes.
THese clear days of Knowledge, that have ransackt the dark corners of most
Arts and Sciences, and freed their hidden mysteries from the bonds of
obscurity, have also registered this of Ringing, in the Catalogue of their
Improvements; as well the Speculative as the Practick part, which of late years
remained in Embryo, are now become perfect, and worthy the knowledge of the
most ingenious. Although the Practick part of Ringing is chiefly the subject of
this Discourse, yet first I will speak something of the Art of Changes, its
Invention being Mathematical, and produces incredible effects, as hereafter
will appear. But first, I will premise a word or two, to show what the nature
of those Changes are. Some certain number of things are presupposed to be
changed or varied; as 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. or any greater number whatsoever; then the
number of things to be so varied must have the like number of fixed places
assigned them. As if five men were sitting upon five stools in a row; the
stools are supposed to be fixed places for the five men, but the men by consent
may move or change to each others places at pleasure, yet still sitting in a
row as at first: now this Art directs how, and in what order those five men may
change places with each other, whereby they may sit sixscore times in a row,
and not twice alike. And likewise a Peal of five Bells, being raised up to a
fit compass for ringing of Changes, are there supposed to have five fixed
places, which time assigns to their notes or strokes; yet the notes of the
Bells may change into each others places at pleasure: now this Art also directs
the manner and method of changing the five notes in such sort, that they may
strike sixscore times round, and not twice alike.

The numbers of Changes are thus to be discovered. Two must first be admitted
to be varied two ways; then to find out the Changes in three, the Changes on
two must be multiplied by three, and the product will be six, which are the
complete number of Changes on three.

Those six Changes being multiplied by four, will produce 24, which are the
complete number of Changes on four. The 24 Changes on four, being multiplied by
five, will produce 120, which are the complete number of Changes on five. And
in like manner the 120, being multiplied by six, will produce 720, which are
the complete number on six. The 720, being multiplied by seven, will produce
5040, which are the number of Changes on seven. The 5040, being multiplied by
eight, will produce 40320, which are the number of Changes on eight. Those
Changes on eight, being multiplied by nine, will produce 362880, which are the
number of Changes on nine. Those Changes on nine, being multiplied by ten, will
produce 3628800, which are the number on ten. Those on ten, being multiplied by
eleven, will produce 39916800, which are the number on eleven. Those also being
multiplied by twelve, will produce 479001600, which are the complete number of
Changes on twelve. And if twelve men should attempt to ring all those Changes
on twelve Bells, they could not effect it in less than seventy five years,
twelve Lunar Months, one week, and three days, notwithstanding they ring
without intermission, and after the proportion of 720 Changes every hour. Or if
one man should attempt to prick them down upon Paper, he could not effect it in
less than the aforesaid space. And 1440 being pricked in a sheet, they would
take up six hundred sixty five Reams of Paper, and upwards, reckoning five
hundred Sheets to a Ream; which Paper at five shillings the Ream, would cost
one hundred sixty six Pounds five Shillings.

The reason of the aforesaid Multiplication, by which the numbers of Changes
are discovered, and also that those Products are the true numbers of Changes,
will plainly and manifestly appear in these following Demonstrations.

But first, two must be admitted to be varied two ways, thus. 12 21



And then consequently, three will make three times as many Changes as two; for
there are three times two figures to be produced out of three, and not twice
two the same figures, which are to be produced by casting away each of the
three figures one after another. First, 123 213 132 312 231 321

cast away 3, and 1.2 will remain; cast away 2, and 1.3 will remain; cast away
1, and 2.3 will remain. So that here are three times two figures produced out
of the three, and not twice two the same figures, as 12. 13. 23. each two may
be varied two ways, as before: then to the changes which each two makes add the
third figure which is wanting; as to the two changes made by 1.2 add the 3, to
the changes on 1.3 add the 2, and to the changes on 2.3 add the 1, and the
three figures will stand six times together, and not twice alike, as here
appears.

Four will make four times as many changes as three. 1234 2134 1324 3124 2314
3214 1243 2143 1423 4123 2413 4213 1342 3142 1432 4132 3412 4312 2341 3241 2431
4231 3421 4321

For there are four times three figures to be had out of four, and not twice
three the same figures, which are to be produced by casting away each of the
four figures by turns. First cast away 4, and 123 will remain; cast away 3, and
124 will remain; cast away 2, and 134 will remain; and lastly, casting away 1,
and 234 will remain; so that here is 123, 124, 134, 234, and not twice three
the same figures. Now each three may be varied six ways, according to the
preceding Example. Then to the six changes which each three makes, add the
fourth figure which is wanting; as to the six changes on 123 add the 4, to the
six changes on 124 add the 3, to the six changes on 134 add the 2, and to the
six changes on 234 add the 1, which renders the changes complete; for then the
four figures stand twenty four times together, and not twice alike, as here
appears.

Five will make five times as many changes as four; for there are five times
four figures to be had out of five, and not twice four the same figures, which
are to be produced as before, by casting away each of the five figures by
turns. Cast away 5, and 1234 will remain; cast away 4, and 1235 will remain;
cast away 3, and 1245 will remain; cast away 2, and 1345 will remain; cast away
1, and 2345 will remain. So that here are five times four figures produced, and
not twice four the same figures. Now each four maybe varied twenty four ways,
as in the preceding example; then to the twenty four changes which each four
makes, add the fifth figure which is wanting: as to the twenty four changes on
1234, add the 5; to the twenty four changes on 1235, add the 4. to the changes
on 1245, add 3. to the changes on 1345, add 2. and to the changes on 2345, add
1. which renders the changes complete, for then the five figures stand sixscore
times together, and not twice alike.

12345 21345 13245 31245 23145 32145 12435 21435 14235 41235 24135 42135 13425
31425 14325 41325 34125 43125 23415 32415 24315 42315 34215 43215 12354 21354
13254 31254 23154 32154 12534 21534 15234 51234 25134 52134 13524 31524 15324
51324 35124 53124 23514 32514 25314 52314 35214 53214 12453 21453 14253 41253
24153 42153 12543 21543 15243 51243 25143 52143 14523 41523 15423 51423 45123
54123 24513 42513 25413 52413 45213 54213 13452 31452 14352 41352 34152 43152
13542 31542 15342 51342 35142 53142 14532 41532 15432 51432 45132 54132 34512
43512 35412 53412 45312 54312 23451 32451 24351 42351 34251 43251 23541 32541
25341 52341 35241 53241 24531 42531 25431 52431 45231 54231 34521 43521 35421
53421 45321 54321
And in this manner the complete numbers of changes on six, seven, eight, nine,
ten, eleven, twelve, etc. may also be demonstrated.

The numbers of changes will also plainly appear by the methods, whereby they
are commonly pricked and rung. Now the nature of these methods is such, that the
changes on one number comprehends the changes on all lesser numbers, and that
so regularly, that the complete number of changes on each lesser number are
made in a most exact method within the greater; insomuch that a complete Peal
of changes on one number seems to be formed by uniting of the complete Peals
on all lesser numbers into one entire body; which will manifestly appear in the
479001600 changes on twelve: for that Peal comprehends the 39916800 changes on
eleven; these likewise comprehend the 3628800 changes on ten, these changes on
ten comprehend the 362880 on nine, these on nine comprehend the 40320 on eight,
these on eight comprehend the 5040 on seven, these likewise the 720 on six, the
720 also comprehend the 120 on five, the 120 comprehend the 24 changes on four,
these also comprehend the six changes on three, and the six comprehend the two
changes on two. Each of these Peals (viz.) on eleven, ten, nine, eight, seven,
six, five, four, three, and two, being made in a most exact method within the
changes on twelve. For Example, two are first admitted to be varied two ways,
12 21

thus --

Now the figure 3 being hunted through each of those two changes, will produce
the six changes on three. The term Hunt, is given to a Bell to express its
motion in Ringing, which in figures is after this manner. It must lie behind,
betwixt, and before the two figures: first behind them thus, 1 2 3; then
betwixt them, thus, 1 3 2; now before them, thus, 3 1 2: this is called a
hunting motion, and here it has hunted through the first change of the two,
wherein it made three variations, as appears in the figures, standing thus in
order. 123 132 312

--

Now it must hunt through the other change, which is 2 1, in the same manner as
before; that is, first it must lie before, then betwixt the two figures, then
behind them, thus, 321, 231, 213. Here it has hunted through again, 123 132 312
321 231 213

wherein it made three more variations; which three being set directly under
the former, the six variations will then plainly appear, as in these figures:
where the three figures stand six times together, and not twice alike.

Now the figure 4 being in like manner hunted through each of those six
changes, will produce the 24 changes on four. First, therefore it must hunt
through the first, which is 123, letter 1234 1243 1423 4123

; then through the second change of the six, which is 132, letter 4132 1432
1342 1324

; then through the third, which is 312, letter 3124 3142 3412 4312

, and so it being hunted through the rest of the changes likewise, will produce
the twenty four changes on four.

The figure 5 being hunted through each of those twenty four changes, will
produce the 120 changes on five. First therefore it must hunt through the
first, which is 1234, letter 12345 12354 12534 15234 51234

; then through the second, which is 1243, letter 51243 15243 12543 12453 12435

; then also through the third, which is 1423, letter 14235 14253 14523 15423
51423

. In which manner it being hunted through the rest of the twenty four changes,
will produce the 120 on five. And then the figure 6 being hunted through each
of those sixscore changes will produce the 720 changes on six. And the figure 7
being hunted through each of those 720 changes, will produce the 5040. In which
manner also the eighth, ninth, tenth, eleventh, and twelfth, being successively
hunted through each Peal in the aforesaid order, will at length produce the
complete number of changes on twelve. Wherein it is observable, that all the
figures, except two, have a hunting motion; which two may properly be termed
the Center, about which the rest do circulate. By these methods it is evident,
that every hunting figure has a certain number of figures assigned, through
which it is constantly to hunt: as in the aforesaid Example on twelve, where the
1.2 are assigned for the figure 3 to hunt through, as appears in the six
changes before. And in like manner, 123 are assigned for the figure 4 to hunt
through; 1234 are assigned for the figure 5 to hunt through; 12345 for 6 to
hunt through, etc. Now the figure 3 hunts as many times through the 1.2. as
those two make changes, that is, two times wherein it makes twice three
changes, that is, six, as before appears. The figure 4 hunts as many times
through the 123, as those three figures make changes, that is, six times;
wherein it makes six times four changes, which amounts to twenty four. The
figure 5 hunteth as many times through the 1234, as those four figures make
changes, that is, twenty four times; wherein it makes twenty four times five
changes, which amounts to 120. The figure 6 hunts as many times through the
12345, as those five make changes, that is 120 times, wherein it makes 120
times six changes, which amounts to 720. And in like manner the figure 7 hunts
720 times through 123456, wherein it makes 720 times seven changes, which
amounts to 5040. The eighth hunteth 5040 times through 1234567, wherein it
makes 40320 changes. The 9th hunteth 40320 times through 12345678, wherein it
makes 362880 changes. The tenth hunteth 362880 times through 123456789, wherein
it makes 3628800. The eleventh hunteth 3628800 times through
1.2.3.4.5.6.7.8.9.10. wherein it makes 39916800. And lastly, the twelfth
hunteth 39916800 times through 1.2.3.4.5. 6.7.8.9.10.11. wherein it makes
39916800 times twelve changes, which amounts to 479001600, being the complete
number on twelve. By which it is evident, that every hunting figure hunts as
many times through its assigned number of figures, as those figures are capable
of making changes, which in short comprehends the sum and substance of this
method, which is universal from two, to all greater numbers whatsoever.

If we consider the multitude of different words, wherewith we express our
selves in Speech, it may be thought almost impossible that such numbers should
arise out of twenty four Letters; yet this Art of variation will produce much
more incredible effects. To give an instance thereof, I will show the numbers
of every quantity of Letters from two to twelve, that may be produced out of
the Alphabet. The generality of Words consisting of these quantities, (viz.)
two letters, three letters, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten, eleven,
and twelve letters. There are 10626 times four letters to be produced out of
the twenty four letters of the Alphabet, and not twice four all the same
Letters. There are likewise 42504 times five letters, 134596 times six letters,
346104 times seven, 735471 times eight, 1307504 times nine, 1961256 times ten,
2496144 times eleven, and 2704156 times twelve. Now each quantity being varied
by the rules of this Art, will produce incredible numbers. First the 10626
times four letters, being multiplied by 24, which are the number of ways to
vary each four letters, will produce 255024 that is to say, four letters may be
produced out of the Alphabet to stand together after this manner (a b c d) two
hundred fifty five thousand and twenty four times, and not twice alike. And in
like manner, the 42504 times five Letters, being multiplied by 120, which are
the number of ways to vary each five, will produce 5100480. The 134596 times
six letters, being also multiplied by 720, will produce 96909120. The 346104,
being multiplied by 5040, will produce 1564364160. The 735471, being multiplied
by 40320, will produce 29554290720. The 1307504, being multiplied by 362880,
will produce 474467051520. The 1961256, being mulmultiplied by 3628800, will
produce 7117005772800. The 2446144, being multiplied by 39916800, will produce
99728079819200. And lastly, the 2704156 time twelve letters, being multiplied
by 479001600, will produce 1295295050649600, which products being all added
together, as also 12696 which are the numbers consisting of two and three
letters, the whole will amount to 1402645824276320, wherein there are not two
alike, nor two letters of one sort in any one of them; which being written or
printed on large Paper in folio, allowing 5000 to a sheet, they would take up
561058329 Reams of Paper and upwards, reckoning 500 sheets to a Ream: which
Paper all the Houses in the City and Liberties of London would not contain; and
in quantity doubtless infinitely exceeds all the Books that ever were printed
in the world, reckoning only one of each Impression. And at the rate of five
shillings the Ream, the Paper would cost 140564582 Pounds sterling; which is
above four times as much as the yearly Rent of all the Lands and Houses in
Englaud amounts to. And all the people both young and old in the City and
Suburbs of London (admitting they are five hundred thousand) could not speak
the like numbers of words under forty years and upwards, each of them speaking
15000 every hour, and twelve hours every day. These prodigious numbers are the
more to be admired, considering that the greatest number of letters in any of
them, exceeds not twelve, neither are two letters of one sort in any one of
them: but by producing and varying all the greater quantities, and placing two
or more letters of one sort, or two of one sort and two of another, with all
variety of the like nature that commonly happens in words, the numbers arising
thereby would infinitely exceed the former. And if all the numbers of every
quantity of letters from one to twenty four, together with all the variety as
aforesaid, were methodically drawn out and varied according to the rules of
this Art; which might easily be performed in respect of the plain and practical
method of doing it; but the infinite numbers of them would not permit a Million
of men to effect it in some thousands of years: it would be evident, that there
is no word or syllable in any language or speech in the world, which can be
expressed with the character of our Alphabet, but might be found literatim and
entire therein; and more by many thousands of Millions than can be pronounced,
or that ever were yet made use of in any language.

I will here give one instance of another kind, showing the admirable effects
of this Art, and so conclude. A man having twenty Horses, contracts with a
Brick-maker to give him one hundred pound Sterling; conditionally that the
Brick-maker will deliver him as many Loads of Bricks, as there are several
Teams of six Horses to be produced out of the aforesaid twenty to fetch them,
and not one Team or Set of six Horses to fetch two Loads. The Brick-maker
might be thought to have made a very advantageous bargain, but the contrary
will appear. For there are thirty eight thousand seven hundred and sixty
several Teams of six Horses, to be produced out of twenty, and not twice six
the same Horses; then the Brick-maker must deliver as many Loads as there are
Teams, and each Load consisting of five hundred Bricks, the whole would amount
to 19380000, which being bought for one hundred pounds as aforesaid, would not
cost above five Farthings a thousand: and at the rate of thirteen shillings and
four pence the thousand, they amount to twelve thousand nine hundred and twenty
pounds Sterling. But should a contract be made with the Brick-maker to deliver
as many Loads of Bricks, as there are Teams of six Horses in each, to be
produced out of the aforesaid twenty, which shall stand in the Cart in a
differing manner; that is to say, although there may be the same Horses in
several Teams, yet their places shall be so changed, that they shall not stand
twice alike in any two Teams. On this account the Brick-maker must deliver
seven hundred and twenty times as many as before; for there are 38760 several
Teams as before I have showed: then each Team may be placed 720 ways in the
Cart, and not twice alike, which is to be done according to the methods whereby
the 720 changes on six Bells are rung. So that 38760, which are the number of
Teams, multiplied by 720, which are the number of ways to vary the six Horses
in each Team, the product will be be 27907200, which are the complete number of
Teams; and every Team carrying one Load, consisting of five hundred Bricks, the
Whole will amount to 13953600000 Bricks. And after the proportion of a hundred
and fifty thousand of Bricks to a House, they would build ninety three thousand
and twenty four Houses; which are above six times as many as the late dreadful
fire in London consumed. And at the rate of thrteen shillings and four pence
the thousand, they are worth 6976800 pounds Sterling, which is at least four
hundred Waggon-loads of money, as much as five Horses can ordinarily draw.

AN INTRODUCTION To the Practice of RINGING.
AS the original design of casting Peals of Bells was in order to make pleasant
Music thereon; so the Notes in every Peal are formed apt for that end and
purpose, every Peal of Bells being tuned according to the principles of Music;
for in a Peal of six Bells are the six plain Song-Notes, whereupon all Music
consists, namely, la sol fa mi re ut. But in regard that in ringing of them the
Notes cannot be had at command, as the Notes of other Instruments may;
therefore, as the Practitioners in ancient time found some necessity to cause
all the Notes to strike successively after one another, so likewise they
thought fit in ringing them to place the Notes in this following order. The
least note to lead or strike first, then the Note which is the next degree
deeper or flatter, and so the rest of the notes to strike after each other
according to their degrees, the flattest striking last; in which order the
notes were successively reiterated both at fore-stroke and back-stroke, from
the beginning to the end of each Peal. And at this day the same order is also
observed in raising, ceasing, and ringnig them at a low compass; wherein each
note being confined to strike in a certain place, therefore had they their
terms of First, Second, Third, Fourth, Fifth, etc. given them, to denote their
order and places of striking; from whence also the Bells derive those terms of
distinction by which they are now known. Although the ringing of a Peal of
Bells in the aforesaid order, (which is commonly termed Round-ringing) is in it
self Musical; yet the Notes may be so placed in ringing, that their Music may
be rendered much more pleasant: for in Music there are Concords, which indeed
may be termed the very life and soul of it, that renders all Music exceeding
pleasant: the principal are Thirds, Fifths, and Eights; Thirds are 1 3. 2 4.
and such like: Fifths are 1 5. 2 6. etc. Eights are 1 8. 2 9. 3 10. etc. each
Concord consisting of two notes. They may well be termed Concords, in respect
of their agreement and harmony; for the two notes (as if it were by mutual
consent) being struck together at one instant, or else immediately after one
another, affords delightful melody to the ear; in which respect, a peal of five
Bells are capable of making better Music than a peal of four; six better than
five; and more especially will ten or twelve make more excellent Music than
any lesser numbers can possibly do, there being greater variety of Concords
therein, and especially of Eights. For this Musical end were changes on Bells
first practiced, changes being nothing else but a moving and placing of the
Notes in ringing, whereby variety of pleasant Music is made; and as the manner
of moving the notes, is, for two notes to change places with each other,
therefoae are they called Changes. The methods of changes being somewhat
intricate, I have therefore penned the following Treatise as a Clue to guide
the Practitioner through the Labirinth of them, wherein I have made use of
figures to represent the notes of Bells, the manner thus. In a peal of five
Bells there are five several notes, which with figures are thus expressed, 1 2 3
4 5: the figure 1 represents the least or sharpest note, which is termed the
First, because its place in round ringing is to lead; this note is most
commonly called the Treble. The figure 2 represents the note which is the next
degree deeper or flatter, and is termed the Second, because it strikes in the
second place. And in like manner 3 represents the note of the third Bell, 4 the
note of the fourth Bell, and 5 the note of the Fifth or Tennor. In which
manner, the figures in all the following methods do likewise represent the
notes of Bells.

Since the ringing of changes requires the peal of Bells, on which the changes
are to be rung, to be first raised up to a set Pull, which compass is most
proper for the ringing of them; therefore the Learners first practice must be
to raise a Bell true in peal, to ring it at a low compass, and also to cease it
true in peal, wherein consists the chief grounds of this Art, which depends on
the Ear, and therefore much judgment is required therein. And to speak the
truth, most practitioners are in these days somewhat deficient herein; the
ringing of changes having generally diverted the Learners fancy from the
practice of raising, round-ringing, and ceasing, by which means we have in a
manner lost one Excellency in the pursuit of another. Therefore I could wish
that the Practitioners of this Art would set a greater esteem on true Ringing
in general, since the only excellency as well in the ringing of Changes as
Rounds, depends thereon: the keeping of time being as essential to render all
kinds of ringing pleasant to the ear, as it is to render any other kind of
Music; therefore the practitioner ought to have a Musical ear, and to have
some judgment in beating time, without which he can never ring his Bell true in
its place. A prospect of true ringing at any certain compass under the Set,
may thus be taken; for Instance, in ringing a peal of 5 Bells; from the
fore-stroke of every note to the next fore-stroke of the same note, there ought
to be eleven punctums or Beats of time, which are all supposed to stand at
Aequidistances: now in ten of these punctums, the five notes ought exactly to
strike at the fore-stroke and back-stroke, and the eleventh stands as a Cipher
to guide the Treble-note at fore-stroke to a double proportion of time from the
Tennor-note at back-stroke: which blank punctum must also be beaten in the same
place by every note, to render its fore-stroke answerable to that of the
Treble. For example; the third note having struck at fore-stroke, it must beat
eleven punctums of equidistance unto its striking there again. The first
punctum is that of the 4th note, the second 5, the third 1, the fourth 2, the
fifth 3, the sixth 4, the seventh 5, the eighth 0, the ninth 1, the tenth 2,
the eleventh its own place of striking again at fore-stroke. These punctums or
Beats of time, must be proportioned either wider or closer, according to the
compass of the Treble: therefore first the Treble must fix its compass certain
and true at fore-stroke, which ought to be proportionate to what the number of
the notes, and compass of the peal of Bells, may according to judgment permit;
and then from one fore-stroke of it to the next, if there are five notes; there
ought to be eleven punctums of equidistance assigned, wherein the notes should
exactly strike (except the blank) as before. From hence it is, that the most
judicrous Ringer ought to be put to the Treble; for that bell cannot possibly
be rung true by any other means than by beating of its own time; and although
the exactness of true ringing requires the like in every note, when once the
compass is fixed, yet the leading note being rung true, may be a guide to the
rest of the notes, which may tolerably take their measures of time from the
Treble-note: but for every note to take its measure of time solely from the
next preceding note, must needs be very erroneous; for thereby they implicitly
lead one another out of the way. Or else in the ringing of five bells, from the
fore-stroke of every note to the next fore-stroke of the same note, there may
be one and twenty punctums or beats of time assigned, to stand at
equidistances; and the five notes, as they follow one another, at the
forestroke and back-stroke to strike in every second punctum, except the
Treble-note at forestroke, which must strike in the third punctum from the
Tenor at back-stroke; so that then there will be two of those spaces betwixt
every note, and three betwixt the note of the Tenor at back-stroke and the note
of the Treble at fore-stroke, which possibly by some may be held a better
compass than the former: but quot homines tot sententiae. Every Practitioner,
that has judgment to beat his own time, has the advantage of ringing his bell
true, whilst the rest of the notes commit faults: for the compass being once
fixed, as many bells as do either rise or fall from thence commit errors.

The truest way of raising a peal of bells according to the best of modern
practice, is, as quick as may be; every Ringer taking assistance to raise his
bell, according as the going of it requires. In raising of them, the lesser
bells, as the Treble etc. ought at the first pull to be swayed very deep, and
held down in the sway by strength of arms as much as may be, to delay the time
of their first striking, by which means the bigger bells, which carry a large
compass, may have space to come in; and the raising of the smaller bells to be
continued with a strong pull, giving them scope over head (for the aforesaid
reason) until they come up Frame-high, or thereabouts, and then the pull to be
slackened, and the bells leisurely to be raised to the intended height or
pitch. The bigger bells of the peal, as the Tenor etc. must in their first
raising be checked or pinched over head, by which means the notes of all the
bells may be made to strike round in their due place and order from the
beginning; and observe, that at the first pull all the bells must follow one
another as close as may be. A peal of bells may thus be ceased: the falling of
the bells from a Sett-pull must gradually be done, by checking them only at
Sally, until the low compass renders the Sally useless; and when they are
ceased so low, that they scarce strike at back-stroke for want of compass: then
he that rings the Treble, may give notice (by stamping on the ground) that the
next time the bells come to strike at the fore-stroke, they may be checked down
so low as to cease their striking at the back-stroke, yet their striking round
at the fore-stroke may be continued, until they are brought into a chime, which
is a grateful conclusion of a peal.

In raising of a peal of bells, all the notes ought to strike round at one
pull: but mistake me not, I do not mean at the first pull; for at small bells
it is usual to sway them all round at the first pull without striking; at the
second pull to strike them at the fore-stroke, and at the third pull at
back-stroke. In raising of a peal of more weighty bells, it is usual to strike
them double at the fourth pull, because the extraordinary weight and large
compass of the hind-bells permits it not to be done sooner. In the first
raising of a peal of bells, one bell ought not to strike before the rest, or to
miss striking when the rest go round: neither ought any bell in ceasing to
strike after the rest, or to leave striking before the rest; all which,
according to the strictness of true ringing, are accounted great faults.

The peal of bells on which the changes are to be rung, must first be raised up
to a Settpull, which compass is most proper for the ringing of changes; for
then the notes of the bells may be had at command. Therefore before the young
Practitioner can be capable of ringing changes, he must be extraordinary well
skilled in the managing of a bell at a Settpull, which is absolutely requisite,
for this reason: In the ringing of changes, his mind will be so busied and
wholly taken up with the consideration of the course and method of them, and
his eye continually wandering about to direct his pull in the following of the
other bells; that unless he has extraordinary skill in the managing of his own
bell, and can set it in a manner hood-winkt, he will be apt either to drop or
overturn it; or else on the other hand, for want of skill, his eye and mind
will be so fixed on his own rope and bell to guide the managing of it, that he
cannot at the same time mind the course of the changes, and then no wonder if
he is in a wood, which consequently follows; and indeed hence partly it is, that
the Learners in their first practice do oftentimes toil and moil themselves to
so little purpose. Therefore it is not enough that the young Practitioner can
set a bell it may be half a score times together, when it is an even wager that
he either drops or overturns it in those ten pulls: but he must be so perfectly
skilled, as that he might adventure to lay ten to one, that he can set it
thirty or forty times together, both fore-stroke and back-stroke, without
dropping or overturning it, and without looking directly either on his hands or
rope whilst he sets it. Therefore in his practice of setting a bell, he may
cast his eye about on the other bell-ropes whilst he manageth his bell, whereby
he may accustom himself to manage it as the ringing of changes requires.

The ringing of changes is performed, partly by the ear, and partly by the eye;
the ear informs when to make a change, the eye directs the pull in the making
of it; but then again the ear guides the striking of the note true in its place
according to time. So that the ear and eye have each of them its proper object
in the ringing of changes, and therefore ought at the same time to be
absolutely free from all others whatsoever, the notes of the bells being the
object of the ear, and the bell-ropes the object of the eye. Now these two
Senses in the time of ringing do each of them thus perform its office. First,
the ear, as a Sentinel, discovers the near approaching change, and also the
place wherein his note lies, that is, whether before or behind the note
wherewith it is to make a change, and gives present information to the eye, to
perform its part accordingly in the making of it; but then again the eye refers
it to the ear, to place the note true in striking. But questionless (by the
bie) the truest ringing of changes is to be performed only by the ear; but then
the Practitioners must be capable to judge of time, and to beat it true, which
must be the only direction to guide their pull; and then it must be performed
at a peal of bells that may be managed with ease: and being so fitted in all
respects, the changes may doubtless be rung more true, with greater pleasure to
the Practitioners, and much more free from mistakes and forgets, only by the
ear, than by making use of the eye to direct their pull. But in regard that
either the ill going of the bells, or want of fit accomplishments in the
practitioners, may render it unfit for common practice; therefore the surest
way is to ring both by the eye and ear, as I said before. Now to render the eye
and ear rightly useful in the ringing of changes, five things ought by the
young Practitioner to be well understood. First, he must be able to distinguish
the notes of a peal of bells, and to know one from another in the time of
ringing. Secondly, he must apprehend the places of the notes. Thirdly, the
precedence of notes. Fourthly, the manner of making a change in ringing.
Fifthly, a general prospect of the manner of putting the four preceding notions
into practice.

Observation 1. The Learner must be able to distinguish the notes of a peal of
bells one from another, and to know them asunder; as the Treble-note from the
Second, the Second from the Third, etc. which, it is true, may readily be done in
round ringing, because each note may be known by the place wherein it
constantly strikes; but in ringing of changes it is more difficult. For
admitting that six bells should strike in this order, 5.3.6.1.4.2. it might
puzzle an unskilful ear to judge which is the Treble, or which the Second note,
especially whilst any other note strikes betwixt them: and the like difficulty
might happen in dinguishing the rest of the notes, as the 2d from the 3d, etc.
To remove this difficulty, he must endeavor to acquire some skill in tuning
the notes of a peal of bells with his voice, which he may do by imitatieg the
notes of the bells when he hears them ring: or else any person that has skill
in singing, will presently direct him therein, and also how to take the true
pitch of any notes with his voice, which will be the only means to distinguish
them asunder.

Observe. 2d. The Learner must rightly apprehend the places of the notes, which
I think cannot better be done than by this means. Considering that the notes of
a peal of bells do all strike one after another at the forestroke, stroke, and
the like at back-stroke; it might be requisite for him to imagine, that the
notes in their striking do lie in a direct line, that is, in a row at the
fore-stroke, and the like again at back-stroke; for then the places of the
notes will much resemble the places of the figures wherewith the changes are
pricked: for as the figures of every change do all stand in a row; so likewise
the notes of the bells, being imagined to strike in the like row, he may the
more readily apprehend the places of the notes, and consequently of changing
them. For the practick part of this Art, is performed by means of imaginary,
not real notions; which will thus manifestly appear. This is the platform of a
Frame, wherein five bells 1 2 3 4 5 may be supposed to hang in a Steeple, the
figures therein representing the places wherein the five bells hang. Now in the
sixscore changes on five bells, we will suppose the Treble to be the whole
Hunt, and to hunt up first over the Second, then over the Third, etc. Now the
Treble cannot really move out of the place wherein it hangs; but by delaying
its striking until the Second Bell has struck, it may by that means strike
next after it; and again, by delaying its striking until the Third has struck,
it may also strike next after that, this being the true manner of the changes;
by which it is evident, that the bells have neither really such places nor
motion as is pretended, but is merely imaginary, and was at first feigned only
as a Guide to direct the Practitioner's apprehension in the ringing of them. So
that although the art of changes is in it self a real thing, yet the notions by
which they are reduced to practice on bells, are not so. For which reason, the
several practitioners of this Art, before they can become expert, are fain to
form in their minds imaginary notions to guide them; some after one manner,
some perhaps after another, according to their several fancies, yet all tending
to render the methods of changes practicable on bells; and having once formed
in their minds such imaginary helps, they become expert in short time: and then
no sooner do they understand the methods of changes pricked with figures, which
they commonly discover at first view; but they are presently capable of ringing
them readily on bells, which experience daily testifies. And hence it is, that
oftentimes the Learners, although they perfectly understand the methods of
changes pricked, and also can perfectly manage a Bell; yet for want of a right
apprehension of the nature of changing the notes, which of themselves it may be
they cannot soon attain, are therefore much puzzled in their first practice of
ringing changes. Therefore as a guide, the Learner must first form in his mind
a fit representation of the places of the notes; which I think cannot better be
done, than by imagining each note to be a figure; as the Treble-note to be the
figure 1, the second note the figure 2, the third note the figure 3, and the
like of the rest. Then whenever he hears a peal of bells ring, let him by
strength of imagination conceit, that each note bears the shape of a figure;
that is, at the same instant of time that the note strikes, he may imagine that
it leaves the impression of the figure behind it, and that with the eye of his
imagination he perfectly sees it: and likewise as the notes of the bells do all
strike after one another at the fore-stroke, so he may imagine that they lie in
a row in the shape of figures; and the like again at back-stroke. For instance:
suppose that five Muskets were charged with five bullets, and that each bullet
bears the shape of a figure; one Gun to be charged with the figure 1, another
with the figure 2, and the other three Guns with these three figures, 3.4.5.
Then supposing a straight line were drawn upon the wall, thus -- and that the
five Muskets were by five men levelled against the line, which is to be the
mark for them to shoot at; the figure 1 to be first shot off, then the figure
2, and so the rest in order immediately after one another: now at the same
instant of time that the Guns are heard to go off, the five figures would
appear in a diagram row upon the wall, thus. So in like manner when he hears a
peal of five bells strike after one another at the fore-stroke, and again at
backstroke, he may imagine that at the very instant of their striking their
notes appear to his apprehension in the shape of the five figures, and that
they strike in a row, thus, 1 2 3 4 5, as if each Bell were a Gun, and had shot
out its note in the shape of a figure. There being necessity that the young
Practitioner must either imagine each note to be a real figure, or else a
representative: for as the ear is to be his guide to direct when to make each
change; so a right apprehension of the motion and places of the notes, must be
a means to guide his ear. Now in regard that the changes are first pricked with
figures, from whence the notes of the bells derive their course; therefore if
in ringing he imagine each note to be a real figure, then the same knowledge
that guides the pricking, guides also as readily the ringing of them, for then
the note of his bell is supposed to have the same course with that of a real
figure. But if he imagines that each note is not a real, but a representative
of a figure; then consequently it must only have the like, and not the same
course: by which means, whilst he is ringing of changes, his mind must have
frequent recourse to his Pocket, that is, to the changes there pricked; from
whence he must continually fetch instructions to direct the course of his Bell,
which is oftentimes the case of the Learner: his thoughts in the time of
ringing being commonly upon the figures that are pricked, either upon paper, or
else upon the Steeple-wall, whilst it should be wholly intent upon the notes.
Therefore in a word, the Practitioner whilst he is ringing of changes, must fix
his mind fully and wholly upon the notes of the bells, and not permit it in the
least to wander from thence; for the notes are to be the sole object of the
thoughts in the time of ringing.

The notes being imagined to strike in a row as aforesaid, their places will
then soon be understood. The notes do take their places according to their
successive order of striking both at fore-stroke and back-stroke; each
succeeding note taking its place next to that which preceds it: for whatsoever
bell leads either at fore-stroke or at back-stroke, its note lies in the first
place of the supposed row of notes; and that which strikes next after the
leading note, its note lies in the second place of the supposed row of notes,
and so the rest in the like order. As if five bells should strike thus after
one another either of fore-stroke or back-stroke, 5 4 1 2 3. here the 5th lies
in the first place, because it was first struck; the 4th in the second place,
because it was second struck; the Treble in the third place, because it was
third struck; the 2d in the fourth place, because it was fourth struck; and the
3d in the last place, because it was last struck; and the like of the notes in
every change.

Observe. 3. The next thing to be understood by the Learner, is the precedence
of the notes. Now whereas in the ringing of changes, the notes do all strike
after one another at the fore-stroke, and again at the backstroke, therefore
are they said to lie before or behind each other, according to their places of
striking. As if five men were standing in a row, as these five figures
represent, 1 2 3 4 5, the first man to stand at the fig. 1, the second man at
the figure 2, etc. and that they stand with their faces all one way, that is,
the first man ready to lead, and the rest to follow him one behind another. Now
the first man stands before the rest, and the fifth man behind the rest; the
second man stands behind the first man, but before the third; the third man
stands behind the second, but before the fourth; and the fourth stands behind
the third, but before the fifth. In which manner the notes being supposed to
strike in the like row, may also be said to lie before or behind each other as
the men did. For whatsoever note leads either at fore-stroke or back-stroke, is
said to lie before the rest; and that which strikes last, to strike behind the
rest. The note which lies in the second place, as on the one hand it lies
behind the leading note, so on the other hand it lies before the note in the
third place. As the note in the third place lies behind the note in the second
place, so it lies before the note in the fourth place. And in like manner,
every note is said to lie behind those that strike before it, and before those
that strike after it.

Observe. 4. A Change is to be made betwixt two notes, by moving them into each
others places; wherein it is to be observed as a general Rule, That every change
must be made betwixt two notes that strike next to each other. As if five bells
were ringing round in this order, 1 2 3 4 5, the 1 and 2 may make a change, or
2 and 3, or likewise 3 and 4, or 4 and 5, because each two lie next each other;
but the 1 and 3 cannot, because 2 strikes between them, much less may 1 and 4,
etc. The two notes which make every change, moves into each others places in
the making of it; wherein one note is said to move up, and the other down. The
reason why one of them is said to move up, is, because he that rings that bell,
in the making of the change must hold it up at the Set a little longer than
ordinary, to delay its striking, whereby it is made to follow the other note
which before it preceded; and because it is so held up, therefore it is said to
make an Vp-change, or to move up: and on the contrary, the reason why the other
note is said to move down, is, because he that rings it, pulls down the bell a
little sooner than ordinary, to make it strike before the note which before it
followed; and because it is so pulled down, therefore it is said to make a
Downchange, or to move down. I will here give a short though certain rule to
know when an Up-change or a Down-change is to be made: whenever any note
moves to strike behind the note wherewith it makes a change, it makes an
up-change in doing it; and whenever it moves to strike before the note, which
it is to make a change with, it makes a down-change in doing it: so that every
note which moves fromward the leading-note, makes an up-change; and when it
moves toward the leading-note, it makes a downchange. I will here show the
manner of making a change: admitting that a peal of five bells were raised to a
sett-pull, which is the usual compass for ringing of changes; the notes are
first supposed to strike in this order, 1 2 3 4 5. Now a change may be made
betwixt any two notes that strike next each other; I will here make it betwixt
the 3d. and 4th. which is to be done by moving them into each others places.
Now it is observable, that before the making of the change, the 3d. note lies
before the 4th. that is, it strikes next before the 4th; and the 4th. lies
behind the 3d. that is, it strikes behind it: now in the making of the change,
the 3d. must move to strike behind the 4th: wherein it makes an up-change; and
the 4th. note at the same time must move to strike before the 3d. wherein it
makes a down-change; the change being made, the bells will strike thus, 1 2 4 3
5. All changes whatsoever are made in the aforesaid manner: for as the 3d note
made an up-change in moving to strike behind the 4th, and the 4th at the same
time a down-change in moving to strike before the 3d; so in like manner the two
notes that make every change, must in the making of it move the one up, and the
other down, as the 3d and 4th here has done. The Learner may take notice, that
in ringing terms it is not usual to say, that a bell makes an up-change, or a
down-change; but in short, that it moves up or down, which implies the former.
When a note makes an up-change, it is then said to move over the other note; and
when it makes a down-change, to move under it: as in the next preceding
example, where the 3d note is said to move up over the 4th, and the 4th down
under the 3d, in which manner the terms over and under are given to the two
notes that make every change.

Observe. 5. In the time of ringing changes, two things are by the Practitioners
to be well considered. First, to observe and readily to know, which two bells
are always to make the next succeeding change: Secondly, if he is concerned
therein, to consider what bell he is to follow in the making of it. Upon a
right knowledge of these two things, depends the Practick part of this Art. To
make him expert herein, he must before hand perfectly understand, and readily
remember the course and method of the changes pricked with figures, wherein he
ought to be so well skilled, as to be able to prick them down diverse ways, that
is, to make any figure a Hunt at pleasure; which when he can readily and
speedily do, without pausing to consider of the course, then it is presumed that
he understands the methods thoroughly. But yet he will not be capable to put
them in practice, until he understands the manner of making a change in
ringing; neither can he understand that, until he understands the precedence of
the notes; nor the precedence, until he understands the places; nor the places,
until he knows the notes one from another. Therefore the four preceding
observations being first perfectly understood, and also the methods of the
changes as before; the Practitioner may then successfully proceed in the
ringing of changes; and as a further help therein I will here instruct him.
There are three bells concerned in the making of every single change, except
only when it is made behind, and then but two: whenever the note of his bell
is to make a change with any other note, his ear must then inform him whether
it lies before or behind the other note; if it lies before, then in making the
change it must move up behind it, that is, to follow it; and consequently, he
must draw down his bell next after that which he makes a change with, which is
called an up-change, as I said before. But if the note of his bell lies behind
the other, then in making of the change it must move down to strike before it,
and consequently he must draw down his bell next after that which the other
before followed, this being a down-change. So that the making of an up-change
is very easy, because he must always follow that bell which he makes a change
with; but a down-change is more difficult, because he cannot so readily
apprehend what bell he is to follow; yet there is a certain rule for it, which
is this: to observe beforehand what note strikes the next but one before his,
which bell he must follow in the making of the change. Whenever the two
notes, which strike next before his note, are to make a change; he must
consider, that notwithstanding his note is to lie still in its place, yet he is
concerned therein, because the bell which he followed before the making of the
change, must in the making of it move away down, and therefore he must follow
the bell that comes into its place.

The changes are to be rung, either by walking them, as the term is; or else
Wholepulls, or Half-pulls. By walking them, is meant, that the bells go round
four, six, eight times or more in one change; which way is very proper for
young Practitioners, to introduce them into a more ready way of Practice; for
whilst the bells go round diverse times in one change, they have in the mean
time leisure to consider which two bells are to make the next following change,
and also what bell each of them is to follow in the making of it; and so by
diligence in practice they will by degrees acquire a more ready skill to enable
them to ring at whole-pulls. Whole-pulls, is, when the bells go round at the
fore-stroke and back-stroke in a change; and every time they are pulled down at
Sally, a new change is made. Whole-pulls was the general practice in former
times; and indeed, considering the manner of the hanging of the bells in those
days, they could not well be rung at half-pulls: but since the improvement of
the Art of Bell-hanging, that is, with round Wheels, trussing them up in the
Stock, and placing the Roll at right Angles with the Sole of the Wheel; the
bells go much better, and are managed with more ease at a Sett-pull than
formerly: therefore the changes are now generally rung at half-pulls, that is,
at the fore-stroke one change, at the backstroke another, and so throughout.

In ringing half-pulls, some peals of changes will cut compass, wherein the
whole Hunt comes always to lead at the backstroke; to prevent which, make the
first change of the peal at the back-stroke. In plain and single changes on six
bells, to hunt (that is, whole Hunt) the Treble, third, or fifth, down at the
beginning of a peal cuts compass, unless prevented as before. Also to hunt the
second, fourth, or sixth up at the beginning of a peal, cuts compass, unless
prevented as before. Which rules, leaving out the Tenor, serves in like manner
to prevent cutting compass on five bells.

It Is convenient in ringing, to give notice of the extreme changes, and he that
rings the slowest Hunt, may best do it. The manner of it is, to say Extreme,
when the leading bell is pulling down, in order to make the change next before
the extreme; by which means there will be one complete change betwixt the
warning and the extreme: longer warning would be too much, and shorter too
little.

THE diverse kinds of changes on Bells may be comprehended under two heads, viz.
Plain Changes, and Cross Peals, which terms are comparatively given: for as the
first are plain and easy only in comparison to the methods of the second; so
consequently the second cross and intricate in comparison to the methods of the
first. I will first show in what respect they differ, and then proceed to the
methods. Plain changes (I mean complete peals) are such as have one universal
method, wherein all the notes except three have a direct hunting course, moving
gradually under each other in one plain and uniform order. But the methods of
cross peals are various, each peal having a course differing from all others:
and although most of them have Hunts, yet the Hunts have different kinds of
motions, and some very intricate. Moreover plain changes are also termed Single
changes, because in the ringing of them there is only a single change made in
the striking of all the notes once round either at fore-stroke or backstroke;
whereas in cross changes it is usual to make as many changes as the number of
notes will permit. For example, supposing that a peal of 5 bells were raised,
and rung at a Settpull; the notes are supposed to strike round in this order,
12345: now any two of the notes that strike next together may make a change,
therefore either a single or a double change may be made at pleasure. The
single change is made by changing only two notes; the double change is made by
changing four notes, that is, two to make one change and two another, yet it is
called one double change, and not two changes, in regard it is made in the
striking of the five notes of the bells once round: as, admit the treble,
second, third, and fourth, should make a change, it is thus to be done, 21435,
where the Treble and Second made one change, and 3, 4 another; which we will
imagine so be made at the fore-stroke of the bells, and therefore it is called
one double change, and not two changes, because it is entirely made in the
striking of the five notes once round. So that this one double change has
effected that which would have required two single changes to have done the
like. For instance, there can but two notes change their places at once in a
single change, therefore the Treble and Second shall first change their places
thus, 21345; then the third and fourth thus, 21435: so that here the five notes
have gone twice round to effect that, which in the double change was done in
going once round. And this is the nature of the difference between Plain and
Cross changes.

As the Learner ought to proceed regularly in his practice, beginning first
with the plainest and easiest methods. I will therefore observe that order, and
first show the course and methods of Plain changes.

The Changes on two Bells.
Two bells are capable to make only two changes, which is to be done by
changing the notes twice, as in these figures. --

12 -- 21 12

The Changes on three Bells.
There are six changes on three bells; which are made by this rule: the two
first and two last notes must be changed by turns.

123 First the two first notes, which are 12 thus. 213 The two last, which are
13, thus. 231 The two first 321 The two last 312 The two first 132 The two last
123 In these six changes it is observable, that the two first notes, which were
12, made the first change of the six; but they may as well be rung by beginning
with the two last notes, which are 2, 3 thus 132 Next the two first notes,
which are 13, thus, 312 The two last 321 The two first 231 The two last 213 The
two first 123

The six changes can be rung no more than these two ways here set down.

The Six changes are sometimes rung by observing a hunt therein, which is very
improper, since every note has a like course. Yet I confess in demonstrating
the methods on twelve, I did there admit a Hunt into the six changes; but that
was only for demonstration sake.

The complete peals of plain changes, from three to all greater numbers
whatsoever, as the Twenty four changes on four, the Sixscore on five, the Seven
hundred and twenty on six, etc. are pricked and rung by one method; all the
notes having a hunting-motion, except only three in each peal, which three do
make the six changes in the same manner as they are before pricked. So that the
Six changes on three may be termed the basis or foundation of the complete
peals on all greater numbers.

Every Hunting note in each peal has a certain number of notes assigned,
through which it is always to hunt. The term hunt is given to a note in respect
of the manner of its motion, which I will show in this example. First, the
notes of four bells are supposed to strike round in this order, 1234. The
Treble shall be the Hunt, and the other three assigned or appointed for it to
hunt through. Now whereas the Treble-note leads, it must move through its
assigned number to strike behind them: and whereas every change must be made
betwixt two notes that strike next each other, as I have showed before in the
4th Observation; therefore the hunting-note is confined to move gradually
through the rest by making a change with each note that strikes next to it; and
accordingly it must first move into the 2d place, next into the 3d place, and
lastly into the 4th. So that it is to make a change with every note that lies
behindit; first with the 2d note, next with the 3d, and lastly with the 4th.
1234 The first change is thus 2134 The second thus 2314 The third thus 2341 The
hunting note has here moved through its assigned number; for whereas at first
it did lead, now it strikes behind them. Wherein it is observable, that it made
up changes all the way; which of necessity it must do, because every note with
which it was to make a change, lay behind it: and because it made up changes,
therefore it is said to have hunted up. The hunting-note shall now move through
its assigned number again, to lead as at first. Therefore first it must move
into the 3d place, then into the second place, and lastly into the first place,
which is called the Treble's place; in which motion it must make a change with
each note that strikes next before it: first with the 4th note, next with the
3d, then with the 2d. The first change thus 2314 The second thus 2134 The third
thus 1234 It Is observable, that here the Treble made down-changes all the way,
which of necessity it must do, because every note with which it was to make a
change, lay before it: and because it made down-changes, therefore it is said
to have hunted down. This is the manner of the motion of the hunting notes in
all peals of plain changes; for they hunt up and down through their assigned
number, as the 1 here has done. This example is plain and full to instruct the
Learner in the hunting of any bell, therefore he ought to peruse it diligently,
that he may understand the true scope and meaning of it; and as a help he may
apply himself to practice by taking a Treble, and attempt to hunt it up and
down as this Example directs; which he may the more readily do, if he
understand the 5th Observation before set down, which guides him to make a
change in ringing. So that partly by reading and well considering of what I
have here wrote, and partly by practice, he may in a short time become perfect
in the hunting motion of any note; which when he rightly apprehends, he will
then presently be capable of understanding the following methods; and therefore
I shall be the more brief in my directions to them.

The Changes on four Bells.
Twenty four changes may be rung upon four bells: 1234
but the Learner may first practice the twelve changes, and the eighteen
changes. In the twelve changes the notes are all to be hunted up after one
another, which may be called the Twelve all over. First the treble-note must be
hunted up, letter 2134 2314 2341

; then the second note must likewise hunt up, letter 3241 3421 3412

; next the third note must hunt up, letter 4312 4132 4123

; and lastly the 4th note also, letter 1423 1243 1234

.

The four notes may also hunt down one after another. First, the 4th note must
hunt down to lead: then the 3d note likewise, and so the 2d and Treble one
after another, which may be termed the Twelve all under.

Courteous Reader, in my directions to the course of each peal, I do there
refer by letters to the examples; which I am forced to do, to prevent those
confused breaks, and unhandsome spaces, which otherwise would have happened
both in examples and precepts. Whatever letter I mention in my directions,
refers to the like at the figures. For instance; in my directions to the twelve
changes next before, I there directed the treble-note to be first hunted up,
letter 2134 2314 2341

; which letter refers to the the like letter at the first three changes of the
twelve, where the Treble hunted up, as it is here again represented, and the
like of the rest.

In the Eighteen changes, the Treble is a hunting note, but never hunts up
farther than the 3d place; and when it lies there, 1234
the two first notes must make a change; and every time it leads, the two
hindmost notes. First it hunts up into the 3d place, letter 2134 2314

; the two first notes, which are 2. 3, make a change, letter 3214
; the Treble hunts down 3121 1324

. The two hindmost notes make a change 1342
, the Treble hunts up 3142 3412

. The two first notes, which are 3.4, make a change 4312
; the Treble hunts down 4132 1432

; the two last notes, which are 3.2, make a change 1423
, 4123 4213

2413
2143 1243

1234
which method being continued, will bring the bells round at the end of
eighteen changes. The Eighteen changes may also be rung by hunting the 4th note
down into the 2d place, and then a change to be made behind: the 4th note to be
hunted up again into its own place, and then a change to be made before, which
course being continued, will produce Eighteen changes.

The Six changes on three are the ground of the Twenty four changes on four;
for one of the four notes has a constant hunting motion through the other
three, in the same manner as in the preceding Example, page 50. and the three
notes are to make the six changes in the same manner as I have before showed in
the changes on three bells; one of the six changes being always made every time
the hunt lies either before or behind the three bells: therefore if the Learner
do but rightly apprehend the course of the six changes, and also the manner of
the motion of the hunting note, he will presently understand the method of the
twenty four changes. The six changes in the twenty four, according to the terms
of ringing are called Extreme changes, and the three bells which makes them,
Extreme bells. So that in the twenty four changes, there is a hunt and three
extreme bells. Every time the hunt lies either before or behind the extreme
bells, an extreme change must then be made. The extreme changes may be made two
ways, viz. either betwixt the two farthest extreme bells from the hunt, or else
betwixt the two nearest extreme bells to it. 1234
In this Example every extreme change shall be made betwixt the two farthest
extreme bells from the hunt, and the treble shall be the hunting note, which
must first hunt up 2134 2314 2341

; then the two farthest notes from the hunt, which are 2.3, must make an
extreme change 3241
. The Treble must hunt down 3214 3124 1324

. The two farthest notes from the hunt, which are 2.4, must make an extreme
change 1342
. The treble must hunt up 3142 3412 3421

; the two farthest notes from the hunt, which are 3.4, must make an extreme
change 4321
. The treble-note must hunt down 4312 4132 1432

. The two farthest extreme bells from the hunt, which are 3.2, must make an
extreme change 1423
. The treble must hunt up 4123 4213 4231

. The two farthest notes from the hunt, which are 4.2, must make an extreme
change 2431
. The treble must hunt down 2413 2143 1243

. The two farthest extreme bells, which are 4.3, must make an extreme change
1234
, which concludes the peal. Now the Learner for his satisfaction may take out
the extreme changes in the same order as they were made, as first at 3241
, then 1342
, and so 4321
. 1423
. 2431
. 1234
. and they will stand as they are here set down; 3241 1342 4321 1423 2431 1234

where it is evident, that 2.3.4 have made the six changes according to the
method of the first six changes on three bells, before set down, ( page 48.)
where the first change of that six was 213, and this being 324, is the same in
course though the figures differ, and the rest of the changes in this six, are
likewise the same in course and method with those.

In the preceding twenty four changes, every extreme change was made betwixt
the two furthest extreme bells from the hunt. I will therefore here set down an
example, where they shall be made between the two nearest bells to it. First,
1234
the treble hunts up 2134 2314 2341

. The two next notes to the hunt, which are 3.4, must make an extreme change
2431
. The Treble must hunt down 2413 2143 1243

. The two nearest notes to the hunt, which are 2.4, must make an extreme change
1423
. The Treble hunts up 4123 4213 4231

. The two nearest extreme bells to the hunt, which are 2.3, must make an
extreme change 4321
. The Treble hunts down 4312 4132 1432

. The two next extreme bells to the hunt, which are 4.3, must make a change 1342
. And the like extreme changes being made as at 3241
and 1234
, 3142 3412 3421

concludes the peal.

The six extreme changes, viz. ( 2431
. 1423
. 4321
. 1342
. 3241
. and 1234
.) being set down by themselves, 3214 3124 1324

will stand in this order, as here you see; where it is plain, that 2 3 4 have
made the six changes, according to the method of the last six changes on three
bells, page 49. 2431 1423 4321 1342 3241 1234

where the first change of that six is made between the last two notes thus, 1
3 2. So in like manner is the first here thus, 243, which is the same method
with that, though not the same figures.

So that the making of the extreme changes two ways in the twenty four,
proceeds from the two ways of making the six changes on three bells. This last
way of making the extreme changes, may, for distinction from the other way, be
called mediums; which term is very proper, in regard that the two middlemost of
the four notes do always make the extreme change. The extreme changes in one
peal must all be made alike, that is, either betwixt the two farthest notes
from the hunt, or else betwixt the two nearest notes to it; but the most usual
way is to make them between the two farthest.

Any note may be made a hunt at pleasure, and its first motion at the beginning
of the peal may be either up or down. The twenty four changes may be rung
sixteen ways according to the aforesaid method, yet the changes in each are
still one and the same; but by making each note a hunt, and moving it either up
or down at the beginning, 2d. down. 3d. up 4. up. 1234 1234 1234 3134 1243 2134
2143 2143 2143 1243 2134 2413 1423 2314 4213 1432 3214 4231 4132 3241 2431 4123
2341 2341 4213 2431 2314 2413 2413 3214 2431 4213 3241 4231 4231 3421 4321 4321
4321 4312 3421 4312 3412 3412 3412 3421 4312 3142 3241 4132 3124 2341 4123 1324
2314 1423 1342 3214 1432 1432 3124 1342 4132 3142 3142 4123 1342 3124 1423 1324
1324 1243 1234 1234 1234
and also by making the extreme changes two ways, the course of the changes
will be so altered, that the same changes shall not come all along together in
any two of those sixteen ways. With the hunting of one note it may be rung four
ways; for the note may move either up or down at the beginning of the peal;
then in its motion either way the extreme changes may be made two ways, as
before: so that to make each note a hunt, and with each hunt to ring it four
ways makes sixteen in the whole. Wherein it is observable, that the treblenote
cannot be moved down at first, nor the 4th up; therefore an extreme change must
first be made, which is as effectual as if either note had moved at first. I
have here pricked the twenty four changes three ways, wherein the extreme
changes are all made betwixt the two farthest notes from the hunt.

The Changes on five Bells.
There are sixscore changes to be rung on five bells; but the Learner may first
practice some shorter peals, as the Ten changes, the twelve, the Fourteen, the
Twenty all over, the Twenty with one hunt, and the Forty eight.

In the Ten changes the treble must first hunt up 21345 23145 23415 23451

; 12345
the 2.3 must make a change 32451
. The treble must hunt down again 32415 32145 31245 13245

; the 3.2 must make another change 12345
. The ten changes may also be rung by hunting down the 5 to lead; then 3.4 to
make a change; the 5 to be hunted up again, and the 4. 3 to make another change.

In the Twelve changes the treble hunts up into the third place, 12345
then the two first notes make a change; the treble hunts down again, then the
two hindmost notes make a change. First the treble hunts into the 3d place
21345 23145

; the two first notes 2.3 make a change 32145
. The treble hunts down 31245 13245

; the two last notes make a change 13254
; the treble hunts up 31254 32154

; the two first notes make a change 23154
; the treble hunts down 21354 12354

; the two last notes make another change 12345
.

In the Fourteen changes, the treble first hunts up behind; then the 5 hunts
down to lead; the treble then hunts down again into its own place; and the
fifth also hunts up into its own place.

The Twenty all over are rung in the same manner as the Twelve all over upon
four bells, to which I refer.

In the Twenty changes with one hunt, the hunting note continually hunts up and
down through the other notes, and every time it lies either before or behind
them, an extreme change must be made betwixt the two farthest notes from it.
12345
The treble shall be the hunt, and first hunteth up 21345 23145 23415 23451

. An extreme change is made 32451
; the treble hunts down 32415 32145 31245 13245

; an extreme change is made 13254
; which course must be continued to the end. The extreme changes may also be
made betwixt the two next notes to the hunt. Any note may be made a hunt at
pleasure, yet still observing to make the extremes as before.

In the forty eight changes, 12345
the 5th and 4th are both hunts, and 1 2 3 do make the six changes; the 5.4 do
hunt down by turns, and when either of them leads, then one of the six changes
is made. First the 5 hunts down 12354 12534

; one of the six changes is made 15234 51234 52134

; the 5 hunts up into its own place 25134 21534 21354 21345

; the 4 hunts down 21435 24135 42135

; another of the six changes is made 42315
; then the 4 must hunt up, and the 5 down again, etc. which course must be
continued to the end.

In the Sixscore changes, four of the notes do make the Twenty four changes,
and the fifth note hunts continually through them: so that the course and
method of the Sixscore is in effect the same with that of the Four and twenty.
For as the Four and twenty comprehended the Six changes on three; so in like
manner the Sixscore comprehend the Four and twenty changes on four, and the Six
changes on three. Therefore in the Sixscore there must be two hunts and three
extreme bells; one of the hunts is termed the whole-hunt, and the other the
half-hunt, The three extreme bells do make the Six changes in the same manner
as they were made before in the Four and twenty changes upon four bells, and
are here also called Extreme changes: the half-hunt and three extreme bells do
make the Four and twenty changes in the same manner as the Four and twenty
changes on four bells were likewise made: and the whole hunt continually hunts
through those four bells, and every time it either leads or lies behind them,
one change must then be made in the twenty four. 1 shall here be the
whole-hunt, 2 the half-hunt, 12345
and 3 4 5 extreme bells: so that 2 3 4 5 must make the four and twenty
changes. Every extreme change shall be made betwixt the two farthest extreme
bells from the half-hunt. First, the treble hunts up 21345 23145 23415 23451

. One of the twenty four changes must now be made; and therefore 2 which is the
hunt in the twenty four, must begin its motion through the extreme bells 32451
. The treble hunts down 32415 32145 31245 13245

; the half-hunt must proceed in its course 13425
; the whole-hunt hunts up 31425 34125 34215 34251

; The half-hunt proceeds forward 34521
; the whole-hunt moves down 34512 34152 31452 13452

. The half-hunt should now proceed, but having finished its course through the
extreme bells, therefore an extreme change must now be made betwixt the two
farthest extreme bells from it, which are 3.4. 14352
. The treble must hunt up 41352 43152 43512 43521

; the half-hunt must now begin its course again through the extreme bells 43251
; treble hunts down 43215 43125 41325 14325

; the half-hunt proceeds in its course down 14235
; treble hunts up 41235 42135 42315 42351

; the half-hunt proceeds in its course down 24351
; treble hunts down 24315 24135 21435 12435

; the half-hunt having finished its course, threfore an extreme change must be
made betwixt the two farthest extreme bells from it, which are 3.5 12453
. The treble hunts up 21453 24153 24513 24531

. The half-hunt begins its motion again through the extreme bells, and first it
moves up over 4th 42531
. The whole hunt moves down 42513 42153 41253 14253

; the half-hunt must proceed in its course, 41523 45123 45213 45231

and therefore must move over another note 14523
45321
. And this method being observed, will produce sixscore changes, 45312 45132
41532 14532

and then the bells will in course come round. Now it is observable, that the
changes at 32451
13425
34521
14352
43251
14235
24351
12453
42531
14523
45321
and 15432
, being set down by themselves, that is, the 1 to be excluded, and the changes
on 2345 to be set directly under one another in the same successive order as
they were made, it will thereby appear, that those four figures have made
twelve changes of the twenty four, according to the method of the first twenty
four changes on four bells before set down. And whereas here are just half the
sixscore changes pricked down, so likewise here are just half the four and
twenty changes made therein: and the remaining part of this sixcore being
likewise pricked, the remaining part of this four and twenty would also appear
therein, which part being added to the former twelve, would make up the twenty
four changes complete; and the method of them the same in all respects with the
first twenty four changes on four bells, page

Any note may be made a whole hunt at pleasure, and its first motion at the
beginning of the peal may either be up or down. Any note may also be made a
half-hunt, and its first motion likewise up or down at pleasure; yet still
observing that the half-hunt and three extreme bells must make the twenty four
changes, as in this last example. So that in the sixscore changes the Learner
may observe, that the three extreme bells are always assigned for the half-hunt
to hunt through; and the half-hunt and three extreme bells are also assigned
for the whole-hunt to hunt through: so that the whole-hunt always hunts through
four notes, and the half-hunt through three. The extreme changes may be made
two ways; first, betwixt the two farthest extreme bells from the half-hunt, as
in this last example: secondly, betwixt the two next extreme bells to the
half-hunt, which may be called mediums, for distinction from the former. But
the most usual and easiest way, is to make them betwixt the two farthest notes
from the half-hunt.

Whereas the treble or fifth being made whole-hunts, the first of them can
neither be moved down, nor the last up, at the beginning of a peal; therefore
one of the twenty four changes must first be made, which is as effectual, as if
the treble had moved down, or the 5th up.

The Learner may observe, that two of the four and twenty changes are never
made together in any sixscore, but as soon as one is made, the whole-hunt moves
through the four notes before another can be made.

The sixscore changes may be rung one hundred and sixty ways, which are thus
demonstrable. There are five times four figures to be produced out of five, and
not twice four the same figures: as 1234. 1235. 1245. 1345. 2345. with each
four the twenty four changes may be pricked sixteen ways, as before I have
showed on four bells; so that here will be five times sixteen four and
twenties, which amount to eighty, and not two alike. Now to each four add the
fifth figure which is wanting, as to 1234 add 5, to 1235 add 4, to 1245 add 3,
to 1345 add 2, to 2345 add 1, and every fifth figure being hunted through the
sixteen four and twenties, which the other four make, as the 5 through the
sixteen four and twenties which the 1234 make, and the like of the rest, will
produce as many sixscores as there were four and twenties, that is, 80. Then
the whole hunt may hunt two ways through each four and twenty, that is, up and
down at the beginning, which doubles the former number, and makes 160 in the
whole.

Treble up, fifth down.
12345 -- 21345 23145 23415 23451 23541 23514 23154 21354 12354 12534 21534
25134 25314 25341 52341 52314 52134 51234 15234 Extre 15243 51243 52143 52413
52431 25431 25413 25143 21543 12543 12453 21453 24153 24513 24531 24351 24315
24135 21435 12435 Extre. 14235 -- 14253 14523 -- 15423 Extre 15432 -- 14532
14352 -- 14325 Extre. 13425 -- 13452 13542 -- 15342 Extre. 15324 -- 13524 13254
-- 13245 Extre. 12345
Treble up, fourth down.
12345 -- 21345 23145 23415 23451 24351 24315 24135 21435 12435 14235 41235
42135 42315 42351 Extre. 42531 42513 42153 41253 14253 12453 21453 24153 24513
24531 25431 25413 25143 21543 12543 12534 21534 25134 25314 25341 Extre. 52341
52314 52134 51234 15234 15243 -- 15423 14523 -- 14532 15432 -- 15342 15324 --
13524 13542 -- 13452 14352 -- 14325 13425 -- 13245 13254 -- 12354 12345 --
Second down, fourth up.
12345 -- 21345 21354 12354 13254 13524 13542 Extre. 31542 31524 31254 32154
23154 23145 32145 31245 31425 31452 34152 34125 34215 32415 23415 24315 42315
43215 43125 43152 Extre. 43512 43521 43251 42351 24351 23451 32451 34251 34521
34512 35412 35421 35241 32541 23541 23514 32514 35214 35124 35142 Extre. 53142
53124 53214 52314 25314 25341 52341 53241 etc.
In ringing terms the hunts are named in short, as in the peals here pricked.
The first which is named is here understood to be the whole-hunt, and the last
the half-hunt. For instance, Treble is the whole-hunt, and fifth the half-hunt;
and treble is the whole-hunt, and fourth the half-hunt, etc.

The Changes on six Bells.
THere are seven hundred and twenty changes to be rung on six bells. But the
Learner may first practice some shorter peals.

The twenty four changes are thus rung. The treble must continually hunt
through the rest of the notes, and every time it leads or lies behind them,
123456
an extreme change must then be made between the two farthest notes from it.
The treble hunts up 213456 231456 234156 234516 234561

. A change is made betwixt the two farthest notes from it, which are 2.3 324561
. The treble hunts down 324516 324156 321456 312456 132456

. An extreme change is made betwixt 5.6 132465
, which method must be continued to the end. Any note may be made a hunt at
pleasure, and the extreme changes may as well be made betwixt the two nearest
notes to the hunt. The Thirty-all-over are rung according to the method of the
Twelve-all-over upon four bells, to which I refer.

The thirty six changes are thus rung. 123459
The treble hunts up into the third place, and then the two first notes make a
change. The treble hunts down again to lead, and then the two notes in the 3d
and 4th places do make a change, 314256 341256

except the 2 lies next the treble, 431256
and then the two hindmost notes. The treble hunts up 213456 231456

413256 143256

. The two first notes make a change 321456
. 142356
. The treble hunts down 212456 132456

412356 421356

; the 2.4 make a change 134256
241356
. In which manner the changes are to be made until the treble leads, 214356
124356

124365 etc.

and the 2 (which may be termed the half-hunt) lies next it, and then the
extreme change is made behind, as in the last change of this example, there
being but two of these changes in the peal.

In the Twelvescore long-hunts, (otherwise called the Esquire's twelvescore)
the 6th and 5th are hunts, and 1234 do make the twenty four changes. The 6th
and 5th do hunt down by turns, and when either of them leads, one of the twenty
four changes must then be made. The course and method of this is the same with
that of the forty eight changes on five bells, to which I refer the Learner.

In the Sevenscore and four, the treble and tenor are both hunts; and 2345 do
make the twenty four changes, 123456
2 being the hunt therein. The treble and tenor do both hunt at one and the
same time, the one up, and the other down, crossing each others course; and
when one of them leads, the other always lies behind; at which time one of the
twenty four changes must be made. The extreme changes in this peal are made in
the same manner as before I have showed upon four bells. The treble hunts up,
and the tenor down 213465 231645 236145 263415 623451

. One of the twenty four changes is made 632451
. The treble hunts down, and the tenor up 362415 326145 321645 312465 132456

. Another of the twenty four changes is made 134256
. The treble hunts up, and the tenor down 314265 341625 346125 364215 634251

, etc. which method must be observed to the end. 634521 etc.


In the sixscore changes there is a wholehunt, a half-hunt, and four extreme
hells. The half-hunt and four extreme bells do make the twenty changes in the
same manner as the twenty changes were made upon five bells with one hunt. page
61. The whole hunt has a continual motion through the other five notes, and
every time it leads and lies behind them, one of the twenty changes must then
be made. In this example, treble is the whole hunt, 2 the half-hunt, and 3456
extreme bells; therefore 23456 must make the twenty changes wherein 2 is the
hunt, and every time it lies either before the four extreme bells, or behind
them, an extreme change must then be made, which here shall be betwixt the two
sarthest extreme bells from the half-hunt. 123456
The treble hunts up 213456 231456 234156 234516 234561

. One of the twenty changes must now be made, therefore 2 being the hunt in it,
must begin its course through the extreme bells 324561
. The treble hunts down 324516 324156 321456 312456 132456

; The half-hunt proceeds forward 134256
; the treble hunts up 314256 341256 342156 342516 342561

; the half-hunt proceeds forward in its course 345261
; the treble hunts down 345216 345126 341526 314526 134526

; the 2 proceeds forward 134562
; the treble hunts up 314562 341562 345162 345612 345621

; the half-hunt should now proceed forward, but its course through the extreme
bells being finished, therefore an extreme change must be made betwixt 3.4,
which are the two farthest extreme bells from it, 435621
. The treble must hunt down 435612 435162 431562 413562 143562

; the half-hunt must now go its course again through the extreme bells, and
firsteit moves down under the 6th, 143526 etc.
etc. which method must be continued to the end. Any note may be made a whole
hunt at pleasure, or a half-hunt also. And the extreme changes may be made
betwixt the two nearest extreme notes to the half-hunt; but withal observing
to make all the extremes in one peal alike. There are four extreme changes in
each peal, and thirty changes distance from one to another.

The method of the Seven hundred and twenty, has an absolute dependency upon
the method of the Sixfcore changes on five bells; for five of the notes are to
make the sixscore changes, and the sixth note hunts continually through them,
and every time it leads or lies behind them, one of the Sixscore changes must
then be made. The method of the Seven hundred and Twenty is in effect the same
with that of the Sixscore: for as the Sixscore comprehended the Twenty four
changes on four, and the Six on three; so likewise the Seven hundred and twenty
comprehend the Sixscore changes on five, the Twenty four changes on four, and
the Six changes on three. Therefore here must be three Hunts, and three Extreme
bells: the three Hunts are thus distinguished; one of them is called the
whole-hunt, another the half-hunt, and the other the quarter-hunt. The
Half-hunt, Quarter-hunt, and three Extreme bells, are to make the Sixscore
changes; the Quarter-hunt and three Extreme bells are to make the Twenty four
changes, and the three Extreme bells are to make the six changes, which are
here also called extreme changes, and made in the same manner as before I have
showed upon four bells. In this example here pricked, treble is the wholehunt,
2d the half-hunt, 3d the quarter-hunt, and 4 5 6 extreme bells. Now it is
observable, that 4 5 6 are to make the six extreme changes, which will divide
the seven hundred and twenty into six equal parts; the 3 4 5 6 are to make the
twenty four changes, wherein the 3d is the hunt, (but in the seven hundred and
twenty it is called the quarter-hunt;) and and 2 3 4 5 6 are to make the
sixscore changes, wherein the 2d is the whole-hunt (though in the 720 it is
called the half-hunt,) by which it is evident, that the treble continually hunts
through these five 2 3 4 5 6, the 2d through the four 3 4 5 6, and the 3d
through these three 4 5 6; which are assigned for the respective hunts to hunt
through, from the beginning to the end of the peal. First the treble hunts up
213456 231456 234156 234516 234561

Now one of the sixscore changes must be made, therefore the 2d being the hunt
in the sixscore, must begin its course through the other four notes 324561
. The treble hunts down 324516 324156 321456 312456 132456

; the 2d proceeds in its course 134256
. the treble hunts up 314256 341256 342156 342516 342561

. The 2d proceeds forward in its course 345261
; the treble hunts down 345216 345126 341526 314526 134526

; the 2d proceeds forward 134562
; the the treble hunts up 314562 341562 345162 345612 345621

; the 2d, which is the half-hunt, should now proceed forward, but having
finished its course through the four bells, therefore the 3d, which is the
quarter-hunt, must begin its motion through the extreme bells 435621
. The treble hunts down 435612 435162 431562 413562 143562

. The half-hunt must now begin its course again through the four bells, and
first therefore it moves down under the 6 143526
. The treble must hunt up again, and then the 2d must move down under another
bell, which method must be observed until the 2d has moved quite down through
the four bells again, and then the 3d must proceed forward by moving over
another of the extreme bells; which method must be observed in the motion of
the three hunts, until the quarter-hunt has moved up behind the extreme bells,
and then the whole and half-hunts, having gone their course again through the
bells, an extreme change must be made: after which the whole, half, and
quarter-hunts proceed again in their course as before.

123456 213456 231456 234156 234516 234561 h 324561 324156 324156 321456 312456
132456 h 134256 314256 341256 342156 342516 312561 h 345261 345216 345126
341526 314526 134526 h 174562 314562 341562 345162 345612 345621 q 435621
435612 435162 431562 413562 143562 h 143526 413526 431526 435126 435216 435261
h 432561 432516 432156 431256 413256 143256 h 142356 412356 423156 423516
423561 243561 243516 243156 241356 214356 124536 q 124536 214536 241536 245136
245316 245361 h 425361 425316 425136 421536 412536 142536 h 145236 415236
451236 452136 452316 452361 h 453261 453216 453126 451326 415326 145326 h
145362 415362 451362 453162 453612 453621 q 456321 456312 456132 451632 415632
145632 h 145623 415623 451623 456123 456213 456231 452631 452613 452163 451263
415263 145263 h 142563 412563 421563 425163 425613 425631 h 245631 245613
245163 241563 214563 124563 Extrem. 125463

The letter h standing by the figures signifies half-hunt, that is, the motion
of the half-hunt in that change; and likewisc q the quarterhunt. Here are the
first sixscore changes of a seven hundred and twenty; wherein it is observable,
that all the changes at h and q, being set down by themselves in the same
successive order as they were made, that is, the 1 to be excluded, and the
changes on the other five figures to be set down directly under one another,
and the extreme change at last, it will thereby appear, that the five figures
have made twenty changes of a sixscore, according to the method of the example
on five bells, page 63. with this only difference, these are made on 23456, and
those were made on 12345; but the five figures of each have both alike course,
the 2d and 3d going the same course in this, as the treble and 2d did in that.
Now whereas the sixscore changes here pricked down are a sixth part of the seven
hundred and twenty; so likewise are the twenty changes, here made by 23456, a
sixth part of the sixscore: and then consequently, the seven hundred and twenty
changes being all pricked, the sixscore changes on 23456 would plainly appear
therein, in the same manner as twenty of them appear in this sixscore.
Therefore more need not be said of the method of the 720, since the method of
the sixscore changes on five bells being well understood, will be a sure and
certain guide to the Learner: only this one thing farther; in ringing of this
peal with any hunts, the second extreme change being made between the two bells
which made the first extreme, will always bring the bells round at the end of
the twelvescore. But after twelvescore are made, they cannot in course be
brought round until the end of the 720.

The 720 changes may be rung one thousand nine hundred and twenty several ways,
which is thus demonstrable. There are six times five figures to be produced out
of six, and not twice five the same: as 12345. 12346. 12356. 12456. 13456.
23456. and with each five the sixscore changes may be pricked one hundred and
sixty ways, as before I have showed on five bells. Now to each five add the
sixth figure which is wanting, as to 12345 add 6, to 12346 add 5, to 12456 add
3, to 13456 add 2, and to 23456 add 1. And the sixth figure which is added,
being hunted through all the several sixscores which the other five figures
make; for instance, the 6 through the 160 several sixscores which 12345 make,
and the 5 also through the 160 several sixscores, which 12346 make, and the
like of the rest; will produce as many seven hundred and twenties as there are
sixscores, that is, six times one hundred and sixty, which amounts to nine
hundred and sixty. Then the note that hunts through the other five, may hunt
two ways through each sixscore, that is, up and down, which will double the
former number, and make nineteen hundred and twenty in the whole.

AN INTRODUCTION to the Knowledge of CROSS PEALS.
THese Peals are termed cross in respect of their intricate methods; wherein
several notes moving at one and the same time, do thwart or cross each other in
their course and motion, some moving up, others at the same time down, gives
this Denomination to the Peals. The end of pricking them is to make the
complete number of changes by a method differing from that of other Peals. For
although five can be varied but 120 ways, and six but 720 etc. yet the methods
by which they are varied, are differing, according to the several fancies of
the Artist. And as order and method are the only basis on which this Art is
founded; so the skilful Artists, the better to effect the aforesaid end, have
thought fit in most peals to appoint one note to be as it were a Helm or
Rudder, by which the course of the peal is steered; which note is termed a
Hunt, and has one constant uniform motion throughout the peal, differing from
that of the other notes. The manner of its motion is continually through the
other notes, that is, from leading to strike behind, and from thence again to
lead, which motion, first up and then down, is termed one complete Course. Some
peals upon five bells, as old Doubles, etc. consist of single Courses; there
being ten changes in every single Course, and twelve of those Courses in the
peal. Other peals upon five bells, as London Paradox, etc. consist of double
Courses; there being twenty changes in every double Course, and six of those
Courses in the peal. Upon six bells there are also single and double Courses,
viz. twelve changes in every single Course, as in Grandsire Bob etc. and twenty
four changes in every double Course, as in College Bob, etc. the change wherein
the Hunt leaves leading being the first change of every Course. Now the methods
of these peals being well considered, they will be found more easy than at the
first view they may seem to be; for the first Course of any Cross Peal being
judiciously viewed, the general method of the whole peal will thereby appear:
for all the Courses in a Cross peal do agree in these three respects. First, in
the motion of the Hunt; secondly, in the motion of the rest of the notes;
thirdly, in the making of the changes, which will plainly appear in the
following peals, (some few changes in each peal only excepted, as hereafter I
shall show in my Directions to the several peals:) for proof of which I will
give an instance in the peal of new Doubles upon five bells, these being the
three first Courses of the peal. Wherein it is observable, First Course 2d
Course 3d Course 12345 13524 15432 21354 31542 51423 23145 35124 54132 32415
53214 45312 23451 35241 54321 32541 53421 45231 23514 35412 54213 32154 53142
45123 31245 51324 41532 13257 15342 14523 13524 15432 14253
that the last change of the first Course which is 13524, I have set down again
it the top of the second Course; and likewise the last change of the second
Course which is 15432, I have also put at the top of the third course; which I
have done for the plainer Demonstration of what I here intend. So that the ten
lowermost changes are the ten changes of each Course.

First therefore, as to the motion of the bunt, the 1 which is the hunt moves
directly up behind, where it lies twice, and then down again to lead, where it
lies also twice; as appears in each of these three Courses, and the like also
throughout the peal.

Secondly, as the 2d, 3d, 4th, and 5th bells move through the first Course, so
the bells that lie in the 2d, 3d, 4th, and 5th places in the last change of
every course, moves in the same manner also through the next following course.
For instance; first, for the bell in the 2d place: in the first course the 2d
bell moves down to lead, where it lies twice, and then dodges until the
treble comes down to it. So likewise in the second course, the 3d bell lying in
the 2d place moves down to lead, where it lies twice, and then dodges until
treble comes down to it; and also in the third course, the 5th bell lying in
the 2d place, moves down to lead where it lies twice, and dodgeth until the
treble moves down to it. Secondly, for the bell in the 3d place. In the first
course the 3d bell moves down to lead, and there dodgeth until the treble
comes down to it: so likewise in the second course the 5th bell lying in the 3d
place moves down to lead, and there dodgeth until the treble comes down to it:
and also in the 3d course the 4th bell lying in the 3d place moves down to
lead, and there dodgeth until the treble comes down to it. Thirdly, for the
bell in the fourth place: In the first course, the fourth bell moves up behind,
then down into the 3d place where it lies twice, then up again behind; so
likewise in the second course, the 2d bell lying in the 4th place moves up
behind, then down into the 3d place where it lies twice, then up again behind;
and also in the third course the 3d bell lying in the 4th place, moves
therefore up behind, then down into the 3d place where it lies twice, then up
again behind. And such uniform motion also has the bell in the 5th place
through every course.

Thirdly, that the changes in all the courses of the peal are made alike, will
here also plainly appear in the three courses. For the first change of every
course is made on the two first and two last bells; the second change of every
course is made on the four last; the the third is made on the four first; the
fourth on the two first and two last; the fifth on the four first; the sixth on
the two first and two last; the seventh on the four first; the eighth on the
four last; the ninth on the two first and two last; and the tenth single.

And thus in every Cross-peal the Courses do all agree, first in the motion of
the Hunt, secondly in the motion of the rest of the notes, and thirdly in the
making of the changes, as before I have showed. So that these three things
being well observed, will be very helpful both in pricking and ringing them;
the first and third being most proper to direct the pricking of them, and the
first and second the ringing of them. Therefore if the Practitioner do but
observe how the changes are made in the first course of a peal, wherein he must
have particular regard to the motion of the Hunt, (which a little further help
from the following directions to each peal, as to the making of Extremes and
Bob-changes) he may easily prick down all the following Courses of the same
peal: and therefore in the following peals I have only pricked down two or
three of the first courses for an example, and then have abridged the rest of
the peal by setting down only the changes that are made at the leadings of the
Hunt. But note, there are some few Cambridg-peals upon five bells, wherein all
the courses of each peal do not agree in the aforesaid three respects: For
although as to the motion of the whole-hunt they do, yet in the motion of the
rest of the notes, and consequently in the making of the changes they do not.

It being very difficult to begin the following peals with cross hunts, that
is, to make the 2d, 3d, 4th, etc. whole-hunts, I will therefore set down a
general rule for making the first changes at the beginning of each Peal,
wherein consists the great difficulty. In any Cross peal the whole-hunt may
move either up or down at the beginning; and the motion of the whole-hunt in
the first course of each of the following peals will direct the first motion of
any cross hunt, and consequently of making the first changes in that peal. For
Example, admit the 4th were made the whole-hunt in the peal called Old doubles
and singles upon five bells, and to hunt up at first: now to know how to make
the first changes, observe how the change is made wherein the treble (which is
there the whole-hunt) moves up out of the 4th place, and in the same manner
must the change be made wherein the 4th bell also moves up out of that place:
therefore as the change wherein the treble moves up out of the 4th place is a
single behind; so likewise must the change wherein the 4th bell moves up out of
that place, be also a single behind thus, 12354: and then as the next change
wherein the treble lies still behind is double of the four first bells; so
likewise the next change wherein the 4th bell lies still behind, must also be
made on the four first, thus, 21534, etc. Or admit the 4th were to hunt down at
the beginning, then observe how the change is made wherein the treble hunts
down out of the 4th place, and so in like manner must the change be made
wherein the 4th hunts also down out of that place: therefore as the change
wherein the treble hunts down out of the 4th place, is double of the four first
bells; so likewise must the change wherein the 4th bell hunts down out of that
place, be also double of the four first thus, 21435; then as the treble makes a
single when it moves down out of the 3d place, so likewise must the 4th next
make a single change in moving down out of the 3d place thus 24135, etc. which
observations will guide the making of the first changes in in any cross peal
with any Hunts; but observe whenever the first change of any peal hapens to
be single, it must be made at the back-stroke to prevent cutting compass; and
the like when a double change happens first in a peal of Triples and Doubles.
And moreover by the way observe, that all the following peals are so pricked,
that in ringing them at half-pulls, if the first change of each peal is made at
the fore-stroke, the single changes in each peal will always be made at the
back-stroke; and also the double changes in Triples and Doubles, excepting some
few Single in two or three peals. But when it happens that the first change of
a peal is made at the back-stroke, then consequently the bells at the end of
the peal will come round at a fore-stroke change.

In such peals on five bells where singles are made in the 3d and 4th places at
the leadings of the whole-hunt, the extremes may there be made three ways in
each peal; viz. every time the half-hunt lies next the whole-hunt; secondly,
every time it lies behind; thirdly, every time the half-hunt lies next the
whole-hunt, and also behind: in this last way there are six extremes in each
peal, but in other ways only three in each; the extremes being always made when
the whole-hunt leads, and betwixt the two farthest extreme bells from the
half-hunt.

In such peals upon five bells wherein there are three extremes, and made in
the 3d and 4th places at the leadings of the whole-hunt; the rest of the
singles at the leadings of the whole-hunt may be made two ways in each peal,
viz. either in the 2d and 3d, or the 4th and 5th places; if they are made in
the 2d and 3d, then the extremes must be made when the half-hunt lies behind;
but if the singles are made behind, then the extremes must be made when the
half-hunt lies next the whole-hunt, the extremes being always made between the
two next extreme bells to the half-hunt.

In all the following peals the figures standing by themselves at the title of
the peal, are the hunts in the peal there pricked: for instance, in the first
cross-peal upon five bells called Old doubles and singles, the two figures
standing thus 1 and 2, are the hunts in that peal; 1 is the whole-hunt, 2 the
half-hunt, and the like of the rest.

All peals of doubles upon five bells, which go sixty changes complete without
any single, by making of two extremes they will go 120. And also all peals of
doubles upon six bells, and triples and doubles upon six, which go 360 changes
without any single or extreme, by making of two extremes they will go 720. The
extremes in all these complete peals proceeding from one and the same cause,
are therefore to be made after one manner, according to this general and
infallible rule: Wheresoever any two of the extreme bells are in course to make
a change, those two bells by lying still will effectually make the extreme. So
that the making of the extreme in doubles upon five bells, necessitates the
making of a single change at the same time, by reason that the two extreme
bells which should contribute to the making of the double change, do lie still;
so that the single change is accidental, and very improperly called the
extreme. When the extremes in triples and doubles upon six bells are made at
double changes, then there happens two singles in the peal; but when they are
made at triple changes, then those two changes will become double, and
consequently the 720 will then go complete without any single. Upon five bells
the first extreme must be made within sixty changes from the beginning, and the
second extreme just sixty changes from the first. Upon six bells the first
extreme must be made within 360 changes from the beginning, and the second
extreme just 360 changes from the first. The easiest way in practice, is to
make the extremes at the leadings of the whole-hunt; wherein it may be observed
as a general rule, That in all peals upon six bells, where the half-hunt
dodgeth behind at the bobs, there the first extreme may be made either the
first, second, or third time: the half and quarter-hunts dodg together behind,
and then the second extreme must be made the third time those two bells dodg
again together behind, after the first extreme is made. And also in all such
peals upon six bells, where the doubles at the leadings of the whole-hunt are
made on the four middle bells, there the first extreme may be made either the
first, second, or third time the half and quarter-hunts do make a change in the
2d and 3d places, and then the 2d extreme must be made the third time those two
bells come there again to make a change after the first extreme is made. The
singles at all these extremes must be made by the half and quarterhunt. The
first extreme in any peal may also be made at any place, where two of the
extreme bells are in course to make a change according to the preceding general
rule; and then the making of the second extreme may be guided by observations
taken from the changes at the leadings of the whole-hunt: for at the leadings
of the whole-hunt the half and quarter-hunts always come together to make a
change in one place, just at 120 changes distance from one another throughout
each peal. Now as the second extreme must be made just 360 changes from the
first, so the making of it may thus be guided: Look how many changes, or else
how many leadings of the whole-hunt the first extreme is made after the half
and quarter-hunts have made a change together, so many changes or leadings of
the whole-hunt must the second extreme be made, after the third following time
that those two bells do make a change in the same place again. And likewise in
all peals, where there are single and double bobs, the same observations will
also hold good, in making the extremes either after the single or double bobs
as before; there being likewise 120 changes distance between the single bobs
and also between the double bobs: so that if the first extreme is made at a
single bob, the second must then be made at the third following single bob, and
the like also at double bobs. And such kind of observations, according to the
nature of the peal, will guide the making of the second extreme in any peal,
either upon five or six bells. Wherein it is observable, that the second extreme
must always be made by the same two bells, and in the same place where the
first was made, which two bells will in course lie apt for that purpose; and
the rest of the bells will also in course lie in the same places at the second
extreme where they lay at the first. After the making of the first extreme, the
method of the peal goes on as if no extreme had been made; and also after the
making of the second extreme if any remains, it also goes on, until in course
the bells come round.

In all complete peals of doubles upon six bells there may also moveable
extremes be made, which are made according to this rule; wheresoever any two of
the extreme bells are together, and in course to lie still, those two bells by
making a change will thereby make the extreme, which is as effectual as the
fixed extreme, the reason and ground of both being one and the same. There are
also two of these extremes in each peal, and the second always made 360 changes
from the first, and the making of it guided by such kind of observations as
before. When moveable extremes are made, then there will be two triple changes
in the 720; but when fixed extremes are made, then two singles.

The art of cross-pricking may receive a being from this consideration. As
every complete peal of plain changes upon one number comprehends the complete
peals on all lesser numbers; so likewise every complete crosspeal must of
necessity do the like, although their cross course permits it not to be done so
regularly and demonstrably as the former. From whence may be inferred, that
every note in a cross-peal must of necessity lie as many times in one place, as
the rest of the notes are capable of making changes; and also that two or more
of the notes must jointly lie in the same places as many times, as the
remaining number are also capable of making changes: this being a certain
touchstone to prove all cross-peals after they are pricked, and must be held as
a principle on which to ground such methods of pricking, that the course of all
the notes may demonstrably tend to produce those effects. And from hence it is,
that the whole hunt immediately derives the manner of its uniform motion
through the courses of each peal. And the changes in every course are as so
many guides to conduct the rest of the notes in such sort, that they may be
prepared to lie at the last change of the course in apt places for each
succeeding course to receive them, and to perform the like. Now as the changes
in all the courses of a peal are made alike, except as before; so in the
composing of cross-peals, by pricking of one course may soon be discovered,
whether or no a complete Peal will from thence arise.

Cross Peals.
The Twenty four, Doubles and Singles on four Bells.
THis peal consists equally of double and single changes; 1234 2143 2413 4231
4321 3412 3142 1324

one change is double, the next single, and so throughout. 1 is here the hunt,
and 2.3.4 extreme bells. Every double change is made on the two first and two
last bells, and every single on the two middle bells, except when and 1 leads,
and then behind which is called extreme. All the bells have a direct
Hunting-course up and down until 1 leads, and then the bell in the second place
lies still, whilst the two hind-bells make a dodg; which being made, all the
bells proceed again in their Hunting course. The three changes of ( 1342 3124
3214 2341 2431 4213 4123 1432

1423 4132 4312 3421 3241 2314 2134 1243

1234
) are the three extreme changes.

There are three ways to make the extreme changes. First, every time the hunt
leads, as in the peal here pricked; secondly, every time it lies behind;
thirdly, every time it leads and lies behind: in this last way there are six
extreme changes in the peal, but in the other two ways, only three extremes;
the extreme changes must always be made betwixt the two farthest bells from the
hunt. Any bell may hunt at pleasure, and it may move either up or down at the
beginning of the peal. If the 1 or 3d do hunt down, or the 2d or 4th up at the
beginning, the first change must be single, and made of the back-stroke (if
it is rung at half-pulls) to prevent cutting compass; but if either of those
bells do hunt the contrary way, then the first change must be double.

Old Doubles and Singles. 1 and 2.
ONE change is double, the next single, and so by turns. The treble has a
direct hunting course, as in plain changes. Every double change is on the four
first bells, and the treble is one of the two bells that makes every single
change, except when it leads, and then the single is in the 3d and 4th places;
but when 2 lies next the treble, then the single is behind, which is called
extreme. Every time the treble leaves leading, the two first bells continue
slow dodging, until the treble comes down and displaceth them. And when the
treble moves down out of the 5th place, 12345 21435 24135 42315 42351 24531
24513 42153 41253 14523 14253 41523 45123 54213 54231 45321 45312 54132 51432
15342 15432 13254 13524 12435 Extre. 12453 15324 15234 13452 13542 14235 14325
12543 Extre. 12534 13425 13245 14532 14352 15243 15423 12354 Extre. 12345

the bell that comes into it lies still there, until the treble comes thither
again, except when the extreme change is made behind. Every bell lies twice
together in the 3d and 4th places, except when the treble leads, and also when
it hinders them in hunting.

This old peal may be rung by a new course, which differs from the former only
in the single changes that are made every time the whole-hunt leads, viz. every
single may be made either in the 2d and 3d, or 4th and 5th places. If they are
made in the 2d and 3d, then the extremes must be made when the half-hunt lies
behind; but if they are made in the 4th and 5th places, then the extremes must
be made when the half-hunt lies next the whole-hunt, the extremes being always
made in the 3d and 4th places.

London Paradox. 1 and 2.
ONE change is double, 12345 21435 24135 21453 24153 42513 45213 42531 45231
54321 53421 54312 53412 35142 31542 35124 31524 13254 13524 15342 15432 14523
14253 12435 Extre. 12453 14235 14325 13452 13542 15324 15234 12543 Extre. 15243
15423 14532 14352 13425 13245 12354 Extre. 12345

the next single, and so by turns. The motion of the treble is after this
manner; in hunting up, first, it makes a dodg in the 2d and 3d places, then it
lies twice in the 4th place, and four times behind; in which manner also it
hunts down again, and then leads four times. The rest of the bells have a like
course and motion with that of the treble, until the treble leads. Now it is
observable, that every single change is made in the 2d and 3d places until the
treble leads, and then in the 3d and 4th places; but when 2 lies next the
treble, then an extreme behind. The changes at the leadings of the whole-hunt
have an absolute dependency upon the course of the twenty four changes, doubles
and singles upon four bells-; and the extremes to be made as many ways as in
that peal, which are here guided by the motion of the half-hunt.

Phoenix 5 and 4.
ONE change is double, 12345 21354 23154 32513 35214 53241 52341 25431 24531
42513 45213 54123 51423 15432 14532 41352 43152 34125 34215 43125 41325

the next single, and so by turns. Every bell leads twice, and lies behind four
times. Every single is made in the 2d and 3d places, until the 5th comes
behind, and then in the 3d and 4th places; but when the 4th leads, (the 5th
being behind) the single is in the 2d and 3d places.

London pleasure. 1 and 2.
THis peal in the former printing of it was pricked another way, but I have here
transposed that Course, which in my opinion renders it more easy and practical.

12345 21345 23145 32145 31245 31425 34125 34215 34251 32451 32415 23415 23451
23541 23514 23154 21354 12354 13254 13524 13542 31542 31524 31254 32154 32514
32541 35241 35214 35124 35142 35412 35421 53421 53412 53142 51342 15342 15324
15234 12534 12543 15243 15423 15432 14532 14523 14253 12453 12435 14235 14325
14352 13452 13425 13245 12345
Mr. Tendering 's Peal, called Grand Paradox. 1 and 5.
ONE change is double, the next single, and so by turns. The motion of the
whole-hunt is after this manner: first, it moves up into the 2d and 3d places,
lying twice in each; then it moves up and makes a dodg behind, and then lies
still one change in the 5th place; then it makes another dodg behind, and so
moves down into the 3d and 2d places lying twice in each as before, and then
leads four times. Every other bell has a like course and motion with that of
the treble until the leadings of the treble, and then observe, that every time
the treble goes to lead and leaves leading, the double change is made on the
two first and two last bells, ercept when it goes to lead if the half-hunt
lies next it, and then not. Every bell leads four times, and every single is
made behind. The change wherein each bell leaves leading, is always made on the
four first bells, except as before.

12345 21354 21345 23154 23145 32415 32451 34215 34251 43521 43512 45321 45312
54132 54123 51432 51423 15243 15234 12543 12534 21543 21534 25143 25134 52314
52341 53214 53241 35421 35412 34521 34512 43152 43125 41352 41325 14352 14325
13452 13425 15324 15342 13524 13542 12453 12435 14253 14235 15432 15423 14532
14523 13254 23245 12354 12345
What you please, Doubles and Singles.
EVery bell leads four times, and lies behind twice, except when the extreme is
made behind; and twice in the second place, except when the extreme is made
before: and note, when the treble is before the fourth stroke, the single is in
the 2d and 3d, the next time the single is behind; but at other times the
single is in the 3d and 4th places. When any bell leaves leading the double
change is on the two first and two last, and the extremes are made by turns,
first behind, then before, and so on to the end, for there are six extremes.

12345 21354 21534 25143 25413 52431 52341 53214 53124 35142 35412 34521 34251
43215 43125 41352 41532 14523 14253 12435 extre. 12453 21435 21345 23154 23514
32541 32451 34215 34125 43152 43512 45321 45231 54213 54123 51432 51342 15324
15234 12543 extre. 15243 14352 14532 15423 extre. 15432 13254 13524 15342
extre. 13542 14235 14325 13452 extre. 13425 12534 12354 13245 extre. 12345
Old Doubles. 1 and 2.
THE changes are all double, except one single exery time the treble leads. The
treble has a perfect hunting course as in plain changes, and every other bell
has a like hunting course with that of the treble until the treble leads, and
then a single is made in the 3d and 4th places; but when the 2 lies next the
treble, the single is behind which is called extreme.

12345 21435 24153 42513 45231 54321 53412 35142 31524 13254 13524 31254 32145
23415 24351 42531 45213 54123 51432 15342 15432 14523 14253 12435 extre. 12453
14235 14325 13452 13542 15324 15234 12543 extre. 12534 15243 15423 14532 14352
13425 13245 12354 extre. 12345
New Doubles. 1 and 2.
THE changes are all double, except one single at every leading of the treble.
The treble has a perfect hunting course as in plain changes; and when it moves
up from leading, the two first bells dodg until it comes down again and
displaceth them. Every bell that comes into the 3d place lies there twice, and
then moves up behind; but the bell which lies there when the treble leaves
leading, moves down. Every bell lies twice behind, except at the changes
wherein the treble goes to lead and leaves leading. Every time the treble
leads, a single change is then made in the 3d and 4th places; but when the 2
lies next the treble, an extreme behind.

12345 21354 23145 32415 23451 32541 23514 32154 31245 13254 13524 31542 35124
53214 35241 53421 35412 53142 51324 15342 15432 14523 14253 12435 extre. 12453
14235 14325 13452 13542 15324 15234 12543 extre. 12534 15243 15423 14532 14352
13425 13245 12354 extre. 12345
Reding Doubles. 1 and 2.
THE treble has a direct hunting courle as in plain changes, and when it moves
up from leading the two first bells dodg until it comes down again and
displaceth them; and whilst they dodg before, every bell that comes down into
the 3d place lies there twice, and then moves up again behind. But after the
dodging all the bells go a direct hunting course up and down, until the dodging
again hinders them as before. Every bell lies twice behind, 12345 21354 23145
32415 23451 32541 23514 32154 31245 13425 14352 41532 45123 54213 45231 54321
45312 54132 51423 15243 12534 31543 25134 52314 25341 52431 25413 52143 51234
15324 13542 14235 12453 14523 15432 13254 extre. 12354 13524 15342 14253 12435
14325 13452 15234 12543 15423 14532 13245 extre. 12345

except when the treble leaves leading if the 2d lies next it, and then the
double is made on the two first and two last bells; by which means the two
hind-bells then make a dodg, which happens in course once in twenty changes,
that is, every second time the treble leaves leading. By this method it will go
sixty changes, and then an extreme must be made. The extremes in this peal may
be made according to the preceding general rule set down in the Introduction.
Here the first extreme is made at the end of sixty changes, the bells lying 1 3
2; and when they come to lie so again, the second extreme must be made; the
extreme is made behind, two of the extreme bells lying there, and the single is
made in the 2d and 3d place at both the extremes.

Grandsire. 1 and 5.
THE treble has a direct hunting course as in plain changes, and every other
bell has also a like hunting course with that of the treble except when the
bobs hinder. The bobs are double changes, and made on the two first and two
last bells according to this rule, viz. every time the treble goes to lead and
leaves leading, a bob-change is then made, except the 5th lying next it makes a
change there with it, and then not. Now it is observable, that once in twenty
changes, that is, at every second leading of the treble, the 5th lies next it,
and consequently there is but one bob-change then to be made, but at other
times two; so that at one leading of the treble there is but one bob-change
made, at the next leading there are two, and so successively by turns, which
for distinction may be called single and double bobs, The two bells that dodg
behind at a bob continue there dodging until the treble comes up and displaceth
them, and at every bob-change the bell in the 3d place lies still, 12345 21354
23145 32415 34251 43521 45312 54132 51423 15243 12534 21543 25134 52314 53241
35421 34512 43152 41325 14352 13425 31452 34125 43215 42351 24531 25413 52143
51234 15324 13542 31524 35142 53412 54321 45231 42513 24153 21435 12453 14235
41253 42135 24315 23451 32541 35214 53124 51342 15432 14523 41532 45123 54213
52431 25341 23514 32154 31245 13254 extre. 13245 15342 13524 14253 12435 15234
12543 13452 14325 15423 14532 12354 extre. 12345

and then moves down to lead. By this method it will go sixty changes; and to
carry on the course extremes must be made, there being two in the peal. The
manner of making an extreme I have at large showed in the Introduction, and the
extremes may here be made in any place according to the general rule there set
down. The easiest way in practice is to make them at the leadings of the
treble; at any single bob it may be made behind, two of the extreme bells lying
there, and to lie still whilst the bells in the 2d and 3d places do make the
single change: at any double bob it may be made in the 2d and 3d places, so
that the single must there be made behind.

If the first extreme is made at the single bob, the second must be made at the
third following single bob; or if the first is made at a double bob, the second
must be made at the third double bob following, as in this peal here pricked,
where the first extreme is made at a double bob, and the second also made at
the third following double bob.

This peal will go with any hunts, and to begin it on the four hind bells; but
then in ringing it at half-pulls, the first change being made at back-stroke to
prevent cutting compass, the bells at the end of the peal will come round at a
fore-stroke change. Therefore the better way is to begin it on the four first
bells, which may also be done with any hunts, excepting 1.3, 1.5. and 2.3, 2.4,
2.5, wherein the first change of each may be a bob. And observe, that in any
way of beginning it, the bells must all proceed in such a perfect hunting
course as the first change directs them, until the first bob comes to be made.

Old Triples and Doubles.
ONE change is triple, the next double, and so by turns, except one single at
the end of every sixty changes. Every triple change is made on the two first,
the two middle, and two last bells; and every double is made on the four middle
bells, except when the hunt leads and then on the four hind bells. Treble is
here the hunt, and has a direct hunting course up and down as in plain
changes: the rest of the bells have also a direct hunting course up and down
except when the treble leads, and then each bell that was hunting up (except
that in the 2d place) makes a dodge with the next bell below it, and then
proceeds forward again in its course up; and each bell which at the same time
was hunting down, makes a dodg with the next bell above it, and so proceeds
forward in its course down; which method will carry on the peal five courses of
the hunt, that is sixty changes as they are here pricked.

In the 120 there is also a half-hunt; 123456 214365 241635 426153 462513
645231 654321 563412 536142 351624 315264 132546 135264 312546 321456 234165
243615 426351 462531 645213 654123 561432 516342 153624

and when the whole-hunt leads and the half-hunt lies next it, a single change
must then be made, either in the 3d and 4th, or 5th and 6th places; but
observing when the half-hunt comes again to lie next the whole-hunt, another
single change must be made in the same place where the first was made. 156342
513624 531264 352146 325416 234561 243651 426315 462135 641253 614523 165432
164523 615432 651342 563124 536214 352641 325461 234516 243156 421365 412635
146253 142635 416253 461523 645132 654312 563421 536241 352614 325164 231546
213456 124365

These single changes are called extremes, there being two in every sixscore,
and the last of them always falls out in course to be made just 60 changes from
the first, that is, at the fifth leading of the whole hunt after the first
extreme.

In the 240 there is also a half-hunt; and when the whole-hunt leads, and the
half-hunt lies next it, a single change being then made in the 4th and 5th
places, will bring the bells round at twelvescore, there being four singles in
the peal, one of which falls in the course at the end of every sixty changes.

In the 720 there is a whole, half, and quarter hunt, and every time the
whole-hunt leads and the half-hunt lies next it, a single change must then be
made in the 4th and 5th places as in the twelvescore; but when the quarter-hunt
lies next the half-hunt, that is, when the three hunts come together before,
(which always happen at the end of every twelvescore) then the single must be
made behind, which is called extreme, there being three of them in the peal.

The sevenscore and four triples and doubles are the same with the former
except at the leadings of the treble, and then a single is always made in the
3d and 4th places; but when the 2 lies next the treble, an extreme is made in
the 4th and 5th places. This peal is grounded on the twenty four doubles and
singles, the four middle bells making them at the leadings of the treble.

Grandsire Bob. 1, 2 and 4.
THE general method of this peal is the same with that next before, but with
this difference; whereas in that peal singles were made at the end of every
sixty changes to carry on the course, in this there are double changes made in
their stead, which are called Bob-changes, and made when the treble leads in
the 2d and 3d and the 5th and 6th places, whereas at other times the double is
there made on the four hind bells.

The Practitioner may observe these rules in the ringing of it, viz. whatsoever
bells he follows when he hunteth up, he must follow the same bells again, and
in the same order, the next time he hunts down, as in these changes here
pricked, where the treble in hunting up first follows 2, then 4, and then 6; and
when it comes behind, first it follows 2 again, then in its hunting down it
follows 4 and 6 in the same order as when it hunted up; which is also observed
in the ringing of any other bell, but with this difference betwixt the
whole-hunt and the rest of the bells, viz. Every time the whole-hunt leaves the
treble's place and hunts up, it follows different bells from what it did in
its former hunting up, as may be seen in this example: where in its first
hunting up it first follows 2, then 4, then 6; 123456 -- 214365 241635 426153
462513 645231 654321 563412 536142 351624 315264 132546 135264 312546 321456
234165 243615 426351 462531 645213

whereas in the next hunting up it first follows 3, then 2, then 4. But the
first time any other bell leads after a bob, whatsoever bells it then follows
in its hunting up, it follows the same bells likewise and in the same order
every time it hunts up, and consequently every time it hunts down unto the next
bob; as in this example, where 2 in its first hunting up, first follows 4, then
6, then 5, and likewise when it next hunts up it follows 4 6 5 as before, etc.
But when the whole-hunt is the second bell which he follows in hunting up, he
must follow it again when he next lies behind.

It Is observable, that at every leading of the treble the two hind bells dodg;
and whenever the half-hunt dodgeth there, a bob must then be made, except the
quarter-hunt dodgeth there with it, and then not; which is an infallible rule,
by which he that rings the halfhunt may always give notice of the bobs as well
when the peal is inverted, as in the ordinary way of ringing it. The bobs fall
out in course single and double, the one single, the next double; and so by
turns; there being three single bobs and three double bobs in the
eighteenscore, and consequently six of each in the 720.

The aforesaid method being observed, will carry on the course of the peal to
the end of eighteenscore, which is just half the 720, and then it terminates,
as appears in the eighteenscore here pricked: but by making an extreme that
number may be doubled; for then eighteenscore changes more will go in course
according to the former method; and another extreme being likewise made at the
end of the last eighteenseore will complete the 720. The manner of making an
extreme I have showed at large in the Introduction, page 90. where I have also
set down a general rule for making them, to which I refer.

The first extreme may be made either the first, second, or third time that the
half and quarter hunts dodg behind; or else at the first, second, or third
single bob; at either of which places the single must be made behind. 123456
325416 342516 143526 -- 214365 234561 324156 bob. 124536 241635 243651 231465
134562 125463 426153 426315 213645 315426 -- 462513 462135 126354 351246 152643
645231 641253 123645 532164 156234 654321 614523 216354 523614 -- 563412 165432
261534 256341 165324 536142 bob. 625143 265431 163542 351624 156423 652413
624513 -- 315264 514632 564231 642153 136452 132546 541362 546321 461235 bob.
135264 453126 453612 416325 163425 312546 435216 435162 143652 -- 321456 342561
341526 bob. 136245 234165 324651 314256 134625 132654 243615 236415 132465
316452 -- 426351 263145 134256 361542 123564 462531 621354 312465 635124 125346
645213 612534 321645 653214 -- 654123 165243 236154 562341 152436 561432 162534
263514 526431 154263 516342 615243 625341 254613 -- 153624 651423 652431 245163
145623 156342 564132 564213 421536 bob. 513624 546312 546123 412356 154632
531264 453621 451632 143265 -- 352146 435261 415362 142356 145362 bob. -- bob.
-- 146532 154326 162345 135426 162453 bob. -- 163254 -- 164235 164523 145236 --
153246 -- -- 142563 136524 152364 146325 146253 -- 135642 -- bob. 142635 124653
-- 125634 164352 -- 126435 153462 126543 -- 124365

Here are eighteenscore changes wanting one, which one if it were made double
as the former, would bring the bells round, therefore an extreme must be made
as in this change 123465, the two hind bells making the extreme, and the bells
in the 3d and 4th places making the single. Now in regard that this extreme is
made the second time the whole-hunt leads after a double bob, therefore the
second extreme must be made the second time the whole-hunt leads after the
third double bob following.

This peal may be rung with any hunts, and to begin the changes triple and
double as in this here pricked.

Fifty three LONDON- Peals upon Five, Six, Seven, and Eight Bells, composed by
F. S.
Crambo.
THE changes are all single; it has a perfect course, and may be pricked many
ways.

12345 42513 52431 32154 35421 15243 21345 45213 25431 23154 35412 51243 21435
45231 25413 23145 53412 51234 24135 54231 25143 32145 53142 15234 24153 54321
52143 32415 35142 15324 42153 45321 52134 23415 35124 13524 42135 45312 25134
23451 53124 13542 42315 54312 25314 32451 51324 31542 24315 54132 52314 32541
51342 31524 24351 45132 52341 35241 15342 31254 42351 45123 25341 35214 15432
13254 42531 54123 23541 53214 51432 13245 24531 54213 23514 53241 51423 31245
24513 52413 32514 53421 15423 31425 13425 34215 43152 41523 12453 12354 13452
34251 41352 14523 21453 12345 31452 43251 41325 14253 21543 34152 43521 14325
41253 12543 34125 34521 14352 41235 12534 43125 34512 14532 14235 21534 43215
43512 41532 12435 21354

The Primrose. 1 and 2.
THE treble has a perfect course as in plain changes. 12345 51432 15234 21435
15342 -- 24135 15432 12543 24315 -- Extre. 23451 14523 12534 32541 14253 --
35214 -- 15243 35124 12435 15423 31524 Extre. -- 13254 12453 14532 13524 --
14352 31254 14235 -- 32154 14325 13425 32514 -- 13245 35241 13452 -- 53421
13542 12354 54312 -- Extre. 54132 15324 12345
And when it hunts up out of the 2d place it makes two singles together, and
the like when it hunteth down. When it leads, the single is in the 3d and 4th
places, except when 2 lies next it, and then an extreme behind. Every bell
(except the treble) leads four times, and lies still behind until the treble
displaceth it, except at the extreme.

Orpheus.
12345 14253 34125 54312 32541 52134 13254 41523 43152 53421 23514 51243 13245
41532 43125 53412 23541 51234 31254 45123 34215 35421 25314 15243 31245 45132
34251 35412 25341 15234 32154 54123 32415 53142 52314 12543 32145 54132 32451
53124 52341 12534 23154 51423 23415 51342 25431 21543 23145 51432 23451 51324
25413 21534 21354 15423 24315 15342 24531 12354 21345 15432 24351 15324 24513
12345 12435 14523 42315 13542 42531 12453 14532 42351 13524 42513 21435 41352
43215 31542 45231 21453 41325 43251 31524 45213 24135 14352 34521 35142 54231
24153 14325 34512 35124 54213 42135 13452 43521 53214 52431 42153 13425 43512
53241 52413 41235 31452 45321 35214 25143 41253 31425 45312 35241 25134 14235
34152 54321 32514 52143

One change is double, the next single, and so by turns.

New Doubles and Singles. 1 and 2.
ONE change is double, the next single, and so by turns. The treble has a
direct hunting course up and down as in plain changes, 12345 51324 15234 21354
15342 -- 23154 15432 12543 32514 -- Extre. 32541 14523 12534 23451 14253 --
23415 -- 15243 32145 12435 15423 31245 Extre -- 23254 12453 14532 13524 --
14352 31542 14235 -- 35142 14325 13425 53412 -- 13245 53421 13452 -- 35241
13542 12354 35214 -- Extre. 53124 15324 12345
and every time it goes to lead and leaves leading, the change is double on
the two first and two last bells, the rest of the double changes are on the
four first. The treble is one of the two bells that makes every single change
except when it leads, and then the single is made in the 3d and 4th places; but
when the 2 lies next the 1, then an extreme is made behind. When the treble
leaves the two first bells, they continue slow dogding until treble comes down
and displaceth them. Every bell (except the treble) lies twice in the 3d place.

The Morning Star. 1 and 2.
THE treble has a direct hunting course as in plain changes; and every time it
hunts up, it makes two singles together, and the like when it hunts down: when
it leads the single is behind, but when 2 lies next it an extreme is made in
the 3d and 4th places. Every time the treble goes to lead and leaves leading,
the double is on the two first and two last bells, and every bell except the
treble leads four times together.

12345 51432 14523 15243 -- 21354 54132 14532 -- 14253 23154 54312 -- 13425
14235 23514 53421 12354 13452 -- 25341 35241 extre. -- 15324 52431 32514 12534
12543 15342 54213 32154 -- extre. -- 54123 31254 14352 12453 12435 51423 13245
14325 -- extre. 15432 13254 -- 13542 12345 15423 -- 15234 13524

The Quirister. 1 and 2.
THis peal consists most of double changes; the treble has a direct hunting
course as in plain changes, and every time it hunts up and down it makes a
single in the 3d and 4th places; 12345 32514 15234 21354 35241 15243 23145
53421 -- 23415 54312 14352 24351 54132 14325 42531 51423 -- 45213 15432 12543
45123 15423 extre. 41532 51432 12453 14523 54123 -- 14532 54213 15324 41523
52431 15342 45132 25341 -- 45312 23514 14253 43521 23154 14235 34251 21345 --
32415 12354 13542 32145 extre. 13524 31254 12534 -- 13245 -- 12435 13254 13425
extre. 31245 13452 12345 32154 --
and when it leads, the single is behind, but when 2 lies next it an extreme is
made in the 3d and 4th places.

When the treble leaves the two hind bells, they continue dodging until it
comes up again and displaceth them, and then they hunt directly down; the first
to lead, and the other into the 2d place: that which moves to lead, having lead
four times, gives place to the treble; but when the Treble has done leading it
takes the treble's place again, and leads four times more and then hunts
directly up; the other bell which moved down into the 2d place lies there
twice, and then the Treble in hunting down moves it into the 3d place where it
lies still, until the Treble in hunting up moves it back into the 2d place,
where having lain twice it hunteth up. This Peal is as musical, easy, and
practical as any of this kind that ever was pricked.

The Faulcon. 1 and 2.
THis Peal consists most of double changes. The treble has a direct hunting
course as in plain changes, and every time it hunts up and down it makes a
single in the 3d and and 4th places, and when it leads a single is also made
there, but when 2 lies next it the extreme is made behind. When the treble
leaves the two first bells they continue there until it comes down again and
displaceth them, but obferve, when the treble moves into the 5th place, and
again from thence, the double is on the two first and two last bells, by means
of which the two first bells then dodg, but before and after they lie still.
Every bell lies twice in the 3d place and then hunts up, except that which lies
there when the treble leaves leading.

12345 53241 -- 15243 21354 35421 14235 15423 23145 53412 14325 -- 23415 53142
-- 14532 32451 51324 13452 14352 23541 15342 13542 -- 32514 15432 -- 13425
32154 -- 15324 13245 31245 14523 15234 -- 13254 14253 -- 12354 13524 -- 12543
extre. 31542 12435 extre. 12345 35124 extre. 12534 35214 12453 --

Merry Andrew. 1 and 2.
ONE change is double, the next single, and so by turns. The treble leads four
times, lies behind four times, and twice in every other place. Every other bell
leads four times. When the treble leaves the two hind-bells they continue
dodging until it comes up again and displaceth them. Every single is made
behind until the treble hinders, and then in the 2d and 3d places. When the
treble leads and the 2d lies next it, then an extreme is made in the 3d and 4th
places.

When the treble goes to lead and leaves leading, the double is on the two
first and two last bells, and when every other bell goes to lead and leaves
leading, the double is on the four first.

12345 51423 23514 15243 21354 15432 32154 15234 21345 15423 32145 12543 23154
14532 31254 extre. 23145 14523 31245 12453 32415 41532 13254 -- 34215 41523
13245 13542 32451 45132 12354 13524 34251 45123 extre. 15342 43521 54213 12534
15324 45321 52413 -- -- 43512 54231 14352 14235 45312 52431 14325 14253 54132
25341 13452 12435 54123 23541 13425 extre. 51432 25314 -- 12345

May Day. 1 and 5.
ONE change is double, the next single, and so by turns. When the treble goes
to lead and leaves leading, the double is on the two first and two last bells;
and when every other bell goes to lead and leaves leading, the double is on the
four first.

The treble has a constant dodging course, 12345 45132 12543 21354 41523 15234
23154 45123 12534 21345 54213 -- 23145 54231 14352 32415 52413 13452 32451
52431 14325 34215 25341 Extre. 34251 25314 14235 43521 23541 -- 43512 23514
15324 45321 32154 13524 45312 31254 15342 54132 32145 13542 51432 31245 --
54123 13254 12453 51423 12354 14253 15432 13245 12435 14532 Extre. Extre. 15423
13425 12345 14523 -- 41532 15243
for in its hunting up it first makes a dodg in the second and third places,
and then another behind, and then it lies still one change in the 5th place;
then in its hunting down it makes another dodg behind, and also another in the
2d and 3d places, and then leads four times. So that the treble is one of the
two bells that makes every single until it leads, and then it is made in the 2d
and 3d places, except when the 5th lies behind, and then an extreme is made in
the 3d and 4th places. When the treble leaves the two hind-bells they continue
slow dodging, until it comes up agaiu and displaceth them. Every bell leads
four times.

St. Dunstan 's Doubles. 1 and 2.
THE changes are all double except one single every 2d time the treble leads,
12345 13245 12453 21354 -- -- 23145 15423 13542 32415 14532 15324 34251 -- --
43521 12354 14235 45312 extre. single. 54132 12534 14253 51423 -- -- 15432
14352 13524 14523 13425 15342 41532 -- -- 45123 15243 12435 54213 single.
Extre. 52431 15234 12345 25341 -- 23514 14325 32154 13452 31245 -- 13254 12543
single. extre.
there being six in the peal. The treble is a perfect hunt; and every time it
goes to lead and leaves leading, the double is made on the two first and two
last bells, at which changes the bells in the 3d place lie still and then move
down, and the two hind-bells at the same time dodg: but at other times all the
bells have a direct hunting course. When the treble leads, and the 2d lies
either in the 2d or 3d places, then a single must always be made betwixt the
two next extreme bells to the 2d.

Church Doubles. 1 and 2.
THE changes are all double except six singles as the former. 12345 13254 14325
21435 single. -- 24153 13245 12543 42513 -- Extre. 24531 14532 12453 42351
15423 -- 24315 -- 15324 42135 12354 13542 41253 Extre -- 14523 12534 14235
15432 -- single. 51342 13425 14253 53124 14352 -- 35214 -- 15342 53241 15243
13524 35421 single. -- 53412 15234 12435 35142 -- Extre. 31524 13452 12345
The treble is a perfect hunt; and every time it moves up into the 5th place,
and also out of it, the double is then made on the two first and two last
bells, at which time the bells in the 3d place do lie still and then move up;
and the two first bells at the same time dodg. When the treble leads, and the
2d lies either in the 2d or 3d places, then a single must always be made
betwixt the two next extreme bells to the 2d.

In this and the former peal the singles may be made in another manner, viz.
when the whole-hunt leads, and the half-hunt lies either in the 4th or 5th
places, a single must then be made betwixt the two next bells to the half-hunt;
but at other times a double change to be made when the whole-hunt leads, as in
the former way.

Stedman 's Principle.
THE changes are all double, two singles excepted. One double is made on the
two first and two last bells, the next on the four last, and so by turns
successively; excepting every sixth change, which is double on the four first
bells, and for distinction is called a Parting change. All the bells have a
like course. The general method is this; the three first bells go the six
changes, and the two hind-bells in the mean time dodg; then a Parting change is
made which parts the two hind-bells, moving that in the fourth place down into
the 3d, and that in the 3d place up into the 4th, and then the three first
bells go the six again, the two hind-bells in the mean time dodging as before;
and then another Parting change is made, and so successively on. Every bell
that comes behind continues there dodging six changes with one bell and six
with another, and then in course the Parting change brings it down. One six
cuts compass, the next does not, and so by turns successively. In the six which
cut compass the two first bells of the three makes the first change of it, but
in the other the two last of the three. By this method the peal will go sixty
changes, and to carry it on farther extremes must be made. An extreme is made
by the lying still of two bells when in course they should make a change, as
before I have showed more fully in the Introduction, page 90. but withal
observing, that whereas in this peal the bells have all a like course,
therefore they may all be termed extreme bells, and consequently the extremes
to be made according to this general rule, viz. the first extreme may be made
by any two bells that are in course to make a change within the compass of the
first sixty changes of the peal; and the second extreme must be made according
to this rule, Whatsoever two bells are dodging behind at the first extreme,
when the same two bells come to dodg there again, is a certain warning for the
second extreme to be then made. And observe, how many changes the first extreme
is made from a parting change; so many likewise must the last extreme be made
after a Parting change also. And the single and extreme comes in course 12345
42135 52431 24513 51324 21354 41253 25341 42153 15342 23145 14523 52314 24135
13524 32415 41532 53241 21453 31542 23451 45123 35214 12435 35124 24315 54132
32541 14253 53142 42351 51423 23514 41235 35412 43215 15432 32154 14325 34521
34251 51342 31245 13452 43512 43521 53124 13254 31425 45321 45312 35142 extre.
34152 54312 54321 31524 13245 43125 53421 53412 13542 31254 41352 35241 35421
15324 32145 14532 53214 34512 51234 23415 41523 52341 43152 15243 32451 45132
25314 34125 12534 34215 54123 23541 31452 21543 43251 51432 32514 13425 25134
42315 15423 23154 14352 52143 24351 51243 21345 41325 25413 42531 52134 12354
14235 24531 45213 25143 extre. 12453 42513 54231 21534 12345 21435 45231 52413
12543 24153 54213 52134 15234 each of them to he made in the same place and by
the same bells at the last extreme, as they were at the first. Here the singles
are made behind, and the extremes in the 2d and 3d places; and as the 4th and
5th bells do dodg behind at the first extreme, so likewise when they come to
dodg there again, the second extreme is then made, the treble leading at both
of them, as appears in the peal^ here pricked.

The first Parting change is here made the third change at the heginning, and
that (...) cuts compass.

In all the several ways of ringing this peal^ if the Parting changes are made
at the forestroke, as in course they are in this he^^ pricked, then cutting
compass is always on the same sixes, as in this peal: but when the Parting
changes are made at back-stroke, then the contrary six always cuts compass to
wha^ does here.

Peals upon Six Bells.
The single Method.
THE changes are all single, 123456 213456 213465 231465 231456 321456 324156
234156 234516 324516 324561 234561 235461 325461 325416 235416 235146 325146
321546 312546 312564 132564 132546 135246 135264 -- 153642 153624 135624 135642
-- 153426 153462 135462 135426 -- 153264 153246 152346 152364 -- 125643 125634
126534 126543 -- 162435 162453 164253 164235 -- 146352 146325 164325 164352 --
146523 146532 164532 164523 -- 146235 146253 142653 142635 -- 124356 124365
123465 123456

and treble is the hunt. When the treble moves up out of the 2d place, the two
first bells continue slow dodging until the treble comes there again. And when
the treble moves down out of the fourth place, the two hind-bells likewise
continue slow dodging until the treble comes there again. When the treble
leads, (if it is rung at half-pulls) the forestroke change (that is, at the
third stroke of the treble's leading) is made in the 3d and 4th places, the
rest of the changes there are made hehind. By this method it will go sixscore
changes.

To ring 240. When the whole-hunt leads, and the half-hunt dodgeth behind; the
forestroke change must then be made in the 2d and 3d places, as in this here
pricked, where the 2d is the half-hunt, and there are little marks set at the
fore-stroke changes.

To ring 360. When the whole-hunt leads, and the half and quarter-hunts dodg
behind, the fore-stroke change must then be made in the 2d and 3d places as
hefore.

To ring 720. When the whole-hunt leads, and the half-hunt dodgeth behind, the
forestroke change must then he made in the 2d and 3d places as hefore, except
the quarterhunt dodgeth there with the half-hunt, and then in the 3d and 4th
places as at other times. The 2d and 4th, or the 2d and 6th may he the half and
quarter-hunts, or others at pleasure.

Note, in all the following peals upon six bells, the bobs are double changes,
and always made at the leadings of the whole hunt (except Nonsuch Bob, for
there the Bobs are made at the change wherein the whole-hunt goes to lead, and
not when it does lead.) And whereas in the following peals the directions for
calling bob runs thus; viz. Every time the half-hunt dodgeth behind, a Bob must
then be made, etc. it is there implied, That whereas every time the whole-hunt
leads, the two hindbells then dodg; therefore when the halfhunt dodgeth there
at the leading of the whole-hunt, a bob must then be made. And in like manner
also must all the bobs in the following peals be made at the leading of the
whole-hunt. He that rings the half-hunt may best call bob in all peals. A Cure
for Melancholy.
DOubles and Singles. The Treble is the whole-hunt, which leads four times,
lies behind as many, and twice in every other place. When it moves up out of
the fourth place, the two bells in the third and fourth places continue dodging
until it comes down there again, and then the two hindbells dodg until the
Treble displaceth them. The Treble is one of the bells which makes every
double change, except when it lies still behind, and then the double is on the
four first, and also when it leads the double is on the four last. 123456
134625 213465 -- 213456 162345 231465 162354 231456 163245 234165 163254 234156
-- 243516 125634 245316 125643 243561 126534 245361 126543 423561 -- 425361
154263 423516 154236 425316 152463 452136 152436 452163 -- 451236 143526 451263
143562 415236 bob 415263 134526 145236 134562 145263 -- 142536 156423 142563
156432 -- bob 156423 165423 156432 165432 bob -- 165423 132654 165432 132645 --
136254 143652 136245 143625 -- bob 124365 134652 124356
Every single is made in the fifth and sixth places, except when the Treble
lies there, and then in the third and fourth places. Every bell except the
Treble lies four times in the second place. By this method it will go sixscore
changes, but by making of bobs it will go 240, 360, or 720. The bob is a double
change at the leading of the Treble, wherein the bell in the fourth place lies
still.

To ring 240. Every time the half hunt dodgeth behind, a bob must then be made
as in this here pricked, where 2 is the half-hunt.

To ring 360. Every time the half and quarter-hunts dodg together behind, a bob
must then be made.

To ring 720. Every time the half-hunt dodgeth behind a bob must then be made,
except the quarterhunt dodgeth there with it, and then not.

2 may be the half hunt, 123465 123456

and 4 the quarter hunt, or others at pleasure.

The Morning Exercise.
DOubles and singles. 123456 -- 142365 213465 164352 142356 213456 164325 --
231465 bob 146532 231456 163452 146523 234165 163425 bob 234156 -- 145632
243516 165243 145623 243561 165234 -- 245316 156243 143265 245361 156234 143256
254631 -- 134265 254613 154326 134256 256431 154362 -- 256413 bob 136524 265143
153426 136542 265134 153462 bob 261543 -- 135624 261534 152643 135642 216543
152634 -- 216534 125643 132465 126543 125634 132456 126534 -- 123465 162543
124365 123456 162534 124356
treble is the whole hunt, and hunteth up into the 2d, 3d, and 4th places,
lying twice in each; then having made a dodg behind, it lies still in the
sixth place, and then makes another dodg behind, and so hunts down in the same
manner as it hunted up, and then leads four times. When the Treble moves down
out of the fifth place, the two hind-bells dodg until it comes up there again;
during which time the bell in the 4th place lies still. And when the Treble
moves up out of the second place, each bell that comes there lies four times,
until the Treble comes down there again. Every single is made behind. By this
method it will go 120 changes; and by making of bobs it will go 240, 360, or
270. At the bobs the bell in the 2d place always lies still.

To ring 240. Every time the half-hunt dodgeth behind, a bob must then be made,
as in this here pricked, where 2 is the halfhunt.

The warning for the bobs in the 360 and 720, is the same with that in the peal
next before: 2 may be the half-hunt, and 4 the quarter-hunt, or others at
pleasure.

The City Delight.
DOubles and Singles. Treble is the wholehunt, and lies four times before,
four times behind, and twice in every other place. When it moves up out of the
third place, the singles are made in the second and third places until it comes
there again, and then behind until it moves up again out of the third place.
When it moves down out of the fourth place, the two hind-bells dodg until it
comes up there again, during which time the bell in the fourth place lies
still. By this method it will go 120, and by making of bobs it will go 240,
360, or 720. At the bobs the bell in the second place always lies still; and
the warning for them is the same with that in the two last peals. In the 240
here pricked, 2 is the half-hunt; and in the 360 or 720, the 2 and 4 may be the
half and quarterhunts, or others at pleasure.

123456 265143 153462 126534 143256 213465 256143 -- 126543 134265 213456
251634 156234 -- 134256 231465 251643 156243 124365 -- 231456 215634 165234
124356 135642 234165 215643 165243 142365 135624 243165 125634 -- 142356 bob
234615 125643 164352 -- 136542 243615 152634 164325 145623 136524 246351 152643
bob 145632 -- 264351 -- 163452 bob 132465 246531 154326 163425 146523 132456
264531 154362 -- 146532 123465 265413 bob 162534 -- 123456 256413 153426 162543
143265

London Nightingale.
DOubles and Singles. Treble is the wholehunt, and lies four times before,
four times behind and twice in every other place. 123456 -- 163245 213465
126543 163254 213456 126534 -- 231465 162543 125634 231456 162534 125643 234165
-- 152634 234156 153624 152643 243516 153642 -- 423516 bob 164523 243561 156324
164532 423561 156342 bob 245361 -- 165423 425361 134562 165432 245316 134526 --
425316 -- 143652 452136 135462 143625 452163 135426 bob 451236 -- 146352 451263
142356 146325 415236 142365 -- 415263 124356 132465 145236 124365 132456 145263
-- 123465 154236 136245 123456 154263 136254
When it moves down out of the 5th place, the two hind-bells continue dodging
until it comes there again, during which time the bell in the fourth place
lies still. And when the two hind-bells leave dodging then the two first bells
dodg until the hind-bells dodg again, and then they cease. By this method it
will go 120; and by making of bobs it will 240, 360, or 720. At the bobs the
bell in the second place always lies still; and the warning for them is the
same with that in the preceding peals- In the 240 here pricked, 2 is the
half-hunt; and in the 360 or 720, the 2 and 4 may be the half and quarter-hunts
or others at pleasure.

The Evening Delight.
DOubles and Singles. Treble is the wholehunt and leads four times, lies behind
four times, and twice in every other place, 123456 -- 213465 146253 231465
164253 213645 bob 231645 146235 236154 164235 263154 -- 236514 162453 263514
126453 265341 bob 256341 162435 265431 126435 256431 -- 254613 124653 245613
142653 254163 124563 245163 142563 241536 -- 214536 145236 241356 154236 214356
145326 124365 154326 142365 -- 124635 153462 142635 135462
except in the 2d and 3d places where it makes a dodg every time it hunts up
and down. Every other bell has the same course with the whole-hunt; but
observing, when they come down and have made a dodg in the second and third
places, they lie still one change in the second place, and then make another
dodg there, and so hunt up as the Treble did. But note, when the Treble goes
to lead and leaves leading, the bells in the third and fourth places he still.
Every single is made in the second and third places, and every bell lies four
times behind. By this method thod it will go 120. 153642 165342 135642 156342
-- -- 136524 153624 163524 135624 bob 153264 136542 135264 163542 -- -- 132546
165324 123546 156324 132456 bob 123456
and by making of bobs it will go 240, 360, or 720. At the bob-change, the bell
in the 4th place always lies still.

To ring 240. Every time the half-hunt dodgeth in the second and third places a
bob must then be made, as in this here pricked, where 6 is the half-hunt.

To ring 360. Every time the half and quarter-hunts dodg together in the second
and third places, a bob must then be made.

To ring 720. Every time the half-hunt dodgeth in the 2d and 3d places a bob
must then be made, except when the quarter-hunt dodgeth there with it, and then
not.

In the 360 or 720, the 6 and 5 may be the half and quarter-hunts, or else 2
and 4, or others at pleasure.

College Doubles.
TReble is the whole-hunt, and has a direct hunting course. When it moves down
out of the 5th place, the two hind-bells dodg until it comes there again;
during which time the bell in the fourth place lies still: 123456 156234
213465 165243 231456 -- 234165 164352 243615 bob 246351 163425 264531 -- 265413
162534 256143 126543 251634 -- 215643 124365 125634 142356 152643 -- 512634
145623 521643 bob 526134 146532 562314 -- 563241 143265 536421 134256 534612 --
543162 135642 541326 bob 514362 136524 154326 -- bob 132465 153462 123456 --
but otherwise the five hind-bells have a direct hunting course. By this method
it will go sixty changes; and by making of bobs it will go 120, 180, 360. At
the bob-changes the bell in the second place always lies still.

To ring 120. Every time the half-hunt dodgeth behind, a bob must then be made;
as in this here pricked, where 2 is the half-hunt.

To ring 180. Every time the half and quarter-hunt dodg together behind, a bob
must then be made.

To ring 360. Every time the half-hunt dodgeth behind a bob must then be made,
except when the quarter-hunt dodgeth there with it, and then not.

In the 180 or 360, 2 and 4 may be the half and quarter-hunts, or others at
pleasure.

By making of two extremes the 360 may be doubled. They are to be made
according to the rules in the Introduction, page 90.

Non-such Bob.
DOubles. Treble is the whole-hunt, and has a direct hunting course. When it
moves up out of the third place, 123456 532641 213465 352614 231456 532164
234165 531246 324615 513264 234651 153624 324561 156342 234516 516324 324156
561342 321465 563124 312456 653214 132546 563241 135264 653421 315246 563412
351264 653142 352146 651324 532416 615342 352461 bob 165324 543162 163542
453612 613524 543621 631542 453261 635124 543216 365214 453126 635241 451362
365421 415326 635412 145236 365142 142563 361524 412536 316542 421563 bob
425136 136524 245316 135642 425361 315624 245631 351642 425613 356124 245163
536214 241536 356241 214563 536421 124653 356412 126435 536142 216453 531624
261435 513642 264153 153462 624513 154326 264531 514362 624351 541326 264315
the bell that comes there lies still until the Treble comes down there again;
during which time the two first bells dodg. When the Treble leaves the two
hind-bells, they dodg until the change wherein the Treble goes to lead, and
then one of them moves down; but as soon as that change is made, the two
hindbells dodg again until the Treble moves up and parts them. Every time the
Treble leads, the double is made on the four hind-bells throughout the peal. By
this method it will go sixty changes; and by making of bobs it will go 120,
180, or 360. The bob is always made at the change wherein the Treble goes to
lead, the two first and two last bells making it.

To ring 120. Every time the half-hunt dodgeth before, is a warning for a bob
to be made the next time the whole-hont goes to lead; as in this here pricked,
where 6 is the half-hunt.

To ring 180. Every time the half and quarter-hunts dodg together before, is a
warning for a bob to be made when next the Treble goes to lead.

To ring 360. Every time the half-hunt dodgeth before, is a warning for a bob
to be made the next time the Treble goes to lead, 624135 621453 612435 bob
162453 164235 614253 641235 642153 462513 etc.

except the quarter-hunt dodgeth there with it, and then not.

In the 180 and 360, the 6 may be the half-hunt and 5 the quarter-hunt, or
others at pleasure.

By making of two extremes the 360 may be doubled; they must be made according
to the rule in the Introduction, page 90.

The bobs in this peal may also be made at the leadings of the whole-hunt as in
other peals, and the bell in the fourth place to lie still at every bob-change.
The warning for them in the 120, 180, and 360 being the same with that in the
College Doubles, page 143.

London Doubles.
THE Treble is the whole-hunt; and has a direct hunting course. When it moves
down out of the fifth place the two hind bells dodg until it comes there again,
during which time the bell in the fourth place lies still. When the Treble is
behind, the two first bells make a change; but at other times the leading bell
lies still. By this method it will go sixty changes, and by making of bobs it
will go 120, 180, or 360. At the bob-changes the bell in the second place
always lies still. The warning for the bobs in the 120, 180, and 360, is the
same with that in College Doubles, p. 143. By making of two extremes it will
go 720. The extremes must be made according to the rule in the Introduction,
page 90.

In the 120 here pricked, 2 is the half-hunt; and in the 180 and 360, 2 and 4
may be the half and quarter-hunts, or others at pleasure.

123456 541263 156342 -- 213465 542136 -- 164523 231456 524316 134562 bob
234165 523461 bob 165432 243615 253641 135426 -- 246351 256314 -- 143652 426531
265134 242356 bob 425613 261543 124365 146325 452163 216534 -- -- 451236 126543
136245 132465 415263 162534 163254 123456 145236 -- -- 154263 153624 125634
514236 bob 152643 Triples, Doubles, and Singles.
123456 153462 214365 bob 241635 135426 246135 -- 264315 153246 623451 152364
632541 -- 365214 125634 356124 126543 351624 -- 315264 162453 132546 164235
135264 -- 312546 146325 321456 bob 324156 164352 342516 -- 435261 146532 453621
bob 546312 164523 564132 -- 561432 146253 516342 142635 153624 -- bob 124365
135642 123456 -- Triples, Doubles, and Singles dodging behind.
123456 162345 214365 126354 241356 -- 243156 156423 234516 bob 325461 154632
352641 -- 536214 134256 563124 143265 561324 -- 516342 163542 153624 136524
135642 -- 316524 126435 361542 bob 365142 124653 356412 -- 534621 154326 543261
145362 452316 -- 425136 165243 421536 bob 412563 162534 145236 -- bob 132465
142563 123456 -- Doubles, and Triples.
123456 152364 214365 125346 241356 -- 243165 165432 234615 bob 326451 164523
362541 -- 635214 134256 653124 143265 651342 -- 615324 153624 163542 135652
136524 -- 315642 125463 351624 bob 356142 124536 365412 -- 634521 164352 643251
146325 462325 -- 426135 156284 421653 bob 452635 152648 146253 -- bob 132465
142635 123456 -- -- Single Bob.
123456 134562 214365 135426 241635 -- 426153 125634 462513 bob 645231 1526^^
462531 -- 645213 142356 654123 143265 561432 -- 516342 163542 153624 165324
156342 -- 513624 125463 531264 bob 352146 152436 325416 -- 234561 132654 325461
136245 234516 -- 243156 146532 421365 bob 412635 164523 146253 -- bob 124365
164235 123456 -- London Bob.
123456 -- 214365 162534 241356 126543 423165 -- 432615 145623 346251 bob
436521 146532 345612 -- 354162 135642 531426 bob 513462 136524 154326 -- bob
125634 153462 152643 -- -- 164352 146253 bob 164235 163425 -- -- 132465 124365
123456 142356 -- 153246 135264 City Bob.
123456 163425 214365 bob 241035 136452 426153 -- 462513 163254 645231 162345
465321 -- 643512 126543 634152 125634 361425 -- 316245 152436 132654 154263
136245 -- 312654 145362 321564 bob 235146 154326 253416 -- 524361 145623 254631
bob 526413 154^32 562143 -- 651234 145236 615324 142563 163542 -- bob 124365
136524 123456 --

These six peals will each of them go sixty changes without any bob, and by
making of bobs each of them will go 120, 180, and 360. In three of them, viz.
Triples Doubles and Singles, Single-bob, and City-bob, at the bob-changes the
bell in the fourth place always lies still; whereas at the rest of the changes
which are made at the leadings of the whole-hunt, the bell in the second place
lies still. And in the other three peals, viz. Triples doubles and singles
dodging behind, Doubles and Triples, and London Bob, at the bob-changes the
bell in the second place always lies still, whereas at the rest of the changes
that are made at the leadings of the whole-hunt, the bell in the fourth place
lies still. The warning for the bobs in the 120, 180, and 360, in each of
these six peals is the same with that in the 120, 180, and 360 in College
Doubles, p. 143. Each of these peals will go 720 with two extremes, which must
be made according to the rule in the Introduction, page 90.

In the 120 of each there pricked, viz. in City Bob, London Bob, and Triples
doubles and singles, the 2 is the half-hunt, and in the other three peals the 3
is the half-hunt.

In the 180 and 360 of each peal, the 2 and 4 may be the half and
quarter-hunts, or others at pleasure.

New Bob.
TRiples and Doubles. The general method of this Peal is the same with
Grandsire Bob, and the bobs also made as in that peal. It will go 120, 180, or
240, and by making of two extremes it will go 360 or 480; and with six singles
it will go 720.

To ring 120. Every time the half-hunt dodgeth behind a bob must then be made.

To ring 180. Every time the half and quarter-hunt dodg together behind, a bob
must then be made; and by making of two extremes it will go 360. The first
extreme may be made at the first, second, or third bob; observing to make the
second extreme at the third following bob from the first extreme, where the
singles in both must be made behind.

To ring 720. The bobs throughout the peal are made by the same rule as in the
120; but farther observing, when the whole and half-hunts come together before,
if the quarter-hunt lies either in the third or fourth places, then a single
must be made betwixt the two next extreme bells to the quarter-hunt.

The 2 may be the half-hunt and 4 the quarter-hunt, or others at pleasure.

College Little Bob, dodging behind.
TRiples and Doubles. ^^3456 162345 ^^4365 126354 241356 -- 423165 156423
432615 bob 346251 154632 364521 -- 635412 134256 653142 143265 561324 -- 516342
163542 153624 136524 135642 -- 316524 126435 361542 bob 635124 124653 653214 --
562341 154326 526431 145362 254613 -- 245163 165243 421536 bob 412563 162534
145236 -- bob 132465 142563 123456 --
The Treble is the whole-hunt, and has a direct hunting course. When it moves
down out of the fifth place, the two hind-bells dodg until it comes there
again. All the bells have a direct hunting course, but observing, that when any
bell moves up into the fourth place, if the Treble is then any where below it,
it lies there twice, and then moves down again. By this method it will go sixty
changes; and by making of bobs it will go 120, 180, or 360. At every bob-change
the bell in the second place lies still. The warning for the bobs is the same
with that in College Doubles, page 143. And the two extremes in the 720 must
be made according to the rule in the Introduction, page 90.

In the 120 here pricked, 3 is the half-hunt; and in the 180 or 360, 2 and 4 may
be the half and quarter-hunts, or others at pleasure.

This peal in practice will be found very plain and easy, and also good
Music.

College Little Bob, dodging before and behind.
TRriples and Doubles. 123456 bob 214365 156342 241356 -- 423165 134562 243615
bob 426351 135426 246531 -- 425613 142356 245163 124365 421536 -- 412563 136245
145236 163254 154263 -- 512436 125634 521463 152643 254136 -- 524316 164523
253461 bob 523641 165432 256314 -- 526134 143652 251643 bob 215634 146325
126543 -- 162534 132465 -- 123456 153624
The The Treble has a direct hunting course, and when it moves up out of the
second place, the two first bells dodg until it comes there again; and also
when it moves down out of the 5th place, the two hind-bells dodg until it comes
there again. Every bell that moves up into the fourth place, if the Treble is
any where below it, lies there twice and then hunts down; and also every bell
that moves down into the third place, if the Treble is any where above it,
lies there twice, and then hunts up behind. By this method it will go sixty
changes, and by making of bobs it will go 120, 180, or 360. At every bob-change
the bell in the second place lies still. The 2 is the half-hunt in the 120
here pricked, and 2 and 4 may be the half and quarter-hunts in the 120 and 360,
or others at pleasure.

The warning for the bobs is the same with that in the College Doubles, p.
143. And the two extremes in the 720 must be made according to the general rule
in the Introduction, page 90.

Court Bob.
TRiples and Doubles. The Treble has a direct hunting course. Every bell that
comes before and behind makes a Dodg, then lies still, and so moves away,
except the bell that lies still behind when the treble leads, and also that
bell which leads when the Treble lies behind, both which do dodg before and
after their lying still, and then move away. When the treble leads and lies
behind, the double is made on the four middle bells. By this method it will go
sixty changes; and with bobs it will go 120, 180, or 360. At the bob-changes
the bell in the fourth place lies still.

To ring 120. 123456 165324 214365 156234 241356 -- 423165 143265 243615 134625
426351 -- 462531 152643 645213 bob 465123 125634 641532 -- 614523 143652 165432
134562 156342 -- 513634 126543 531642 bob 356124 162534 536214 -- 352641 143526
325461 134256 234516 -- 324156 165243 231465 156423 213456 -- 124365 132495 bob
bob 142356 123456 --
Every time the half-hunt makes a change next the wholehunt, a bob must then
be made, as in this here pricked, where 2 is the half-hunt.

To ring 180. Every time the half and quarterhunts make a change together next
the wholehunt, a bob must then be made.

To ring 360. Every time the half-hunt makes a change next the wholehunt a bob
must then be made, except when a quarter-hunt makes a change there with it, and
then not.

In the 180 and 360 2 and 4 may be the half and quarter-hunts, or others at
pleasure. The two extremes in the 720 must be made according to the rule in the
Introduction. The first extreme may be made either the first, second, or third
time that the half and quarter-hunts make a change together in the second and
third places at the leading of the whole-hunt; and then the second extreme must
be made the third time following that those two bells make a change there
again, the extremes being there made in the fourth and fifth places, and the
singles in the second and third places.

Every time the Treble leads, the double may as well be made on the four
hind-bells, and the bobs to be made as before; but the warning for them the
same with College Doubles.

Five College Bobs.
IN these five peals the Treble is the wholehunt, and has a like dodging
course in all of them. The general method of the five peals is as follows: viz.

College Bob the first. When the Treble moves down out of the fifth place, the
two hind bells dodg until it comes there again. Every bell leads twice, and
then hunts up into the fourth place, unless the dodging course of the Treble
hinders it, where it lies twice and then moves down again; except the bell
that dodged with the Treble before, and also that which leads when the Treble
lies still behind, both which hunt directly up. When the Treble moves down
from dodging in the third and fourth places, the bell that dodged there with it
continues in those two places, lying twice together in each by turns until the
Treble comes to dodg there with it again.

College Bob the second. Every bell when it comes to lead makes a dodg before,
then it lies still one change, then it makes another dodg, and so moves up
into the fourth place where it lies still twice, and then down again; except
it dodgeth with the Treble in the fourth place, and then it hunts up behind.
But when the Treble moves down out of the third place, the two bells in the
third and fourth places continue there until the Treble comes up there again,
during which time the two hind-bells dodg.

College Bob the third. When the Treble leaves leading, the two first bells
dodg until it comes to lead again; except when the Treble dodgeth behind, for
then the two first bells lie still. When the Treble leaves the two hind bells,
they lie still one change, dodg the next, and so by turns until the treble
comes there again. The two middle bells always dodg until the Treble hinders
them. College Bob the First.
123456 435216 214365 etc. 124356 163542 213465 bob. 231456 165324 324165 --
321456 123564 234165 bob. 243615 125346 426351 -- 462315 143526 643251 134562
634521 -- 365412 165432 365421 156423 534612 -- 543162 124653 451326 142635
453162 -- 541326 136245 514362 bob. 153426 132654 513462 -- 154326 156234
145362 bob. 413526 152643 143562 -- 415326 146253 451362 164235 543126 --
541362 132465 453126 123456 College Bob the Second.
123456 543216 214365 etc. 124356 153624 213465 bob 231645 135642 326154 --
231654 153462 326145 bob 362415 135426 634251 -- 364215 153246 632451 152364
623541 -- 265314 125634 625341 126543 263514 -- 236154 162453 321645 164235
236145 -- 321654 146325 312564 bob 135246 164352 315264 -- 132546 146532 135264
bob 312546 164523 132564 -- 315246 146253 351426 142635 534162 -- 351462 124365
534126 123456 College Bob the Third.
123456 462513 214365 etc. 123465 165432 214356 bob 241365 156423 423156 --
241356 143526 423165 bob 243615 134562 426351 -- 423615 152364 246351 153246
423651 -- 246315 126543 243651 125634 426315 -- 246135 164235 421653 162453
246153 -- 421635 143652 412653 bob 146235 134625 412635 -- 146253 165324 142635
bob 416253 156342 142653 -- 416235 132546 461253 135264 642135 -- 461235 124365
642153 123456 College Bob the Fourth.
123456 462513 214365 etc. 124356 165432 213465 bob 231456 156423 324165 --
321456 143526 234165 bob 243615 134562 426351 -- 246315 152364 423651 153246
246351 -- 423615 126543 243651 125634 426315 -- 462135 164235 641253 162453
642135 -- 461253 143652 416235 bob 142653 134625 412635 -- 146253 165324 142635
bob 416253 156342 146235 -- 412653 132546 421635 135264 246153 -- 241635 124365
426153 123456 College Bob the Fifth.
123456 632514 214365 etc. 124356 163542 213465 bob 231456 136524 324165 --
321456 163425 234165 bob 324615 136452 236451 -- 234615 163254 326451 162345
234651 -- 326415 126543 324651 125634 236415 -- 326145 152436 231654 154263
236145 -- 321654 145362 312645 bob 136254 154326 316245 -- 132654 145623 136245
bob 312654 154632 132645 -- 316254 145236 361245 142563 632154 -- 631245 124365
362154 123456

College Bob the fourfh. When the Treble leaves the two hind bells, they dodg
until it comes there again; and then the two first bells dodg until the Treble
gives way for the two hind bells to dodg again, and then the two first bells
cease dodging.

College Bob the fifth. When the Treble leaves the two hind bells, they dodg
until it comes there again. And when it leaves the two first bells they lie
still one change, dodg the next, and so by turns until it comes down there
again; during which time the bells in the third and fourth places dodg except
when the Treble hinders them.

By these methods each of them will go 120 changes, and by making of bobs they
will go 240, 360, or 720. In the first of them the bell in the second place
lies still at the bob-changes, and in the other four the bell in the fourth
place always lies still.

To ring 240. Every time the half-hunt dodgeth behind a bob must then be made,
as in these peals here pricked; where, in the first peal the 4 is the half-hunt,
and in the other four peals the 2 is the half-hunt.

To ring 360. Every time the half and quarter-hunts dodg together behind, a bob
must then be made.

To ring 720. Every time the half-hunt dodgeth behind a bob must then be made,
except when the quarter-hunt dodgeth there with it, and then not.

In the 360 or 720 of each peal the 2 may be the half-hunt, and 4 the
quarter-hunt, or others at pleasure.

The Experiment.
TRiples and Doubles. The Treble is the whole-hunt, but never hunteth up
farther than the fourth place, for the four first bells go Doubles and Singles;
and every time the Treble leads an extreme is made in the third and fourth
places, according to the common course of doubles and singles upon four bells;
which course of doubles and singles must be continued, the two hind bells in
the mean time dodging, until the making of the first Parting change, which will
separate the two hind bells; and then the four first bells go the same course
of doubles and singles again, the two hind bells dodging as before, until the
making of the second Parting change, and so successively. The Parting change is
a double change on the four middle bells, and made at the leading of the
Treble. The first Parting change may be made either at the first second or
third leading of the Treble, observing, that whatsoever bell in the first
Parting change moves down to the Treble, when the Treble leads and that bell
lies next it again, the second Parting change must then be made. And
whatsoever bell in the second Parting change moves down to the Treble when the
Treble leads, and that bell lies next it again, the third Parting change must
then be made, and so successively. There being five Parting changes in the
Peal, and as many half-hunts, each of the bells (the Treble excepted) taking
that place one after another; and consequently, the five persons that ^ing them
must call the Parting changes one after another as their turn comes, according
to the aforesaid rule.

Changes upon Seven Bells.
THE methods upon five may be pricked upon seven, observing but the true
disserence of proportion in the changes; that is doubles upon five bells must
be triples upon seven; doubles and singles upon five must be triples and
doubles upon seven, etc.

Plain Triples.
ALL the bells have a direct hunting course. 1234567 2143657 2416375 4261735
4627153 6472513 6745231 7654321 7563412 5736142 5371624 351726^ 3152746 1325476

All peals upon six bells wherein half the changes are triples, will go upon
seven according to this method here pricked; two of the changesupon six being
always made at the leadings of the Treble, the six hindmost bells making them:
the first is a triple change brought in by the course of the bells, and the
next must either be double or single according to the method of the changes
upon six.

Dodging Triples.
TRiples and Doubles upon six may also go upon seven, according to this method
here pricked, but in the same manner as the sonner.

1234567 2143576 2415367 4251376 4523167 5432617 4523671 5432761 4523716
5432176 5341267 3514276 3152467 1325476 1352746
College. Bob Triples.
EVery time the Treble leaves leading, 1234567 2135476 2314567 3241657 3426175
4362715 4637251 6473521 6745312 7654132 7561423 5716243 5172634 1527364 1253746

the bell in the third place lies still, whilst the four hind bells dodg; but
otherwise all the bells have a direct hunting course as Plain Triples. By this
method it will go seventy changes, and by making of bobs it will go 350. The
rule for the bobs is this; when the Treble goes to lead, if the half-hunt
lying before gives it place, then a bob must be made at that change, wherein
the bell in the third place lies still, and the four hind bells dodg; so that
at every bob the four hind bells make two dodges before they part. By making of
two extremes it will go 700, and with four extremes it will go 1400. But by
making of intervening bobs it will go 700 complete triples without any extreme;
1400 with two extremes, and 2800 with four extremes. Any bell may be made a
half-hunt.

College Bob, Triples: the second way.
1234567 2135476 2314567 3241576 3425167 4352617 4536271 5463721 5647312
6574132 6751423 7615243 7162534 1726354 1273645 2176354 2713645 7231654 7326145
3762415 3674251
when the Treble leaves leading, the two hind bells dodg until Treble parts
them; but in all other respects it is the same with the former, and the bobs
made in the same manner, and by the same rule as in that peal, and it will go
as many changes also as that.

College Triples, dodging behind.
1234567 2143576 2415367 4251376 4523167 5432617 5346271 3564721 3657412
6375142 6731524 7613542 7165324 1756342 1753624 7135642 7316524 3761542 3675124
6357214 6532741
College Triples, dodging before and behind.
1234567 2143576 2415367 4251376 2453167 4235617 2436571 4263751 2467315
4276135 2471653 4217635 4126753 1462735 1467253 4176235 4712653 7421635 4726153
7462513 4765231
Each of these two peals by the method here pricked will go Eighty four changes;
and then when the Treble leads, and the half-hunt lies next it, a Parting
change being then made, they will go 420. And by making of bobs they will go
5040. 2 may be the half-hunt, or any other at pleasure. The Parting change is a
double on the four middlemost of the six hind bells.

It Is plainly demonstrable, that he Principle upon five may go 420 triples upon
seven, which is a twelfth part; 840, which is a sixth part; or 1260, which is a
fourth part of the whole, and the utmost period of triple changes. And then by
making of four extremes it may go 5040, the complete peal.

Great variety of peals may be pricked upon seven: as Triples, Triples and
Doubles, Triples Doubles and Singles; Doubles, Doubles and Singles, etc. But
changes upon seven being seldom practiced, I will therefore forbear to wast
more paper in pricking down examples, and proceed to the changes on eight.

Changes upon Eight Bells.
SIxscores upon five bells are commonly rung upon eight, three bells lying
behind. The most musical to lie behind are 218, 418, 148, 248, 348, 468, 648,
548, 864, 241, 321. and 135 to be laid behind, and then 1 and 3 to dodg
throughout the peal. And also 184 to be laid behind, and to go the six changes
thus, 814. 841. 481. 418. 148. 184. 814. etc. and so on to the end of the
sixscore. They may go the sixes either at whole or half-pulls. Peals upon six,
as Triples and Doubles, etc. make exceeding good music upon Eigh^. 48. 68. 41.
or 18. lying behind. Or else Triples and doubles upon the six middle bells, the
Treble leading, and the Tenor lying behind. And also Triples upon seven, the
Tenor lying behind. But for such as have not yet attained the skill to ring
these complete peals, Sett-changes are very proper for them, being easy and
rung with little difficulty.

College Grounds.
THE grounds of these sett-changes are of two kinds. First, placing of the
bells Fifths, or secondly Thirds. To place them fifths; the 4 must hunt up
behind the 7, the 3 behind the 6, and the 2 behind the 5. Or else the 5 may
hunt down under the 2, the 6 under 3, and the 7 under 4. Or otherwise, first a
single, then a double, and then a triple change to be made on the middlemost
bells, all which are to one effect; for then the bells will lie fifths thus,
15. 26. 37. 48. Here are four Concords to be chiefly regarded in the peal. The
first is 15. the second 26. the third 37. and the fourth is 48. These four
Concords may go the methods of any changes upon four bells; 1.5 being taken for
the Treble, 2.6 for the Second, 3.7 for the Third, and 4.8 for the Fourth; and
the Concords to change places with each other at pleasure. Wherein it is
observable, that the two notes of every Concord must constantly attend each
other in their motion; that is, whenever one of the two notes moves, the
other must follow it. For example: admit they were to go the twenty four
changes, and that 1.5 were to hunt up over 2.6, 3.7, and 4.8. first therefore
it must move up over 2.6, wherein it makes four changes: for first, the 5 moves
up over the 2 thus, 12563748, the 1 must follow it thus, 2156.37.48. Then the 5
moves up over 6.2165.37.48. the 1 follows it again 26.15.37.48; here the two
Concords have made a change. In which manner also 1.5 must move up over 3.7.
and 4.8. And in this manner are the Concords to move and change places with
each other throughout the peal. Or secondly, to place the bells thirds, the 64
and 2 must hunt up, or else the 3 5 7 down; or otherwise a triple, a double,
and a single change to be made on on the middlemost bells; all which are to one
and the same effect, for then the bells will lie thirds thus, 13.57.24.68. Here
are also four Concords principally to be regarded in the peal: the first is
1.3, the second 5.7, the third 2.4, and the fourth 6.8. These four Concords may
also go the methods of any changes upon four bells, 1.3 being taken for the
treble, 5.7 for the second, 2.4 for the third, and 6.8 for the fourth, and they
must move in the same manner as before I have showed. By these Grounds great
variety of excellent and Musical changes are to be rung. If they go the twenty
four, then the peal will consist of four times that number, that is, ninety six
changes. But they may go only the first eight changes of the twenty four, and
then the peal will consist of thirty two. Or else the first eight changes of a
twenty four doubles and Singles, which will consist of forty eight if the
double changes of the twenty four are singled, otherwise but thirty two as
before. Any Concord may be made a hunt, and to move either up or down at the
beginning: so that these Grounds afford great diversity. In the ringing of
these Sett-changes the notes will lie sometimes fifths, sometimes thirds, and
sometimes thirds and fifths, and then it is pleasant Music to Clam them, that
is, the two notes of each Concord to strike together; and if they are clam'd
true, the eight bells will strike as if they were but four, but with far
greater harmony. They may Clam two or three bouts, and then strike open as
many, and so alternately; or else they may Clam one pull, open the next, and so
on. To reduce the notes of the fifths to their right places again at the
conclusion of the peal, either 2 3 4 must hunt down, or else 7 6 5 up; or
otherwise a Triple double and single change to be made on the middlemost bells,
all which are to one effect, and will bring the bells round. To reduce the
thirds, either move down 246 into their places, or else move up 7 5 3 into
theirs; or otherwise make a single, double, and triple change on the middlemost
bells; all which are to one effect, and will bring the bells again round.

The methods of all peals upon six bells may be pricked upon eight, observing
but proportion in the changes, according to the difference in the number of
bells, viz. Triples and doubles upon six must be quadruples and triples upon
eight. Doubles upon six must be Triples upon eight, etc.

Bob Major.
PLain Quadruples and Triples. All the bells have a direct hunting course until
the Treble leads, and then the six hindmost bells dodg. 12345678 21436587
24163857 42618375 46281735 64827153 68472513 86745231 87654321 78563412
75836142 57381624 53718264 35172846 31527486 13254768 13527486

By this method it will go 112. And by making of bobs it will go 224, 336, or
672. The bob is a triple change at the leading of the Treble, wherein the bell
in the 4th place lies still.

To ring 224. Every time the half-hunt dodgeth behind, a bob must then be made.

To ring 336. Every time the half and quarter-hunts dodg together behind, a bob
must then be made.

To ring 672. Every time the half-hunt dodgeth behind, a bob must then be made,
except when the quarter-hunt dodgeth there with it, and then not. The 2 may be
the half-hunt, and 4 the quarter-hunt, or others at pleasure.

By making of two extremes it will go 1344, and with four extremes it will go
2688.

All peals upon six bells wherein half the changes are triples, will go upon
eight according to the method before pricked, but after this manner. If it is a
peal upon six, which consists of 360 or 720 changes, then in the ringing of it
upon eight there must be five hunts. The Treble may be the first hunt; 2 the
second etc. Now the method of the peal must go on according to that before
pricked until the Treble leads, and the 2 lie next it, and then two of the
changes upon six are always made, the six hind bells making them: the first is
always a triple change brought in by the course of the bells thus, 12436587,
and the second either double or single according to the method upon six; and
the third fourth and fifth Hunts in eight, are the whole half and quarter-hunts
in the changes upon six, By this method it will go 40320 complete, but then
every 112th change will be a double, and sometimes single in some peals. The
bells may be brought round at 672 in some peals, but in others not till 1344.

College Bob-Major.
QVadruples and Triples. The first has single dodging behind; the second
single dodging before and behind; the third The first. The second. The third.
The fourth. 12345678 12345678 12345678 12345678 21436587 21436587 21436587
21436587 24163578 24163578 24135678 24135678 42615387 42615387 42316587
42316587 46251378 24651378 43261578 24361578 64523187 42563187 34625187
42635187 65432817 24536817 36452817 24365817 56348271 42358671 63548271
42638571 53684721 24385761 65384721 24368751 35867412 42837516 56837412
42637815 38576142 24873156 58673142 24367185 83751624 42781365 85761324
42631758 87315642 24718356 87516342 24613785 78136524 42173865 78153624
41267358 71863542 41237856 71856342 41263785 17685324 14328765 17583624
14627358 16758342 13482756 15786342 16423785 double dodging behind; and the
fourth double dodging before and behind. It may also be pricked a fifth way,
viz. with single dodging before, and double dodging behind. And likewise a
sixth way, viz. with doubled dodging before, and single dodging behind The
dodging is without intermission except when Treble hinders, and also betwixt
two bells until Treble parts them. By this method each of them will go 112, and
by making of bobs they will go 224, 336, or 672. The bobs are triple changes at
the leadings of the Treble; in the first second and sixth the bell in the 4th
place lies still at the bobs, and in the third fourth and fifth the bell in
the 2d place lies still. The warning for the bobs is the same with that in
Bob-major next before. And the extremes made as in that peal, 2 may be the half
and 4 the quarter-^unt in the four first, or others at pleasure.

College Triples, dodging before and behind.
BY this method it will go 112, 12345678 21435687 24153678 42513687 24531678
42536187 24563817 42568371 24586731 42587613 24578163 42571836 24517863
42157836 41275863 14725836 17452863

and by making of bobs it will go 224, 336, or 672. The bob is a triple-change
at the leadings of the Treble, wherein the bell in the 4th place lies still.
The warning for the bobs is the same with that in Bob-major, and the extremes
also the same as in that peal. The 2 may be the half-hunt, and 4 the
quarter-hunt, or others at pleasure.

The Wild-Goofe Chase.
TRiples. 12345678 21536784 25163748 52613784 56231748 65327184 63572814
36752841 37625481 73265418 72356148 27531684 25713648 52173684 51237648
15327684 13572648 31752684 37125648 73215684 72351648

The fourth bell must first hunt up into the 7th place, and then the 4 and 8
continually dodg behind throughout the peal, except when the Treble hinders
them. The bell that moves up into the 6th place when the Treble moves down from
thence, lies still there until the Treble displaceth it; during which time the
two hind bells dodg, and the five first go a perfect hunting course. And also
when the Treble moves up out of the 5th place, the five first bells go a
hunting course until it comes down there again. By this method it will go
eighty changes, and by making of bobs it will go 160, 240, or 480. The bob is a
triple change at the leading of the Treble, wherein the bell in the 4th place
lies still.

To ring 160. Every time the half-hunt makes a change in the 2d and 3d places,
a bob must at the same time be made.

To ring 240. Every time the half and quarter-hunts make a change together in
the second and third places, a bob must then be made.

To ring 480. Every time the half-hunt makes a change in the second and third
places, a bob must then be made, except when the quarter-hunt makes a change
there with it, and then not. The 2 may be the half-hunt, and 6 the
quarter-hunt, or others at pleasure.

College Triples, dodging behind.
THE method of ringing this peal is the same in all respects with that next
before, with this only difference. Every time the whole-hunt leads, the triple
change is here made on the six middle bells, which parts the two hind-bells,
and so introduces them by degrees into the body of the peal. By this method it
will go 112, and by making of bobs it will go 224, 336, or 672. The bob is a
triple change at the leading of the Treble, 12345678 21435687 24153678 42513687
45231678 54326187 53462817 35642871 36524781 63254718 62345178 26431587
24613578 42163587 41236578 14326587 13462857 31642875 36124857 63214875

wherein the bell in the 6th place lies still. The warning for the bobs in the
224 is the same with that in the 160 next before. In the 336 it is the same with
that in the 240 next before. And in the 672 it is the same with that in the 480
next before. 2 may be the half-hunt and 5 the quarter-hunt, or others at
pleasure.

The Grand Experiment.
QVadruples and Triples. The Treble is the whole-hunt, but never hunteth up
farther than the sixth place; for the six first bells go triples and doubles,
it matters not of what sort, provided that the double changes at the leadings
of the Treble are always made on the four hindmost of the six bells; which
course of triples and doubles must be continued, the two hindmost of the eight
bells in the mean time dodging until the first Parting change is made, which
will separate the two hindmost bells; and then the six first bells go the same
course of triples and doubles again, the two hindmost bells in the mean time
dodging as before, until the second Parting change is made, and so
successively. The Parting change is a triple change on the six middle bells,
and made at the leadings of the whole-hunt. The first Parting change may be
made either at the first second third fourth or fifth leading of the Treble;
observing, that whatsoever bell in the first Parting change moves down to the
Treble, when the Treble leads and that bell lies next it again, the second
Parting change must then be made. And again, whatsoever bell in the second
Parting change moves down to the Treble, when the Treble leads and that bell
lies next it again, the third Parting change must then be made, and so
successively; there being seven Parting changes in the peal, and as many
half-hunts, each of the seven bells taking that place one after another. So
that the seven persons that ring the 2d, 3d, 4th, 5th, 6th, and 7th bells, must
call the Parting changes one after another, according as the aforesaid rule
directs them: or else he that rings the Treble may do it, but not so well as
the rest. To ring it with such peals upon six bells which consist of single
courses, it will go 420; with double courses 840. This peal may also be rung
triples, that is, the six first bells to go doubles, the two hind bells in the
mean time dodging, and the Parting changes to be made as before. But in ringing
it with such Peals of Triples and Doubles, or else Doubles upon six bells,
where the double change at every leading of the Treble is made in the 2d 3d 5th
and 6th places, there, whatsoever two bells lie next the Treble at the first
Parting change, the same two bells will lie next it at every Parting change,
which will be a rule for calling them, there being only five Parting changes in
it, which are triples as before. The first Parting change may also here be made
either the first second third fourth or fifth time the Treble leads. If it is
rung with peals upon six bells, consisting of single Courses, it will then go
300, with double Courses 600. This peal may also be rung by Concatenating of
diverse kinds of methods. For as the peal consists of several parts, viz. from
one Parting change to the next, being accounted a complete part; so each part
may be rung by a different method from the rest. For any peals upon six bells,
whether doubles, or triples and doubles, consisting either of single or double
Courses, may indifferently be rung together in this peal, succeding each other
in the several parts of it, and at every Parting change a new method to Begin.
Or else any two of them to succeed each other alternately throughout the parts
of the peal, or more or less at pleasure. But still observing, that all that
are rung together in one peal must be such, where the doubles at the leadings
of the Treble are made on the four hindmost of the six bells; or else all of
them such, where the doubles at the leadings of the Treble are made in the
second and third, and the fifth and sixth places. If they are of the first
kind, then there will be seven Parting changes in the peal, and as many
half-hunts; and the half-hunts must successively call the Parting changes as
before I have showed: if of the later kind, then but five Parting changes,
which must be called by the same rule as before I have showed in ringing it
with one peal of this kind. And also observing, if the first Parting change is
made at the first second third or fourth leading of the Treble, then whatsoever
method it goes at first, it must also go the same again after the last Parting
change is made. But in ringing it with peals of the first kind, the second
being made the first half-hunt, and to call the first Parting change; and with
peals of the later, the 3d likewise: then the last Parting change in either of
them will conclude the peal.

This peal may go the method of the Experiment upon six bells, page 162, that
is, the four first bells to go the Twenty four Doubles and Singles as in that
peal; and the four hindmost bells in the mean time to dodg double. The Parting
changes are triples on the middle bells, and the same rules observed in making
and calling them, as in that peal: but here are seven of them in this, and 168
changes.

The Experiment upon six may also be rung Comprehensively herein. The six first
bells to go that complete peal, the two hindmost of the eight bells in the mean
time dodging; and every time the 3d bell comes to call the Parting change on
six, then instead of it a Grand change must be made, that is, a triple on the
six middle bells: and then the six first bells to go the complete peal again,
the two hindmost bells in the mean time dodging as before, until the third
bell calls another Grand change, and so successively; there being three of them
in the peal, and 360 changes. If the bells are placed 23567148 at the
beginning, the 4.8 will dodg behind the first sixscore of it, 4.1 the second,
and 1.8 the third, and then the 5th may call the Grand changes in the place of
the 3d; or any other three bells may be laid behind at first, for the sake of
Musical dodging. The first Grand change may be made either at the first second
third fourth or fifth Parting change, obferving, that whatsoever bell at the
first Grand change should then in course have called a Parting change, every
time that bell comes to call a Parting change, it must call a Grand change in
the place of it: or else any one of the six first bells (the whole-hunt
excepted) may be appointed beforehand to attend the calling of the Grand
changes, observing, that every time that bell comes to call a Parting change, a
Grand change must be called in the place of it.

Imperial Bob.
QVadruples and Triples. The Treble has a dodging course. The two first and
two last bells always dodg until the Treble hinders them, and in the mean time
the two next bells to those dodging bells do lie still one change, dodg the
next, and so by turns until the Treble also hinders them. And the two bells in
the fifth and sixth places whilst the Treble is behind, and those in the 3d and
4th places when it is before dodg, until Treble likewise hinders them. By this
method it will go 224, and by making of bobs it will go 448, 672, or 1344. The
bob is a triple change at the leading of the Treble, wherein the bell in the
fourth place lies still.

12345678 21436587 12346578 21435687 24136578 42315687 24135678 42316587
24361578 42635187 24631578 42365187 24635817 42368571 24365817 42638571
24365871 42638517 24635871 42368517 24638157 42361875 24368157 42631865
24613857 42168375 24618357 42163875 41268357 14623875 41263857 14628375
14263857 41628375 14268357 41623875 46128357 64213875 46123857 64218375
46281357 etc. 16847253 16482735 18765432 bob 17864523 16573824 bob 15678342
17352648 17536284 13274586 13725468 12438765 12347856 14826357 14283675
18645273 18462537 16587432 bob 15684723 18753624 bob 17856342 15372846 15738264
13254768 13527486 12436587 12345678
To ring 448. Every time the half-hunt dodgeth behind a bob must then be made,
as in this here pricked, where 2 is the half-hunt.

To ring 672. Every time the half and quarter-hunts dodg together behind, a bob
must then be made.

To ring 1344. Every time the half-hunt dodgeth behind a bob must then be made,
except when the quarter-hunt dodgeth there with it, and then not. The 2 and 4
may be the half and quarter-hunts, others at pleasure.

NOTTINGHAM Peals.
Nottingham Mixed Peal. 1.6.2.
THE Changes are plain Trebles and Doubles until the Treble leads, 123456
214365 241635 426153 462513 645231 654321 563412 536142 351624 315264 132546
132564

and then a single change is always made. The Peal called Old Doubles and
Singles upon five bells is the ground of this Peal, every single in this peal
being the single in that. For as in that peal the whole-hunt is one of the two
bells that make every single; so likewise in this, the 6 being the half-hunt,
is one of the two bells that makes every single change herein, except when it
lies next the whole-hunt, and then the single is behind; but when 2 lies also
next the 6, then extreme in the fourth and fifth places.

Nottingham Trebles and Doubles. 1. 2. 3.
THE ordinary course is to move directly, 123456 214365 241356 423165 432615
346251 364521 635412 653142 561324 516342 153624 135264 312546 321564

except when the whole-hunt passes either out of or into the secand's place,
and then constantly dodg behind. There are single and double bobs; the bob is a
double change at the leading of the Treble, wherein the bell in the 4th place
lies still. When the third hunt dodges behind, the second hunt then leading,
is a warning for the single bob to be made at the next leading of the Treble.
And when the second and third hunts dodg together behind, is a warning for the
double bob to be made at the two next leadings of the Treble. The two extremes
in the 720 must be made according to the general rule in the Introduction, p.
90.

Nottingham Single Bob. 1. 5. 2.
ONE time the Treble hunts quite up, 123456 214365 241635 426153 462513 645231
654213 562431 526413 254631 245361 423516 432156 341265 314625 136452 bob
163425 614352 641532 465123 456132 541623 514263 152436 154263

the next time only up into the fourth place, and so by turns, as in the
example here pricked. The bells observe the course of the Treble, and also dodg
it being before; and once in 120 changes bob, when that bell which is nominated
for the second hunt lying behind twice, meets with the third hunt when the
first hunt is going to lead. The second and third hunts are both one.

The first single, The second single. 124365 123465 124356 123456

Nottingham Bob. 1 and 2.
THE Treble has a dodging course, and every time it leads, the double is on
the four middle hells, except the bobs which are made in the 2d and 3d, and the
5th and 6th places. The bobs are single and double. When the whole-hunt leads
and the half-hunt lies behind, is a warning for a double bob to be made at the
two next leadings of the Treble, there being but three changes betwixt the two
bobs. And when the half-hunt lies in the first and second places for twenty
changes together, is a warning for a single bob to be made the second time the
Treble leads. The extremes must be made according to the general rule in the
Introduction, page 90.

123456 214365 241635 426153 421635 246153 264513 625431 624513 265431 256341
523614 526341 253614 235164 321546 325164 231546 213456 124365 142635 416253
412635 146253 bob 164235 612453 621543 265134 261543 625134 652314 563241
562314 653241 635421 364512 365421 634512 643152 461325 463152 641325 614235
162453 126543 215634 216543 125634 152364 513246
Redding Bob.
THE Treble has a dodging course, 123456 214365 124356 213465 231456 324165
231465 324156 234516 325461 235416 324561 235461 324516 234561 325416 235146
321564 235164 321546 312564 135246 315264 132546 135264

and when it moves up out of the 2d place the two first bells dodg until it
comes there again; and when it moves down out of the 5th place, the two hind
bells dodg until it comes there again, except only whilst it dodgeth in the 3d
and 4th places, and then the two hind bells lie still. When the Treble lies
behind the double is on the four first bells; and when it leads on the four
last. By this method it will go 120, and by making of bobs it will go 240, 360,
or 720. At the bobs the bell in the 4th place lies still. The rule of calling
the bobs is the same with that in the College Bobs, page 162.

Redding Bob according to the Cambridg way.
THis is the same with the former, excepting only the double changes which are
made when the Treble dodgeth in the 3d and 4th places, 123456 214365 124356
213465 231456 324165 321456 231654 236145 321654 312645 136254 316245 132654
136245

both in hunting up and down; which are here made on the four hind bells,
whereas in that they were made on the four first bells: so that here the two
hind bells dodg without intermission until the Treble hinders them. This will
also go 240, 360, and 720, and the bobs made by the same rule as the former.

Fifteen OXFORD Peals.
Adventure. 1 and 2.
DOubles and singles. 12345 35142 12453 15243 21435 31542 -- 15423 24135 35124
14235 14532 21453 31524 14325 14352 24153 13254 13452 -- 42513 13524 13542
13425 42531 15342 -- 13245 45214 15432 15324 12354 45231 -- 15234 Extr. 54321
14523 12543 12345 54312 14253 Extr. 53421 12435 12534 53412 Extr. --
Every bell leads four times. The Treble has a dodging course; and is one of
the two bells which makes every single change except when it leads, and then
it is made in the 3d and 4th places; but when the 2 lies next it, an extreme
behind.

Camelion. 1 and 2.
EVery time the Treble hunts up and down, it makes a single in the third and
4th places, 12345 45213 21354 45123 23145 41532 23415 14523 24351 14251 42531
--
and when it leads the single is there also; but when 2 lies next it, then an
extreme behind. Every bell except the Treble leads four times.

Medley. 1 and 5.
DOubles and Singles. The Treble leads four times, lies behind as many, and
swice in every other place. Every other bell leads four times. Every single is
made behind, 12345 54132 21354 54123 21345 51432 23154 51423 23145 15243 32415
15234 34215 12543 32451 12534 34251 -- 43521 14352 45321 14325 43512 13452
45312 13425
except when the Treble is either in the fourth or fifth places, and then in
the second and third places. Every time the Treble goes to lead and leaves
leading, the double is on the two first and two last bells, except when the
Treble goes to lead if the 5th gives it place, and then the double is made on
the four first bells.

Oxford Paradox. 1 and 5.
DOubles and singles. Every bell leads four times, and lies behind as many.
Every single is made in the third and fourth places until the Treble leads,
12345 54312 21435 54132 21345 45312 23154 45132 23514 41523 32154 41253 32514
14523 35241 15423 35421 14532 53241 15432 53421
and then in the second and third places: but when the Treble leads and the
fifth lies behind, then the extreme in the third and fourth places.

Halliwell. 1 and 2.
TReble leads four times, 12345 54312 21354 45312 21345 54132 23154 54123 23145
51432 32415 51423 23415 15432 32451 15423 34251 14532 43521 14523 45321 --
lies behind as many, and twice in every other place. When it leaves the two
hind bells, they dodg until it comes there again, except when it leads and 2
lies next it, for then an extreme is made in the third and fourth places.

Oxford Sixscore.
THE Treble has a direct hunting course, 12345 32514 21345 32154 23145 31254
23415 13254 23451 13524 32541
as in plain changes; and the changes are all single except when the Treble
lies behind, and then a double is made on the four first bells; and when it
leads, the single is in the third and fourth places, but when 2 lies next it
an extreme behind.

Fortune. 1 and 2,
DOubles. 12345 13254 21354 -- 23145 14523 32415 14532 34251 -- 43521 12354
45312 Extr. 54132 12534 51423 -- 15432 14352 15423 14325 -- -- 13245 etc.
The Treble is a perfect hunt, and when it leaves the two hind bells they dodg
until it comes there again. Every bell leads twice, and then hunts directly up,
unless the aforesaid dodging hinders them. Every time the Treble leads, a
single is made behind, except when 2 lies next it, and then an extreme in the
third and fourth places.

Oxford Single Bob. Triples, Doubles, and Singles. 1. 2. and 3.
THE Treble has a direct hunting course; 123456 214365 241356 423165 432615
346251 364521 635412 653142 561324 516342 153624 156342 513624 531642 356124
365214

and when it leaves the two hind bells they dodg until it comes there again.
Every bell leads twice, and then hunts directly up, unless the aforesaid
dodging hinders them. When the Treble leads, the double is on the four hind
bells. By this method it will go sixty changes, and by making of singles it
will go 120, 240, 360, or 720. The singles in the 120, 240, and 720, must be
made by the same method with those in Old Triples and Doubles, page 109. And to
ring 360, every time the 1.2 lie together before, the single must be made
behind; and when 1.2.3 lie together there, then the single in the fourth and
fifth places.

Oxford Double Bob. Triples, Doubles, and Singles.
WHen the Treble leaves the two first bells, 123456 246135 214365 421653 241356
412635 423165 146253 243615 142635 426351 416253 243651 461235 426315
they dodg until it comes there again; but in all other respects it is the same
with the former. And the singles in the 120, 240, 360, and 720, to be made as
in that Peal.

Oxford Single Bob.
THE method of this Peal is the same in all respects with Oxford Single Bob,
Triples Doubles and Singles, excepting the bobs in this peal, which are made in
stead of the singles in that. By making of bobs it will go 180 or 360. The bob
is a double change at the leading of the Treble, wherein the bell in the fourth
place lies still.

To ring 180, there must be a whole and half-hunt; and when the whole-hunt is
before and the half-hunt behind, the next change is to be a bob.

To ring 360, there must be a whole, half, and quarter-hunt, viz.

First, when the whole-hunt comes to lead, and the half-hunt to fall behind,
the next change is a bob: and Secondly, when the whole-hunt leads before the
quarter-hunt, and the half-hunt is in the fifth place, the next change is also
a bob.
The 1 and 5 may be the whole and half-hunts in the 180, and 1.5.3 the whole,
half, and quarter-hunts in the 360, or others at pleasure.

Oxford Double Bob.
THE method of this peal is the same in all respects with Oxford double Bob
before, excepting the bobs in this peal, which are made instead of the singles
in that. The bobs are here made in the same manner, and called by the same rule
in the 180 and 360, as in Oxford single Bob next before; and the two extremes
in the 720, both in this and the last peal, must be made according to the
general rule in the Introduction.

Oxford Triple Bob.
THE Treble is the whole-hunt, 123456 214365 124356 213465 231456 324165 321456
234165 243615 426351 423615 246351 264531 625413 624531 265413 256143 521634
526143 251634 215643 126534 216543 125634 152364 513246 153264 512346 521364

and has a dodging course. When it leaves the two hind bells, they dodg until
it leads, and then a double is made on the four middle bells, which parts the
two hind bells; but then the two hind bells dodg again until the Treble
displaceth them. Every bell leads twice (except when the Treble dodgeth there)
and as they hunt up and down do make a dodg in the third and 4th places. When
the Treble moves up from dodging before, the bell that dodged there with it
continues in the first and 2d places, lying twice together in each, until the
Treble comes down to dodg there with it again. By this method it will go 120,
and by making of bobs it will go 360. At the bobs the bell in the fourth place
lies still. The warning for them is this, When the half-hunt leads, and the
Treble moves down, and dodgeth there with it, a bob must then be made at that
leading of the Treble. The 3 may be the half-hunt, or any other.

Oxford Triple Bob, the second way.
THis peal is in all respects the same with that next before, 123456 254613
214365 245163 124356 421536 213465 425163 231645 241536 326154 214356 321645
123465 236154 213456 263514 124365 625341 142635 623514 416253 265341 146235
256431 412653 524613 421563 526431 245136
except the double change which is made when the Treble moves up out of the
second place, and also down into that place again, which is here made on the
four middle bells, and consequently parts the two hind bells, which in the
former peal continued dodging together. This will also go 360, the bobs being
made in the same manner, and also the warning for them the same, as in the
former peal.

Oxford Riddle, or the Hermophrodite.
TReble is the whole-hunt; whilst it is hunting up the two last bells dodg, and
whilst it is hunting down the two first. 123456 341652 214365 314562 241356
135426 423165 134562 432615 315426 346251 351462 432651 534126 346215 543216
436125
Every time it leads and lies behind, the double is made on the four farthest
bells from it. Every bell leads twice and lies behind twice, except the
dodging hinder. By this method it will go sixty changes triples and doubles,
and then by making of singles as in Old triples and doubles, it will go 120,
240, or 720.

My Lord. 144.
DOubles. Treble is a perfect Hunt. Every bell leads twice, and then moves up
into the third place where it lies twice, 123456 213465 231456 324156 342516
432561 423651 243615 234165 321465 312456 132465 123645 --

and then moves down again except the motion of the Treble hinders. When the
Treble goes to lead and leaves leading, the double is on the two first and two
last bells; and when it leads, it is on the four middle bells. But when it
leads, and the 6 lies behind, then a single in the third and fourth places.

If a double be made on the four hind bells, at every third leading of the
Treble it will go 180 complete doubles; and then by making of two singles it
will go 360, or with four singles 720.

Seventeen Peals composed at CAMBRIDGE, by Mr. S.S.
My Honey. 1 and 2.
I In this peal there is a whole-hunt and an half-hunt. 12345 31254 54321 21354
31245 45231 21345 13254 54231 23154 -- 45213 23145 13524 54213 32415 15342
45123 23415 -- 45132 32451 15432 41523 23451 51423 41532 32541 51432 14523
23541 54123 -- 32514 54132 14253 23514 45312 12435 32154 54312 -- 32145 45321
12453
The whole-hunt lies always four times before, and four times behind, and
twice in every other place. The two hindmost bells always dodg 'till the
whole-hunt hinders, except when the whole-hunt is before, at which time there
are four changes made of a four and twenty doubles and singles; the first of
which is a double change brought in by the course of the bells (as in the
following ^eal appears) 13254; the second is a single in the third and fourth
places (13524); the ^hird is a double on the four last (15342), and the fourth
a single again in the third and fourth places (15432), except when the
^alf-hunt is with the whole-hunt before, then it is to be an extreme behind.
When the whole-hunt leaves the third's place hunting up, the two foremost bells
dodg till it returns into he same place again.

The Whirligigge. 1 and 5.
IN this peal, first the bells dodg behind (and not before) till the whole-hunt
hinders them; and the next course they dodg in like manner before (and not
behind) till the wholehunt hinders them; and so by turns throughout the whole
peal. When the whole-hunt is before, if the bells were dodging behind before it
came to lead, single behind; if they were dodging before, single in second's
and third's place: and when the whole-hunt leads, and half-hunt is in Tenor's
place, there is always an extreme to be made in 3d and 4th place, which is
every fourth time the whole-hunt leads.

21354 51243 31245 41352 23145 52134 32154 43125 32415 25314 23514 34215 34251
52341 25341 43251 43521 25431 52431 34521 45312 52413 54213 43512 54132 25143
45123 34152 51423 21534 41532 31425 15432 12354 14523 13245 15423 13254 14532
13425

Jack-on-both-sides. 1 and 5.
IN this peal the bells always dodg both before and behind, till the whole-hunt
hinders them; except when both the Hunts 21354 45132 52143 32514 23451 53421
23145 54312 25413 23541 32541 35412 32415 45321 52431 32451 23514 53142 34251
54231 25341 34215 32154 51324 43521 45213 52314 43125 31245 15234 34512 54123
25134 41352 13254 -- 43152 51432 21543 14325 13524 15243 41325 15342 12534
14235 31542 51423 14352 -- 12354 41253 35124 14532 15324 21345 42135 53214
41523 51234 23154 24315 35241 are together either before or behind; for then
the two farthest bells from the Hunts do leave dodging for the next change
only which is always a double made by the two Hunts and the two next bells to
them. The singles and extremes are made as in the Old Doubles.

Winwick Doubles. 1 and 3.
IN this peal, first, the two hindmost bells dodg till the whole-hunt dindreth
them, till the first single is made: and then the two foremost bells dodg 'till
the whole-hunt hinders them, until there be made another single, and so they
continually dodg successively throughout the whole peal. There are six singles
which are made in the same manner as in St. Dunstan's Doubles, page 127.

21354 41532 31254 41523 23145 45123 32145 45132 32415 54213 23415 54312 34251
52431 32451 45321 43521 25341 23541 54231 45312 23514 32514 45213 54132 32154
23154 54123 51423 31245 21345 51432 15432 13254 12435 15342 14523 -- 14253 --
13524 15324

Non-such. 1 and 2.
IN this peal the bells always dodg both behind and before till the whole-hunt
hinders them, except when both the Hunts are together either hehind or before:
for the^ the bells omit dodging for the next change, as in Jack-on-both-sides.
There are four singles which are all made in the 3d and 4th places every third
time that the whole-hunt leads.

21435 25134 32415 53214 54231 34521 24153 52314 23451 35241 45321 35412 42513
25341 32541 53421 43512 53142 24531 52431 23514 54312 34152 51324 42351 25413
32154 45132 31425 15342 24315 52143 31245 41523 13452 -- 42135 51234 13254
14532 14325 15432 41253 15243 -- 15423 41352 14235 12534 13524 51432 43125
12453 21354 31542 54123 34215 21543 23145 35124 45213 43251

Cambridg Delight. 2 and 4.
IN this peal the two hindmost bells always dodg till the whole-hunt hinders
them. When the whole-hunt leaves the thirds place hunting up, the two foremost
bells dodg till the half-hunt hinders them, whose course is the same with the
course of the half-hunt in Grandsire. There are two singles which are made by
the same rule as in Grandsire.

13254 15243 14235 45231 31524 12534 41325 42513 13542 21543 43152 24531 31452
25134 34512 25413 34125 52143 35421 52431 43215 51234 53241 54213 42351 15324
52314 45123 24315 51342 25341 41532 23451 15432 23514 14352 32415 14523 32541
13425 34251 41253 35214 31245 43521 42135 53124 32154 45312 24153 35142 23145
54132 21435 53412 -- 51423 12453 54321 23154

Cambridg Delight, another way. 1 and 4.
IN this peal the two hindmost bells always dodg till the whole-hunt hinders,
as in the former Peal. When the half-hunt leaves the 3ds place hunting up, the
two foremost bells dodg till the whole-hunt hinders. It differs from the
former peal in this; 21354 51234 31524 23145 52143 35142 32415 25413 53412
34251 24531 54321 43521 42351 45231 45312 43215 42513 54132 34125 24153 51423
31452 21435 15432 13425 12453 14523 14352 14235 41532 41325 41253 45123 43152
42135 54213 34512 24315 52431 35421 23451 25341 53241 32541 52314 35214 23514
25134 53124 32154 21543 51342 31245 12534 15324 13254 15243 13542 13245
That whereas in that the bells always begin to dodg before when the whole-hunt
leaves third's place, and are parted by the half-hunt; in this they begin to
dodg before when the half-hunt leaves the third's place, and are parted as well
before as behind by the whole-hunt. It differs also, in that the half-hunt in
this peal always bobbeth behind on the contrary stroke to what it does in the
former peal; there are two singles, which are made as in the former peal.

The Dream, upon five bells. 1 and 2.
IN this peal the two hindmost bells always dodg till the whole-hunt hinders,
except when the two Hunts are together before. Or it may be rang by making the
two foremost bells dodg always, except the Hunts be together behind. There are
six single changes which are all behind every other time the whole-hunt leads,
the half-hunt at every single lying either in the 2d or 3ds places.

21435 51342 41235 53142 24153 53124 42153 35412 42513 35214 24513 34521 45231
32541 25431 43251 54321 23451 52341 42315 53412 24315 53214 24135 35142 42135
35124 21453 31524 41253 31542 12543 13542 14235 13524 -- 15324 -- 15342 12534
14253 51324 etc.

The Contention upon five bells. 1 and 2.
IN this peal the two hindmost bells dodg as in the former peal till the Hunts
are together before for twenty changes; and then for the next twenty changes
the two foremost bells dodg, except the Hunts are together behind. There are six
singles which are made as in the former peal.

21435 51342 41523 41235 24153 53124 45132 42153 42513 35214 54312 24513 45231
32541 53421 42531 54321 23451 35241 24351 53412 24315 53214 42315 35142 42135
35124 24135 31524 41253 31542 21453 13542 14235 13452 12543 15324 -- 14325 --
14253 12534 etc.

The Cheat. 1 and 3.
IN this peal the two hindmost bells always dodg 'till the whole-hunt hinders,
and the two foremost bells dodg 'till either the whole or half-hunt hinders. Or
on the contrary, the two foremost bells may dodg 'till the whole-hunt hinder,
and the two hindmost 'till either the whole-hunt or half-hunt hinder. Or it may
be rang a third way, by joining both these courses together, ringing twenty
changes of it one way, and the next twenty changes the other way throughout the
peal. There are six singles which are all made behind, every second time the
whole-hunt leads; or at pleasure it may be rang with twelve singles, which are
likewise all made behind.

21354 41532 31542 51243 23145 45123 35124 52134 32415 54213 53214 25314 34251
45231 52341 23541 43521 54321 25431 32451 45312 53412 52413 34215 54132 35142
25143 43125 51423 31524 21534 41352 15432 13542 12543 14325 14523 -- 15234 --
13524 14352 etc.

Topsie-turvie. 1 and 2.
21354 41532 31542 21453 23145 45123 35124 24135 32415 54213 53214 42315 34251
45231 35241 24351 43521 54321 53421 42531 45312 53412 35412 24513 54132 35142
53142 42153 51423 31524 51324 41235 15432 13542 15234 14325 14523 -- 12543 --
13524 14352 etc.

Jumping Doubles dodging before.
IN this peal every change is a jumping change (in which one bell leaps over
two bells at once,) except when the Treble is either behind or before, for then
there is always a plain double change made, or else a single at the end of each
sixty changes. Treble 12345 31254 54132 24513 53241 43521 21534 23145 45213
42351 35421 34215 52143 32514 54321 24531 53214 43152 25314 23451 45231 42315
35142 31425 52431 32541 54312 24153 51324 13254 25341 23415 45123 41231 15432
-- 52413 32154 51432 14352 14523 13245 25134 21345 15243 13425 41352 etc. 51243
12453 12534 31542 34125 15324 14235 21453 53124 43512 13542 41523 42135 35412
34251 is a perfect Hunt; the two foremost bells always dodg until the Treble
hinder. When the Treble is hunting up, the jumping changes are all made by the
bell in the Tenor's place, jumping into third's, except only that one when
Treble goes out of second's place into third's; for then the bell in the 3ds
place jumps into Trebles, where it dodgeth with the bell in the 2ds place till
Treble hinder. When Treble is hunting down every jumping change is made by the
bell in the 3ds place jumping into Tenor's, except when it goes out of third's
place into second's, for then the bell in Treble's place jumps into 3ds. And
observe always, that when Treble is going to lead the first time, the bell in
Tenor's place jumps into third's, and the next time the bell in the third's
place into Tenor's throughout the peal. There are two singles which are made,
as in Grandsire.

Jumping Doubles dodging behind.
IN this peal Treble is a perfect Hunt, as in the former. The two hindmost
bells always dodg till Treble hinders. When Treble is hunting up the bell in
the thirds place always jumps into Treble's, excepting only when Treble goes
out of third's place into fourth's; for then the bell in Tenor's place jumps
into 3ds. And observe, that every second time the Treble goes out of 4th into
5ths place, the bell in Treble's place jumps into 3ds; whereas at other times
at the same change the bell in 3ds place jumps into Treble's. When Treble
leaves the 5ths place hunting down, the bell in the 3ds place jumps into
Treble's; when she leaves 4ths place the bell in 3ds place jumps into Tenor's.
When she is either in the 2d or 3ds places hunting down, the bell in the
Treble's place jumps into 3ds. There are two singles made, as in the former
Peal.

12345 31425 52143 24513 25341 34251 31254 43152 25314 45231 52431 23415 23145
34215 32541 54321 45213 32154 32514 42351 23451 35412 54132 21345 53241 24531
42315 53124 41523 13254 35421 52413 24153 31542 15432 -- 43512 25134 41235
15324 14523 13245 34125 51243 12453 13542 51432 etc. 41352 12534 14235 51324
45123 13425 15243 21453 35142 54312 14352 21534 42135 53214 43521

Symphonie, upon six bells. 1. 2. and 3.
IN this peal are 720 changes, all doubles except twelve singles, which are
made as in plain Trebles and Doubles on six bells. The two hindmost bells
always dodg till the whole-hunt hinders them, except when a single is is made
in the 4th and 5th places. When the whole-hunt leaves the 4ths place hunting
up, the two foremost bells dodg till it leaves the same place again hunting
down: but it may be rang at pleasure to make the bells dodg perpetually before
as well as behind, by making in every twelve changes two Trebles, one of them
when the whole-hunt leaves the 3ds place hunting up, and the other when it
leaves the 4ths place hunting down; so that there will be in the whole peal
Sixscore Treble-changes. When the whole-hunt is behind, the four fore-most
bells dodg; when the whole-hunt is before, the four hindmost dodg.

213465 316254 615342 514623 412536 231456 361245 651324 541632 421563 234165
362154 653142 546123 425136 324615 632514 563412 456213 245316 234651 362541
653421 546231 425361 326451 635241 564321 452631 243561 236415 365214 654312
542613 423516 326145 635124 564132 452163 243156 321654 631542 561423 451236
241365 312645 613524 516432 415263 214356 132654 163542 156423 145236 124365
136245 165324 154632 142563 124635 etc.

Grandsire upon Symphonie. 1. 2. and 6.
THis peal of Symphonie may be rang with but two single or two treble changes
at the end of either Eighteenscore, by ringing it with single and double bobs,
as in Grandsire Bob. The rule for calling the bobs in this peal is the very
same as in Grandsire Bob, but when the bob-changes are to be made, the Hunts do
not lie in the same order as in Grandsire Bob; for in this peal at a single bob
the whole-hunt leads, the half-hunt is in the 5th place, and the quarter-hunt
in the 4th place. And at the first bob of a double bob the half-hunt is in
Tenor's place, and quarter-hunt in 2ds place; and at the later bob the 213465
316254 316542 316425 612354 231456 361245 361524 361452 621345 324165 632154
635142 634125 263154 234615 362514 365412 364215 623514 324651 632541 635421
634251 263541 236451 365241 364521 362451 625341 326415 635214 634512 632415
265314 236145 365124 364152 362145 625134 321654 631542 631425 631254 261543
312645 613524 613452 613245 216534 132654 163542 163425 163254 126543 136245
136524 136452 162345 125634 etc. half-hunt is in the 5th place, and
quarter-hunt in 2ds place, just contrary to what it is in Grandsire Bob. I have
pricked this peal with two Treble changes in every twelve; so that if you make
two Trebles more at the end of either Eighteenscore (which must be made when
the whole-hunt is going to lead just two changes sooner than if you should have
made a single) there will then be in the whole 720 just Sixscore and two Treble
changes.

Trebles and Doubles on six Bells with six Singles. 1. 2. and 3.
THis peal is taken ont of the Dream upon five bells. Every time the whole-hunt
is before, there being two changes of that peal made in this. Every bell is a
perfect 214365 241635 426153 462513 645231 654321 563412 536142 351624 315264
132546 135264 312546 321456 234165 243615 426351 462531 645213 654123 561432
516342 153624 bob. 135642 153462 135426 153246 152364 125634 126543 162453
164235 146325 bob 164352 146532 145623 154263 152436 125346 125364 sing. etc.
Hunt, when the whole-hunt is before dodg on the four hindmost, except the
half-hunt be either in the 5th or Tenor's place, then always bob as in
Grandsire Bob, except the quarter-hunt lies next to the half-hunt, for then it
is always to be a dodg on the four hindmost. Every other time that the
whole-hunt and half-hunt come together before, there is a single, which is
always made behind.

A Twelvescore Trebles and Doubles. upon Six Bells.
IN this peal the four foremost bells go a four and twenty Doubles and Singles,
observing 214365 234165 261453 156423 241356 324156 216435 165243 423165 231465
124653 -- 243156 213456 214635 615234 421365 124365 126453 165324 412356 142635
162435 -- 143265 416253 614253 163542 142356 461235 612435 136452 413265 642153
164253 -- 431256 641235 146235 316425 342165 462153 412653 136245 432156 426135
142563 -- 341265 241653 -- 132654 314256 421635 145236 154326 123564 132465
246153 -- -- 134256 264135 514362 213546 312465 621453 154632 123456 321456
624135 -- -- always, That for one Four and Twenty the bell in the Treble's
place is the hunting bell, and for the next the bell in the 4ths place
throughout the peal, the two hindmost bells always dodging till the end of the
Twenty Four; at which time there is a double made (if the bell in the Treble's
place was the Hunt in the Twenty Four) on the four middlemost; but if the bell
in the 4ths place was the hunting bell, the double is to be made in Treble and
2d and 4th and 5th places.

Cambridg Bob.
THE Treble has a constant dodging course; 123456 325416 214365 352146 123465
531264 214356 532146 241365 351264 423156 315246 421365 132564 243156 315264
234516 132546 325461 135264 324516 312546 235461 135246 324561 312564 235416
321546 234561 etc.
and when it leaves the two hind bells, they dodg until it comes there again,
except when the Treble dodgeth before, and then they lie still. The two middle
bells always dodg until the Treble comes there. When the Treble leaves dodging
before, every bell leads twice, except when the Treble lies still behind, and
then the two first bells make a dodg. Bobs are made as in Grandsire Bob, and
the warning for them the same also with that.

Fourteen more Peals, composed at CAMBRIDG.
Doubles and Singles on five Bells.
The Parasite. 1 and 5.
IN this peal the Bells behind always dodg, except the Treble prevents them.
When Treble is leaving the 3ds place hunting up, the bells before dodg at whole
pulls, if Tenor be not one of them, until it parts them. The course of the
bells in hunting is the same with Tendering.

12345 35241 31524 42531 21354 35214 31542 42513 21345 53124 35124 24153 23154
53142 35142 24135 23145 51324 53412 21453 32415 51342 53421 21435 32451 15324
54312 12453 23415 15342 54321 12435 23451 13524 45231 14253 32541 13542 45213
14235 32514 etc.

The Tulip. 1 and 2.
IN this peal Treble hunteth as in Tendering. 21354 51423 21345 51432 23154
54123 23145 54132 32415 45312 32451 45321 23415 54312 23451 54321 32541 45231
32514 45213 23541 54231 23514 54213 32154 45123 32145 45132 31254 41523 31245
41532 13254 14523 13524 14253 15342 12435 15432 12453 etc.
When Treble is in third's place hunting up, the bells dodg before at
whole-pulls, till it comes and parts them. When it is in third's place hunting
down the bells behind always dodg, except it leads, till it parts them. When
Treble is before there are four changes of twenty four doubles and singles;
whereof the first is brought in by the hunting of the bells. All the singles in
the Twenty four are made in the 3d and 4ths place, except 1-2 before, then
extreme behind.

The Honey-suckle. 1 and 2.
IN this peal every bell leads four times. While every bell but Treble is
leading, the bells behind always dodg: every 4th change is made by the four
foremost bells. When Treble is leading there are four changes of Twenty four
doubles and singles made as in the the former peal. The first change is on the
four bells before.

21435 53421 51342 24351 21453 53412 51324 24315 24135 35142 53142 42135 24153
35124 53124 42153 42513 31542 35214 41235 42531 31524 35241 41253 45213 13254
32514 14523 45231 13524 32541 14253 54321 15342 23451 12435 54312 15432 23415
12453 etc.

Peals on 5 bells, with twelve Singles. Blunderbus. 1-2.
IN this peal every bell is a Hunt. When Treble and 2d are together either
before or behind, the farthest bells from them dodg till either of them part,
excepting the extremes. When the Treble is before a single in 3d and 4th place,
which is unmade the next time except 1-2; for then the Hunts being together
before, the bells behind must dodg according to the rule forementioned.

21354 14325 13452 51234 23154 23145 41235 13542 15324 21345 32415 42153 31452
15234 12354 34251 24513 34125 51324 12534 43521 25431 43215 53142 -- 34512
52341 42351 35412 21543 43152 53214 24531 53421 25134 41325 35124 25413 35241
etc. 14235 31542 42143 32514

Hudibras. 1 and 2.
IN this peal every bell is a Hunt. When Treble is before a single always in 3d
and 4th place which is unmade the next time, except it be 1-2, for then the
bells behind dodg until Treble parts them.

21354 15423 14532 31245 25143 23145 51243 14352 13425 21534 32415 52134 41532
63245 12354 34251 25314 45123 31425 12534 43521 23541 54213 34152 -- 45312
32451 52431 43512 21543 54132 34215 25341 45321 25134 51423 43125 23514 54231
etc. 15243 41352 32154 52413

Weston Doubles. 1 and 5.
IN this peal Treble is is a perfect Hunt. Every other time Treble is leaving
the 3ds place hunting up, the bells before dodg till it comes and parts them:
the bells behind dodg but when Treble hinders them, except the extremes which
are in 3d and 4ths place when it is 1-2 before; all the other singles are made
behind when Treble is leading. It may be rang by making all the singles behind,
by making the change before it is 1-2 on the bells before.

12345 13254 51432 45123 32514 21354 13245 15423 41532 23154 23145 31254 15432
14523 21345 32415 32145 51423 14532 12354 23451 23415 54132 41523 -- 32541
24351 45312 45132 12534 23514 42531 54321 54312 etc. 32154 45213 45231 53421
31245 54123 54213 35241

Peals on five bells with 10 Singles. The Antilope.
IN this peal the bells hunt as in Grandsire. When Treble is before, a single
is always made by the Tenor, and the bell which follows it, except two
doubles which are made as the singles in Gransire. It may be rang like Cambridg
delight either way by observing the same method if like Cambridg delight the
common way; and by making the singles by the half-hunt and the bell before it,
if like Cambridg delight the other way.

21354 15243 34152 24531 53214 41253 23145 12543 31425 25413 52341 -- 32415
21534 13452 52143 25431 15432 34251 25143 13425 51234 24513 14532 43521 52413
31452 15324 42153 -- 45312 54131 34125 13524 41235 12354 54132 45321 43215
31542 14253 Extr. 51423 43512 42351 35124 14235 13245

The Maremaid.
IN this peal behind dodg twelve changes, 13254 12435 31245 21345 32154 12354
23145 21534 21354 12543 12534 15234 15243 51243 51234 15423 52143 51432 25134
15342 21543 51324 21453 53124 etc.
excepting the sixth which is made on the bells before, and the twelfth which
is a single in the 3d and 4ths places; and twelve changes before, excepting
also the sixth, which is made by the bells behind, and the twelfth which is a
single in 2d and 3ds places. When they dodg behind, every odd change is on the
last bells, and every even one a bob, excepting these two changes. When they
dodg before, every odd change is a bob, and every even one on the four first
bells, excepting likewise those two changes which are made according to the
forementioned rule

The Checkquer. 1 and 5.
IN this peal the Treble is whole-hunt, and Tenor the half-hunt for twenty
changes; and then Tenor the whole-hunt and treble the half-hunt for the next
twenty, 21354 31254 23145 13524 32415 15342 34251 51432 43521 54123 45312 45213
54132 42531 51423 24351 15432 42315 14523 24135 41532 42153 45123 24513 54213
25431 52431 52341 25341 53214 23514 35124 32154 31542 31245 13452 13254 31425
13245 13425 etc.
and so they hunt by turns throughout the peal. When Treble is the whole-hunt
the bells behind always dodg, except it hinders them; and when Tenor is the
whole-hunt, the bells before, except that hinders them; when Treble is before
and Tenor dodging behind, a single made by the Tenor and the bell which dodged
with it; when Tenor is behind and Treble dodging before, a single made by the
Treble and the bell which dodgeth with that.

THis peal may be rang by hunting the Treble and Tenor as before, and it
differs from it only in this; 21354 12543 23145 21453 32415 24135 34251 42315
43521 43251 45312 34521 54132 35412 51423 53142 15432 35124 14523 53214 41532
35241 45123 53421 54213 54312 52431 45132 25341 41523 52314 14532 25134 15423
21543 51243 12534 15234 21534 15243 etc.
when it is 1-5 behind in the hunting of the Treble, the bells before dodg till
Tenor parts them; and when it is 1-5 before, in the hunting of the Tenor the
bells behind dodg till Treble parts them: and then when Treble is the
whole-hunt and Tenor half, it is plain Cambridg delight inverted. It may be
rang by hunting the half-hunt, as in Cambridg Delight the other way, in either
of those ways of ringing it, but then the single is always made by the hunting
bell.

An example in that like Cambridg Delight the other way.

Gogmagog. 1.5.
IN this peal the bells hunt as in Grandsire, 21354 34512 12543 23145 43152
21534 32415 41325 25143 34251 14352 52413 43521 -- 54231 45312 14325 45321
54132 41352 43512 51423 43125 34152 15243 34215 31425 12534 32451 13452 21543
23541 -- 25134 25314 13425 52314 52134 31452 53241 51243 34125 35421 15234 etc.
and it differs from it in this, That there is not every other time a single
bob, but in stead of a single one every other time a double one: so that only
once in four times there is a single bob; when Tenor is dodging behind there is
always a single made by it, and the bell which dodgeth with it if Treble
leads, otherwise not.

1-4.
THis peal may be rung like Cambridg Delight, if every other time the dodging
before be omitted; or it may be rang by dodging constantly as in Cambridg
Delight, by making double bobs and single bobs as in Grandsire: it may likewise
be rang by making the course of the half-hunt in all the ways of ringing it the
same with Cambridg delight the other way; observing in all of them to make the
singles as before directed.

An example of that like Cambridg Delight the other way, in which the dodging
before is every other time omitted. 1-4.

21354 14523 12534 34152 25314 23145 41532 -- 31425 52134 32415 45123 12543
13452 51243 34251 54213 21534 14325 15234 43521 52431 25143 41352 -- 45312
25341 52413 43125 15243 54132 52314 54231 34215 51234 51423 25134 45321 32451
52143 15432 21543 43521 23541

Cambridg Marigold. 1.2. and 3.
IN this peal are 720 changes, 214356 312564 165432 241536 321654 164523 425136
236154 -- 452316 263514 146253 453261 265341 142645 542361 623541 -- 543216
625314 124365 534126 652134 124635 351426 561234 etc. 315246 516324 132546
153624 135264 156342
which are all doubles except 12 singles which are made as in Plain trebles and
doubles. Treble is a perfect Hunt, and except the dodges (which are the same as
in Oxford double Bob) every double change is made by the treble and the three
next bells to it: observing always that the bell in Tenor's place lies still
'till it gives place to the Treble, or be removed by a dodg behind when the
Treble is before. When Treble leaves 3ds place hunting up, the bell that then
comes before, leads thrice, and likewise the next bell after it till Treble
comes back into 3ds place again; at all other times every bell leads twice.
The bell in Tenor's place lies five times behind, (and when the single is made
in the middle ten times) till treble remove it; and when treble comes back it
lies five times more behind, and then is displaced by a dodg behind and hunts
down at whole-pulls. This peal may be rang by making bobs single and double as
in Grandsire Bob with but two singles or two trebles, which must be made just
Eighteen score changes one from the other.

The Nightingall. 1.2. and 3.
IN this peal are 720 changes, which are all doubles except twelve singles,
which are made as in the former peal; and if you ring Grandsire Bob upon it,
there may be but two singles, or else two trebles, as in the Marigold. Treble
is a perfect Hunt: the bells in 4th and 5th places dodg till treble parts them,
123456 356241 213546 536214 231456 356124 324156 531624 234516 513264 324561
153624 235461 156342 325416 -- 235146 165432 321546 164523 312456 -- 132546
146253 135264 142635 315624 -- 351264 124365 532164 sing. 352614 124635 532641
--
and then the two foremost bells do the like for eight changes together till
treble hinders them, and gives way to the other two bells to dodg again in the
4th and 5th places, which is always for three changes and no more, except when
the single is made in that place, and then they dodg six times. When treble is
behind, dodg the four first; when it is before on the four last, as in Marigold.

FINIS.

